CORNELL 

UNIVERSm 

LIBRARY 


052031 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104697 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED  BY  THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND  BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A, 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  AECHDEACON   F.    W.    FAEEAE,   D.D.,   F.E.S.— EIGHT  EEV.  H.    COTTEEILL,   D.D., 
P.E.S.E.— VEET  EEV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EEV.  CANON  Q. 
KAWLINSON,  M.A.— EEV.  A.  PLUMMEE,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
Kew  Yoek  akd  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

VICAJt   AND  RURAL  DBAN  OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND   EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO   THE   LORD 
BISHOP  OP  GLOUCESTER  AND   BRISTOL 


AND  BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL, 

EDITOR  OF  "THE  HOMILETIC  QUARTERLY." 


I.   KINGS. 

(Sxposition  axitt  ^omiletice  : 
REV.    JOSEPH   HAMMOND,   LL.B.,  B.A., 

VICAR  OF  ST.  AU3TEU. 

fomilUs  bs  l)arione  ^ntliors: 

KEV.  K.  DE  PRESSENSfi,  D.D.  REV.  A.  ROWLAND,  M.A.,  LU* 

REV.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.  REV.  J.  A.  MACDONALD. 

REV.  J.  URQUHART. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yobe  and  Toronto. 


3<^<)y9f'3 


THE 

BOOKS  OF  THE  KINGS. 

INTBODUCTION. 


L  Unity  of  ths  Wobk. 

Tbb  BooIcs  now  bnown  to  ns  as  the  First  and  Second  Books  of  the  Kings, 
like  1  and  2  Samuel,  were  originally  and  are  really  bnt  one  work,  by  one 
writer  or  compiler,  and  it  is  only  for  convenience  of  reference  and  because 
of  long  established  usage  that  we  here  treat  them  as  two.  In  all  Hebrew 
MSS.  down  to  the  time  of  Jerome  certainly,  and  probably  down  to 
A.D.  1518,  when  the  Hebrew  text  was  first  printed  by  D.  Bomberg  at  Venice, 
the  division  into  two  books  was  unknown.  It  was  first  made  in  the  Greek 
version  by  the  Septnagint  translators,  who  followed  a  prevailing  custom  of 
the  Alexandrine  Greeks  of  dividing  ancient  works  for  facihty  of  reference. 
The  division  thus  introduced  was  perpetuated  in  the  Latin  version  of 
Jerome,  who  took  care,  however,  whDe  following  the  LXX.  usage,  to  notice 
the  essential  unity  of  the  work;"'  and  the  authority  of  the  Septuagint  in 
the  Eastern,  and  of  the  Vulgate  in  the  Western  Church,  has  ensured  the 
continuance  of  this  bipartite  arrangement  in  all  later  time. 

That  the  two  books,  however,  are  really  one  is  proved  by  the  strongest 
internal  evidence.  Not  only  is  there  no  break  between  them — the  separation 
at  1  Kings  xxii.  63  being  so  purely  arbitrary  and  artificial  that  it  is  actually 
made  haphazard  in  the  middle  both  of  the  reign  of  Ahaziah  and  of  the  ministry 
of  Elijah — ^bnt  the  nnity  of  purpose  is  conspicuous  throughout.  Together  they 
afford  us  a  continuous  and  complete  history  of  the  kings  and  kingdoms  of 
the  chosen  people.    And  the  language  of  the  two  books  points  conclusively 

•  -  Qnartns  MtlaeMm,  i^.,  Begnm,  qui  iiL  et  iv.  Begum  volnnune  eontinetnr  "  (Prolog. 
Oaleat.)  Similarly  Origen  in  Etaeb.  "  Eccles.  Hist."  vi.  25 :  BaoiXawv  rpirn,  m-aprf  U  M 
OioftfiiXiH  Aafiit,  imif  tan  fiaoiXaa  ta^ii. 

m* 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


to  a  single  writer.  While  there  are  no  indications  of  the  manner  of  speech 
of  a  later  period,  no  contradictions  or  oonfasions  such  as  would  arise  from 
different  miters,  there  are  many  phrases  and  formulsa,  tricks  of  expression, 
and  turns  of  thought,  which  show  the  same  hand  and  mind  throughout  the 
entire  work,  and  effectually  exclude  the  idea  of  a  divided  authorship.^ 

While,  however,  it  is  indisputable  that  we  have  in  these  two  portions  of 
Holy  Scripture  the  production  of  a  single  writer,  we  have  no  sufficient 
warrant  for  concluding  as  some  (Eichhorn,  Jahn,  al.)  have  done,  that  the 
division  between  them  and  the  Books  of  Samuel  is  equally  artificial,  and 
that  they  are  parts  of  a  much  greater  work  (called  by  Ewald  "the  Great 
Book  of  the  Kings  ") — a  work  which  comprised  along  with  them  Judges, 
Euth,  and  1  and  2  Samuel  The  arguments  ia  support  of  tliis  view  are 
stated  at  considerable  length  by  Lord  Arthur  Hervey  in  Smith's  "  Dictionary 
of  the  Bible  "  (vol.  ii.  p.  21),  but  to  my  thinking  they  are  entirely  incon- 
clusive, and  have  been  effectually  disposed  of  by,  among  others,  Bahr,* 
KeU.t  and  Rawlinson,  J  each  of  whom  cites  a  number  of  peculiarities  not 
only  of  diction,  but  of  manner,  arrangement,  materials,  &e.,§  which  clearly 
distinguish  the  Books  of  Kings  from  those  which  precede  them  in  the  sacred 
Canon. 

n.  TrrM. 

The  name  Emos  (D^S^D)  requires  but  little  notice.  Whether  these 
scriptures  bore  this  name  from  the  first  or  not — and  it  is  hardly  likely  that 
they  did,  the  probability  being  that  the  Book  was  originally  cited,  like  those 
of  the  Pentateuch,  &c.,  by  its  initial  words,  ^n  I^DHI,  and  was  only  called 
"  Kings  "  from  its  contents  (like  the  Book  of  "  Samuel ")  at  a  later  period — 
this  one  word  aptly  describes  the  character  and  subject-matter  of  this 
composition  and  sufficiently  distinguishes  it  from  the  rest  of  its  class.  It  is 
simply  a  history  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah,  in  the  order  of  their 
reigns.  The  LXX.  Title,  BamXciuv.  y. !.  (i,e.  "Kingdoms"),  expresses  the  same 
idea,  ||  for  in  Eastern  despotisms,  and  especially  under  the  Hebrew 
theocracy,  the  history  of  the  kingdom  was  practically  that  of  its  kinifB. 

•  "Die  Konige,"  Binleitung,  §  8. 

t  "  The  Booka  of  the  Kings."  English  Translation.  Introduction,  pp.  9, 10.  Oompaw 
his  "  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,"  vol.  i.  pp.  254 — 260. 

X  "  Speaker's  Commontary,"  vol.  ii.  p.  468. 

§  For  example.  The  chronology  ol  the  Kings  is  precise  and  detailed,  whilst  that  of 
1  and  2  Samuel  ia  extremely  vague  and  general ;  the  Kings  abound  in  references  to  th( 
Mosaic  law,  which  are  nowhere  found  in  Samuel ;  the  author  of  the  former  constantlj 
refers  to  his  authorities,  the  writer  of  the  latter  never. 

II  Jerome,  in  his  "  Prologus  Galeatus,"  questions  the  fitness  of  this  title,  but  with 
insufficient  reason.  The  books  contain  the  history  of  two  kingdoms,  though  of  but  out 
nation. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  KINGS.  iii 

IIT.  Contents  and  Pueposb. 

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  history  of  the  kings  of  the 
chosen  people  will  necessarily  have  a  different  character  and  a  different 
design  from  the  chronicles  of  all  other  reigns  and  dynasties ;  it  will,  in  fact, 
be  such  history  as  a  pious  Jew  would  naturally  write.     Such  a  one,  even 
without  the  guidance  of  Inspiration,  would  inevitably  view  all  the  events  in 
the  history  both  of  his  own  and  of  neighbouring  nations,  not  so  much  in 
their  secular  or  purely  historical  as  in  their  religious  aspect.    His  firm 
belief  in  a  particular  Providence  superintending  the  affairs  of  men,  and  re- 
quiting them  according  to  their  deserts  by  temporal  rewards  and  punishments, 
would  alone  give  a  stamp  and  colour  to  his  narrative  very  different  from 
that  of  the  profane  historian.     But  when  we  remember  that  the  historians 
of  Israel  were  in  every  case  prophets;  that  is,  that  they  were  the  advocates 
and  spokesmen*  of  the  Most  High,  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  history  in  their 
hands  will  have  a  "  purpose,"  and  that  they  will  write  with  a  distinctly 
religious  aim.    Such  was  assuredly  the  case  with  the  author  of  the  Enras. 
His  is  an  ecclesiastical  or  theocratic  rather  than  a  civil  histoiy.    Indeed, 
as  Bahr  well  observes,  "Hebrew  antiquity  does  not  know  the  secular 
historian."  t     The  different  kings,   consequently,  are  pourtrayed  not  so 
much  in  their  relations  to  their  subjects,  or  to  other  nations,  as  to  the 
Invisible  Ruler  of  Israel,  whose  representatives  they  were,  whose  religion 
they  were  charged  to  uphold,  and  of  whose  holy  law  they  were  the  executors. 
It  is  this  consideration  accounts,  as  Bawlinson  remarks,  for  the  great  length 
at  which  certain  reigns  are  recorded  as  compared  with  others.    It  is  this 
again,  and  not  any  "  prophetico-didaotio  tendency,"  or  any  idea  of  advancing 
the  prophetic  order,  accounts  for  the  prominence  given  to  the  ministries  of 
EUjah  and  Elisha,  and  to  the  interpositions  of  various  prophets  at  different 
crises  of  the  nation's  life  (see  1  Kings  i.  46 ;  xi.  29 — 40 ;  xiii.  12,  21 — 24 ; 
xiv.  6 — 16 ;  xxii  8 ;  2  Kings  xix.  20  ;  zx.  16 ;  xxii.  14,  &c.)    It  explains 
too  the  constant  references  to  the  Pentateuch,  and  to  the  previous  history 
of  the  race  (1  Kings  ii.  8 ;  iii.  14 ;  vi  11,  12  ;  viii.  66,  &o. ;  2  Kings  x.  31 ; 

*  The  rrpo-^tfnit  it  properly  one  who  speaks  for  another,  as  adTOcate  ox  interpreter.  It 
18  a  mistake  to  explain  the  word  of  prediction  or/oretelling.  The  vpo  has  no  reference  to 
time.  Apollo  is  called  /1[6£  trpo^ifniQ — "the  interpreter  of  Jove"  (Aesoh.  Eumen.  19). 
And  Plato  oalls  poets  Movauv  irpojirJTm  (Fhaedr.  262  d).  It  is  true  that  the  term  KUJ 
oouveyi  primarily  the  idea  of  itispiration,  or  possession  (K^^,  ebullivit,  Gesenius, 
Thesannu,  ii.  838 ;  cf.  it&vne  from  imivoiuu),  but  this  word  also,  at  an  early  period,  had 
the  meaning  of  "  spokesman,"  as  in  Ezod.  vii.  1, "  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet." 
The  "  prophets"  of  the  New  Testament  (1  Cor.  zi.  4, 6 ;  ziv.  passim),  it  is  well  known,  wei* 
preachers  rather  than  prediotera,  and  the  term  "prophesying"  was  formerly  used  in  ou 
mm  language  of  expounding. 

t  In  the  American  translation  of  Lange's  "  Bibelwerk"  unfortunately  rendered,  "  The 
■eoular  historian  does  not  know  Hebrew  anti(;iuity." 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


xiv.  e ;  xvii.  18,  16,  87 ;  xviii.  4—6,  &c.),  and  the  constant  comparison  of 
the  Buecessive  monarohs  with  the  king  "  after  God's  own  heart "  (1  Kings 
xi.  4,  88;  xiv.  8;  xv.  8,  11,  &o.),  and  their  judgment  by  the  standard  of 
the  Mosaic  law  (1  Kings  iu.  14 ;  vL  11, 12 ;  viii.  66,  &o.)  The  object  of 
the  historian  clearly  was,  not  to  chronicle  the  naked  facts  of  Jewish  history^ 
bnt  to  show  how  the  rise,  the  glories,  the  decline  and  the  fall  of  the  Hebrew 
kingdoms  were  respectively  the  results  of  the  piety  and  faithfulness  or  of 
the  irreligion  and  idolatry  of  the  different  kings  and  their  subjects.  Writing 
during  the  captivity,  he  would  teach  his  coimtrymen  how  all  the  miseri6& 
which  had  come  upon  them,  miseries  which  had  culminated  in  the  destruction 
of  their  temple,  the  overthrow  of  their  monarchy,  and  their  own  transporta- 
tion from  the  land  of  their  forefathers,  were  the  judgments  of  God  upon 
their  sins  and  the  &uits  of  the  national  apostasy,  He  would  trace,  too,  the 
fulfilment,  through  successive  generations,  of  the  great  promise  of  2  Sam. 
vii.  12 — 16,  the  charter  of  the  house  of  David,  on  which  promise  indeed 
the  history  is  a  continuous  and  striking  commentary.  True  to  his  mission 
SB  the  Divine  ambassador,  he  would  teach  them  everywhere  to  see  the  finger 
of  God  in  their  nation's  history,  and  by  the  record  of  incontrovertible  facta^ 
and  especially  by  showing  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  and  threatening* 
of  the  Law,  he  would  preach  a  return  to  the  faith  and  morals  of  a  purer  age, 
and  would  urge  "his  contemporaries,  living  in  exile  with  him,  to  cling 
faithfully  to  the  covenant  made  by  God  through  Moses,  and  to  honour 
steadfastly  the  one  true  God."  * 

The  two  Books  embrace  a  period  of  four  and  a  half  centuries ;  viz.  from 
the  accession  of  Solomon  in  B.a  1016  to  the  close  of  the  captivily  of 
Jehoiachin  in  b.o.  662. 

IV.  Datb. 

The  date  of  the  composition  of  the  Kings  can  be  fixed,  with  much  greater 
facihty  and  certainty  than  that  of  many  portions  of  Scripture,  from  the 
contents  of  the  Books  themselves.  It  must  lie  somewhere  between 
B.C.  561  and  b.o.  588 ;  that  is  to  say,  it  must  have  been  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  Babylonian  captivity.  It  cannot  have  been  before  B.a  561,  for  that 
is  the  year  of  the  accession  of  Evil-Merodach,  whose  kindly  treatment  of 
Jehoiachin,  "in  the  year  that  he  began  to  reign,"  is  the  last  event  men- 
tioned in  the  history.  Assuming  that  this  is  not  an  addition  by  a  later 
hand,  which  we  have  no  reason  to  think  is  the  case,t  we  have  thus  one 
Umit— a  maximum  of  antiquity— fixed  with  certainty.  And  it  cannot  have 
been  after  b.o.  688,  the  date  of  the  return  under  Zerubbabel,  as  it  is  quite 
inconceivable  that  the  historian  should  have  omitted  to  notice  an  event  of 
Buoh  profound  importance,  and  one  too  which  had  such  a  direct  bearing  on 
•  Theniui.  f  gee  Keil,  Introduction  to  Kings,  p.  ». 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  KINGS. 


the  purpose  for  vhioh  the  history  was  penned — which  was  partly,  as  we 
have  abeady  remarked,  to  trace  the  fulfilment  of  2  Sam.  vii.  12 — 16,  in 
the  fortunes  of  David's  house— had  that  event  occurred  at  the  time  when  he 
wrote.  We  may  safely  assign  this  year,  consequently,  as  the  minimum  date 
for  the  composition  of  the  work. 

And  with  this  conclusion,  that  the  Books  of  Kings  were  written  during 
the  captivity,  the  style  and  diction  of  the  Books  themselves  agree.  "  The 
language  of  Kings  belongs  unmistakably  to  the  period  of  the  captivity " 
{Bawlinson,  "  Speaker's  Commentary,"  pp.  469,  470).  *  Lord  A.  Hervey, 
indeed,  contends  that  "  the  general  character  of  the  language  is  that  of  the 
time  befort  the  Babylonish  captivity  " — elsewhere  he  mentions  "  the  age  of 
Jeremiah  " — ^but  even  if  we  allow  this,  it  does  not  in  the  least  invalidate  the 
conclusion  that  the  work  was  given  to  the  world  between  ao.  460  and 
B.O.  440,  and  probably  about  b.o.  460. 

Y.  Thb  AuTHORsm* 

is  •  question  of  much  greater  difficulty,  t  It  was  long  held,  and  it  is  still 
maintained  by  many  scholars,  that  the  Kings  are  the  work  of  the  prophet 
Jeremiah.  And  in  support  of  this  view  may  be  alleged — 1.  Jewish  traditioa 
The  Talmud  (Baba  Bathra,  f.  IS.  1)  unhesitatingly  ascribes  the  work  to 
him.  Jeremia*  scripsit  librum  suwm  tt  librum  regum  et  threnot,  2.  The  last 
chapter  of  2  Kings  agrees,  except  in  some  few  particulars,  with  Jer.  liL  The 
spelling  in  the  latter  is  more  archaic  and  the  facts  recorded  in  vers.  28 — 80 
differ  team  those  of  2  Kings  xxv.  22 — 26,  but  the  general  agreement  is  very 
striking;  It  is  alleged,  accordingly,  and  not  without  reason,  that  the  two 
narratives  must  have  had  a  common  origin,  and  more,  that  the  final  page  of 
Jeremiah's  history  of  the  Kings,  with  a  few  alterations  and  additions  made  by 
•  later  hand,  was  appended  to  his  collection  of  prophecies,  as  forming  a 
fitting  conclusion  to  those  writings.  And  certainly  this  arrangement,  though 
it  does  not  prove  Jeremiah's  authorship  of  the  Kings,  does  afford  evidence 
of  a  very  ancient  belief  that  he  was  the  writer.  8.  There  is  in  many  cases  a 
marked  resemblance  between  the  language  of  Kings  and  that  of  Jeremiah. 
Havernick,  perhaps  the  most  powerful  and  energetic  advocate  of  this  view, 
has  furnished  a  striking  list  of  phrases  and  expressions  common  to  both.  \ 
And  so  marked  are  the  correspondences  between  them  that  even  Bahr,  who 
summarily  rejects  this  hypothesis,  is  constrained  to  allow  that  "  the  mode  of 

*  BawliuBon  givoa,  be.  HU,  an  inteiesting  list  of  the  word*  and  phrasea  which  inbstaa. 
tiste  this  aBsertion.    And  bm  Diot.  Bib.  vol.  ii.  p.  26. 

t  "  As  regards  the  anthorship  of  these  Books,  but  Uttle  difflonlfy  presents  itself  "  (Lord 
A.  K&yej,  who  asoribes  them  to  Jeremiah).  Bat  Bahr,  Eeil,  ol.  reject  this  idea  with  equal 
positiveness. 

I  Einleitnng,  vol.  iL  pp.  171  iqq.  Tblf  lilt  la  Moessibl*  t«  tiu  EogUsh  nwlar  in  th* 
-"  Speaker's  Oommentary,"  ii.  p.  471. 


INTRuDUCTION  TO 


thinkmg  and  expression  resembles  that  of  Jeremiah,"  and  he  accounts  for 
the  similarity  by  the  conjecture  that  our  author  had  before  him  the  -writinga 
of  the  prophet  or  was,  perhaps,  his  pupil,*  while  Stahelin  is  driven  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  writer  was  an  imitator  of  Jeremiah.  But  the  resem- 
blance  is  not  confined  to  words  and  phrases :  there  is  in  both  writings  the 
same  tone,  the  same  air  of  despondency  and  hopelessness,  t  while  many  of 
the  facts  and  narratives  again  are  more  or  less  common  to  the  history  and 
the  prophecy.  J  4  Another  consideration  which  is  equally  striking  is  the 
omission  of  all  mention  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah  in  the  Books  of  Eiugs — an 
omission  easily  accounted  for  if  he  was  the  author  of  those  Books,  but 
difficult  to  explain  on  any  other  supposition.  Modesty  would  very  naturally 
lead  the  historian  to  omit  all  mention  of  the  share  he  himself  had  taken 
in  the  transactions  of  his  time,  especially  as  it  was  recorded  at  length  else- 
where. But  the  part  Jeremiah  sustained  in  the  closing  scenes  of  the  history 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  was  one  of  so  much  importance  that  it  is  hard  to 
conceive  any  impartial,  not  to  say  pious  or  theocratic  historian,  completely 
ignoring  both  his  name  and  his  work.f 

But  a  string  of  arguments,  equally  numerous  and  equally  influential,  can 
be  adduced  against  the  authorship  of  Jeremiah,  prominent  among  which  are 
the  following :   1.  That  if  Jeremiah  did  compile  these  histories,  he  must 
have  been  at  the  time  about  eighty-six  or  eighty-seven  years  of  age.    Bahr 
regards  this  one  consideration  as  conclusive.     He,  like  Keil  and  others, 
points  out  that  Jeremiah's  ministry  began  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  the 
reign  of  Josiah  (Jer.  L  2),  when,  it  is  urged,  he  must  have  been  at  least 
twenty  years  of  age.     But  the  Book  of  Kings,  as  we  have  just  seen,  cannot 
have  been  penned  earlier  than  b.o.  562 ;  that  is  to  say,  at  least  sixty-six 
years  afterwards.    In  reply  to  this,  however,  it  may  fairly  be  remarked  (1) 
that  it  is  quite  possible  that  Jeremiah's  entrance  upon  the  prophetic  office 
took  place  before  he  was  twenty  years  old.  He  calls  himself  a  child  (IJ??  Jer. 
L  6),  and  though  the  word  is  not  always  to  be  taken  literally,  or  as  furnish- 
ing any  definite  chronological  datum,  ||  yet  the  tradition  that  he  was  but  a 
boy  of  fourteen  is  not  wholly  irrational  or  incredible.     (2)  It  is  quite  within 
the  bounds  of  possibility  that  the  work  may  have  been  written  by  an 
octogenarian.    We  have  had  conspicuous  instances  amongst  our  own  con- 
temporaries of  men  far  advanced  in  years  retaining  all  their  mental  vigour 
•  Thig  latter  supposition  is  also  the  view  of  Thenius.    Bleek  suggests  Baruoh 
t  Compare  2  Kings  xvu.  U  with  Jer.  vii.  26 ;  1  Kings  ix.  8  with  Jer.  xxii.  8 ;  and 
«  ^ngs  m.  12  with  Jer.  xix.  8.    These  parallels  are  the  more  striking  since  they  disclose 
M  the  same  time  a  similarity  of  tone  and  of  language. 
t  For  a  Ust  of  these,  see  "  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,"  vol.  ii.  pp.  28—30 
I  It  ii  true  Jeremiah  ig  only  mentioned  twice  by  the  Chronicler,  but  this  is  easi]j 
•ooounted  for  by  the  brevity  and  inoompleteneBS  of  his  work. 
It  Hagelsbaoh,  "  Jeromias,"  in  Lange's  "  Bibelwerk,"  p.  2.  " 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  KINGS.  tU 

and  engaging  in  arduous  literary  labours.  And  (3)  it  does  not  absolutely 
follow,  because  the  last  paragraph  of  the  Kings  carries  us  down  to  b.o.  5C2 
that  that  is  also  the  date  of  the  composition  or  compilation  of  the  rest.  It 
is  quite  obvious  that  the  bulk  of  the  work  might  have  been  written  by 
Jeremiah  some  years  before,  and  that  these  concluding  sentences  might 
have  been  added  by  him  in  extreme  old  age.  There  is  much  greater  force, 
however,  in  a  second  objection,  viz.,  that  the  Kings  must  have  been  written 
or  completed  in  Babylon,  whilst  Jeremiah  spent  the  concluding  years  of 
his  life  and  died  in  Egypt.  For,  though  it  is  not  absolutely  certain,  it  is 
extremely  probable  that  the  work  was  finished  and  published  in  Babylon. 
There  is  not  much  weight  perhaps  in  Bahr's  remark  that  it  cannot  have 
been  composed  for  the  handful  of  fugitives  who  accompanied  Jeremiah  to 
Egypt,  but  must  have  been  designed  for  the  kernel  of  the  people  in  cap- 
tivity, for  the  prophet  may  have  composed  the  work  in  Tabpenes,  and  have 
at  the  same  time  hoped,  perhaps  even  provided,  for  its  transmission  to 
Babylon.  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  while  the  writer  was  evidently 
familiar  with  what  transpired  in  the  court  of  Evil-Merodaoh,  and  was 
acquainted  with  details  which  could  hardly  have  been  known  to  a  resident 
in  Egypt,  there  is  an  absence  of  all  reference  to  the  latter  country  and 
the  fortunes  of  the  remnant  there.  The  last  chapter  of  the  work,  that  is  to 
say,  points  to  Babylon  as  the  place  where  it  was  written.  So  also,  prima 
facie,  does  the  expression  of  1  Kings  iv.  24,  "  beyond  the  river  "  (Auth.  Vers. 
' '  on  this  side  the  river  ").  The  "  region  beyond  the  river  "  can  only  mean 
that  west  of  the  Euphrates,  and  therefore  the  natural  conclusion  is  that  the 
writer  must  have  dwelt  east  of  the  Euphrates,  i.e.,  in  Babylon.  It  is 
alleged,  however,  that  this  expression,  which  is  also  found  in  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah,  had  come  at  this  time  to  have  a  meaning  different  from  its  strict 
geographical  signification,  and  was  used  by  Jews,  wherever  they  might 
happen  to  reside,  of  the  provinces  of  the  Babylonian  Empire  (including 
Palestine),  west  of  the  Great  Eiver,  just  as  a  Eoman,  even  after  residing 
in  the  country,  might  speak  of  Gallia  Transalpina,  and  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  the  expression  is  used  indifferently  of  either  side  of  the  Jordan,  and 
therefore  presumably  it  may  designate  either  side  of  the  Euphrates.*  But 
it  is  to  be  observed — 1.  that  in  the  majority  of  instances  where  the  expres- 
sion is  used  of  the  Euphrates  (Ezra  vi.  6;  vii.  21,  25 ;  Neh.  ii  7),  it  is 
found  in  the  lips  of  persons  residing  in  Babylonia  or  Media;  2.  that  in 
other  instances  (Ezra  iv.  10, 11,  16)  it  is  used  in  letters  of  state  by  Persian 
officers,  who  would  naturally  adapt  their  language  to  the  usages  of  the 
Persian  court  and  of  their  own  country,  even  when  resident  abroad,  and 
lastly,  that  in  the  one  instance  (Ezra  viii.  36)  where  the  words  are  employed 

*  Bee  note  on  ch.  iv.  9i, 


viji  INTKODUOTION  TO 


of  Jews  resident  in  Palestine,  it  is  by  a  Jew  who  had  just  returned  from 
Persia.  While  therefore  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  positive 
oonolusion  from  the  use  of  this  formula,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  impres- 
sion that  on  the  whole  it  suggests  that  the  Book  was  written  in  Babylon, 
and  therefore  not  by  Jeremiah.  8.  A  third  consideration  alleged  by  Eeil 
in  his  earlier  edition,'*'  viz.,  that  the  variations  of  style  and  diction  between 
2  Kings  XXV.  and  Jer.  lii.  are  such  as  to  negative  the  supposition  of  their 
having  proceeded  &om  the  same  pen,  or  rather  such  as  to  compel  the  belief 
that  "  this  section  has  been  extracted  by  the  author  or  editor  in  the  two 
cases  from  a  common  or  more  copious  source,"  is  too  precarious  to  require 
much  notice,  the  more  so,  as  (1)  these  variations,  when  carefully  examined, 
prove  to  be  inconsiderable,  and  (2)  even  if  the  distinct  authorship  of  these 
two  portions,  or  their  having  been  copied  from  a  common  authority,  were 
established,  it  would  by  no  means  necessarily  follow  that  Jeremiah  had  not 
copied  them,  or  had  had  no  share  in  the  rest  of  the  work. 

It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  arguments  for  and  against  Jeremiah's 
authorship  of  the  Einos  are  so  evenly  balanced  that  it  is  impossible  to 
speak  positively  one  way  or  the  other.  Professor  Bawlinson  has  stated  the 
conclusion  to  which  an  impartial  survey  conducts  us  with  great  fairness 
and  caution.  "  Though  Jeremiah's  authorship  appears,  all  things  oon« 
sidered,  to  be  highly  probable,  we  must  admit  that  it  has  not  been  froved, 
and  is,  therefore,  to  some  extent,  uncertain,  "t 

YI.    SOUBOES  or  THE  WOBE. 

The  Books  of  Kings  being  obviously  and  necessarily,  from  their  historical 
character,  to  a  very  large  extent,  a  compilation  from  other  sources,  the 
question  now  presents  itself,  What  and  of  what  sort  were  the  records  from 
which  this  narrative  was  constructed  ? 

What  they  were  the  writer  himself  informs  us.  He  mentions  three 
"  books  "  from  which  his  information  must  have  been  largely  derived—"  ih$ 
book  of  the  acts  of  Solomon  "  (1  Kings  xi.  41)  ;  "  the  book  of  tk*  dfvmwlM  of 
{lit.  of  the  words  [or  events]  of  the  days  to)  the  kings  ofJudah  "  (1  Kings  xiv.  29 ; 
XV.  7,  22 ;  xxiL  45 ;  2  Kings  passim) ;  and  "  the  booh  of  the  Chroniclu  ("  the 
words  of  the  days")  of  the  kings  of  Israel"  (1  Kings  xiv.  19;  xv.  81,  Ao.) 
That  he  made  abundant  use  of  these  authorities  is  evident  from  the  bot 
that  he  refers  to  them  more  than  thirty  times ;  that  he  constantly  quoted  from 
them  verbatim  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  passages  agreeing  almost  verbatim 
with  those  of  the  Kings  are  found  in  the  Books  of  Chronicles,  and  also  from 

•  PiolMKir  BawlinBon  appears  to  have  only  had  the  edition  of  1846  before  hJm.  But 
the  Ewai  of  EeU  and  DeUtzsoh's  Oommentaiy  is  practicaUy  a  new  work,  and  diffm  verj 
materially  from  its  predecessor. 

t  "  Speaker's  Commentary,"  U.  473. 


THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  KINGS. 


the  nse  of  expressions  which  manifestly  belong,  not  to  our  author,  but  to 
Bome  document  which  he  cites.*  It  is  consequently  more  than  "  a  reason- 
able supposition  that "  this  "  history  was,  in  part  at  least,  derived  from  the 
works  in  question."!  And  there  is  a  strong  presumption  that  these  were 
his  only  authorities,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  a  narrative  of  th« 
ministry  of  the  prophets  Elijah  and  Elisha,  for  though  he  refers  to  them  so 
constantly,  he  never  once  refers  to  any  other.  What,  however,  was  the 
precise  character  of  these  writings  is  a  matter  of  considerable  uncertainty. 
We  are  warranted  in  the  belief,  from  the  way  in  which  they  are  cited,  that 
they  were  three  separate  and  independent  works,  and  that  they  contained 
fuller  and  more  extended  accounts  of  the  reigns  of  the  several  kings  than 
.  any  which  we  now  possess,  for  the  invariable  formula  in  which  they  are 
referred  to  is  this,  "  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  ...  .  are  they  not  written 
in  the  Book  of  the  Chronicles,"  &o.  It  hardly  follows,  however,  as  Bahr 
thinks,  that  this  formula  implies  that  the  works,  at  the  time  our  history  was 
written,  were  *'in  general  circulation,"  or  "  in  the  hands  of  many,"  for  our 
author  surely  might  reasonably  refer  to  them,  even  if  they  were  not  generally 
known  or  rea^y  accessible.  But  the  great  question  in  dispute  is  this: 
Were  "  the  books  of  the  words  of  the  days  to  the  kings,"  as  their  name  at 
first  sight  seems  to  imply,  state  papers ;  i.e,,  pubUc  archives  prepared  by 
appointed  ofBcers,  or  were  they  private  memoirs  of  the  different  prophets. 
The  former  opinion  has  the  support  of  many  great  names.  ^  It  is  alleged 
in  its  favour  that  there  was,  at  any  rate  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  a  state 
fanctionary,  "  the  recorder,"  whose  business  it  was  to  chronicle  events  and 
prepare  memoirs  of  the  different  reigns,  a  *'  court  historian,"  as  he  has 
been  called ;  §  that  such  memoirs  were  certainly  prepared  in  the  kingdom 
of  Persia  by  an  authorized  ofQcer,  and  were  afterwards  preserved  as  state 
annals,  II  and,  lastly,  that  such  public  documents  appear  to  be  snfQciently 
indioated  by  the  very  name  they  bear,  "  The  book  of  the  chronicles  to  the 
kings."  There  is  no  question,  however,  despite  these  allegations,  that  the 
second  view  is  the  correct  one,  and  that  the  "  Chronicles  "  were  the  com- 
pilations, not  of  state  o£&cials,  but  of  various  members  of  the  schools  of  the 
prophets.    For,  to  begin  with,  the  name  by  which  these  writings  are  known, 

*  The  ezpiessioii  "unto  thU  day,"  in  the  great  majority  of  oases,  oaimot  lefer  to  the 
date  of  anthorship— the  time  of  the  oaptivity— but  belongs  to  a  period  when  the  southem 
kingdom  vaa  still  in  exiatenoe,  and  the  temple  was  still  standing.  See  1  Kings  mL  8 ; 
lx.13;  z.  12;  2  Kings  ii.  22;  z.  27;  ziv.  7;  svL8;  zz.l7,&o. 

t  Bawlinson. 

t  Among  others,  Berthold,  Havemick,  Movers,  and  Evald. 

I  Ewald,  "History  of  Israiel,"  iii.  p.  270.  Ewald,  however,  does  not  identify  this  oiBee* 
with  the  itfasUroiBemembranoer  (see  p.  267)  as  many  writers  do.  See,  e.g..  Dim.  Bible, 
Art.  "King." 

II  A  «imiiai-  institiitiMi  il  said  to  exist  in  modem  Persia.  Vida  Maloolm's  «  History  tt 
nnria,»  ah.  niii 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


and  which  has  heen  thought  to  imply  a  civil  origin,  really  means  no  more 
than  this,  "  the  Book  of  the  history  of  the  timet  of  the  Kings,"  &o.,  as  Keil 
interprets  it,  and  by  no  means  indicates  any  official  archives.  And,  in  the 
second  place,  we  have  no  evidence  in  support  of  the  view  that  the  recorder  or 
any  other  officer  was  charged  with  the  preparation  of  the  history  of  his  time. 
The  word  T?tD  properly  means  "  remembrancer,"  and  he  was  no  doubt  so 
called,  not  "  because  he  kept  the  memory  of  events  alive,"  *  but  because  he 
reminded  the  king  of  the  state  affairs  which  required  his  attention.  It  is 
generally  admitted  +  that  he  was  "  more  than  an  annalist,"  but  is  not  so 
well  understood  that  in  no  case  in  which  he  figures  in  the  history  is  he  in 
any  way  connected  with  the  public  records,  but  always  appears  as  the  king's 
adviser  or  chancellor  (cf.  2  Kings  xviii.  18,  37;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  8),  More- 
over, there  are  almost  insuperable  difficulties  in  the  way  of  believing  that 
the  "  books  of  the  Chronicles "  can  have  been  compiled  by  this  remem- 
brancer. For  example,  (1)  there  is  no  trace  of  the  existence  of  any  such 
functionary  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel ;  (2)  David  is  said  to  have  instituted 
the  office  of  "  court  and  state  scribe,"  but  we  find  that  David's  history  was 
recorded,  not  in  any  state  annals  prepared  by  this  functionary,  but  in  "  the 
book  of  Samuel  the  teer,  and  in  the  book  of  Nathan  the  prophet,  and  in  the 
book  of  Gad  the  seer  "  (1  Chron.  xxix.  29).  Now,  surely,  if  any  such  officer 
charged  with  such  a  duty  had  existed,  the  record  of  David's  life  would 
have  been  composed  by  him,  and  not  by  unofficial  and  irresponsible  persons. 
But  (8)  the  state  archives  of  the  two  kingdoms,  including  the  memoirs — if 
such  there  were — of  the  different  kings,  can  hardly  have  escaped  the  sack 
of  Samaria  and  the  burning  of  Jerusalem.  It  has  been  conjectured,  indeed, 
that  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  monarchs  preserved  the  records  of  con- 
quered nations  in  their  respective  capitals,  and  permitted  such  of  the 
exiles  as  had  acquired  their  favour  to  have  access  to  them,}  but  this,  as 
Bahr  observes,  is  obviously  a  supposition  "  as  unfounded  as  it  is  arbitrary," 
and  is  beset  with  difficulties.  Seeing  that  not  only  the  royal  palace,  but 
also  "  all  the  great  houses  were  burned"  (2  Kings  xxv.  9),  the  conclusion  is 
almost  inevitable  that  all  the  public  records  must  have  perished.  And  such 
records— in  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  at  least— had  also  had  to  run  the 
gauntlet  of  intestine  warfare  and  dissension.  A  dynasty  cannot  be  changed 
nine  times,  and  each  time  be  destroyed,  root  and  branch,  without  the 
greatest  danger  to  the  archives  of  sharing  the  same  fate.  That  amid  aU  the 
changes  and  chances  of  the  two  kingdoms,  changes  which  culminated  in 
the  transportation  of  the  two  entire  nations  to  distant  lands,  the  state 
•Duals  had  been  preserved  and  were  accessible  to  a  historian  of  the  time  of 

•  Diet.  Bib.,  Art.  "  King." 

t  See  Diet.  Bib.,  Art.  "  Beoorder." 

t  Btahelin,  Einleitung,  b.  129,  cited  bj  BEha, 


THE  BOOKS  OF  TUE  KINGS. 


the  captivity,  seems  almost  incredible.  But  our  author  manifestly  refers  to 
the  "Books  of  the  Chronicles,"  &c.,  as  still  existent  in  his  time,  and,  if  not 
generally  circulated,  yet  guarded  and  accessible  somewhere.  But  a  BtUl 
more  conclusive  argument  against  the  "atate  paper"  origin  of  our  histories 
is  found  in  their  contents.  Their  tone  and  language  absolutely  forbid  the 
supposition  that  they  were  based  on  the  records  of  any  court  historio- 
grapher. They  are  to  a  very  large  extent  histories  of  the  sins,  idolatries, 
and  enormities  of  the  respective  sovereigns  whose  reigns  they  describe. 
"  The  history  of  the  reign  of  each  of  the  nineteen  kings  of  Israel  begins 
with  the  formula, '  He  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.' 
The  same  formula  occurs  again  with  respect  to  twelve  out  of  the  twenty 
kings  of  Judah.  .  .  .  Even  of  the  greatest  and  most  glorious  king, 
Solomon,  it  is  related  at  length  how  deeply  he  fell.  '  The  sin  of  Jeroboam 
who  made  Israel  to  sin '  is  represented  as  the  source  of  all  the  evils  of  the 
kingdom:  the  conspiracies  and  murders  of  a  Baasha,  a  Shallum,  a 
Menahem ;  the  shameful  acts  of  an  Ahab,  a  Jezebel,  and  a  Manasseh  are 
recorded  without  any  indulgence."  *  And  these  are  the  deeds  and  the  reigns 
with  respect  to  which  we  are  referred  for  fuller  information  "  to  the  Books 
of  the  Chronicles."  For  that  these  "  Chronicles "  contained  accounts  of 
the  impieties  and  abominations  of  the  various  kings  is  clear  from  2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  8,  where  we  read  (of  Jehoiakim),  "  His  abominations  which  he  did 
and  that  which  was  found  in  him,  behold  they  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah."  Now,  it  is  altogether  out  of  the  ques- 
tion that  any  court  scribe  can  have  described  his  late  master's  reign  in 
such  terms  as  these ;  indeed  no  one  could  or  would  have  used  such 
language,  but  men  who  lived  at  a  later  period,  and  those,  courageous  and 
high-minded  prophets,  who  were  perfectly  independent  of  the  court  and 
regardless  of  its  favours.  And,  lastly,  the  constant  change  of  dynasty  on 
the  throne  of  Israel  is  fatal  to  the  supposition.  We  have  already  mentioned 
those  changes  as  endangering  the  preservation  of  the  state  papers,  but  they 
are  equally  an  argument  against  the  memoirs  of  the  different  royal  houses 
having  been  written  by  the  "  recorder,"  for  the  object  of  each  successive 
dynasty  would  be,  not  to  preserve  a  faithful  record  of  the  reigns  of  ita 
predecessor,  but  to  stamp  them  with  infamy,  or  consign  them  to  oblivion. 

We  find,  therefore,  that  the  prevailing  opinion  as  to  the  character  of  the 
"  books  01  true  words  of  the  days '  is  encompassed  with  difficulties.  But 
these  vanish  at  once,  if  we  see  in  these  records  the  compilations  of  the 
schools  of  the  prophets.  We  have  incontrovertible  evidence  that  prophets 
did  act  as  historians.  Samuel,  Nathan,  Gad,  Iddo,  Ahijah,  Shemaiah, 
Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani,  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz,  are  all  mentioned  by 

•  Bahr  (Einleitung,  p.  12),  whom  1  have  largely  followed  in  this  not* 


^  INTRODUCTION  TO 


namo  as  the  oompilers  of  memoirs.  We  know,  too,  that  for  portions  of 
this  very  history  we  must  be  indebted  to  members,  probably  unknown 
members,  of  the  prophetio  order.  The  histories  of  EKjah  and  Elisha 
never  formed  part  of  the  "books  of  the  Ohronioles."  and  they  contain 
matters  which,  in  the  nature  of  things,  can  only  have  been  contributed  by 
these  prophets  themselves,  or  by  their  scholars  or  servants.^  The  history 
of  Elisha,  especially,  has  several  marks  of  a  separate  origin.  It  is  dis- 
tinguished by  a  number  of  peculiarities — "  provincialisms"  they  have 
been  called — which  betraiy  a  different  hand,  while  the  narratives  are  snch 
as  can  only  have  proceeded,  originally,  from  an  eye-witness.  But  perhaps 
it  is  hardly  necessary  to  mention  these  particulars,  as  it  is  "  universally 
allowed  that  prophets  generally  were  the  historians  of  the  Israelitish 
people.'"*'  It  was  almost  as  essential  a  part  of  their  office  to  trace  the  hand 
of  Ood  in  the  past  history  of  the  Hebrew  race  as  to  predict  fatnre  visita- 
tions, or  to  promise  deliverances.  They  were  preachers  of  righteousness, 
spokesmen  for  God,  interpreters  of  his  just  laws  and  dealings,  and  to  be 
this  they  only  needed  to  be  faithful  and  impartial  historians.  It  is  not 
without  significance,  in  this  connexion,  that  the  historical  books  of  the  Old 
Testament  were  known  to  the  Jewish  fathers  by  the  name  D^K^^i}  "  and  are 
distinguished  from  the  books  strictly  prophetical  only  in  this,  that  the 
adjective  D^J^e^Kl  priore$,  is  applied  to  them,  and  to  the  latter  D^JlinK 
potterimres."  f 

But  we  have  evidence  of  the  most  positive  and  conclusive  kind,  evidence 
almost  amounting  to  demonstration,  that  the  three  authorities  to  which  our 
historian  so  repeatedly  refers,  were  in  their  original  form  the  works  of 
different  prophets,  and  not  of  the  public  annalist.  For  we  find  that  where 
the  author  of  Ejnos,  after  transcribing  a  string  of  passages,  which  agree 
almost  word  for  word  with  a  series  in  the  Books  of  Ohronioles,  |  and  which 
must  therefore  have  been  derived  fi:om  a  common  source,  refers  to  "  the  book 
of  the  acts  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi  41),  the  chronicler  radicates  as  the 
documents  upon  which  he  has  drawn,  "  the  book  of  Nathan  the  prophet,  and 
the  prophecy  of  Ahijah  the  Shilonite,  and  the  visions  of  Iddo  the  uer. 
The  conclusion,  therefore,  is  irresistible  (2  Chron.  ix.  29),  that  the  "book 
of  the  words  of  the  days  to  Solomon,"  if  not  identical  with  the  writings  of 
the  three  prophets  who  were  the  historians  of  that  reign,  was  nevertheless 
based  on  those  writings,  and  to  a  large  extent  composed  of  extracts  from 

•  Bahr,  who  cites  Knobel, "  Der  Prophet,  der  Hebr."  i.  68  sqq.  JoBephiu  (Oontim  Aniga. 
I.  8)  expressly  says,  "  The  prophets,  who  were  after  Uosei,  wrote  down  whrt  wm  dMuta 
their  time  in  thirteen  books."  "-•«»■■  uww  b 

tBahr. 


:  Compare  1  Kings  viii.  12-60  with  %  Ohron.  vL  1-40:  1  Einn  iUL. 
•  Ohroa.  ^  7-285  1  Kings  x.  1-28,  with  2  Ohron.  ix.  l-M.  ^ 


Ci-lLtt 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  KINGS. 


them.  It  is  possible,  and  indeed  probable,  that  in  the  one  "  book  of  the 
Chronicles,"  the  memoirs  of  the  three  historians  had  been  condensed, 
arranged,  and  harmonized ;  but  it  hardly  admits  of  doubt  that  the  latter 
were  the  originals  of  the  former.  And  the  same  remarks  apply,  mutotu 
mutandis,  to  the  "  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Judah."  The 
history  of  Eehoboam  in  1  Kings  xii.  1—19  is  identical  with  the  accotmt  of 
that  monarch  in  2  Chron.  x.  1 — 4  ;  the  words  of  1  Kings  xii.  20 — 24  are 
the  same  that  are  found  in  2  Ghron.  xi.  1—4 ;  while  2  Ohron.  xii.  13  is 
practically  a  repetition  of  1  Kings  xiv.  21.  But  the  authority  to  which 
our  author  refers  is  the  "  book  of  the  ohronieles  of  the  kings  of  Judah," 
whereas  that  mentioned  by  the  Chronicler  is  "  the  book  of  Shemaiah  the 
prophet,  and  of  Iddo  the  seer"  Now  it  is  clear  that  these  parallel  passages 
are  derived  &om  the  same  source,  and  that  source  most  be  the  book  or 
books  of  these  two  prophets.* 

Nor  does  it  invalidate  this  contention  that  the  Chronicler,  in  addition  to 
the  prophetic  writings  just  named,  also  cites  occasionally  the  "  book  of  the 
kings  of  Israel  and  Judah"  (2  Chron.  xvi.  11 ;  xxv.  26 ;  xxvii.  7 ;  xxviii. 
26 ;  xxxii.  82 ;  xxxv.  27,  &o.) ;  in  one  place  apparently  called  "  the  book  of 
the  kings  of  Israel "  (2  Ghron.  xx.  84),  together  with  a  "  Midrash  of  the 
book  of  the  Kings  "  (S  Chron.  xxiv.  27).  For  we  have  no  evidence  whatso- 
ever that  any  of  these  authorities  were  of  a  public  and  civU  character.  On 
the  contrary,  we  have  ground  for  believing  that  they  were  composed  of  the 
memoirs  of  the  prophets.  It  is  not  quite  clear  what  the  Midrash  just 
referred  to  was,  but  the  two  works  first  cited  were  probably  identical  with 
"  the  Books  of  the  Chronicles "  so  often  mentioned  by  our  historiaa 
And  in  one  case  (2  Chron.  xx.  84),  we  have  distinct  mention  of  a  prophetic 
book  or  writing — ^that  of  Jehu,  the  son  of  Hanani — ^which  was  embodied  in 
the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel.f 

We  can  hardly  be  mistaken,  therefore,  in  concluding  from  these  data 
that  the  prime  "  sources  of  this  work  "  were  really  the  prophetic  memoirs 
mentioned  by  the  Chronicler  (1  Chron.  ixvii.  24 ;  xxix.  29 ;  2  Chron. 
ix.  89;  xii.  15;  xiii.  22;  xx.  84;  xxiv.  27;  xxvi.  22 ;  xxxii.  82;  xxxiii.  18) 
which,  together,  perhaps,  with  other  writings,  the  authors  of  which  are 
unknown  to  us,  furnish  the  materials  for  the  "  Books  of  the  Words  of  the 
Days,"  &c. 

The  relation  of  the  Kings  to  the  Books  of  the  Ohbonicleb  will  be  more 
appropriately  discussed  in  the  Introduction  to  that  volume. 

*  The  foot  that  the  Ohioniokr  alleges  hii  anthority,  and  that  a  diflerent  one  from  1h» 
anthoritj  giTen  by  the  Einqs,  forbids  the  assumption  that  the  agreement  is  the  result  ol 
copying  on  the  part  of  the  former  from  the  latter. 

t  n^^i'l,  literally  was  made  to  atetnd  tg/on,  *.«.,  wu  introduced  or  inoorporated  into  fh« 
histwy  of  the  Unga  of  IsraeL 


xlT  INTEODUCTION  TO 


VII.    CEBDIBILrrY. 

But  the  question  may  possibly  arise,  Are  these  Trritings,  whatever  their 
origin,  to  be  accepted  as  authentic,  sober  history  ? 

It  is  a  question,  happily,  which  may  be  dismissed  with  few  words,  for 
their  veracity  has  never  been  seriously  doubted.  If  we  except  the  miraculous 
portions  of  the  history — to  which  the  only  serious  objection  is  that  they  are 
miraculous,  and  therefore  in  the  nature  of  things  must  be  mythical — there 
is  absolutely  no  reason  for  challenging  the  veracity  and  honesty  of  the 
narrative.  Not  only  has  it  throughout  the  air  of  sober  history;  not  only  is 
it  accepted  as  such — ^including  the  supernatural  portions — by  our  Lord  and 
His  apostles  (Matt.  vi.  29 ;  xi.  14 ;  Luke  iv.  25-27;  ix.  8, 54 ;  Mark  i.  6 ;  Acts 
vii.  47,  48;  Eom.  xi.  8,  4;  Heb.  xi.  35;  James  v.  17, 18;  Eev.  ii,  20;  xi.  9), 
but  it  is  everywhere  confirmed  by  the  monuments  of  antiquity  and  the 
records  of  profane  historians,  whensoever  it  and  they  happen  to  have  points 
of  contact.  The  reign  of  Solomon,  for  example,  his  friendly  relations  with 
Hiram,  his  Temple,  and  his  wisdom  are  mentioned  by  the  Tyrian  historians, 
from  whom  Dius  and  Menander  of  Ephesus  derived  their  information  (Jos., 
Contra  Apion.  i.  sectt.  17,  18).  The  proficiency  of  the  Zidonians  in  the 
mechanical  arts  and  their  knowledge  of  the  sea  is  attested  both  by  Homer 
and  Herodotus.*  The  invasion  of  Judah  by  Shishak  in  the  reign  of  Eeho- 
boam,  and  the  conquest  of  many  of  the  cities  of  Palestine,  is  proved  by  the 
inscription  of  Earnak.f  The  name  and  the  importance  of  Omri  are  pro- 
claimed by  the  inscriptions  of  Assyria,  which  also  teU  of  the  defeat  of 
'*  Ahab  of  Jezreel  "  by  the  Assyrian  armies,  of  the  defeat  of  Azariah,  and  the 
conquest  of  Samaria  and  Damascus  by  Tiglath  Pileser.  J  And,  to  pass  by 
later  matters  and  points  of  less  moment,  the  recently  discovered  Moabite 
stone  bears  its  silent  but  most  striking  vritness  to  the  conquest  of  Moab  by 
Omri,  and  its  oppression  by  him,  and  by  his  son  and  successor,  for  forty 
years,!  and  to  the  successful  rebellion  of  Moab  against  Israel,  ||  and  also 
mentions  by  name  Mesha,  Omri,  Chemosh,  and  Jehovah.  In  the  face  of 
such  remarkable  and  minute  corroborations  of  the  statements  of  our  historian, 
and  in  the  absence  of  any  well-founded  instances  of  misstatement  on  his 
part,  and,  indeed,  of  any  solid  grounds  for  impeaching  his  historical  accuracy, 
it  would  be  the  very  wantonness  of  criticism  to  deny  the  credibility  and 
tmthfulnesB  of  these  records. 

Vin.  Chronoloot. 
There  is  one  particular,  however,  in  which  our  text,  as  it  now  stands,  is 
open  to  Bome  suspicion,  and  that  is  the  matter  of  dates.     Some  of  these,  it 

•  See  note  on  ch.  v.  6.  f  See  note  on  oh.  xiv.  26. 

J  See  notea  on  2  Kings  xvi.  7 — 16. 

§  See  note  on  2  Kings  i.  X,  and  ill.  4,  S. 

II  See  note  on  2  Kings  iii.  8. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  KINGS. 


; 


wonld  appear,  have  been  accidentally  altered  in  the  conree  of  transcription 
— a  result  which  need  cause  us  no  surprise,  if  we  remember  that  anciently 
numbers  were  represented  by  letters,  and  that  the  Assyrian,  or  square 
characters,  in  which  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  have  been  handed 
down  to  us,  are  extremely  liable  to  be  confounded.  The  reader  will  see  at  a 
glance  that  the  difference  between  3  and  3  (which  represent  respectively 
two  and  twenty),  between  T  and  ")  (four  and  two  hundred),  between  n  and 
n  {eight  and  four  hundnd),  is  extremely  slight.  But  other  dates  would 
appear  to  have  been  altered,  or  inserted — ^probably  from  the  margin — ^by 
some  reviser  of  the  text.  We  have  nothing  more  than  what  we  find  else- 
where in  Scripture,  and  even  in  the  text  of  the  New  Testament — the  marginal 
gloss  finding  its  way,  almost  unconsciously,  into  the  body  of  the  work.*  It 
will  be  sufficient  to  mention  here  as  instances  of  such  imperfect  or  erroneous 
chronologies,  1  Kings  vi.  1 ;  xiv.  21 ;  xvi.  23 ;  2  Kings  i.  17  (cf.  iii.  1) ;  xiii. 
10  (cf.  xiiL  1) ;  xv.  1  (c£  xiv.  23) ;  xvii.  1  (cf.  xv.  80,  33).  But  this  fact, 
though  it  has  occasioned  no  little  difficulty  to  the  commentator,  in  no  way 
detracts,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  from  the  value  of  our  history.  And  it  does 
(his  less  because  these  corrections  or  interpolations  are  as  a  rule  sufficiently 
conspicuous,  and  because,  as  has  been  justly  remarked,  "  the  chief  difficulties 
of  the  chronology  and  almost  all  the  actual  contradictions  disappear,  if  we 
Bubtraot  from  the  work  those  portions  which  are  generally  pareathetia"t 

IX.  LiTEBATUBB. 

Amongst  the  works  available  for  the  exposition  and  illustration  of  the 
text,  and  to  which  reference  is  most  frequently  made  in  this  Commentary, 
are  the  following : — 

1.  Commentar  tiber  der  B&eher  der  KSnige.    Von  Dr.  Eaxl  Fried.  Kiel.    Moskau,  1846. 

S,  Biblischer  Commentar  fiber  die  prophetischen-Geschichts-bilcher  des  A.  T.  Drifter 
9mtd :  Die  BUcher  der  KSnige.  Leipzig,  1874.  By  the  same  authoi.  Both  these  woiks 
are  acoessible  to  the  English  reader  in  translations  published  by  Ilessrs.  Clark  of  Bdrn- 
bnrgh  (1857  and  1877).  I  hare  thought  it  well  to  refer  to  both  volumes,  as  though  the 
latter,  no  doubt,  represents  Keil's  matured  judgment,  still  the  former  occasionally  contains  ' 
valuable  materials  not  included  in  the  latter  work. 

8.  Die  BUcher  derKdnige.  Von  Dr.  Karl  0.  W.  F.  Bahr.  Bielefeld,  1873.  This  is  one  of  the 
most  valnable  volumes  of  Lange's  TheologischHomiletisches  Bibelwerk.  It  has  been  trans- 
lated, nnder  the  editorship  of  Dr.  Philip  SchafE,  by  Dr.  Harwood,  of  New  Haven,  Conn. 
(Edinb.,  Clark);  and  as  the  translation, especially  in  its  "Textual  and  Grammatical" 
section,  contains  additional  and  oocasionally  useful  matter,  I  have  referred  both  to  it  and 
to  the  original. 

4.  Symbolik  des  Mosaitchen  Culttu.  By  the  same  author.  Heidelberg,  1837.  For  all 
that  concerns  the  Temple  and  its  ritual,  this  work  is  indispensable,  and  though 
occasionally  lomewhat  fanoifol,  is  a  monument  of  BShr's  profound  and  varied  learning. 


*  Scrivener,  "  Introduction  to  New  Testament  Criticism,"  pp.  13, 18. 
t  Eawlinson,  "  Speaker's  Commentary,"  p.  476. 


xH  INTBODUOTION  TO  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  KINGS. 


6.  Die  BUcher  der  KOiAge.  Von  Otto  Thening.  Ldpzig,  1849.  This  work,  I  regret  to  gay, 
I  only  know  indirectly.  But  some  proofs  of  its  snggestiveness,  and  some  of  its  destnutiTS 
tendencies,  will  be  tonnd  in  the  Exposition. 

6.  Holy  Bible  with  Commentary.  {"  Speaker's  Oommentaiy.")  The  Books  of  Kings, 
hy  the  Bey.  Canon  Bawlinson.  London,  1872.  This,  though  perhaps  somewhat  meagre 
in  its  textual  criticism  and  exegesis,  is  especially  rich,  as  might  be  expected  from  the 
well-known  learning  of  its  author,  in  historical  references.  I  have  also  occasionally  cited 
his  "Historical  Illustrationa  ol  the  Old  Testament"  (S.  P.  0.  E.),  and  his  "Bampton 
Lectures." 

7.  The  History  of  Israel.  By  Heiorich  Ewald.  English  Trandation.  London,  1878. 
Vols.  in.  and  IV. 

8.  Syntax  of  the  Hebrew  Language.  By  the  same  anthor.  London,  1879.  The  dtstiona 
from  this  latter  work  are  distinguished  from  those  from  the  "  History  of  Israel "  hj  the 
sectional  number  and  letter,  thus :  280  b. 

9.  The  Holy  Bible.  Vol.  HI.  By  Bishop  Wordsworth.  Oxford,  1877.  The  great 
feature  of  this  commentary,  it  is  hardly  neoeasary  to  say,  in  addition  to  the  patriatie 
learning  which  it  reveals,  and  the  piety  which  breathes  through  it,  is  the  moral  and 
spiritual  teaching  which  the  author  never  fails  to  draw  from  the  text.  There  is  perhaps  • 
tendency  to  over-spiritualize,  and  I  have  been  unable  to  follow  the  writer  in  manj  ol  his 
mystical  interpretations. 

10.  Lectures  on  the  Jewiih  Church.  VoL  II.  By  Dean  Stanley.  London,  188B. 
Though  difiering  repeatedly  and  very  widely  from  his  eonolusiona,  I  am  very  sensible  of 
the  great  charm  of  pictnresqneness  and  the  graphio  power  which  maika  ereiythiag  that 
this  highly  gifted  author  touches. 

11.  Sinai  and  Palestine.    By  the  same.    Fifth  Edition.    London,  1858. 

U.  Biblical  Betearches  in  the  Holy  Land.  By  the  Bev.  Dr.  Bobinson.  •  tola.  Londoa, 
1866. 

IZ.  Handbook  for  Travellen  in  Syria  and  PatetHne.  By  the  Ber.  J.  lb  Porter.  London 
Murray,  1858. 

14.  The  Land  and  the  Boot.    By  the  Bev.  Dr.  Thomson.    S  vols.    London,  1859 

16.  Tent-work  in  Palestine.  By  Lieut.  Conder,  B.E.  This  is  by  far  the  most  readablt 
and  valuable  work  which  the  recent  Exploration  of  Palestine  has  produced.  Kew  Edition, 
Loudon,  1880. 

16.  Handbook  to  the  Bible.  By  F.  B.  Conder  and  0.  B.  Oonder,  B  Ji.  London,  1879. 
This  is  cited  as  "  Conder,  Handbook."  "  Conder  "  alone  always  refers  to  the  "  Tent-work." 

17.  Narrative  of  a  Journey  through  Syria  and  Palestine.  By  Lieut.  0.  W.  M.  Van  da 
Velde.    2  vols.    Edinburgh  and  London,  1854. 

18.  Contemplations  on  the  Historical  Passages  of  the  Old  Testament,  By  Bialup  tt»H, 
8  vols.    S.  P.  0.  E. 

19.  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians.  By  Sir  J.  Gtudner  \nikinioiL 
New  Edition.    London,  1880. 

20.  EUas  der  ThisbiUr.    Von  F.  W.  Erummaoher.    Elberfdd,  1886. 

21.  Qesenii  Thesaurus  Philologieus  Critieus  Linguae  Sehraeat  VetiH$  TmAhmhA 
lipsiae,  1836. 

22.  Qesenius's  Hebrew  Qrammor,  VooitMBtb  Edition  ealuged  and  iatpiOTOd  te  tL 
Boedi«;«b   LsBdoa.l8ia. 


THE    FIRST 

BOOK  OF   THE  KINGS. 


EXPOSITION 


CHAPTEB  L 
Tea  BETOur  or  Asonijab  amd  the  acoxb- 
BiON  OP  Solomon.  —  The  first  chapter  of 
this  book  is  occupied  vdth  the  aoceasion 
of  Bolomon  and  with  the  circumetauces 
which  preceded,  marked,  and  followed  that 
event.  The  author,  or  compiler,  evidently 
considered  that  his  work  properly  began 
with  the  reign  of  Israel's  third  king, 
and  David's  illness  and  death  are  only 
introduced  into  the  narrative  because 
they  necessitated  a  hasty  and  premature 
coronation  of  Solomon,  and  exercised  an 
important  influence  on  the  beginning  of 
his  reign  (ch.  ii).  In  the  natural  order  of 
events,  Solomon  would  not  have  succeeded 
until  his  father's  death,  but  Adonijah's 
attempt  to  possess  himself  of  the  kingdom 
required  the  immediate  elevation  of  Solomon 
to  the  throne,  and  this  attempt  having  been 
suggested  by  David's  extreme  feebleness, 
the  author  is  compelled  to  begin  his  history 
with  an  account  of  David's  decay  and  death. 
In  the  opening  verses,  consequently,  he  in- 
troduces ns  into  the  chamber  of  sickness. 
His  materials  for  this  part  of  the  history 
were  no  doubt  derived  from  the  "Book  of 
Nathan  the  prophet "  (1  Chron.  xxix.  29 ; 
a  Chron.  ix.  29).  The  date  of  these  events 
is  B.o.  1016. 

Ver.  1.— Now  [Heb.  and,  but  "now" 
more  nearly  expresses  the  import  of  the 
original,  for  1  has  here  little  or  no  oonneot- 

1    KIN08. 


ing  force.  It  is  commonly  found  at  the  b«> 
ginning  of  a  book  (as  in  Exod.,  Levit.,  Josh., 
Judges,  2  Sam.,  Buth,  &<>.),  and  that  where 
there  is  no  connection  whatever  with  any 
earlier  writing  (as  in  Esther,  Ezek.,  Jonah, 
&o.)  It  can  hardly  imply,  therefore,  "  that 
the  historian  regards  his  work  as  a  con- 
tinuation of  a  preceding  history  "  (Bawlin- 
eon),  nor  is  there  any  need  to  suppose  that 
it  "  has  been  taken  from  a  writing  contain- 
ing the  earlier  history  of  David."  Keil] 
King  [Heb.  the  king.  The  frequent  use  of 
this  title,  "King  David,"  "  King  Solomon," 
"King  Asa,"  &o.,  is  characteristic  of  our 
author.  The  expression  is  not  unknown  in 
2  Sam.,  but  it  occurs  so  rarely  as  to  con- 
stitute a  distinction  (not  a  link,  as  Words- 
worth) between  that  book  and  the  Kings.] 
David  was  old  [yet  2  Sam.  v.  4,  6,  shows 
that  he  cannot  have  been  more  than  seventy. 
(He  was  thirty  at  his  accession ;  his  reign 
at  Hebron  lasted  seven  years  and  a  half ;  at 
Jerusalem  thirty-three  years.)  Bawlinson 
says,  "  the  Jews  at  this  time  were  not  long 
lived."  Certainly,  the  Jewish  kings  were 
not.  Only  David,  Solomon,  and  Manasses 
exceeded  threescore]  and  stricken  [Heb, 
gone,  i.e.,  advanced]  In  years.  [A  common 
expression,  only  found  with  ]|7t  as  in  Gen. 
xviii.  11 ;  xxiv.  1 ;  Josh.  xiii.  1,  &o.]  And 
they  covered  him  with  clothes  [lit.  cover- 
ings. 1J3  is  used  of  any  covering,  whether 
of  the  person  (Gen.  xxxix.  12  ;  1  Kings  xiii. 
10),  or  the  bed  (1  Sam.  xix.  13),  or  even  a 
table  (Num.  iv.  6).  Indeed,  the  outer  gar- 
ment was  used,  at  least  by  the  poor,  for  a 
covering  at  night  (Exod.  xxii.  27).  The 
context  (ver.  47)  shows  that  betJclothes  or* 


a 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


CH.  I,  1—63. 


intended  here]  but  lie  gat  no  heat.  [A 
common  experience  of  the  aged.  David's 
early  hardships  and  later  sorrows  and 
anxieties  appear  to  have  aged  him  pre- 
maturely. Possibly  he  was  also  afflicted 
with  disease.] 

Ver.  2. — Wherefore  [Heb.  and]  his  ser- 
vants [according  to  Josephus  (Antiq.  vii.  14, 
3),  his  physicians]  said  unto  him.  Let  there 
be  sought  [lit.  as  marg.,"Jet  them  seek"] 
for  my  lord  the  king  [the  singular  pro- 
noun is  used  as  representing  the  servant 
who  was  spokesman  for  the  rest]  a  young 
virgin  [marg.,  "  a  damsel,  a  virgin."  She 
must  be  young,  to  impart  heat,  and  a  virgin, 
as  befitted  a  king.  Though  she  was  recom- 
mended as  a  nurse,  they  would  naturally 
suppose  she  might  be  taken  as  a  concubine] 
and  let  her  stand  before  the  king  [i.e.,  as 
servant  (ver.  4).  Cf.  ch,  xii.  6,  8;  Gen. 
xli.  46 ;  Dan.  i  5 ;  Deut.  i.  38  (with  Josh, 
i.  1)  1  Kings  X.  8.  In  the  East,  servants 
still  stand  and  wait  their  masters'  plea- 
sure. Cf.  2  Kings  V.  25],  and  let  her  cherish 
him  [So  also  the  LXX.,  xai  iarm  avrbv 
9a\irovaa.  But  Gesenius,  al.  "  be  a  com- 
panion to  him"]  and  let  her  lie  In  thy  [or 
"his,"  LXX.  avrov,  Vulg.  suoj  bosom  [the 
expression  is  generally,  but  not  invariably 
(see  1  Kings  iii.  20 ;  Euth  iv.  16)  used  de 
complexu  venerea]  that  my  lord  the  Wng 
may  get  heat.  [This  close  embrace  of 
youth  was  an  obvious  way  of  imparting 
animal  heat  to  age  ("Calor  a  corpore 
juveniU  ao  sano  maxime  prodest  seuibus." 
Grotius),  and  was  the  more  favoured  because 
other  and  internal  remedies  were  not  then 
known.  It  is  recognized  by  Galen,  and  is 
said  to  have  been  prescribed  by  a  Jewish 
physician  to  the  Emperor  Frederick  Bar- 
barossa  (Bahr).  It  is  stated  by  Boberts 
that  it  is  still  largely  followed  in  the  Bast.] 
Ver.  3. — So  [Heb.  and']  they  sought  (cf. 
Esth.  ii.  2),  for  a  fair  [this  word  points  to 
the  same  conclusion  as  "  virgin  "  in  ver.  2] 
damsel  throughout  aU  the  coasts  [i.e., 
borders  (cos«o=rib,  side).  An  old  writer 
speaks  of  the  "  coasts  and  quarters  of 
heaven"]  of  Israel,  and  found  Ablshag 
[="Father  of  error."  Names  compounded 
with  Ab,  "  father,"  were  and  are  very  com- 
mon in  the  East.  We  have,  e.g.,  Ab-ssilom 
in  ver.  6,  and  46i-athar  in  ver.  7]  a  [Heb. 
the}  Shunammite  [Shunem,  a  town  of 
Issachar  (Josh.  xix.  18),  now  called  S61am, 
"  a  flourishing  village  encompassed  by  r ar- 
dens"  (Porter),  and  "in  the  midst  of  the 
finest  cornfields  in  the  world  "  (Grove),  lies 
on  the  lower  slope  of  "Little  Hermon," 
and  has  before  it  the  wide  plain  of  Esdrae- 
lon.  Another  Shunammite  appears  in  the 
saored  history  (2  Kings  iy.  8)]  and  brought 
her  to  the  king; 


Ver.  4. — And  the  damsel  was  very  fair 
[lit.  ,fair  to  exceeding]  and  cherished  [see  on 
ver.  2]  the  king,  and  ministered  to  him ; 
but  the  king  knew  her  not.  [This  is  men- 
tioned  to  explain  the  history  of  chap,  ii 
13-25.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  Adonijah 
could  never  have  presumed  to  seek  her  in 
marriage,  and  Bathsheba  would  never  have 
promised  her  help  in  his  suit.  Such  an 
incestuous  alliance  would  not  only  have 
been  contrary  to  the  law  (Levit.  xvji.  8), 
but  abhorrent  to  all  true  Israelices  (cf. 
1  Cor.  V.  1).  In  this  fact,  which  the  court 
knew,  and  which  the  nation  at  large  did  not 
know — they  could  only  suppose  that  such 
a  "search"  for  one  so  exceeding  "fair" 
meant  the  increase  of  the  seraglio — Adoni- 
jah found  his  point  d'appui  for  a  second 
attempt  on  the  throne.  The  older  expositor* 
and  some  of  the  modem,  notably  Words- 
worth, assume  that  Abishag  was  David's 
wife,  in  the  sense  of  being  legally  married 
to  him,  (Com.  &,  Lap.  discusses  the  question 
at  considerable  length,  and  with  needless 
pruriency.)  But  this  idea  finds  no  support 
in  Scripture,  which  represents  her  as  simply 
an  attendant.  It  is  idle  to  remark,  conse- 
quently, that  "  the  Jewish  law  allowed 
polygamy  "  (Eawlinson). 

Ver.  5. — ThenAdonlJah  [= "Jehovah  is  my 
Lord."  The  fourth  son  of  David,  and  now 
apparently  the  eldest  surviving.  It  seems 
probable  that  ChUeab,  or  Daniel  (1  Chron. 
iii.  1),  David's  second  son,  died  in  infancy. 
For  Amnon  s  death,  see  2  Sam.  xiii.  29; 
for  Absalom's,  ibid,  xviii.  14.  He  must  now 
have  been  between  thirty-three  and  forty 
years  of  age  (having  been  born  in  Hebron)] 
the  son  of  Hagglth  [  =  " Festive"  (Gesen.) 
"the  dancer"  (Stanley)]  exalted  him- 
self, saying  [to  himself  and  his  confederates], 
I  will  be  king.  [It  is  not  difficult  to  trace 
this  resolve  to  its  sources.  They  were  (1) 
his  seniority  (ch.  ii.  22).  It  is  true  there 
was  no  "  right  of  primogeniture  "  in  the 
Hebrew  monarchy.  "  The  God- King  had. 
reserved  to  Himself  the  choice  of  the  earthly 
king"  (Keil).  David  himself  was  not  thfr 
eldest,  but  the  youngest  brother.  At  the 
same  time  primogeniture,  ceteris  paribus, 
would  have,  and  as  a  matter  of  fa^t  had, 
considerable  weight.  The  firstborn  had  the 
birthright ;  can  we  doubt  he  would  expect 
the  crown,  and  think  it  hard  if  he  were- 
passed  over?  (see  2  Chron.  xxi.  3).  (2) 
His  personal  attractions.  Adonijah  would 
think  that  his  beauty  and  stature  (Josephus 
mentions  the  latter)  marked  him  out,  as- 
similar  gifts  had  done  Saul  (1  Sam.  ix.  2), 
for  the  throne.  (3)  He  was  encouraged  in 
his  pretensions,  if  indeed  they  were  not, 
suggested  to  him,  by  others,  by  Joab,  for 
example   (see   on    ver.   7).     (4)   Possibly 


1—53.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


love  for  the  beautiful  Shunammite  and  the 
desiie  to  gain  possesBion  of  her  may  have 
strengthened  his  resolves.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  he  and  his  beauty  are  mentioned  just 
after  her  and  hers] :  and  he  prepared  [Heb. 
made']  him  chariots  and  horsemen  [rather 
horses,  as  in  1  Sam.  viii.  11 ;  1  Kings  v.  6, 
Heb.  The  former  passaRe  almost  settles  the 
meaning  here.  KeU  assumes  that  a  mounted 
escort  is  meant  J,  and  fifty  men  to  run 
before  Mm  [as  Absalom  before  him  (2  Sam. 
XV.  1).  Adonijah  seems  in  every  vsay  to 
have  imitated  Absalom.  Josephus  says  ha 
resembled  him  in  disposition.  Chariots, 
horses,  and  outrunners  arementioned(l  Sam. 
viii.  11)  as  the  very  first  ot  the  king's  in. 
signia.  Horses  were  Buch  natural  and 
familiar  tokens  of  royal  state  (not  being 
employed  in  agriculture  or  for  travelling), 
that  the  Hebrew  kings  were  warned  (Deut. 
xvii.  16)  against  multiplying  them.  Out- 
runners again,  such  as  the  Eoman  emperors 
had  (called  by  them  cutsores),  and  such  as  we 
find  at  the  present  day  in  Egypt,  /oof-men 
who  precede  the  chariot  at  full  speed,  and 
by  their  shrill  cries  clear  the  way,  are  ad- 
mirably calculated,  to  impress  the  public 
mind.  According  to  Morier,  "runners 
before  -the  king's  horse  in  Persia  are  indis- 
pensable to  the  royal  state."  Adonijah 
hoped  by  this  display  of  regal  pomp  to  win 
the  suffrages  of  the  people.] 

Ver.  6. — And  his  father  had  not  dis- 
pleased [or  pained,  afflicted.  The  LXX. 
has  diriKuiXvaiv]  him  at  any  time  [Heb. 
from  his  days,  i.e.,  all  his  days,  LXX.  oi^l- 
■iroTt,  Vulg.  a  diebus  ejus,  Sein  Lebtage 
(Biihr).  Some  (Seb.  Schmidt,  e.g.)  would 
understand  "  since  the  days  of  his  ambition 
and  display"]  in  saying,  Why  hast  thou 
done  so  7  and  he  also  [i.e.,  he  also,  as  well  as 
Absalom,  mentioned  presently;  or,  possibly, 
he  as  well  as  Abishag  just  mentioned. 
Bahr's  rendering,  "Und  dazu  war  er  sehr 
schon,"  &c.  "  Aid  moreover  he  "  was,  &c. 
will  not  stand]  was  a  very  goodly  man  [of. 
2  Sam.  xiv.  25.  This  accounted  in  part 
not  only  for  his  ambition,  but  also  for  his 
following];  and  Ms  mother  [the  two  last 
words  are  not  in  the  original,  which  simply 
has  "and  she  bare,"  !T1?;.  There  is  no 
need,  with  Thenius,  to  read,  iTj  genuit,  or 
with  others,  HvlD.  We  have  a  similar 
ellipsis  in  Num.  xxvi.  59.  The  meaning 
is  quite  clear,  viz.,  that  Haggith  bare 
Adonijah  to  David  next  after  Maaohah  bore 
bim  Absalom.  This  fact  is  mentioned  to 
show  that  he  was  the  eldest  surviving  son ; 
and  it  shows  therefore  that  seniority  counted 
for  something  (of.  ch.  ii.  25)]  bare  Mm 
after  Absalom. 

Ver.    7.— And  he  conferred  rHeb.  "hU 


words  were  "  (2  San;,  iii.  17,  Hob,)]  with  Joab 
[Joab's  share  in  this  conspiracy,  despite  big 
hitherto  unwavering  fidelity  to  David,  is 
easily  accounted  for.  He  must  have  known 
that  he  was  under  David's  displeasure,  and 
he  must  have  feared,  too,  that  he  would  be 
an  object  of  dislike  and  distrust  to  a  suc- 
cessor trained,  as  Solomon  had  been,  under 
David's  and  Nathan's  immediate  influence. 
He  could  hardly  be  unconscious  that  under 
a  new  reign  his  position — unless  he  took 
measures  to  assure  it — would  be  a  preca- 
rious one.  He  resolved,  therefore,  to  seooie 
himself  by  helping  Adonijah  to  his  throne. 
It  is  also  highly  probable  that  Adonijah's 
ambitious  character  was  much  more  to  his 
liking  than  that  of  the  pious  and  pacific 
Solomon.  Adonijah's  physical  qualities, 
again,  would  no  doubt  commend  him  to 
this  rough  soldier,  who  may  also  have 
sympathised  with  him  as  the  eldest  sou. 
And  there  may  have  been  other  circum- 
stances (such,  e.g.,  as  close  personal  friend- 
ship), of  which  we  know  nothing]  the  son 
of  Zerulah,  and  with  AMathax  [in  2  Sam. 
viii.  17,  we  read  that  "  Ahimelech  son  of 
Abiathar"  was  priest.  Similarly,  1  Cbron. 
xxiv.  6.  An  obvious  transposition]  the 
priest.  ["  Abiathar's  defection  is  still  more 
surprising  "  thaii  Joab's  (Eawlinson).  It  is 
certainly  remarkable,  when  we  consider  the 
close  ties  which  subsisted  between  Abiathar 
and  David,  ties  which  were  cemented  by 
the  blood  of  eighty-five  persons  (1  Sam. 
xxii.  18),  and  strengthened  by  the  many 
afflictions  which  they  had  shared  in  com- 
mon {ibid.  ver.  23  to  eh.  xxviii. ;  2  Sam.  xv. 
24 — 29),  that  he  should  have  joined  in  a 
plot  to  defeat  David's  cherished  hopes  and 
plans — ^plans,  too,  which  he  most  surely 
have  known,  had  the  sanction  of  religion 
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  5),  and  there  must  have 
been  some  powerful  motive  to  account  for 
this.  May  we  not  find  one  in  jealousy  of 
Zadok,  who  had  for  some  time  been  asso- 
ciated with  him  in  the  priesthood,  who  is 
generally  mentioned  first  (2  Sam.  viiL  17 ; 
XV.  29,  35,  36;  xx.  25),  as  if  he  were  the 
more  important  and  influential,  and  whose 
advancement,  after  the  prophecy  of  1  Sam. 
ii.  33 — 36,  Abiathar  could  not  contemplate 
without  su^pic^on  and  dread.  Is  it  not 
highly  probable  that  among  the  "words" 
Adonijah  had  with  him  was  a  promise  to 
restore  the  priesthood  to  his  family  exclu- 
sively, as  the  reward  of  his  allegiance] :  and 
they  following  Adonijah  helped  him  (lit.,  as 
marg.,  '-helped  after  Adonijah."  It  is  a 
pregnant  construction,  "  they  aided  having 
followed  the  side  of  Adonijah  "  (Geseuius). 
Ver.  8. — But  Zadok  the  priest  [2  Sam, 
viii.  17.  It  is  generally  said  to  be  difiSoult  to 
explain  "how  Zadok  and  Abiathar  came 


THE  FIltST  BOOK  OF  IQNGS. 


[CH.  I.  1—63. 


both  to  be  'priests  at  this  time."  Eaw- 
linson,  who  adds  that  "the  best  expla- 
nation is  that  Abiathar  was  the  real  high 
priest,"  oiHciating  in  Zion,  while  Zadok 
acted  as  chief  priest  at  the  tabernacle  at 
Gibeon.  (Bahr,  by  a  strange  oversight, 
assigns  to  Zadok  the  care  of  the  ark  on 
Mount  Zion,  whereas  1  Chron.  xvi.  39, 
distinctly  connects  his  ministry  with  the 
tabernacle  of  witness  at  Gibeon.)  But  the 
precedence  (see  on  ver.  7)  generally  assigned 
to  Zadok  is  hardly  consistent  with  the  idea 
that  Abiathar  was  "  the  real  high  priest." 
The  fact  is  that  a  duality  of  high  priests, 
associated,  apparently,  on  pretty  equal 
terms,  was  not  unknown  in  Jewish  history. 
The  oases  of  Eleazer  and  Ithamar,  Hophni 
and  Phinehas,  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  will 
occur  to  all.  2  Kings  xxv.  18,  speaks  of  "  the 
chief  priest"  and  "the  second  priest;" 
2  Chron.  xxxi.  10,  of  the  "  chief  priest  of 
the  house  of  Zadok."  And  a  dual  priest- 
hood would  be  the  more  necessary  in 
David's  days,  because  of  the  two  sanctu- 
aries, Zion  and  Gibeon.  We  find,  however, 
from  1  Chron.  xv.  11,  that  Zadok  was 
already  priest  at  the  time  of  the  bringing 
op  of  the  ark.  And  the  true  explanation, 
no  doubt,  is  that  Zadok  had  succeeded  some 
member  of  his  family,  in  all  probability 
Jehoiada,  called  in  1  Chron.  xii.  27,  "  the 
leader  of  Aaron  "  (Heb.J,  who  had  certainly 
been  liigh  priest  in  the  time  of  Saul  (1  Chron. 
xxvii.  6),  and  who  would  hardly  be  degraded 
when,  with  3700  followers ,  he  joined  David 
at  Hebron.  On  his  decease,  or  cession  of 
office,  Zadok,  who  had  joined  at  the  same 
time  with  a  large  contingent,  was  associated 
with  Abiathar  in  the  priest's  office.  This 
dual  arrangement,  consequently,  was  the 
result  of  David's  Jiaving  taien  over  a  high 
priest  from  Saul,  together  with  the  kingdom, 
when  he  had  Abiathar  as  priest  already,] 
and  Benalah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  [i.e., 
Jehoiada  the  high  priest  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  5). 
Benaiah  was  consequently  a  Levite,  and  of 
the  family  of  Aaron;  set,  however,  by 
David,  because  of  his  prowess  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
20,  21;  1  Chron.  xi.  22)  over  the  body- 
guard (2  Sam.  viii.  18 ;  1  Chron.  xviii.  17). 
Probably  he  was  a  near  relative  of  Zadok.] , 
and  Nathan  the  prophet  [a  Jewish  tradi- 
tion makes  Nathan  the  eighth  son  of  Jesse. 
He  comes  before  us  2  Sam.  vii.  2,  3,  17; 
xii.  1 — 12,  25]  and  Shlmel  [by  Ewald  iden- 
tified with  Shammah  (1  Sam.  xvi.  9),  or 
Shimeah,  David's  brother  (2  Sam.  xiii.  3 ; 
xxl.  21).  Others  suppose  him  to  be  the 
Shimei  of  1  Kings  iv.  18.  But  see  note  on 
chap.  ii.  8.  Josephus  calls  Shimei  (not 
Bei,  as  Bahr  states)  A  ^avlSov  i/iiXos] ,  and 
Rel  [this  name  occurs  here  only.  Ewald 
would  identify  him  with  Baddai  (1  Chron. 


ii.  14),  another  brother  of  David,  fcnt  on 
very  slender  grounds] ,  and  the  mighty  men 
[or  heroes.  Gesen.  "chiefs."  Not  the  600 
men  who  formed  David's  band  in  his  wan- 
derings  (1  Sam.  xxv.  13;  xxvii.  2)  (Bawlin- 
son),  but  the  30  (or  37)  to  whom  thianame 
of  Gibborim  is  expressly  given,  2  Sam."  xxiii. 
8 ;  1  Chron.  xi.  15,  25 ;  xxix.  24.  Comp. 
2  Kings  X.  25,  Heb.]  which  belonged  to 
David  [same  expression  as  in  2  Sam,  xxiii. 
8]  were  not  with  Adonljah. 

Ver.  9. — And  Adonijah  slew  [or  sacrificed, 
LXX.  iOvaiaait:  It  was  a  sacrificial  feast, 
like  Absalom's,  2  Sam.  xv.  12  (where  see 
Speaker's  note).  Eeligious  festivity,  i.e., 
was  the  apparent  object  of  their  assembling : 
religion  was  invoked,  not  merely  to  cloke 
their  designs,  but  to  cement  them  together] 
sheep  and  oxen  and  fat  cattle  by  [Heb. 
with  ;  same  expression,  2  Sam.  xx.  8]  the 
Btone  of  Zoheleth,  [i.e.,  "theserpent  "(Gesen.) 
"  No  satisfactory  explanation  has  been  given 
of  this  name"  (Bawlinson).  See  Smith's 
"Diet.  Bible"  sub  voc,  where  the  various 
interpretations  are  given.  The  stone,  which 
served  as  "  a  natural  altar  for  the  sacrificial 
feast,"  the  spring,  which  afforded  "water 
for  the  necessary  ablutions,"  and  the  situa- 
tion with  respect  to  the  adjoining  city 
recommended  this  place  as  a  rendezvous] 
which  is  by  En-Bogel  [Josh.  xv.  7 ;  xviii. 
16  ;  2  Sam.zvil  17.  Perhaps  "  the  spring 
of  the  spy."  The  Chald.,  Arab.,  and  Syr. 
render  "the  spring,  of  the  fuUer" — the 
Orientals  wash  clothes,  &c.,  by  treading 
(rogel)  them.  Josephus  says  it  was  without 
thecity,in  theroyalgarden(ii'/3a(nX[Kti  Trnpo- 
Seiaifi).  The  authorities  are  divided  between 
the  "  Fountain  of  the  virgin  "  (Ain  um  ed- 
Deraj),  and  the  "Well  of  Job"  (Blr  Eyub.) 
See  the  arguments  in  Sonar's  "Land  of 
Promise,"  App.  5 ;  Thomson's  "  Land  and 
Book,"  vol.  ii.  p.  528  ;  and  Mr.  Grove's  Art. 
in  Smith's  "Diet.  Bib."  Porter  ("Hand- 
book of  Palestine  ")  identifies  En-Bogel  with 
Btr  Eyub  without  remark.  There  is  much 
to  be  said  on  either  side.  The  pool  of 
Siloam  ("Bib.  Museum")  has  nothing  in  its 
favour]  and  called  all  his  brethren  the 
king's  sons  [including,  it  would  seem,  even 
the  elder  sous  of  David  and  Bathsheba,  who 
would  bring  up  the  number  to  fifteen  (1 
Chron.  iii.  5).  They  too,  if  living,  would 
naturally  resent  the  preference  of  the 
youngest  brother],  and  all  the  men  of 
Judah,  the  king's  servants  ["all  the 
.fudeans  who  were  serving  at  court,  as 
being  members  of  his  own  tribe  "  (Keil). 
The  fierce  jealousy  between  Bphraim  and 
Judah  would  almost  compel  the  king  to 
surround  himself  with  soldiers  and  attend- 
ants of  the  latter  tribe.  Some  of  the  invited 
guests,  no  doubt,  like  Absalom's  two  hun- 


CH.  1.  1—68.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


dred,  "  went  in  their  simplicity  and  knew 
not  anything  "  (2  Sam.  xt.  11). 

Ver.  10. — But  Nathan  the  prophet,  and 
Beualali,  and  the  mighty  men,  and  Solomon 
tala  brother,  he  called  not.  [It  is  clear 
from  this  verse  that  Adonijah  perfectly 
understood  that  he  had  in  Solomon  a  rival. 
The  intentions  and  promises  (ver.  13)  of  his 
father  can  hardly  have  been  unknown  to 
him.  The  name  "Jedidiah,"  too,  bestowed 
upon  Solomon  by  Nathan  (2  Sam.  xii.  25), 
taken  in  connexion  with  the  prophecy  of 
Nathan  (ibid.  vii.  12 ;  cf.  1  Chron.  xxii.  9, 
10),  must  have  proved  to  him  that  Solomon 
was  marked  out  for  David's  successor.  He 
seems  to  have  been  well  aware  also  who 
were  Solomon's  supporters.  To  some  of 
them  he  may  have  made  indirect  overtures. 

The  historian  having  recorded  Adonijah's 
preparations  for  a  coup  d'itat,  now  relates 
the  manner  in  which  the  plot  was  frustrated. 
The  prophet,  who  had  been  the  guardian 
and  preceptor  of  Solomon's  youth,  and  who 
knew  the  Divine  will  respecting  the  succes- 
sion (1  Chron.  xxii.  9, 10),  takes  prompt  and 
energetic  measures  to  defeat  the  conspiracy. 

Yer.  11. — Wherefore  Nathan  spake  unto 
Bathsheba  the  mother  of  Solomon  [the  per- 
son after  Solomon  most  directly  concerned 
and  also  best  fitted  to  approach  the  king] 
saying:,  Hast  thou  not  heard  that  Adonijah 
the  son  of  Haggitb  [possibly  there  is  a  touch 
of  worldly  wisdom  here,  as  Eawlinson  sug- 
gests, "  Haggith,  thy  rival."  We  may  be 
sure  David's  harem  was  not  without  its  fierce 
jealousies.  But  (see  ver.  5,  and  ch.  ii.  13) 
the  patronymic  is  so  common  in  Heb.  that 
we  cannot  safely  found  an  argument  upon  it. 
See  on  chap.  ii.  5]  doth  reign  [Heb.  did 
reign.  LXX.  kpaaiXfvaev,  aor.  =  "  suc- 
ceeded." "  Schon  so  gut  wie  Konig  geworden 
ist."  Bahr  and  Eeil]  and  David  our  Lord 
knoweth  it  not. 

Ver.  12. — Now  therefore  come,  let  me 
give  [Heb.  counsel]  thee  counsel,  that  thou 
mayest  save  [Heb.  and  save,  i.e.,  by  acting 
upon  it]  thine  own  life,  and  the  Ufe  of  thy 
son  Solomon.  The  custom  of  Eastern 
kings — to  secure  their  thrones  by  a  massacre 
of  their  rivals — has  received  many  illustra- 
tions, notably  among  the  Ottomans,  and  is 
receiving  one  in  Burmah  at  the  present 
moment  (May,  1879).  We  have  Scripture 
instances  in  Judges  iz.  6  ;  1  Kings  xv.  29 ; 
2  Kings  X.  7, 14 ',  xi.  1  (of.  1  Sam.  xxiv.  21). 
To  put  a  royal  mother  to  death,  along  with 
her  offspring,  though  perhaps  unusual,  was 
not  unknown.  Bawlinson  cites  the  instances 
of  Cleopatra,  widow  of  Philip  of  Macedon, 
who  was  murdered    with  her    infant    son 


Caranus  by  Olympias ;  and  Eoxana,  widow 
of  Alexander  the  Great,  who,  with  her  son, 
was  put  to  death  by  Cassander.  Nathan  doe* 
not  say  this  will  be,  but  may  be,  Bathsheba'e 
fate. 

Ver.  13..— Go  and  get  thee  In  [Heb.  come} 
unto  king  David,  and  say  unto  him,  Didst 
not  thou,  my  lord,  0  king,  swear  unto  thine 
handmaid  [this  oath  of  David's  to  Bathsheba 
(see  vers.  17,  30)  is  not  elsewhere  recorded, 
but  it  was  evidently  well  known  to  Nathan, 
and  probably,  therefore,  to  others  also] 
saying,  Assuredly  [Heb.  that,  '3,  recitantis] 
Solomon  thy  son  shall  reign  after  me,  and 
he  [emphatic]  shall  sit  upon  my  throne  f 
why  therefore  doth  Adonijah  reign  7 

Ver.  14 — Behold,  while  thou  yet  talkest 
there  [the  original  is  more  graphic,  "thou 
art  yet  talking  .  .  .  and  I "]  with  the  king, 
I  also  will  come  after  thee  and  confirm 
[marg.,  "  fill  up,"  cf.  ■KXrjfiiiam,  LXX.  Stillan 
idiom  of  the  East.  Boberts  (quoted  in  the 
"Biblical  Museum  ")  cites  many  illustrations. 
The  meaning  is,  not  to  add  to,  amplify,  but 
to  corroborate.  See  ch,  ii.  27 ;  viii.  16,  24^ 
thy  words. 

Ver.  15. — And  Bathsheba  went  In  unto 
the  king  into  the  chamber  [lit.,  inner  cham- 
ber, OaKafioi,  cubiculum  penetrale,  Buxtorf. 
Same  word  2  Sam.  iv.  7  ;  xiii.  10]  and  the 
king  was  very  old  [the  repetition  (see  ver.  1) 
is  not  idle  or  unmeaning.  Here  the  word 
refers  to  feebleness  rather  than  age.  It  is 
mentioned  to  explain  David's  confinement 
to  his  chamber]  and  Abishag  the  Shunam- 
mite  ministered  unto  the  king.  [This  is 
introduced  to  show  the  king's  helplessness. 
It  does  not  prove  that  "  there  was  a  dis- 
interested witness  present"  (Eawlinson), for 
she  may  have  withdrawn,  as  Bathsheba  did 
presently  (ver.  23),  and  Nathan  (ver.  32). 
It  is  a  graphic  touch,  painted  probably  from 
the  Ufe,  and  by  the  hand  of  Nathan,  from 
whom  this  naiTative  is  derived, 

Ver.  16. — And  Bathsheba  bowed,  and  did 
obeisance  [cf.  2  Sam.  xiv.  4.  But  we  are 
hardly  justified  in  seeing  here  "  more  than 
the  ordinary  Eastern  salutation  "  (Eawlin- 
son). The  Jewish  court  seems  to  have  been 
very  ceremonious  and  stately  (1  Sam.  xxiv. 
8 ;  2  Sam.  xix.  24).  The  king  was  the  repre- 
sentative of  Heaven].  And  the  king  said. 
What  wouldest  thou  [marg.,  V?liat  to  thee  ? 
Not  necessarily.  What  thy  supplication  ?  (as 
Eawlinson).  It  rather  means  generally, 
"  What  thy  business  ?  "  Quid  tibi,  not  quid 
petis. 

Ver.  17. — And  she  said  unto  him.  My 
Lord,  thou  swarest  by  the  Lord  thy  God  unto 
thine  handmaid,  saying.  Assuredly  Solomon 
thy  son  shall  reign  after  me,  and  he  shall 
sit  upon  my  throne. 

Ver.   18. — And  now,   behold,   Adonijali 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  1. 1—58. 


relgmetli ;  and  now  my  Lord  the  king,  thou 
knowest  it  not. 

Ver.  19. — And  he  hath  slain  oxen  and 
fat  cattle  and  sheep  In  abundance,  and 
hath  called  all  the  sons  of  the  king,  and 
A.blathar  the  priest,  and  Joab  the  captain 
of  the  host ;  but  Solomon  thy  servant  hath 
he  not  called.  [Said,  not  to  "  show  that 
Solomon  had  reason  to  fear  the  worst  if 
Adouijah  should  succeed"  (Keil),  but  to 
prove  that  there  was  a  plot.  It  showed  the 
cloven  foot.] 

Ver.  20.— And  thou  [instead  of  nnsi,  the 
Chald.,  Syr.,  and  Vulg.,  with  many MSS'.  read 
nnri  "and  now;"  but  this  looks  like  an 
emendation,  and  "  proelivi  lectioni  jtras- 
ttat  ardua."  Similarly,  the  second  "  now" 
in  ver.  18  appears  as  "  thou  "  in  200  MSS. 
These  variations  are  of  very  little  conse- 
quence, but  the  received  text,  in  both  cases, 
is  somewhat  the  more  spirited]  my  lord,  0 
Mng  [the  repetition  (see  vers.  18,  21,  24, 
27)  illustrates  the  profound  deference  and 
court  paid  to  the  Hebrew  monarch  (see  on 
ver.  16),  especially  when  we  remember  that 
these  are  the  words  of  a  wife] ,  the  eyes  of  aU 
Israel  are  upon  thee  (cf.  oh.  ii.  15)  that  thou 
Bhouldest  tell  them  who  shall  sit  on  the 
throne  of  my  lord  the  king  after  him. 
This  shows  that  there  was  no  "right 
of  primogeniture."  The  kings  of  the  East 
have  always  designated  their  successor 
amongst  their  sous.  "Alyattes  desig- 
nated Croesus  ;  Cyrus  designated  Cam- 
byses,  and  Darius  designated  Xerxes" 
(Rawlinson).  "  The  Shah  of  Persia,  at  the 
beginning  of  this  century,  had  sixty  sons, 
all  brought  up  by  their  mothers,  with  the 
hope  of  succeeding"  (Morier,  quoted  by 
Stanley).  And  the  tings  of  Israel  claimed 
and  exercised  a  similar  right  (2  Chron.  xi.  22  ■ 
xxi.  3). 

Ver.  21.— Otherwise  [there  is  no  corre- 
sponding word  in  the  Heb.]  It  shall  come  to 
pass,  when  my  lord  the  Mng  shall  sleep 
[strictly,  "  lie  down  : "  see  on  ch.  ii.  10]  with 
his  fathers  [this  phrase,  so  common  in  the 
books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles,  only  occurs 
"  once  m  the  Pentateuch  (Deut.  xxxi.  16) 
and  once  in  the  historical  books  before 
Kings  (Rawlinson).  It  was  evidently  the 
product  of  an  age  when  the  nation  was  set- 
tled, and  men  had  their  family  sepulchres] 
that  land  my  son  Solomon  shaU  be  counted 
[Heb.  be]  offenders  [Heb.  as  marg.,  sinners. 
ihe  primary  meaning  of  SDH  is  "  to  miss  the 
mark."  Like  a/iaprdveiv,  it  came  to  be  used 
of  all  err-mg  and  transgression.  Bathsheba 
and  bolomon  would  be  obnoxious  to  Adoni- 
jah,  as  representing  a  rival  cause  ;  possibly 
also  as  guilty  of    high  treason    (Olerions, 


Ver.  22.— And  lo,  while  she  yet  talked 
with  the  Idng,  Nathan  the  prophet  also 
came  In.  [Heb.  came,  i.e.,  to  the  palace. 
"  Came  in"  almost  implies  that  he  entered 
the  room,  which  he  did  not  till  summoned 
(ver.  23).  Observe,  Nathan's  words  convey 
no  suggestio  falsi.  He  does  not  deny  a  pre- 
vious interview  with  Bathsheba,  nor  does  he 
confess  it.  If  there  is  an  appearance  of  arti- 
fice, there  was  no  intention  to  deceive.  And 
the  artifice,  such  as  it  was,  was  not  only 
harmless,  but  for  the  public  good. 

Ver.  22.— And  they  told  the  kliig,  say- 
ing. Behold  Nathan  the  prophet  [we  are 
scarcely  justified  in  seeing  in  this  "  solemn 
announcement  of  his  approach  "  an  "  indi- 
cation of  the  consideration  in  which  he  was 
held  "  (Stanley).  It  is  difficult  to  see  how 
otherwise  he  could  be  announced.  It  ia 
clear  that  he  was  constantly  spoken  of  as 
"the  prophet"  (vers.  10,  22,  34,  38,  &e. 
Cf .  2  Sam.  vii.  2 ;  xii.  25] .  And  when  he 
was  come  In  before  [Heb.  and  he  came  before 
— three  words  instead  of  six]  the  king,  he 
bowed  himself  before  the  king  with  his 
face  to  the  ground  [see  on  vers.  16,  20; 
and  of.  ver.  31,  where  we  have  a  similar 
expression.  "In  the  Assyrian  sculptures, 
ambassadors  are  represented  with  their  faces 
actually  touchmg  the  earth  before  the  feet 
of  the  monarch"  (Eawlinson).  This  pro- 
found reverence  on  the  part  of  Nathan  is 
the  more  remarkable,  when  we  remember 
how  he  had  once  denounced  David  to  his 
face  (2  Sam.  xii.  7)] . 

Ver.  24.— And  Nathan  said,  My  Lord,  0 
king,  hast  thou  said  [the  Heb.  has  no 
question,  but  a  strong  aflSrmation :  "  thou 
hast  said,"  i.e.,  "thou  must  have  said  (Du 
hast  wohlgesagt."  Bahr).  Nathan  puts  it 
thus  forcibly,  in  order  to  draw  from  the  king 
a  disclaimer],  AdonDah  shall  reign  after 
me,  and  he  shall  sit  upon  my  throne? 
[Same  words  as  in  vers.  13, 17,  and  possibly 
designedly  so.  The  coincidence  conveys  the 
meaning,  "  Thou  hast  sworn  Solomon  shall 
reign, "  &c.  "  Thou  hast  said,  Adoniiah  shaU 
reign,"  &c.] 

Ver.  25.— For  [proof  that  the  king  must 
have  deoreed  that  Adonijah  should  succeed 
him.  There  appears  to  be  an  undertone  of 
reproof  in  these  words.  Nathan  assumes 
that  Adonijah  cannot  have  done  all  this 
without  David's  knowledge  and  sanction, 
because  "his  father  had  not  displeased 
him  at  any  time  "  (ver.  6).  This  uprising 
was  the  result  of  David's  over-indulgence 
and  want  of  firmness]  he  Is  gone  down  this 
day,  and  hath  slain  [see  on  ver.  9]  oxen  and 
fat  cattle  and  sheep  in  abundance,  and 
hath  called  all  the  king's  sons,  and  tli« 
captains  of  the  host  [Joab  was  the  cap- 
tain (ver.  19).    The  plural  shows  that  othei 


cs.  1. 1~53.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


high  officers  had  followed  his  lead.  "Under 
the  captains  of  the  host  (yer.  25],  the  ser- 
vants of  the  king  (ver.  10)  are  included " 
(Bahr).  Bahr's  accidental  miscitation  (yer. 
10  for  ver.  9)  has  apparently  led  his  American 
translator  (p.  24)  to  the  serious  mistake  of 
identifying  these  "  captains  of  the  host "  with 
"the  mighty  men"  (Gibborim)  of  ver.  10, 
who,  it  is  distinctly  said,  ' '  were  not  with 
Adonijah]  and  Ablathax  the  priest,  and 
behold,  they  eat  and  drink  before  him  [con- 
vivia  apta  conjurationihus.  Grotius]  and  say, 
God  save  king  Adonijah.  [Heb.  "let  the 
king  (not  "king,"  asmarg.)  Adonijah  live," 
or  better,  "live  the  king,"  &o.  (comp. 
the  vivat  rex,  and  the  vives  and  vivas  of 
later  days.)  This  was  the  customary  ac- 
clamation wherevrith  the  Jews  greeted  their 
kings  (of.  ver.  39 ;  1  Sam.  x.  24 ;  2  Sam. 
zvi.  16:  3  Kings  xi.  12;  2  Ghron.  xxiii. 
11). 

Ver.  26. — But  me,  even  me  [Heb.  7]  thy 
servant  [to  Nathan  this  omission  was  most 
significant.  He  seems  to  say  that  he  had 
not  been  called  because  he  had  been  con- 
cerned in  the  appointment  of  a  successor 
2  Sam.  vii.  13]  and  Zadok  the  priest,  and 
Benalah  the  son  of  Jeholada,  and  thy  ser- 
vant Solomon  [Bahr  thinks  that  "  we  have 
in  the  order  of  these  names  a  climax,  in 
which  Solomon,  as  the  highest  personage,  is 
named  last  "]  hath  he  not  called. 

Ver.  27.— Is  this  thing  done  [DN  =  an,  or 
perhaps, ««m,  "Is  it  then  the  case  that,"  &o.] 
by  [Ut.,  from  with]  my  lord  the  king  [i.«., 
with  his  privity  and  by  his  appointment] , 
and  thou  hast  not  shewed  It  unto  thy  servant 
[Heb.  "  made  thy  servact  know."  Nathan 
submits  that  he  has  a  strong  claim  (2  Sam. 
xii.  25)  to  be  informed,  should  there  be  any 
change  in  the  king's  plans] ,  who  should  sit 
upon  the  throne  of  my  lord  the  king  after 
him  ?  [Same  expression  as  in  ver.  20.  The 
repetition  was  well  calculated  to  impress 
upon  the  king  the  importance  of  nominating 
a  successor  at  once. 

Ver.  28. — Then  king  David  [see  on  ver.  1] 
answered  and  said.  Call  me  Bathsheha  [she 
evidently  left  the  chamber  when  Nathan 
entered  it.  "  This  was  done,  not  to  avoid 
the  appearance  of  a  mutual  arrangement 
(Cler.,  Then,  al.),  but  for  reasons  of  pro- 
priety, inasmuch  as  in  audiences  grantjd 
by  the  king  to  his  wife  or  one  of  his  coun- 
sellors, no  third  person  ought  to  be  present 
unless  the  king  required  his  assistance." 
Eeil.  ]  And  she  came  Into  the  king's  presence, 
and  stood  before  the  king.  [Here,  as  in 
numberless  other  instances,  our  translators 
have  disregarded  literalness  in  favour  of 
euphony.  The  Hebrew  has  here  an  exact 
repetition,  "came  before  the  king,  and 
stood  before  the  king."    The  Authorized 


Version  rendering  was  adopted  as  tho  mow 
spirited  and  rhythmical. 

Ver.  29.  —And  the  king  sware  [see  on 
ver.  51]  and  said,  As  the  Lord  Uveth  [oi 
"by  the  life  of  Jehovah."  Of.  "by  the 
life  of  Pharaoh"  (Gen.  xhi.  15).  This  was  the 
common  form  of  oath.  See,  e.g.,  ch.  ii.  24 ; 
Judges  viii.  19 ;  Buth  iii.  13 ;  1  Sam.  xiv. 
39  ;  xix.  6 ;  xx.  21 ;  xxix.  6 ;  and  especially 
Jer.  iv.  2;  V.  2;  Hos.  iv.  15.  It  is  cha- 
racteristic of  David  to  introduce  into  the 
formula  some  such  clause  as  the  following] , 
that  hath  redeemed  my  soul  [i.e.,  life]  out 
of  all  distress.  Same  expression  as  in 
2  Sam.  iv.  9.  Similar  expressions  are  found 
inPsa.  XXV.  22,  andxxxiv.  22.  The  repeated 
deliverance  out  of  straits  and  danger — "out 
of  the  hand  of  all  his  enemies,  and  out  of 
the  hand  of  Saul" — was  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  features  of  David's  life,  and  it 
is  no  wonder  that  he  repeatedly  commemo. 
rates  it,  converting  every  adjuration  into 
an  act  of  thanksgiving.  Sinularly,  Jacob 
(Gen.  xlviii.  16.) 

Ver.  30. — Even  as  I  sware  unto  thee  by 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  saying,  Assuredly 
[Heb.  '3  that,  often  prefixed  to  the  oratio 
directa;  not  lending  any  emphasis  (=iwimoJ, 
as  Keil  says  the  first  and  third  ^3  of  thig 
verse  do,  bufin  English  simply  redundant. 
See  on  vers.  13,  17]  Solomon  thy  son  shall 
reign  after  me,  and  he  shall  sit  upon  my 
throne  [same  words  as  in  vers.  13,  17,  24. 
These  close  repetitions  are  the  habit  of  the 
East]  In  my  stead,  even  so  [Heb.  that  so] 
will  I  (certainly  [not  in  Heb.]  do  this  day. 

Ver.  31. — Then  Bathsheba  bowed  with 
her  face  to  the  earth,  and  did  reverence 
to  the  king  [see  on  vers.  16,  23],  and 
said.  Let  my  lord  king  David  live  for 
ever.  [This  hyperbolical  expression  is  here 
only  used  of  a  Hebrew  monarch.  It  was 
constantly  addressed  to  the  Babylonian  and 
Persian  kings.  See  Dan.  ii.  4 ;  iii.  9 ;  v.  10 ; 
vi.  21 ;  Nehem.  ii.  3. 

Ver.  32. — And  king  David  Bald  [this 
prompt  and  vigorous  action  shows  that 
David's  force  of  character  and  mental  power 
were  unimpaired] ,  Call  me  Zadok  the  priest, 
and  Nathan  the  prophet,  and  Benalah  the 
son  of  Jeholada.  ["  the  order  of  the  names 
marks  the  position  of  the  persons  with 
respect  to  the  matter  in  hand."  Rawlinson] . 
And  they  came  before  the  king. 

Ver.  33.^-The  king  also  said  [Heb. 
"  And  the  king  said,"  which  is  everyway 
preferable.  The  "  also  "  is  somewhat  con- 
fusing] ,  Take  with  you  the  servants  [i.e., 
the  Oherethites  and  Pelethites,  ver.  38]  of 
your  lord,  [Heb.  lords ;  probably  a  plwalit 
majestatis  (cf  Gen.  xxxix.  2 ;  xlii.  30 ; 
2  Kings  iL  3,  5,  16),  suggested  to  David  by 
the  USU8  loquendi  of  the  court.     This  ex- 


THE  FIEST  BOOK.  OF  KING 8. 


[CH.  L  1— 6& 


nression  seema  at  first  a  strange  periphrasiB 
for  "my  servants."    But  David  naturally 
adopts  the  language    those    around    him 
were  always  using.    See  ver.  43  ;  also  2  Sam. 
xi  11  and  XX.  6.    Note:  The  latter  passage, 
which  refers  to  the  king,  has  the  plur.;  the 
former,  refemng  to  Joab,  the   smg.J  and 
cause  Solomon  my  son  to  ride  upon  mine 
own  mule,  [Ut.,  "  the  she-mule     (the  most 
prized  in  the  Bast.    Of.  Judges  v.  10,  Heb.) 
"which  is  mine."  This  wasnot  merely  a  mark 
ol  honour  (ei.  Gen.  xli.  43 ;  Esth.  vi.  8,  9), 
but  a  public  and  very  significant  indication 
of  David's  vfill    respecting  his  successor. 
The  populace  would  perceive  at  once  who 
was  destined  to  sit  in  David's  seat.     "  The 
Babbins  tell  us  that  it-was  death  to  ride  on 
the  king's  mule  without  his  permission" 
(Bawlinson).  nil?,  the  fern,  form  is  only 
found  here  aud^in  vers.  38,  44.    The  mtUe 
would  seem  to  have  been  a  recent  importa- 
tion into  Palestine — we  never  read  of  them 
•  before  the  time  of  David— and  the  Israelites 
were  forbidden  to  breed  them  (Levit.  xix. 
19).    Their  use,  consequently,  was  naturally 
vsstrioted  to  royal  or  distinguished  person- 
ages (2  Sam,  xiii.  29).     Wordsworth  sees  in 
the  word  a  proof  that  David  had  not  dis- 
obey ed  God  by  multiplying  horses  to  himself] , 
and   brtng    him    down   to  Glhon.    [Not 
Gibeon,  which   Thenius    most    arbitrarily 
would    substitute   for   the   received  text. 
Where  was  Gihon?    The  popular   belief 
(accepted  by  Bahr  and  Keil,  as  well  as  by 
some  geographers)  is  that  it  was  in  the 
valley  of  the  Son  of  Hinnom,  a  part  of 
which  still  bears  the  name  of  Gihon,  i.«.,to 
the  west  of  Jerusalem,  and  not  far  from  the 
Jaffa  gate.    By  many  indeed  the  present 
Birket-es-Sultan    is    identified   with    the 
Lower  Pool  of  Gihon.    But  others  (Fergu- 
son, Bawlinson,  Ac.)  see  in  it  the  ancient 
name  of  the  Tyropaeon.      Scripture  does 
not  speak  of  it  as  a  spring,  though  the 
"source  of  the  waters  of  Gihon"  is  men- 
tioned 2  Chron.  xxxii.  30,  Heb.     The  text 
shows  that  it  was  below  the  city  ("bring 
him  down  upon  Gihon,"  ver.  38.    Cf.  also 
ver.  40).    2   Chron.  xxxiii.   11,  speaks  of 
"  Gihon  in  the  valley,"  where  it  is  very 
noticeable  that  the  word  used  is  Nachal 
(i.e.  W&dy,  watercourse).    But  this  "  isthe 
word  always  employed  for  the  valley  of  the 
Eedron,  east  of  Jerusalem,  the  so-called 
Talley  of  Jehoshaphat ;  ge  (ravine  or  glen) 
being  as  constantly  employed  for  the  valley 
of  Hinnom,  south  and  west  of  the  town" 
(Grove, "  Diet.  Bible," art.  Gihon).  It  is  also 
to  be  noticed  that  the  text  last  cited  men- 
tions Gihon  in  connection  with  Ophel,  which 
UeB  south-east  of  Jerusalem.    The  Chald., 
Arab.,  and  Syr.  are  probably  right,  there- 
tare,  in  identifying  Gihon  here  with  Siloam 


(which  lies  at  the  foot  of  Ophel),  in  favout 
of  which  it  mfiy  further  be  said  that  it 
would  be  admirably  suited  for  David's  pur- 
pose  of    a    counter    demonstration — and 

that  whether  En-Eogel  is  to  be  found  at  the 
Well  of  the  Virgin  or  the  Well  of  Job. 
Siloam  is  at  no  great  distance  from  either, 
and  quite  withm  earshot,  whereas  th8 
traditional  Gihon  is  altogether  out  of  the 
way.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this 
procession  to  and  from  Gihon  was  ordained, 
not  because  there  was  any  special  reason 
for  anointing  Solomon  there — for  it  was  not 
a  holy  place — but  purely  as  a  demonstration 
to  the  populace,  and  to  checkmate  the  con- 
spirators. It  was  probably  a  public  place, 
and  would  accommodate  a  large  concourse 
(Poole). 

Ver.  34. — And  let  Zadok  the  priest  and 
Katban  the  prophet  [Bahr  sees  in  the  fact 
that  Nathan  was  associated  with  Zadok  in 
the    anointing,   "the    high    significanco 
David  attributed  to  the  prophetic  office  in 
IsraeL"    But  the  prophets  constantly  per- 
formed this  ceremony.    Samuel  anointed 
both  Saul  and  David ;  Elisha  anointed  Jeha 
(2  Kings  ix.  1),  and  was  commissioned  to 
anoint  Hazael  (1  Kings  six.  15, 16)  ]  anoint 
him    [the  king,  being  a  sacred  personage, 
was  Bet  apart  to  the  office,  like  the  priest 
and    prophef,    by   anointing.     Saul   was 
probably  anointed  twice  (1  8am.  x.  1;  xi. 
15.      Cf.    xii.    8).      David   was  anointed 
thrice  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13  ;  2  Sam.  ii.  4 ;  v.  3. 
Solomon  was  anointed  twice  (ver.  39;  1  Chron . 
xxix.  22).    The  Babbins  have  always  held 
that  subsequent  kings  were  not  anointed, 
where  the  succession   was  regular.     But 
this  opinion  must  be  taken  quantum  valet. 
It  is  true  that  we  only  read  of  the  anointing 
of  Jehu  (2  Kings  ix.  6),  Joash  (ibid.  xi.  12), 
and  Jehoahaz  (ibid,  xxiii.  30),  and  that  in 
these  three  cases  the  accession  was  irregular. 
But  it  is  obvious  that  other  kings  may  have 
been   anointed  as  weU,  though  the  fact  is 
not  recorded.     There  would  be  no  reason 
for  recording  it  in  ordinary  cases     It  seemj 
hardly  likely,   too,  that  any  bmg  would 
readily  dispense  vrith  an  ordinance  which 
would  so  much  strengthen  his  title]  there 
king  over  Israel:  and  blow  ye  with  the 
trumpet  [the  sound  of  the  trumpet  would 
almost  seem  to  have  been  a  necessary  ac- 
companiment of  coronations,  or  the  procla- 
mation of  a  new  king.   See  2  Sam.  xv.  10 ; 
2  Kings  ix.  13;  xi.  14],  and  say,  God  save 
king  Solomon.    [See  on  ver.  25.] 

Ver.  35. — Then  ye  shall  come  up  (after 
him  [not  in  the  LXX.  Cod.  Vat.]  that  he 
may  [Heb.  and  he  shall]  come  and  sit  upon 
my  tlccne  [in  every  possible  way  his  acces- 
sion was  to  be  proclaimed  and  confirmed]  i 
for  he  shall  be  Ung  in  my  stead  [David  i.«. 


CH.  I.  1—53. 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


Tirtually  abdicates  in  Solomon's  favour.  Cf . 
rers.  46, 51.  63 ;  1  Chroii.  xxix.  23,  26] ,  and 
I  have  appointed  Mm  [he  and  him  are  em- 
phasised in  the  original]  to  be  ruler  over 
Israel  and  over  Judah.  It  is  possible,  as 
Bahr  thinks,  that  Israel  and  Judah  were 
severally  mentioned  because  David  had 
once  been  Mng  over  Judah  only,  and  be- 
cause Israel  had  gone  over  to  the  side  of 
Absalom.  It  is  more  probable,  however, 
that  "Israel  and  Judah"  was  even  then  the 
current  designation  of  the  two  component 
'  parts  of  the  realm  (see  2  Sam.  ii.  9, 10;  xix. 
11,  41,  &o.).  Besides,  we  can  hardly  sup- 
pose  that  the  historian  has  in  every  case, 
though  he  probably  has  in  this,  preserved 
the  exact  words'of  the  speaker;  and  it  need 
cause  us  no  surprise  had  he  put  into  David's 
mouth  the  phraseology  of  a  later  age.  In 
the  nature  of  things  he  can  only  give  us  the 
substance  of  conversations  such  as  these. 

Ver.36.— And  Benalahthe  son  of  Johoiada 
[probably  he  spoke,  not  because  the  execu- 
tion of  the  order  depended  upon  him 
(Bahr);  for  both  Zadok  and  Nathan  had  a 
much  more  important  part  to  perform,  but 
as  a  blunt  soldier  who  was  accustomed  to 
speak  his  mind]  answered  the  king  and 
said.  Amen:  the  Lord  God  [lit.,  "Jehovah, 
he  Ood,"  i&c.]  of  my  lord  tbe  ^ng  say  so 
too. 

Ver.  87.— As  the  Lord  hath  been  with  my 
lord  the  king  [cf.  1  Sam.  xx.  13.  "  This 
phrase  expresses  a  very  high  degree  of  the 
Divine  favour"  (Eawlinson).  See  Gen.  xxvi. 
3,  4 ;  zxviii.  15 ;  xxxiz.  2, 21 ;  Exod.  iii.  12; 
Josh.  i.  5 ;  1  Chron.  xxii.  11,  &c.] ,  even  so 
be  be  with  Solomon,  and  make  his  throne 
greater  than  the  throne  of  my  lord 
king  David.  [This  was  said  from  a  full 
and  honest  heart,  not  to  flatter  David's 
vanity  (Thenius).  It  is  thoroughly  charac- 
teristic of  the  man  so  far  as  we  know  him. 
And  the  prayer  was  fulfilled  (ch.  iii.  11,12).] 
Ver.  38.— So  Zadokthe  priest,  and  Nathan 
the  prophet,  and  Benaiah  the  son  of  Je- 
holada,  and  the  CheretMtes,  and  the  Pela- 
thltes  [these  were  the  royal  body-guard 
— tiufuiTo^vkaKeQ  Josephus  calls  them — who 
were  commanded  by  Benaiah  (2  Sam.  viii. 
18 ;  XV.  18  ;  xx.  23 ;  xxiii.  2b).  But  while 
their  functions  are  pretty  well  understood, 
great  difference  of  opinion  exists  as  to  the 
origin  or  meaning  of  the  words.  By  some 
they  are  supposed  to  be  Gentile  names.  A 
tribe  of  Cherethites  is  mentioned  1  Sam. 
XXX.  14,  (Cf.  Ezek.  xxv.  16  ;  Zeph.  ii.  5), 
and  in  close  connexion  with  the  Philistines 
(ver.  16).  Hence  Cherethite  has  been 
thought  to  be  another  name  for  Philistin'-  ; 
and  as  the  LXX.  and  Syr.  render  the  wor^ 
"  Cretans,"  it  has  been  conjectured  that  the 
Philistines  bad   their  origin   from  Ci«te. 


They  did  come  from  Caphtor,  and  that  it 
probably  Crete  (see  Gen.  x.  14 ;  Jer.  xlvii. 
4;    Amos  ix.   7;    Deut.   u.   23).      '?!'!?§• 
again,  is  not  unlike  'flE'^S-    In  favour  of 
this  view  is  the  fact  that  David  certainly 
had  a  body-guard  of  foreign  mercenaries  (2 
Sam.   XV.   18,   where  the   "  Gittites "  are 
connected  with  the  Cherethites).    Nor  does 
it  make  againet  it  that  "two  designations" 
would  thus  "  be  employed  side  by  side  for 
one  and  the  same  people  " — as  if  we  should 
speak  of  Britons  and  Englishmen  (Bahr). 
For  the  names  look  like  a  paronomasia — of 
which  the  Jews  were  very  fond — and  a  trick 
of  this  kind,  would  at  once  account  for 
the  tautology.     [Since  writing  this,  I  find 
the  same    idea  has   already  occurred   to 
Ewald.]     But  the  other  view,  adopted  by 
Gesenius,  is  that   the  names   are  names 
of  office  and  function.  Cherethite  he  would 
derive  from  3"11J,  cut,  day ;  and  by  Chere- 
thites he  would  understand  "executioners," 
which  the  royal  body-guard  were  in  ancient 
despotisms  (Gen.  xxxix.  1,  Heb. ;   Dan.  iL 
14,  &o.    See  on  ch.  ii.  25).    In  the  Pele- 
thites  (ri7B,  swiftness)  he  would  see  the 
pubUO' couriers  (ay/apoi)  of  Eastern  mon. 
archies  (see  Herod,  viii.  98  and  2  Chron. 
XXX.  6).    We  see  the  guard  discharging  the 
function  first  named  in  2  Kings  x.  25 ;  xi. 
4,  8;   and  the  latter  in  1  Kings  xiv.  27 
(marg.)]went  down  [i.e.,  from  the  palace  on 
Mount  Zion]  and  caused  Solomon  to  ride 
upon  King  David's  mule,  and  brought  blm 
to  [br:  cf.  ii.26]Gihon[Chald.,  Syr.,  Arab., 
Shilohd] . 

Ver.  39. — And  Zadok  the  priest  took  an 
horn  of  oU  [Heb.  the  oil.  The  "holy  anoint- 
ing oil,"  Exod.  XXX.  25,  31,  compounded  as 
directed  in  vers.  23-25,  was  evidently  part 
of  the  furniture  of  the  tabernacle  (Exod. 
xxxi.  11 ;  xxxix.  38).  Eleazer  was  charged 
with  its  preservation  (Num.  iv.  16),  and  the 
Eabbins  say  it  lasted  till  the  captivity]  put 
of  the  tabernacle  [the  tabernacle  on  Mount 
Zion,  containing  the  ark  (2  Sam.  vi.  17 ;  1 
Chron.  xv.  1)  must  be  meant  here.  There 
was  not  time  to  have  gone  to  the  tabernacle 
at  Gihon  (Stanley),  which  was  three  hours 
distance  from  Jerusalem  (Keil).  Though 
Abiathar  had  charge  of  this  sanctuary,  yet 
Zadok  would  readily  gain  access  to  it,  es- 
pecially in  the  king's  name]  and  anointed 
Solomon.  And  they  blew  the  trumpet  [of. 
2  Sam.  XV.  10  ;  2  Kings  ix.  13 ;  xi.  14]  ;  and 
all  the  people  said,  God  save  king  Solomon. 
[Notice  the  exact  fulfilment  of  the  threefold 
charge  of  ver.  34  and  its  result.  Solomon 
was  confirmed  in  his  office  by  the  suffraget 
of  the  people.] 
Ver.  40. — And  all  the  people  came  up  aftei 


10 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  I.  1—63. 


Mm  [same  expression  as  ver.  36.  The  pro- 
cession, the  sound  of  the  trumpets,  &o.,  had 
collected  a  large  crowd,  which  followed 
Solomon  on  his  return] ,  and  the  people 
piped  [Heb.  were  piping]  with  pipes  [pipes 
or  flutes  were  used  on  occasions  of  rejoicing 
(Isa.  V.  12  ;  xxx.  29.  Cf.  1  Sam.  x.  5),  and 
also  of  mourning  (Jer.  xlviii.  36 ;  Matt.  ix. 
23).  It  is  true  that  a  very  slight  change 
(D^^TI?  S^bVn)?  instead  of  D*';'?n.3  D»'?.^np) 
will  give  the  meaning,  "  dancing  with 
dances,''  which  Ewald  prefers,  on  the 
ground  that  "all  the  people"  could  not 
have  produced  their  pipes  at  a  moment's 
notice.  But  the  objection  loses  its  force 
•when  it  is  observed  (Eawlinson)  that  the 
text  implies  that  only  some  of  the  people 
piped.  "All  the  people  came  up  .  .  .  and 
the  people"  Ac.  liesides,  even  if  it  were 
not  so,  some  allowance  is  surely  to  be  made 
tor  Eastern  hyperbole.  And  the  received 
text  is  to  be  preferred  on  other  grounds. 
The  LXX. ,  however,  has  t^opEwo v  tv  xoooIq\  , 
and  rejoiced  with  great  joy  [Heb.  "  were 
rejoicing  a  great  joy  "] ,  and  the  earth  rent 
[this  is  certainly  a  strangly  hyperbolical 
expression.  For  V|?3  strictly  means  to 
cleave  asunder,  tear  open  (see,  «.j.,-Num. 
xvi.  31 ;  Amos  i.  13 ;  2  Chron.  xxv.  12). 
And  Thenius  suggests  a  slight  emendation 
of  the  text,  viz.,  ^j^JJIPlI  (i.e.,  "resounded") 
for  Vi^aril  which  would  obviate  this  diffi- 
culty. He  points  out  that  while  the  LXX. 
Cod.  Vat.  has  ippdyri,  some  versions  have 
rjxritrev,  and  the  Vulg.  insonuit.  But  per- 
haps it  is  safer  to  keep  to  the  lectio  ardud] 
with  the  sound  of  them  THeb.  "  with  their 
voices  "] . 

Ver.  41.— And  Adonljah  and  all  the 
guests  that  were  with  him  heard  It  [it  is 
probable  they  "  were  listening  with  some 
anxiety  to  hear  if  anything  would  occur." 
Eawhnson]  as  they  had  made  an  end  [Heb. 
"and  they  hadfinished"]  of  eating,  And  when 
Joab  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  [the 
original  almost  implies  that  Joab's  practised 
ear  was  the  first  to  catch  the  note  of  the 
trumpet.  He  seems  U:  have  been  the  first 
to  suspect  its  significance] ,  he  said,  Whsre- 
fore  is  this  noise  of  the  city  being  in  an 
uproar?  [More  exactly,  "in  commotion." 
ilDin,  an  ouomatopoetio  word,  hke  our 
English  "  hum."  We  speak  of  the  "  hum 
of  the  city,"  "  the  buzz  of  business,"  &c.] 

Ver.  42.— And  whUe  he  yet  spate,  be- 
hold, Jonathan  the  son  of  Ablathar  the 
priest  [Cf.  2  Sam.  xv.  36 ;  xvii.  17.  His 
experience  had  marked  him  out  for  the  post 
of  watchman]  came  [That  he  had  not 
arrived  before  shows  how  prompt,  and  even 
hurried,  had  been  the  measures  taken  by 


Solomon's  party]  and  Adonljah  said  imt« 
Mrn  [Heb.  and  LXX.  omit "  unto  him"]  Com* 
In  [Heb.  come.  See  on  ver.  22.  "  Come 
in "  suggests  the  idea  of  a  house  or  tent, 
whereas  the  feast  was  at  fresco'] ;  for  thou 
art  a  valiant  man  [it  is  Adonijah  (not 
Joab,  as  Bahr — of  course  by  an  oversight — 
says)  who  speaks  thus.  Perhaps  "  able," 
"honest,"  or  "  worthy  man  "  (cf.  ver.  52  ; 
same  word  in  Heb. ;  also  Prov.  xii.  4)  would 
be  nearer  the  mark.  "  Valiant  "  is  clearly 
out  of  place]  and  brlngest  good  tidings.  [A 
similar  expression  2  Sam.  xviii.  27.  It  was 
evidently  a  familiar  saying.  The  idea,  ' '  a 
good  man  will  bring  good  news  "  corresponds 
with  that  of  the  proverb  of  1  Sam.  xxiv.  13. 
Adonijah's  misgivings  reveal  themselves  in 
these  words.  He  fears  the  worst,  but  strives 
to  put  on  a  cheerful  face  and  to  encourage 
his  guests.] 

Ver.  43. — And  Jonathan  answered  and 
said  to  Adonijah,  Verily  [Bather,  "nay 
but,"  "  on  the  contrary  "  [immo  vera).  See 
Gen.  xvii.  19,  Heb.,  "Nay,  but  Sarah  thy 
wife,"  &c.,  and  Gesen.,  Thesaurus,  sub  voce 
?3K.  This  particle  has  not  "  always  an  ob- 
jecting force"  (Eawlinson) — see  Gen.  xlii.21, 
and  especially  2  Sam.  xiv.  6 ;  2  Kings  iv.  14 
— but  only  in  the  later  Hebrew,  e.g.,  2 
Chron.  xix.  3;  xxxiii.  17]  our  Lord  wng 
David  hath  made  Solomon  king. 

Ver.  44.-  And  the  king  hath  sent  with 
Zadok  the  priest,  and  Nathan  the  prophet, 
and  Benalah  the  son  of  Jeholada,  and  the 
Cherethltes,  and  the  Pelethltes  [see  on  ver. 
38] ,  and  they  have  caused  him  to  ride  upon 
the  king's  mule. 

Ver.  45.— And  Zadok  the  priest  and 
Nathan  the  prophet  have  anointed  him 
king  In  Glhon :  and  they  are  come  up  from 
thence  rejoicing,  so  that  the  city  [HHi'? 
same  word  as  in  ver.  41.  Elsevhere  almost 
exclusively  found  in  poetry]  rang  again 
[rather,  "  is  in  commotion. "  Same  expres- 
sion in  ver.  41  and  Euth  i.  19,  where  it  is 
translated,  "  the  city  was  moved  "] .  This 
is  the  noise  [Heb.  voice]  that  ye  have  heard. 

Ver.  46. — And  also  [the  same  two  words 
are  found  at  the  beginning  of  vers.  47,  48. 
They  accord  well  with  the  breathless  and 
excited  state  of  the  speaker,  and  suggest 
how  each  successive  detail  told  on  the 
hearers]  Solomon  sltteth  [rather,  "  sate,  took 
his  seat,"  UaOiae  (LXX.)  aorist.  See  ver.  35] 
on  the  throne  of  the  kingdom  [rather,  "  the 
royal  throne."  So  Gesen.  All  David'i 
directions  were  now  fulfilled] . 

Ver.  47.— And  moreover  [D3)  as  before] 
the  king's  servants  [see  on  ver.  33]  came 
to  bless  our  lord  king  David  [Jonathan 
here  refers  in  all  probability  to  the  words 
of  Benaiah,  vers.  86,  37.  He  does  not  know 


CH.  L  1—53.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


11 


the  exact  particulars,  and  ascribes  to  the 
"  servants  "  the  words  of  their  commander. 
Of  coiirse  it  is  possible  that  "the  body- 
guard took  up  the  -words  of  Jehoiada 
(Benaiah  ?)  their  captain  and  repeated  them 
■with  some  slight  alteration."  Bawlinson] 
sayiniTi  God  [so  the  Keri.  '  The  Cethib  has 
"thy  God"]  make  the  name  of  Solomon 
better  than  thy  name  and  make  Ms 
throne  greater  than  thy  throne  [This 
prayer  was  fulfilled  (chap.  iii.  12 ;  iv.  21-24] . 
And  the  king  bowed  himself  [in  worship. 
Cf.  Gen.  xlvii.  31]  upon  the  bed. 

Yer.  48. — And  also  thus  saith  the  king, 
Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which 
hath  given  one  to  sit  on  my  throne  this 
day,  mine  eyes  even  seeing  it.  [These 
last  words  are  added  because  it  is  quite  an 
exceptional  thing  for  a  king  to  see  hia  suc- 
cessor on  the  throne.] 

Ver.  49. — ^Andallthe  guests  [Heb.  called, 
LXX.  kXijtoi]  that  were  with  [Heb.  to] 
Adonijah  were  afraid  [Heb.  trembled]  and 
rose  up  [LXX.  omits]  and  went  every  man 
his  way.  [This  fear  and  flight  betray  a 
consciousness  of  guilt.  They  cannot  have 
believed  in  the  right  of  primogeniture.] 

Yer.  50. — And  Adonijah  feared  because 
of  Solomon  and  he  arose  and  went  and 
caught  hold  of  the  horns  of  the  altar.  [Gf. 
chap.  ii.  28.  Probably  the  altar  of  Mount 
Zion,  chap.  iii.  15  ;  2  Sam.  vi.  17.  Though 
it  is  impossible  to  say  positively  whether 
this  er  the  altar  at  Gibeon  (chap.  iii.  4)  or 
that  recently  erected  on  the  threshing  floor 
of  Araunah  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  25)  is  meant.  For 
the  "  horns,"  see  Exod.  xxvii.  2  j  xxxviii.  2 ; 
and  compare  xxx.  2.  They  were  of  shittim 
{i.e.,  acacia)  wood  overlaid  with  brass,  and 
served  a  double  purpose.  Victims  were 
bound  to  them  (Psa.  oxviii.  27),  and  blood 
was  put  upon  them,  Exod.  xxix.  12.  As  to 
the  altar  as  a  place  of  sanctuary,  see  on 
chap.  ii.  28.  Evidently  a  right  of  sanctuary 
existed  amongst  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  at 
the  time  of  the  Exodus,  and  probably  from 
time  immemorial.  It  is  referred  to  in  Exod. 
xxi.  14,  but  it  was  much  circumscribed  by 
the  appointment  of  the  cities  of  refuge 
<Num.  XXXV.  10  sqq.)  By  "laying  hold  of 
the  boms  the  offender  thereby  placed  him- 
self under  the  protection  of  the  saving  and 
helping  grace  of  God  "  (Bahr,  "  Symbolik," 
i.  474) 

Yer.  51. — And  It  was  told  Solomon,  say- 
ing, Behold  Adonijah  fearetb  King  Solomon, 
for  lo,  he  hath  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of 
the  altar,  saying,  let  king  Solomon  [this 
repetition  of  the  title  is  striking.  Both 
courtiers  and  criminals  hasten  to  give  the 


young  king  his  new  honours.  In  Adonijah'g 
mouth  it  is  also  a  virtual  abdication  of  hia 
claim  to  the  throne  and  a  direct  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  new  monarch.  But  see 
on  vers.  1  and  35.]  swear  unto  me  to-day 
[Cf.  2  Sam.  xix.  23.  This  is  one  of  many 
passages  which  show  how  lightly  the  Jews 
esteemed  promises  in  comparison  with 
oaths.  The  sentiment  possibly  took  its 
rise  in  the  oaths  sworn  by  the  Divine  Being 
(Gen.  xxii.  16 ;  xxiv. 7;  Exod. xvi.  16,  &c.), 
though  it  is  possible,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
these  asseverations  were  made  in  deference 
to  the  popular  sentiment.  Be  that  as  it 
may,  the  oath  held  a  much  more  conspicu- 
ous and  important  place  in  the  Jewish  than 
the  Christian  economy.  See  Gen.  xxi.  23 ; 
xxxi.  23  ;  Num.  xiv.  2 ;  xxx.  2  ;  Judges  xv. 
12 ;  xxi.  1 ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  28 ;  Jer.  v.  2,  and, 
to  omit  other  passages,  1  Kings  i.  13 ;  ii.  8, 
23,  42.  Even  our  Lord,  who  rebuked  the 
habit  (Matt,  v,  84—37 ;  xxiii.  16—22)  re- 
spected the  adjuration  of  Caiaphas,  and 
St.  Paul  frequently  appeals  to  God  (Acts 
xxvi.  29  ;  2  Cor.  i.  23 ;  xi.  31 ;  Phil.  I  8.) 
The  Christian  reUgion,  as  it  has  gradually 
begotten  a  reverence  for  tmih,  has  made 
the  simple  word  into  a  bond]  that  he  will 
not  slay  his  servant  [Cf.  "  I  will  be  Eiug," 
ver.  5.]  with  the  sword  [the  usual  form  of 
capital  punishment,  oh.  ii.  8,  25,  31,  46. 
Adonijah  indirectly  confesses  thai  he  had 
merited  death] . 

Yer.  51.— And  Solomon  said  li.e  ,  lie  re- 
fused to  swear] ,  If  hs  will  shew  himself  a 
worthy  man  [!?:n-13,  cf.  ^;n-E>H<,ver.42], 
there  shall  not  an  hair  of  him  laU  to  the 
earth  [i.e.,  not  a  single  hair  shsJl  be  injured. 
Same  expression  1  Sam.  xiv.  45;  2  Sam. 
xiv.  11 ;  Acts  xxvii.  34.  It  v/as  evidently  a 
familiar  saying]  but  if  wickedness  shall  be 
found  in  him,  [i.  e. ,  if  he  shall  commit  any 
fresh  crime]  he  shall  die  [Heb.  W\,  "then 
he  shall  die,"  emphatic] 

Yer.  53. — So  King  Solomon  sent  and  they 
brought  him  down  [The  altar  was  elevated : 
probably  a  slope,  not  steps  (Exod.  X'..  26) 
led  to  it]  from  [Heb.  from  upon.  H''  was 
still  clinging  to  it]  the  altar.  And  ho  oame 
and  bowed  himself  to  king  Solorjot  [i.e., 
made  obeisance  to  him  as  king.  Cf .  "ers. 
16,  23,  31]  and  Solomon  salfl  -iuto  him, 
Go  to  thine  house.  This  waa  not  a  sen- 
tence of  banishment  from  coui-t,  but  merely 
a  dismissal  to  a  private  life,  i^avUving  a  tacit 
admonition  to  hve  quioHy  wid  be  thankful 
that  his  life  was  spsj-o'J  Mm.  "  Vad".  in 
domum  tuam,  ibi  quiesm  ft  res  tuas  age,  ntt 
te  publicis  regni  mn  <4ijotii*  immisct 
(Corn,  k  Lapide), 


la  THE  FIRST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS.  [ch,  i.  1— 63» 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — The  chamler  of  aicTcneas.  This  opening  chapter  of  1  Kings  intro. 
duces  us  into  the  privacy  of  a  sick  room.  Stretched .  upon  a  couch,  covered- 
with  many  folds  of  rich  Eastern  drapery,  we  see  a  feeble,  decrepit,  attenuated  man. 
At  his  side  stands  a  fair  young  girl,  assiduously  ministering  to  his  wants.  Prom 
time  to  time  the  door  opens,  and  prophet,  priest,  and  warrior  enter  to  receive  his 
instructions ;  for  happily  the  mind  is  not  a  wreck  like  the  body.  Its  vigour  is 
hardly  abated,  though  the  bodily  strength  is  weU-nigh  exhausted.  He  has  but. 
reached  the  appointed  threescore  years  and  ten,  and  yet — such  have  been  the  hard- 
ships of  his  life — the  vital  force  is  spent.  They  cover  him  with  clothes,  but  he- 
gets  no  heat.  The  flame  of  life  is  slowly  but  surely  expiring.  But  we  see  at  once 
that  this  is  no  ordinary  room ;  that  this  is  no  conmaon  patient.  The  gorgeous 
apparel,  the  purple  and  fine  linen,  the  "  attendance  of  ministers,  the  standing  of 
servants,"  proclaim  it  a  king's  court.  And  the  insignia,  the  pomp,  the  profound 
homage  proclaim  that  this  sick  man  is  a  king.  Yes,  it  is  David,  second  king  of 
Israel,  but  second  to  none  in  goodness  and  true  greatness,  who  lies  here.  His- 
chequered  life,  bo  fuU  of  romance,  of  chivalry,  of  piety,  is  drawing  near  its  close. 
But  the  hour  of  death  is  preceded  by  a  period  of  feebleness  and  decay.  For  sick- 
ness is  no  respecter  of  persons.  It,  too,  like  death,  "  thunders  at  the  palace  gatw 
of  kings  and  the  dweUuigs  of  the  poor."    There  is  no  release  in  that  war, 

"  Beeptre  and  crown  must  tumble  dowa, 
And  in  the  dust  be  equal  made 
With  the  poor  common  scythe  and  spado." 

The  sickness  of  David,  then,  may  fittingly  suggest  some  thoughts  as  to  sickness  in 
general.  What,  let  us  ask,  is  its  purpose,  what  its  uses  ?  Why  is  it  that,  as  a  rule, 
a  period  of  gradual  decay  precedes  death  ?  For  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  man 
alone,  of  all  the  animals,  dies  of  disease.  Among  all  the  myriad  forms  of  life,  that 
is,  he  alone  dies  gradually.  The  lower  animals,  as  a  rule,  prey  upon  each  other. 
Beasts,  birds,  fishes,  insects,  aU  die  a  violent  death.  No  sooner  is  one  of  them 
attacked  by  sickness,  or  enfeebled  by  old  age,  than  it  is  dispatched  and  devoured 
by  its  fellows.  It  is  thus  the  balance  of  the  species  is  preserved.  But  in  the  case 
of  men,  sudden  death  is  the  exception.  For  them  there  remains,  as  a  rule,  a  dis- 
cipline of  pain  prior  to  dissolution.  It  is  well  to  ask  why  this  is.  The  general 
answer  is,  of  course,  obvious.  It  is  because  of  that  other  life,  that  future  reckoning 
which  awaits  men  after  death.  Let  us  consider,  however,  in  what  ways  sickness 
and  pain  are  a  preparation  for  the  life  and  the  judgment  to  come. 

I.  Sickness  is  God's  notice  to  quit.  We  should  think  it  hard  to  be  ejected 
from  our  home  and  turned  into  the  street  without  due  notice.  We  want  a  Kttle 
time  to  make  preparations.  Especially  is  this  the  case  when  we  are  leaving  our 
earthly  tabernacle— leaving  not  a  home,  but  a  world.  Now  God  has  given  us 
abundant  and  repeated  notice  in  the  various  accidents  and  occurrences  of  life.  Too 
often,  however,  both  the  lessons  of  Providence  and  the  warnings  of  the  preacher 
are  unheeded.  So  the  Lover  of  souls  will  give  men  a  final  warning,  and  one  that 
they  cannot  mistake,  cannot  well  disregard.  They  shall /eei  it  in  their  own  persons, 
biokness  shaU  bid  them  set  then-  house  in  order  and  prepare  to  meet  their  God.  A 
German  fable  teUs  us  that  once  upon  a  time  Death  promised  a  young  man  that  he 
would  not  summon  him  until  he  had  first  sent  several  messengers  to  apprize  him 
of  his  coming.  So  the  youth  took  his  fill  of  pleasure,  and  wasted  health  and 
strength  m  notous  living.  Presently,  a  fever  laid  him  low.  But  as  no  messenger 
had  appeared,  he  had  no  apprehensions  ;  and  when  he  recovered,  he  returned 
tortnwith  to  his  former  sins.  He  then  fell  a  prey  to  other  maladies,  but,  remem- 
Denng  Jus  covenant  with  Death,  made  light  of  them.  "  I  am  not  going  to  die,"  h« 
**'®1'  "i.  ,  ?'^*  niessenger  has  not  yet  come."  But  one  day  some  one  tapped  him 
on  the  shoulder.    He  tui'ned,  and  saw  Death  standing  at  his  elbow.    "  FoUow  me  " 


-OLI.  1— fiS.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  II 

said  the  King  of  Terrors ;  "  the  hour  of  thy  departure  is  corns.''  "  How  is  this  ?  " 
exclaimed  the  youth  ;  "  thou  art  false  to  thy  word  I  Thon  didst  promise  to  send 
me  messengers,  and  I  have  seen  none."  "  Silence  1 "  sternly  answered  the 
Destroyer.  "  I  have  sent  thee  messenger  after  messenger.  What  was  the  fever  ? 
What  was  the  apoplexy?  What  was  each  sickness  that  befel  thee?  Each  was 
my  herald ;  each  was  my  messenger."  Yes,  the  first  use  of  sickness  is  to  remind 
men  of  death.  And  how  much  they  need  that  reminder  we  may  learn  from  the 
<jase  of  David.  He  had  long  been  familiar  with  death.  He  was  no  stranger  to 
^'  th'  imminent  deadly  breach,"  had  known  many  "  hairbreadth  'scapes,"  and  often 
there  had  been  "  but  a  step  between  his  soul  and  death."  Nay,  he  had  once  seen 
the  Destroyer  himself,  seen  him  standing  with  his  drawn  sword  ready  to  smite. 
And  yet  the  man  who  had  faced  death,  who  had  long  carried  his  life  in  his  hand, 
recaives  a  final  warning  ere  its  close.  That  sickness,  perhaps,  first  brought  home 
to  him  his  m.ortftlity,  first  cried  to  him,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God.  Bemove  th» 
diadem  and  take  off  the  crown  "  (Ezek.  xxi  26).    But 

II.  Sickness  is  God's  way  of  weaning  men  feom  t^E  world.  It  is  natural 
to  cling  to  life ;  but  it  is  necessary  we  should  be  made  willing  to  leave  it.  The 
wrench  is  felt  the  less  when  some  of  the  ties  which  bind  us  to  earth  have  been 
snndered :  when  life  loses  its  attractions.  It  is  the  office  of  pain  and  sickness  to 
make  life  valueless,  to  make  men  anxious  to  depart.  How  often  it  happens  that 
men  who  at  the  beginning  of  illness  wiU  not  hear  of  death  are  presently  found 
praying  for  their  release.  Such  are  the  "uses  of  adversity."  An  old  writer 
compares  affliction  to  the  bitter  unguent  which  nursing  mothers  who  would  wean 
their  offspring  sometimes  put  upon  their  breast.  A  few  weeks  on  the  couch  of  pain, 
and  we  soon  cry  out  that  Ufe  is  not  worth  the  Uving. 

III.  Sickness  is  God's  discipline  for  paradise.  True  it  is  that  all  "  earthly 
care  is  a  heavenly  discipline."  AIL  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to  are  designed  to  be 
the  instruments  of  our  perfection.  Like  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  we  are  "made 
perfect  through " sufferings,"  For  us,  as  for  Him,  "the  cross  is  the  ladder  to 
heaven."  Those  are  two  suggestive  words,  which  only  differ  by  one  letter — iraBiniaTa, 
fiaBimara,  "  afflictions,  instructions."  But  while  all  affliction  is  a  school,  the  last 
illness  should  be  the  finishing  school.  At  the  last  assay  the  furnace  must  bo 
heated  more  than  it  has  been  wont  to  be.  "  I  have  learnt  more,"  said  Mr.  Cecil, 
"  within  these  curtains  in  six  weeks  than  I  have  learnt  in  all  my  life  before."  The 
chamber  of  sickness  is  an  enforced  Retreat.  There,  ears  "that  the  preacher  could 
not  school "  are  compelled  to  listen.  There,  "lips  say  '  God  be  pitiful'  which  ne'er 
flaid  '  God  be  praised.'  There,  many  have  learnt  for  the  first  time  to  know  them- 
selves. .And  how  necessary  is  this  last  discipline  David's  sick-chamber  may  teach 
us ;  for  he  had  already  had  his  share  of  troubles.  His  life  had  been  largely  spent 
in  the  school  of  adversity.  "  In  journeyings  often,,  in  peril  of  robbers,"  &c.  (2  Cor. 
xi.  25, 26),  these  words  aptly  describe  his  early  career.  Aad  even  since  he  ascended 
the  throne,  how  often  has  the  sword  gone  through  his  soul.  Amnon,  Absalom, 
Tamar,  Abner,  Amasa,  what  tragedies  are  connected  with  these  names.  Few  men 
have  experienced  such  a  long  and  bitter  discipUne  as  he ;  and  it  woiild  seem,  too,  to 
have  accomplished  its  work.  If  we  may  judge  by  some  of  his  later  Psalms,  full  of 
contrition,  of  humility,  of  devout  breathings  after  God,  that  sweet  and  sanctified 
soul  had  "learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered."  But  he  is  not 
■spared  the  final  chastening.  The  sweet  singer  of  Israel,  the  man  after  God's  own 
heart,  must  go  awhile  into  the  gloom  and  the  silence  of  the  sick-room,  there  to  be 
made  fuUy  "  meet  for  the  Inheritance  of  the  saints  in  Hght."  Men  often  pray  to 
he  spared  a  long  sickness,  often  commiserate  those  who  experience  one.  But  we 
have  learned  that  it  has  its  uses.  We  see  that  it  is  a  last  chance  given  to  men :  a 
last  solemn  warning,  a  final  chastening  to  prepare  them  for  the  beatific  vision.  The 
Neapolitans  call  one  of  the  wards  of  their  hospital  L'Antecamera  della  Morte — the 
ftnte-chamber  of  death.  It  is  thus  that  we  should  regard  every  "  chamber  of  sicknesa." 

Ver.  5  sqq.  with  ch.  ii.  13  sqq. — Adonijah'a  history  and  its  lessons. 

i.  He  was  a  spoilt  child. — "  His  father  had  not  displeased  him  at  any  time." 


14  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ca.  i.  1—53. 


(eb.  i.  7).  There  is  no  greater  unkincliiess  and  injustice  to  a  child  than  over-in- 
dulgence. The  chUd  is  the  father  of  the  man.  The  boy  who  has  all  bis  own  way 
will  oertaiiily  want  it  in  after  Ufe,  and  will  not  get  it,  to  bis  own  disappointment 
and  the  unhappiness  of  all  around  him.  He  that  lovetb  bis  son  chastenetb  him 
betimes.  David  was  probably  so  engrossed  with  pnbUc  cares  and  duties  that  bia 
first  care,  after  God — bis  family — was  neglected.  How  unwise  are  those  parents 
who  devolve  the  care  of  their  children  at  the  most  critical  and  impressionable  time 
of  life  on  domestics,  who  are  often  iU-suited  or  unequal  to  the  charge.  One  of  the 
first  duties  a  child  demands  of  its  parents  is  that  it  should  be  corrected  and 
conquered.  The  will  must  be  broken  in  youth.  The  sapling  may  be  bent,  not  so 
the  trunk.  David's  unwise  indulgence,  bis  sparing  the  rod,  prepared  a  rod  for 
his  own  and  Adonijah's  back.  It  was  the  sin  of  Eli  that  "bis  sons  made  tliem- 
Belves  vile  and  he  restrained  them  not."  And  one  sin  of  David  was  that  he  had 
not  checked  and  "  displeased  "  this  wilful  son. 

II.  He  was  endowed  by  nature  with  a  dangeeotts  peopeett.  "  He  also  was 
a  very  goodly  man."  Gifts  of  form  and  feature,  much  as  all  admire  them,  and 
much  as  some  covet  them,  are  frequently  a  snare  to  their  possessor.  Perhaps,  upon 
the  whole,  personal  beauty  has  oftener  proved  a  curse  than  a  blessing.  "  For  the 
most  part,"  says  Lord  Bacon,  "itmaketh  a  dissolute  youth."  Oftener  still  it  spoils 
the  character.  The  conceit  of  the  Platonists,  that  a  beautiful  body  loves  to  have  a 
beautiful  soul  to  inhabit  it,i8  unhappily  not  borne  out  by  facts.  "A  pretty  woman," 
it  has  been  said,  and  it  is  often  true,  "adores  herself"  (Euj^enie  de  Guerin).  The 
natural  tendency  of  this  possession  is  to  engender  pride,  selfishness,  conceit, 
ambition.  A  striking  exterior  has  often  cost  its  possessor  dear.  It  did  both 
Absalom  and  Adonijah  no  good.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  it  was  David's 
"  goodly"  sons  conspired  against  him,  and  it  was  liis  "fair  ''  daughter  Tamar  was 
dishonoured.  Adonijah's  face  was  ati  important  factor  in  his  history :  it  contributed 
to  his  ruin.  It  favoured,  perhaps  it  suggested,  bis  pretensions  to  the  throne.  He 
thought,  no  doubt,  "  the  first  in  beauty  should  be  first  in  might."  Had  be  been 
blessed  with  an  insignificant  appearance  be  would  probably  have  saved  bis  head. 
As  it  was,  courted  and  admired,  he  thought  the  fairest  woman  of  her  time  was 
alone  a  fit  ma'.ch  for  him  ;  and  pride  whispered  that  a  man  of  such  a  presence  was 
marked  out  for  a  king,  and  so  urged  him  to  bis  ruin.  Let  us  teach  our  childien  to 
covet  only  "  the  beauty  of  the  souL" 

III.  He  was  cursed  with  an  inoedinatb  ambition.  "  I  will  be  king." 
"  Cursed,"  for  it  has  cursed  and  blighted  many  lives.  Like  the  ignis  fatuus,  it  has 
lured  men  to  their  destruction.  It  has  been  well  called  "  a  deadly  tyrant,  an 
inexorable  master."  "  Ambition,"  says  the  most  eloquent  of  divines,  "  is  tlje  most 
troublesome  and  vexatious  passion  that  can  afflict  the  sons  of  men.  It  is  foil  of 
distractions,  it  teems  with  stratagems,  and  is  swelled  with  expectations  as  with  a 
tympany.  ...  It  is  an  infinite  labour  to  make  a  man's  self  miserable ;  he  makes 
his  days  full  of  sorrow  to  acquire  a  three  years'  reign."  What  a  striking  illustra- 
tion of  these  words  does  Adonijah's  history  supply.  If  be  could  but  have  been 
content  to  fill  the  second  place  he  might  have  lived  honoured,  happy,  and  useful. 
But  ambition  soured  and  then  cut  short  bis  life.  How  much  of  the  misery  of  the 
world  is  caused  by  despising  "that  state  of  life  unto  which  it  has  pleased  God  to 
call  us  "  and  stretching  out  after  another  for  which  we' are  not  fitted.  Adonijah's 
history  teaches  this  lesson— Solomon  may  have  partly  drawn  it  from  his  life  and 
death—"  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,"  &o. 

IV.  He  stooped  to  unworthy  means  to  attain  his  object.  "  Chariots,"  "horses, 
fifty  men  to  run  before  him." .  It  is  much  like  the  Roman  device,  "  Panem  et 
circenses."  History  repeats  itself.  But  these  things  were  almost  innocenbcompared 
with  the  measures  he  took  when  these  failed.  The  smooth  intrigue  of  a  marriage, 
the  employment  of  the  king's  mother  as  his  tool.the  plausible  words,  the  semblance 
of  resignation  to  the  Divme  will— and  all  this  to  overthrow  a  brother  who  had 
generously  spared  bis  life.  And  all  this  was  the  outcome  of  ambition— ambition 
which  makes  men  trample  on  the  living  and  the  dead.  Alas  1  we  never  know  to 
what  base  courses  we  may  be  reduced  if  we  once  embark  in  immoral  enterprises. 


OH.  1. 1—53.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  U 

Adonij all's  "I  wiU  be  king"  led  to  conspiracy,  rebellion,  intrigue,  ingratitude;  to 
defiance  of  a  father,  of  a  brother,  of  God. 

V.  He  was  not  without  waening,  but  it  was  in  vain.  The  failure  of  his  first 
conspiracy,  the  abject  terror  which  followed,  the  flight  to  the  sanctuary,  the  terrified 
clinging  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  the  piteous  entreaty  for  life — these  things  should 
have  been  remembered,  should  have  "  changed  his  handand  checked  liis  pride."  Still 
more,  his  brother's  magnanimity, "  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  him  fall  to  the  earth ; " 
or,  if  not  that,  his  message,  "  If  wickedness  be  found  in  him  he  shall  die."  All  are 
of  no  avail.  The  passion  for  empire,  like  the  passion  for  play,  ia  almost  incurable. 
Adonijah  was  playing  for  a  throne :  he  staked  honour,  safety,  piety — and  lost.  He 
played  again — and  this  time  a  drawn  sword  was  suspended  over  bis  head — he 
staked  his  life,  and  lost  it. 

VI.  He  was  suddenly  cut  off,  and  that  without  bemedy.  And  this  was  the 
end  of  the  spoiled  child,  of  the  "curled  darling;"  this  the  end  of  his  pomp  and 
circumstance,  of  his  flattery  and  intrigue,  of  his  steadfast  resistance  of  the  wiU  of 
heaven — that  the  sword  of  the  headsman  smote  him  that  he  died.  Instead  of  the 
throne,  the  tomb  ;  instead  of  the  sceptre,  the  sword.  Chariots  and  horses,  visions 
of  empire,  visions  of  love — one  feU  thrust  of  the  steel  put  an  end  to  all  that.  Died 
Adonijah  as  a  fool  dieth,  ingloriously,  ignobly.  "  When  we  are  dead,  all  the  world 
sees  who  was  the  fool."  Adonijah's  death  was  the  fitting  and  natural  conclusion 
of  his  life.    He  has  sowed  to  the  wind  :  what  wonder  if  he  reaps  to  the  whirlwind. 

Ver.  6. — Adonijah  and  the  Lord's  Anointed.  The  conspiracy  of  Adonijah  and 
its  issue  may  suggest  some  lessons  as  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  those  who 
oppose  His  reign.     For  consider — 

I.  Solomon  is  a  type  of  oue  blessed  Lord.  This  is  universally  allowed.  The 
true  "son  of  David  "  is  the  Son  of  God.  He  is  the  Divine  Wisdom,  the  true  Anointed 
One,  the  eternal  King  of  Israel.  Solomon  "the  peaceful"  prefigured  the  great 
"  Prince  of  Peace." 

II.  The  kingdom  of  Solomon  foreshadowed  Chrisi's  reign.  This  is  taught 
"by  most  certain  warrants  of  Holy  Scripture"  (see  e.g.,  Luke  i.  32,  33,  and  cf.  2 
Sam.  vii.  11,  12;  Ps.  Ixxii.  11,  sqq.  ;  Isa.  ix.  7;  xvi.  5  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5). 

III.  The  opposition  to  Solomon's  rule  prefigured  the  resistance  of  the 
POWERS  of  this  world  TO  Christ.  The  second  Psahn,  the  primary  reference  of 
which  is  to  Solomon,  has  its  absolute  fulfilment  in  our  Lord  (Acts  iv.  25-27).  Note 
here  (1)  As  against  Solomon  were  leagued  princes,  priest,  and  general,  so  against 
the  Christ  were  gathered  tetrarch,  priests,  and  proconsul.  (2)  As  the  aid  of  religion 
was  invoked  against  Solomon  by  Adonijah  and  Abiathar  (note  on  ver.  9),  so  it  was 
invoked  against  our  blessed  Lord  by  Annas  and  Caiaphas  (St.  Matt.  xxvi.  65 ;  St. 
John  xix.  7;.     In  both  cases,  religion  was  used  as  a  cloke.     Now  observe — 

IV.  The    course    of  Adonijah's    conspiracy   foreshadows    (1)    the    brief 

SUCCESS,  and  (2)  THE  SUDDEN   OVERTHROW,  OF  THE   POWERS  OF  EVIL.      (1)    The  brief 

success.  As  for  a  time  everything  seemed  to  favour  the  conspirators— David's  in- 
decision, Adonijah's  following,  &c.— so  now  the  powers  of  this  world  seem  to  have 
their  own  way.  The  silence  of  God,  a  corrupt  priesthood,  physical  force,  the 
chariots  and  horses  of  the  world,  the  pomp  and  glitter  of  wealth— aU  seem  to 
promise  success.  The  cause  of  Christ,  like  that  of  Solomon,  seems  to  be  desperate. 
But  (2)  The  sudden  overthrow.  In  the  very  hour  of  apparent  success,  amid  cries 
of  "  God  save  King  Adonijah,"  the  trumpet  blast  proclaimed  the  destruction  of  their 
hopes,  and  the  trembling  and  terrified  guests  hurriedly  dispersed  to  their  homes. 
So,  at  the  trump  of  the  archangel,  if  not  before,  the  "  gates  of  hell "  shall  be  over- 
come and  the  enemies  of  our  Lord  shall  be  put  to  confusion,  and  flee  to  the  moun- 
tains and  hills  to  cover  them  (St.  Luke  xxiii.  30).  Meanwhile  the  Church  and  her 
ministers,  like  Bathsheba  and  Nathan,  must  cry  to  the  Eternal  Father,  "  Lord, 
how  long  "  (Rev.  vi.  10)  ? 

V.  The  DURATION  of  the  conspiracy  prefigures  (1)  THE  BRIEF  REJECTION  AND 

(2)  THE  ETERNAL  REIGN  OF  CHRIST.  The  Conspiracy  lasted  at  the  longest  a  few 
weeks ;  the  peaceful  reign  of  Solomon  extended  over  forty  years.    The  conspiracy 


X6 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  i.  1—58. 


against  Christ  has  lasted  over  1800  years— for  "  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  undel 
liini  "—but  what  is  this  compared  with  eternity,  and  "  He  shall  reign  for  ever  wnA 
ever  "  (Eev.  xi.  15 ;  of.  Dan.  vi.  26). 

VI.  The  end  of  the  conspikatoes  foreshadows  (1)  the  judgment  and  (2)  thh 
DOOM  OF  THE  ENEMIES  OF  CHRIST.  (1)  The  judgment.  No  sooner  was  Solomon 
anointed  king  than  he  sate  in  judgment  upon  Adonijah  (ver.  52),  and  no  long  time 
afterwards  upon  Joab  and  Abiathar.  (2)  The  doom.  He  condemned  Abiathar  to 
banishment  (ch.  ii.  26),  and  appointed  Adonijah  and  Joab  to  be  slain.  Even  so  our 
Lord  wUl  presently  sit  upon  the  judgment  throne  and  will  in  like  manner  banish 
("  Depart,  ye  cursed  ")  and  deliver  to  death  ("  These  mine  enemies,  which  would 
not  that  I  should  reign  over  them,  bring  hither  and  slay  them  before  me  ")  the 
opposers  of  His  glorious  reign. 

Ver.  11  sqq. — The  Jewish  prophet :  an  example  to  the  Christian  pastor.  The 
dealings  of  Nathan  with  David  may  suggest  some  thoughts  as  to  (1)  the  office, 
and  (2)  the  duties  of  the  Christian  minister.     For  observe — 

The  Christian  minister  occupies  in  the  new  dispensation  a  position  some- 
what    ANALOGOUS    TO   THAT   OF   THE    PROPHET   IN   THE    OLD.       PrOpheCy,   that  is  to 

say,  is  one  of  his  functions.  For  prophecy  does  not,  strictly  and  properly,  mean 
prediction  (or  foretelling),  but  preaching  (or  forthtelling).  The  prophetes  was  the 
spokesman  or  interpreter  of  God.  (See  Introduction,  note.)  The  "  prophesyings  "  of 
the  New  Testament  (1  Cor.  xi.  xiv)  were  preachings  or  expositions ;  and  in  this 
sense  the  word  is  used  by  Lord  Bacon,  and  others.  So  the  prophet  was,  and  the 
preacher  is,  an  ambassador  for  God,  an  expounder  of  his  laws,  a  herald  of  his 
kingdom.  The  former,  therefore,  may  well  serve  as  a  pattern  to  the  latter.  Now 
the  dealings  of  the  prophet  Nathan  with  King  David  were  of  two  kinds:  1.  He 
admonished  him  in  health ;  2.  Me  counselled  him,  in  sickness.  Hence  let  us 
learn  that  we  owe  doctrine,  reproof,  correction,  instruction  in  righteousness ;  in 
other  words,  "  both  public  and  private  monitions  and  exliortations,  as  well  to  the 
sick  as  to  the  whole  within  our  cures."  (See  "  The  Ordering  of  Priests,"  Book  of 
Common  Prayer.)  The  latter  are  liable  to  be  overlooked.  But  the  prophet 
further  suggests  to  us  (1)  ivhat  are  the  ministrations  or  admonitions  the  pastor 
owes  to  hisflocTc,  and  (2)  what  is  the  spirit  in  which  he  should  offer  them.  He 
teaches  the  former  by  his  dealings  with  David  in  health,  and  the  latter  by  his 
dealings  with  David  in  sickness. 

I.  Under  the  first  head,  observe  that,  1.  He  boldly  denownced  David?s  sin  (2  Sam. 
xii.  7)  at  the  risk,  perhaps,  of  his  life,  and  fearlessly  threatened  him  with  shame 
(ver.  11)  and  sword  (ver.  10).  2.  Be  proclaimed  forgivmess  on  David's  repentanet 
(ver.  13).  3.  He  ministered  comfort  in  David'n  sorrow  (ver.  25).  4.  He  en- 
couraged and  advised  David  in  his  undertakings  (2  Sam.  vii.  3—17.  Behold  here, 
the  principal  duties  of  the  pastoral  ofliee— to  rebuke  sin,  to  pronounce  absolution,  to 
comfort  the  sorrowmg,  to  guide  the  conscience.  And  note:  in  all  these  functions, 
Nathan  merely  echoed  the  word  the  Lord  had  given  him.  "We  must  take  care 
not  to  "  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord,  to  do  more  or  less." 

II.  Under  the  second  category,  we  find  that,  1.  He  was  faithful  to  his  God.  He 
had  been  employed  by  God  to  declare  Solomon  the  heir  to  the  throne  He  would 
have  been  unfaithful  had  he  permitted  another  to  usurp  the  crown  2  He  was 
faithful  and  deferential  to  his  king.  As  keeper  of  the  king's  conscience,  as 
trusted  adviser  and  counsellor,  he  owed  it  to  the  king  to  apprize  him  of  Adoniiah's 
plot.  It  IS  a  sacred  duty  to  speak,  and  he  speaks— speaks  with  the  profound 
reverence  which  even  the  Lord's  prophet  owes  to  the  Lord's  anointed  (ver.  28), 
(A  great  churchman  confessed  that  he  had  not  served  his  God  as  faithfully  as  he 
had  served  his  king.  Nathan  was  true  to  both.)  3.  He  was  disinterested.  He 
ctroh  twr  T  ^''^-  1  ^*  '"J"^}^^  Hebrew  commonwealth,  for  the  Jewish 
Church,  that  he  acts  and  speaks.  He  does  not  abuse  his  position  to  extort  gifts 
from  a  dying  man.  (Compare  Savonarola  dictating  the  terms  of  absolution  to 
Lorenzo  de' Medici.)  ^.  He  was  discreet.  "Wise  as  serpent,  but  haSess  as 
dove.      He  approaches  Bathsheba  (ver,  11),  excites  her  alarm  (ver.  12).  uses  hei 


OH.  1. 1—63.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  17 

BtB  the  most  likely  agent  to  prevail  with  the  king,  instruois  her  (ver.  13),  foUows  her 
(ver.  22).  "  The  poUoy  of  Nathan  was  of  use  as  well  as  his  prophecy  "  (Bp.  HaU). 
Thus  the  prophet  teaches  the  pastor  to  use  all  fidelity,  to  show  true  loyalty  and 
courtesy,  to  act  purely  and  unselfishly,  to  use  the  means  God  has  put  within  his 
reach  with  consideration  and  discretion. 

The  Benedlbtua  of  the  Old  Testament,  cmd  the  Benedictua  of  the  New  (Ver. 
48 ;  Luke  i.  68). 

On  two  memorable  occasions  this  doxology  has  been  found  on  the  lips  of  the 
saints.  No  doubt  the,  formula,  "Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,"  was  a 
favourite  one  with  the  people  of  Israel ;  no  doubt  the  words  were  often  used  (cf. 
Ps.  xli.  13;  Ixxii.  18).  But  there  are  two  occasions  of  pre-eminent  interest  and  im- 
portance when  this  thanksgiving  broke  from  joyful  lips.  Let  us  consider  them. 
1.  It  was  used  (as  we  see)  by  the  aged  King  David  on  the  day  that  he  saw  his  son 
Solomon  (Peace)  a  forerunner  of  the  Messiah,  seated  on  the  throne  of  Israel.  2.  It 
was  used  by  the  aged  priest  Zacharias  on  the  day  that  he  saw  his  son  John  (Grace), 
ihe  forerunner  of  Messiah,  brought  into  the  commoEwealth  of  Israel.  It  is  just 
possible,  but  hardly  probable,  that  the  words,  as  used  by  the  latter  (under  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Luke  i.  67)  had  a  reference  to  their  use  by  the 
former.  But  it  may  be  instructive,  nevertheless,  to  compare  these  two  ascriptions 
of  praise,  for  they  are  more  or  less  characteristic,  the  one  of  the  old  dispensation, 
the  other  of  the  new.     Let  us  observe, 

I.  Their  points  op  contact.    II.   Their  points  of  conteast. 

I.  They  are  alike  in  three  particidars.  1.  Each  Benedictus  wis  in  some  sort 
the  "  Nunc  Dimittis  "  of  an  aged  saint.  Each  proceeded  fi:om  a  man  "  old  and 
stricken  in  years  "  (1  Kings  i.  1 ;  Luke  i.  7) ;  each  from  a  man  of  fervent  piety 
(1  Kings  xi.  4 ;  Luke  i.  6) ;  each  was  suggested  by  the  speaker's  son  rising  up 
to  take  his  place,  and  to  carry  on  his  and  God's  work.  2.  Each  Benedictus  was 
connected  with  a  son  of  David.  The  first  was  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the 
anointing  of  a  Son  of  David  to  be  King ;  the  second  was  in  thankful  anticipation  of 
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  David  to  be  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  Note  :  all  the 
praises  of  Scripture  connect  themselves  directly  or  indirectly  with  Christ.  3.  Each 
Benedictui  was  elicited  by  God's  gracious  fulfilment  of  His  piomise.  The  first 
commemorated  the  realization  of  the  promise  of  a  successor  made  through  the  prophet 
Nathan  (2  Sam.  vii.  12) ;  the  second,  the  (proximate)  fulfilment  of  the  promises  of 
a  Saviour,  made  by  "  all  the  holy  prophets  since  the  world  began  "  (Luke  i.  70), 
and  of  which  the  promise  of  2  Sam.  vii.,  was  a  foretaste  and  pledge.  Note :  in  all 
ages  the  faithfulness  of  God  has  elicited  the  thankfulness  of  his  people. 

II.  But  let  us  now  consider  their  points  of  contrast.  These  are  four  in  number, 
and  show  how  the  thanksgiving  of  David  was  for  temporal,  and  that  of  Zacharias 
for  spiritual  benefits.  1.  The  Benedictus  of  David  celebrated  the  ascent  of  the 
throne  of  Israel  by  his  Son ;  that  of  Zacharias,  the  leaving  of  the  throne  of  Heaven 
by  the  Son  of  God.  Solomon  was  beginning  his  glory :  Jesus  had  laid  His  aside. 
Solomon  was  going  to  be  ministered  unto :  Jesus  to  minister  to  others.  •  2.  The 
Benedictus  of  David  commemorated  the  gift  of  a  son  to  rule  His  people :  that  of 
Zacharias,  the  gift  of  a  Saviour  to  redeem  the  world  (vers.  68,  77,  79).  8.  The 
Benedictus  of  David  proclaimed  that  the  succession  to  the  throne  was  preserved  in 
his  house :  that  of  Zacharias,  that  through  the  "  house  of  David  "  a  "horn  of  salva- 
tion "  was  raised  up  for  men.  The  aged  king,  doubtless,  thought  that  in  Solomon 
God  had  "  made  the  horn  of  David  to  bud  "  (Ps.  cxxxii.  17) ;  but  Zacharias  cele- 
brated the  true  fulfilment  of  that  promise — its  blossoming  into  salvation.  4.  The 
Benedictus  of  David  celebrated  the  reign  of  a  son  who  should  be  a  man  of  peace 
(1  Chron.  xxii.  9) :  that  of  Zacharias,  the  coming  of  one  who  should  guido  men's 
"feet  into  the  way  of  peace"  (ver.  79).  We  said  each  Benedictus  was  a  sort  of 
NvMC  Dimittis.  That  last  sentence  of  David's — "Mine  eyes  also  seeing  it " — carry 
our  thoughts  to  another  of  the  Evangelical  Hymns,  the  Ntime  Dimittis  oi  Simeon 
— "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation."  Zacharias  was  not  a  greater  poet  than 
David.    And  David,  as  well  as  he,  spake  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  2).    Yet 

1    KTNOS.  o 


18 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KING8.  [ch.  i.  1—68, 


how  much  grander,  and  every  way  nobler,  is  the  Benedictus  of  the  latter  than  thai 
of  the  former  ;  of  the  New  Testament  than  tlie  Old.  It  is  because  the  theme  is  so 
much  higher,  and  the  benefits  are  BO  much  greater,  because  "  a  greater  than 
Solomon  is  here." 

The  two  triumphal  enfries.— Twice  in  the  history  of  Jerusalem  has  a  Son 
of  David  ridden  through  her  streets,  sitting  on  ass  or  mule,  amid  ihe  shouts  and 
praises  of  the  people.  Let  ub  compare  the  two  occasions.  They  will  furnish  a 
further  proof  and  illustration  of  the  typical  character  of  Solomon;  a  further  proof 
tliat  a  "  greater  than  Solomon  is  here."     Observe — 

I.  Thb  teiumphal  eide  through  the  city  was  in'  each  case  after  an 
ANOINTING. — Solomon  had  been  anointed  by  prophet  and  priest :  Jesus,  the  Divine 
Solomon,by  God  himself.  Solomon'sanointing  was  with  holy  oil  out  of  the  tabernacle 
(ver.  39) ;  that  of  Jesus  with  the  Holy  Ghost  (Luke  iv.  18 ;  Acts  iv.  27 ;  x.  38). 
Solomon  was  anointed  to  be  king :  Jesus  to  be  King,  and  Priest,  and  Prophet. 

II.  Each  rode  through  the  city  as  kino  (vers.  34,  85). — "God  save  King 
Solomon,"  cried  the  populace.  "  Blessed  is  the  king  that  cometh  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord"  (Luke  xix.  38).  In  each  case  the  words  were  true,  "  Behold  thy  King 
cometh  "  (Matt.  xxi.  5 ;  John  xii  15).     And 

III.  Each  kode  as  the  Son  of  David  (1  Kings  i.  43 ;  Matt.  xxi.  9)  — Did  the 
populace  remember  the  triumphal  progress  of  Solomon,  one  thousand  years 
before,  through  those  same  streets,  as  ihey  cried,  "Hosauna  to  the  Son  of  David" 
(Matt.  xxi.  9—15). 

IV.  Each  rode  amid  the  acclamations  of  the  people. — Each,  that  is  to  say, 
was  acknowledged  as  king  by  popular  acclaim.  In  each  case,  a  curious  Oriental 
hyperbole  expresses-  the  enthusiastic  rejoicing  and  the  deafening  cries  of  the 
throng.  "  The  earth  rent  "  (1  Kings  i.  40).  "  The  stones  would  immediately  cry 
out"  (Luke  xix.  40;  of.  Matt.  xxi.  10).  But  here  the  resemblance  ends.  Hence- 
forward how  great  and  striking  is  the  contrast. 

I.  All  the  great  people  surrounded  Solomon  :  cue  Lord  was  PBEtiEDBS  and 
FOLLOWED  BY  THE  POOR.  The  dignitaries  of  the  realm,  both  in  churcli  and  state, 
prophet  and  priesf,  soldier  and  civilian,  all  assembled  to  do  Solomon  honour.  But 
our  Lord  had  none  of  these  to  do  Him  reverence.  "  Master,  rebuke  Thy  disciples  " 
(Luke  xix.  39).     The  pomp  and  grandeur  were  aU  on  the  side  of  Solomon. 

II.  Solomon  went  to  sit  on  his  throne  :  Jesus  to  suffer  and  reign  on  the 
CROSS.  The  former  rode  to  ease  and  glory  and  pomp  and  unparalleled  magnifi- 
cence ;  the  latter  to  shame  and  spitting,  to  denial  and  death.   But,  crux  scala  caeli. 

III.  Solomon  rode  to  gloky:  Jesus  to  bring  others  to  glory.  The  triumphal 
entry  of  Solomon  was  an  ordinary  thing.  Such  royal  progresses  have  often  been 
before  and  since.  But  never  has  the  world  seen  such  an  entry  as  that  of  our 
Bedeemer.  He  might  have  reigned  as  a  king,  but  He  chose  to  suffer  as  a  felon : 
He  might  have  Uvod  for  self.  He  chose  to  die  for  others.  Shall  we  deny  Hun  our 
hosannas  ?     Shall  not  earth  and  heaven  ring  with  His  praises  ? 

HOMILIES  BY  "VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 
Ver.  5. — The  sin  of  ambition.  Ambition  is  not  always  wrong.  It  is  a 
common  inspiration;  and  when  the  desire  for  distinction  is  associated  with  fitness 
for  it,  the  call  to  effort  and  advance  is  from  God.  But  for  such  ambition  the  world 
would  stagnate.  When  the  schoolboy  is  working  for  a  prize,  when  the  writer  or 
speaker  resolves  to  be  amongst  the  foremost  men  of  his  age,  when  the  man  of  busi- 
ness presses  on  towards  the  front  ranks  in  the  commercial  world,  we  see  what 
should  be  applauded  and  not  condemned,  so  long  as  lawful  objects  are  sought  by 
lawful  means.  Let  us,  in  all  our  pursuits,  remember  God's  laws  for  exaltation. 
Men  are  to  go  higher,  when  they  have  fulfilled  the  duties  of  the  lower  sphere.  They 
are  to  rise  on  performances,  and  not  on  discontent.  Hence,  if  ambition  be  con- 
Bcientious,  it  will  prompt  to  the  minutely  faithful  performance  of  trivial  duties. 
With  a  tireless  hand  crooked  things  -will  be  made  straight,  and  rough  places  plain, 
before  the  glory  is  revealed.    If,  however,  ambition  be  not  ruled  by  righteousness, 


CH.  I.  1-53.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  19 

or  modified  by  love,  if  it  is  regardless  of  the  rights  of  others  and  of  the  wUl  of  God, 
then  it  is  a  sin ;  the  sin  which  was  the  herald  of  disobedience  and  death,  the  source 
of  the  tyranny  and  bloodshed  which  have  desolated  the  world.  It  was  this  sin 
of  which  Adonijah  was  guilty  when  he  "  exalted  himself,  saying,  I  wiU  be  king  1 " 
Let  us  see  wherein  the  sinfulness  of  his  sin  lay. 

I.  This  ambition  prompted  Adonijah  to  an  infringement  of  the  divine 
ORDINANCE.  It'hasbeen  said  that  his  act  was  natural,  though  foohshly  precipitate ; 
for,  according  to  the  usual  law  of  primogeniture,  he  had  a  right  to  expect  the  throne. 
But  the  law  of  primogeniture  was  never  the  law  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  which  in 
spirit  was  a  theocracy  throughout.  The  invisible  King  distinctly  reserved  to  him- 
self the  right  of  appointment  (Dent.  xvii.  14,  15).  True,  seniority  was  a  tacit  indi- 
cation of  the  Divine  wiU,  but  this  was  always  overruled  by  any  special  revelation 
of  God's  choice.  He  who  had  chosen  David  from  amongst  his  brothers,  ohose 
Solomon,  and  there  was  fitness  in  the  choice  ;  not  only  because  as  a  man  of  peace 
he  was  qualified  to  build  the  Temple  (1  Chron.  xxii.  8,  9),  but  also  because  his 
succession  was  a  pledge  to  his  parents,  and  to  aU  the  people,  that  after  the  death  of 
their  first  child  the  sin  of  David  and  Bathsheba  was  buried  in  oblivion  (eomp.  Psa. 
U.  2,  7,  9,  with  Isa.  xhii.  25,  &c.).  This  Divine  choice  was  publicly  known. 
Nathan  sided  with  Solomon  not  as  "  the  leader  of  a  court  cabal,"  but  as  the  pro- 
phet of  the  Lord ;  and  Adonijah  himself  was  well  aw.^e  of  the  election  of  his 
brother  (ch.  ii.  15).  "When  Adonijah  said  "  I  will  be  king,"  he  deliberately  set 
up  his  will  against  God's.  A  deep  significance  underlies  God's  choice  of  men.  He 
elects  according  to  fitness  and  fits  according  to  election,  so  that  the-  e  is  ultimate 
harmony  between  circumstances  and  character.  The  two  sons  of  Zebedpe  were 
taught  this.  They  had  as  much  seeming  right  to  the  place  of  honour  which  they 
sought  as  had  Adonijah  to  the  throne.  They  belonged  to  "  the  twelve,"  were 
personally  beloved  of  their  Lord,  and  their  mother  was  related  to  the  Vii'gin  Mary, 
and  was  of  those  who  ministered  to  Jesus.  But  Jesus  said,  "  to  sit  on  my  right 
hand  and  on  my  left  is  not  mine  to  give,  but  it  shall  be  given  to  those  for  whom  it  is 
prepared  of  my  Father."  In  other  words,  honours  would  be  given  by  law  and  not 
by  favour ;  not  from  arbitrary  impulse,  but  from  a  knowledge  of  what  was  right  and 
fitting.  Draw  lessons  of  contentment  from  the  assurance  that  our  lot  is  appointed 
by  God.  Show  the  necessity  for  our  own  sakes  of  submissiveness  in  prayer,  lest 
God  should  give  us  our  request  and  send  leanness  into  our  soul. 

II.  This  ambition  was  a  craving  for  outward  honour,  and  not  for  inward 
worth.  "  He  prep  (red  him  chariots  and  horsemen  and  fifty  men  to  run  before 
him,"  His  ambition  was  to  have  these  for  their  own  sakes,  not  to  increase  his 
influence  for  good.  Nor  was  he  the  last  man  who  cared  for  glitter  and  show.  The 
candidate  for  a  competitive  examination,  who  seeks  only  for  honours,  and  cares 
nothing  for  the  learning  and  studious  habits  which  may  be' acquired,  will  never  be 
a  true  student.  So  with  the  professional  man  who  works  for  money  only,  &c. 
Honours  thus  won  are  unsatisfying  and  transient.  Their  worth  is  fitly  represented 
in  the  ceremonies  observed  at  the  coronation  of  a  Pope.  The  M.  C  holds  in 
one  hand  a  lighted  taper,  and  in  the  other  a  reed  surmounted  by  a  piece  of  flax. 
The  flax  is  ignited  and  flashes  up  into  light,  but  in  a  few  moments  the  flame  dies 
out  and  the  thin  ashes  fall  at  the  Pontiffs  feet,  while  a  sonorous  voice  chants  the 
words,  "  Pater  sanctus,  sic  transit  gloria  mundi."  The  pagans  understood  to  some 
extent  the  lesson  we  seek  to  enforce.  Their  temple  of  honour  had  only  one  entrance, 
and  that  was  through  the  temple  of  virtue.  Over  the  gates  of  the  kingdom  oi 
Christ  these  words  are  written,  "  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted,  and  he 
that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased."  In  the  day  when  spiritual  reahties  shall  be 
revealed  there  shall  be  not  the  glorification,  but  the  "  manifestation  of  the  sons  of 
God,"  and  in  the  outcome  of  character  inwrought  by  God's  Spirit  true  and  lasting 
glory  shall  be  found. 

III.  This  ambition  asserted  itself  with  a  complete  DiSREaARD  for  the 
rights  of  others. — David  stUl  reigned ;  Solomon  was  his  appointed  successor ; 
but  Adonijah  trampled  their  rights  beneath  his  feet  as  he  mounted  the  throne. 
Selfishness  is  the  chief  of  those  elements  in  ambition  which  constitute  its  sinfulness. 


10  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  i.  1—68. 

Hence  we  may  test  ambition,  by  asking  ourselves  how  we  regard  onr  comjietitors. 
If  a  man  envies  others ;  if,  without  compunction,  he  will  crush  another  to  the  wall 
that  he  may  pass  him  by ;  if  he  refuses  to  help  another  in  sore  straits,  who  is  within 
his  reach,  on  the  ground  that  every  man  is  for  himself;  then  his  ambition  is  a  sin. 
This  is  more  clearly  revealed  by  our  Lord  than  by  the  old  dispensation.  He  has 
taught  us  not  only  to  love  our  neighbours,  but  our  competitors,  and  even  our  foes. 
He  has  urged  us  to  "  bear  one  another's  burdens,"  to  deny  ourselves,  and  take  up 
our  cross  to  follow  Him.  The  Christian  Church  has  a  sacrifice  for  its  basis,  and  a 
cross  for  its  banner. 

IV.  This  ambition  was  nurtured  in  defiance  of  significant  warning. 
Adonijah  repeated  his  brother's  offence.  (Comp.  2  Sam.  xv.)  He  knew  how  that 
bright  young  life  had  closed  in  darkness,  when  Absalom  died  helpless  and  unpitied 
by  the  hand  of  Joab.  He  had  often  seen  his  father  sitting  looking  at  himself  with  a 
far-off  look  in  his  eyes,  as  if  he  stUl  were  saying, "  O,  Absalom,  would  God  I  had  died 
for  thee,  O  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  I"  Yet  the  same  sin  which  had  been  so 
signally  pimished  he  resolved  to  commit.  History  is  crowded  with  illustrations  of 
the  fact  that  men  who  have  lived  as  Adonijah  did  have  found  their  honours 
unsatisfying,  and  have  died  in  disappointment  and  despair.  Alexander,  who  con- 
quered the  world,  died,  after  setting  fire  to  a  city,  in  a  scene  of  awful  debauchety. 
Hannibal,  who  at  one  time  could  fill  three  bushels  with  the  gold  rings  of  fallen 
knights,  died  by  poison,  administered  by  his  own  hand,  unwept  in  a  foreign  land. 
Csesar,  who  conquered  eight  hundred  cities,  fell  stabbed  to  the  heart  by  his  friends, 
in  the  place  of  his  noblest  triumph.  Napoleon,  the  conqueror  of  Europe,  died  a 
heavt-broken  captive.  It  has  been  writ  large,  in  letters  of  blood,  so  that  he  who 
runs  may  read,  "  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off  1" 

Conclusion. — WUl  you,  with  the  nobler  possibilities  set  before  you  in  the  gospel, 
whom  angel  voices  are  calling  to  higher  things,  whose  conscience  is  whispering  of 
duty  and  love,  to  whom  Christ,  the  suffering  Saviour,  the  King  of  Gloiy,  says, 
"  Follow  Me  1 "  will  you,  like  Adonijah,  tni'n  to  the  ways  of  self-indulgence  and 
vainglory,  to  prove  as  he  did  that  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death." — A.  B. 

Ver.  6. — Moral  ruin  in  a  religious  Jiome,  It  is  a  notorious  fact  that  the  sons 
of  devout  men  sometimes  prove  a  curse  to  their  parents,  and  bring  dishonour  on 
the  cause  of  God.  When  sin  entered  the  world,  it  caused  the  earth,  on  which 
flowers  had  aforetime  blossomed,  to  bring  forth  thorns  and  briars.  This  is  a  picture  of 
a  sad  truth,  known  in  the  first  home,  and  in  many  another  since.  Eve  rejoiced 
over  the  fair  child  she  had  "gotten  from  the  Lord,"  and  did  not  snspect  that 
passions  were  sleeping  within  him  which  would  nerve  his  arm  to  strike  the  fatal 
blow  which  slew  his  brother  and  destroyed  his  mother's  peace.  Such  sorrow  has 
been  experienced  in  subsequent  history.  Isaac's  heart  was  rent  by  the  deceit  of 
Jacob  and  the  self-will  of  Esau.  Jacob  found  his  own  sin  repeated  against  himself, 
for  he  who  had  deceived  his  father  when  he  was  old  and  blind,  suffered  an  agony 
of  grief  for  years,  because  he  was  falsely  told  by  his  sons  that  Joseph  was  dead. 
Probably  few  have  had  more  domestic  sorrow  than  David.  He  experienced,  in  its 
bitterest  form,  the  grief  of  a  parent  who  has  wished  that  before  his  son  had  brought 
such  dishonour  on  the  home,  he  had  been,  in  the  innocence  of  his  childhood,  laid  to 
rest  beneath  the  daisies.  Of  David's  sons,  Amnon,  the  eldest,  after  committing 
a  hideous  sin,  had  been  assassinated  by  the  order  of  Absalom,  his  brother.  Absalom 
himself  had  rebelled  against  his  father,  and  had  been  killed  by  Joab,  as  he  hung 
helpless  in  the  oak.  Chileab  (or  Daniel)  was  dead.  And  now  of  the  fourth  son, 
the  eldest  suijiving,  Adonijah,  this  sad  story  is  told.  Adonijah's  sin  seems  so 
unnatural  at  first  sight  that  we  must  try  and  discover  the  sources  whence  so  bitter 
and  desolating  a  stream  flowed.  We  shall  find  them  in  three  adverse  influences 
ABOUND  HIM  AT  HOME,  which  are  hinted  at  in  our  text. 

I.  Adonijah  inherited  a  constitutional  tendency  to  ambition  and  self- 
OONOEIT.  His  association  with  Absalom  is  not  without  significance.  The  two 
brothers  were  alike  in  theii-  sin  and  in  the  tendencies  which  led  to  it.  These  were 
mherited. 


«B.  1. 1—68.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


(1)  The  law  that  "UTce  produces  like"  which  is  proved  to  demonstration 
in  the  breeding  of  lower  animals  (illustrations  from  horses  bred  for  speed  or  en- 
durance, dogs  for  fleetnesB  or  scent,  pigeons  for  swiftness  or  beauty,  &c.),  asserts 
itself  in  man.  Not  only  are  physical  qualities  inherited,  so  that  we  recognise  a 
I'  family  likeness  "  between  children  of  the  same  parents ;  but  mental  qualities  are 
inherited  too  ;  statesmanship,  heroism,  or  artistic  gift,  reappearing  in  the  same 
family  for  generations.  Moral  tendencies  are  transmitted  too ;  and  Scripture 
exemplifies  it.  If  Isaac  is  so  luxurious  that  he  must  have  his  savoury  dish,  we  do 
not  so  much  wonder  that  Esau,  his  son.  sells  his  bu:thright  for  a  mess  of  pottage. 
If  Bebekah,  like  Laban  her  brother,  is  greedy  and  cunning,  her  son  Jacob  inherits 
her  tendency,  and  must  live  a  life  of  suffering,  and  present  many  an  agonising 
prayer  before  he  is  set  free  from  his  besetting  sin.  So  is  it  still.  The  drunkard 
gives  to  his  offspring  a  craving  for  drink,  which  is  a  disease.  In  more  senses  than 
one,  ''The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them.''  Surely,  then,  when  not  only  future 
happiness,  but  the  destiny  of  children  depends  on  the  choice  of  a  life  partner,  there 
should  be  regard  paid  not  merely  ^to  physical  beauty,  or  mental  endowment,  or 
social  position,  but,  above  all  these!  to  moral  and  spiritual  worth. 

(2)  It  is  argued  that-  this  law  of  moral  heritage  affects  personal  responsi- 
bility ;  that  it  is  hardly  fair  to  condemn  a  man  for  a  sin  to  which  he  is  natu- 
rally prone.  But  "  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  Whatever 
your  parentage,  you  are  not  "  committed  to  do  these  abominations."  If  the  dispo- 
sition be  evil,  it  need  never  become  the  habit  of  life.  It  is  something  you  may 
yield  to,  but  it  is  something  you  may  resist ;  for  "  He  is  faithful  who  will  not 
suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  what  you  are  able  to  bear."  Bather  should  any 
tendencies  to  evil  be  recognised  as  God's  voice  calling  attention  to  the  weak  places 
of  character,  that  there  we  may  keep  most  eager  watch  and  ward.  And  because 
we  are  weak.  He  has  sent  His  Son  to  bring  dehverance  to  the  captives,  that  through 
Him  we  may  be  inspired  with  hope,  and  fitted  with  strength,  and  rejoice  in  the 
liberty  wherewith  Christ  makes  His  people  free. 

II.  Adonijah  was  misled  by  adulation.  "  He  was  also  a  very  goodly  man." 
Physically,  as  well  as  morally,  he  was  a  repetition  of  Absalom.  His  parents  were 
guilty  of  partiality.  David  loved  him  the  more  because  (like  the  lost  boy)  Adonijah 
was  so  fair,  so  noble  in  mien,  so  princely  in  stature.  Courtiers  and  soldiers  (who 
looked,  as  they  did  in  Saul's  time,  for  a  noble-looking  king)  flattered  him.  Joab 
and  Abiathar  joined  the  adulators.  Intoxicated  with  vanity,  Adonijah  set  up  a 
royal  court,  as  Absalom  had  done  (see  ver.  5).  Every  position  in  life  has  its  own 
temptations.  The  ill-favoured  child  who  is  the  butt  at  school  and  the  scapegoat  at 
home  is  tempted  to  bitterness  and  revenge.  His  character  is  likely  to  be  unsightly, 
as  a  plant  would  be,  which  grows  in  a  damp,  dark  vault.  There  can  behttle  beauty 
if  there  is  no  sunshine.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  gift  of  physical  beauty  attracts 
attention  and  wins  admiration,  or  if  conversational  power  be  brilhant,  &o.,  it  is  a 
source  of  peril.  Many  a  one  has  thus  been  befooled  into  sin  and  misery,  or  entrapped 
into  an  unhappy  marriage,  and  by  lifelong  sadness  paid  the  penalty  of  foUy,  or 
Tenturing  too  far,  prompted  by  ambition,  has  fallen,  hke  Icarus  when  his  waxen 
wings  melted  in  the  sunshine.  When  that  time  of  disappointment  and  disenchant- 
ment comes,  happy  is  it.  when  such  an  one,  hke  the  prodigal,  comes  to  himself,  and 
says,  "  I  wUl  arise,  and  go  to  my  father ! " 

III.  Adonijah  was  undisciplined  at  home.  "  His  father  had  not  displeased 
him  at  any  time  in  saying.  Why  hast  thou  done  so  ?"  Tljis  refers  not  only  to  the 
special  act  of  rebellion,  but  to  the  tendencies  and  habits  leading  up  to  it,  which 
David  bad  not  checked,  for  fear  of  vexing  the  high-spirited  lad.  The  weak  indul- 
gence of  children  (such  as  that  which  Eli  exhibited)  is  the  cause  of  untold  misery. 
Not  many  parents  blazon  abroad  the  story  of  their  domestic  grief.  Loyal  hands 
draw  down  the  veil  over  the  discord  at  home,  and  that  agony  of  prayer  which  is 
heard  by  "  the  Father  who  seeth  in  secret."  You  do  not  see  the  girl  who  mars  the 
beauty  of  her  early  womanhood  by  a  flippant  disregard  of  her  parents,  and  whose 
own  pleasure  seems  to  be  the  only  law  of  her  life.  You  do  not  see  the  child  whose 
hasty  passion  and  uncontrolled  temper  are  the  dread  of  the  household  ;  who,  by 


as  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  i.  1—53. 


his  ebtillitions  of  rage,  gets  what  he  wishes,  till  authority  is  disregarded  and  trodden 
underfoot.  You  do  not  see  the  son  who  thinks  it  manly  to  be  callous  to  a  niother's 
anxiety  and  a  father's  counsels,  who  likes  to  forget  home  associations,  and  is  sink- 
ing in  haunts  of  evil,  where  you  may  weep  over  him  as  a  wreck.  But,  though  you 
see  them  not,  they  exist.  Far  otherwise,  in  some  of  these  sad  experiences,  it 
might  have  been.  Suppose  there  had  been  firm  resolution  instead  of  habitual 
indulgence  ;  suppose  that  authority  had  been  asserted  and  used  in  days  before  these 
evil  habits  were  formed ;  suppose  that,  instead  of  leaving  the  future  to  chance, 
counsels  and  prayers  had  moulded  character  during  moulding-time— might  there 
not  have  been  joy  where  now  there  is  grief?  Heavy  are  our  responsibilities  as 
parents.  Yet  splendid  are  our  possibihties  1  These  children  who  may  prove  our 
curses  may,  with  God's  blessing  on  our  fidelity,  grow  up  to  be  wise,  pure-hearted, 
courageous  men  of  God,  who  will  sweeten  the  atmosphere  of  the  home,  and  purge 
tlii?  nation  of  its  sins,  and  make  the  name  of  "  the  King  of  saints  "  honoured  and 
praised  throughout  the  world  !  "  Train  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of 
the  Lord."— A.  B. 

Vers.  39-41. — Tlie  dethronement  of  the  false  by  the  enthrnnement  of  the  true. 
When  Bathsheba  and  Nathan  brought  David  news  of  Adouijah's  revolt,  and 
told  him  that  Joab  and  Abiathar  were  at  the  coronation  feast  at  En-rogel,  it  is  note- 
worthy that  the  king  made  no  direct  attack  on  the  conspirators.  He  merely  com- 
manded that  Solomon  should  be  seated  on  the  royal  mule,  that  he  should  ride  in 
state  to  Gihon,  and  that  there  Zadok  should  anoint  him  king,  and  proclaim  by  the 
sound  of  trumpet  that  he  was  appointed  ruler.  It  was  this  which  paralysed  the  traitor- 
ous assembly.  The  sound  of  the  trumpet  was  to  theu"  scheme  what  the  blast  of  the 
rams'  horns  was  to  the  walls  of  Jericho,  when  they  fell  in  irreparable  ruin.  David's 
method  was  the  wisest,  the  sorest ;  for  it  not  only  removed  a  present  evil,  but  pro- 
vided a  fixture  good.  'The  lesson  is  obvious,  and  is  susceptible  of  wide  application  ; 
that  the  false  is  most  surely  dethroned  by  the  enthronement  of  the  true.  The  strong 
man  armed  keeps  his  goods  in  peace,  until  a  stronger  than  he  shall  come.  (See 
Luke  xi.  21,  22.)     Suggest :  applications  of  this  principle. 

I.  Vain  thoughts  are  to  be  expelled  by  the  incoming  of  what  is  wise  and 
GOOD.  The  Psalmist  liated  "  vain  thoughts,"  because  he  loved  God's  law  (Psa. 
cxix.  113).  When  the  heart  is  empty,  swept,  and  garnished,  there  is  room  for  worse 
evils  to  come  (Matt.  xii.  44).  The  full  mind  and  heart  are  safe.  Apply  to  the  eon- 
quest  of  wandering  thoughts  in  worship,  of  vanity  in  children,  &o. 

II.  Self-will  is  to  be  conquered  by  a  nobler  and  stronger  will.  We  are 
early  taught  this.  Every  child  carries  out  his  own  wishes  without  regard  to  others, 
tiU  he  recognizes  that  the  parent's  will  is  authoritative.  Sooner  or  later  there  is  a 
struggle,  and  only  when  it  is  decided  m  one  way  is  there  rest.  Similarly  we  have  to 
learn  to  subordinate  onr  thoughts  to  God's  revelation,  our  wishes  to  His  will,  and 
this  lesson  is  more  painfuUy  learnt  as  the  years  pass  by  and  the  habit  of  self-rule 
grows  stronger. 

III.  Unworthy  affections  are  to  be  overcome  by  a  worthy  love.  When  love 
IS  set  on  the  unworUiy,  force  is  useless,  argument  is  vain.  But  if  the  love  is  diverted 
to  a  nobler  object,  it  naturally  disentangles  its  tendrils  from  the  unworthy.  In  the 
highest  sphere  it  may  be  said  of  love  to  our  Lord, "  that  love  shall  all  vain  love  expel." 

iV.  ILRROR  is  to  be  subdued  BY  TRUTH.  The  hatred  of  aitizans  to  machinery 
when  first  introduced  was  not  conquered  by  dragoons,  nor  by  prisons,  but  by  the 
discoveryon  their  part  of  the  mistake  they  had  ignorantly  made.  So  with  all 
errors.  We  shall  not  destroy  heathenism  by  the  abuse  of  the  idols,  but  by  the 
presentation  of  Christ.  •' 

V.  Garb  is  to  be  extirpated  by  prayer.  In  many  hearts  care  is  enthroned. 
To  many  a  one  our  Lord  might  say,  "  Thou  art  careful  and  troubled  about  many 
things.  We  cannot  reason  away  our  anxieties,  nor  force  them  from  our  minds, 
but  we  can  have  the  rest  our  children  have,  who  never  trouble  about  the  morrow 
because  they  trust  in  us.  It  would  be  vain  to  say,  "  Be  careful  for  nothing,"  unless 
the  apostle  could  add  the  alternative,  "  bi,t  in  everything,  by  prayer  and  suppUo». 


OH.  I.  1—63.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


23 


tion,  with  thanksgiving,  make  your  requests  known  unto  God ;  and  the  peace  of 
God  which  passeth  all  understanding  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds." 

VI.  Evils  keioning  in  society  ake  to  be  oveetheown  by  what  is  noblee  than 
VEEY. — Apply  this  broadly,  e.g.,  wholesome  hterature  must  defeat  pernicious. 
Low  amusements,  intoxicating  drinks,  &o.,  will  pass  away  when  there  is  the 
establishment  of  nobler  substitutes  for  these. 

The  whole  subject  is  summed  up  in  Christ — the  true  King  of  humanity, 
the  incarnation  of  all  that  is  worthy  of  being  loved  and  enthroned.  Draw 
the  analogy  between  Solomon  the  anointed  king,  as  he  rides  on  the  mule  into 
Jerusalem  amid  the  acclamations  of  the  people,  and  the  entry  of  our  Lord  into 
Jerusalem  as  described  Matt.  xxi.  If  worldllness,  or  selfishness,  or  ambition,  or 
lust  has  been  reigning  in  your  heart,  the  usurped  will  be  dethroned  when  you  wel- 
come Christ  as  King  and  say,  "  0  Lord  our  God,  other  lords  besides  thee  have 
had  dominion  over  us,  but  now  we  acknowledge  Thee  to  be  our  Lard,  to  the  gloiy 
of  God  the  Father." 

Descend  to  Thy  Jerusalem,  0  Lord, 
Her  faithful  children  cry  with  one  accord ; 
Come,  ride  in  triumph  on  ;  behold,  we  lay 
Our  guilty  lusts  and  proud  wills  in  Thy  way. 

Thy  road  is  ready.  Lord  ;  Thy  paths,  made  straight, 

In  longing  expectation  seem  to  wait 

The  consecration  of  Thy  beauteous  feet. 

And,  hark,  hosannas  loud  Thy  footsteps  greet. — A.  % 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  n.  1—11. 

Tm     UST     WORDS     AND    DEATB     OF    DaVID. 

— The  death  of  David,  and  of  course  the 
eharge  which  preceded  it,  did  not  foUow 
inmiediately  (as  the  casual  reader  might  be 
tempted  to  suppose)  on  the  events  related 
in  chap.  i.  We  find  from  1  Chron.  xxiii. — 
xxix.  23,  that  the  aged  king  recovered  suffi- 
cient strength  to  leave  his  sick  room,  to 
gather  round  him  the  princes  of  Israel 
(1  Chron.  xxiii.  2),  to  make  a  number  of 
fresh  arrangements  respecting  the  priests 
and  Levites  and  the  services  of  the  sanc- 
tuary, and  even  to  "stand  up  upon  his 
feet"  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  2)  and  address  a 
large  assembly  respecting  the  erection  ani 
adornment  of  the  Temple.  And  once  more, 
in  strains  which  are  among  the  noblest  and 
sweetest  which  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel 
ever  penned,  he  "blessed  the  Lord  before 
all  the  congregation"  (ch.  xxix.  10.  sqq.) ; 
he  also  instituted  festal  sacrifices  on  a 
scale  of  great  magnificence,  and  witnessed 
a  second  and  probably  more  formal  and 
pubUo  consecration  of  his  son  to  the  kingly 
office  (vers.  21,  22;  cf.  1  Sam.  xi.  15; 
2  Sam.  V.  3).  But  the  recovery  cannot 
have  been  otherwise  than  transient  —it  was 


but  the  sudden  brightening  of  the  flam* 
before  it  dies  out  in  the  socket — and  we  sec 
him  in  this  second  chapter,  once  more  in 
the  ante-chamber  of  death.  Now,  he  has 
already  given  his  parting  charge  to  the 
princes  of  the  realm,  and  has  publicly 
exhorted  Solomon  to  discharge  his  duties 
faithfully  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  9,  10) ;  but  as 
he  feels  the  end  approaching,  he  summons 
him  to  his  side  to  impart  to  him  his  last 
and  private  instructions,  and  addresses  him 
thus: 

Ver.  1. — I  go  the  way  [lit. ,  I  am  walking 
(same  word  as  in  ver.  3)  in  the  way]  of  all 
tlie  eartli  [i.e.,  of  all  the  sons  of  earth,  all 
mankind  (cf  1  Sam.  17,46;  1  Kings  x.,  24; 
Psa.  Ixvi.  4,  &c.)  The  path  to  Sheol,  the 
path  which  all  his  forefathers,  and  untold 
millions  more,  have  trod,  he  is  treading  it 
now.  The  words  sound  like  a  reminiscence 
of  Josh,  xxiii.  24.  Perhaps,  too,  the  thought 
of  Joshua  suggested  to  his  mind  the  next 
words] :  but  be  thou  strong,  and  be  a  man. 
[Similar,  though  not  identical,  words  were 
four  times  addressed  to  Joshua  (Josh.  i. 
6,  7,  9,  18),  and  David  may  well  have 
thought  that  his  son,  in  entering  upon  his 
difficult  duties,  was  not  at  all  unlike  Joshua 
when  he  succeeded  Moses  in  the  leadership 
of  Israel,  and  that  he  needed  similar  en- 
couragement.   It  is  not  necessary  to  lup- 


C4 


THE  PIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  n.  1 — 11 


pose,  as  Canon  BawlinBon  does  ("  Speater'i 
Com.,"  vol.  ii.  p.  489),  that  in  the  words, 
"  show  thyself  a  man,"  we  have  a  reference 
to  Solomon's  youth;  for  words  precisely 
similar  were  addressed  to  each  other  by  the 
Philistines  at  Aphek  (1  Sam.  iv.  9).  The 
age  of  Solomon  at  his  accession  is  very 
doubtful.  David  said,  "  Solomon  my  son 
is  young  and  tender "  (1  Chrou.  xxii.  5 ; 
xxix.  1) ;  and  Solomon  says  of  himself,  "  I 
am  a  little  child  "  pij  "1^3  (1  Kings  iii.  7). 
Josephus,  probably  reflecting  the  tradition 
of  his  time,  fixes  his  age  at  foui  teen ; 
Eupolemus  at  twelve.  I  incline  to  think 
that  the  words  "  young  and  tender"  ahnost 
forbid  the  favourite  opinion  that  he  was 
about  twenty.] 

Yer.  3.— And  keep  the  cbargre  [lit., 
"  watch  the  watch  "  (custodies  custodiam 
Jehovae),  or,  "  serve  the  service."  Bahr 
paraphrases,  "be  a  true  watcher  in  the 
service  of  Jehovah."  The  words  are  con- 
stantly employed  to  denote  a  strict  per- 
formaiico  of  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  or 
of  the  duties  of  the  priests  and  Levites 
(Lev.  viii.  35 ;  xviii.  30 ;  Numb.  i.  63 ; 
iii.  7,  8,  25,  28,  32,  88  ;  xxxi.  30  ;  1  Chron. 
xxiii.  32,  &o. ;  also  Gen.  xxvi.  6).  "The 
reference,"  says  Eawlinson,  "is  to  the 
charge  given  to  all  the  kings  in  Beut. 
xvii.  18 — 20."  But  there  is  no  necessity 
for  restricting  it  to  that  one  injunction. 
What  the  charge  is  is  explained  presently] 
•f  the  lord  thy  God  to  waUc  In  His  ways, 
to  keep  [same  w:ord]  His  statutes,  and 
His  commandments,  and  His  judgments, 
and  His  testimonies  [it  is  impossible  to 
draw  any  clear  and  sharp  distinction  be- 
tween these  four  words,  as  the  older  ex- 
positors do.  "  The  phrase  is  derived  from 
the  Pentateuch  "  (Wordsworth).  The  force 
of  the  accumulation  of  practically  synony- 
mous terms  is  to  represent  the  law  in 
its  entirety  {"Die  Totalitdt  des  Gesetzes," 
Keil) ;  of.  Deut.  v.  31,  viii.  11,  and  espe- 
cially Psa.  oxix.] ,  that  thou  mayest  prosper. 
[The  marginal  rendering,  "do  wisely,"  is 
preferred  by  some  (Keil,  e.g.)  ;  but  the 
translation  of  the  text  has  the  authority 
of  Gesenius  and  others  on  its  side,  and 
gives  a  better  meaning.  "  The  context 
evidently  requires  '  prosper '  here,  as  in 
Josh.  i.  7"  (Bawlinson).  "That  thou 
mayest  ...  do  wisely  "  is  a  very  lame 
and  impotent  conclusion  to  ver.  3.  We 
have  here  an  evident  reminiscence  of  Josh, 
i.  7  ;  possibly  also  of  Deut.  xxix.  9.  David 
was  unquestionably  well  versed  in  the 
Scriptures  of  that  age,  of  which  every  king 
was  commanded  to  make  a  copy. 

^«r.  4.— That  the  Lord  may  continue 
[rather,  "  establish  "  (ut  confirriiet),  as  it  is 
resdersd  in  'i  Sam.  vii.  25,  where  this  same 


word  of  pronise  is  spoken  of.  Cf.  1  Kings 
viii.  26]  His  word  which  He  spake  con- 
cerning me  [by  the  mouth  of  Nathan, 
2  Sam,  vii.  12 — 17  (of.  Psa.  Ixxxix.  4) ;  or 
David  may  refer  to  some  subsequent  pro- 
mise made  to  him  directly.  In  the  promise 
of  2  Sam.  vii.  there  is  no  mention  of  any 
stipulations,  "  If  ihy  children,"  <fee.  But 
both  here  and  in  Psa.  cxxxii.  12,  and  in 
1  Kings  viii.  25,  special  prominence  is 
given  to  the  condition  (dum  se  bene 
gesserint),  which  no  doubt  was  understood, 
if  not  expressed,  when  the  promise  was 
first  made],  sayti^.  If  thy  children  take 
heed  to  [lit.,  "keep,"  same  word  as  in  vers. 
2,  3 J  their  way,  to  walk  before  me  In  truth 
with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  soul 
there  shall  not  fW  thee  [lit.,  "  be  cut  off  to 
thee,"  as  marg.  (cf.  1  Sam  ii.  29;  Josh.  ix.  23). 
This  word  does  not  occur  in  the  original 
promise  made  through  Nathan.  But  it  does 
'  occur  in  subsequent  versions  of  the  promise, 
1  Kings  viii.  25,  ix.  5,  a«  well  as  here — a 
strong  presumption  that  the  promise  must 
have  been  repeated  to  David  in  another 
shape],  said  he,  a  man  on  the  throne  of  Israel 

But  this  thought — that  the  permanence 
of  his  dynasty  depended  on  the  faithful 
observance  of  the  law  as  it  is  written  in  the 
book  of  Moses  (i.e.,  in  all  its  details),  seemg 
to  have  reminded  the  dying  man  that  he 
himself  had  not  always  kept  the  statutes 
he  was  urging  his  successor  to  keep.  It 
had  been  his  duty  as  king,  a«  the  power 
ordained  of  God,  to  visit  all  violations  of 
the  law  of  God  with  their  appropriate 
penalties ;  and  this  duty,  in  some  instances 
at  least,  had  been  neglected.  For  the  law 
of  Moses,  reaffirming  the  primaval  law 
which  formed  part  of  the  so-called  "  precepts 
of  Noah  "  (Gen.  6)— that  ix,  blood  must  be 
expiated  by  blood — enjoined,  with  singular 
emphasis  and  distinctness,  the  death  of  the 
murderer  (Numb.  xxxv.  16,  17,  18,  19, 
80—33 ;  Exod.  xxi.  14).  It  declared  that 
BO  long  as  murder  remained  unpunished, 
the  whole  land  was  defiled  and  under  a 
curse  (Numb.  xxxv.  33).  And  it  gave  the 
king  no  power  to  pardon,  no  discretion  in 
the  matter.  Until  the  red  stain  of  blood 
was  washed  out  "by  the  blood  of  him  that 
shed  it "  the  Divine  Justice  was  not  satis- 
fied, and  a  famine  or  pestilence  or  sword 
might  smite  the  land.  Now,  David  kne^ 
all  this :  he  could  not  fail  to  know  it,  tot 
he  had  seen  his  country,  a  few  years  before- 
visited  by  a  famine  because  of  the  un 


OH.  n.  1—11.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


20 


BTenged  blood  of  the  Gibeonites  (2  Sam. 
zxi.  1).  And  yet,  one  notorious  and  in- 
famous murderer  had  not  been  put  to 
death.  The  assassin  of  Abner  and  of 
Amaaa  still  polluted  the  earth,  stiU  occu- 
pied a  distinguished  position,  and  defied 
panishment.  But  if  the  law  of  Moses  was 
to  be  kept,  then,  whatever  it  might  cost, 
and  however  painful  it  might  be  (Deut. 
xix.  13),  he  must  die ;  and  David,  for  the 
welfare  of  his  kingdom,  the  stability  of  his 
throne,  and  above  all,  the  honour  of  God, 
must  require  his  death.  No  doubt  it  had 
often  burdened  his  mind,  especially  during 
these  last  days  of  feebleness,  the  thought 
that  punishment  had  been  so  long  delayed ; 
and  therefore,  as  he  sees  the  end  apprroach- 
ing,  he  feels  that  he  must  enjoin  upon  his 
successor  the  fulfilment  of  that  duty  which 
he  had  been  too  "  weak "  to  discharge 
(2  Sam.  iii,  39).    Hence  he  proceeds, 

Ver.  5. — "Moreover,  thou  knowest  also 
what  Joal),  the  sou  of  Zerulah  [there  is  no 
"  emphasis  on  these  words :  he  who  was 
mine  own  sister's  son,"  as  Wordsworth,  see 
on  i.  11] ,  did  to  me  and  [this  last  word  has 
no  place  in  the  original,  and  should  be  left 
out,  as  it  is  misleading.  It  makes  David 
demand  the  death  of  Joab  partly  because  of 
iyis  private  injuries  he  had  suffered  at  his 
hands,  and  partly  because  of  his  two  brutal 
murders  mentioned  presently.  But  this 
is  just  what  David  did  not  do ;  for  he  is 
careful  to  exclude  all  mention  of  his  private 
wrongs.  It  is  true,  he  says,  "  what  Job 
did  to  me,"  but  that  is  because  "the 
sovereign  is  smitten  in  the  subject "  (Bp. 
Hall),  and  because  the  first  of  these  mur- 
ders had  caused  David  to  be  suspected  of 
complicity,  while  each  had  deprived  him  of 
an  able  officer.  And  the  words  that  follow] 
what  he  did  to  the  two  captains  of  the  hosts 
of  Israel  [these  words  are  clearly  explicative 
of  the  "what  he  did  to  me."  Only  thus  can 
we  explain  the  absence  of  the  "and"]  unto 
Abner  the  son  of  Ner  [2  Sam.  iii.  27.  This 
was  one  of  those  foul  murders  to  which  the 
law  expressly  denied  any  right  of  sanctuary, 
for  it  was  "with  guile"  (Exod.  xxi.  14).  Joab 
"  took  Abner  aside  in  the  gate  to  speak  with 
him  peaceably,  and  smote  him  there  in  the 
abdomen  "] ,  and  unto  Amasa  the  son  of 
Jether  [or  Ithra.  In  2  Sam.  xxvii.  24, 
Ithra  is  called  "  an  IsraeUte,"  an  obvious 
mistake  for  "  Ishmaelite,"  as  indeed  it 
stands  in  1  Chron.  ii.  17.  Amasa's  mother, 
Abigail,  was  sister  of  David  and  Zeruiah ; 
Amasa,   consequently,    was    Joab's    first 


cousin.  This  murder  was  even  fouler  than 
that  of  Abner.  Here  there  were  ties  of 
blood ;  they  were  companions  in  arms,  and 
there  was  no  pretence  of  a  vendetta]  ,  whom 
be  slew  and  shed  [lit.,  "  put,"  a  somewhat 
strange  expression.    It  ^most  looks  as  if 

Iviy,  "upon  him,"  had  dropped  out.  The 
meaning  "make,"  which  Keil  assigns  to 
D*^  is  not  borne  out  by  his  references, 
Deut.  xiv.  1 ;  Exod.  x.  2.  "  Showed," 
"  displayed,"  is  nearer  the  original] ,  the 
blood  of  war  In  peace  [the  meaning  is 
obvious.  Blood  might  lawfully  be  shed  in 
time  of  war,  in  fair  fight ;  and  Joab  might 
have  slain  the  two  captains  in  battle  with- 
out guilt.  But  he  slew  them  when  they 
were  at  peace  with  him  and  unprepared,  by 
treachery] ,  and  put  the  blood  of  war  [the 
LXX.  has  dljia  aBwav,  "  innocent  blood  "] 
upon  bis  girdle  that  was  about  his  loins 
and  in  bis  shoes  that  were  on  his  feet 
[we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  girdle  and 
sandal  are  mentioned  as  "die  Zeichen  des 
Kriegerttandes"  (Bahr),  i.e.,  military 
insignia;  nor  yet  that  the  idea  is  "from 
the  girdle  to  the  vandal"  (Ewaldl,  i.e., 
copiously.  These  are  usual  (hardly 
"  principal,"  as  Keil)  articles  of  Eastern 
dres?,  of  the  civilian's  as  well  as  of 
the  soldier's,  and  these  two  are  mentioned 
because,  no  doubt,  the  horril  le  details  of 
the  two  murders,  and  especially  of  the  last 
(see  2  Sam.  xx.  8),  had  been  reported  to 
David.  He  had  been  told  at  the  time  how 
the  blood  of  Amasa  had  spurted  on  to  the 
girdle  of  Joab,  and  streamed  down  into  hihi 
sandals,  and  these  details,  which  no  doubt 
made  a  deep  impression  upon  his  mind,  are 
recited  here  to  show  how  dastardly  and 
treacherous  was  the  deed,  and  how 
thoroughly  Joab  was  stained  vrith  innocent 
blood,  blood  which  cried  to  heaven  for 
vengeance  (Gen.  iv.  10)]. 

Ver.  6. — Do  therefore  according  to  thy 
wisdom  [cf.  Prov.  xx.  26.  It  needed  great 
discretion  in  exacting  the  puni^iment  ot 
death  in  the  case  of  one  who  was  so  power- 
ful, who  had  such  influence  with  the  army 
and  the  people,  whose  crimes  had  been 
passed  over  for  so  long  a  time,  to  whom 
David  was  so  much  indebted — Joab  had 
partly  won  and  had  twice  preserved  for 
him  his  crown — and  to  whom  he  was  aUied 
by  ties  of  blood.  To  act  precipitately  or 
unwisely  might  provoke  a  revolution] ,  and 
let  not  bis  hoar  head  [see  on  ver.  9.  Joab, 
though  David's  nephew,  could  not  have 
been  much  his  junior,  and  David  was  now 
seventy]  go  down  to  the  grave  in  peace. 
[He  must  die  a,  violent,  not  a  natural  death, 
as  Corn.  4  Lap.  This  expression,  no  doubt, 
looks  vindictive,  but  that  is  solely  because 


26 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  II.  1—11. 


we  forget  the  character  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment dispensation  (as  one  of  temporal  re- 
wards and  punishments.  See  the  "  Exposi- 
tor," vol.  iii.  p.  114),  the  position  of  David  as 
king  (as  the  authorized  dispenser  of  punish- 
ments, and  as  responsible  to  God  for 
dispensing  them  without  fear  or  favour), 
and  the  principles  of  the  Mosaic  code  (as  a 
lex  talionis,  demanding  blood  for  blood,  and 
requiring  the  magistrates  and  people  to 
purge  themselves  of  the  guilt  of  blood,  by 
demanding  "  the  blood  of  him  that  shed  it "). 
Let  these  considerations  be  borne  in  mind, 
and  there  is  absolutely  no  warrant  for 
charging  David  with  malevolence.  Words- 
worth lays  stress  on  the  fact  that  Joab  had 
not  repented  of  his  crimes.  But  we  need 
have  recourse  to  no  such  suppositions.  The 
Jewish  law  affi^rded  no  place  of  repentance 
to  the  murderer.  No  amount  of  contrition 
would  cleanse  the  land  of  blood.  The 
temporal  penalty  must  be  paid.  In  the 
case  of  Da\id  himself,  it  was  only  commuted 
by  special  revelation  (2  Bam  xii,  10,  13, 
14),  not  remitted. 

Ver.  7.— And  to  the  Eona  of  BarzUlal 
[the  "  Beni-Barzillai  "  would  include  son, 
or  sons,  and  all  other  descendants.  It  is 
highly  probable,  though  it  is  not  expressly 
stated,  that  Chimham  was  the  son  of  Bar- 
zillai  (2  Sam.  xix.  37).  Eawlinson  says, 
"  Who  the  other  sous  were  is  not  known." 
It  would  be  more  correct  to  say  that  we  do 
not  know  whether  there  were  any  other 
sons.  The  family  was  still  existing  temp. 
Ezra  (Ezra  ii.  61),  where,  it  is  worth  notic- 
ing, we  real  of  the  daughters  of  Barzillai 
(ef.  Nebem.  vii.  63).  In  Jeremiah  xli.  17, 
we  read  of  the  "habitation  (nnj,  cara- 
vanserai, khan)  of  Chemoham,"  where  the 
Eeri  has  Chimham.  It  has  been  argued 
from  the  mention  of  this  name,  and  the 
fact  that  their  khan  was  near  Bethlehem, 
that  David  or  Solomon  gave  the  family  land 
there] ,  and  let  them  be  of  those  that  eat  at 
thy  table  [i.e.,  of  those  who  have  their  sus- 
tenance from  the  royal  table,  not  necessarily 
at  it  (Keil) ;  cf.  Dan.  i.  5  ;  2  Kings  xxv.  29. 
Presence  at  the  table  is  expressed  by 
iP^'f  ^JJ  (2  Sam.  ix.  11,  12).  It  was  es- 
teemed an  essential  part  of  royal  munifi- 
cence throughout  the  East  that  the  king 
should  feed  a  large  number  of  retainers  and 
dependants.  Cf.  the  account  of  Solomon's 
daily  provision  in  1  Kings  iv.  22,  28  ;  also 
2  Sam.  xix.  28;  Judges  i.  7]  ;  for  so  [i.e., 
in  like  manner,  with  food]  ;  they  came  to 
we  [lit.,  "  came  near."  The  Hebrew  a'lp 
often  includes,  as  here,  the  idea  of  succour. 
Cf.  Ps.  Ixix.  J  9 ;  Lam.  iii.  67.  Barzillai 
certainly  came  (a  Sam.  xvii.  27),  and  pro- 
bably Chimham,  but  the  Speaker's  Com- 


mentary is  mistaken  when  it  says  thai 
"  Chimham  is  mentioned  as  present."  Ha 
was  present  at  the  return  of  David  (2  Sam. 
xix.  31,  38,  but  not  necessaiily  before] 
when  I  fled  because  of  pit. ,- "  from  the  face 
of "]  Absalom  thy  brother. 

The  mention  of  Absalom,  and  those 
terrible  days  of  revolt  and  anarchy,  when 
he  was  constrained  to  flee  for  his  life,  seems 
to  have  reminded  the  dying  king  of  one  of 
the  bitterest  ingredients  of  that  bitter  cup 
of  shame  and  suffering — the  cruel  curses  of 
Shimei.  He  remembers  that  the  sin  of 
Shimei,  which  was  nothing  else  than  treason 
and  blasphemy,  has  so  far  escaped  punish- 
ment. In  a  moment  of  generous  enthusiasm, 
he  had  included  Shimei  in  the  general 
amnesty  which  he  proclaimed  on  his  return 
(2  Sam.  xix.  23).  He  had  thought,  no 
doubt,  at  the  time  only  of  the  offence 
against  himself;  he  had  forgotten  his 
sacred  and  representative  character  as  "the 
Lord's  anointed ; "  or  if  he  had  remem- 
bered it  (ver.  21)  the  emotions  of  that 
memorable  day  had  obscured  or  perverted 
his  sense  of  justice  and  duty.  But  he  hhs 
since  realized — and  the  thought  weighs 
upon  his  conscience  in  the  chamber  of 
death — that  he  then  pardoned  what  he  had  , 
no  power  to  pardon,  viz.,  a  sin  to  which 
the  Mosaic  law  attached  the  penalty  of 
death.  For  blasphemy,  as  for  murder, 
there  was  no  expiation  short  of  the  death 
of  the  blasphemer  (Lev.  xxiv.  14 — 16  ;  of. 
1  Kings  xxi.  10,  13) ;  and  blasphemy,  like 
murder,  though  not  perhaps  to  the  same 
extent,  involved  those  who  heard  it  in  its 
guilt,  until  they  had  discharged  themselves 
of  their  sin  upon  the  head  of  the  guilty  (Lev. 
xiv.  14  ;  cf.  Lev.  v.  1).  But  Shimfi,  so  far 
from  having  suffered  the  penalty  of  the 
law,  had  been  twice  protected  against  it ; 
twice  preserved  alive,  in  defiance  of  law,  by 
the  supreme  magistrate,  •  the  executor  of 
law.  And  David,  who  has  been  charging 
his  son  to  keep  the  law,  now  realizes  that 
he  himself  has  been  a  law-bveaker.  He  has 
kept  his  oath,  sworn  to  his  own  or  his 
people's  hurt,  and  he  will  keep  it  to  the 
end.  But  Solomon  is  under  no  such  obli- 
gation. He  can  demand  the  long  arrears 
of  justice,  none  the  less  due  because  of  the 
time  that  has  elapsed  and  the  royal  lachei 


CH.  II.  1—11.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


27 


C'  nullum  tempus  occurrit  regi ") ;  he  can 
deal  with  the  blasphemer  as  the  law  directs, 
and  this  David  now  charges  him  to  do. 

■Ver.  8. — And,  behold,  thou  hast  with  thee 
[Bahr  understands  by  '^DJ?,  "near  thee,"  (in 
deiner  Ndlie)  because  BaUurim  was  near 
Jerusalem.  Keil  gathers  from  this  word 
that  Shimei  "was  living  at  that  time  in 
Jerusalem,"  and  refers  to  ver.  36,  which,  if 
anything,  implies  that  he  was  not.  But  it 
is  worth  suggesting  whether  Shimei  may 
not  be  the  Shimei  to  whom  reference  is 
made  in  oh.  i.  8.  (Dean  Stanley  notices 
this  as  a  possibility,  but  alleges  nothing  in 
support  of  it :  "Jewish  Church,"  vol.  ii.  p. 
171,  note.)  We  there  find  Shimei  and  Bei 
mentioned  as  firm  adherents  of  Solomon  at 
the  time  of  Adonijah's  rising,  and  in  these 
words,  they  "  were  not  loith  Adonijah." 
Surely  it  is  not  an  unfair  presumption — if 
there  is  nothing  to  rebut  it— that  the  Shimei 
subsequently  mentioned  as  "with"  Solomon 
is  the  same  person.  But  it  has  been  ob- 
jeoted  (e.g.,  by  Kitto)  that  the  false  part 
that  Shimei  played  at  the  {ime  of  Absalom's 
revolt  would  have  for  ever  prevented  his 
being  recognized  and  mentioned  as  one  of 
Solomon's  supporters.  I  very  much  doubt 
it.  The  great  influence  which  Shimei  pos- 
sessed must  be  taken  into  account.  Nothing 
shows  that  influence  more  clearly  than  the 
fact  that  on  the  day  of  David's  restoration, 
despite  the  part  he  had  taken,  and  the 
possible  disgrace  and  danger  that  awaited 
him,  he  could  still  command  the  attendance 
of  one  thousand  men  of  Benjamin  (2  Sam. 
ziz.  17).  Probably  the  secret  of  his  in- 
fluence lay  in  the  fact  that  he  was  "of  the 
family  of  the  house  of  Saul,"  and  possibly, 
owing  to  the  insignificance  of  Saul's  de- 
scendants, was  the  mainstay  and  chief  re- 
presentative of  that  house.  And  if  eo,  there 
is  nothing  at  all  surprising  in  the  mention 
of  the  fact  that  he  was  "  not  with  Adonijah," 
and  was  subsequently  "  with  "  Solomon. 
It  may  have  been  a  matter  of  great  con- 
sequence at  that  critical  time,  which  side 
Shimei — and  the  thousand  or  more  Ben- 
jamites  at  his  back— espoused.  And  if  he 
did  then  declare  for  Solomon,  it  cnuld 
hardly  fail  to  procure  him  some  amount  of 
favour  and  consideration.  He  would  thence- 
forward rank  amongst  the  friends  of  the 
young  king,  and  the  words  "  thou  hast  with 
thee"  would  accurately  describe  his  po- 
sition] Shimei,  the  son  of  Gera  [another 
Shimei,  the  son  of  Elah,  is  mentioned  (1 
Kings  iv.  11)  as  Solomon's  officer  in  Ben- 
jamin. Gera  must  not  be  thought  of  as  the 
"  father  "  of  Shimei,  except  in  the  sense  of 
ancestor.  He  was  removed  from  him  by 
many  generations,  being  the  son  of  Beia 


and  the  grandson  of-  Benjamin  (Oen.  xlvi. 
21;  of.  1  Chron.  vii.  6).  Ehud,  three 
hundred  years  earlier,  is  also  described  as 
"  a  son  of  Gera,"  Judg.  iii.  16] ,  a  Benjamite 
[lit.,  tAe  Benjamite,  meaning  that  Gera,  not 
Shimei,  was  the  Benjamite.  He  was  well 
known  as  the  son  of  Benjamin's  firstborn 
(1  Chron.  viii.  1),  and  the  head  of  a  house 
in  Benjamin.  Professor  Gardiner  (American 
translation  of  Lange,  textual  note,  p.  29), 
following  the  LXX.  and  Vulg.,  insists  that, 
\3'P'n"|3  (with  the  article)  can  only  mean 
"  sou  of  the  Jaminite,  i.e.,  of  the  descen- 
dants of  Jamin,  a  son  of  Simeon."  But 
this  is  directly  contrary  to  what  we  read 
a  Sam.  xvi. ,  viz. ,  that  Shimei  was  of  "  a 
family  of  the  house  of  Saul,"  i.e.,  a  Ben- 
jamite. And  to  this  the  grammar  agrees. 
Judges  iii.  15  is  an  exact  parallel,  and  com- 
pare ^E'Dg'ri-n'a,  1  Sam.  vi.  14,  18,  and 
*pniiri-n*3,  l  Sam.  xvi.  1,  18;  xvii.  58]  of 
Bahurlm  [the  name  means  "The  young 
men. "  It  was  some  six  miles  distant  from 
Jerusalem,  in  Benjamin,  and  on  (or  off,  as 
Josephus,  Ant.  vii.  9,  7,  implies)  the  main 
road  to  Jericho  and  the  Jordan  valley.  It 
may  have  lain  in  one  of  the  wMieb  branch- 
ing out  from  the  ravine  which  runs  con- 
tinuously alongside  the  steep  descent  to 
Jericho.  The  event  narrated  in  2  Sam.  iii. 
16  as  happening  at  Bahurim  may  well  have 
served  to  inflame  Shimei's  hatred.  In  sp;te 
of  his  rancorous  hostility,  however,  we 
gather  from  2  Sam.  xvii.  18,  that  David  had 
some  faithful  adherents  there] ,  which  [lit. , 
"and  he"]  cursed  me  with  agkevous  [ace. 
to  Gesenius,  aZ.,  "strong,"  i.e.,  sweeping; 
Eeil,  vehement;  Thenius,  "heillos,"  flagi- 
tious. 'Li^'K.,,KaTapavoivvrip&v.  Vulg., maJc- 
dictio  pessima]  curse  in  the  day  when  I 
went  to  Mahanaim  [2  Sam.  xvi.  5]  ;  but  he 
came  down  to  meet  me  at  Jordan  [lit.,  the 
Jordan,  i.e.,  the  descender,  so  called  from 
the  rapidity  of  the  stream  (it  has  a  fall  of 
1400  feet  in  about  100  miles)  or  from  the 
steep  descents  which  lead  to  it.  The  word 
always  has  the  defin.  art.],  and  I  swaie  tc 
him  by  the  Lord,  saying,  I  wiU  not  put  thee 
to  death  with  the  sword  [2  Sam.  xix.  23] . 
Ver.  9.— Now  therefore  [lit.,  "and  now." 
Possibly  the  "now"  is  a  note  of  time  in 
apposition  to  the  "  day  "  of  ver.  8,  or  rather 
the  time  of  Davids  oath.  "I  then  un- 
advisedly sware  unto  him,  but  now  the  law 
must  have  its  course,"  Probably  it  is  merely 
inferential, — quae  cum  ita  tinf]  hold  him 
not  guiltless  [rather,  thmi  shalt  not  leave 
himunpunished  (Vatablus,  Gesen.,Bahr,ai.); 
cf.  Exod.  XX.  7  ;  Jer.  ixx.  11] ;  for  thou  art 
a  wise  man  [fpoviuos  rather  than  <ro^dc 
(LXX.)  Gesen.  renders  here,  "  endued  with 
ability  to  judge."     David  clearly  desirei 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  11.  1 — H. 


that  wisdom  and  justice,  not  malice  or 
passion,  should  be  Solomon's  guide] ,  and 
Imowest  what  thou  oughtest  to  pit.,  shalt 
or  slwuldesf]  do  to  him  ;  hut  [Heb.  and]  hla 
hoar  head  [mentioned,  not  maliciously,  but 
with  the  idea  that  punishment,  which  had 
been  long  delayed,  must  overtake  him 
nevertheless.  The  age  of  Joab  and  Shimei 
would  make  the  Divine  Nemesis  the  more 
conspicuous.  Men  would  "  see  that  there 
was  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth"] 
bring  thou  down  to  the  grave  with  blood. 
The  Auth.  Version  here  needlessly  alters 
the  order  uf  the  original,  which  should  be 
followed  wherever  it  can  be  (and  it  generally 
can)  without  sacrifice  of  idiom  and  elegance. 
In  this  case  the  alteration,  by  the  slight 
prominence  it  gives  to  "  hoar  head"  and  to 
"  blood,"  gives  a  factitious  harshness  to  the 
sentence.  The  Hebrew  stands  thus  :  ' '  And 
thou  shalt  bring  down  his  hoar  head  with 
blood  to  Sheol."  This  order  of  the  words 
also  exhibits  somewhat  mo^e  clearly  the 
sequence  of  thought,  which  is  this:  "Thou 
art  wise,  therefore  thou  knowest  what  by 
law  thou  shouldest  do.  What  then  shalt 
do  is,  thou  shalt  bring  down,"  &o.  It  is 
clear  from  these  words  that  if  David  was 
actuated  by  malice,  by  a  "  passionate  desire 
to  punish  those  who  had  wronged  him" 
(Plumptre,  Diet.  Bib.,  art. "  Solomon "),  or  by 
"  fierce  and  profound  vindictiveness  "  (Stan- 
ley, "  Jewish  Church,"  vol.  ii.  p.  135),  he  was 
profoundly  unconscious  of  it.  If  it  was  "  a 
dark  legacy  of  hate "  {ibid.)  he  was  be- 
queathing to  Solomon,  then  he  stands  before 
us  in  these  last  hours  either  as  an  unctuous 
hypocrite,  or  as  infatuated  and  inconsistent 
to  the  last  degree.  That  the  man  who,  in 
his  opening  words  (ver.  3),  ehjoiued  upon 
his  son,  in  the  most  emphatic  manner,  a 
strict  and  literal  obedience  to  the  law  of 
Heaven,  should  in  these  subsequent  words, 
delivered  almost  in  the  same  breath,  re- 
quire him  to  satiate  a  long-cherished  and 
cruel  revenge  upon  Joab  and  Shimei  (the 
latter  of  whom  he  had  twice  delivered  from 
death),  is  an  instance  of  self-contradiction 
which  is  almost,  if  not  quite,  without 
parallel.  But  as  I  have  showed  elsewhere, 
at  some  length,  it  is  a  superficial  and  entirely 
erroneous  view  of  David's  last  words,  which 
supposes  them  to  have  been  inspired  by 
malice  or  cruelty.  His  absorbing  idea  was 
clearly  this,  that  he  had  not  "kept  the 
charge  of  the  Lord ; "  that  he,  the  chief 
magistrate,  the  "revenger  to  execute  wrath," 
by  sparing  Joab  and  Shimei,  the  murderer 
and  the  blasphemer,  both  of  whose  lives 
were  forfeited  to  justice,  had  failed  in  his 
duty,  had  weakened  the  sanctions  of  law, 
HTirl  compromised  the  honour  of  the  Most 
High.      He  is   too  old  and  too  weak  to 


execute  the  sentence  of  the  law  now,  but 
for  the  safety  of  his  people,  for  the  security 
of  his  throne,  it  must  be  done,  and  there- 
fore Solomon,  who  was  under  no  obligation 
to  spare  the  criminals  his  father  had  spared, 
must  be  required  to  do  it.  Of  the  Jewish 
king  it  might  be  said  with  a  special  pro- 
priety, "  Bex  est  lex  loquens,"  and  seldom 
has  the  voice  of  law  spoken  with  greater 
dignity  and  fidelity  than  by  David  in  this 
dying  charge.  To  say,  as  Harwood  does, 
(Lange,  American  Trans.,  p.  32)  that  "no- 
thing but  sophistry  can  justify  his  [David's] 
charge  to  Solomon,  not  to  let  the  unfortu- 
nate man  [Shimei]  die  in  peace,"  merely 
shows  how  imperfectly  the  writer  has  en- 
tered into  the  spirit  of  the  theocratic  law, 
that  law  under  which  David  Uved,  and  by 
which  alone  he  could  be  governed  and 
govern  others. 

Yer.  10.— So  [Heb.  anct]  David  dept 
[Heb.  lay  down] .  The  idea  of  33^  is  not 
that  of  sleep  so  much  as  of  the  recumbent 
posture  of  the  dead.  It  points  to  the  grave 
rather  than  to  Sheol  (Gresen.),  though  the 
latter  idea  is  not  excluded.  Wordsworth 
(after  i  Laplde)  finds  here  "an  assertion 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  existence  of  the  soul 
after  death,  and  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body,"  but  it  is  not  in  the  text]  with  his 
fathers  (cf.  the  Latin  expression  abiit  ad 
plures,  and  the  Greek  I;  TrXeovuv  iKiaBiu], 
and  was  burled  in  the  city  of  DaTld  [i.e, 
the  hill  of  Zion,  which  he  had  fortified. 
His  citadel  became  bis  sepulchre,  and 
thenceforward  bore  his  name.  Intramural 
interment  was  permitted  only  to  prophets 
and  kings.  Jerusalem  is  completely  under- 
mined  by  caves  and  caverns,  and  Zion  is 
no  exception  to  the  rule.  One  of  these, 
possibly  enlarged,  probably  became  the 
burying-plaoe  of  the  kings.  It  was  known, 
not  only  in  Nehemiah's  day  (Nehem.  iii 
15,  16),  but  down  to  the  age  of  the  apostles 
(Acts  ii.  29).  Probably  owing  to  a  mis- 
understanding of  St.  Peter's  words,  "his 
sepulchre  is  with  us,"  &o.,  the  Coenaculum 
is  now  shown  as  David's  tomb.  Josephus 
says  Solomon  placed  a  vast  quantity  of 
treasure  with  the  body,  three  thousand 
talents  of  which  were  taken  out  by  Hyrcanus 
(Ant.  xiii.  8.  4).  He  has  also  a  curious 
story  of  an  attempted  plunder  of  the  tomb 
by  Herod  (Ant.  xvi.  7.  1) 

Ver.  11.— And  the  days  that  David  reigned 
over  Israel  were  forty  years :  seven  years 
reigned  he  In  Hebron,  and  thirty  and  three 
years  reigned  be  In  Jerusalem  [as  elsewhere 
(1  Chron.  xxix.  27),  the  historian  has  dis- 
regarded the  fraction  of  a  year  in  giving 
the  length  of  David's  reign.  He  reigned 
at  Hebron,  according  to  2  Sam.  v.  6,  "  seven 
vears  and  six  months." 


OH.  n  1—11.]  THE  PIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  29 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — A  Jewish  deathbed,  A  brilliant  poet  and  essayist  once  summoned 
his  stepson,  the  young  Earl  of  Warwick,  to  his  bedside,  and  with  perfect  dignity  and 
composure  bade  him  mark  "  how  a  Christian  man  can  die."  In  this  section,  one 
far  greater,  and  yet  in  one  sense  far  less,  than  Addison, — greater  as  a  poet,  as  a 
statesman,  as  a  patriot  ;*  less,  inasmuch  as  "  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  oi 
heaven  is  greater  than  he," — ^beckons  us  to  the  chamber  of  death,  and  bids  us  wit- 
ness the  departure  of  a  pious  Jew — of  a  typical  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.  In  one 
sense,  David  is  the  greatest  figure  in  the  Old  Testament.  He  alone,  of  all  that  are 
bom  of  women,  has  been  called  a  "  man  after  God's  own  heart."  And  more  :  If 
Solomon  is  of  all  Old  Testament  characters  the  most  secular,  certainly  David  is  by 
far  the  most  spiritual.  Proof :  His  songs  are  still  chanted  in  church  as  well  as 
synagogue,  and  Christian  souls  find  no  fitter  expression  for  their  devout  longings 
and  aspirations  than  in  the  language  of  his  exquisite  Psalms.  Let  us  hear  his  last 
recorded  words.  The  last  utterances  of  great  men  are  allowed  to  have  a  special 
interest.  They  have  often  been  intensely  characteristic.  Let  us  listen  to  "  the  last 
words  of  David."  Let  us  carefully  notice  (1)  What  he  does  say,  and  no  less  care- 
fully (2)  What  he  does  not  say. 

I.  What  he  dobs  say.  1.  He  says  he  is  not  afraid  to  meet  death.  His  con- 
duct, his  demeanour  says  this.  See  how  calmly  he  looks  it  in  the  face.  "  I  go  the 
way,"  &c.  He  hardly  knows  what  death  means;  knows  but  little  of  the  life 
beyond ;  his  hopes  and  fears  are  bounded  by  the  pale  and  shadowy  realm  of  Sheol, 
but  he  can  trust  the  living  God,  and  he  thinks — he  beUeves — "  they  cannot  cease 
to  live  whom  God  does  not  cease  to  love."  And  so  he  goes  into  the  gloom  and 
the  shadows  with  the  trust  of  a  child  that  holds  the  father's  hand ;  he  approaches 
the  grave 

**  Aa  i/Uo  vtlib  wrai>is  the  drapery  ol  ins  coucb 
About  him,  and  lies  do^m  to  pleasant  dreams." 

We  have  a  far  nobler  creed— a  livelier  hope  than  his.  Jesus  Christ  has  "brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light."  We  have  heard  of  the  rest  of  Paradise ;  of  the 
resurrection  ;  of  the  beatific  vision.  Shall  we  then  dread  to  die  ?  Shall  we  be  put 
to  shame  by  a  Jew  ?  The  Mohammedan  calls  death  the  "  terminator  of  delights  and 
the  separator  of  companions."  Socrates  said,  "  Whether  it  is  best  to  live  or  die,  the 
gods  only  know."  Shall  we  act  as  if  we  had  no  better  belief  ?  Surely  our  bene- 
ficent religion,  audits  gospel  of  immortality,  should  make  us  brave  to  die.  2.  He 
bids  us  he  'mindful  of  our  mor'ality.  There  are  Christians  who  will  not  think, 
will  not  speak  of  death.  Not  so  David.  He  saw  the  end  approaching,  and  he  faced 
it.  It  is  well  we  should  have  fi:om  time  to  time,  as  we  constantly  have  in  daily  Ufe, 
in  the  dispensations  of  God's  providence,  a  memento  mori.  Pagan  and  Moslem 
monarohs  have  had  their  heralds  daily  and  pubHcly  remind  them  of  their  frailtj'. 
The  ancient  Egyptians  would  bring  a  mummy  to  their  feasts.  The  Kaffirs  ever  keep 
the  boards  for  their  coffins  in  their  houses.  With  their  dismal  and  often  hopeless 
creeds,  they  yet  remember  death.  Shall  we,  who  know  that  death  is  but  the  gate 
of  Mfe,  ostrich-like,  shut  our  eyes  to  it,  and  all  "  think  all  men  to  be  mortal  but  our- 
selves ?"  3.  He  teaches  us  in  death  to  think  of  duty  ;  to  remember  those  who  will 
come  after  us — our  friends,  enemies,  church,  and  country.  He  leaves  a  son  "  young 
and  tender."  He  is  concerned  for  his  piety,  for  his  prosperity ;  and  through  him, 
for  the  piety  and  prosperity  of  the  nation.  He  knows  that  the  words  of  the  dying 
have  weight.  He  wiU  not  depart  without  a  solemn  dying  charge.  It  is  the  last 
best  gift  he  can  bestow.  The  Christian  must  not  die  selfishly.  Even  in  pain  and 
feebleness,  he  must  care  for  others.  If  he  can,  he  ought  to  charge  his  children  and 
connexions ;  to  warn  them,  to  bless  them.  Should  he  be  less  jealous  for  their  present 
and  eternal  welfare,  or  less  concerned  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  God,  than  was  this 
dying  Jew  ?  4.  He  reminds  us  that  men  die  as  they  ha/oe  li/ued.  David  has  kept 
the  law,  "  save  in  the  matter  of  Uriah,"  &c.    His  death  is  of  a  piece  with  his  life— 


30 


THE  FIBST  BOOX  OF  KINGiS.  [ch.  ii.  1—11. 


it  is  the  natural  outcome,  the  good  fruit  from  a  good  tree.  During  life,  he  has  been 
very  zealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  The  ruling  passion  displays  itself  in_  death. 
The  great  desire  of  the  man  who  has  kept  the  law  is  that  his  son  may  keep  it.  To 
die  well,  one  must  hve  well.  The  last  struggle  works  no  change  in  the  character. 
Deathbed  repentance  is  generally  delusive.     They  deceive  themselves,  who, 

"  Dying,  put  on  the  weeds  of  Dominic, 
Or  as  Franciscans  think  to  pass  disguised." 

6.  He  warns  ua  to  let  our  house  %n  order,  to  pay  our  debts  and  square  our 
accounts  before  we  die.  David,  we  read,  "  prepared  abundantly  (for  the  temple) 
before  his  death."  He  has  made  royal  provision  for  the  house  that  sliould  be  built. 
But  he  remembers  at  last  that  three  deOts  of  his  are  still  undischarged ;  a  debt  of 
gratitude  to  the  sons  of  Barzillai,  a  debt  of  retribution  to  Joab,  and  another  to 
Shimei.  "  Due  punishment  of  malefactors  is  the  debt  of  authority  "  (Bp.  Hall).  He 
will  not,  like  some,  "go  on  sinning  in  his  grave ; "  he  wiU  have  these  debts  dis- 
charged. He  cannot  depart  in  peace  while  they  burden  his  conscience.  And  we, 
too,  go  where  "  there  is  neither  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,"  where  wrongs 
cannot  be  redressed,  where  accoimts  cannot  be  settled.  Have  we' any  crime  uncon- 
fessed,  or  injury  unrepaired,  any  enemy  unforgiven  ?  "  What  thou  doest,  do 
quickly."     But  let  us  now  consider — 

II.  What  David  does  not  say.  The  silence  of  Scripture  is  often  golden,  is  some- 
times as  instructivef  as  its  voices.  Here  is  a  case  in  point.  The  most  spiritual  of  Old 
Testament  saints — the  man  after  God's  own  heart — is  dying,  and  he  knows  it.  He 
gives  his  son  his  parting  counsels,  and  what  are  they  ?  They  are  all  of  this  world. 
Observe — 1.  There  is  no  mention  of  a  future  life  ;  no  "  hope  fuU.  of  immortality,'' 
no  talk  of  reunion,  but  rather  a  sad  "vale,  vale  in  aeiemum  vale."  The  mo^t 
remarkable  feature  in  David's  last  words  is,  that  there  is  not  one  word  about  another 
life.  The  Christian  could  not  die  thus.  Even  "half-inspired  heatliens"  have 
expressed  a  livelier  hope — witness  Cicero's  "  O  praeclaruiu  diem  cum  ad  illud  divi- 
num  animoram  concilium  ooetumque  proficiscar  " — and  how  immeasurably  higher 
than  this,  again,  is  St.  Paul's  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ!  "  I  go  the  way 
of  all  the  earth" — it  is  like  the  sound  of  the  clods  upon  the  cofiSn,  without  the- 
faintest  whisper  of  a  "Resurgam."  What  a  contrast  between  this  and  the  apostle's 
exultant  cry,  "  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory  ! "  And  the  very  humblest  Chris- 
tian could  harilly  depart  as  David  did,  with  absolutely  no  reference  to  the  realm  of 
the  future.  -  There  would  assuredly  be  some  comforting  word  about  the  many -man- 
sions, the  rest  for  the  weary,  the  gates  of  pearl,  the  streets  of  fine  gold.  Of  all  this 
David  »aid  nothing,  neither  in  life  nor  death,  because  he  knew  nothing.  He  had 
hopes,  anticipations,  convictions  almost,  as  some  of  the  Psalms  show,  but  he  had 
not  what  the  Christian  has,  the  "  full  assurance  of  faith,"  the  "  sure  and  certain 
hope  of  a  resurrection  to  eternal  hfe."  In  this  respect  how  much  greater  was 
Addison,  how  much  more  "full  of  all  blessed  conditions"  his  death.  In  this 
respect,  every  Christian  deathbed  has  a  glory  and  a  consecration  and  a  triumph 
which  we  miss  in  the  death  chamber  of  the  sweet  Psalmist  of  Israel,  the  most 
saintly  and  sphitual  of  all  the  Jews.    As  Coleridge, 

"  Is  that  a  deathbed  where  the  Christian  lies  f 
Tes,  but  not  his ;  'tis  death  itsell  there  dies," 

2.  There  is  no  idea  of  a  future  recompense.  Hence,  partly,  his  urgent  demand 
for  the  punishment  of  Joab  and  Shimei.  He  does  not  know  of  a  'Mndgment  to 
come;  of  any  distribution  of  rewards  and  punishments  after  death.  He  has  been 
taught  that  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  alike  are  to  be  "recompensed  in  the 
earth,  and  therefore  Joab  and  Shimei,  albeit  old  and  greyheaded,  i^ust  not  die  in 
peace.  If  they  do,  justice,  he  thinks,  wiU  be  robbed  of  its  due.  How  different  the 
conception  of  the  Christian !  He  views  with  calmness  the  miscairiage  of  justice; 
he  sees  the  wicked  in  great  prosperity  ;  he  "  bears  the  whips  ^nd  scorns  of  time," 
suffers  the  stings  and  arrows  of  outrageous  fortune,"  knowing  that  tins  worid  k 


CH.  II.  1—11.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  31 

not  aU ;  that  "  God  is  patient  because  he  is  eternal,"  and  that  "  the  crooked  shall 
be  made  straight,  and  the  rough  places  plain,"  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ. 
3.  There  was  no  hope  of  a  kingdom,  and  a  crown.  David's  idea  was  that  he  was 
leaving  a  kingdom  ;  St.  Paul's  that  he  was  going  to  one.  "Bemove  the  diadem  and 
take  off  the  crown  " — this  was  the  message  of  death  to  the  Hebrew  kings.  And  to 
us  death  brings  a  crown  (Rev.  ii.  10,  iii.  11;  2  Tim.  iv.  8;  James  i.  12,  &c.),  a 
throne  (Rev.  iii.  21),  a  sceptre  (Rev.  ii.  27),  a  kingdom  (Dan.  vii.  18  ;  Luke  xxii.  29  ; 
Heb.  xii.  28,  &c.)  To  the  Jew  death  was  practically  the  end  of  life  and  of  glory  ; 
to  the  Christian  it  is  the  beginning  of  both. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Eikon  Basilike.  Tlie  king,  the  close  of  whose  chequered  and 
romantic  career  is  narrated  in  this  section,  was  the  pattern  king  of  the  Hebrew 
people,  and  is  in  many  respects  a  model  for  all  kings.  The  portrait  drawn  here 
and  in  the  Psalms  is  a  veritable  Eikon  Basilike,  both  truer  and  worthier  of  regard 
than  that  "  Portraiture  of  liis  sacred  Majesty,"  so  famous  and  so  influential  in  the 
history  of  our  own  country.  We  see  him  gathered  to  his  fathers.  Let  us  honestly 
frame  his  eulogium. 

I.  He  -was  one  of  nature's  kings.  The  first  king  of  Israel  seems  to  have  been 
chosen  because  of  his  physical,  the  second  because  of  his  moral,  qualifications.  His 
was  a  kingly  soul.  "  Kind  hearts  are  more  than  coronets  " — yes,  and  more  than 
crowns.  Few  nobler  and  greater  men  have  ever  Uved.  Witness  his  magnanimity, 
his  chivalry,  his  loyalty,  his  bravery,  his  tenderness,  his  forgiveness  of  wrongs.  See 
the  records  of  1  Sam.  xvi,  12,  21 ;  xvii,  82—37,  50 ;  xviii.  14— 36  ;  xxii.  23 ;  xxi*. 
5, 22 ;  XXV.  16  ;  xxvi.  9—25  ;  2  Sam,  i.  11—16  ;  ii.  5, 6  ;  iii.  31—39  ;  iv.  9—12 ;  ix.  1 ; 
xvi.  10,  12 ;  xviii.  33 ;  xix.  22.  Such  a  man,  had  he  lived  and  died  among  the 
sheepfolds,  would  have  been  "  king  of  men  for  all  that." 

II.  He  was  one  op  Heaven's  kings.  "  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God." 
All  legitimate  monarchs  reign  de  jure  divino.  But  not  aU  equally  so.  He  was 
expressly  chosen  of  God  (1  Sam.  xvi.  1 ;  Psa.  Ixxxix.  20),  was  taken  from  the  sheep- 
folds  and  firom  perilous  watches  against  the  lion  and  the  bear  to  be  the  viceroy  of 
Heaven.  And  he  proved  himself  a  king  after  God's  own  heart.  He  is  the  standard 
with  which  subsequent  monarchs  are  compared,  and  by  which  they  are  judged. 
(2  Kings  xi.  4,  33 ;  xv.  3—5,  11 ;  2  Kings  xiv.  8,  &o.) 

III.  He  was  faithful  to  the  King  op  kings.  "  He  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  turned  not  aside  from  anything  that  he  commanded 
him  aU  the  days  of  his  life,  save  only,"  &o.  (1  Kings-  xv.  H).  "  His  heart  was  perfect 
■with  the  Lord  his  God"  (1  Kings  xi.  4).  He  kfpt  God's  commandments  and 
statutes  (ver.  34).  He  was  qualified  to  govern  by  having  learnt  to  obey.  He  re- 
quired nothing  from  his  subjects  which  he  did  not  himself  render  to  his  sovereign 
Lord. 

IV.  He  faithfully  executed  the  judgments  of  a  king.  The  powers  that  be 
are  appointed  "  to  execute  wrath  on  him  that  doeth  evU."  The  Churcli  at  her  altar 
prays  "  that  they  may  truly  and  indifferently  minister  justice,  to  the  punishment  of 
•wickedness  and  vice."     "  A  wise  king  scattereth  the  wicked  and  bringeth  the  wheel 

over  them."  "The  execution  of  justice  on  the  guilty  is  essential  even  to  the  exercise 
of  mercy  to  those  whose  safety  depends  on  the  maintenance  of  the  law  "  (Words- 
worth). David  was  never  more  kingly  than  when  he  "  cut  off  all  wicked  doers 
from  the  city  of  the  Lord  "  (Psa.  ci.  8). 

V.  He  was  a  king  to  the  last.  "  David  did  never  so  wisely  and  carefully 
marshal  the  affairs  of  God  as  when  he  was  fixed  to  the  bed  of  his  age  and  death  " 
(Bp.  Hall).  It  is  the  king  speaks  in  this  dying  charge.  It  was  because  he  was 
king,  and  as  snch  owed  obedience  to  the  King  of  kings,  and  owed  protection  and 
the  vindication  of  law  to  his  subjects,  that  he  could  not  pardon  Joab  and  Shimei. 
A  private  person  can  forgive  private  wrongs  ;  a  king  may  not  forgive  public  injuries, 
for  he  may  not  give  away  what  is  not  his  to  give.  It  is  true  the  son  of  David 
prayed  for  the  forgiveness  of  his  murderers.  It  is  true  that  we  are  to  forgive  those 
who  have  wronged  us.  But  we  are  not  to  defeat  the  ends  of  justice,  and  bid  the 
malefactor  go  free.    Nor  wiU  the  Son  of  David  forgive  conscious  and  inveterate 


B2 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  n.  1—11. 


rebelKon.  He  it  is,  the  fount  of  all  mercy,  who  will  say,  "  Those  mine  enemieB, 
who  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over  them,  bring  hither,  and  slay  them  before 
me  "  (Luke  xix.  27). 

VI.  He  sought  and  found  mercy  feom  the  Kino  of  kings.  He  was  not 
perfect,  not  sinless.  "  Save  only  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hittite."  It  is  not 
the  "  fierce  light  that  beats  upon  a  throne  "  discloses  David's  imperfections ;  it  is 
his  own  confessions.  In  Psahn  li.  he  has  himself  recorded  his  sin  and  his  profound 
penitence ;  in  Psahn  xixii.  he  tells  us  of  his  pardon.  The  king  of  Israel  tells  us 
how  the  King  of  Heaven  forgives.  And  here  most  of  aU,  perhaps,  is  he  a  pattern 
for  all  kings,  for  all  men,  to  the  end  of  time.  This  Eikon  BaaiUke  has  many 
goodly  and  noble  features,  but  the  fairest  lineament  of  all  is  the  story  of  his  sin 
and  its  forgiveness  (2  Sam.  -ai.  1-13). 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — ^Holy  Scripture  gives  us  many  a  touching  and  pathetic  description 
of  the  death  of  the  father  of  a  family,  showing  how  it  at  once  sanctions  and  sancti- 
fies natural  affection.  The  farewells  of  David  remind  us  of  those  of  Jacob.  Death 
sometimes  seems  to  fill  the  men  of  God  of  the  old  covenant  with  the  spirit  of 
prophecy,  as  if  the  summit  of  the  earthly  life  was  illiuninated  with  a  purer  radiance 
falling  upon  it  from  a  higher  sphere.  Death  is  indeed  to  all  the  messenger  of  God 
to  reveal  to  us  great  truths ;  it  is  a  great  prophet. 

I.  Death  shows  to  us  where  ends  the  way  of  all  the  eakth  (1  Kings  ii.  2). 
Pascal  says,  "However  brilliant  the  tragedy  may  have  been,  the  end  is  always 
death.    From  every  grave  which  is  dug  comes  a  voice  crying,  Memento  mori." 

II.  Death  teaches  us  to  look  at  ouk  past  existence  as  a  whole,  as  from  a 
height  we  look  down  on  the  plain  below.  It  brings  out  the  great  object  of  life, 
the  essential  truth  too  oft^n  drowned  in  the  busy  hiun  of  the  world.  David 
thinks  no  more  at  this  hour  of  the  glory  or  of  the  pleasures  of  life.  Its  one 
great  end  stands  out  more  clearly  before  liim — to  walk  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord, 
to  keep  His  statutes  and  His  commandments.     This  is  wisdom  and  prudence. 

III.  Death  reminds  the  servants  of  God  that  their  work  does  not 
perish  with  them  ;  that  none  of  them,  not  even  the  greatest,  is  an  indispensable 
instrument  of  the  work ;  that  they  are  only  links  in  the  chain.  Thus  the  torch 
which  is  to  enlighten  the  world  is  passed  from  hand  to  hand. 

IV.  The  inheritance  of  a  holy  work  to  be  carried  on  is  the  best  of 
those  blessings  which,  according  to  God's  promise,  are  to  rest  upon  His  people 
to  the  third  and  fourth  generations  (Exod.  xx.  6).  A  great  responsibUity  rests 
upon  a  Christian  famUy,  and  their  education  ought  to  be  conducted  with  a  view  to 
it.  This  succession  in  piety,  in  Uving  and  acting  faith,  is  more  important  and  more 
real  than  the  succession  by  means  of  official  ordination. 

V.  Every  servant  of  God,  in  his  death,  may  say  with  Jesus  Christ,  "It  is 
expedient  for  you  that  I  GO  AWAY ; "  "  Yb  shall  do  greater  things  than 
THESE."  It  is  weU.  to  know,  when  our  work  is  done,  that  it  will  be  carried  on 
by  another.  With  Solomon,  the  Jewish  theocracy  received  a  new  development, 
such  as  it  had  never  known  in  the  time  of  David.  It  is  well  for  us  to  die,  even  for 
the  sake  of  the  work  of  God,  which  we  are  called  to  accomplish  up  to  a  certain 
pomt,  but  no  further. 

VI.  How  much  better  still  is  it  for  us  to  die,  when  we  look  at  it  in 
the  hght  of  eternity.  "  David  slept  with  his  fathers  (ver.  10),  but  only  like  them 
to  be  earned  home  to  God,  to  rest  in  Abraham's  bosom  "  (Luke  xvi.  22).  For 
ouj-selyes,  we  may  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  To  depart,  and  be  with  Christ  is  far  better" 
(Phil.  1.  18).— E.  DE  P. 

Ver.  2.—"  Show  thyself  a  man."    The  reUgion  of  God  is  the  religi(m  of  man. 
irue  rehgion  is  the  perfecting  of  our  humanity. 
I,  Man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God-    This  is  His  essential  characteristio. 


OH.  n.  1—11.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  38 

The  more  He  reflects  this  image,  the  more  truly  manly  He  is.     The  religion  of 
the  Bible  restores  His  manhood. 

II.  There  is  no  faculty  in  man  which  does  not  find  its  complement  and 
ITS  DEVELOPMENT  IN  GoD.  His  .reason  finds  in  God  alone  the  truth  which  it 
seeks.  His  heart  only  finds  an  object  adequate  to  its  power  of  loving  in  the  God 
who  is  Love.  His  conscience  has  for  its  ideal  and  its  law  the  Divine  holiness. 
"  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect "  (Matt.  v.  48) . 
His  will  derives  its  power  alone  from  God.  1.  The  Son  of  God  was  the  Son  of 
man,  and  realized  the  true  idea  of  humanity  in  His  holy  life.  2.  The  religion  of 
God  honours  and  exalts  man,  even  as  falsehood  and  error  degrade  and  debase  hiiii. 

3.  The  Divine  morality  is  in  profound  harmony  with  true  human  morality,  that 
law  which  is  written  in  the  natural  conscience.    The  petty  religiousness  which  says, 
"Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not"  (Col.  ii.  21),  and  creates  all  sorts  of  artificial 
duties,  is  not  in  accordance  wiQi  true  piety,  the  one  great  commandment  of  which  • 
—love  to  God  and  man — approves  itself  at  once  to  the  gospel  and  to  the  conscience. 

4.  Be  a  man  means,  finally.  Do  thy  duty  hke  a  man.  Be  one  of  the  violent  who 
take  the  kingdom  by  force.  Let  us  be  careful  not  to  effeminate  our  Christianity  by 
a  soft  sentimentahsm.  Let  us  leara  from  the  Son  of  God  to  be  truly  men  "  after 
God's  own  heart."— E.  de  P. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — A  royal  father's  last  words.  David's  eventful  life  is  drawing  to  a 
close.  He  has  proved  himself  to  be  "a  man  after  God's  own  heart."  Not  a 
perfect  man,  for  he  had  giievous  defects.  But,  in  the  main,  he  recognized  the 
grandeur  of  his  position  as  "  the  Lord's  anointed."  He  lived  by  the  inspiraticm 
of  a  Divine  purpose.  He  "  served  his  own  generation  by  the  will  of  God  "  (Acts 
xiii.  36).  His  very  faults  bore  witness  to  the  native  force  of  his  character.  The 
height  of  the  precipice  measures  the  depth  that  frowns  beneath  it.  _  Great  natures 
are  most  capable  of  great  temptations,  great  sorrows,  and  great  sins.  But  now 
great  David  dies,  and  the  sovereignty  of  Israel  must  pass  into  other  hands. 

I.   The   CALMNESS   of  a  good   man  IN   THE     FACE   OF   DEATH.      "  I   gO  the    Way  of 

all  the  earth."  There  is  a  tone  of  quiet  composure  and  satisfaction  in  these  words- 
remarkable  feature  of  the  way  in  which  most  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  con- 
fronted death.  More  than  mere  Oriental  courage,  mere  passive  submission  to  the 
inevitable,— faith  in  the  Unseen  and  Eternal— fortitude  of  a  soul  that  has  found  a 
nobler  inheritance  than  earth  supplies— peaceful  self-surrender  into  the  hands  of 
the  Living  God.  Yet  not  like  the  clear  and  certain  vision  of  Christian  faiili. 
Compare  this,  "  I  go  the  way,"  &c.,  with  St.  Paul's  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,"  &c. 
(2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8).  He  who  has  a  Uving  hold  on  Christ  can  say,  not  merely  "  I  go  tlie 
way  of  all  the  earth,"  but  "  I  go  my  way  to  the  eternal  home  of  the  redeemed." 
"  Absent  from  the  body ;  present  with  the  Lord."  Composure  iu  the  face  of  death 
very  much  a  matter  of  natural  temperament — dependent  on  physical  conditions — 
to  be  distinguished  from  the  higher  triumph  of  faith.  Men  of  faith  sometimes  in 
"  bondage  tlirough  fear  of  death."  Live  much  with  Christ,  and  when  the  fatal  hour 
comes  the  sting  and  the  terror  shall  be  taken  away. 

II.  The  caee  of  a  godly  father  foe  the  well-being  of  his  son.  Often 
in  the  life  of  David  we  see,  through  the  garb  of  his  kingly  character,  the  throblung 
of  the  true  fatherly  heart.  .  The  spirit  of  fatherhood  here  takes  the  form  of  wise  and 
solemn  counsel  befitting  the  time.  Fine  touch  of  nature  in  this.  Tlie  true  father 
desires  that  his  sons  should  be  nobler,  better,  happier  than  himself.  He  lives 
over  again  in  their  life,  and  would  have  them  to  avoid  the  errors  and  evils  into 
which  he  has  fallen.  David's  yearning  for  Solomon  is  at  once  intensified  and 
hallowed  by  the  remembrance  of  his  own  wrong-doing.  "Be  strong  and  sliew 
thyself  a  man."  Solomon's  youth,  gentle  disposition,  heavy  responsibilities,  alike 
demanded  such  counsel.  Supreme  lesson  of  life  for  the  young— the  path  of 
obedience  to  the  Divine  law  is  that  of  safety  and  prosperity.  The  vrisdom  and 
strength  God  gives  will  enable  the  "  little  child"  in  the  noblest  sense  to  "  play  the 
man."  Each  generation  on  a  vantage  ground  as  compared  with  those  that  went 
before  it— children  "  heirs  of  all  the  ages."    Best  legacy  the  fathers  leave  tliem— 

1  kings,  •• 


34  THE  FIEST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  u.  1-11. 


the  gi-eal  principles  of  truth  and  righteousness,  as  iUustrated  by  their  own  living 
history.  Cliart  of  the  ocean  of  life  in  the  children's  hands;  rocks  and  shoals  and 
hidden  currents  traced  by  the  care  and  toil  and  suffering  of  those  who  sailed  before 
them.     Let  them  use  it  wisely  if  they  would  have-a  safe  and  prosperous  voyage. 

III.  The  steadfastness  of  God's  purpose  amid  all  the  changes  of  human 
HISTORY.  David  dies  in  the  faith  that  "the  Lord  will  continue  His  word."  The 
"  everlasting  covenant  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure  "  is  not  fluctuating  and  perish- 
able as  the  things  and  beings  of  earth.  Steadfast  order  of  the  heavenly  bodies 
and  of  the  seasons  a  symbol  of  the  sure  covenant  (Jer.  xxxiii.  20).  The  frailty  of 
man  often  serves  to  deepen  our  impression  of  the  eternity  of  God.  Human  life  a 
tale  soon  told,  but  "  the  couneel  of  the  Lord  standeth  fast,"  &o.  This  is  our  security 
for  the  triumph  of  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  in  the  world,  "  All  flesh  is 
grass,"  &o.  (1  Peter  i.  24).  Man  dies,  but  God  lives ;  and  the  hope  that  stays  itself 
upon  His  word  can  never  be  put  to  shame. 

IV.  The  conditional  nature  of  Divine  promises.  "  If  thy  children  take  heed," 
&o.  All  Divine  promises  are  thus  conditional.  Faith  and  practical  submission 
needed  to  place  us  in  the  Une  of  their  fulfilment.  God  "  continues  His  word  "  to 
those  who  continue  in  His  ways.  The  proudses  are  "Yea  and  amen"  in  Christ. 
Be  "  in  Him  "  if  you  would  realize  them. — W. 

Vers.  2,  8.  —  A  charge  from  a  dying  king.  The  utterances  of  dying  men 
natiirally  Lave  weight.  Those  who  stand  on  the  border  line  between  time  and 
eternity  have  less  temptation  to  disguise  the  truth,  and  are  more  likely  than  others 
to  see  things  in  their  true  relations.  When  those  who  speak  to  us  thence  are  men 
who  have  long  loved  us,  and  who  have  ever  proved  worthy  of  our  love,  we  must  be 
callous  indeed  if  their  words  are  powerless.  Exemplify  by  the  mention  of  any 
whose  whole  future  destiny  turned  upon  the  wish  and  the  counsel  of  a  dying  father 
or  friend.  David's  counsel  to  Solomon  had  this  double  value.  He  spoke  as  a 
dying  man,  and  as  a  wise  and  loving  father.  Happy  would  it  have  been  for  the 
son  had  this  counsel  always  been  the  law  of  his  life.  1.  The  anxiety  of  David  for 
the  moral  and  spiritual  welfare  of  his  son.  Some  parents  deem  their  duty  done 
if  they  see  their  sons  and  daughters  fairly  "settled  in  life,"  without  much  consider- 
ation for  character.  David  cared  first  for  character,  and  next  for  circumstances. 
He  believed  that  if  the  heart  were  right  with  God,  things  would  of  themselves  go 
right  with  men.  2.  The  willingness  of  Solomon  to  receive  suoh  counsels.  How 
different  was  his  spirit  from  that  of  Adonijah  (1  Kings  i  6).  Though  young,  high- 
spirited,  of  princely  rank,  and  already  anointed  king,  he  bows  to  hsten  to  his  aged 
father.  Lessons  of  reverence  for  age,  and  respect  to  parents,  to  be  drawn  from  this. 
In  his  charge  to  Solomon,  David  inculcates — 

I.  The  importance  of  complete  obedience  to  God.  He  had  seen  the  terrible 
effects  of  partial  obedience  in  Saul,  his  own  predecessor.  (Illustrate  from  Saul's  hfe.) 
1.  This  implies  the  recognition  of  God  as  King.  He  is  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords,  and  even  princely  Solomon  was  to  remember  that  he  had  a  Master 
in  heaven.  This  would  be  not  only  for  his  own  good,  but  for  the  welfare  of  his 
kmgdom.  The  tyrannies,  the  exactions,  the  cruelties  of  an  ordinary  Eastern  despot 
would  be  impossible  to  one  who  habitually  acknowledged  that  he  was  responsible 
to  God,  and  that  wrongs  which  no  human  court  could  avenge  would  receive  just 
retribution  from  "the  Judge  of  aU  the  earth."  The  wishes  of  his  dying  father 
might  somewhat  restrain  him,  but  these  could  not  have  the  abiding  power  of  the 
law  of  the  ever-Hving  and  ever-present  God.  What  safety  belongs  to  him  who,  Uke 
Joseph,  says  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and 
Bin  against  God  1 "  That  thought  may  be  ours  in  the  darkness  as  well  as  in  the 
light,  amid  strtagers  as  well  as  m  the  precincts  of  home.  To  the  lad  setting  out 
trom  his  fathers  house,  to  the  man  undertaking  new  responsibihties,  the  metBige 
comes,  "Keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in  His  ways."  2.  Thit 
involves  thoroughness  in  obedience.  David  uses  no  vain  repetitions  when  he  speaks 
ot  statutes,  commandments,  judgments,  and  testhnonies."  The  whoU  law^  not 
a  part  of  it  only,  was  to  be  remembered.    We  are  aU  tempted  to  partial  obedienw. 


OH.  u.  1-11.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS,  80 

It  is  easy,  natural,  profitable  to  obey  some  commands.  Disobedience  will  bring 
disease,  or  siiame,  or  loss  of  reputation,  and,  fearing  such  penalties,  some  refrain 
from  transgression.  But  there  are  other  laws  of  God,  obedience  to  which  brings 
dishonour  rather  than  glory,  impoverishment  and  not  advantage ;  and  these  also 
are  to  be  obeyed  if  we  would  "  walk  before  God  in  truth,  with  aU  our  heart." 
Again  there  are  some  precepts  which  seem  of  trifling  value,  and  we  are  tempted  to 
say  we  need  not  be  too  precise.  But  we  forget  that  God's  laws,  even  the  least  of 
them,  are  terribly  precise.  Science  is  proving  this  in  every  department  of  nature. 
The  tide,  for  example,  will  not  stop  short  a  foot  in  space,  nor  a  moment  in  time,  to 
save  the  life  of  the  helpless  man  penned  in  between  the  rocks.  And  are  moral  laws 
less  inexorable  ?  Besides,  the  crucial  test  of  obedience  is  found  in  relation  to  Utile 
things.  If  youj?  child  obeys  your  important  command,  because  he  sees  its  import- 
ance, you  are  glad ;  but  you  are  much  more  pleased  when  he  doea  something  you 
told  him  to  do,  merely  because  you  wished  it,  for  this  is  a  higher  proof  of  genuine 
obedience  than  that. 

II.  The  necessity  op  personal  ebsoldtion.  "  Be  thou  strong,  therefore,  and 
show  thyself  a  man."  This  sounds  like  an  echo  of  God's  own  words  to  Joshua  (i.  7). 
The  occasions  top  were  similar.  Joshua  was  entering  on  his  leadership,  and 
Solomon  was  on  the  steps,  of  his  throne.  David  would  evoke  the  manly  rusolution 
of  his  son.  There  was  the  more  necessity  for  this,  because  his  honoured  and  heroic 
father  could  no  longer  stand  beside  him.  One  of  God's  reasons  for  taking  away 
our  parents  by  death  is  to  develope  and  strengthen  our  character.  When  the 
saplings  grow  under  the  shelter  of  the  parent  tree,  they  are  weakly  ;  but  when  the 
giant  of  the  forest  falls,  and  the  winds  of  heaven  begin  to  buffet  those  which  have 
had  its  protection,  their  strength  becomes  greater,  and  their  roots  strike  deeper. 
"  Show  thyself  a  man,"  says  David  to  Solomon.  Some  suppose  th«y  show  their 
manhood  by  aping  the  airs  of  the  elders  (smoking,  ewcaiiiig,  &c.)  But  in  David's 
sense,  to  show  yourself  a  man  is  to  prove  yom-self  wise,  valorous,  virtuous,  and 
above  all,  loyal  of  heart  to  God.  This  exhortation  then  implies  the  manifestation  of 
moral  com-age  and  strength.  These  are  required  in  order  to  the  obedience  we  have 
described,  for  such  obedience  implies  struggle.  1.  There  is  conflict  with  self .  We 
have  to  check  the  uprising  of  passion,  to  fight  against  the  pride  which  -vyould  make 
us  refuse  to  submit  to  the  revelation,  and  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  &c.  2.  There 
is  resistance  to  the  evil  influences  of  others.  When  Solomon  was  misled  by  his 
wives,  and  began  to  worship  their  gods,  he  was  forgetting  the  command,  "  Be 
strong  and  show  thyself  a  man."  Point  out  the  necessity  for  moral  courage,  and 
for  the  renewal  of  strength,  by  waiting  on  God,  to  those  surrounded  by  evil  associates. 
S.  There  is  antagonism  ta  popular  customs.  In  school,  in  business,  in  national 
policy,  in  church  routine,  it  is  easier  to  float  with  the  stream  than  to  contend 
agfiinst  it.  He  must  needs  "  be  strong,  and  show  himself  a  man,"  who  would  say, 
"  We  must  obey  God  rather  tlian  man ! "  Show  where  Solomon  found  this 
strength,  and  where  he  lost  it.  Give  examples  of  both  from  sacred  history.  E.g., 
the  discipies  were  cowards  when  Christ  Was  away,  but  they  became  heroes  when  the 
promise  was  fulfilled  at  Pentecost:  "They  were  endued  with  power  from  on  high." 

III.  The  assurance  of  resulting  blessedness,  '^  That  thou  mayest  prosper," 
Ac.  As  an  historical  fact,  this  promise  was  fulfilled.  The  kingdom  of  Solomon 
prospered  as  long  as  he  was  faithful  to  the  God  of  his  father.  His  apostasy  sowed 
the  seeds  of  its  decay.  God's  promises  are  contingent,  not  absolute.  They  have 
attached  to  them  implied  conditions.  This,  which  was  shown  in  material  blessings 
under  the  covenant  of  the  old  economy,  is  abidingly  true.  It  is  not  that  man  merits 
■the  blessings  of  God  by  his  obedience,  but  that  he  unfits  himself  to  receive  them  by 
disobedience.  This  is  yet  more  clearly  seen  under  the  light  of  the  new  dispensation, 
God  gives  a  man  that  which  he  is  fit  for,  on  earth  and  in  heaven.  In  and  tlnrough 
Jesus  Christ  He  has  broadened  our  views  of  recompense.  Beyond  death  the 
fulfilment  of  this  promise  extends,  and  he  who  is  faithful  with  the  few  things  shall 
be  at  last  a  ruler  over  many.  In  a  spirit  of  humble  obedience  and  prayerful 
dependence,  let  us  seek  to  keep  the  charge  and  win  the  blessednesi  revealed  in 
these  dying  words  of  the  sweet  Singer  of  Israel. — A.  B. 


M 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  u.  12— 2S. 


ADONIJAH'S  INTKIGUB 
EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTEE  n.  12— 2S. 

Yer.  12. — ^And  Solomon  sate  on  tbe  throne 
of  David  Ills  father,  and  his  Idngdom  [i.e., 
dominion,  sway]  was  established  greatly. 
[Cf.  2  Chron.  i.  1,  2.  This  verse  serves  as 
a  kind  of  heading  or  introduction  to  the 
rest  of  the  chapter.  It  was  principaljy  by 
the  removal  of  rivals  and  disaffected  persons 
that  his  sway  was  established. 

Yer.  13. — And  Adonljah,  the  son  of  Hag- 
glth,  came  to  Bathsheha,  the  mother  of  Solo- 
mon. \TheJJXJi..a,ddSKal'jrpo<reKvvrj(jev  avry, 
but  the  words  are  probably  inserted  from  ver. 
19.  The  historian  now  relates  the  plot  of 
Adonijah  and  its  defeat.  Foiled  in  his  pur- 
pose to  mount  the  throne  by  direct  means, 
Adonijah  and  his  advisers  Imve  recourse  to 
intrigue  and  subtlety.  By  the  aid  of  Abishag, 
he  hopes  to  accomplish  what  his  chariots 
and  horsemen  (ch.  i.  5)  had  failed  to  efiect. 
And  he  first  addresses  himself  to  the  queen 
mother  ("Aggreditur  mulierem,  ut  regnandi 
ignaram  ita  amoribus  facilem."  Grotius). 
The  position  of  the  queen  dowager  in  the 
Hebrew  kingdom  was  an  influential  one; 
not  unlike  that  of  the  Yalidg  sultana 
amongst  the  Ottomans.  Hence  the  con- 
stant mention  of  each  king's  mother  (1 
Kings  xiv.  31 ;  xv.  10,  where  notice  ver. 
13;  2  Kings  xi.  1;  xii.  1;  xiv.  2;  xv.  2, 
&c. ;  hence,  too,  the  part  which  such  • 
queen  mother  as  Athaliah  found  it  pos- 
■ible  to  take.  This  pre-eminence  was  a 
natural  result  of  the  polygamy  of  Eastern 
■overeigns  (and  the  consequent  intrigues  of 
the  harem),  coupled  with  the  high  estima- 
tion in  which  the  mother  was  held  in  the 
East.]  And  she  said,  Comest  thou  peace- 
ably. [Heb.  Is  it  peace  thy  coming  f  Bath- 
aheba  was  evidently  surprised  by  his  visit. 
Owing  to  the  part  he  had  taken  against  her 
son,  there  would  naturally  have  been  but 
few  dealings,  if  not  positive  alienation, 
between  them.  Her  first  thought,  conse- 
quently, is,  "  What  can  this  coming  mean  ?" 
The  prominence  of  the  idea  of  peace  in  aU 
Eastern  salutations  has  often  been  noticed. 
Cf .  1  Sam.  xvi.  4 ;  2  Kings  ix.  22 ;  iv.  26  ; 
V.  21 ;  Lukex.  5 ;  Johuxx.  19—21,  Ac]  And 
ke  said.  Peaceably  [Heb.  peace."] 

Ver.  14. — He  said  moreover  [Heb.  And 
he  said]  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto 
thee  [lit.,  "  a  word  to  me  (of.  est  mihi)  for 
thee."  This  expression  throws  some  light 
en  the  New  Testament  phrase,  W  iiioi  Kai 
•01,  John  ii  4,  &c.]     And  she  said.  Say  on. 

Ver.  16. — And  he  said.  Thou  knowest  that 


the  ]dne:dom  was  mine  [tehon  to  gut  wi 
mein  (Bahr).  Adonijah  evidently  mad 
much  of  the  tight  of  primogeniture  (cf.  ver, 
22),  which  was  not  unrecognized  among 
the  Jews.  There  is  possibly  in  these  wor? 
too,  a  hint  at  the  p^  Bathsheba  had  tak 
in  defeating  his  claims]  and  that  all  Isra 
set  their  tkces  [i.e.,  eyes]  upon  me  that 
should  reign  [Heb.  upon  me  all  Israel  set, 
&B.  The  "  me  "  is  emphatic  by  its  position. 
So  is  the  "  mine  "  just  before  used.  Several 
commentators  remark  that  Adonijah'a  words 
were  not  strictly  true.  But  we  hardly  expect 
to  find  truth  on  such  an  occasion.  Adonijali 
was  adroit  and  diplomatic,  and  puts  the  case 
as  it  best  serves  his  purpose.  In  order  to 
propitiate  Bathsheba,  he  exaggerates  his 
loss  and  disappointment,  just  as  in  the  next 
words,  in  order  to  put  her  ofi  her  guard,  he 
plays  the  saint  and  obtrudes  his  piety  and 
resignation]:  howbelt  [lit.,  and]  the  king- 
dom is  turned  about  and  Is  become  my 
brother's,  for  it  was  his  from  the  Lord. 
[This  verse  shows  pretty  clearly  that  Adoni- 
jah had  not  renounced  his  pretensions  to 
the  throne.  Despite  the  pitiful  failure  of 
his  first  conspiracy,  and  notwithstanding 
Solomon's  generous  condonation  of  his 
treason,  he  cannot  forget  that  he  was,  and 
is,  the  eldest  Burviving  son,  and  had  been 
very  near  the  throne.  And  as  to  the  king- 
dom being  his  brother's  by  Divine  appoint- 
ment, he  cannot  have  been  ignorant  of  that 
long  ago  (2  Sam.  xii.  25),  yet  he  conspired  aU 
the  same.  And  it  is  not  difficult  to  read 
here  between  4he  lines,  that  he  has  not  re- 
linquished his  hopes,  and  does  not  acqui- 
esce in  Solomon's  supremacy.] 

Ver.  16.— And  now  I  ask  one  petition  of 
thee  [Heb.  request  one  request]  deny  me  not 
[marg.,  "  turn  not  away  my  face."  Better, 
Turn  not  back,  i.e.,  repulse  not.  EawHnsuu 
paraphrases,  "  Make  me  not  to  hide  my 
face  through  shame  at  being  refused ; "  but 
this  is  not  the  idea  of  the  original,  which 
means.  Reject  me  not ;  send  me  not  away. 
In  the  Heb.  "  face"  often  stands  for  "per- 
son," for  eyes  (ver.  15),  looks,  mienl.  And 
she  said  unto  Mm,  gay  on. 

Ver.  17.— And  he  said.  Speak,  I  pray  thee, 
unto  Solomon  the  king ;  for  he  will  not  say 
thee  nay,  [will  not  repulse  thee.  Same  words 
as  ver.  16.  There  is  a  spice  of  flattery  in 
these  words.  He  now  exaggerates  her  in- 
fluence with  the  king]  that  he  may  give  me 
Abishag  the  Shunammlte  to  wife.  [We  are 
hardly  justified  in  concluding,  as  some  com- 
mentators have  done,  that  love  had  nothing 


OH.  n.  12—26.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


87 


to  do  with  this  request.  It  is  not  improb- 
able, on  the  coutrary ,  tbat  a  passioD  tor  the 
beautiful  Sbunamnite,  perhaps  th^  iairost 
woman  of  her  time,  may  have  first  given  a 
powerful  impulse  to  Adouljah's  ambition 
(see  on  ch.  i.  5).  At  the  same  time,  he  must 
bave  had  ulterior  motives  (see  on  ver.  22). 

Ver.  18.  —  And  Bathsheba  said,  Well 
[there  is  no  reason  why  the  strict  render- 
ing "good,"  should  not  be  preserved  here. 
The  A.V.  follows  the  LXX.  koKHc-  Similarly 
Luther,  wohl ;  but  Bahr,  gut'\ ,  I  wHl  speak 
for  thee  [LXX.  irfpi  irou]  unto  the  Mng. 

Ver.  19. — Bathsbeba  tberefore  [lit.,  Atid 
Bathsheba]  went  unto  Mng  [Heb.  the  king] 
Solomon,  to  speak  unto  blm  for  Adouljab. 
And  the  king  rose  up  to  meet  her,  and  bowed 
blmseU  unto  her,  [the  LXX.  reads,  "  and 
kissed"  her  (icat '<care^l^))(Tel'  aiirfiv).     There 
is  not  necessarily  a  pregnant  construction,  as 
Keii  insists;  "rose  up  and  went  down  to 
meet  her."     We  get  here  a  glimpse  of  the 
siiiteliness   of    Solomon's    court]    and  sat 
down  on  his  throne,    and  caused  a  seat 
[lit.,  throne,  same  word]  to  be  set  [most 
probdblj  the  servants  of  Solomon  placed 
the  seat  for  the  queen  mother,  as  the  LXX. 
(triei)  QpovOQ)  and  most  translators.     The 
reception  was  clearly  a  public  one,  if  the  in- 
terview was  private.     But  the  original  is 
simply,  "  and  he  set,"  &c.,  suggesting  that 
Solomon  may  have  done  it,  as  a  mark  of 
respect,  with  his  own  hands.  He  "  received 
liis  mother  as  HTJ?  "  (cb.  xv.  13).    Bahr] 
for  the  mother  of  the  king,  and  she  sat  on 
bis  right  hand.     [The  place  of  honour.  Cf. 
Psa.   ex.  1  ;   Matt.  xx.  21 ;  xxv.  33  ;  Acts 
vii.  56 ;  Eom.  viii.  34 ;  Heb.  i.  3 ;  viii.  1, 
&a.  It  was  also  the  place  of  honour  amongst 
Aiixbians  (Keil),  Greeks,  and  Eomans,   as 
the  veiy  names  evitivvfiai; — an  euphemism  for 
afiKTrtpoe — and  sinistra,  show. 

Ver.  20.— Then  she  said,  I  desire  one  small 
petition  of  thee,  [do  it  seemed,  no  doubt, 
to  her,  in  her  inexperience  and  ignorance  of 
Ailimij  ib's  real  motives.  She  thought  she 
hjld  the  threads  of  a  love  story  in  her  bands, 
and  that  it  would  be  a  small  thiug  for 
Solomon  to  make  these  handsome  lovers 
happy] :  I  pray  thee,  say  me  not  nay.  And 
the  king  said  unto  her,  Ask  on,  my  mother: 
for  I  wiU  not  say  thee  nay.  [The  readiness 
of  the  king  to  grant  whatever  she  asked  proves 
that  the  reasons  which  induced  him  to  deny 
her  request  must  have  been  weighty  ;  i.e., 
Adonijah's  suit  cannot  have  been  devoid  of 
poUtical  oonsequences. 

Ver.  21.— And  she  said,  tet  Ablshag  the 
Shunammlte  be  given  to  Adonijah  thy 
brother  to  wife.  [For  the  construction  (HK 
with  a  nominative,  or,  as  some  think,  JH; 
osed  impersonally  —  man    gebe),   cf.    Gen. 


xxvii.  42 ;  Exod.  x.  8 ;  and  especially  Num. 
xxxii.  5  ;  and  see  Geseu.,  Lex.  s.  v.  n{$  and 
Ewald,  Syntax,  295  b.] 

Ver.  22. — And  king  Solomon  answered  and 
said  unto  his  mother.  And  why  dost  thou 
ask  Ablshag  the  Shunammlte  for  Adonijah  7 
[Professor  Plumptre  (Diet.  Bib.,  art.  "  Solo- 
mon ")  says  this  "  narrative  is  not  a  Uttle 
perplexing."  He  then  specially  remarks  on 
the  strangeness  of  Bathsbeba's  interceding 
for  Adoaiiah,  and  also  on  Solomon's  "  flash- 
ing into  fiercest  wrath  "  at  her  request.  He 
explains  the  facts,  however,  by  "  Mr.  Grove's 
ingenious  theory  identifying  Ablshag  with 
the  Shulamite  (Cant.  vi.  13),  the  heroine  of 
the  Song  of  Songs."     It  is  "  the  passion- 
ate love  of  Solomon  for  '  the  fairest  among 
women '  that  has  made  Bathsheba,  "  hither- 
to supreme,  to  fear  a  rival  influence,  and  to 
join  in  any  scheme  for  its  removal."    The 
king's    vehement    abruptness    is   in    like 
manner  accounted  for.     He  sees  in  the  re- 
quest at  once  an  attempt  to  deprive  him  of 
the  woman  he  loves  and  a  plot  to  keep  him 
still  in  the  tutelage  of  childhood.     Of  the 
ingenuity  of  this  theory  no  one  can  doubt, 
nor  yet  that  it  may  possibly  represent  the 
actual  facts.    But  it  is  not  necessary,  nor 
does  it  help  much  to  the  explanation  of  the 
narrative.     Bathsbeba's  intervention  may 
easily  be  accounted  for  by  (1)  her  desire  to 
conciliate  her  son's  most  formidable  rival; 
(2)  her  feminine  interest  in  a  love  match ; 
and  (3)  her  pride,  which  could  not  but  be 
flattered,  on  being  assured  that  her  influence 
with  t)ie  king  was  so  great.     Nor  is  it  any 
more  difficult  to  assign  a  reason  for  Solo- 
mon's sudden  outburst  of  anger.     This  re- 
quest is  evidence  to  him  of  a  fresh  plot 
against  his  throne,  a  plot  so  skilfully  laid 
that  its  abettors  have  been  able  to  deceive 
his  own  mother,  and  bave  made  ber  a  tool 
for  its  advancement.     Surely  this  is  quite 
enough  to  account  for  Solomon's  indigna- 
tion.    And  the  theory  of  a  love  story  has 
this  disadvantage,  that  the  young  king  com- 
pletely ignores  it  in  what  follows,  all  his 
concern  being  about  the  kingdom,  and  not 
one  word  being  said  about  the  woman ;  and 
again — and  this  is  almost  fatal — his  mention 
of  Joab  and  Abiathar,  and  his  subsequent 
dealings  with  them,  prove  conclusively  tbat 
he  suspected  a  conspiracy  against  his  crown, 
not  a  scheme,  in  which  these  latter  could 
have  had  no  interest,  and  therefore  no  part, 
to  rob  him  of  a  mistress]  ask  for  him  the 
kingdom  also  [Heb.  and  ask  for  him  — and 
(you  will  next)  ask  for  him ;  or.  Aye,  ask 
for  him,  &e.     It   was  quite  natural  that 
Solomon  should  see  in  Adonijah's  suit  for 
Abisbag  an  indirect,  but  none  the  less  real 
or  dangerous,  attempt  to  compass  his  own 
downfall.    For  it  was  one  of  the  customs  oi 


38 


THE  FlBaT  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  II.  12-  li&, 


Oriental  monarchies  that  the  harem  of  a 
sovereign  descended  to  his  successor.  Thus 
the  impostor  Smerdis  took  possesRion  of  the 
liarem  ol  Cambyses  (Herod,  iii.  68),  while 
Darius  in  turn  liad  some  of  the  wives  of 
Smerdis  (iii.  88).  And  what  is  much  more 
to  the  point,  a  similar  custom  obtained 
amougst  tlie  Jews.  David,  for  example, 
succeeded  to  the  wives,  along  with  the  king- 
dom, of  Saul  (2  Sam.  xii.  8).  And  we  see 
from  the  case  of  Abner  and  Eizpah  (Ibid. 
iii.  8),  and  still  more  from  that  of  Absd,lom 
(ch.  zvi.  23),  that  to  "  take  possession  of 
the  harem  was  the  most  decided  act  of 
sovereignty"  (Lord  A.  Hervey,  Speak.  Com. 
on  2  Sam.  xvi.  21).  Now  all  these  instances 
were  of  too  recent  a  date,  and  had  attracted 
far  too  much  attention  at  the  time,  to  have 
made  it  pes  iible  for  them  to  have  escaped 
either  Solomon's  or  Adonijah's  observation. 
They  manifest  "  such  a  close  connection  in 
pubUo  opinion  between  the  title  to  the 
crown  and  the  possession  of  ttie  deceased 
monarch's  wives,  that  to  have  granted  Ado- 
nijah's request  would  have  been  the  strongest 
encouragement  to  his  pretensions  "  (Bawlin- 
son  in  loco).  It  may  be  said  that  Abishag 
had  not  really  been  the  concubine  of  David 
(oh.  i  4),  which  is  true,  and  which  explains 
what  vonld  otherwise  have  been  the  aston- 
ishing impiety  of  Adonijah  (Lev.  xviii.  8, 
XX.  11 ;  of.  1  Cor.  v.  1),  and  the  wonderful 
complaisance  of  Bathsheba.  There  is  no 
warrant  for  charging  Adonijah  (as  is  done 
by  k  Lapide,  Wordsworth,  al.)  with  defy- 
ing the  Divine  law  and  seeking  an  inces- 
tuous alliance,  for  the  historian  is  careful 
to  represent  Abishag  as  David's  attendant, 
and  not  as  his  wife.  But  it  is  hardly  prob- 
able that  the  nation  at  large  knew  this. 
People  generally  could  only  suppose  that 
this  fair  young  gu:l,  chosen  out  of  all  the 
thousands  of  Israel  because  of  her  beauty, 
had  become  to  all  intents  and  purposes  one 
of  the  royal  seraglio.  It  is  almost  a  cer- 
tainty, therefore,  that  Adonijah's  request 
concealed  a  plot  for  using  Abishag  as  a 
stepping-stone  to  the  throne,  and  Solomon 
certainly  is  not  to  be  blamed  it  he  inter- 
preted it  by  the  hght  of  contemporaneous 
history,  and  by  the  usages  of  his  time  and 
country.  He  knew  that  his  brother  had 
made  one  deliberate  effort  to  supplant  him, 
and  therefore  he  could  only  conclude  tliat 
this  was  a  sncond,  though  veilel,  attempt 
.to  deprive  bim  of  his  kingdom];  even  for 
Mm,  and  for  Ablathar  the  priest,  and  for 
Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah.  [ice  LXX.  and 
other  translators  appear  to  have  had  a 
slightly  different  text  before  them.  TheLXX. 
renders,  xai  airif  'A^iadap  ml  avn^  'Iwr)/3, 
r.  r.  X;  the  Vulgate,  "ct  )iubH  Ahiathar," 
&o.     The  Chald.   paraplirases,   "nonne  i» 


contilio  fuerunt  ille  et  Ahiathar"  &o.  Keil 
well  remarks  that  "the  repetition  of  I7 
answers  entirely  to  the  emotional  character 
of  the  words."  We  can  hardly  believe, 
however,  that  in  these  conversations  we 
have  the  ipnKSima  verba  of  the  speakers 
If  so,  how  were  they  preserved  and  handed 
down  to  the  author?  Even  a  "  couit  scribe" 
would  hardly  catch  every  turn  of  expression. 
And  possibly  this  interview  with  Bathsheba 
was  private.  It  would  almost  seem,  from 
the  immediate  mention  of  Joab  and  Abia- 
thar,  as  if  Solomon  had  received  some  prior 
intimation  of  this  second  conspiracy.  Pos- 
sibly his  renarkable  penetration  had  di- 
vined that  mischief  was  brewing  from  the 
bearing  of  the  three,  who  no  doubt  would 
be  narrowly  watched.  Or  he  may  havp 
heard  of  frequent  meetings  on  their  part. 
Anyhow,  Adonijah's  suit  is  to  him  conclu- 
sive proof  of  a  plot]. 

Ver.  23. — Then  king  Solomon  sware  liy 
the  Lord,  saying-,  God  do  so  to  me,  and  more 
also  [a  common  f.jim  of  adjuration  (Buth 
i.  17  ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  44  ;  xx.  13;  2  Sam.  iii.  9; 
xix.  13,  &c.)  =  Gott  soil  mich  fort  und  fort 
strafen.  Biihr] ,  If  [or  "  that."  '3  constantly 
follows  formulas  of  swearing,  as  in  all  the 
passages  just  cited.  Cf.  the  use  of  Sri  in 
New  Testament.  The  order  of  the  next 
words  in  the  Hebrew  is  noticeable]  against 
his  life  spake  Adonijah  this  word.  ['(B'S33» 
"  at  the  peril  or  cost  of  his  life."  Cf.  2  Sam. 
xxiii.  17;  Josh,  xxiii.  11.] 

Ver.  24.— Now  therefore [Ileb .  and  now], 
as  the  Lord  liveth,  which  hath  estabUshed 
me,  and  set  me  [a  '  has  here  crept  into 
the  text ;  obviously  owing  to  the  fact  that 
tbis  same  letter  both  precedes  and  follows] 
on  the  throne  of  David  my  father,  and  who 
hath  made  me  an  house  [Keil  and  Words- 
worth understand  by  this  expression,  "  hatb 
given  me  issue."  "Solomon,"  says  Keil, 
"had  already  one  son,  viz.,  Eehoboaiu, about 
a  year  old  (comp.  xi.  42  with  xiv.  21,  and  2 
Chron.  xii.  13)."  But  some  doubt  seems  t» 
attach  to  the  "forty  and  one  years"  men- 
tioned as  the  figH  of  Rehoboam  at  his  acces- 
sion. Biibr  sa;  s  Solomnu's  "  marriage  did 
not  occur  till  afterwards  (iii.  1).  And  we 
find  from  1  Kings  xi  ,S8;  2  Sam.  vii.  11,27, 
that  to  '  make,'  or  '  build  an  house,'  means 
to  found  a  lasting  dynasty"] ,  as  be  promised 
[Heb.  spake,  i.e  ,  at  2  Sam.  vii.  11—131, 
Adonijah  shall  be  put  to  death  this  day. 

Ver.  25. — And  King  Solomon  sent  by  the 
hand  [i.e.,  the  instrumentality;  not  neces- 
sarily eigcnhfindig,  as  Thenius.  Cf.  Exod. 
iv.  13  ;  1  Sam.  xvi.  20,  Heb. ;  1  Kings  xii.  15 ; 
xiv.  18 ;  Jer.  xxxvii. 2  ("which he  spake  bi/  the 
/i"7j.f  of  Jeremiah  "),&c.  The  same  expression 
IS  found  iii  ver.  46  of  this  chapter!.  Of  Beaaiab 


CH.  II.  12—25.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


89 


[in  the  East  the  captain  of  the  king's  body- 
guard has  always  been  the  "chief  of  the 
executioners,"  the  title  given  to  Potiphar, 
Gen.  xxxvii.  36,  Heb. ;  in  2  Kings  xxv.  8  to 
Nebuzai-Adan ;  and  in  Dan.  ii.  14  to 
Arioch  "  the  captain  of  the  king's  guard, 
which  was  gone  forth  to  slay  the  wise  men, 
&c.]  and  he  fell  upon  him  so  that  he  died. 
[Solomon  has  been  accused  of  "  a  cold- 
blooded vengeance  "  and  of  "  that  jealous 
cruelty  so  common  in  Oriental  despots,"  in 
ordering  the  execution  of  his  brother.  But 
unjustly.  It  is  to  be  remembered  tbat  on 
the  occasion  of  Adonijah's  first  rebellion  the 
young  monarch  had  displayed  the  greatest 
magnanimity  towards  him.  He  might  then 
have  justly  decreed  against  him  the  death 
which  no  doubt  the  conspirators  had  de- 
signed against  him  (1  Kings i.  12.)  Adonijah, 
by  fleeing  to  the  altar,  showed  that  he  had 
good  grounds  for  fearing  the  avenging 
sword.  He  was  clearly  conscious  that  he 
had  merited  the  death  of  the  traitor.  But 
Solomon  spared  him,  during  good  behaviour. 
He  warned  him  tbat  "  if  wickedness  were 


found  in  him  "  be  should  die  (1  Kings  i.  52.) 
His  first  treason,  consequently,  was  not  to 
be  lost  sight  of,  in  case  he  were  guilty  of  a 
fresh  offence.  And  now  that  he  is  found 
conspiring  again;  now  that  he  abuses  the 
royal  clemency,  and  seeks  by  chicanery  and 
intrigue  to  snatch  his  brother's  crown,  the 
sentence  of  death  takes  effect.  This 
renewed  attempt,  after  failure  and  forgive- 
ness, must  have  convinced  the-  king  that 
Adonijah's  pretensions  would  be  a  standing 
menace  to  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  his 
empire,  and  therefore  he  owed  it  to  himself, 
to  his  subjects,  and  above  all  to  God,  who 
had  entrusted  him  with  the  crown,  to  put 
this  restless  and  dangerous  plotter  out  of 
the  way.  To  pass  over  a  second  offenc* 
would  be  a  virtual  encouragement  of  sedition, 
for  it  woald  show  that  the  king  was  weak 
and  might  be  trifled  with.  Adonijah  there- 
fore must  die,  not  only  in  expiation  of  his 
treason,  but  as  an  example  to  the  subjects 
of  Solomon,  that  the  disaffected,  including 
all  Adonijah's  partizaiis,  might  be  awed  into 
obedience. 


H0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  22—25. — The  Brothers.  It  may  be  instructive  if,  after  the  manner  of 
ancient  writers,  we  draw  out  a  comparison  between  the  two  brothers  whose  histery 
is  recorded  in  part  in  this  section,  and  who  here  appear  as  rivals.  Their  careers 
were  very  different.  The  one  reigned  with  almost  unparalleled  magnificence  for  forty 
years;  the  other  fell  in  the  very  May-morn  of  his  life  by  the  sword  of  the  execu- 
tioner. What  were  the  causes  which  produced  such  different  results  ?  Let  ui 
consider  some  few  of  them. 

I.  Adonijah  was  endued  with  beauty,  Solomon  with  wisdom.  The  first  had 
goodliness ;  the  second  goodness.  Men  admired  Adonijah ;  the  Lord  loved  Solomon 
(2  Sam.  xii.  24).  To  the  elder  brother  the  AUwise  Providence  allotted  t'.;e  gifts  of 
face  and  form — exterior  advantages — to  the  latter  He  gave  "  wisdom  and  tindsr- 
standing  exceeding  much,  and  largeness  of  heart " — the  quiet,  unobtrusive  ador«- 
ment  of  the  spirit.    Wisdom  is  better  than  rubies ;  yes,  and  better  than  beauties. 

II.  Adonijah  was  ambitious;  Solomon  was  pious.  The  first  loved  self,  and 
sought  his  own  advancement.  The  second  "  loved  the  Lord  "  (1  Kings  iii.  b).  The 
first,  by  his  own  showing,  resisted  and  defied  the  will  of  Heaven  (1  Kings  ii.  15) ; 
the  latter  "  walked  in  the  statutes  of  David  his  father."  Adonijah  desired  riches, 
honours,  the  life  of  his  enemies ;  Solomon  asked  for  none  of  these  things,  but  for 
an  imderstanding  heart  (chap.  iii.  9, 11).  Their  lives  consequently  were  regulated 
on  totally  different  principles.  The  first  acted  as  if  he  were  master  (chap.  i.  &) ;  the 
second  remembered  he  was  but  a  servant  (ver.  9).  And  Adonijah  lost  everything, 
even  his  life,  while  Solomon  gained  everything — the  wisdom  for  which  he  asked ; 
the  "  richest  honour  "  for  which  he  did  not  ask.  Verily  "  godliness  is  profitable 
unto  all  things  (1  Tim.  iv.  8). 

III.  Adonijah  sought  to  force  events  ;  Solomon  waited  patiently  for  the 
Lord.  Adonijah  would  not  wait  tUl  his  father  was  dead;  he  would  snatch  the 
sceptre  from  the  old  man's  feeble  grasp ;  he  would  be  king  at  any  cost,  and  at  once. 
It  is  worth  noticing  that  Solomon  on  the  other  hand  took  no  part  in  the  measures 
which  placed  him  on  the  throne.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  The 
one  sought  to  frustrate  the  designs  of  Providence,  the  other  "  committed  himseK  to 
him  that  judgeth  nghteously."     And  Jie  was  crowned  and  Adonijah  was  executed. 


40 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  II.  26— 8S. 


IV.  Adonijah  rebelled  against  his  father;  Solomon  reverenced  his 
MOTHER.  Treafinent  of  parents  is  a  test  of  character.  To  honour  father  and 
mother  is  "  the  first  commandment  with  promise."  Adonijah  repaid  his  father's 
indulgence  with  treason  against  his  throne ;  Solomon,  when  seated  on  his  throne, 
had  a  throne  set  for  his  mother.  If  he  were  king,  his  mother  should  be  queen.  He 
received  her  with  the  profoundest  respect,  though  she  was  his  subject ;  for  he  "  counted 
her  uncrowned  womanhood  to  be  the  royal  thing."  The  fortunes  of  these  two 
brothers  were  not  more  diverse  than  their  characters,  as  revealed  by  their  treatment 
of  their  elders.  And  their  histories  accorded  with  their  principles ;  their  lives  and 
deaths  illustrated  the  commandment. 

V.  God  chose  Solomon  and  refused  Adonijah.  As  in  the  case  of  Esau  and 
Jacob,  as  in  the  case  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  the  younger  is  preferred  to  the 
elder.  And  yet  the  elder  was  apparently  the  popular  favourite.  "  Man  looketh  on 
the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."  It  is  the  case  of 
David  and  his  brethren  over  again.  In  aU  these  cases  "  the  Lord  hath  set  apart 
him,  that  is  godly  for  himself."  The  meek,  pacific  Solomon,  the  rejected  of  Joab 
and  Abiathar,  is  the  accepted  of  Jehovah.  And  the  brilhant  and  beautiful  Adoni- 
jah, his  advantages,  his  influence,  his  efforts,  all  these  avail  him  nothing,  for  "  the 
proud  " — and  we  may  add,  the  selfish,  the  disobedient — "  the  Lord  knoweth  afar 
ofT"  (Fsa.  cxxzviii  6),  while  "the  wicked  and  him  that  loveth  violence  his  soul 
hateth  "  (Psa.  xL  5). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n.  26—35. 

The  depositiok  of  Abiathab  and  the 
death  op  joab. 

Ver.  26.— And  unto  Abiathar  the  priest 
[see  note  on  1  Kings  i.  8.  The  historian 
now  relates  the  end  of  Adonijah's  confeder- 
ates] said  the  king,  get  thee  to  Anathoth 
[The  Heb.  is  extremely  curt  and  authorita- 
tive, correBpouding  well  with  the  anger  and 
determination  of  the  speaker.  Anathoth, 
the  home  of  Abiathar,  was  also  the  residence 
of  another  high  priest,  Hilkiah  (Jer.  i.  1). 
It  was  in  Benjamin,  a  priests'  city,  and  had 
suburbs  (Jos.  xxi.  13,  17,  18).  It  has  been 
identified  by  Eobinson  with  Anata,  a  village 
IJ  brs.  N.N.B.  of  Jerus.  The  name  (  = 
Answers)  according  to  Gesenius,  means, 
"  answers  to  prayer,"  but  according  to  the 
Talmud, "  echoes  "] ,  unto  [?JJ  is  here  almost 
theequivalentof  "jN,  Cf.£Sam.xv.4,20,Heb. 
Ac]  thine  own  fields  [the  patrimony  of  his 
family]  forthouartworthy  of  death;  [Heb. 
a  man  of  death ;  LXX.  avi)p  Qavarov^  i.e., 
IvoxoQ  duvarou,  Matt.  xxvi.  66.]  but  I  will  not 
at  this  time  [Heb.  in  this  day}  put  thee  to 
death  [i.  c,  the  sentence  of  death  was  deferred 
during  good  behaviour.  It  is  hardly  correct 
to  eay  that  Abiathar  was  "  spared  for  a  time, 
but  only  for  a  time  "  (Stanley) .  More  correctly 
Com.  i,  Lapide:  "Misit  eum  in  patriam  ut 
ibi  vitam,  quam  ei  condonabat,  quiete  tradu- 
ceret. "  For  aught  we  know,  he  died  in  peace 
[because  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God 
before  David  my  father  [Thenius,  quite  need- 
lessly would  read  for  "  ark,"  *'ephod"  (1  Sam. 


xxiii.  6).  Zadok  and  Abiathar  ha4  borne 
the  ark  (not  of  course  in  person,  but  per 
alios,  viz.,  the  Levites  Uriel,  Joel,  &c.:  1 
Chron.  xv.  11),  when  David  brought  it  up  to 
Jerusalem,  and  also  during  his  flight  from 
Absalom  (2  Sam.  xv.  24 — 29).  Abiathar  had 
thus  been  associated  both  with  David's  joys 
and  sorrows]  and  because  thon  hast  been 
afflicted  in  all  wherein  my  tether  was 
afflicted.  [See  1  Sam.  xxii.  17—28  ;  2  Sam. 
XV.  24,  &c.] 

Ver.  27.— So  Solomo.:.  thrust  out  Abiathar 
from  being  priest  unto  the  Lord,  that  he 
might  fulfil  [Heb.  to  fulfil.  "  An  addition  of 
the  narrator,  not  the  intention  of  Solomon.  It 
is  the  'iva  irXripuid^  of  the  New  Testament." 
Bahr]  the  word  of  the  Lord,  which  he  spake 
concerning  the  house  of  Ell  In  ShUoh  [1 
Sam.  ii.  81 — 35.  Abiathar  was  the  last 
descendant  of  the  house  of  Ithamar.  With 
his  deposition  the  high  priesthood  reverted 
to  the  house  of  Eleazar,  and  so  another 
"  word  of  the  Lord "  had  its  fulfilment 
(Num.  XXV.  15).] 

No  one  can  justly  accuse  Solomon  of  un- 
necessary severity  or  of  cruelty  in  his  treat- 
ment of  Abiathar.  On  the  occasion  of  his 
first  conspiracy,  Abiathar  seems  to  have 
escaped  even  censure.  And  yet  that  con- 
spiraoy,  had  it  succeeded,  would  almost  cer- 
tainly have  involved  Solomon's  death  (ch.  i. 
12).  He  is  now  found  plotting  again,  for  the 
action  of  Solomon  proves  that  there  hadbeen 
a  second  plot.  Oriental  usages  would  have 
justified  bis  death.  He  is  simply  warned 
and  banished. 

Ver.  28.— Then  Udlngs  [Heb.  And  the  re- 


CH.  n.  26—86.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


41 


port,  &o.  Not  necessarily  of  Abiathar's 
deposition,  but  certainly  of  Adonijdih's 
death]  came  to  Joab,  for  Joab  had  turned 
after  [same  ezpressiou  as  in  Ezod.  xxiii.  2  ; 
Judges  ix.  3J  Adonijali,  though  [lit.,  and] 
be  turned  not  after  Absalom.  [The  LXX. 
(God.  'Vat.),  Vulg.,  and  all  ancient  Tereions 
except  the  Chald.,  here  read  Solomon,  which 
Ewald  and  Theniua  adopt.  This  reading  is 
perhaps  too  summarily  dismissed  by  most 
commentators,  as  involying  a  statement 
which  would  be  self-evident  and  superfluous. 
But  it  is  not  so.  The  meaning  would  then 
be  that  Joab  had  inclined  to  Adonijah,  and 
had  not,  subsequently,  gone  over  to  the  side 
of  Solomon  —  information  which  is  much 
less  obvious  than  that  he  had  not  "  gone 
after  Absalom."  The  Arabic  version  may 
thus  be  nearest  the  truth,  which  reads, 
"  Neither  did  he  love  Solomon."  Somewhat 
similarly  Josephus.]  And  Joab  fled  unto  the 
tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  and  caught  bold  of 
the  horns  of  the  altar.  [As  Adonijah  bad 
done  before  him  (ch.  i.  60).  His  flight  is 
almost  certain  evidence  of  his  guilt,  ("  Joab 
vero  seipsum  prodidit."  Munster.)  Why 
should  he  flee,  if  conscious  of  innocence? 
Solomon  had  acted  generously  before,  and 
Joab  would  not  be  aware  of  David's  dying 
instructions.  His  two  assassinations  had 
remained  bo  long  unpunished  that  he  would 
hardly  expect  to  be  called  to  an  account  for 
them  now.  We  have  here,  therefore,  another 
indication  of  a  second  conspiracy,  and  it  is 
an  old  belief  (Theodoret,  al.)  that  Joab  had 
suggested  to  Adonijah  the  plan  of  marriage 
with  Abishag.  Some  have  asked  why  Joab 
should  flee  to  the  altar  when  his  crimes  de- 
prived him  of  the  right  of  the  sanci^uary.  But 
a  drowning  man  grasps  at  a  straw.  It  is 
probable  that  he-never  thought  of  his  mur- 
ders, but  only  of  his  treason.  According  to 
the  Babbis,  death  at  the  altar  ensured  him 
burial  amongst  his  fathers  (Munster).  But, 
if  this  were  so,  it  would  hardly  enter  into 
bis  calculations. 

Ver.  29.— And  it  was  told  king  Solomon 
that  Joab  was  fled  unto  the  tabernacle  of 
the  Lord ;  and,  behold,  he  Is  by  the  altar. 
[The  LXX.  here  inserts,  "  And  Solomon  the 
Mng  sent  to  Joab,  saying,  What  has  happened 
thee,  that  thou  art  fled  to  the  altar  ?  A  nd  Joab 
said.  Because  I  feared  before  thee,  and  lfl£d 
to  the  Lord."  This  is  only  a  gloss,  but  it 
is  an  instructive  one.  It  shows  that  the 
author  regarded  Joab's  flight  as  betraying 
a  guilty  conscience.]  Then  Solomon  sent 
Benaiah,  the  son  of  Jeholada,  saying,  Go, 
fall  upon  him.  [The  LXX.  adds, "  and  bury 
him."'] 

Yer.  80, — And  Benalah  came  to  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  Lord,  and  said  unto  him 
rSeuaiah  evident^  "  hesitaited  to  stain  the 


altar  with  blood."  It  was  only  the  sanctity 
of  the  altar  which  made  it  an  asylum. 
There  wasstrictly  no"  ngftt  of  sanctuary  "], 
Thus  saith  the  king,  Come  forth.  [Probably 
Solomon  had  directed  that  Joab  should,  if 
possible,  be  induced  to  leave  the  altar. 
Every  Jew  would  dread  its  profanation  by 
strife  and  bloodshed.]  And  he  said,  Nay; 
but  I  will  die  here.  [Heb.  "  here  will  I  die." 
Joab  may  possibly  have  thought  that 
Solomon  woiid  hardly  venture  to  put  him 
to  death  there,  and  that  so  he  might  some- 
how escape  with  his  life.  But  it  is  more 
probable  that  he  counted  on  death,  and 
that  a  feeling  of  superstition,  or  of  defiance, 
had  decided  him  to  meet  his  doom  there. 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  gross  super- 
stition not  uncommonly  accompanies  irre- 
ligion  and  brutality ;  and  it  is  quite  con- 
ceivable that  Joab  hoped  for  some  indefinable 
benefit  from  the  shadow  of  the  altar,  much 
as  the  poor  Polish  Jew  expects  from  burial 
in  Jerusalem.  Or  his  motive  may  have 
been  defiance,  thinking  he  would  "render 
Solomon  odious  to  the  people,  as  a  profaner 
of  the  Holy  Place"  (M.  Ueury).  It  can  hardly 
have  been  to  put  off  for  ever  so  short  a  time 
the  execution,  as  Bishop  Hall  imagines.] 

Yer.  31.— And  the  king  said  unto  him.  Do 
as  he  hath  said,  and  fall  upon  him  [the 
law  decreed  (Exod.  xxi.  14)  that,  if  jl  man 
had  slain  his  neighbour  with  guile,  he 
should  be  taken  from  the  altar  to  die. 
Possibly  the  desperate  character  of  Joab 
made  literal  compliance  with  this  command 
well-nigh  impossible.  The  attempt  to  drag 
him  from  his  place  of  refuge  might  have 
led  to  a  bloody  encounter.  And  the  kiug 
evidently  felt  that  Joab's  crimes  justified 
exceptional  measures],  and  bury  him  [why 
this  injunction  ?  Possibly  because  the  spirit 
of  Deut.  xxi.  23  seemed  to  Solomon  to  re- 
quire it.  Both  Bahr  and  Eeil  think  it  was 
that  Joab's  services  to  the  kingdrm  might 
be  requited  with  an  honourable  sepulture. 
Was  it  not  rather  that  the  corpse  might  be 
removed  with  all  possible  haste  from  the 
sanctuary,  which  it  defiled,  and  hidden  from 
view,  as  one  accursed  of  God,  in  the  earth  ? 
So  Bishop  Hall :  "  He  sends  Benaiah  to 
take  away  the  offender  both  from  God  and 
men,  from  the  altar  and  the  world  "] ;  that 
thou  mayest  take  away  [LXX.  "to-day," 
aiiliepov]  the  Innocent  blood  [for  the  con. 
[■truction  of.  1  Sam.  xxv.  31 ;  Neh.  ii.  12 ; 
and  Ewald,  287d.  Innocent  blood,  i.e.,  blood 
not  shed  in  war,  or  forfeited  to  justice,  rested 
upon  the  community,  or  the  authorities 
responsible  for  its  punishment  (Num. 
XXXV.  33 ;  Deut.  xix.  10,  13 ;  xxi.  9.  Of. 
Gen.  iv.  10)  until  satisfaction  was  made. 
See  on  ver.  6] ,  which  Joab  shed,  trora  me, 
and  f^om  the  house  of  my  father.     [Heh. 


12 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  U.  26 — iiO. 


"from  upon  me."  Solomon  evidently  be. 
lieved  that  the  guilt  of  blood  was  upon  him 
and  his  house  so  long  as  Abner's  and 
Amasa's  blood  remained  unavenged  ("The 
blood  that  is  not  required  from  the  mur- 
derer will  be  required  from  the  magistrate." 
Henry),  and  that  he  and  his  seed  might 
have  to  answer  for  it,  as  Saul's  seed  had 
done  (2  Sam.  xxi.  1,  9).  This  is  one  of  the 
many  considerations  which  show  that  both 
David  and  Solomon  were  actuated  not 
by  "coldblooded  vengeance"  or  "long- 
cherished  resentment"  (Stanley),  but  by  a 
sense  of  duty.  In  fact,  Jewish  law  im- 
peratively demanded  the  death  of  Joab, 
iind  to  spare  him  was  to  violate  all  law, 
and  to  imperil  the  throne  and  the  people. 
"Only  a  superficial  observer,"  says  Ewald, 
"can  here  reproach  Solomon  with  needless 
severity."] 

Ver.  32. — And  the  Lord  shall  return 
[LXX.  t7r£ffrp£i/(£,  returns,  or  returned] 
his  blood  [LXX,  to  aT^a  r^c  ddiKiiig  aurou, 
i.e.,  the  blood  he  had  shed.  Cf.  vers.  33, 
41]  upon  his  own  head,  who  fell  upon  [same 
word  as  in  vers.  29,  31.  So  that  it  was 
strictly  a  re-taliation.  The  lex  talionis  was 
carried  out  to  the  letter]  two  men  more 
righ'eous  and  better  than  he,  and  slew 
them  with  the  sword,  my  father  David  not 
knowing'.  [Heb.  "  and  my  father  David 
krifw  not,"  i.e.,  was  not  privy  ihereto. 
Solomon  thinks  of  the  unjust  suspicions 
which  these  crimes  cast  upon  his  father.] 

Ver.  33. — Their  blood  shall  therefore  re- 
turn upon  the  head  of  Joab,  and  upon  the 
head  of  his  seed  [according  to  Exod.  xx.  5 ; 
xxxiv.  7 ;  Lev.  xx.  6 ;  xxvi.  39.  There  is 
an  obvious  reference  to  David's  curse 
2  Sam,  iii.  29,  which  thoroughly  agreed 
with  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament  in 
comprehending  the  children  in  its  sweep. 
And  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  sins  of  the 
fathers  are  still,  by  the  operation  of  natural 
laws,  and  by  the  constitution  and  laws  of 
society,  visited  upon  the  children,  to  the 
third  and  fourth  generation]  for  ever  :  but 
upon  [Heb.  to]  David,  and  upon  his  seed, 
and  upon  his  house,  and  upon  his  throne, 
sr<s.-ill  there  be   [or  ''he,"  optalive  ;    LXX. 


ysvoiTo]  peace  [««.,  prosperity]  for  ever 
firom  the  Lord.  [So  persuaded  is  Solomon 
that  he  is  fulfilling  a  religious  duty  in  de 
creeing  the  execution  of  Joab ;  so  little 
thought  has  he  of  malice,  revenge,  or  any 
baser  motive,  that  he  counts  on  the  Divine 
blessing  m  perpetuity  for  the  deed.] 

Ver.  34. — So  Benaiali,  the  son  of  Jeholada, 
went  up  [not  because  the  altar  "  stood  higher 
up  Mount  Zion  than  Solomon's  house " 
(Keil),  but  because  Gibeon,  where  the  taber- 
nacle and  brazen  altar  then  were,  stood 
higher  than  Jerusalem.  It  is  remarkable 
that  retribution  thus  overtook  Joab  on  the 
very  scene  of  his  last  murder,  for  it  was  "  at 
the  great  stone  which  is  in  Gibeon  "  (2  Sam. 
XX.  8),  that  he  slew  Amasa.  Cf.  2  Kings 
ix.  26 :  "I  will  requite  thee  in  this  plat, 
saith  the  Lord  "  ] ,  and  fell  upon  Tiim,  and 
slew  him :  and  he  was  buried  In  his  own 
house  [possibly  in  the  courtyard :  hardly 
in  the  gsrden.  The  same  is  recorded  of 
Samuel  (1  Sam.  xxv.  1).  It  was  evidently 
an  exceptional  occurrence.  Kemembering 
the  estimation  in  which  the  Jew  held  the 
corpse  and  the  grave  (Num.  xix.  11,  16, 
22;  of.  Matt,  xxiii.  27),  it  must  have  been 
a  singular  honour  to  make  of  the  house  a 
mausoleum.  No  doubt  it  was  designed  to 
be  such  in  Joab's  case.  Whatever  his 
crimes,  his  services  had  deserved  well  of 
his  country.  Possibly  his  friends  were  led 
to  pay  him  this  special  honour  as  a  kind  of 
counterpoise  to  the  ignominy  of  his  death] 
In  the  wilderness  [i.e.,  of  Judah.  /cab's 
mother  was  of  Bethleiiem,  which  was  on 
the  border  of  the  desert.  The  "  wilderness 
of  Tekoah  "  (2  Chron.  xx.  20),  according  to 
Jerome,  was  visible  from  Bethlehem,  being 
but  six  Eoman  miles  distant. 

Ver.  36.— And  the  king  put  Benalah  the 
son  of  Jeholada  In  his  room  over  the  host : 
and  Zadok  the  priest  did  the  king  put  in 
the  room  of  Ablathar.  [It  is  hardly  likely 
that  Joab  would  be  retained  in  command  of 
the  army  after  the  conspiracy  of  chap,  i., 
nor  is  this  implied  in  this  verse,  the  mean- 
ing of  which  is  that  Benaiab  took  the  place 
of  Joab,  and  that  Zadok  henceforward  was 
sole  high  priest.] 


HOMILETICS. 
Vers.  26,  aT.-Tfc*  Begraded  High  Priest.    We  may  find  in  this  section  a  sermon 
Zi!^T   ^^^  '•el?t^°'i^°f  the  world-power  to  the  Church ;  the  province  of  the 

nowl  «  ,1  i??'°^f,''^''  °  '^'  "^.'"^y  =.  ^^^^  "'«  "^«  P^ope^  I'^ts  of  tl^e  temporal 
power  and  what  is  the  exclusive  domain  of  the  spiritual ;  these  have  been  vexed 
Ouestions  for  many  centuries.  They  are  prominent  topics  ^t  the  presint  day.  We 
may  perhaps  find  m  this  history  a  few  principl.  s  to  guide  us.  Fo?  we  learn 
abfl^rlTX^f  f  ^'  °^  ^f  ™''  ''°''  "'^""^^  ""=  POLITICS.  No  one  can  deny  their 
&c  As  Sf^i*°  ^l'°-  ^'^Y  "'"  ^^''.'  ^  "^^y  S^«  clerffj-men,  and  "nihil  hJrZi," 
&e.     As  citizens,  they  may  have  convictions.    Having  convictions,  they  mav  snrelV 


i-H.  II.  at)— 35.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  4» 

give  effect  to  them.  No  one  can  deny  again  that  they  have  often  interfered  to  good 
purpose.  Witness  the  case  of  Jehoiada.  It  may  sometimes  be  a  duty  to  interfere. 
But  aU  the  same,  their  plane  is  not  tlie  plane  of  politics.  Their  iroXiriviia  is  th» 
Church.  And  what  is  lawful,  is  not  always  expedient.  Their  meddling  has  often 
cost  not  only  them,  but  the  Church,  dear.  Well  had  it  been  for  Abiathar ;  well  for 
the  Wolseys,  Eichelieus,  and  many  more,  had  they  never  given  up  "  to  party  what 
was  meant  for  mankind."  There  are  questions — imperial  questions  of  right  and 
wrong — where  the  clergy  must  speak  out;  there  are  other  questions— party  ques- 
tions— where,  for  their  own  and  their  flocks'  sake,  they  had  better  hold  their  peace. 

II.  That  peibsts  aeb  men  of  like  passions  with  other  men.  Abiathar  appa- 
rently was  not  free  from  that  "last  infirmity  of  noble  minds."  It  was  probablv 
jealousy  of  Zadok  impelled  him  to  conspire  against  Solomon,  and  to  join  hands  witli 
the  murderer  Joab  against  the  prophet  Nathan.  Neither  the  holy  anointing  oil  nor 
the  discharge  of  the  priest's  office  destroys  tlie  pJironema,  swrkos  (see  Art.  IX.)  It 
is  worthy  of  note  that  thp  first  high  priest  was  guilty  of  idolatry,  envy,  and  murinur- 
ings ;  that  the  sons  of  Eli  committed  abominable  crimes ;  and  that  the  high  priests- 
Annas  and  Caiaphas  condemned  ti  e  Lord  of  Ghn-y.  Every  high  priest  needed  to 
"  maie  atonement  for  hia  own  sins  "  (Lev.  xvi.  6,  11).  Abiathar,  the  minister  oi 
God,  was  a  traitor  against  God  and  His  anointed.  Having  tlie  frailties,  temptations, 
and  passions  of  other  men,  priests  often  commit  sins,  sometimes  commit  crimes. 

III.  That  priests  may  be  punishkd  for  their  crimes  by  the  secular  power. 
For  centuries  the  Latin  Church  contended  with  our  forefathers  for  the  exemption 
of  ecclesiastics  from  the  authority  of  civil  tribunals.  But  the  Jewish  priests  ei  joyed 
no  such  exemption.  Abiathar  was  threatened  by  Solomon  with  death,  and  was 
thrust  out  of  his  office.  Our  Great  High  Priest  respected  the  tribunal  of  Pontiua 
Pilate.  And  His  apostle  answered  for  himseK  before  Felix  and  Festus,  and  before 
great  Caesar  liimself.     (Cf.  Art.  xxxvii.  of  tlie  "  Articles  of  EeUgion.")     But 

IV.  Priests  are  to  be  treated  with  the  reverence  due  to  their  office. 
"  Because  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God."  Criminous  clergy  are  not  to  be 
so  punished  as  to  bring  their  sacred  calling  into  contempt  (not,  e.g.,  to  be  set  to 
sweep  the  streets,  as  General  Butler  forced  one  of  the  American  bishops  to  do  in 
New  Orleans).  If  the  man  is  entitled  to  no  consideration,  the  office  is.  He  wears 
the  livery  of  the  Great  King.  The  vessel  is  "  earthen,"  but  the  treasure  "heavenly" 
(•i  Cor.  iv.  7).     "  As  men  are  to  God's  ministers,  they  will  find  Him  to  them." 

V.  Priests  may  be  degraded  from  their  position,  but  cannot  be  deprived  or 
THEIR  PRIESTHOOD.  They  did  not  derive  their  authority  from  the  civil  power.  It 
did  not  give,  and  it  cannot  take  away.  David  did  not  make  Abiathar  priest,  and 
Solomon  could  not  unmake  him.  We  find  from  chapter  iv.  4  that  he  was  still 
called  "  priest."  He  that  is  "  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron,"  can  only  be  reoalted  of 
God.  When  Solomon  "  thrust  out  Abiathar,"  he  "  deprived  him  of  bis  dignity,  but 
did  not  strip  him  of  his  priesthood"  (Theodoret).  The  state  may  fine,  imprisoa, 
banish,  put  to  death  Christ's  ambassadors  according  to  their  desprts,  but  it  may 
not  alter  their  message,  tamper  with  their  creeds,  confer  their  orders,  or  prescribe 
their  ordinances.  "  To  Cassar  the  things  which  are  Caesar's,  and  imto  God  the  things 
that  are  God's." 

VI.  In  removing  the  unworthy  priest  the  civil  power  is  fulfilling  THE  WILL 

OP  the  Lord.  The  "  sure  word  of  prophecy  " — indeed  a  double  prophecy — had  its 
fulfilment  when  Solomon  banished  Abiathar.  The  secular  power  thereby  aceom- 
phshed  the  good  pleasure  of  God  declared  four  hundred  years  before  (Num.  xxv. 
13).  And  the  magistrate  who,  in  the  exercise  of  the  authority  conferred  on  him  by 
God  for  the  punishment  of  evil  doers,  degrades  the  criminous  priest,  silences  him, 
visits  him  with  appropriate  paios  and  penalties,  is  doing  God  service ;  is  fulfilling 
the  will  of  God,  who  would  have  evil  ministers  above  all  others  brought  to  justice 
and  chastised ;  the  more  influential  their  example,  the  more  need  of  conspicuous 
and  exemplary  punishment. 

Vers.  2JS— 3-'>- — Th"  D  aih  of  Joab.  "Know  ye  not  that  there  is  a  prince  and  a 
gieat  man  fullcn  this  day  in  Israel" — so  might  men  say  as  they  heard,  so  may  wt 


44  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oa.  u.  'Zb— bi> 


say  as  we  read,  the  liMory  of  .Toab's  death.  After  David,  ho  was  by  far  the  greiltcst 
mln-The  ablest  general/the  bravest  soldier,  the  most  capable  statesinan-of  that 
Ze  He  was  "  the  Marlborouj;!.,  the  Belisa.ius  of  the  Jewish  emFU;e."  He  had 
fou-ht  David's  battles,  won  his  conqnosts,  captui-ed  his  citadel  and  twice  preserved 
for  him  his  crown.  It  is  a  .ad  and  tragic  ending  of  such  a  brilhant  career  The 
idol  of  the  array,  the  man  who  was  first  in  the  deadly  breach  (2  Chron.  a.  6),the  ever 
victorious  hero,  dies  miserably,  by  the  thrust  of  an  old  comrade.  For  him  the 
sanctnai-y  of  God  has  no  protection.  Though  he  clings  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  it 
avails  him  nothing.  No,  tlie  blood  of  the  white-headed  warrior,  winner  of  a  hun- 
dred well-fought  fields,  streams  round  the  consecrated  structure  and  stams  the 
place  of  the  Divine  Presence.     What  are  the  lessons,  let  us  ask,  of  such  a  death? 

I  \Vhy  is  he  here  ?  It  is  (1)  because  his  conscience  has  mode  him  a  cowa/rd. 
He  who  never  turned  his  back  on  the  foe,  has  fled  before  a  breath,  a  mere  ramour. 
He  has  not  been  attacked,  not  even  threatened  ;  but  the  secret  is  out,  the  con- 
spuracy  is  discovered,  his  head  is  forfeited.  He  betrays  his  guilt  by  his  flight.  Time 
was  when  he  would  have  faced  almost  any  danger,  when  he  would  have  died 
rather  than  fled.  But  then  he  had  a  support  and  stay,  in  the  consciousness  of 
rectitude,  which  he  has  not  now.  Now,  his  own  heart  denounces  him. 
"  None  have  accused  thee  ;  'tis  thy  conBcience  cries." 

The  man  whose  conscience  is  burdened  with  crune  has  an  enemy,  a  traitor,  within 
the  camp.  But  why  has  he  fled  to  the  sanctuary ;  why  chosen  the  tabernacle  of  God  for 
his  refuge  ?  For  Joab  has  not  loved  the  habitation  of  God's  house,  The  tabernacle 
of  the  Lord  could  not  be  "  amiable  "  to  that  guilty  heart.  His  choice  would  be 
"  the  congregation  of  evildoers."  A  stranger  to  the  tabernacle  and  its  services,  why 
is  he  here?  It  is  (2)  because  men  ofti-n  betake  themselves  in  ad/versity  to  the 
religion  they  despised  in  prosperity.  Yes,  Joab's  is  no  solitary  case.  It  is  too 
common.  Witness  the  so-called  deathbed  repentances;  witness  the  cries  and 
prayers  which  go  up  in  the  hour  of  peril  fi-om  lips  which  never  prayed  before.  Men 
who  have  neglected  God  and  contemned  the  ordinances  of  religion  in  health  often 
turn  to  Him  and  to  them  in  sickness.  "  It  is  the  fashion  of  our  foolish  presumption 
to  look  for  protection  where  we  have  not  cared  to  yield  obedience."  But  (8)  the  altar 
of  God  is  for  sacrifice,  not  for  sanctuary.  The  purpose  of  the  altar,  its  ruison  d'etre, 
was  that  sacrifices,  i.e.,  that  worship,  might  be  offered  thereon.  It  was  an  accident, 
so  to  speak,  that  made  of  it  a  sanctuary ;  the  accident  of  its  sacredness.  Because 
it  was  ordained  of  God,  fashioned  after  a  Divine  pattern  and  employed  in  the  Divine 
service,  it  was  natm-ally  and  riglitly  rega,rded  as  holy,  as  a  structure  not  to  be  pro- 
faned, and  hence  the  manslayer  fled  thither  for  protection.  But  this  use  of  the 
altar  was  quite  beside  its  original  intention.  It  was  made  for  worsh'p,  for  the 
service  of  God,  not  for  the  defence  of  man.  Joab  disregarded  its  proper  use ;  he 
used  it  for  his  own  convenience.  And  have  we  not  seen  something  like  this  in  our 
own  days  ?  Eeligion  is  ordained  for  man  to  hve  by.  Its  primary  purpose  is  the 
glory  of  God.  It  exists  that  man  may  offer  "  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to 
God  ; ''  that  man  may  be  himself  "  a  hving  sacrifice."  But  there  are  those  who 
would  use  it  only  as  a  sanctuary,  as  a  place  to  flee  to  when  they  can  sin  no  longer. 
Tliey  want  the  benefits  of  rehgion  without  its  obligations ;  they  pervert  it  from  its 
proper  and  holy,  to  a  purely  selfish  purpose ;  tliey  want  it  for  death  and  i,  was 
meant  for  life.  They  act,  i.e  ,  much  as  .loab  did,  and  it  ia  to  be  feared  their  last 
«nd  will  not  be  unlike  his.  The  altar  they  have  slighted  will  not  shelter  them  in 
the  day  of  evil. 

II.  But  let  us  now  ask,  secondly.  Why  is  he  pui  to  death  here  ?  The  altar 
was  never  meant  to  be  staineii  with  human  blood.  If  it  was  not  for  sanctuary,  still 
less  was  it  for  slaughter.  And  it  has  sheltered  many  ;  why  may  it  afford  him  no 
asylum  ?  It  is  (1)  Because  he  has  come  to  it  too  late.  Had  he  come  before,  and 
come  as  a  worshipper,  he  would  not  have  needed  to  come  now  as  a  fugitive.  Had  he 
«TMi  come,  after  his  great  crimes,  as  a  sincere  penitent,  he  might,  perchance,  hav« 
found  forgivenasa.     David  was  deUvered  from  blood-yuiltiness,  and  why  "not  joab  ? 


OB.  u.  86—46.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


U 


But  he  only  comes  to  the  altar  hecaiise  he  is  driven  to  it ;  because  he  can  do 
nothing  else.  Yes,  "  it  is  too  late  to  cry  for  mercy  when  it  is  the  time  of  justice." 
Those  who  put  off  repentance  tiU.  they  can  sin  no  longer  find  that  such  feigned 
repentance  profits  them  nothing.  There  is  a  time  when  "  the  door  is  shut."  2. 
BecoMse  "  he  shall  home  judgment  without  mercy  that  showed  no  mercy."  Joab's 
murders  could  not  have  been  more  treacherous,  more  cruel.  "  The  blood  of  war  in 
peace."  "  Took  him  aside  in  the  gate  to  speak  with  him  peaceably  "  (2  Sam.  iii.  27, 
marg.).  "  Took  Amasa  by  the 'beard  with  the  right  hand  to  kiss  him"  (ib.  xx.  9). 
There  is  a  lex  talionis  which  governs  the  dealings  of  God  with  transgressors.  The  cruel 
murderer  shall  be  cruelly  murdered.  The  assassin  shall  be  executed  at  the  altar.  He 
that  "  showed  no  pity  "  shall  receive  none.  8.  Beccmse  Ood  pays  sure,  even  if  he 
pays  slowly.  It  was  thirty-four  years — an  entire  generation — since  Abner's  blood  first 
cried  from  the  ground.  Eight  years  had  elapsed  since  Amasa's  death.  And  Joab, 
meanwhile,  had  maintained  his  position.  Still  "  over  aU  the  host  of  Israel,"  stiQ 
second  only  to  the  king.  If  ever  he  or  others  had  dreamed  of  pimishment,  they 
must  by  this  time  have  given  up  all  fear,  or  all  hope.  David  had  died  and  Joab 
still  lived.  Joab  had  conspired  once  and  yet  he  was  spared.  Is  there,  men  would 
ask,  a  retributive  Justice  ?  is  there  a  "  God  that  judgeth  the  earth"  ?  Yes,  though 
Joab  has  "  hoar  hairs,"  though  he  has  all  but  gone  down  to  the  grave  in  peace,  hi& 
sin  has  found  him  out.  And  the  blood  which  reddens  those  gray  hairs,  the  blood 
which  crimsons  the  sanctuary,  proves  that  there  is  a  Nemesis  for  crime :  that  if 
Justice  has  a  halting  foot,  she  nevertheless  overtakes  the  fleetest  oflender ;  that  "  if 
the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceedingly  small."  4.  Because 
"  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  Only  the  blood  of  Joab  could 
expiate  the  bloodshed  he  had  wrought  Nothing  else  could  cleanse  the  land.  For 
innocent  blood  guilty  blood ;  this  was  the  law.  How  different  is  the  gospel  The 
blood  of  Christ  speaketh  better  things  than  the  blood  of  Abel,  ay,  than  the  blood  of 
Joab.  The  blood  of  Jo4!>  made  an  atonement  for  the  land.  There  the  guilty  died 
because  of  the  innocent.  The  blood  of  Jesus  made  an  atonement  for  the  world. 
Here  the  innocent  dies  because  of  the  guilty.  The  blood  of  Joab  teUs  of  vengeance, 
of  retribution,  of  death.  The  blood  of  Jesus  speaks  of  mercy,  of  restitution,  of 
life  and  love  and  peace.  Yes,  the  death  of  Joab  may  surely  speak  to  us,  but  it 
speaks  to  Uttle  purpose,  unless  it  tells  us  of  "  the  precioiis  blood  of  Christ." 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n.  86—46. 

The  end  of  Shimei. — This  fresh  intrigue 
of  Adonijah's  warns  the  king  that  he  must 
be  on  his  guard  and  Keep  a  watch  over  sus- 
pected persons.  Prominent  among  these, 
from  his  antecedents  and  connexions,  would 
be  Shimei. 

Yer.  36. — And  tlie  ktng  sent  and  called 
for  Shimei  [probably  from  Baburim.  But 
see  on  ver.  8]  and  said  unto  Mm,  Build 
thee  [Not  necessarily  as  "  a  guarantee  for 
his  residence  there  "  (Wordsworth).  Jew- 
ish law  would  make  a  purchase  difficult. 
Lev.  xxv.  23.  Cf .  1  Kings  xxi.  3]  an  house  In 
Jerusalem  and  dw^Il  there  [where  he  would 
be  under  staveillance  and  where  his  sinister 
influence  with  the  men  of  Beujamin  would 
be  neutralized]  and  go  not  forth  thence  any 
whither  [or,  "  hither  and  thither."  Weder 
dahin  noch  dorthin.    Bahr.] 

Ver.  37.  — For  It  shall  be,  on  the  day  thou 
goest  out  and  passest  over  the  hrook  [lit., 


watercourse,  wftdy.  The  Eidron  is  quite 
dry,  except  during  and  lor  a  short  time  after 
the  winter  rains]  Eidron  [The  Eidron 
is  mentioned  speoially  because  that  was 
the  direction  which,  it  might  be  presumed, 
Shimei  would  take,  his  old  home  being 
at  Baburim] ,  thou  shalt  Imow  for  certain 
that  thou  Shalt  surely  die  [The  Hebrew 
is,  if  possible,  still  more  striking  and  em- 
phatic, "To  know  thou  shalt  know  that 
to  die  thou  shalt  die."  Shimei  could  not 
say  that  he  had  not  been  plainly  warned] : 
thy  blood  shall  be  upon  thine  own  head. 
[Cf.  Lev.  XX.  9,  and  especially  Joshua  ii.  19 ; 
also  ver.  31  of  this  chapter. 

Ver.  88. — And  Shimei  said  to  the  Mag, 
The  saying  [or  thing,  matter,  131,  like  Xdyoi 
pijlia,  in  Greek  (of.  Sache,  iu  Germ. ,  from 
sagen)  means  (1)  word  and  (2)  deed]  i» 
good  [ghimei  cannot  complain  ot  the  con- 
dition, remembering  what  he  had  done  (2 
Sam.  XV.  5-7)  and  that  Solomon  was  not 
bound  by  his  father's  oath  (2  Sam  xix.  23)]; 


46 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  n.  86—46. 


as  my  lord  the  Mng  hath  said,  bo  will  thy 
servant  do.  And  Shlmel  dwelt  [in  obedience 
to  thia  behest]  in  Jerusalem  many  days, 

Ver.  39. — And  It  came  to  pass  at  the  end 
of  three  years  that  two  of  the  servants  of 
Shlmei  ran  away  [it  has  been  thought  by 
some  that  their  flight  was  preconcerted  with 
their  master.  But  the  narrative  does  not 
favour  this  supposition]  to  Achlsh,  son  of 
Maachah,  king  of  Gath.  [This  may  well 
have  been  the  "  Achish,  pon  of  Maoch" 
{1  Sam.  xxi.  11;  xxvii.  2),  to  whom  David 
fled  fifty  years  before.  Longer  reigns  than 
this  are  not  unknown  to  history.  Or  it 
may  have  been  his  grandson] .  And  they 
told  Shlmei,  saying.  Behold,  thy  servants  he 
In  Gath. 

Yer.  40. — And  Shlmei  arose  and  saddled 
his  ass  [not  necessarily  himself.  Qui  facit 
per  nlium,  facit  per  se.  Matthew  Henry 
thinks  Shimei  did  it  himself  for  the  sake  of 
seoresy.  Many  expositors  also  thiuk  that 
he  went  by  night.  The  text  rather  suggests 
the  idea  that  both  the  going  and  the  return 
were  perfectly  open  and  undisguised]  and 
went  to  Gath.  [It  is  impossible  to  avoid 
the  question,  What  can  have  led  to  this  in- 
fatuated disregard  of  his  oath  and  life  ?  Now 
his  perversity  may  of  course  have  been 
judicial — pibs  Deus  vult  perdere,  prius  de- 
mentat — but  as  to  the  means  which  led  to 
this  issue,  it  is  enough  if  we  may  believe  he 
had  been  dared  to  it  either  by  his  servants 
or  others.  The  fierce  Benjamite  would 
naturally  be  galled  to  the  quick  by  the 
thought  that  his  slaves  could  thus  openly 
set  liiTTi  at  defiance ;  he  may  have  heard 
from  those  who  came  from  Gath  that  they 
were  exulting  over  him  ;  and  he  may  have 
resolved  at  all  hazards  to  teach  them  a 
lesson.  He  cannot  have  forgotten  either 
Solomon's  explicit  warning  or  his  own 
solemn  oath  (ver.  42) ;  he  must  have  gone 
to  Gath  with  his  eyes  open,  and  nothing 
but  a  great  provocation,  such  as  mockery 
and  defiance,  will  account  for  his  going.]  And 
Shimei  went  and  brought  his  servants  from 
Gath. 

Ver.  41. — ^And  it  was  told  Solomon  that 
Shlmei  had  gone  from  Jerusalem  to  Gath 
and  was  come  again.  [He,  no  doubt,  per- 
suaded himself  that  his  immediate  return, 
especially  when  taken  in  connexion  with 
the  object  of  his  journey,  would  excuse  liim 
to  the  king.  He  would  perhaps  argue  that 
a  magnanimous  sovereign  like  Solomon 
could  never  deal  hardly  with  one  who  tlms 
placed  his  life  in  his  hands.  He  can  hardly 
have  built  his  hopes  on  his  not  having 
crossed  the  Kidron,  for  he  must  have  per- 
fectly understood  that  he  was  to  go  "no 
«ihither." 
Ver.  42— And  the  king  sent  and  called 


for  Shimei,  and  said  unto  him,  Did  I  not 
make  thee  swear  by  the  Lord  In  ihus  cornea 
out  quite  incidentally  that  Solomon  had 
bound  Shimei  by  an  oath.  The  LXX.  em- 
bodies this  information  as  a  direct  statement 
in  the  text  of  ver.  37,  Kd:i  Upsmev  airbvo 
PairiKeis  iv  ry  fifdpf  tKEiV^jbut  it  is  obviously 
a  gloss]  and  protested  unto  thee,  saying, 
Enow  for  a  certain,  on  the  day  that  thou 
goest  out  and  walkest  abroad  any  whither, 
that  thou  Shalt  surely  die  7  and  thou  saidst 
unto  me.  The  word  that  I  have  heard  is 
good.  [The  LXX.  (Vat.)  omits  "  And  thou 
saidst,"  &o.  This  last  sentence  has  been 
punctuated  thus :  '  'Good  is  the  word.  I  have 
heard."  Probably  nB'S,  "which,"  is  to  be 
understood. 

Ver.  43. — ^Why  then  hast  thou  not  Isept 
the  oath  of  the  Lord  a;ndthe  conunandment 
that  I  have  Charged  [Heb.  comtnanded] 
thee  with.  ["  Shimei  ought  to  have  been 
warned  against  trifling  with  Solomon's 
forbearance  by  the  punishment  already 
inflicted  on  Adonijah  and  Joab."  Words- 
worth.] 

Ver.  44. — The  king  said,  moreover  [Heb. 
And  the  king  said]  Thou  knowest  all 
the  wickedness  which  thine  heart  is  privy 
to  [Heb.  knowetK]  that  thou  didst  to  David 
my  father  [Sol#non  brings  a  threefold 
charge  against  Shimei.  He  has  violated  a 
solemn  oath,  "  by  the  life  of  Jehovah,"  and 
so  has  "profaned  the  name  of  his  God" 
(Lev.  xix.  12).  He  has  broken  his  parole 
and  set  at  naught  the  king's  commandment. 
He  has  defied  and  blasphemed  the  Lord's 
anointed.  He  must  die]  therefore  the  Lord 
shall  return  ["hath  returned,"  or  "re- 
turns." LXX.  avrairkSioKt,  aor.  _  The  king 
regards  himself  as  merely  the  instrument 
and  dispenser  of  the  Divine  Justice.  Accord- 
ing to  him,  it  is  God,  not  spite,  demands 
and  has  brought  about  Shimei's  execution] 
thy  wickedness  upon  thine  own  head  [Every 
Jew,  taught  to  expect  that  "  every  trans- 
gression and  disobedience"  would  receive 
its  "  just  recompense  of  reward  "  in  this  life 
present  would  see  in  Shimei's  almost  un- 
accountable infatuation  the  finger  of  God. 
To  them  he  would  seem  delivered  np  to 
destruction. 

Ver.  45. — And  Wng  Solomon  shall  be 
blessed,  and  the  throne  of  David  shall  be 
established  before  the  Lord  for  ever.  [It 
is  inconceivable  that  Solomon  could  have 
spoken  thus  if  he  had  been  conscious  either 
of  sharp  practice,  or  spite,  or  cruelty.  The 
words  are  those  of  one  wlio  is  sure  that  he 
is  doing  God  service.] 

Ver.  46. — So  the  king  commanded  Ben- 
alah,  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  which  went  out 
and  fell  upon  him  that  he  died.  [The 
execution  of  Shimei  has,  perhaps,  on  the 


CH.  n.  86-46.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


4? 


whole  given  more  offence  than  that  of  Joab 
or  even  Adonijah.  He,  at  any  rate,  was 
not  "  a  mui'derer  whom  vengeance  suffereth 
not  to  live,"  nor  had  he  taken  any  part  in 
leoent  oonspiracieB.  On  the  contrary,  he 
seems  to  have  lived  quietly  enough  under 
the  eye  of  the  king.  And  it  consequently 
has  the  appearance  of  cruelty  and  mulevo- 
lence  that  Solomon  should  "  press  the 
letter  of  a  compact  against  him,"  especially 
when,  by  returning  to  Jerusalem,  he  placed 
his  hfe  at  Solomon's  mercy.  But  it  is  not 
difficult  to  offer  a  complete  justification  of 
Solomon's  action  in  this  matter.  In  the 
first  place,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that 
cruelty  had  no  part  in  his  character.  In 
his  long  reign  of  forty  years  there  are 
absolutely  no  evidences  of  a  brutal  and 
tyrannical  disposition.  There  is  a  strong 
presumption,  oonsequentljr,  that  he  was  not 
actuated  by  cruelty  on  this  occasion,  a  pre- 
sumption which  finds  support  in  the  con- 
sideration that  Solomon  was  much  too 
sagacious  to  prejudice  himself  in  popular 
ostimation  at  the  commencement  of  his 
reign  by  proceedings  which  would  have  the 
least  suspicion  of  vindiotiveness.  And  (2) 
with  this  probability  the  facts  of  the  case 
entirely  agree.  Shimei's  life,  as  we  have 
seen,  was  forfeited  to  Jewish  law.  As  he  had 
so  long  been  spared,  however,  the  king  gave 
him  a  gracious  respite.  The  conditions 
imposed  were  not  onerous.  Shimei  bad  but 
to  keep  his  parole  and  he  would  live ;  to 
break  it  and  he  would  assuredly  di&  He 
did  break  it ;  not  without  provocation,  it 
may  be,  but  he  broke  it,  and  broke  too  his 
solemn  oath.  It  may  be  said  it  was  hard 
he  should  lose  his  slaves,  but  better,  surely, 
loM  them  than  his  life.     Besides,  there 


were  other  ways  of  recovering  them  ;  or,  if 
he  must  pursue  them  in  person,  his  proper 
course  was  evidently  to  ask  the  king's  per- 
mission. That  he  did  not  do  so  is  in  itself 
a  suspicious  circumstance,  and  Solomon 
might  reasonably  think  that  the  flight  of 
the  slaves  was  but  a  feint,  and  that  Shimei's 
visit  to  a  foreign  court  had  really  a  political 
object.  But,  be  that  aa  it  may,  the  king 
had  protested  unto  him  that  if  he  went  any 
whither,  he  should  most  certainly  die 
When  he  went,  when  he  despised  the  royal 
command  and  disregarded  his  sacred  oath, 
how  was  it  possible  for  Solomon  to  break 
his  word  ?  To  do  so  would  have  been 
inevitably  to  compromise  himself  with  his 
subjects,  and  to  forfeit  their  reverence  and 
trust.  Besides,  there  was  a  duty  he  owed 
to  his  dead  father,  and  above  all,  one  which 
he  owed  to  the  living  God.  He  had  now 
the  opportunity  for  which  his  father  bade 
him  wait,  of  putting  into  force  the  provisions 
of  the  Mosaic  law,  of  requiring  the  death  of 
the  blasphemer,  of  showing  his  subjects 
that  the  law  could  not  be  defied  with  im- 
punity, that  though  vengeance  was  not 
I  executed  speedily  against  evil  works,  still 
retribution  was  certain  in  the  long  run,  and 
so  of  teachiug  them  a  much  needed  lesson 
of  obedience  and  respect  of  authority. 
Every  consideration,  therefore,  of  justice, 
moraUty,  filial  piety,  and  reUgion  warranted 
him  in  putting  Shimei  to  death.  Every 
imputation  of  weakness,,  in-esplution,  dis- 
regard of  his  pUghted  word,  compromise  of 
his  royal  dignity,  and  indifference  to  religion 
might  justly  have  been  levelled  against  him, 
had  he  interfered  between  Shimei  and  th« 
sword  of  Justice. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vera.  44 — 46. — The  End  of  the  TramsgreBsor,  Such  was  the  end  of  Shimei— 
violent,  sanguinary,  shameful.  Old  man  as  he  is,  he  may  not  die  in  peace :  hia 
hoar  hairs  must  be  crimsoned  with  his  blood.  What  does  this  teach  ?  what  its 
message  to  Christian  men  ?  It  is  twofold.  It  speaks  (1)  of  the  Sin,  (2)  of  the 
Retribution. 

I.  It  teaches  (1)  The  sin  of  treason.  He  had  offered  insult  and  defiance  to  his 
lawful  king.  Rebellion  against  constituted  authority  can  only  be  justified  by  in- 
tolerable tyranny  and  outrage.    He  who 

"dares  to  wield 
The  regicidal  steel " 

must  answer  to  Him  by  whom  kings  govern.  We  are  to  "  honour  the  king,"  to 
"  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers."  "  They  that  resist  shall  receive  to  themselves 
damnation,"  as  did  this  rebel  Benjamite.  2.  The  sin  of  blasphemy.  "A  grievous 
curse."  Aimed  at  the  king,  it  reached  the  King  of  kings.  It  was  not  only  de- 
structive of  authority ;  not  only  an  affront  offered  to  the  majesty  of  law  ;  it  was  an 
indirect  blow  at  the  Majesty  of  Heaven.  Men  cannot  "speak  evil  of  dignities  ' 
without  sin.    Those  who  "  curse  God  "  wiU  "  die  "  (Job  ii  9).    How  little  do  meu 


48 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [cH.  IL  86—46, 


make  of  blasphemy  1  But  Sliimei  had  to  pay  for  it  with  his  life  8.  The  sm  qf 
veriurv  It  was  this  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  He  broke  through  his  oath. 
Though  lie  said,  "  the  Lord  liveth,"  he  swore  falsely.  He  thus  profaned  the  awful 
incommunicable  name,  and  incurred  the  Divine  curse  (Zeoh.  v.  4).  Perjuries  are 
plentiful  in  our  days,  our  police  courts  being  witness.  (Some  kiss  the  thumb,  and 
not  the  book.)  "  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless,"  &o.  4.  The  gin  of  disobe- 
dience. The  king  had  adjured  him,  had  "  protested,"  had  said  _"  know  for  certain," 
&c. ;  and  even  if  the  Kidron  were  mentioned  arbitrarily,  stiU  it  served  to  test  his 
obedience.  The  prohibition,  therefore,  could  not  have  been  plainer.  He  disre- 
garded it,  and  died.  "Fool,"  does  any  one  say?  Stay!  The  great  King  has  said, 
"  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  He  has  solemnly  testified  what  will  bo  the 
doom  of  disobedience,  and  yet  how  often  have  we  crossed  our  Kidron — the  bound 
of  His  law— have  gone  after  our  own  lusts  and  pleasures,  and  it  is  only  becausa 
He  is  God  and  not  man,  only  because 

"the  heart  of  the  Eternal 
Is  most  wonderfully  kind," 

that  we  have  not  died.  6.  The  sin  amd  folly  of  presumption.  Wliatever  may 
have  led  Shimei  to  go  after  his  slaves,  it  was  certainly  presumption  brought  him 
back.  He  would  hardly  have  returned  had  he  not  counted  on  forgiveness.  No 
doubt  he  had  persuaded  himself  either  that  Solomon  would  never  know,  or  that,  if 
he  did,  he  would  be  magnanimous.  "  Allowance  wUl  be  made  for  me,"  he  had 
said  ;  "  my  return  wiU  disarm  suspicion  and  ensure  clemency.'?'  But  the  sword  of 
Benaiah  soon  undeceived  him.  And  such  will  be  the  end — death,  shame,  ever- 
lasting contempt— of  those  who  presume  on  the  mercy  of  God.  How  many  say, 
"  God  is  so  good,  He  wiU  never  be  hard  upon  us,"  &c.  But  is  God  true  ?  Can 
He  deny  Himself?  Even  Solomon  could  not  go  back  from  his  word ;  and  can  the 
Holy  One  ?  Alas,  if  despair  has  slain  its  thousands,  presumption  has  slain  its  ten 
thousands.  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  since  the  invention  of  the  safety  lamp  there 
have  been  more  accidents  in  mines  than  there  were  before. 

II.  As  to  the  RETRIBUTION,  We  are  reminded,  1.  That  curses  commonly  come 
home  to  roost.  The  "  grievous  curse  "  of  Shimei  did  not  hurt  David.  But  it  was 
his  own  destruction.  The  poisoned  arrow  missed  its  mark,  but  it  recoiled  on  the 
archer.  The  engineer  is  hoist  by  his  own  petard.  A  curse  rests  on  those  who  curse 
the  king  (cf.  Eccles.  x.  20).  2.  'I'hat  respite  does  not  mean  release.  When  David 
"sware"  to  him,  Shimei  thought  himself  safe.  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death 
was  past.  He  would  die  in  his  nest.  We  often  mistake  God's  forbearance  for 
forgetfulness.  He  is  long-suffering,  and  men  ask,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His 
coming  ?  "  Because  "  He  does  not  settle  His  accounts  once  a  week  "  (Goethe) 
the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil.  But  the  day  of  retri- 
bution comes  as  a  thief,  as  the  flood,  as  the  sword,  as  the  snare.  3.  That  if  we 
die,  it  is  our  own  fault.  Shimei  had  his  hfe  in  his  own  hands.  It  rested  with  him 
alone  whether  he  lived  or  died.  He  should  hve,  if  he  would  but  hve  at  Jerusalem. 
But  he  chose  death.  Men  cause  their  own  destruction.  God  has  no  pleasure  in 
their  death.  "Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  4.  That  warnings  are  commonly 
lost  on  the  wicTced.  "  How  could  Shimei  be  so  infatuated  ?  "  we  ask.  What,  have 
we  not  seen  his  infatuation  paralleled  ?  Have  we  never  seen  repeated  warmugs 
repeatedly  neglected  ?  Yes,  souls,  sins,  warnings,  results,  are  the  same  in  all  ages. 
5.  That  when  Ood  recTcons,  He  recTcons  for  all.  The  sword  avenged  the  sin  of 
eight  years  before.  And  in  the  Great  Assize,  everything — both  cup  of  cold  water 
and  idle  word — will  receive  its  just  recompense  of  reward. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  41 — 46. — Retributions.  This  is  one  example  of  the  way  in  which  Solomon 
earried  out  David's  dying  command,  as  given  in  verses  6 — 9.  Shimei's  violation  of 
his  promise  in  reference  to  not  leaving  Jerusalem,  though  the  immediate  ocoasiun, 
was  thus  not  the  real  reason  of  his  punishment.     He  had  been  all  along  a  doomed 


CH.  II.  36—46.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OE  KINGS.  49 

man.  A  great  deal  in  David's  ooumiaud  in  reference  to  these  men  that  we  cannot 
regard  with  complacency;  so  far  as  there  was  anything  of  personal  vindictiveness 
in  it,  om:  moral  sense  condemns  it.  Would  it  not  have  been  more  magnanimous  if 
with  his  dying  breath  he  had  freely  forgiven  these  old  offenders  ?  Solomon's  con- 
duct, however,  wears  a  different  aspect.  A  father's  word  would  be  to  him  an 
imperious  authority  ;  to  vindicate  a  father's  honour  the  instinctive  impulse  of  fihal 
affection ;  to  avenge  the  innocent  blood  a  sacred  obligation.  Moreover,  these  men 
deserved  their  fate.  Joab  had  been  a  traitor  and  murderer;  Abiathar  had  abused 
the  sanctity  of  his  priestly  office  by  helping  the  cause  of  the  usurper ;  Shimei  had 
"  cursed  the  Lord's  anointed."    This  incident  suggests — 

I.  The  eternal  law  that  WEONa-DoiNS  must  be  follovted  by  its  due  recom- 
pense. Becognise  the  Divine  element  in  this  act  of  human  retribution.  There  is 
a  Nemesis  that  tracks  the  steps  of  the  transgressor,  and  sooner  or  later  overtakes 
him ;  not  a  natural  law  merely,  but  an  intelUgent  Divine  wiU  aiid  power.  The 
superstition  of  the  Melitaus  had  a  deep  and  solemn  truth  in  it  (Acts  zxvuL  4). 
Striking  correspondence  often  between  the  sin  and  the  penalty.  Men  suffer  in 
forms  resembling  the  injury  they  inflict.  "  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,"  &c.  "  AU 
they  that  take  the  sword,"  &o.  The  weapon  used  wrongfully  recoils  upon  the  head 
of  him  who  wielded  it.  "  Curses,  like  birds,  come  home  to  roost."  In  the  teaching 
of  Christ  and  His  apostles,  however,  the  law  of  retribution  appears,  not  in  its  old 
bare,.cruie  form,  but  in  a  more  vital  and  spiritual  form.  New  Testament  idea — sin 
bears  within  itself  the  germ  of  its  own  punishment.  The  penalty  is  a  development 
rather  than  an  arbitrary  infliction.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death." 
Sin  may  be  divinely  forgiven,  and  yet  go  on  to  produce  in  this  world  aU  sorts  of 
bitter  fruits.  "May  one  be  pardoned  and  retain  the  offence?"  No;  but  the 
pardoned  man  may  retain  in  himself  the  evil  effects  of  what  he  has  done,  and  see, 
with  infinite  remorse,  the  evil  effects  in  others.  The  sin,  as  a  "finished"  fact, 
takes  its  place  in  the  general  procession  of  cause  and  effect,  independently  of  God's 
mercy  to  the  transgressor.  On  the  other  hand,  the  worst  retribution  is  iu  the  moral 
nature  of  the  sinner  himself. 

"  There  is  no  future  pang 
Can  deal  that  justice  on  the  self-condemn'd 
He  deals  on  his  own  soul."     {Manfred.) 

{E.g.,  Shasebpejlbb's  Macbeth;  'Milton's  Satan.) 

No  escape  from  this  retribution  but  in  "  the  cross."  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  hi« 
Son,"  &c.  It  will  not  wipe  out  all  the  effects  of  transgr^i^ion,  but  it  wiU  aiTest  the 
eternal  penalty,  and  perfectly  cleanse  the  fountain  from  which  the  evil  springs. 

II.  The  nobleness  of  a  teuthful  and  fearless  discharge  of  djjty.  Solomon's 
deed  a  homage  to  the  sense  of  duty.  Magnanimity  blended  witB  severity.  He 
spares  Abiathar,'but  has  no  mercy  on  Joab  and  Shimei.  Note  the  reasons  of  this 
distinction.  As  a  "  man  of  peace  "  he  had  no  love  for  this  retributive  work.  It 
might  involve  him  in  trouble.  But  he  shrinks  not  from  doing  the  thing  he  con- 
ceives to  be  right.  Men  often  constrained  by  force  of  circumstances,  or  persuasion 
of  a  Divine  voice  within  them,  to  do  what  they  have  no  natural  inclination  for 
doing.  Essence  of  all  moral  nobleness  to  make  duty  rather  than  incHnation  or 
poUey  the  law  of  one's  life.  In  men  of  highest  natiore  conscience  is  the  ruling 
power.  However  it  may  appear,  that  Life  is  the  most  blessed  which  is  the  most 
perfect  homage  to  the  law  of  right. 

II.  The  superiority  op  Christian  ethics  above  the  moral  standard  of  olden 
TIMES.  In  following  the  chronicles  of  these  old  Hebrew  kings  we  feel  that  we  are 
■moving  in  a  moral  region  of  somewhat  dim  hght  and  low  level.  It  must  needs  be 
so  if  there  is  a  real  law  of  development  in  Scripture  and  the  dispensations  of  God. 
We  may  recognise  the  working  of  Divine  principles  of  truth  and  righteousness  nmid 
the  confusions  of  the  time,  and  yet  feel  that  we  have  in  the  law  of  Christ  a  far  higher 
rule  of  conduct.  We  admit  what  is  good  in  David  and  Solomon,  but  He  is  our 
model  who,  on  the  cross  of  sacrifice,  prayed,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do." — W. 

1    KINGS.  ' 


80 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  in.  1—16. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPIEE  m.  1—15 


The  Bboinnino  of  Solomon's  Beion. — 
In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  seen 
the  establishment  of  Solomon's  rule  (ver. 
46)  by  the  removal  of  internal  foes,  i.e., 
of  disaffected  and  rebellious  subjects.  In 
this  we  see  him  strengthening  his  position 
by  an  external  alliance,  by  a  marriage  with 
an  Egyptian  princess.  This  event,  however, 
is  related  here,  not  because  the  historian 
had  this  connexion  of  ideas  in  his  mind,  but 
probably  because  the  marriage  came  nezt  in 
order  of  time. 

Ver.  1.— And  Solomon  made  affinity  [Not 
"  aUianoe  "  (as  some  have  supposed)  but 
relationship.  Lit.,  made  himself  son-in-law] 
with  Fharaoh  king  of  Egypt  [which  of 
the  Pharaohs  this  was,  it  is  impossible  to 
say  with  certainty.  As,  however,  Shishak 
(oh.  xi.  40 ;  xiv.  25)  is  undoubtedly  the 
Sheshonk  who  succeeded  to  the  throne  of 
Egypt  in  the  26th  year  of  Solomon  (Poole), 
and  who  was  the  first  king  of  the  22Dd 
dynasty  of  Manetho,  we  may  safely  identify 
this  Pharaoh  with  "a  late  Mng  of  the  21st 
(or  Janite)  dynasty."  It  has  been  assumed 
(Bunsen,  Ewald,  Brugsch,  al.)  that  it  was 
Fsusennes  II.,  the  last  king  of  that  house, 
on  the  supposition  that  he  reigned.  35  years, 
(as  stated  by  Eusebius),  but  according  to 
Airicanus,  his  reign  was  limited  to  14  years. 
It  is  wiser  to  say,  therefore,  with  Mr.  Poole 
(Diet.  Bib.,  "Pharaoh  ")  that  this  Pharaoh 
' '  cannot  yet  be  identified  on  Manetho's 
list."  It  is  also  impossible  to  decide  whether 
the  alliance  was  first  sought  by  Solomon 
with  a  view  to  win  over  a  powerful  and 
dangerous  neighbour  (Thenius),  to  whose 
inroads  his  northern  border  was  exposed, 
and  especially  to  counteract  the  influence  (ch. 
xi.  21)  of  Hadad  (Plumptre),  or  whether  the 
marriage  was  proj-vsed  by  Pharaoh  because 
the  21st  dynasty  "had  then  become  very 
weak"  (Eawlinson)  and  its  head  desired 
"  friendly  relations  with  the  kingdom  of 
Israel,  which  had  grown  into  a  i  ower  to 
be  dreaded  "  (Keil).  But  we  may  reasonably 
suppose  that  the  aUianoe  "  must  have  been 
to  most  Israelites  a  very  startling  one " 
(Plumptre.)  Egypt  (Eahab,  Psa.  Ixxxix. 
10;  Isa.  U.  9)  was  to  every  Israelite  a 
name  both  of  triumph  and  dread.  The 
Pharaohs  were  their  ancestral  foes],  and 
took  FIiaraoh'B  daughter  [A  marriage  such 
as  this  was  not  without  precedent  (Qen.  xli. 
45  ;  Bxod.  ii.  21 ;  Num.  xii.  1 ;  Matt.  i.  6 ; 


Euth  iv.  13),  nor  was  it  condemned  by  the 
Law,  which  only  forbade  intermarriage  with 
the  nations  of  Canaan  (Exod.  xxxiv.  16; 
Deut.  vii.  3),  and  sanctioned  the  union  of 
an  Israelite  with  a  captive  taJcen  in  war 
(Deut.  xxi.  13 ;  cf.  xx.  14).  "  At  the  same 
time,  it  was  only  when  the  foreign  wives 
renounced  idolatry  .  .  .  that  such  marriages 
were  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the 
law  "  (Eeil).  As  Solomon  at  this  period  of 
his  life  faithfully  observed  the  law,  as  he  is 
never  blamed  for  this  marriage,  and  as  there 
is  no  trace  whatever  of  the  introduction  of 
Egyptian  rites  into  Israel,  it  is  a  fair  pre- 
sumption that  the  Egyptian  princess  con- 
formed to  the  religion  of  her  adopted 
country] ,  and  brought  her  Into  the  dty  cf 
David  [2  Chrou.  viii.  11  speaks  of  her 
dwelling  in  "the  house  of  David,"  i.e.,  it 
would  seem,  the  palace  which  David  had 
occupied]  until  he  bad  made  an  end  [this 
hardly  shows  that  he  had  begun  to  build, 
as  Keil  infers.  He  did  not  begin  building 
the  Temple  until  the  fourth  (1  Kings  vi.l),  nor 
his  own  house  until  the  eleventh  year  {ib. 
vii.  1)  after  his  accession,  and  the  marriage, 
though  not  at  the  very  commencement  of 
his  reign,  can  hardly  have  been  delayed  to 
the  eleventh  year,  and  may  have  taken  place 
before  the  death  of  Shrmei]  of  building  his 
own  house  [of.  oh.  vii.  7]  and  the  house  of 
the  Lord  [cf .  ch.  vi. ;  vii.  51]  and  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem  round  about.  [Probably,  he 
both  strengthened  and  extended  the  city 
walls,  as  Jospphus  (Ant.  viii.  6.  1)  affirms. 
Ace.  to  the  LXK.  addition  to  ch.  xii.,it  was 
on  this  task  that  Jeroboam  was  employed 
(ch.  xi.  27  ;  cf.  ix.  15).  David  had  fortified 
a  part  of  the  city  (2  Sam.  v.  9). 

Ver.  2.— Only  [The  word  perhaps  signifies 
"that  there  was  one  exception  to  the  flourish- 
ing condition  of  things  which  the  writer 
has  been  describing"  (Eawlinson),  though 
the  people  are  nowhere  blamed  for  sacri- 
ficing on  the  high  places,  and  Solomon's  sac- 
rifice at  "  the  great  high  place  "  was  fuU  of 
blessing.  The  idea  rather  is  that  just  as  he 
was  obliged  to  bring  his  Egyptian  wife  into 
the  city  of  David,  because  his  palace  was 
not  yet  finished,  so  the  people  were  com- 
pelled to  sacrifice  on  the  high  places,  be- 
cause the  temple  was  not  yet  built  (Eeil), 
and  "  the  place  "  where  God  would  put  His 
name  had  only  just  been  chosen  (1  Chron. 
xxii.  1)]  the  people  eacrlBced  [Heb.  were 
sacrificing,  i.e.,  habitually,  constantly]  In 
high  places  [All  nations  have  chosen  hill  tops 
for  acts  of  worship,  perhaps  as  being  nearer 
heaven.  "  Even  Abraham  built  an  altar  to 
the  Lord  on  a  mountain  near  Bethel  (Gen. 


OH.  III.  1—15.] 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


61 


lu.  7,  8 ;  of.  xxii.  2,  9  ;  xxxi.  54)."  And 
the  uae  of  high  places  for  this  purpose  \ras 
not  distinctly  ooudemned  in  the  Law.  It  is 
true  the  Hebrews  were  commanded  to  have 
but  one  place  of  sacrifice  (Lev.  xvii.  9; 
Deut.  xii.  5, 11, 13,  26,  27  ;  of.  Jos.  xxii,  29), 
And  this  no  doubt  was,  if  not  an  indirect 
prohibition,  a  discouragement  of  such 
sanctuaries.  It  has  been  held,  however, 
that  this  command  was  purely  prospective, 
and  it  is  certainly  remarkable  that  even 
when  the  Israelites  were  settled  in  the  pro- 
aiised  land,  and  the  tabernacle  was  Bet  up 
•(Josh,  xviii.  1),  altars  were  constantly  built 
And  sacrifices  offered  on  Ugh  places,  and 
sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  Gideon  (Judg.  vi. 
26),  and  Manoah  [ib.  xiii.  19,  20),  by  express 
Divine  command.  Later  on  we  find  Samuel 
{1  Sam.  vii.  9,  10;  xi.  16;  xvi.  6),  Saul 
/xiii.  9 ;  xiv.  35),  David  (1  Chron.  xxi.  26), 
Solomon  and  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  30),  offer- 
ing sacrifices  in  various  places,  which  they 
•could  not  possibly  have  done  had  it  seemed 
to  them  that  this  was  condemned  before- 
hand by  the  Law.  It  is  highly  probable, 
therefore,  that  though  the  contemporaries  of 
Joshua  took  a  different  view  (as  Josh.  xxii. 
15 — 31  proves),  the  men  of  a  later  age  ex- 
«a£ed  themselves  on  the  ground  stated  in 
the  text,  that  "there  was  no  house  built 
unto  the  name  of  the  Lord."  It  has  been 
held  by  some  that  "  had  they  not  sacrificed 
and  burnt  incense  on  high  places,  they 
could  not  have  sacrificed  or  burnt  incense  at 
all "  (Bp.  Horsley) ;  but  this  seems  to  over- 
look the  fact  that  there  was  one  place  pro- 
vided for  sacrifices — the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle— and  that  for  some  reason  or  other 
they  sacrificed  elsewhere.  And  the  reason, 
no  doubt,  was  the  one  assigned  by  the  his- 
torian. It  should  be  added  that  this  term 
"  high  place  "  (np3)  came  to  be  used  of  all 
places  of  worship,  not  only  on  heights,  but 
•even  those  in  valleys  (2  Kings  xvii.  9  ;  Jer. 
vii.  31 ;  xxxii.  35).  The  Bamah  sometimes 
consisted  of  an  altar  only,  but  as  a  rule, 
there  was  a  shrine  or  sanctuary  erected  hard 
l)y  (ch.  xiii.  32  ;  2  Kings  xvii.  29  ;  xxiii.  19), 
the  Beth-Bamah,  for  which  the  word  Bamah 
is  sometimes  loosely  employed  (ch.  xi.  7; 
xiv.  23  ;  2  Kings  xxi.  3)] ,  because  there  was 
no  liouse  built  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord 
tui'il  those  days. 

Ver.   3. — ^And  Solomon   loved  the  Lord 

[thus  keeping  the  first  and  great  command- 
ment, the  "  Shema  Israel "  (Deut.  vi.  5  ;  of. 
XXX.  16  ;  Matt.  xxii.  37  ;  Luke  x.  27] ,  vralk- 
Ing  la  the  statutes  of  David  his  father  [i.e., 
tnose  which  David  had  kept  (verses  6, 14)  and 
commanded  him  to  keep  (ch.  ii.  4)]  :  only  he 
sacrt&ced  and  burnt  Incense  in  high  places. 

[These  words  clearly  show  that  the  worship 
of  the  high  places,  although  condoned,  and 


indetd  accepted,  by  God  (ver.  6)  was  not 
strictly  lawful  and  right.  It  was  an  igno- 
rance that  God  winked  at.  The  historian, 
remembering  what  the  worship  of  the  high 
places  became,  notices  this  as  an  imperfec- 
tion of  Solomon's  early  reign,  though  ha 
does  not  say  that  such  worship  was  sinful. 

Yer.  4. — ^And  the  Mng  went  to  Glbeoa 
[Josh.  ix.  3 ;  x.  2 ;  xviii.  25 ;  xxi.  17 ; 
2  Sam.  xxi.  1.  Now  known  as  El-Jib,  a 
commanding  eminence  (as  the  name  implies) 
some  six  miles  north  of  Jerusalem.  Strictly, 
it  consists  of  two  heights,  on  one  of  which, 
it  is  conjectured,  the  town  stood,  while  the 
other  was  the  high  place.  Solomon  was 
accompanied  to  Gibeoa  by  "  all  the  congre- 
gation," including  the  captains,  judges,  go- 
vernors, &c.  (2  Chron.  i.  2,  3]  to  sacrifice 
there  [This  religious  service  was  debigned 
to  inaugurate  his  reign  (2  Chron.  i.  13), 
after  the  precedent  of  1  Sam.  xi.  15  ;  cf.  3 
Sam.  vi.  2.  His  object  was  also  to  supph. 
cate  the  Divine  blessing  on  his  undertakings. 
If  his  visit  served  at  the  same  time  as  a 
farewell,  or  "honourable  funeral  to  the 
tabernacle  "  (Wordsw.)  this  was  an  accident] ; 
for  that  was  the  great  high  place  [being 
the  place  of  the  tabernacle  and  brazen 
altar.  In  1  Sam.  xxi.  6  we  find  the  taber- 
nacle at  Nob,  though  without  the  ark  (1 
Sam.  iv.  2).  After  the  massacre  of  the  priests 
it  lost  the  ephod  (1  Sam.  xxii.  20  ;  xxiii.  6). 
It  could  hardly  remain  in  a  spot  stained  by 
so  much  blood ;  but  how  or  when  it  found  its 
way  to  Gibeon,  we  do  not  know.  See  1  Chron. 
xvi.  37,  39;  2  Chron.  i.  3-6] ;  a  thousand  burnt 
offerings  [such  numbers  were  not  infrequent 
at  festivals.  See  on  ch.  viii.  62,  and  cf.  2  Chron. 
xxix.  33,  34.  Bawlinson  reminds  us  that 
"Xerxes  offered  1000  oxen  at  Troy"  (Herod, 
vii.  43).]  did  Solomon  offer  [not,  of  course, 
personally,  as  some  (Ewald,  e.g.)  have  sup 


He  is  said  to  have  "  offered  "  them, 
because  he  (together  with  the  congregation, 
perhaps)  provided  them.  The  immense 
number  alone  shows  that  he  cannot  have 
offered  in  person.  The  festival  probably 
lasted  for  seven  or  eight  days,  but  even  then 
a  thousand  victims  can  hardly  have  been 
offered  whole  (nl75?)  "^iless  the  altar  was 
greatly  enlarged,  or  additional  temporary 
altars  were  erected.  This  latter  supposition 
is  not  negatived  by  the  next  words.  See 
on  ch.  viii.  63,  64.]  upon  that  altar. 

Ver.  5.— In  Gibeon  the  Lord  appeared 
unto  Solomon  in  a  dream  [cf.  Num.  xii.  6. 
A  vision  is  not  necessarily  implied  (as  in 
Gen.  xxviii.  12;  cf.  xv.  12),  though  he  may 
have  seen  some  angelic  form  {angelus  in 
Dei  nomine  ei  apparuit  loquens.  Grotius) — 
of  course,  only  io  his  dream.  Cf.  Matt. 
i.  20;  ii.  12.  Probably  "  appeared  "  is  the 
eijuivalent  of  "revealed  Himself."    Bahr] 


62 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  III.  1 — 16. 


by  night ;  and  Ood  said,  Ask  what  I  shaJl 
give  thee  [of.  Matt.  vii.  7.  This  was  the 
answer  to  the  sacrifices.  The  night  was 
probably  that  which  followed  the  last  day 
on  which  they  were  offered  (ver.  15).] 

Yer.  6. — ^Aad  Solomon  said,  Thou  hast 
shewed  onto  [Heb.  wrought  witK]  thy  ser- 
vant David  my  tiatber  great  mercy  [marg., 
favour]  according  as  he  walked  before  thee 
in  truth,  and  In  righteousness,  and  in  up- 
rightness of  heart  with  thee  [cf.  2  Kings 
XX.  3,  where  Eezekiah  nses  much  the  same 
language  of  himself.  Also  ch.  zi.  4] ,  and 
thou  hast  kept  for  him  this  great  kindness 
[Heb.  favour  ;  same  word  as  above.  David 
himseU  had  regarded  this  as  a  singular 
mercy  (ch.  i.  48)] ,  that  thou  hast  given  him 
a  son  to  sit  [Heb.  sitting]  upon  his  throne, 
as  it  Is  this  day.  [Same  expression  Dent, 
vi.  24 ;  vui.  18 ;  1  Sam.  xxii.  8.  ;  Ezra 
ix.  7.] 

Ver.  7.—  And  now,  0  Lord  my  Go(2,  thou 
hast  made  thy  servant  king  instead  of 
David  my  father ;  and  I  am  but  [Heb.  and 
/  .  .  .  ]  a  little  child :  [These  words  are 
generally  understood  as  indicating  Solo- 
mon's hnmiUty  rather  than  his  age.  No 
doubt,  there  is  some  exaggeration  in  the 
expression,  which  manifestly  is  not  to  be 
taken  au  pied  de  la  lettre  ;  at  the  same  time 
it  is  questionable  whether  such  words  would 
be  used  of  himself  by  a  young  man  of 
twenty,  which  Solomon  is  commonly  sup- 
posed to  have  been.  See  on  ch.  ii.  2,  and  xii. 
8]  I  know  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  In. 
[The  same  phrase  is  found  in  the  Penta- 
teuch, Dent,  xxviii.  6 ;  xxxi.  2.  Also  in  1 
Sam.  xviii.  13  ;  2  Sam.  iii.  25  ;  Ps.  oxxi.  8. 
It  is  the  formula  for  expressing  behaviour, 
conduct,  the  outward  life  of  man.] 

Ter.  8 — ^And  thy  servant  Is  in  the  midst 
of  thy  people  which  thou  hast  chosen  [see 
Deut.  vii.  6] ,  a  great  people,  that  cannot  be 
numbered  nor  counted  for  mtUtltude.  [The 
promisee  of  Gen.  xiii.  16  ;  xv.  5,  lived  in  the 
thoughts  and  language  of  the  Jews,  and  were 
doubtless  the  original  of  this  expression.  Cf. 
also  Num.  vTiii  lo.] 

Ver.  9.— Give  therefore  thy  servant  an 
understanding  [Heb.  hearing.  Cf.  ver.  11 
(Heb.  "to  hear  judgment.")  The  idea  is 
not  docility,  as  the  Vulg.  [cor  docile),  but 
discrimination,  penetration.  Ct  2  Sam. 
xiv.  17  (Heb.) ;  Phil.  1.  9,  10  (marg.)]  heart 
[i.e.,  a  judicial  mind.  The  "  hearing  heart  " 
was  desired,  not  that  it  might  "  give  heed 
to  the  law"  (Keil),  but  to  qualify  him]  to 
Judge  thy  people  [The  Hebrew  Mug,  like  most 
ancient  monarchs,  was  supreme  judge  as 
well  as  governor  ("  prince  and  judge,"  Exod. 
Ii.  14 ;  and  cf.  Exod.  xviii.  16).  The  Jews 
desired  a  long  that  he  might  judge  them 
(1  Sam.  viii  6).    Iheit  rulers  so  tax  had 


been  purely  "Judges"  (D'DSB';  compare 
the  Carthaginian  name,  miffetet.)  When 
they  desired  one  who  should  lead  their 
armies,  they  still  put  his  judicial  functions 
in  the  first  place  (loe.  eit.  ver.  20).  And 
what  were  the  duties  of  a  king  in  this 
respect,  Absalom's  words  (2  Sam.  xv.  4) 
show.  In  vers.  16—28  we  see  Solomon  sit- 
ting as  Chief  Justice] ,  that  I  may  discern 
between  good  and  bad  [i.e.,  right  and 
wrong,  true  and  false ;  cf.  Heb.  v.  14) :  for 
who  Is  able  to  Judge  this  thy  so  great 
[Heb.  /i«ai;^,i.«., numerous;  compare^rav£« 
greges]  a  people.  [The  number  of  the 
Israelites  at  this  period  is  referred  to  in  ch. 
iv.  20.] 

Ver.  10. — And  the  speech  [Heb.  thing  ; 
same  word  as  below]  pleased  the  Lord,  that 
Solomon  had  asked  this  thing.  [Though  in  a 
dream  the  judgment  and  will  were  not  sus- 
pended. Our  dreams  accord  with  our  waking 
thoughts.  This  would  have  been  Solomon's 
choice  at  any  time.] 

Ver.  11. — And  God  said  unto  him.  Because 
thou  hast  asked  this  thing,  and  hast  not 
asked  for  thyself  long  life  [Heb.  many 
days] ;  neither  hast  asked  riches  for  thyself, 
nor  hast  asked  the  life  [i.e.,  destruction  in 
battle]  of  thine  enemies  [not  so  much 
personal  enemies,  like  Hadad  and  Bezon, 
(Raw)inson)  as  military  foes.  The  mean- 
ing is  explained  by  the  corresponding 
word,  "honour"  (TI33  glory)  in  ver.  13]; 
but  hast  asked  [The  word  is  repeated, 
according  to  Hebrew  usage,  now  for  the  sixth 
time]  for  thyself  understanding  to  discern 
[Heb.  hear ;  see  on  ver.  9]  judgment , 

Ver.  12. — Behold,  I  have  done  according 
to  thy  words  [i.e.,  granted  thy  prayer,  as  the 
next  words  show]  :  lo  [Heb.  behold:]  I  have 
given  thee  a  wise  and  an  understanding 
heart,  so  that  there  was  none  like  thee  be- 
fore thee,  neither  after  thee  shall  any  arise 
Uke  unto  thee.  [Cf .  1  Chron.  xxix.  25 ;  2 
Chron.  ix.  22.  But  there  is  no  need  to  re- 
strict the  reference  to  kings  and  princes.] 

Ver.  13.— And  I  have  also  given  thee  that 
which  thou  hast  not  asked,  both  riches  and 
honour  [Heb.  glory] ;  so  that  there  shall  not 
be  any  among  the  kings  Uke  unto  thee  all 
thy  days. 

Ver.  14.— And  If  thou  wilt  walk  In  my 
ways,  to  keep  my  statutes  and  my  com- 
mandments, as  thy  father  David  did  walk 
[ver.  6  ;  xv.  4.  This  is  the  Divine  confirm- 
ation of  David's  words  to  his  son  (ch.  ii.  3, 4) 
and  of  the  son's  description  of  his  father's 
piety  (ver.  6  supra)] ,  then  I  will  lengthen 
thy  days  [Solomon's  days  were  not  of  an 
unusual  length,  as  he  can  hardly  have  been 
more  than  sixty  (if  so  much),  although 
called  Ipj     (ch.  xi.  4)   at  the  time  of  hia 


CH.  HI,  1— 16.j 


THE  FIESr  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


6a 


deoease.     But  he  had  not  fnlfiUed  the  oon- 
dition  (ch.  xi.  9—12). 

Ver.  15. — And  Solomon  awoke ;  and,  be- 
hold, It  was  a  dream  [That  ia  to  eay,  this 
passed  while  Solomon  slept ;  but  it  was  more 
than  a  dream.  The  same  words  are  used 
of  Pharaoh  (Gen.  xli.  7)  when  God  showed 
him  what  He  was  about  to  do  (vers.  25,  28, 
cf.  ch.  xl.  8),  and  this  was  such  a  dream  as 
Pharaoh's  and  as  Joseph's  (Matt.  i.  20  ;  ii. 
19).  It  was  a  dream,  i.e.,  in  which  a  Divine 
revelation  was  made  to  him.  Wordsw.  refers 
to  Solomon's  words,  "  I  sleep,  but  my  heart 
waketh  "  (Cant.  v.  2),  and  "  He  giveth  to  his 
beloved  (Jedidiah)  in  sleep  "  (Ps.  cxxvii.  2)] . 
And  be  came  to  Jeraaalem,  and  stood  before 


the  ark  of  the  covenant  [the  other  sanotu- 
ary  of  that  period  (2  Sam.  vi.  17  ;  1  Chron. 
xvi.  37-40)]  and  offered  up  burnt  offering! 
[probably  in  continuation  of  the  sacrifices 
of  Gibeon,  ver.  4] ,  and  offered  peace  offer- 
ings [in  testimony  of  his  thankfulness  for 
the  signal  favour  recently  vouchsafed  to 
him]  and  made  a  feast  [lit.,  a  drinUng. 
After  the  example  of  David,  1  Chron.  xvi.  3. 
Cf .  1  Kings  viii.  65.  It  was  not  exclusively 
a  symposium.  The  flesh  of  the  animals 
offered  in  sacrifice  was  eaten  by  the  wor- 
shippers and  their  guests  (Lev.  vii.  15,  31 ; 
1  Sam.  ii.  16 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  18).  This  was 
"  a  sacrificial  meal  of  the  CD?^  "  (Keil). 
See  on  ch.  viii.  63]  to  aJI  his  servants. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Ver.  8. — The  Grace  and  Place  of  Love,  "  And  Solomon  loved  the  Lord,  walk- 
ihg  in  all  the  statutes  of  David  his  father,  only  ....  he  sacrificed,"  &o. 

Of  how  many  men,  as  well  as  of  the  wisest  of  men,  may  some  such  words  be  used. 
Of  some  few  it  may  perhaps  be  averred  that  they  have  loved  the  Lord  "  with  a  per- 
fect heart,"  of  fewer  stili,  if  any,  that  they  have  loved  Him  with  aU  the  heart,  and 
all  the  mind,  and  aU  the  soul,  and  all  the  strength.  But  in  the  case  of  most,  a 
qualifying  clause  must  be  added,  an  "  only."  Along  with  sincere  piety,  with  devout 
love  to  Him  who  first  loved  us,  how  often  are  there  found  imperfections,  infir- 
mities, sins.  Sometimes,  e.g.,  the  loved  is  tinged  with  superstition,  as  in  the  case  of 
'St.  Theresa,  Lacordaire,  and  many  Bomanists ;  sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  Calvin 
and  many  Protestants,  it  is  marked  by  harshness  and  intolerance ;  sometimes,  as  in 
the  case  of  Sohleiermacher  and  Bunsen,  it  is  infected  with  rationalism.  The  love, 
that  is  to  say,  is  not  without  alloy ;  it  is  not  the  pure  refined  gold.  In  some  of  the 
blessed  saints  we  find  narrowness  and  bigotry,  in  others  fanaticism ;  in  others,  again, 
Pharisaism  and  presumption.  Now  all  these  "  love  the  Lord  ....  only  .  .  .  ." 
But  observe.  Solomon  was  loved  of  God  ;  blessed,  enriched,  and  prospered  of  God, 
despite  this  "  only ;"  notwithstanding,  i.e.,  that  his  sacrifice  and  service  were  marked 
by  imperfection.    Hence  learn — 

I.  That  God  loves  those  who  love  Him,  despite  their  impeepections.  01 
course  God  loves  men  who  do  not  love  Him.  "  God  commendeth  His  love  towards 
us  in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners,"  &c.  We  often  say  to  children,  "  God  doesn't 
love  you  when  you  are  naughty,"  but  this  is  vicious  theology.  If  this  were  so,  there 
had  been  no  hope  for  our  world.  But  He  is  good  to  the  unthankful  and  evil.  Yes, 
the  love  must  begin  with  God.  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  And 
the  love  that  bore  with  our  sins,  in  the  days  of  our  impenitence,  now  bears  also  with 
our  infirmities  and  ignorances.  Neither  superstition  nor  narrowness  nor  fanaticism 
"nor  any  other  creature  can  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,"  &o. 

II.  That  God  forgives  those  who  love  Him,  notwithstanding  their  infir- 
mities. It  is  not  meant  here  that  our  love  can  make  any  atonement  or  reparation 
for  our  sins.  We  know  of  no  merits  or  mediation  but  His.  "  Your  sins  are  for- 
given you  for  Hia  na/mda  Bake."  But  where  there  is  love,  there  is  forgiveness 
(Luke  vii.  47).  Why,  love  involves  penitence  and  faith,  and  ensures  obedience. 
{Observe  the  next  words,  "Walking  in  all  the  statutes,"  &o.)  Thus,  the  three 
conditions  of  forgiveness  are  all  comprehended  in  love. 

III.  That  God  will  receive  those  who  love  Him,  despite  their  ignoranoeb. 
The  gate  of  heaven  is  never  shut  against  love,  and  only  love  vstlU  open  it. 

"  0  merchant,  at  heaven's  gate,  for  heavenly  ware 
Love  is  the  only  coin  that  passes  there." 

It  must  be  so,  for  "  lore  is  heaven,  and  heaven  is  love." 


54  THE  FLBSX  BOOK  OF  KINGS,  L^^h.  hi,  1—15. 

IV.  That  we  ought  to  love  those  who  love  God,  despite  their  ignorances, 
ufFiRMiTiKS,  AND  IMPERFECTIONS.  If  tlie  Eternal  Love  overlooks  our  "only"  surely 
we  ought  to  overlook  the  "  only"  of  others.  We  may  regret  their  views,  we  may 
think  them  unsound  in  the  faith,  we  may  lament  their  superstition,  their  lack  ol 
"  sweetness  and  light,"  their  vulgarity,  or  fanaticism,  hut  if  God  loves  them,  and 
receives  them  notwithstanding,  what  right  have  we  to  do  otherwise  ?  If  they  love- 
our  Lord,  then  they  are  entitled  to  our  love.  "  Grace  he  unto  all  them  that  lore 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity."  We  find,  consequently,  in  the  rehgion  both 
of  the  Old  Testament  and  of  the  New — 

V.  That  love  is  everything.  It  is  1.  The  fulfilling  of  the  law  (Bom.  xiii.  8. 
10;  Matt.  xxii.  37 — 40).  We  cannot  break  the  law  if  we  love.  "Habe  caritalemetfac 
quicquid  via,"  said  St.  Augustine.  2.  The  stamp  and  seal  royal  of  the  Ghriatiam^ 
"  He  that  loveth,  is  horn  of  God."  "By  this  shaU  aU  men  know  that  ye  are  my 
disciples,  if  ye  have  love,"  &o.  It  has  been  said,  "  Pectus  est  quod  theologum  facit." 
It  is  equally  true  that  the  heart  makes  the  Chrisiiam,,  8.  The  glory  of  the  mem. 
It  was  the  greatest  glory  of  Solomon.  The  highest  praise  recorded  of  him  is,  not 
that  "he  was  wiser  than  all  men  ' '  (ch.  iv.  31),  nor  yet  that  he  "  exceeded  all  the  kings 
of  the  earth  for  riches  and  wisdom"  (ch.  x.  83),  but  that  he  loved  the  Lord.  "The- 
best  thing  that  can  be  said  of  a  man  is  that  he  loves  God."  Solomon  in  all  his 
glory  is  not  greater  than  the  poorest  of  the  saints.  4.  The  one  thing  needful.  The 
one  thing  God  demands  is  the  heart.  (Adelaide  Procter's  beautiful  poem,  "  Qive  me 
thy  heart,"  affords  a  fine  illustration  here.)  It  is  the  mainspring  of  the  man.  The 
hfe  depends  on  the  heart.  In  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  when  the  Bomaa 
Gathohcs  were  commanded  to  attend  Church  under  pains  and  penalties,  some  of 
their  leaders  appUed  to  the  Pope  for  guidance.  "  Let  the  Cathohcs  of  England," 
was  the  astute  reply,  "give  me  their  hearts,  and  the  Queen  may  do  what  she  Iike& 
with  the  rest." 

Vers.  6 — 15. — Go^t  Qifts  and  Solomon's  Choice.  "  And  God  said,  Ask  wLut 
I  shall  give  thee,"  &e.  "Happy  Solomon  I"  we  exclaim,  as  we  read  these 
words.  He  had  all  that  ea/rth  could  give  already — youth,  wealth,  prosperity, 
glory,  greatness.  He  stood  already  on  the  topmost  pinnacle  of  human  feUcity. 
And  now  Heaven  offers  him  his  choice  of  blessings ;  now  the  treasure-house  of  the 
infinite  God  is  opened,  and  he  is  bidden  to  take  what  he  will.  Behold  the  favourite 
of  Heaven  1  It  is  indeed  true  "  there  was  none  like  thee  before  thee,  neither  after 
thee  shall  any  arise  like  unto  thee  "  (ver.  12).  Biit  stay  I  Solomon's  is  not  an  ex- 
ceptional case.  If  we  have  not  his  temporal  advantages,  we  may  share  his 
spiritual  blessings.  For  to  us— to  all,  that  is,  who,  like  Solomon,  "  love  the  Lord  "■ 
^does  the  same  voice  speak,  saying,  "  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee."  Yes ;  He  who 
spake  to  this  new-crowned  king  in  the  night  visions  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken 
unto  us  by  His  Son,  saying,  "  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you."    Let  us  consider — 

I.  LiiiB  Solomon,  we  are  commanded  to  ask.  It  is  not  that  we  are  per- 
mitted so  to  do :  it  is  made  a  positive  duty.  If  we  do  not  ask,  we  sin.  "  Ask,"' 
"  seek,"  "  knock  " — these  are  the  injunctions  of  our  Lord  and  Master.  Asking  is 
an  essential  part  of  our  rehgion.     "  Prayer  is  the  Christian's  vital  breath." 

II.  Like  Solomon,  we  have  but  to  ask,  and  God  will  give.  Solomon  was 
not  a  favourite  of  Heaven.  God  has  no  favourites— that  would  argue  imperfection 
in  the  Deity.  "  Every  one  that  asketh  receiveth,"  &o.  "  Whosoever  shall  call  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  "  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  .  .  . 
and  it  shall  be  given  him."  If  we  have  not  wisdom,  blessing,  pardon,  peace,  it  is 
all  for  want  of  asking.  God  is  "  more  ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray."  And  observe 
here :  we  are  commanded  to  ask,  and  God  is  sure  to  give,  because  He  loves  to 
give ;  it  is  His  nature  and  property  to  give.  Not  only  (as  has  been  beautifully  said) 
18  "  the  greatest  Being  in  the  world  the  greatest  giver,"  but  it  is  an  essential  part 
of  His  perfections  to  give.  We  often  say  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  re- 
ceive," but  God  acts  on  this  principle.  It  is  the  nature  of  man  to  take.  The  first 
lesson  the  child  learns  is  to  grasj*.  Covetousness,  the  desire  to  have,  is  a  part  of 
our  being     It  U  a  part  of  His  bemg  to  desire  to  impart    He  abhors  a  vacuum. 


CH.  m,  1—15.]  XHJE  FliiST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS.  66 

III.  Like  Ahaz,  many  sat,  "  I  will  not  ask."  They  will  not  believe  in  the 
wonderful  charity  of  God.  To  some  it  seems  too  good  to  be  true.  But  many  have 
no  room  for  God's  gifts.  Their  heart  is  full  already.  "  No  room  for  Him  in  the  inn." 

lY.  Like  Solomon,  let  us  ask  the  best  gifts.  That  is  an  instructiye  fabld 
which  teUs  how  Hercules,  on  attaining  manhood,  went  out  into  solitude,  and  sitting 
down  there,  deliberated  long  and  anxiously  with  himself  which  of  the  two  ways 
before  him  it  were  better  to  take— the  way  of  pleasure,  or  the  way  of  virtue.  Such 
a  crisis,  involving  such  a  choice,  happens  in  every  life.  Solomon  must  now  make 
his  choice,  and  it  really  lies  between  pleasure  and  duty,  between  temporal  and 
eternal  blessings.  He  may  choose  glory,  wealth,  renown  —  in  a  word,  earthly 
pleasure  and  prosperity — or  he  may  choose  character,  wisdom,  goodness  ;  in  oilier 
words,  heavenly  and  abiding  treasure.  We  know  which  he  chose.  So  each  oue 
of  us  has  to  choose  in  turn  between  the  showy  and  the  solid,  between  the  bighw 
and  the  lower,  between  God  and  Mammon. 

"  Once  to  every  man  and  nation,  comes  the  moment  to  decide 
In  the  strife  of  Truth  with  Falsehood,  for  the  good  or  evil  side. 

Then  it  is  the  brave  man  chooses,  while  the  coward  stands  aside, 
Doubting  in  his  abject  spirit,  till  his  Lord  is  citicified." 

V.  If,  like  Solomon,  we  choose  the  best  gifts,  the  other  anb  iNnmeB 
BLESSINGS  ARE  THROWN  IN  WITH  THEM.  Consider:  God  gave  Solo»i»n  wisdom 
because  he  asked  for  it,  and  at  the  same  time  gave  him  wealth  because  he  did  not 
ask  for  it.  His  choice  of  the  higher  showed  he  was  fit  to  be  entrusted  wi*fa  the 
lower.  The  gifts  men  covet  most,  viz.,  "  riches  and  honour,"  are  of  so  httle  account 
with  God  that  He  adds  them  as  a  make-weight.  Just  as  when  we  buy  a  jewel  the 
case  is  thrown  in  as  part  of  the  purchase,  so  those  who  choose  the  better  part  receive 
at  the  same  time  aU  that  is  necessary  for  them.  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdont  of 
God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  And 
here  again  observe,  that  not  only  is  it  God's  nature  to  give,  but  to  give  "  exceeding 
abundantly,  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  He  is  "  wont  to  do  more  than  either 
we  desire  or  deserve."  Thus  the  disciples  asked  for  a  form  of  prayer  (Luke  xi.  1). 
Our  blessed  Lord  gave  them  their  desire,  and  gave  at  the  same  time  what  they 
never  dreamed  of  asking  for — some  precious  directions  as  to  the  spirit  of  prayer, 
as  to  perseverance  in  prayer,  &c.  (ib.  vers.  6 — 18).  The  same  idea  is  embodied  in  a 
stanza  of  Wordsworth's — 

"  I  knelt  before  Thy  gracious  throne, 

And  asked  for  peace  with  suppliant  knet ; 
And  peace  was  given  ;  rwt  peace  alone, 
But  love  and  joy  and  ecstasy." 

It  was  in  the  night  visions  that  God  epoke  to  Solomon.  It  ifl  in  no  dream,  no 
vision,  but  in  His  own  written  word,  He  says  to  us,  "  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee.' 
Which  shall  we  imitate,  Solomon  or  Ahaz?  Shall  we  have  aU  or  none?  But  it 
may  be  said,  Solomon's  wisdom  did  him  no  great  service  after  all.  His  prayer  iid 
not  keep  him  from  faUing.  But  why  was  this  ?  It  was  just  because  he  ceased  to 
care  for  wisdom  and  piety,  and  ceased  to  ask  for  it.     Learn,  then,  in  conclusion— 

VI.  If,  LIKE  Solomon,  we  cease  to  covet  the  best  gifts,  and  care  only 

FOR  the   lower,  we    SHALL    CERTAINLY   LOSE    THE    FORMER,  AND   MAY   POSSIBLY  LOSE 

BOTH.  So  that  Solomon's  prayer  mav  teach  us  this  last  lesson,  that  "  men  ought 
always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint."  Yes,  it  seems,  as  we  think  of  the  beginning  and 
then  of  the  end  of  this  ouissant  prince— it  seems  as  if  his  father's  last  words  rous. 
have  been  prophetic— "If  thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee;  but  if  thou 
forsake  hun,  he  will  cast  thee  off  for  ever"  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9)  ;  and  Solomon  s 
fall  solemnly  echoes  and  emphasizes  the  words  which  follow— 0  that  be  had  Uia 
them  to  heart  1—"  Take  heed  now ''  (ver.  10). 


S6  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  m.  1—15. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAKIOUS  ATJTHOES. 

Vers.  8 — 16;  iv.  2 — 34. — The  prayer  of  Solomon  and  its  fulfilment,  "Ask 
what  I  shall  give  thee." 

The  prayek  of  Solomon  is  the  type  op  true  prayer.  We  learn  from  it  (1) 
The  power  of  prayer ;  (2)  The  condition  on  which  it  is  granted ;  (3)  Its  result. 

I.  The  Power.  "  Prayer,"  said  Adolphe  Monod,  '•  sets  in  motion  the  whole 
power  of  God."  The  words  of  God  to  Solomon  show  us  this  Almighty  power, 
placing  itself,  as  it  were,  at  the  disposition  of  human  weakness.  When  the  Son  of  God 
came  to  earth,  taking  upon  Himself  our  frail  humanity,  that  He  might  perfectly 
sympathize  with  aU  its  woes.  He  spoke  in  the  same  way  to  the  poor  bhnd  Barti- 
mseus :  "  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  ?  "  (Mark  x.  51).  Before  going 
back  to  heaven  He  addressed  the  same  language  to  His  disciples :  "  Whatsoever  ye 
shall  ash  the  Father  in  my  name.  He  will  give  it  you"  (John  xvi.  23).  Let  us  then 
ask  aU  that  we  need  with  holy  boldness,  for  it  is  God  Himself  who  bids  us  do  so. 
Like  the  father  of  the  prodigal  son,  He  always  comes  to  meet  us.  Our  hopes  and 
desires  can  never  be  so  large  as  His  promises.  We  truly  honour  Him  when  we  make 
His  love  the  measure  of  our  trust. 

II.  The  conditions  on  which  oue  prayers  are  granted  are  :  {a)  Full  trust  in 
this  infinite  love,  and  grateful  remembrance  of  favours  received:  "Thou  hast 
showed  unto  David  my  father  great  mercy  ....  and  hast  given  him  a  son  to  sit 
on  his  throne"  (ver.  6).  (6)  The  consciousness  of  our  own  helplessness  and 
weakness :  "  I  am  hut  as  a  little  child,  and  know  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  in' 
(ver.  7).  (c)  The  precedence  given  to  spiritual  over  temporal  gifts :  "  Gir.e  thy 
servant  an  understamding  heairt  "  (ver.  9).  Prayer  is  not  intended  to  bring  to  us 
at  once  aU  material  prosperity.  Such  an  answer  to  prayer  might  be  often  injurious, 
hardening  the  heart,  and  depriving  us  of  the  salutary  discipline  of  trial.  If  the 
thing  we  sought  beyond  aU  else  was  material  prosperity,  we  should  be  mere  mer- 
cenaries. We  are  always  heard,  but  not  always  in  the  way  we  desire,  so  far  as  our 
earthly  life  is  concerned.  But  when  we  ask  of  God  a  new  and  understanding  heart, 
wc  are  asking  that  which  He  is  pledged  to  grant,  for  it  is  written :  "  If  any  man  lack 
wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not." 

III.  The  result  of  the  prayer  of  Solomon  was  not  only  the  spiritual  grace  he 
sought,  but  also  the  prosperity  and  glory  of  his  reign.  "  I  have  also  given  .ihee 
that  which  thou  hast  not  asked  "  (ver.  13).  There  is  a  general  application  boSi  to 
individuals  and  nations  of  the  words  of  Christ:  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  His  righteousness,  and  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  you"  (Matt.  tL  33), 
with  the  exception  of  afflictions,  which  may  be  necessary  as  discipline,  and  on  the 
condition  that  we  walk  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  (ver.  14),  for  the  mercy  of  God, 
free  as  it  is,  is  still  bound  up  with  His  holiness,  and  cannot  suffer  the  violation  of 
His  laws. — E.  de  P. 

Vers.  5 — IQ.—  A  wise  prayer.  Gibeon,  the  scene  of  this  incident,  was  one  oi 
the  "  high  places"  of  the  land.  Worship  in  high  places  had  been  forbidden.  Law 
against  it  not  rigidly  enforced  untU  the  place  was  chosen  "  where  the  Lord  would 
cause  his  name  to  dwell."  That  Solomon's  act  in  sacrificing  at  Gibeon  was  not 
condemned  is  proved  by  his  being  favoured  with  this  direct  Divine  communication. 
Every  scene  of  real  worship  may  become  the  scene  of  special  Divine  manifestation. 
"  Tlie  Lord  appeared  unto  Solomon  in  a  dream  of  the  night."  Whatever  our  theory 
of  these  dreams_  of  the  olden  times,  it  was  evidently  an  articulate  and  intelligible 
Divine  communication  that  Solomon  had,  and  his  spirit  was  intensely  active.  His 
choice  of  wisdom  rather  than  riches,  &c.,  was  an  act  of  judgment,  a  decision  of  the 
win,  and  therefore  indicative  of  moral  character.  The  whole  spirit  of  his  prayer 
most  honourable  to  hun.  The  prayer  is,  m  a  sense,  answered  before  it  is  presented. 
Every  holy  yearning  of  the  pious  soul  contams  within  itself  the  pledge  of  its  own 
fulfilment. 

I.  The  natoeb  of  true  wisdom.    A  power  of  moral  discernment.    "An  under- 


OH.  III.  1—16.]  THE  FIE8T  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  67 

standing  heart  to  judge,"  &o.  This  was  the  virtue  of  Solomon's  prayer — it  craved 
a  moral  rather  than  mere  circumstantial,  or  even  intellectual,  endowment.  He 
had  the  wisdom  of  the  man  of  science,  the  "minute  philosopher"  (see  chap.  iv. 
83).  But  higher  wisdom  was  wanted  for  higher  work— for  guiding  and 
governing  the  people — and  this  is  what  he  prayed  for.  Little  trace  in  Solomcn  oi 
the  pure,  fervent  spirit  of  devotion  that  glowed  in  his  father  David.  The  yearning 
of  David's  heart  was  not  so  much  for  wisdom  as  for  holiness.  But  Solomon  has 
a  lofty  ideal  of  kingly  rule  before  him,  and  this  is  how  he  seeks  to  realize  it. 

1.  Wisdom  is  a  practical  quality ;  not  merely  theoretical ;  consists  less  in  true  ideas 
than  in  the  ability  to  embody  them  in  a  real  and  living  form ;  not  knowledge  or 
insight,  hut  power  to  turn  what  is  known  and  understood  to  highest  account.  In 
conamon  affairs  of  hfe — in  matters  of  business,  science,  art — how  many  clever 
theoretical  men  are  there  whose  cleverness  never  takes  a  tangible,  practical  form  I 
You  can  point  to  nothing  that  they  have  ever  done  as  a  worthy  expression  of  their 
native  capacity.  Only  in  a  quaMed  sense  are  such  men  "  vrise."  How  much  more 
in  the  higher  sphere  of  moral  and  religious  life.  Here  also  a  science  and  an  art,  the 
ideal  and  the  practical.  Wisdom  is  the  combination  of  the  two.  It  is  thought  and 
it  is  life — the  science  of  spiritual  truth  and  reality  married  to  the  divine  art  of  living 
under  the  influence  of  what  is  real  and  true. 

2.  Wisdom  deals  with  those  eternal  principles  that  underlie  the  surface  ap- 
pearances of  life.  The  judgment  of  Solomon  in  the  dispute  between  the  two 
women  about  the  child  (verse  16  to  end)  j«  suggestive  here.  Its  pecuHarity  is,  that 
instead  of  trusting  to  appearances  to  decide  the  doubt,  he  leaves  the  decision  to  the 
deep  instinct  of  the  mother's  nature,  i.e.,  his  wisdom  is  seen  in  calling  to  its  aid  a 
principle  profoun'der  and  less  fallible  than  itself.  Apply  this  to  the  higher  conduct 
of  life.  We  want  something  more  reUable  than  our  own  observation  or  reason  as 
a  guide.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.''  Lay  hold  on  God. 
Walk  by  faith.    Let  there  be  a  divine  element  in  your  life : 

"  There  is  more  wisdom  in  a  whisper'd  prayer 
Than  in  the  ancient  lore  of  all  the  schools," 

How  great  the  wisdom  of  him  whose  whole  daily  life  is  a  heaven-ascending  prayer  I 

II.  The  divinb  origin  of  wisdom.  "Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee."  God  is  the 
infinite  Fount  of  Wisdom,  and  He  "  gives"  from  His  exhaustless  fulness.  "  The 
Father  of  Lights."  What  a  world  of  wonders  is  the  book  of  Nature  I  What  creative 
thought,  constructive  skill,  wise  adaptation  are  here  I  A  world  of  profounder 
wonders  is  the  Book  of  Truth.  "  0  the  depth  of  the  riches,''  &c.  But  this  is 
revelation ;  we  have  to  think  of  impartation.  God  will  give  wisdom.  "  Ask  what 
I  shall  give  thee."  "  If  any  man  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  of  God,"  &c.  All  true 
hght  that  guides  man  in  any  right  path  is  His  gift.  Most  of  all  those  right 
thoughts,  high  aspirations,  holy  energies,  which  are  the  very  life  of  men.  Man 
can  only  disclose  his  mental  riches.  The  philosopher  cannot  "give"  the  rustic 
wisdom,  nor  the  father  or  teacher  the  child.  God  sheds  the  light  of  His  Spirit 
into  the  soul.    "  If  ye  being  evU,"  &c. 

III.  The  abundant  reward  op  wisdom.  "  And  I  have  also  given  thee,"  &c. 
(ver.  13),  God's  beneficence  exceeds  the  expectations  of  His  children.  "  Able 
to  do  exceeding  abundantly,"  &c.  (Eph.  ui.  20),  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom 
of  God,"  &c.  (Matt.  vi.  33).  -W. 

Ver.  5. — Sermon  for  Children.  Waiting  for  Ood!s  voice.  Little  children  are 
sometimes  intended  to  do  great  things.  God  has  a  special  place  for  everyone  to  fill. 
Sometimes  the  child  who  is  least  thought  of  in  the  home  or  in  the  class  is  to  have 
the  noblest  destiny.  Two  brothers  once  lived  in  the  same  tent.  One  was  brave 
and  manly,  a  great  hunter,  and  a  popular,  generous  man,  but  his  younger  and 
feebler  brother,  Jacob,  became  greater  than  he.  In  Jesse's  family  at  Bethlehem 
there  were  young  men,  tall,  comely,  and  heroic,  yet  their  shepherd  brother,  whom 
they  despised,  was  chosen  to  be  their  king.  Now  in  David's  own  family  God  made 
His  choice;  and  overlooking  the  beautiftil  Absalom,  and  the  ambitious  Adonijah, 


68  THE  FIKST-BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  m.  1—16. 


he  selected  Solomon,  their  youngest  and  gentlest  brother,  to  be  king  over  one  of  the 
richest  kingdoms  in  the  world,  and  to  rule  His  own  people  in  the  time  of  their 
greatest  prosperity.  It  may  be  that  some  lads  here,  who  are  httle  thought  of,  may 
become  the  leaders  of  a  nation  to  a  nobler  life,  the  teachers  of  their  age,  to  whom 
the  world  will  gladly  listen.  But  whatever  sphere  you  have  to  fill,  you  will  only 
be  ready  to  fill  it  well  when  you  begin,  as  Solomon  began  his  reign,  by  listening  to 
the  voice  of  God.  This  was  the  most  interesting  part  of  Solomon's  life.  He  was 
now  at  his  best.  Ascending  his  father's  throne,  he  was  conscious  of  his  responsi- 
bility, and  asked  God  to  give  him  wisdom  (James  i.  5,  6).  In  youth  our  future  is 
generally  decided.  If  we  go  wrong  then,  it  is  not  easy  to  be  set  right.  An  injury 
done  to  a  living  thing  during  its  growing  time  is  irreparable.  The  man  who  was 
crippled  when  he  was  a  child,  the  tree  blasted  when  it  was  a  sapling,  cannot  by  any 
subsequent  care  be  made  straight  and  whole.  Solomon,  however,  started  well — 
going  up  to  the  ancient  tabernacle  in  Gibeon,  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the  Lord. 

Let  us  see  what  preparation  Solomon  had  for  the  d/ream,  ip«k*n  of  here.  Many 
a  child  says,  "  I  wish  God  would  come  to  me,  and  teU  me  I  might  ask  for  what- 
ever I  liked.  I  often  say  my  prayers,  but  God  does  not  seem  real  to  me.  I  never 
see  Him  or  hear  Him."  You  wiU  not  see  Him  as  did  Solomon,  nor  hear  Him  as 
did  Samuel.  But  you  may  feel  Him  in  your  thoughts— in  the  prompting  to  do 
right,  or  to  speak  the  truth  when  doing  this  may  get  you  into  trouble  ;  and  in  the 
rehef  and  rest  you  know  after  telling  God  about  the  sorrow  you  have.  [Quote  part 
of  Faber's  hymn :  "  Dear  Jesus,  ever  at  my  side."  TeU  some  story  of  a  child  who 
has  found  help,  relief,  and  rest  in  prayer.  This  will  bring  the  old  story  of  Solomon 
near  to  the  experience  of  children.] 

Three  things  prepared  Solomon  for  listening  to  God. 

I.  Solomon  had  come  from  worship.  Describe  the  old  tabernacle,  now  pitched 
on  the  top  of  the  hill  at  Gibeon ;  the  coming  of  the  procession  of  nobles,  soldiers, 
priests,  &o.,  to  the  sacred  festival ;  the  offering  of  the  thousand  victims  ;  the  song  of 
praise,  the  united  prayers,  &c.  This  worship  prepared  the  young  king  for  his 
dream.  Children  go  to  Sunday  schools  who  are  seldom  found  in  God's  house. 
Trace  the  lads  and  girls  leaving  the  senior  classes  to  spend  then-  Sundays  in  pleasure 
and  sin — their  forced  merriment,  their  aching  hearts.  Trying  to  forget  God,  they 
are  not  prepared  to  see  Him  as  Solomon  did.  Contrast  with  this  the  day  spent  in 
worship.  The  childi-en  whose  hearts  are  uplifted  by  songs  of  praise,  who  have  been 
hearing  of  the  love  of  God  in  Clirist,  who  have  been  reminded  of  those  who  knew 
the  Lord,  are  prepared  to  say,  as  Samuel  said,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  servant 
heareth  1  " 

II.  Solomon  was  alone  with  God.  The  crowd  had  dispersed.  The  shouts, 
and  songs,  and  music  were  silent.  The  stars  shone  down  on  the  camp,  and  in  liis 
own  royal  tent  the  young  king  had  retu-ed  to  rest.  As  he  slept  he  dreamed,  and  a 
happy  night  followed  a  lioly  day.  Dreams  were  often  used  by  God  in  olden  days. 
Give  examples.  These  were  overruled,  but  they  were  natural.  A  dream  is  the 
product  of  familiar  thoughts.  Boys  don't  dream  of  protoplasm,  of  which  they  know 
nothing,  but  of  cricket,  lessons,  companions,  &c.  The  elements  of  a  dream  are  in 
the  mind  before  sleep  ;  e.g.,  the  Midianitish  soldier  dreamt  of  a  barley  cake,  which 
was  his  ordinary  food ;  the  Egyptian  butler,  of  Pharaoh's  cup ;  the  baker,  of  liis 
white  baskets  of  bakemeats,  &o.  So  Solomon  had  been  thinking  about  his  kingdom — 
the  greatness  of  his  father,  the  overruling  providence  of  God ;  he  had  been  filled 
with  a  desire  to  rule  wisely,  had  been  fired  with  devotion  during  the  day,  and  all 
these  things  re-appeared  in  his  dream.  If  you  have  never  had  such  dream,  you 
have  had  quiet  times  when  you  were  ill,  or  before  going  to  rest,  when  God  seemed 
real  to  you.  Eecall  the  first  time  when  the  old  form  of  prayer  had  a  new  meaning, 
when  God  seemed  close,  and  loving,  and  gracious.  An  example  from  child  Ufa 
may  be  readily  found. 

III.  Solomon  was  listening  to  God,  who  said,  "Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee." 
Sometimes  children  wish  that  the  fauries,  of  whom  they  read,  actually  existed ;  that 
one,  with  her  fair  form  and  beautiful  wapd,  would  come  and  say,  "Ask  what 
I  shall  give  thee."    Many,  hke  Cinderella,  would  exchange  drudgery  for  glitter. 


OH.  ni.  1— 15.j  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  6( 

God  does  not  do  this.  If  He  did,  many  of  us  would  ignorantly  ask  for  foolish 
things.  We  do  not  know  what  we  shall  be  doing  or  wanting  even  to-morrow. 
If  you  were  going  abroad  and  did  not  know  for  what  country  you  were  des- 
tined, nor  even  whether  it  was  hot  or  cold,  civilized  or  uncivilizeil,  it  would  not 
be  wise  to  provide  things  on  the  chance  they  might  be  useful.  You  might  get 
weapons  of  defence  for  a  country  where  they  would  not  be  wanted,  and  have  to 
wear  in  the  tropics  clothing  only  suited  to  the  polar  seas.  It  would  not  be  really 
kind  for  your  father  to  say,  "  Now  go  into  that  shop,  and  get  whatever  you  hke." 
You  would  say,  "  No,  thank  you ;  as  you  know  where  I  am  going,  and  I  don't,  I 
would  rather  trust  you  ;  though  if  you  think  it  would  be  good,  I  should  like  this,  or 
that."  So  we  are  taught  to  pray  to  our  Heavenly  Father.'  Give  examples.  Some- 
times God  does  give  us  what  we  fooHshly  choose,  as  the  father  did  to  the  prodigal, 
and  then  sorrow  teaches  us  the  folly  of  our  self-will.  The  freedom  to  ask  anything 
can  only  be  given  safely  to  those  who  are  like  Solomon.  He  had  just  given  himself 
up  to  God  as  a  living  sacrifice,  and  had  asked  God  to  accept  him  and  use  him  for 
His  service  ;  for  it  was  this  which  he  expressed  by  his  offeriug  of  a  thousand  burnt 
sacrifices.  (Eomans  xii.  1.)  If  you  can  say  in  your  heart,  "Lord,  I  want  to  become 
like  Jesus  Christ,  and  always  to  be  obedient  to  Thy  will;  I  long  to  be  earnest  and 
humble,  and  pure,  and  loving,  and  to  live  altogether  for  Thee ; "  then  He  says, 
of  all  that  will  keep  you  toward  that,  "Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,  and  your  joy 
shall  be  full." 

Show  the  necessity  of  prayer  to  children  ;  point  out  their  special  temptations  to 
neglect  it;  and  close  by  the  story  of  Esther  going  into  the  king's  presence  with 
trembling,  only  to  see  the  golden  sceptre  extended,  and  to  hear  the  gracious 
encouragement,  "  What  is  thy  petition,  and  what  is  thy  request  ?  and  it  shall  be 
done  unto  thee  I"  "When  thou  saidst,  'Seek  ye  my  face,'  my  heart  said  unto 
Thee,  'Tliy  face.  Lord,  will  I  seek.'  "—A.  R. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  reverent  prayer  of  a  royal  petitioner,  Solomon  had  a  more 
peaceful  reign  and  greater  outward  glory  than  David.  Yet  much  is  said -in  Scripture 
about  the  father,  and  little  about  the  son.  This  revelation  of  God's  truth  about 
men  and  things  is  less  concerned  with  splendid  surroundings  than  with  secret 
struggles.  Few,  if  any,  are  made  great  by  splendoiur.  Hence  a  few  verses  suffice 
to  tell  of  Solomon's  ships  and  palaces,  and  gold  and  ivory ;  but  many  chapters  are 
devoted  to  accounts  of  David's  temptations,  deliverances,  and  prayers.  We  have 
God's  estimate  of  Solomon's  magnificence  in  the  memorable  words  of  Christ, 
"  Consider  the  lUies  of  the  field  how  Ihey  grow  ;  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin : 
and  yet  I  say  unto  you,  that  even  Solomon,  in  all  his  glory,  was  not  arrayed  like 
one  of  these."  From  these  words  we  infer  that  human  greatness  does  not  claim 
God's  regard,  but  that  He  cares  for  liUes  as  well  as  for  kings;  so  that  from  none  of 
us,  however  lowly  our  lot,  is  the  privilege  of  prayer,  granted  to  Solomon,  withheld. 
The  prayer  hefore  us  was  chwrojCterizeA  by  the  following  excellences  : — 
I.  Gratitude.  (Ver.  6.)  Solomon  thanked  God  for  what  his  father  had  been. 
David  was  far  from  being  a  sinless  man,  but  his  son  loyally  veiled  his  faults,  and 
praised  God  for  what  he  had  been  to  himself  and  others/  What  reasons  for  grati- 
tude many  have  in  this  respect.  Loving  care  during  the  feebleness  of  infancy ; 
provision  for  education,  &c.,  often  the  result  of  habitual  self-denial;  protection  of 
the  home  not  only  from  physical,  but  from  morgl  evQs,  in  the  shape  of  bad  litera- 
ture, companions,  &o.  These  are  the  ordinary  blessings  from  parenthood,  but  often 
there  are  more  than  these,  e.i/.,  the  moral  heritage  of  wholesome  tendencies;  the 
good  name,  to  be  chosen  rather  than  great  riches ;  the  repression  of  evil,  and  en- 
couragement of  good  habits  of  thought  and  action  ;  the  counsels  and  warnings  to 
the  inexperienced ;  the  Christian  truth  revealed  in  the  holy  hfe,  proclaimed  by  the 
loving  Ups.  Few  blessings  are  greater  than  these;  but  few  are  less  thankfully  re- 
cognized. Gratitude  should  reveal  itself  in  tender  consideration,  in  graceful 
courtesies,  in  prompt  obedience,  &c.,  in  the  home,  and  should  express  itself  in 
praise  to  the  Giver  of  all  good  gifts.  [This  is  but  an  example  of  subjects  for  grati- 
tude: others  may  be  suggested.] 


flO  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  hi.  1—15. 

II.  Solemnity.  The  young  king  seemed  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  respon- 
sibility. He  was  about  to  succeed  a  father  renowned  as  a,  warrior,  as  a  statesman, 
as  a  poet,  as  a  ruler  of  men.  He  was  about  to  rule  a  numerous  and  prosperous 
people,  who  had  been  specially  declared  to  be  the  Lord's,  so  that  he  would  be  hence- 
forth tlie  representative  of  Jehovah.  He  foresaw  that  there  would  be  snares  not 
easy  to  avoid,  difficulties  hard  to  surmount ;  and  therefore  he  dared  not  go  forward 
without  the  prayer,  "O  God  of  my  father,  stand  by  me."  Contrast  this  with  the 
hght  spirit  in  which  life-work  is  often  undertaken.  Describe  a  father  al)out  to 
vacate  his  plan  in  business,  or  in  the  Church,  whose  honour  has  been  unstained, 
who  has  been  a  king  amongst  men,  and  urge  on  any  who  are  about  to  succeed  to 
such  an  inheritance  the  responsibility  incurred,  that  they  may  feel  "  who  is  suffi- 
■cient  for  these  things  ?  "  To  go  on  to  unknown  temptations,  to  unattempted  duties, 
in  a  flippant,  godless  spirit,  is  to  show  the  foolhardiaess  of  the  captain  who,  in 
strange  waters,  wrecks  his  vessel  on  the  hidden  shoal,  because  he  scorns  to  employ 
a  pilot. 

III.  Hopefulness.  In  ver.  4  he  tacitly  refers  to  what  God  had  done  for  his 
fether,  as_  an  example  and  pledge  of  what  God  could  do  for  him.  He  imphes  that 
the  promise,  like  the  throne,  came  by  inheritance.  This  was  the  teaching  of  the 
patriarchal  dispensation.  It  was  not  withdrawn  by  Christ,  who  came  "  not  to 
destroy,  but  to  fulfil."  Hence,  in  the  first  sermon  preached  after  the  baptism  of  the 
Church  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  Peter  refers  to,  and  endorses  for  this  dispensation,  the 
declaration  of  Joel,  "  The  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children."  Show  how 
the  privileges  of  Christian  parentage  keep  pace  with  its  responsibilities.  What  God 
had  been  to  David  was  a  sign  to  Solomon,  his  son,  of  what  God  would  do  for  h\m  • 
and  therefore  he  prayed  with  eager  hope. 

IV.  Humility.  "  I  am  but  a  httle  child."  Solomon  had  enough  to  make  him 
proud.  He  was  immensely  rich,  was  flattered  by  courtiers,  was  obeyed  by  a  dis- 
ciplined army,  was  strikingly  handsome  (Psalm  xlv.),  and  wss  at  an  age  (twenty 
years  old)  when  no  one  thinks  least  of  himself.  But  he  recognized  that  Ood  made 
him  what  he  was  ("  Thou  hast  made  Thy  servant  king"),  and  that,  so  fe,r  as  wisdom 
and  ability  were  concerned,  he  was  "  but  a  little  child."  Such  has  been  the  spmt 
of  all  truly  great  men,  e.g.,  Moses,  when  called  in  Midian  (Exod.  iii.  11) ;  Isaiah, 
when  he  saw  the  Lord  in  the  temple  (Isa.  vi.)  ;  Jeremiah,  when  invested  with  pro- 
phetic office  (Jer.  i.)  This  humility  should  characterize  all  who  approach  God. 
Refer  to  the  Pharisee  and  pubhcan  (Luke  xviii.  10—14) ;  also  to  declaration  that 
except  we  become  as  little  children  we  cannot  enter  the  kingdom.  Contrast 
Solomon  with  his  brothers,  Absalom  and  Adonijah.  He  was  content  to  wait  God's 
tune,  and  so  was  prepared  for  the  place  prepared  for  him.  The  chrysalis  waits— is 
kept  back— m  its  inactive  stage,  tUl  both  the  wings  are  ready  for  the  sunshme,  and 
the  sunshine  reaay  for  the  wings.  Humbly  let  us  wait  for  the  higher  spheres  oi 
earth  and  the  highest  spheres  of  heaven.— A.  B. 

Vers.  9— 18.  The  wisdom  of  Solomon's  choice.  Solomon  was  never  more 
kmgly  than  when  he  made  this  choice.  Subsequently  he  became  enervated  by 
prosperity  corrupted  by  heathen  associations,  &c.,  but  now  he  ruled  as  a  king  over 
himself.  The  bright  promise  of  Hfe  is  often  graduaUy  overcast,  tiU  it  ends  in  the 
TM.'^fn  f  ^°^'^\'S  ",'?''}  Examples  from  Scripture,  e.g.,  Saul  the  King,  Esau. 
It  IS  weU  to  know  thekind  of  choice  that  "pleased  the  Lord."  In  Solomon^  there 
was  true  wisdom,  for  it  had  these  elements— 

I.  The  choice  wa3  fob  the  good  of  others  rather  than  foe  the  advantage 
OF  HiMSELF._  It  was  uot  hke  asking  for  knowledge  and  wisdom  that  he  SS 
to  ru5e  S'nt^l  "  'Tf  1^'^  followed,  but  this  he  did  not  seek.  hI  wished 
to  rule  Gods  people  well  for  their  good,  and  asked  that  he  might  do  what  was  iust 
in  judgment,  what  was  equitable  in  law.  Such  equity  establishes  any  Tde'^^n 
a  sure  foundation.  Our  hold  on  India  is  chiefly  due  to  the  righteousnJss  of  ow 
magistrates,  and  the  trustworthiness  of  men  like  the  Lawrenc£  Lord  S^  ^ 
Natives  would  not  hesitate  to  bring  an  action  m  one  of  oiL  English  ifwcoi^' 
agamst  an  Englishman,  so  certain  are  they  of  even-handedTstfcI^hSolor^ 


OH.  iiL  16—28.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  61 

sought,  and  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  his  kingdom  (oh.  iv.  26)  arose  from  the  fact 
that  God  gave  it  him.  To  ask  God  to  make  us  wise  and  capable  for  the  sake  of 
others,  is  a  prayer  consonant  with  His  will.  Unselfishness  is  commended  and 
exalted  under  the  new  dispensation  as  it  never  was  under  the  old.  Christ  HimseU 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life  "  a  ransom  for 
many."  The  prayer  of  selfishness,  greed,  avarice,  can  never  be  put  up  in  Christ's 
name. 

II.  The  choice  was  made  op  inward  worth  and  not  op  outward  show.  He 
did  not  ask  for  himself  riches  and  honour.  What  wHl  make  us  noble  is  always 
more  readily  given  by  God  than  what  will  make  us  wealthy.  A  wise  father  would 
rather  that  his  son  should  be  truthful  than  that  he  should  win  popularity  among 
his  schoolfellows  by  anything  surreptitious  and  deceitful.  So  our  heavenly  Father 
cares  little  that  we  should  make  money,  or  win  applause ;  but  He  cares  much  that 
we  should  be  wise,  and  true,  and  loving ;  and  these  graces  He  will  in  no  wise 
withhold  from  those  who  seek.  Sometimes  He  answers  our  prayers  for  these 
inward  blessings  in  modes  we  resent.  The  illness  that  throws  us  back  upon  Him, 
the  failure  that  proves  a  man's  life  does  not  consist  in  the  abundance  of  things  that 
he  possesseth,  &c.,  may  work  in  us  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  The 
Lord  Jesus,  who  was  at- once  the  King  of  Glory  and  the  village  carpenter,  showed 
us  this;  and  in  the  inward  gladness  His  disciples  experienced  amid  their  outward 
woes,  we  have  confirmation  of  it.  Show  how,  in  New  Testament  history,  and  in  the 
lives  of  the  saints,  the  words  which  begin  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  have  been 
fulfilled.  Blessedness  of  the  highest  kind  comes  to  the  poor  in  spirit,  to  them  that 
mourn,  to  the  meek,  to  them  which  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  to  the 
merciful,  to  the  pure  in  heart,  to  the  peacemakers,  and  even  to  those  who  are 
persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake. 

III.  The  choice  made  op  the  higher  brought  with  it  the  lower  blessings. 
(Vers.  11 — 13.)  Because  Solomon  asked  wisdom  God  gave  him  that,  but  added  to 
it  wealth  and  honour.  If  we  ask  grace  to  fulfil  our  mission,  and  rightly  do  our 
Ufe-work,  our  heavenly  Father  will  see  that  we  do  not  want  for  life's  necessities. 
"  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these  things 
shall  be  added  unto  you."  The  teaching  of  Christ  (Matt.  vi.  24 — 84)  goes  to  show 
that  a  man  who  is  chiefly  concerned  to  please  God  need  have  no  anxiety  or  care 
about  lower  things.  If  God  feeds  the  birds,  He  wiU  feed  you ;  if  He  clothes  the 
lilies.  He  will  clothe  you;  if  He  gives  the  life,  He  will  give  the  "meat"  that  is  less 
than  life.  Ask  God  for  the  higher  blessings :  pardon,  righteousness,  reverence, 
wisdom,  &c.,  and  He  will  give  you  not  only  these,  but  all  things  necessary  for  us, 
and  all  the  riches  and  honours  that  are  good  for  us._ 

Solomon's  wisdom  was  great,  but  there  has  come  into  the  world  one  greater  than 
Solomon,  more  worthy  far  of  our  adoration  and  love.  As  the  oMld  in  Nazareth, 
Jesus  grew  in  wisdom,  and  in  stature,  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man.  His 
wisdom  was  purer,  deeper,  truer  than  Solomon's,  because  it  was  united  with  purity 
of  life,  with  victory  over  sin,  and  with  sacrifice  of  self.  He,  is  the  true  Shel6m6h, 
"  the  Prince  of  Peace ;"  the  true  Jedidiah,  "  the  well  beloved  of  the  Father; "  and  to 
Him  now  let  us  humbly  bow  the  knee,  as  to  One  worthy  to  be  exalted  both  as 
Prince  and  Saviour. — A  E. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  III.  16—28. 
Il»  this  section  we  see  how  remarkably 
the  gracious  promise  of  Gibeon  (ver.  12) 
was  fulfilled.  The  "  understanding  to 
discern  judgment "  has  been  richly  bestowed. 
And  this,  no  doubt,  is  the  reason  why  the 
story  is  related  here.  ''ETriSeT^ai  r^v  tov 
fiaai\i(j)t  i^ovXfiBti  gofiav  (Theodoret).     It 


is  just  possible,  M  Theniua  maintains, 
that  the  narrative  was  handed  down  to  a 
succeeding  agS  by  tradition,  and  was  not 
incorporated  into  any  of  the  documents 
from  ■which  our  historian  compiled  hia 
narrative ;  but  this  argues  nothing  against 
its  authenticity  or  its  inspuration.  It  is,  a» 
Bahr  observes,  a  thoroughly  Oriental  itorv. 


62 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  HI.  16—28. 


Ver.  16. — Tlien  came  there  two  women 
that  were  haxlots  [The  Jewish  writers  here, 
as  in  the  case  of  Eahab  (Josh.  ii.  1), 
would  understand  "  hostess,"  "inn-keeper" 
(«n'plJ13>  not  IplOID,  as  Bahr,  which= 
■KavioKHov,  "  inn  ").  In  support  of  Which 
it  is  alleged  that  prostitutes  never  have 
children,  or  if  they  have  are  not  solicitous 
about  them.  The  meaning  "  hostess,"  how- 
ever (as  if  from  j-1T,  to  feed),  is  not  to  be  en- 
tertained for  a  moment,  but  we  may  readily 
admit  that  these  children,  though  bom  out 
of  wedlock,  were  not  necessarily  the  off- 
spring of  professed  harlots,  though  the  fact 
that  their  mothers  dwelt  together  and  alone 
(ver.  17)  is  certainly  suspicious ;  and  see 
Gesen.  t.  v.  HJT.  Grotius,  from  Deut.  xxiii. 
17,  concludes  that  they  must  have  been 
foreigners.  But  it  is  equally  probable  that 
the  law  was  constantly  violated]  unto  the 
king  [as  supreme  judge]  and  stood  before 
him. 

Ver.  17. — And  the  one  woman  said,  0  my 
lord,  I  and  this  woman  dwell  In  one  house ; 
and  I  was  delivered  of  a  chUd  with  her  In 
the  house. 

Ver.  18. — And  It  came  to  pass  the  third 
day  after  that  I  was  delivered,  that  this 
woman  was  delivered  also:  and  we  were 
together;  there  was  no  stranger  with  us 
in  the  house,  save  we  two  in  the  house. 
[Emphasis  is  laid  on  this  fact,  as  showing 
the  possibility  of  the  fraud  and  the  im- 
possibility of  producing  proof.  Hebrew 
women  have  always  required  but  Uttle 
assistance  in  child-bearing.  That  which  is 
written  in  Exodus  i.  19  is  true  to  this  day. 

Ver.  19. — And  this  woman's  child  died  in 
the  night ;  because  she  overlaid  it. 

Ver.  20. — ^And  she  arose  at  midnight 
[rather,  in  the  middle,  i.e.,  dead  of  the 
night.  The  sleeper  could  not  know  it  was 
midnight] ,  and  took  my  son  from  beside  me, 
while  thine  handmaid  slept,  and  laid  it  in 
her  bosom,  and  laid  her  dead  chUd  in  my 
bosom. 

Ver.  21. — And  when  I  rose  in  the  morning 
[while  it  was  still  dusk]  to  give  my  child 
suck,  behold  it  was  dead  :  but  when  I  had 
considered  it  In  the  morning  {i.e.,  in  broad 
daylight ;  Vulg.  clara  luce]  behold  [this 
second  "  behold  "  marks  a  second  discovery] 
it  was  not  my  son  which  I  did  bear. 

Ver.  22. — And  the  other  woman  said. 
Nay,  but  the  living  is  my  son  and  the  dead 
is  thy  son.  And  this  said.  No,  but  the 
dead  Is  thy  son  and  the  living  is  my  son. 
[It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  account  for  the 
pertinacious  claim  to  the  child,  preferred 
even  before  the  king  by  the  pretended 
mother.  The  most  probable  explanation  is, 
that  having  taken  the  child  in  the  first 


instance  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  in  ordei 
to  avoid  the  reproach  of  having  killed  her 
offspring  by  her  clumsiness  and  neglect,  she 
found  it  difScult  to  draw  back  from  her 
false  position — ^which  indeed  she  could  not 
do  without  owning  herself  both  o'.iild-stealer 
and  liar — and  so  she  put  on  a  bold  face  and 
maintained  the  imposture  even  before  the 
monarch  himself.  That  she  did  not  really 
care  for  the  child  is  evident  from  ver.  26.] 
Thus  they  spake  [Heb.  "And  they  spake," 
i.e.,  affinued  and  contradicted]  before  the 
king. 

Ver.  23. — Then  [promptly,  without  hesi- 
tation] said  the  king,  The  one  saith  [Heb. 
"  this  is  saying,"  i.e.,  keeps  saying]  This  is 
my  son  tliat  liveth,  and  thy  son  is  the  dead; 
and  the  other  saith,  Nay,  but  thy  souls 
the  dead  and  my  son  Is  the  living. 

Ver.  24. — And  the  king  said.  Bring  me  a 
sword.  And  they  brought  a  [Heb.  the; 
the  sword,  i.e.,  of  the  executioner,  or  the 
sword  for  which  he  asked]  sword  before  the 
king. 

Ver.  25.— And  the  king  said,  Divide  the 
living  child  in  two,  and  give  half  to  the 
one  and  lialf  to  the  other  [Heb.  one] . 

Ver.  26. — Then  spake  the  woman  whose 
the  llvinsr  child  was  unto  the  king,  for  her 
bowels  [thought  by  most  of  the  ancients  to 
be  the  seat  of  the  affections,  probably  be- 
cause of  the  sensations  which  strong 
emotions  excite  there.  Cf.  ra  trirkayvya 
in  the  New  Testament  (2  Cor.  vi.  12 ;  Phil, 
ii.  1 ;  PhUem.  7,  20,  <feo.]  yearned  [Heb. 
glowed.  We  speak  of  "  glowing  with  pity," 
<&c.]  upon  her  son,  and  she  said,  0  my 
lord,  ^ve  her  the  living  chUd,  and  in  no 
wise  slay  it.  But  the  other  [Heb.  this] 
said  [Heb.  saying]  Let  it  be  neither  mine 
nor  thine,  but  divide  it.  [The  Hebrew  is 
strikingly  concise,  "divide."  We  have 
here  by  far  the  greatest  difficulty  in  the 
story.  When  the  pretender,  who  has 
clamoured  for  the  child ,  is  at  last  offered  it 
by  its  mother,  she  refuses  the  gift  and 
heartlessly  urges  that  it  shall  be  cut  in  two. 
We  can  only  account  for  her  strange  con- 
duct on  the  supposition  that  she  caught 
eagerly  at  any  way  of  escape  from  the 
dilemma  in  which  she  had  placed  herself, 
and  thought,  no  doubt,  that  to  accept  his 
decision  would  be  to  flatter  and  please  the 
king.     (See  Homileties.) 

Ver.  27.— Then  the  king  answered  and 
said  [He  simply  echoes  the  exact  words  of 
the  mother.  This  is  clear  from  the  fact 
that  the  word  n'I^J=na««s,  "the  one  bom," 
here  and  in  ver.  26  rendered  "  child,"  is  a 
very  unusual  one] ,  Give  her  the  living  child, 
and  in  no  wise  slay  it  [The  LXX  which 
reads  "  Give  the  child  to  her  who  said,  Gi"s 


CH.  111.  i6— 28.] 


THE  FlliaX  BOOK  OF  KIKGS. 


it  to  her,"  <feo.,  obscures  the  evidently  de- 
signed repetition]  she  Is  the  mother  thereof 
[Heb.  she,  his  mother], 

Ver.  28. — And  all  Israel  heard  of  the 
Judgment  which  the  king  liad  Judged,  and 
they  feared  the  Idng  [i.e.,  were  impressed 
and  awed  by  his  ahnost  supernatural  pene- 

,  tration,    Bahr  refers  to  Luke  iv.  36 ;  viii. 

'  25] ,  for  they  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God 
[for  which  he  asked  (ver.  9)  and  which  God 


gave  (ver.  12]  was  In  him  [Heb.  within  hini] 
to  do  Judgment.  [Most  of  the  commentatora 
cite  from  Grotius,  the  familiar  story  found  in 
Diodorus  Siculus,  of  Aiiophames,  king  of 
Thrace.  Three  youths  claimed  before  this 
king  each  to  be  the  son,  and  therefore 
successor,  of  a  deceased  king  of  the  Cim- 
merians. He  decided  that  that  one  was  the 
real  son  who  refused  to  cast  a  javelin  at  his 
father's  corpse.] 


H0MILETIC8. 

Ver.  28.  —  Solomon's  Judgment  a  Foreshadowing  of  the  Judgment  to  come. 
Again  we  see  in  Solomon  a  type  of  the  true  "  Son  of  David."  The  arraignment  of 
tlie  two  harlots  is  an  adumbration  of  the  "  great  assize."  This  striking  scene — 
the  young  king  sitting  on  his  throne,  probably  in  a  void  place  at  the  gate  of  the 
city,  in  the  bright  clear  Eastern  morning ;  around  him  his  guards,  counsellorB,  and 
ministers  of  state  (ch.  xii.  6) ;  before  him  th'e  two  harlots  and  the  helpless  child — 
carries  our  thoughts  to  a  day  of  storm  and  cloud,  a  day  of  darkness  and  dread, 
when  the  "  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  upon  the  tlirone  of  His  glory,"  with  "the  holy 
angels  "  around  Him  and  "  all  nations  "  before  Him  (St.  Matt.  xxv.  31).  Let  us  see 
in  this  first  judgment,  then,  an  outline  of  the  last    Observe  : 

I.  The  Judge.  It  is  (1)  the  Son  of  David.  We  do  not  read  of  David's  judg- 
ments. This  a  duty  which  he  was  apparently  remiss  in  discharging  (2  Sam.  xv.) 
He  devolved  the  duty  of  judging  and  punishing  upon  his  son  (1  Kings  ii.  1 — 10). 
Even  so,  the  "Eternal  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  aU  judgment 
to  the  Son."  Because  He  is  the  Son  of  David,  i.e.,  the  Son  of  Man,  oin:  Lord  vrill 
judge  the  sons  of  men.  The  Judge  is,  therefore,  one  who  knows  us,  one  who  feels 
for  us.  It  is  (2)  the  wisest  of  men.  "  He  was  wiser  than  all  men"  (ch.  iv.  31). 
The  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him  to  do  judgment  (ch.  iii.  28).  But  the  Judge  of  men 
and  angels  not  only  has,  but  is  the  Wisdom  of  God  (Prov.  is. ;  1  Cor  i.  24).  The 
Supreme,  the  Essential  Wisdom  wUl  sit  upon  the  great  white  tlirone.  His 
judgments,  therefore,  must  be  "just  and  true."     Now  consider 

II.  The  Judged.  They  were  (1)  of  two  classes.  There  was  the  innocent 
babe  and  the  impure  women.  And  of  the  latter  one  was  true,  the  other  false  ;  one 
right,  the  other  wrong.  There  wiU  be  two  classes,  and  only  two,  in  the  judgment 
to  come :  sheep  and  goats,  wheat  and  tares,  good  fish  and  bad,  the  righteous  and 
the  sinner.  (2)  Both  were  harlots.  "  Whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will 
judge."  Men  cannot,  or  do  not.  Our  pleasant  vices  are  often  undetected ;  or,  if 
known,  are  not  reprobated.     But  see  1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  vi.  9 — 19  ;  Gal.  v  19 — 21. 

III.  The  Judgment.  Thereby  (1)  a  sin  was  brought  to  light.  No  eye  saw  that 
midnight  theft.  They  two  were  alone .  But  the  deed  is  now  dragged  to  the  light 
of  day.  And  the  Lord  "  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness."  What 
was  "  whispered  in  the  ear  in  closets  shall  be  proclaimed  upon  the  housetops." 

(2)  A  wrong  was  redressed.  The  pretended  mother  probably  held  the  child  when 
they  came  before  the  king.  The  true  mother  carried  it  in  her  arms  when  they 
left  the  judgment-seat.  Restitution,  i.e.,  was  enforced.  And  the  judgment-seat 
of  Christ  shall  accomplish  the  restitution  of  all  things.  There  every  wrong  shall 
have  its  remedy.  Now  the  "  foundations  of  the  earth  are  out  of  course."  Might 
stands  for  right.  Possession  is  nine  points  of  the  law.  But  in  that  day  "  suum 
cvdque."  It  is  related  of  one  of  the  Wesleys  that  on  paying  an  account  which  was 
a  gross  imposition,  he  wrote  upon  the  bill,   "  To  be   re-adjusted  in  that  day." 

(3)  Character  was  revealed.  The  true  mother  and  the  pretended  alike  proclaim 
thomselves.  A  word  from  each  decides  the  question,  and  reveals  their  inmost 
thoughts.  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world.  "  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  wiU  I 
judge  thea,"    "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt 


64  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [ch.  m.  16—28. 


be  oondenmecl."     The  Son  of  Man  eball  "maike  manifest  the  counsels  of  the 

heart." 

IV.  The  Eewabd  and  Punishment.  To  the  one  the  tribunal  brought  justifi- 
cation, joy,  peace.  To  the  other,  condemnation,  shame,  contempt.  But  notice 
eapeoially  (1)  the  difference  it  made  in  their  emotions  and  (2)  the  difference  in 
their  reputations.  (1)  The  joy  of  the  mother  who  had  received  her  child  again  may 
be  better  imagined  than  described.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  vexation,  con- 
fusion, remorse,  of  the  pretender  when  her  villainy  was  made  manifest.  And  in 
these  emotions  we  may  see  a  faint  image  of  the  imspeakable  joy  of  the  saved :  of 
the  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth  of  the  lost.  (2)  The  true  mother  would  have 
the  sympathy  of  bystanders,  the  congratulations  of  her  friends,  &c. ;  the  other 
would  be  pointed  at  with  scorn  and  reproach.  Here,  too,  we  have  a  picture,  albeit 
an  imperfect  one,  of  the  issues  of  the  day  of  judgment.  To  the  saint,  tiie  "  Come  ye 
blessed "  of  the  Judge  will  lead  to  "  pleasures  for  evermore ; "  to  the  sinner, 
"  Depart  ye  cursed"  will  be  the  beginning  of  "shame  and  everlasting  contempt." 

Ver.  26. — ;"  Let  it  be  neither  mine  nor  thine,  but  divide  it."  "  The  Word  of 
God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword  ....  and  is  a 
discemer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  «f  the  heart."  The  judgment  of  Solomon  is 
a  striking  commentary  on  this  passage ;  indeed,  it  is  possible  that  the  writer  had 
this  incident  in  his  mind  when  he  penned  these  words.  For  assuredly  the  word  of 
Solomon,  "Divide,"  &e.,  was  sharper  than  the  sword  they  had  just  brought  him  • 
in  wounding  the  mother's  heart  (Of.  Luke  ii.  85) ;  whUe  not  more  surely  would 
the  king's  sword,  had  it  not  been  stayed,  have  pierced  to  the  "  dividing  asunder  of 
the  joints  and  ma/rrow  "  of  the  chUd,  than  did  the  king's  word  distinguish  between 
the  true  and  the  false,  revealing  both  the  tenderness  and  yearning  love  of  the  real 
mother,  and  also  the  thoughts  and  intents  and  workings  of  heart  of  the  pretender. 
It  is  probably,  in  part  at  least,  because  of  their  revelation  of  cha/racter  that  they 
are  recorded  here.  Let  us  now,  therefore,  consider  the  character  and  motives  of 
the  pseudo-mother,  as  disclosed  to  us  in  her  words  and  conduct. 

And  first,  let  us  ask,  what  can  have  led  to  this  cruel  and  unnatural  speech  ? 
Here  is  a  woman  who  has  recently  become  a  mother,  and  who  claims  to  be  the 
mother  of  the  child,  having  no  pity  on  a  helpless  babe.  At  one  moment,  she 
strenuously  contends  before  the  king  for  its  possession,  and  at  the  next  she  con- 
nives at,  and  indeed  clamours  for,  its  murder.  She  has  surreptitiously  taken  it 
from  one  who  would  have  guarded  and  cherished  it;  she  loudly  protests  that  it  is 
hers ;  she  is  so  anxious  to  have  it  that  she  will  plead  for  it  before  the  royal 
tribunal,  and  yet,  when  it  is  gravely  proposed  to  cut  the  hapless  child  in  two,  she 
is  loud  in  her  approval  of  the  plan.  How  can  we  accoimt  for  such  strange 
inconsistency  ? 

The  usual  explanation  is  that  she  was  impelled  to  do  and  say  what  she  did  by 
spite,  by  jealousy.  And,  without  doubt,  there  was  an  element  of  spite  in  her  con- 
duct. If  she  was  to  be  denied  the  child,  she  was  resolved  that  none  else  should 
have  it.  She  would  never  submit  to  the  humiliation  of  leaving  the  judgment-seat 
with  the  character  of  an  impostor,  while  that  other  one  carried  off  the  babe  in  her 
arms  in  triumph.  But  whUe  the  feeling  of  "  dog  in  the  manger"  explains  much, 
it  does  not  explain  all.  It  does  not  account,  for  example,  for  her  having  cumbered 
herself  with  the  care  of  the  child  in  the  first  mstance ;  and  it  hardly  explains  her 
proceeding  to  the  extremity  of  judicial  murder. 

Nor  even  if  we  combine  with  spite  the  desire  to  flatter  the  youthful  king,  do  we 
hnd  a  sufficient  explanation  of  her  inconsistency.  No  doubt  she  thought  it  would 
be  a  comphment  to  her  prmoe  readUy  to  acquiesce  in  his  proposal.  It  is  not  the 
tirst  tune  or  the  last  that  men  have  readily  assented  to  wrong-doing  because  a 
crowned  head  suggested  it.  We  see  in  her  cry,  "  Divide  it,"  a  cringing,  fewnmg 
des^  to  ingratiate  herself  mto  Solomon's  favour,  or  if  not  that,  at  least  to  play  the 
courtier;  but  we  do  not  see  in  this  desire  alone  a  sufficient  explanation  of  this 

•  "  A  blow  with  a  word  strikes  deeper  than  a  blow  with  a  sword, "— Whichcotb. 


OH.  m.  16—28.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  U 

clamovir  for  the  life  of  a  puling  and  innocent  babe.  No,  if  we  are  to  get  at  the  very 
root  of  her  strange  and  Bhameful-conduot,  we  must  first  ask  another  question,  viz., 
What  led  her  to  steal  this  ohUd  from  its  mother's  arms  and  to  claim  it  for  her  own  ? 
What  induced  her  when  she  woke  in  the  night  and  found  her  own  child  dead,  to 
creep  in  the  darkness  to  her  companion's  couch  and  take  a  changeling  for  her  son. 
For  this  was  surely  a  strange  thing  to  do.  We  could  more  readUy  understand  her 
rejoicing  in  the  death  of  her  own  child  of  shame  than  this  eager  desire  to  burden 
herself  with  a  bastard  that  she  had  not  borne. 

Now,  it  is  quite  possible  that  there  were  special  circumstances  connected  with  this 
case,  which,  if  we  knew  them,  would  offer  a  complete  and  certain  explanation  of  her 
conduct.  For  example,  to  pass  by  other  possibilities,  hers  may  have  been  such  a 
case  as  Tamar's  (Gen.  xxxviii.)  But  as  we  do  not  and  cannot  know  what  these 
peculiar  circumstances  were,  if  there  were  any,  we  can  only  collect  her  motives,  as 
best  wo  may,  from  the  record  of  facts  which  we  possess. 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  she  was  not  actuated  by  love  for  the  child.  It  is  unhkely 
that  a  woman  such  as  she  was  could  have  love  for  a  child  such  as  this  was ;  while 
it  is  inconceivable  that  if  she  really  loved  it,  she  would  have  consented  to  and 
counselled  its  death.  Nor  can  it  have  been  the  pride  and  joy  of  having  a  man- 
child  to  call  her  son  (1  John  xvi.  21).  For  the  child  was  not  hers,  and  no  one 
knew  this  better  than  herself.  No  doubt  the  Jewish  mother  had  special  reasons 
for  desiring  offspring  and  for  cherishing  her  children,  but  this  was  the  child  of  a 
stranger. 

What  then  were  her  motives  ?  Were  they  not  these  ?  First,  the  fear  of  reproach, 
and  secondly,  jealousy  of  her  more  fortunate  companion.  Fear  of  reproach  ;  for  no 
woman,  in  any  age  of  the  world,  or  under  any  circumstances,  can  fail  to  be  morti- 
fied and '  humbled  and  ashamed  at  having  occasioned,  by  her  maladroitness,  the 
death  of  her  child.  She  knew  what  the  tongues  of  the  neighbours  would  say :  she 
could  see  them,  perhaps,  even  mocking  her  as  a  murderess.  For  they  could  not 
know  that  the  death  was  accidental  and  some  of  them,  she  feared,  might  think,  if 
they  did  not  say,  that  there  had  been  foul  play  on  her  part.  These  thoughts,  as 
they  mshed  through  her  mind  in  the  black  and  dark  night,  would  be  accentuated 
and  made  well-nigh  intolerable  by  the  thought  that  her  companion  had  been  more 
careful  or  more  fortunate.  What  may  have  passed  between  these  two  women  we 
cannot  say.  For  aught  we  know,  each  may  have  boasted  of  her  child,  or  the  one 
may  have  disparaged  the  child  of  the  other.  There  must  almost  have  been  some- 
thing of  the  kind — and  it  may  have  been  something  extremely  simple — to  account 
for  liis  act  of  child-stealing. 

It  is  quite  possible,  of  course,  that  this  woman,  had  she  been  interrogated  after 
the  fraud  was  detected,  would  have  found  it  difficult  to  say  what  led  her  to  play  this 
false  part.  For  we  may  rest  assured  she  did  not  argue  about  it,  did  not  stop 
to  parley  with  herself  or  to  weigh  the  consequences.  She  acted  on  a  blind,  hasty, 
unreasoning  impulse.  But  all  the  same  it  is  not  difficult  for  us  to  see  that  these 
must  have  been  among  the  springs  of  her  conduct.  And  when  the  fatal  move  was 
once  made,  the  rest  of  her  sin  is  easily  explained.  There  was  then  nothing  for  her 
to  do  but  to  brazen  it  out.  It  was  impossible  for  her  to  stop,  without  proclaiming 
herself  both  liar  and  thief.  As  she  had  Ued  to  her  companion,  so  she  must  Ue  to 
the  neighbours,'  and  as  she  had  hed  to  the  neighbours,  so  she  must  lie  even  before 
the  king.  There  was  no  help  for  it.  Vestigia  nulla  retrorsum !  She  must  go 
en  to  the  bitter  end. 

But  it  is  easy  to  see  how  terribly  trying  and  painful  her  position  would  at  last 
become.  The  constant  fear  of  detection,  or  the  fear  lest  she  should  betray  herself, 
must  have  made  it  almost  insupportable.  Any  moment  something  might  ooze  out 
which  would  reveal  the  deceit  and  cover  her  with  infamy.  Bitterly  must  she  have 
regretted  that  she  had  ever  embarked  on  this  course  of  fraud ;  eagerly  must  she 
have  oast  about  for  any  chance  of  escape. 

And  so  when  the  king  proposed  to  out  the  Gordian  knot ;  when  he  proposed,  that 
is,  to  extricate  her  from  the  toils  which  she  had  woven  round  herself,  is  there  any 
wonder  that  she  caught  eagerly  at  the  first  chance  that  offered,  and  that  vrithout 

1   KINGS.  t 


66 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  m.  16—28. 


a  moment's  reflection  as  to  the  moraUty  of  the  remedy,  and  without  the  least  per- 
ooption  of  the  snare  that  was  spread  for  her.  All  she  thought  was  that  it  promised 
an  honourable  retreat  from  ground  which  was  every  moment  becoming  more 
insecure ;  that  it  opened  to  her,  in  hor  despair  and  dread  of  detection,  a  door  of 
escape.  It  is  this  accounts  for  the  cry,  "  Divide  it."  The  murder  would  cover  her 
multitude  of  lies,  the  blood  of  the  innocent  would  efface  the  traces  of  her  guilt. 

The  lessons  taught  by  this  history  must  be  very  briefly  indicated.  Among  thein 
are  these :       ' 

1.  Impv/rity  almost  inevitably  leads  to  deceit.  The  root  of  all  the  mischief  here 
was  the  unchastity.  The  sin  against  the  body  makes  other  sins  comparatively 
ea=y .     "  It  is  only  the  first  step  that  costs."    And  what  a  step  is  that ! 

2.  Moral  cowardice  may  lead  to  mv/rder.  The  fear  which  prompted  the  hasty 
resolve  to  possess  herself  of  the  living  child,  led  this  miserable  woman  to  steahng, 
lying,  persistent  falseness,  and  to  murder,  in  thought  and  will.  Facilis  descensus 
Averrii,  &o. 

3.  Falsehood  leads  to  falsehood.  The  proverb  says,  "  If  we  teU  one  lie  we  must 
tell  twenty  more  to  bm-y  it."  "  One  Ue  must  be  thatched  with  another  or  it  will 
Boon  rain  through," 

"  0  what  a  tangled  web  we  weave 
When  once  we  venture  to  deceive. " 

4.  Jealousy  dries  up  the  milk  of  human  Jcindness.    It  is  "  cruel  as  the  jiTave.' 

"  Fiercer  than  famine,  war,  or  spotted  pestilence ; 
Baneful  as  death,  and  horrible  as  hell." 

It  led  this  woman  to  act  like  a  fiend ;  to  desire  the  butchery  of  an  innocent  babe. 

6.  Sin  overreaches  itself.  The  pretender  was  caught  in  her  own  toils.  She  had 
no  sooner  said,  "  Divide  it,"  than  she  saw  she  was  undone.  She  had  proclaimed  her 
own  falseness.    "Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee." 

6.  When  the  sinner  is  most  secure,  then  sudden  destruction  coines  upon  him. 
This  woman  had  never  breathed  freely  till  Solomon  said,  "Divide  it."  That  seemed 
such  a  certain  dehverance  that  she  echoed  the  cry.  Now  she  began  to  feel  safe. 
The  next  moment  she  was  disgraced,  condemned,  ruined.  Cf.  Matt.  xziv.  60; 
XXV.  44 ;  1  ThesB.  v.  8,  &o. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  IV.  1—19. 


SoLOUON'S    state    and    court   OFFIOIAIjS. — 

The  account  of  Solomon's  marriage  and 
entry  upon  his  religious  and  judicious  func- 
tions is  appropriately  followed  by  a  descrip- 
tion of  his  court,  of  the  great  functionaries 
ol  the  realm,  of  his  royal  state  and  magni- 
ficence, and,  lastly,  of  his  varied  and  unpre- 
cedented wisdom.  It  must  not  be  supposed, 
however,  from  the  occurrence  of  the  lists  in 
this  particular  place,  that  they  necessarily 
represent  the  appointments  of  the  early  part 
of  Solomon's  reign.  The  mention  of  two 
of  the  married  daughters  of  the  king  (vers. 
11,  16)  has  been  generally  thought  to  prove 
that  the  record  belongs  to  a  much  later 
period,  and  it  certainly  affords  a  powerful 
presumption  in  favour  of  a  later  date.    Too 


much  stress,  however,  must  not  be  laid  on 
tjiis  consideration,  as  the  girls  of  the  East 
marry  early,  and  these  may  well  have  been 
given  to  officers  much  their  seniors,  who  had 
long  been  in  office,  and  who  had  merited 
this  distinction  (of.  Josh.  xv.  16  ;  1  Sam.  xvii. 
25  ;  xviii.  17)  by  the  important  services  they 
had  rendered  to  the  State.  Ewald  sees  in 
these  lists  unmistakeable  evidence  of  compila- 
tion from  the  pubHc  archives.  But  see  Intro  - 
duction,  sect.  vi.  If  the  historians  of  Israel 
were  the  prophets,  nothing  is  more  natural 
than  that  they  should  record  such  details  of 
the  Augustan  age  of  their  race. 

Ver.  1. — So  King  Solomon  was  king  over 
all  Israel  [All  later  kings  ruled  but  a  part 
of  the  land  of  Israel,  as  also  did  David  at 
tirst.] 

Ver.  2.— And  these  were  the  princes  [t.«., 


OB.  IT.  1—19.] 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


a 


miniBteis,  officers.  Ct.  2  Sam.  viii.  15-18, 
and  zx.  23-26]  which  he  had,  Azarlah  the 
Eon  [i.e.,  descendant,  probably  grandson. 
See  on  1  Chron.  yi.  10]  of  Zadok  the  priest. 
[We  are  here  confronted  by  two  questions 
of  considerable  difficulty.  First,  to  whom 
does  the  title  "  priest "  here  belong,  to 
Azariah  or  to  Zadok?  Second,  what  are 
we  to  understand  by  the  term,  a  spiritual, 
or  a  more  or  less  secular  person-  iepei/c  or 
{3(,v\evTtiQ  ?  As  to  1,  the  Vulgate  (saeerdotis) 
ftii  J  apparently  the  Authorized  Version,  with 
the  Babbins,  Luther,  and  many  later  ex- 
pounders, connect  the  title  with  Zadok  (who 
is  mentioned  as  priest  in  ver.  4),  and  under- 
stand that  Azariah,  the  son  of  the  high 
priust  Zadok,  was,  together  with  the  sons  of 
Shisha,  one  of  the  scribes  (ver.  3).  It  is 
true  that  this  view  obviates  some  difficulties, 
but  against  it  are  these  considerations.  (1) 
The  accents.  (2)  The  Chaldee  and  LXX. 
(6  iepeue  Cod.  Alex. ;  Cod.  Vat.  omits  the 
words)  Versions.  (3)  Hebrew  usage,  accord- 
ing to  which  the  patronymic  is  regarded 
as  almost  parenthetical.  (4)  The  fact  that 
in  every  otiier  case  in  this  list  the  title  is 
predicate  nominative  (vers.  3 — 6).  (5)  The 
position  of  Azariah's  name,  first  in  the  list 
—a  position  which  would  hardly  be  assigned 
to  a  scribe.  (6)  The  absence  of  any  copula 
0),  which,  it  is  submitted,  would  be  required 
if  Azariah  and  the  sons  of  Shisha  alike  were 
scribes.  The  question  is  one  of  some  nicety, 
but  the  balance  of  evidence  is  distinctly  in  fav- 
our of  connecting  the  title  with  Azariah,  i.e., 
"  Azariah  son  of  Zadok  was  the  priest." 
This  brings  us  to  2.  What  are  we  to  under- 
stand by  "  the  priest " — jnafl  f  It  is  urged 
by  Eeil,  Bahr,  al.  that  this  cannot  mean 
"  priest "  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word, 
still  less  "  high  priest,"  for  the  following 
reasons :  (1)  Because  the  high  priests  of 
Solomon  are  mentioned  presently,  viz., 
Abiathar  and  Zadok,  and  the  Jews  never 
had  three  high  priests.  (2)  Because  the 
Azariah  who  was  high  priest  under  Solo- 
mon— for  the  words  of  1  Chron.  vi.  10,  '^He 
it  is  that  executed  the  priest's  office,"  &c,, 
must  belong  to  the  Aaariah  of  ver.  9,  and 
have  got  accidentally  misplaced — ^was  the 
son  of  Ahimaaz,  not  of  Zadok.  (3)  Be- 
cause no  grandson  of  Zadok  could  then  be  old 
enough  to  sustain  the  office  of  high  priest. 
{4)  Because  in  one  passage  (2  Sam.  viii.  18, 
compared  vrith  1  Chron.  xvlii.  17)  D^JQ^  w 
osed  of  privy  councillors  and  of  the  sons  of 
David,  who  cannot  have  been  sacrificing 
priests.  Eeil  consequently  would  under- 
stand that  Azariah  was  "  administrator  of 
the  kingdom,  or  prime  minister."  Simi- 
larly Bahr.  But  in  favour  of  the  ordinary 
meaning  oi  the  word  are  these  powerful 


considerations:  (1)  All  the  versions  trans- 
late the  word  by  "  priest,"  i.e.,  they  under- 
stand by  the  term  a  spiritual  person.  (2) 
Whatever  may  be  the  case  with  ]ii3, 
jnlsri ,  "  the  priest "  {par  excellence)  can  only 
be  understood  of  the  high  priest  (ch.  i.  8, 
38 ;  Exod.  xziz.  30  ;  Lev.  xxi.  21 ;  2  Kinga 
xi.  9,  15;  xxii.  4,  8,  10,  12,  14.  Comp. 
2  Chron.  xxvi.  17).  (3)  It  is  extremely 
doubtful  whether  jrij  is  ever  used  except  in 
the  sense  of  Upeig.  EawUnson,  who  says  it 
sometimes  indicates  "  a  civil  officer,  with 
perhaps  a  semi-priestly  character,"  refers  to 
Gesenius  ««6  ftac  voce,  who,  however,  dis- 
tinctly affirms  that  the  word  only  means 
priest,  and  accounts  for  the  application  of  the 
term  to  the  sons  of  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  18) 
on  the  supposition  that  the  Jews  had  priests 
who  were  not  of  the  tribe  of  Levi.  The 
question  is  discussed  with  great  learning  by 
Professor  Plumptre  (Diet.  Bib. ,  art. "  Priest "), 
who  suggests  that  "  David  and  his  sons  may 
have  been  admitted,  not  to  distinctively 
priestly  functions,  such  as  burning  incense 
(Numb.  xvi.  40;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  18),  but  to 
an  honorary,  titular  priesthood.  To  wear 
the  ephod  in  processions  (2  Sam.  vi.  14)  at 
the  time  when  this  was  the  special  badge  of 
the  order  (1  Sam.  xxii.  18),  to  join  the 
priests  and  Levites  in  their  songs  and 
dances,  might  have  been  conceded,  with 
no  deviation  from  the  Law,  to  the  mem- 
bers of  the  roj'al  house."  There  is  one 
difficulty  however  in  the  way  of  accepting 
this  ingenious  and  otherwise  sufficient  ex- 
planation, namely,  that  it  seems  hardly 
likely  that  the  title  of  priest  would  be  freely 
accorded  by  Hebrew  writers  to  men  who 
were  expressly  excluded  from  all  "distinc- 
tively priestly  functions,"  especially  after 
the  use  of  the  same  word  in  the  preceding 
verse  (17)  to  designate  the  high  priest.  And 
I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  discharge  by 
David's  sons  of  the  semi-priestly  functions 
just  referred  to  occasioned  so  much  remark 
as  to  lead  to  the  application  of  the  term 
"priest"  to  them  in  a  special  conventional 
sense ;  in  fact,  that  it  became  a  sort  of 
soubriquet,  which  rather  implied  that  they 
were  not  priests  than  that  they  were.  (Notice 
the  order  of  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  Heb.)  And 
observe  (4),  if  we  are  to  understand  by  "  the 
priest "  in  ver.  2,  "  prime  minister ;  "  by 
"pries.ts"  in  ver.  4,  "high  priests,"  and 
by  "priest"  in  ver  6,  "principal  officer," 
language  has  no  certain  meaning.  (5)  The 
mention  of  Azariah  as  "  the  priest  "  in  the 
same  list  writh  Zadok  and  Abiathar  is  easily 
accounted  for.  We  know  that  Abiathar  was 
deposed  at  the  beginning  of  Solomon's  reign 
(eh.  ii.  27),  and  Zadok  must  then  have  been 
an  old  man.     Their  names  consequently  an 


68 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  rv.  1— 1», 


recorded  (yer.  4)  because  they  were  high 
priests  for  a  brief  period  of  the  reign,  but 
Azaiiah  is  mentioned  first  as  "  the  priest " 
because  he  was  high  priest  during  most  of 
the  time.  (6)  "  Azariah  the  son  of  Zadok"  is 
quite  compatible  with  the  fact  that  Azariah 
was  really  the  son  of  Ahimaaz.  |3  is  con- 
stantly used  in  the  sense  of  "  descendant," 
and  especially  "  grandson."  (Gen.  xxix.  5  : 
xxxi.  28,  55  :  and  see  on  ch.  ii.  8,  "  the 
Bon  of  Gera.")  Zadok  is  no  doubt  men- 
tioned as  better  known  than  Ahimaaz,  and 
probably  because  Azariah  succeeded  him 
directly  in  the  office.  (7)  The  age  of 
Azariah  must  be  uncertain,  and  Solomon's 
reign  was  a  long  one.  (8)  The  position  of 
his  name— first— accords  well  with  the  idea 
that  he  was  high  priest,  which  I  conclude 
that  he  was.  It  is  worliiy  of  remark  that 
in  the  lists  of  David  the  military  officers  of 
the  kingdom  occupy  the  first  place ;  in  those 
of  Solomon,  the  civil  and  religious  digni- 
taries. "  The  princes  of  Solomon  are,  *ith 
one  exception  (ver.  4)  ministers  of  peace." — 
Wordsworth. 

Ver.  3. — EUhoreph  and  Ahlah,  the  sons 
of  SUsha  [probably  the  same  person  who  is 
mentioned  in  2  Sam.  xx.  25  as  Sheva;  in 
2  Sam.  viii.  17,  as  Seraiah  ;  and  in  1  Chron. 
iviii.  16,  as  Shavsha,  David's  scribe.  The 
office  thus  descended  from  father  to  sons. 
The  variations  in  this  name  are  instructive. 
Compare  Kishi  and  Kushaiah,  Abijah  and 
Abijam,  Michaiah  and  Maachah,  Absalom 
and  Abishalom,  &c.  Names  written  ex  ore 
dictantii  are  sure  to  differ.  See  below  on 
ver.  12],  scribes  [the  scribes,  D*1SD,  were 
Secretaries  of  State  :  they  wrote  letters  and 
proclamations,  drew  up  edicts,  and  apparently 
kept  the  accounts  (2  Kings  xii.  10).  Their 
position  in  the  hst  indicates  their  im- 
portance] ;  JehoBhaphat  the  son  of  Ahllud, 
the  recorder.  [He  held  the  same  office  under 
David,  and  is  mentioned  in  all  three  Lists 
(2  Sam.  viii.  17;  xx.  26  ;  1  Chron. xviii.  15). 
The  recorder  or  "  remembrancer "  (marg.) 
was,  perhaps,  "chancellor"  (KeU),  or  keeper 
of  the  king's  conscience,  rather  than,  as 
is  generally  supposed,  chronicler  of  pubhc 
events,  and  keeper  of  the  archives.  See 
Introduction,  sect,  vi.] 

Ver.  4. — ^And  Benalah  the  son  of  Jeholada 

[see  on  oh.  i.  32]  was  [the  A.  V.  supplies 
teas  and  were  quite  needlessly  in  this  and 
Bucceeding  verses.  This  is  simply  a  list  of 
Sjlomon's  princes  and  of  the  offices  they 
discharged]  over  the  host  [cf.  ii.  35]  :  and 
Zadok  and  Abiathar  were  the  priests  [the 
mention  of  Abiathar's  name  after  his  depo- 
sition {ch.  ii.  27,  35)  has  occasioned  much 
remark,  and  has  even  led  to  the  belief  that 
hi  waa  aubsequently  pardoned  and  restored 


to  office  (Clericus).  Theodoret  remark* 
quite  truly,  r^v  ipxv^  d^eiXaro,  oli  rijs  iepui- 
aivrje  lylijivwaev,  and  similarly  Grotius.  Bui 
a  simpler  explanation  is  that  his  name  ia 
put  down  here  because  he  had  been  high 
priest,  though  for  a  brief  period  only,  undei 
Solomon.    See  above  on  ver.  2.] 

Ver.  5. — And  Azariah  the  son  of  Nathan 
[Azariah  was  clearly  not  an  uncommon 
name  (ver.  2,  and  cf.  1  Chron.  ii.  39; 
V.  36—40  Heb. ;  A.  V.  vi..  9—14),  especially  in 
the  high  priest's  family.  Eeil  and  Bahr  pro- 
nounce somewhat  positively  that  this  Nathan 
is  not  the  prophet  of  that  name,  but  Nathan 
the  son  of  David  (2  Sam.  v.  14 ;  Luke  iii. 
31).  It  is  quite  impossible  to  decide  with 
certainty  which  is  meant,  if  either,  though 
Zech.  xii.  12  undoubtedly  favours  the  sup- 
position that  the  latter  is  here  intended] 
was  over  the  officers  [the  twelve  prefects 
mentioned  in  vers.  7  sqq.] :  and  Zabud  th» 
son  of  Nathan  was  principal  officer  [Heb. 
priest,  Vulg.  sacerdos.  Singularly,  as  before, 
the  LXX.  (Vat.)  omits  the  word.  The  ex- 
pression can  hardly  mean  "the  son  of 
Nathan  the  priest,"  but  it  may  either  signify 
that  "  Zabud  ben  Nathan,  a  priest,  was 
kifig's  friend,"  or  that  (as  in  the  A.  V.)  he 
was  a  priest  and  king's  friend.  But  the 
former  is  every  way  preferable.  I  find  it 
easier  to  believe  that  the  true  import  of 
2  Sam.  viii.  18 — the  passage  which  is  cited 
(sometimes  along  with  ib.  xx.  26,  where  the 
IiXX.,  however,  has  iipaii^)  to  prove  that 
there  were  secular  "  priests " — is  not  yet 
understood,  than  to  hold  (with  Gesenius, 
Ewald,  &c.),  that  there  were  sacrificing 
priests  who  were  not  of  the  sons  of  Aaron 
(of.  2  Chron.  xxvi.  18),  or  that  the  word  |n3, 
the  meaning  of  which  was  thoroughly  fixed 
and  understood,  can  have  been  famiUarly 
applied,  except  in  the  strictly  conventional 
way  already  indicated,  to  lay  persons],  and 
[omit]  the  king's  friend.  ["  This  appears 
to  have  bjeu  now  a  recognized  office  (2  Sam. 
XV.  37;  xvi.  16;  1  Chron.  xxvii.  33),"  Baw- 
Hnson.] 

Ver.  6. — Ani  Ahlshar  was  over  the  house- 
hold [steward  and  manager  of  the  palace. 
We  meet  this  office  here  for  the  first  timey 
an  evidence  of  the  growing  size  and  mag- 
nificence of  the  court  (of.  1  Kings  xviii.  3 ; 
2  Kings  xviii.  18  ;  Isa.  xxii.  15).-  That  such 
an  oificer  was  needed,  the  fact  mentioned 
below  (on  ver.  23)  as  to  the  enormous  size 
of  the  royal  household  will  prove] :  and 
Adonlram  [see  on  ch.  xii.  18]  the  son  of 
Abda  was  over  the  tribute.  [Marg.  "  levy," 
i.e.,  the  forced  labour  (ch.  v.  13,  14).  See 
on  ch.  xii.  3.] 

Ver.  7. — And  Solomon  had  twelve  officer! 
[ht.,    persona    "  placed "    or   "  i«(    ovar " 


CH.IV.  1— 19.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


others,  i.e.,  Buperintendents.  The  term  is 
used  of  Doeg  (1  Sam.  xxii.  9).  They  were 
twelve,  not  because  of  the  twelve  tribes,  but 
the  twelve  months]  over  all  Israel,  wMch 
provided  victuals  for  [Heb.  Twurished]  the 
king  and  Ms  household :  each  man  his 
month  In  a  year  made  provision  [lit.,  a 
month  in  the  year  it  was  (i.".,  devolved) 
upon  each  to  nourish.  It  has  been  thought 
by  some  that  these  superintendents  were 
Also  governors  of  provinces  (r/yt/iovec  icat 
aTartiyoi,  Jos.  Ant.  viii.  2,  3),  as  well  as 
purveyors.  But  of  this  nothing  is  said  in 
the  text.  Their  principal  function  was  to 
collect  the  royal  dues  or  taxes  which  were 
evidently  paid,  as  they  still  are  in  the  East, 
in  kind]. 

Ver.  8. — ^Aud  these  are  their  names  [the 
order  is  not  geographical,  nor  do  the  dis- 
tricts correspond,  except  roughly,  with  the 
territories  of  the  -tribes.  The  order  is 
probably  that  of  the  months  for  wliioh  they 
were  severally  responsible,  and  the  districts 
were  marked  out  according  to  the  capa- 
bilities of  the  country] ;  The  son  of  Hur 
{Heb.  as  marg.,  Ben  Hur.  Of  the  twelve 
prefects,  five  are  only  known  by  their  patro- 
nymics, for  it  is  hardly  likely  that  these  are 
proper  names,  like  Ben-hanan  and  Ben- 
zoheth  (1  Chron.  iv.  20).  No  satisfactory 
explanation  of  this  curious  circumstance  has 
hitlierto  been  given.  The  most  probable  is 
that  in  the  document  from  which  this  list 
was  compiled,  the  part  of  the  page  contain- 
ing the  missing  names  had  been  accident- 
ally destroyed],  in  mount  Ephralm.  [See 
on  ch.  xii.  25.  This  district,  which  prac- 
tically coincided  with  the  territory  of 
Ephraim,  was  one  of  the  most  fertile  in 
Palestine.     Hence,  possibly,  it  stands  first.] 

Ver.  9.— The  son  of  Dekar  [Ben-Dekar'] , 
In  Makaz  [unknown  otherwise],  and  in 
Shaalbim  [Josh.  xix.  42  ;  Judg.  i.  35]  and 
Beth-shemesh  [called  Irshemesh,  Josh.  xix. 
41.  Now  'Ain  Shemes],  and  Elon-beth-hanan. 
|Elon,  Josh,  xix,  43.  Probably  Beth-hanan  is 
a  different  place,  the  "  and  "  (1)  having  acci- 
dentally dropped  out  of  the  text.  The  LXX. 
{Vuie  BiiBavdv)  favours  this  view.  It  has 
been  identifiedby  Eobinaon  with  Beit  Huntin. 
This  second  district  embraces  Dan.] 

Ver.  10.— The  son  of  Hesed  [Ben-Hesed], 
In  Arubotli  (Heb.  Arubboth,  unknown] ;  to 
him  pertained  Sochoh  [there  were  two  cities 
of  this  name,  one  in  the  mountain  (Josh. 
XV.  48),  and  one  in  the  "valley"  (the 
Shefelah,  Josh.  xv.  83,  35),  and  both  in  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  from  which,  therefore,  this 
third  district  was  taken],  and  all  the  land 
Of  Hepher.  [Josh.  xii.  17.  Ewald  holds 
that  this  place  was  in  Manasseh,  and  that 
"  it  is  impossible  in  the  twelve  districts  to 
find  any  portion  of  ...  .  Judah."  But 
«ee  above.] 


Ver.  U.— The  son  of  Ablnadab  [B«n 
Ahinadab.  Possibly  the  Abinadab  of  1  Sam. 
xvi.  8 ;  xvii.  13.  If  so,  this  oflicer,  who 
married  Solomon's  daughter,  was  also  his  . 
cousin],  in  [Heb.  omits]  aJl  the  region 
[ilQi},  height;  the  term  is  only  used  in 
connection  with  Dor]  of  Dor  [Josh.  xi.  2  ; 
xii.  23  ;  xvii.  11.  Dor,  now  represented  by 
the  miserable  village  of  Tantura,  Ues  on  the 
strand  of  the  Mediterranean,  north  of 
Cfflsarea.  A  "  spur  of  Moun^  Carmel,  steep 
and  partially  wooded,  runs  parallel  to  the 
coast-Une,  at  the  distance^  of  about  a  mile 
and  a  half "  (Porter).  This  is  the  "  height 
of  Dor."  Thenius  supposes  this  fom-th  dis- 
trict embraced  the  plain  of  Sharon.  Josephus 
(viii.  2.  3.)  limits  this  prefectme  to  the  sea 
coast,  wliich  may  well  include  Sharon. 
Indeed,  without  it,  this  district  would  have 
been  destitute  of  cornlands]  which  had 
Taphath,  the  daughter  of  Solomon,  to  wife. 
["It  has  always  been  a  practice  amongst 
Oriental  potentates  to  attach  to  themselves 
the  more  important  of  their  oificers  by 
giving  them  for  wives  princesses  of  the  royal 
house.  .  .  .  The  practice  of  polygamy  has 
generally  enabled  them  to  carry  out  this 
system  to  a  very  wide  extent "  (Bawlinson). 

Ver.  12.— Baana,the  sonof  AMlud  [cf.  ver. 
3.  Probably  the  recorder's  brother] ,  to  him 
pertained  [the  original,  true  to  its  charac- 
ter as  a  list,  omits  these  words,  simply  giving 
the  name  of  the  officer  and  then  the  towns 
of  his  district  or  province]  Taanach  and 
Meglddo  [similarly  associated,  Josh.  xii.  21 ; 
Judg.  V.  19  ;  i.  27.  These  towns,  which  be- 
came famous  in  later  Jewish  history  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  29  ;  2  Chron.  xxxv.  22),  lay  at  the  foot 
of  the  E.  spurs  of  Carmel,  on  the  margin  of 
the  plain  of  Esdraelon.  See  Conder's  "  Tent 
Work  in  Palestine,"  p.  67]  and  all  Bethshean 
[Josh.  xvii.  11,  16  ;  Judg.  i.  27.  Otherwise 
Bethshan  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  10,  12 ;  2  Sam.  xxi. 
12),  now  Beisan.  The  LXX.  here  translate 
the  word  6  oiicoe  2dw ;  elsewhere  they  write 
I3ai9aav  or  PaiBadfi,  and  in  Judges  i.  27 
explain  ^  Ian  SniOwv  ttoXic,  hence  its  later 
name  Scythopolis.  Eawhnson,  by  an  over- 
sight, interprets  the  name  to  mean  "  house 
of  ttie  sun,"  which  is  the  translation  of 
Bethshemesh.  Bethshan  prob.  means  "  house 
of  rest."  "  The  site  of  the  town  is  on  the 
brow  of  the  descent  by  wliich  the  great  plain 
of  Esdraelon  drops  dovra  to  the  level  of 
the  Ghor."  The  present  writer  was  much 
struck  (in  1861)  by  its  situation.  See 
Conder,  pp.  233,  234.  The  text  shows  that 
it  gave  its  name  to  the  adjoining  district] , 
which  is  by  Zartanah  [probably  the  Zaietan 
of  Josh.  iii.  16  and  the  Zarthan  (same  word  in 
the  Heb.)  of  1  Kings  vii.  46,  which  place  is 
called  Zeredathah  in  2  Chron.  iv.  17,  and  il 
probably  the  Zererath  of  Judg.  vii.  22.  (Thi 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINOa 


[CH.  IT.  1 — 19, 


variations  in  spelling  are  again  to  be  noticed). 
Here  Solomon  oast  the  Temple  vessels.  By 
some  it  is  identified  with  Kurn  Sartabeh  (but 
see  Quart.  Stat,  of  Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  July, 
1874,  and  Conder,  pp.  233,  234),  a  few  miles 
below  Bethshan.  It  is  noticeable  ^iu  con- 
nexion with  Josh.  iii.l6)  that  at  this  point 
the  Jordan  valley  narrows  (Keil).  It  occupies 
high  ground  and  commands  an  extensive 
view  (Eobinsou)]  beneath  [or  below]  Jez- 
reel  [Wordsworth  remarks  that  "  Jezreel, 
now  Zerin,  is  a  lofty  Site."  But  the  idea 
of  "  beneath "  is  not  that  of  depression, 
but  of  geographical  position  =  the  district 
south-east  of  Jezreel]  from  [LXX.  and  from) 
Bethshean  to  Abelmeholah  [lit.  meadow 
of  the  dance.  It  lay  ten  miles  south  of 
Bathshean.  It  is  mentioned  in  connexion 
with  Zererath  (Zaretan)  in  Judg.  vii.  22,_but 
is  best  known  as  the  home  of  EUsha  (1  Kings 
xix.  16)]  even  unto  the  place  that  Is  beyond 
[Heb.  unto  the  other  side  of]  Jokneam.  [Pro- 
perly,  Jokmeam.  Identified  by  the  Survey 
(Conder,  p.  68)  with  Tell  Keinnin,  A  Levitical 
town  (1  Chron.  vi.  68)  probably  the  same  as 
Kibzaun  (cf.  Josh  xxi.  22).  This  district 
coincided  practically  with  the  tribe  of  Man- 
asseh. '  It  embraced  a  part  (see  ver.  17)  of 
the  fertile  plain  of  Esdraelon  and  of  the 
Jordan  valley.] 

Ver.  13. — The  son  of  Geber[possibly  son  of 
the  Geber  mentioned  in  ver.  19]  la  Ramoth- 
gilead  [two  districts  east  of  the  Jordan  are 
now  enumerated.  And  first,  the  territory  of 
ijrad.  Eamoth-gilead  was  a  Levitical  city 
(Deut.  iv.  43  ;  Josh.  xxi.  38).  Its  selection 
as  a  city  of  refuge  (Josh.  xx.  8),  and  as  the 
seat  of  Bengeber's  prefecture,  together  with 
the  constant  wars  waged  for  its  possession 
(1  Kings  xxii.  3;  2  Kings  viii.  28;  ix.  14) 
show  that  it  was  a  position  of  great  strength 
and  importance] ;  to  him  pertained  the 
towns  of  Jalr  [the  Havoth  Jair  are  strictly 
the  lives  {i.e.,  villages,  because  men  live 
there)  of  Jair.  So  Gesenius,  who  cites 
Bisleben  and  similar  names]  the  son 
Manasseh  [it  is  doubtful  whether  the  judge 
of  that  name  (Judg.  x.  3)  or  Jair,  the  son  of 
Segub  (called  a  "  son  of  Manasseh  "  in  Numb, 
xxxii.  41,  because  his  grandmother  was  a 
daughter  of  the  great  Machir,  though  his 
father  belonged  to  Judah,  1  Chron.  ii.  21),  is 
intended.  Probably  it  is  the  latter.  (They  can 
hardly  be  one  and  the  same  person,  though 
they  are  often  identified,  as,  e.g.,  in  the 
Speaker's  Comm.  on  Judg.  x.  3.  Bat  they 
bdong  to  different  periods.)  Curiously 
enough,  the  Havoth  Jair  are  mentioned  in 
connexion  with  each  (see  Numb,  xxxii.  41 ; 
Deut.  iii.  4,  6,  14 ;  Josh.  xiii.  30 ;  1  Chron. 
ii.  22 ;  Judg.  x.  4),  but  in  every  case  except 
the  last  the  reference  is  to  the  son  of  Segub. 
Ab  the  judge  was  probably  one  of  his  de 


scendants,itis  not  surprising  that  the  judge'!- 
sons  should  possess  some  of  the  villages  oi 
Jair],  which  are  in  Gllead ;  to  him  also  per- 
tained the  region  [73rii  lit.,  measuring  cord,. 
came  to  signify  the  region  measured]  of 
Argol)  [elsewhere  "  the  Argob,"  i.e.,  the 
stony.  This  is  the  region  subsequently 
known  as  Trachonitis,  now  called  the  Lejah. 
It  is  distinguished  here  and  in  Josh.  xiii. 
30,  and  1  Chron.  ii.  22  from  the  Gileadile 
district  just  mentioned,  with  which  it  i» 
sometimes  confounded.  Both  seem  to  have- 
been  conquered  by  Jair,  but  the  towns  of  the- 
former  bore  the  name  of  Havoth  Jair  ani 
these  of  Basluin  Havoth  Jair.  Of.  Deut. iii. 
4,  5, 14  with  Numb,  xxxii.  41.  The  latter  con- 
sisted of  threescore  cities,  with  waUs,  gates,. 
andbars.  This  remarkable  district,  twenty- 
two  miles  in  length  by  fourteen  in  breadth,. 
is  "  wholly  composed  of  black  basalt,  which, 
appears  to  have  issued  from  innumerable 
pores  in  the  earth  in  a  Uquid  state.  .  .  .  Be- 
fore cooling,  its  surface  was  violently  agitated, 
and  it  was  afterwards  shattered  and  rent  by 
convulsions.  .  .  .  Strange  as  it  may  seem, 
this  ungainly  and  forbidding  region  is 
thickly  studded  with  deserted  cities  and 
villages  "  (Porter,  "  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan,"' 
also  in  Kitto's  Cycl.  iii.  p.  1032  ;  Diet.  Bib. 
i.  104)]  which  is  in  Bashan,  threescore  great 
cities  with  waUs  and  brazen  bars.  [These 
words  are  a  reminiscence  of  Deut.  iii.  4,  5.] 

Ver.  14. — Ahiuadab  the  son  of  Wdo  [prob- 
ably the  seer  of  that  name,  2  Chron.  ix.  29] 
had  mahanalm  [Heb.  to  Mahanaim,  asmarg. 
That  is,  went,  or  was  appointed,  to  Maha- 
naim. Eawlinson  understands  that  his 
district  was  "  from  the  places  last  mentioned" 
to  Mahanaim,"  but  for  this  the  usus  loquendi 
of  the  writer  would  lead  us  to  expect  1^.  For- 
Miilianaim,  see  Gen.  xxxii.  2 ;  Joshua  xiii. 
26]. 

Ver.  15. — Ahlmaaz  [probably  the  son  of 
Zadok,  2  Sam.  xv.  27';  x-fii.  17]  was  In 
Naphtall ;  he  also  pike  Ben-Abinadab,  ver. 
11]  took  Basmath  the  daughter  of  Solomon 
to  wife. 

Ver.  16. — Banaah  [or  Baana,  the  second 
prefect  of  that  name  (ver.  12).  The  names 
are  identical  in  the  Hebrew.  In  2  Sam.  iv. 
2  the  name  is  Basnah]  the  son  of  Hushal 
[the  Archite,  David's  friend.  Cf.  2  Sam.  xv. 
32]  -was  hi  Asher  and  Aloth.  [No  town  or 
district  of  this  name  is  known.  Probably 
the  word  should  be  Bealoth,  as  in  the  JiXX., 
Syr.,  and  Vulg.  Our  translators  have  tiiken 
the  initial  3  for  a  prefix,  but  it  is  almost 
certainly  part  of  the  name.  There  was  a 
Baaloth  in  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  24)  and  a* 
Baaloth  in  Dan  (ibid.  xix.  44),  but  neither 
of  these  can  be  meant  here.] 

Ver.  17.— Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  ParuaH,. 


'H.  IV,  1—19.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOA  OF  KINGS. 


71 


In  Issachar.  [He  had  consequently  the 
plain  of  Esdraelon,  with  the  exception  men- 
tioned above,  ver.  12.] 

Ver.  18. — Shimel  the  son  of  Elah  [by  some 
identified  with  the  Shimei  of  chapter  i.  8. 
But  see  note  there],  tn  Benjamin.  [It  is 
noteworthy  that  Shimei  was  a  Benjamite 
name,  2  Bam.  xvi.  5,  11.] 

Ver.  19.— Q3l)er  the  son  of  Uri  was  In  the 
country  of  GlUad-  [i.e.,  he  presided  over  the 
parts  not  already  assigned  to  Bengeber 
(perhaps  his  son)  and  Ahinadab.  Gilead  is 
often  used  (see  Deut.  xxxiv.  1  ;  Judg.  xx.  1) 
to  designate  all  the  country  east  of  the 
Jordan.  And  so  apparently  here,  for]  the 
country  of  Slhon  Mng  of'  the  Amorltes,  and 
of  Og  king:  of  Bashan]  embraced  the  whole 
trans- Jordanie  region,  Deut.  iii.  8 ;  Num.  xxi. 
24—35 :  cf.  Psa.  cxxxv.  11 ;  cxxxvi.  19,  20] ; 
and  he  was  the  only  officer  whicli  was  In  tlie 
land.  [This  cannot  mean  "  the  only  officer 
in  Gilead,"  notwithstanding  the  great  extent 
of  territory — the  usual  interpretation — for 
that  would  contradict  vers.  13,  14.  Nor  can 
can  it  mean  the  only  officer  in  his  district, 
or  portion,  of  Gilead,  for  that  is  self-evident, 
and  the  remark  would  apply  equally  to  aU 
the  other  prefects.      And   we  are  hardly 


justified  in  translating  nnt<  D^VJ  "hewasth* 
first  {i.e.,  superior),  officer  "  fset  over  those 
mentioned  above,  vers.  13,  14),  as  Sehulze. 
inx  is  used  as  an  ordinal  number,  but  it  ia 
only  in  connexion  with  days   and   years 

IGesen.  s.  v.)  Some,  following  the  LXX. 
6ij  iv  yy  'lovSa)  would  detach  Judah  from 
ver.  20,  where  it  must  be  allowed  it  occurs 
with  a  suspicious  abruptness,  and  *here  the 
absence  of  the  copula,  so  usual  in  the 
Hebrew,  suggests  a  corruption  of  the  text, 
and  would  connect  it  with  this  verse,  which 
would  then  yield  the  sense,  "  and  he  was,"  (or 
"  there  was  ")  "  one  officer  which  purveyed 
in  the  land  of  Judah."  It  is  to  be  observed, 
however,  that  though  no  mention  has  as  yet 
been  made  of  Judah  in  any  of  the  districts, 
yet  the  prefecture  of  Ben  Hesed  (yer.  10) 
appears  to  have  extended  over  tms  tribe, 
and  the  remark  consequently  seems  super- 
fluous. (Can  it  be  the  object  of  the  writer 
to  show  that  the  royal  tribe  was  not 
favoured  or  exempted  from  contributing  its 
share  ?)  On  the  whole,  the  difficulty  would 
seem  still  to  await  a  solution.  We  can 
hardly,  in  the  teeth  of  ver.  7,  suppose  with 
Ewald,  al.  that  a  thirteenth  officer  ia  here 
intended. 


E0MILETIC3, 

Vers.  2  eqq. — The  Servants  of  Solomon.     •'  These  were  the  princes  which  he 

had."     "  All  Scripture  is profitable  for  instruction,"  &o.     A  bare  list  of 

names  may  teach  some  lessons.  We  shall  find  in  this  list,  first,  some  proofs  of 
Solomon's  wisdom,  and  secondly,  some  principles  to  guide  our  own  conduct.  First, 
however,  let  us  remember  that  to  select  faithful  and  efficient  servants  is  one  of  the 
most  difficult  tasks  of  rulers.  The  welfare  of  the  whole  State  depends  very  largely 
on  the  choice,     (Cf.  Ps.  ci.  5 — 7.)     Now  observe  that  here — 

I.  The  first  place  is  filled  by  God's  priest  (ver.  2).  The  minister  of  religion 
takes  precedence  of  the  ministers  of  state.  The  imiversal  tendency  is  to  put  man 
first  and  God  second.  Solomon — if  this  list  preserves  the  order  of  his  arrangements 
— put  God  first,  in  the  person  of  His  high  priest.  Under  the  theocracy  the  king 
was  a  sort  of  summus  episcopus.  It  was  meet  that  next  to  the  anointed  Prince 
should  stand  the  anointed  Pontiff. 

II.  Priority  is  given  to  the  officers  of  peace  (vers.  3, 4).  Scribes  come  before 
warriors.  In  David's  day  it  was  otherwise.  But  there  has  been  an  advance,  and 
here  is  the  proof  of  it.  War  is  essentially  barbarous.  Among  savage  tribes  war- 
fare is  chronic.  As  men  become  wiser  and  more  civilized,  the  appeal  to  brute 
force  is  less  firequent.  Wiser,  for  war  means  vmwisdom  somewliere.  More 
civilized,  for  the  history  of  civilization  tells  how  the  wager  of  battle,  which  is  now 
confined  to  nations,  was  once  employed  by  tribes,  provinces,  and  private  persons. 
So  that,  in  this  particular,  the  wise  son  was  greater  than  the  pious  father.  For 
this  reason  Solomon  may  biuld  the  temple  which  his  father's  blood-red  hand  may 
not  touch.  For  this  reason  the  son,  not  the  father,  is  the  favourite  type  of  the 
Prince  of  Peace.  One  of  the  world's  greatest  generals  (Napoleon)  said  there  were 
but  two  great  powers,  the  sword  and  the  pen,  and  that,  in  the  long  run,  the  former 
was  sure  to  be  overcome  by  the  latter.  Salomon  would  seem  to  have  been  of  the  same 
opinion.    The  "  scribes  ''  and  the  "recorder  "  precede  the  "  captain  of  the  host," 


71  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  it,  1—19 

m.  Many  places  are  filled  by  the  functionakibs  of  his  fathbe  (vers.  3,  4, 6, 
and  of.  ver.  16).  An  Eastern  autocrat  generally  appoints  his  associates  of  the 
harem  (oh.  zii.  10),  his  personal  favourites,  to  positions  of  trust.  Solomon  showed 
his  wisdom  in  retaining  the  faithful  servants  of  his  predecessor  (compare  the  folly 
of  Eehoboam,  oh.  xii.  8),  and  his  example  thus  confirms  his  precept  (Prov.  xxvii. 
10),  "  Thine  own  friend  and  thy  father's  friend  forsake  not." 

IV.  Some  places  aee  filled  by  his  own  sons-in-law  (vers.  11, 15).  This  does 
not  argue  nepotism,  or  favom'itism  as  the  hand  of  the  king's  daughter  was  often 
bestowed  as  the  reward  of  distinguished  services  (1  Sam.  xvii.  25;  xvui.  17,  27). 
It  may  have  been  the  due  recognition  of  fidelity  and  ability.  lu  any  case  the 
aUiauces  would  strengthen  Solomon's  throne. 

"  The  friends  thou  hast,  and  their  adoption,  tried, 
Grapple  them  to  thy  heart  with  hooks  of  steel." 

Alien  princes  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  proud  to  espoase  Solomon's  daughters, 
but  he  preferred  to  marry  them  to  faithful  subjects.     Blood  is  thicker  than  water. 

V.  AiL  PLACES   OF    TRUST   WERE   FILLED    BY    PERSONS    OF    PIETY.      The    number  ol 

priests'  or  prophets'  sons  employed  by  Solomon  is  very  remarkable  (vers.  4,  6,  14, 
and  possibly  1 5).  He  knew  that  those  who  were  taught  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  would 
best  keep  and  best  enforce  the  law  of  the  realm.  Those  who  "  fear  God  "  are  those 
who  "honour  the  king"  (1  Peter  ii.  17).  "Witness  Joseph,  Obadiah,  Daniel,  and 
the  three  Hebrew  children.  Even  irreligious  masters  know  the  value  of  God- 
fearing servants.  God  blesses  the  house  of  Potiphar  for  the  sake  of  its  pious 
steward.     Piety  involves  probity  and  excludes  peculation  and  malfeasance. 

VI.  Every  officer  had  his  place  and  kept  it.  There  were  definite  duties, 
de"finite  districts.  The  prefectures  were  so  many  parishes.  Each  was  responsible 
for  his  own  and  for  that  only.  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law.  The  prosperity  ol 
Solomon's  reign  may  have  been  largely  due  to  liis  system  and  method.  There  is  a 
hierarchy  and  a  due  order  in  heaven.  The  angels  would  almost  seem  to  have  theii' 
districts  (Deut.  xxxU.  8,  LXX.)  The  great  King  gives  "  to  every  man  according  to 
his  work  "  (Mark  xiii.  34). 

Vers.  7 — 19. — The  Twelve  Prefects  and  the  Twelve  Apostles.  "  And  Solomon  had 
twelve  of&cers  over  aU  Israel."  Considering  how  closely  he  foreshadows  our 
blessed  Lord,  the  twelve  officers  of  Solomon  can  hardly  fail  to  remind  us  of  the 
t\\'elve  Apostles  of  the  Lamb.  It  may  be  instructive  to  compare  their  dignities, 
fuuotions,  &c.     Obsei-ve — 

I.  Their  respective  positions.  The  officers  of  Solomon  were  princes  (ver.  2) ; 
the  officers  of  Jesus  were  peasoMts  and  fishermen.  Ability,  energy,  &c.,  dictated 
Solomon's  choice  ;  humility,  dependence,  weakness,  our  Blessed  Lord's  (Matt, 
xviii.  8,  4;  xxiii.  11 ;  and  cf.  xi.  11).  "  Not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble  are 
called,"  &c.  (1  Cor.  i.  26).     "  Unlearned  and  ignorant  men"  (Acts  iv.  13). 

II.  Their  respectivb  reputations.  The  officers  of  Solomon  were  reverenced 
and  feared  ;  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  were  despised  and  defa/med.  Each  of  the 
twelve  prefects  was,  no  doubt,  a  little  potentate.  The  court  of  Abinadab  in 
Mahanaim,  or  Shimei  in  Benjamin,  would  be  a  copy  in  miniature  of  that  of  the 
king  in  Jerusalem.  And  we  know  what  the  Eastern  tax-gatherer  is  like,  what 
despotic  powers  he  wields,  &c.  Witness  the  Pashas  and  VaUs  of  Tui-key.  How 
different  were  the  twelve  apostles.  The  contrast  could  not  well  be  greater. 
"Hated  of  all  men,"  esteemed  "the  filth  and  offscouring  of  all  things;"  "a 
•peotacle  unto  the  world,  and  to  angels,  and  to  men  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  9-13).  What  the 
hfe  of  an  apostle  was  Uke  we  may  learn  from  2  Cor.  xi.  24—29.  "  Behold,  they 
which  are  gorgeously  apparelled  and  live  delicately  are  in  king's  courts"  (1  Luke 
vii.  25).     "  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all  and  followed  thee  "  (Matt.  xix.  27). 

III.  Their  respective  jurisdictions.  The  twelve  officers  presided  over  tribei. ; 
the  twehie  apostles  ministered  to  continents.  The  whole  of  Palestine  is  about  the 
■ize  of  Wales,  and  this  strip  of  territory  was  divided  into  twelve  parts.  Compare 
with  this  the  apostohc  commission,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  &o.    "Ye  diall  be 


en.  IT.  1—19.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGa  78 

■witnesses  unto  me  ...  ,  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  "  Judaism  was  • 
tribal  religion  ;  the  faith  of  Christ  is  for  humanity. 

IV.  Theie  respective  functions.  1.  The  twelve  officers  were  recei/vera-general ; 
the  twelve  apostles  were  general  givers.  The  first  took  from  the  people  to  give  to 
the  king:  the  latter  received  from  their  King  to  bestow  on  the  people.  To  the 
former,  the  subjects  of  Solomon  brought  taxes  or  tribute ;  the  latter  have  obtained 
blessings  and  gifts  from  their  Lord  for  men.  (Cf.  Acts  i.  8 ;  ii.  18 ;  viii.  18 ;  1  Tim. 
iv.  14;  2  Tim.  i.  6,  &c.)  "It  is  more  blessed  to  give,"  &c.  2.  The  officers 
nourished  the  Tting  (ver.  27,  Heb.)  and  his  a/rmies:  the  apostles  fed  the  Ghv/rch. 
(Cf.  Acts  XX.  28.)  The  14,000  dependants  of  the  com-t,  the  4000  charioteers,  the 
12,000  horsemen,  all 'were  maintained  by  the  twelve  purveyors.  Through  the 
apostles,  the  Lord  fed,  now  4000,  now  7000,  and  through  them,  tlieir  doctrine 
and  theix  successors.  He  stiU  feeds,  with  word  and  sacrament,  the  millions  of  the 
Church. 

So  far  the  comparison  is  largely  in  favour  of  the  prefects.  As  regards  this 
world's  gifts  and  dignities,  they  bear  away  the  palm.  In  their  lifetime  they 
received  their  good  things  and  the  apostles  evil  things.  But  an  eld  authority — it 
is  the  dictum  of  Solon  to  Croesus  (Herod,  i.  30 — 33) — warns  us  to  pronounce  on  no 
man's  fortune  or  happiness  until  we  have  seen  the  end.  And  the  real  end  is  not  in 
this  world.  Let  us  tlierefore  consider  (1)  What  is  the  verdict  of  posterity?  and 
(l)  What  will  be  the  issue  of  futurity  as  to  these  two  classes?  Here  we 
observe — 

I.  The  names  op  some  of  the  prefects  are  forgotten  ;    the  names  of  the 

APOSTLES   ARE   IN   EVERLASTING   REMEMBRANCE.      The  fame  of  SolomOU's  twclve  WaS 

shortlived.  Several  of  them  are  now  known  to  us  only  by  their  patronymics. 
Those  much  dreaded  satraps,  before  whom  subjects  trembled,  their  very  names  are 
in  some  cases  lost  in  obhvion.  But  the  apostoUc  college,  every  member  is  stiU 
famed,  reverenced,  loved  throughout  the  whole  round  world.  Their  names  are 
heard,  Sunday  by  Sunday,  in  the  Holy  Gospel  (of.  Matt.  xxvi.  13).  Better  still, 
their  "  names  are  written  in  heaven  "  (Luke  x.  20  ;  cf.  Phil.  iv.  3).     As  to 

II.  The  TWELVE  apostles  will  judge  the  twelve  PREFECTS.  In  their  time, 
the  latter  sate  on  twelve  thrones,  each  in  his  capital  city,  ruling  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel.  But  their  glory,  like  that  of  the  Boman  general's  pageant,  "  lacked 
continuoMce,"    In  the  midst  of  their  brief  authority 

•*  Comes  the  blind  Fury  with  the  abhorred  sheart 
And  slits  the  thin-spun  life."  ' 

The  dominion  of  the  apostles  is  in  the  future.  It  belongs  to  the  "regeneration." 
"  When  the  Son  of  Man  "—the  true  Son  of  David — "  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his 
glory,"  then  shall  they  ''  sit  on  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes,"  &c. 
(Matt.  xix.  28).  The  despised  fishermen  shall  judge  the  high  and  mighty  ofiacers 
— ^yes,  and  magnificent  Solomon  himself.  Even  now,  it  may  be,  their  glory  is  in 
part  begun. 

"  Lo,  the  twelve,  majestic  princes 

In  the  court  of  Jesus  sit, 

Calmly  watching  all  the  conflict 

Eaging  still  beneath  their  feet." 

Shan  we  follow  the  officers  of  Solomon,  or  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb? 
Shall  we,  that  is,  desire  earthly  advancement,  high  position,  contemporary  fame, 
or  shall  we  count  all  as  dross  that  we  may  "  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him" 
(Phil.  iii.  8 — 11).  '' What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain,"  &c.  We  cannot  all  be 
-vye/tovig  Kal  arpaTityol,  stiU  less  can  we  all  wed  Mngs'  .daughters.  But  we  may  all 
sit  with  Christ  upon  His  throne  (Rev.  iii.  21)  ;  may  all  receive  the  crown  of  life 
(Bev.  ii.  10) ;  may  aU  be  "  called  unto  the  marriage  supper  of  &e  Lamb  "  (£ev, 
xix.  V-ti). 


74 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  rv.  20—34. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV.  20— S4. 


Solomon's  bulk,  state,  and  wisdom. — 
The  remainder  of  this  chapter,  which  de- 
scribes to  us  the  extent  and  character  of 
Solomon's  sway  (w.  20, 21, 24, 25),  the  pomp 
and  provision  of  his  household  (w.  22,  23, 
26 — 28),  and  his  profound  and  varied  wisdom 
(tv.  29 — 34),  has  every  appearance  of  a  com- 
pilation from  different  sources.  It  scarcely 
has  the  order  and  coherence  which  we  should 
find  in  the  narrative  of  a  single  writer. 

Ver.,20. — Judah'  and  Israel  were  many,  as 
the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  In  multitude 
[a  reminiscence  of  Gen.  xiii.  16 ;  xxii.  17 ; 
xxxii.  12  (ef.  ch.  iii.  8).  In  the  reign  of 
Solomon  these  promises  had  their  fulfil- 
ment], eating  and  drlnMng,  and  making 
merry.  [Cf.  1  Sam.  xxx.  16.  The  Hebrew 
here  begins  a  new  chapter.  The  LXX.  omits 
vers.  20,  21,  25,  26,  and  places  vers.  27,  28, 
"and  those  officers,"  &c.,  after  the  list  of 
prefects,  ver.  19.] 

Ver.  21. — ^And  Solomon  reigned  [Heb.  was 
reigning']  over  all  Idngdoms  [Heb.  the 
kingdoms.  That  is,  as  suzerain,  as  is  ex- 
plained presently.  So  that  Psa.  Ixxii.  10, 
11  had  its  fulfilment]  from  the  river  [i.e., 
the  Euphrates,  the  river  of  that  region :  so 
called  Gen.  xxxi.  21 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  31 ;  2 
Sam.  i.  16.  In  Gen.  xv.  18  it  is  called  "  the 
great  river,  the  river  Euphrates."  Similarly 
Josh.  i.  4]  unto  [not  in  the  Hebrew.  It  is 
found  in  the  parallel  passage,  2  Chron.  ix. 
26,  and  perhaps  we  may  safely  supply  it 
here.  Its  omission  may  have  been  occasioned 
by  the  recurrence  of  the  same  word  (1)1)  pre. 
sently.  Some  would  render,  "reigned  .  .  . 
over  the  land,"  &a.,  supplying  3  in  thought 
from  above.  But  "unto"  seems  to  be  re- 
quired after  "from."  Cf.  ver.  24]  the  land 
of  the  PhlUstlues  [this,  i.e.,  the  Mediterra- 
nean shore,  was  the  western  border  of  his 
realm],  and  unto  the  border  of  Egypt  [this 
was  his  southern  boundary.  We  have  nere 
a  reference  to  Geu.  xv.  18,  the  promise 
which  now  first  received  its  fulfilment] : 
they  brought  presents  [i.e.,  tribute.  Similar 
expressions,  2  Sam.  viii.  2 ;  2  Kings  xvii. 
H,  4,  and  especially  Psa.  Ixxii.  10.  What  the 
presents  were  we  are  told  ch.  x.  25,  where, 
however,  see  note],  and  served  Solomon  all 
the  days  of  his  life. 

The  daily  consumption  of  the  royal  house- 
hold is  now  related  to  show  the  grandeur 
Kni  Itaiuy  of  the  court.   And  it  agreed  well 


with  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom.  The 
lavish  provision  of  Oriental  palaces  was 
evidently  a  subject  of  wonder  and  of  boast- 
ing to  the  ancients,  as  the  inscriptions  and 
monuments  show, 

Ver.  22. — And  Solomon's  provision  [marg. 
bread,  but  Dn?,  strictly  signifies  any  kiud 
of  food]  for  one  day  was  thirty  measures 
[Heb.  cars.  The  "Q  was  both  a  liquid  and 
a  dry  measure  (oh.  v.  11)  and  was  the  equi- 
valent to  the  homer  (Ezek.  xlv.  14),  but  its 
precise  capacity  is  doubtful.  According  to 
Josephus,  it  contained  eighty-six  gallons; 
according  to  the  Babbins,  forty-four]  of  fine 
flour  and  threescore  measures  of  meal. 
[Thenius  calculates  that  this  amount  of 
flour  would  yield  28,000  lbs.  of  bread,  which 
(allowing  2  lbs.  to  each  person)  would  give 
14,000  as  the  number  of  Solomon's  re- 
tainers. This  computation,  however,  could 
have  but  little  value  did  not  his  calcula- 
tions, based  on  the  consumption  of  flesh, 
mentioned  presently  (allowing  IJ  lbs.  per 
head),  lead  to  the  same  result. 

Ver.  23.— Ten  fat  [Heb.  fatted,  i.e.,  for 
table]  oxen,  and  twenty  fat  oxen  out  of  the 
pastures,  and  an  hundred  sheep,  beside 
harts  and  roebucks  [or  gazelles]  and 
fallowdeer  [Roebucks.  The  name  yaAmtir  is 
still  current  in  Palestine  in  this  sense  (Gen- 
der, p.  91)] ,  and  fatted  fowl.  [This  word 
(Dn3"13)  occurs  nowhere  else.  The  meaning 
most  in  favour  is  geese.] 

Ver.  24. — For  [the  connexion  seems  to 
be :  Solomon  could  well  support  such  lavish 
expenditure,  because]  he  had  dominion  over 
all  the  region  on  this  side  [131/3  strictly 
means,  on  the  other  side,  beyond  (13Vi 
transiit).  But  here  it  must  obviously 
mean  on  the  west  side,  for  Solomon's  rule 
did  not  extend  east  of  the  Euphrates.  The 
use  of  this  word  in  this  sense  (Josh.  v.  1 ; 
ix._  1 ;  xii.  7 ;  1  Chron.  xxvi.  30 ;  Ezra 
viii.  36 ;  Neh.  ii.  7)  is  generally  accounted 
for  on  the  supposition  that  the  writers  were 
living  in  Babylon  in  the  time  of  the  cap- 
tivity ;  but  this  appears  to  be  by  no  means  cer- 
tain. (See,  e.j.,  Ezraiv.  10, 11.)  The  truth 
seems  to  be,  not  that  ' '  the  expression  be- 
longed to  the  time  of  the  captivity,  but  was 
returned  after  the  return  and  without  regard 
to  its  geographical  signification,  just,  for 
instance,  like  the  expression,  Gallia  Trans- 
alpina "  (Bahr),  but  that  from  the  first  It 
was  employed,  now  of  one  side,  now  of  the 
other,  of  the  Jordan ;  of  the  west  in  Gen. 


CH.  IV.  20^34.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


76 


I.  10,  11;  Josh.  is.  1,  &o.;  of  the  east  in 
Num.  xxii.  1 ;  xxxii.  32 ;  "  and  even  in  the 
same  chapter  is  used  first  of  one  and  then 
of  the  other  Deut.  iii.  8,  20,  25  "  (Spk. 
Comm.  on  Deut.  i.  1),  and  that  it  was  sub- 
sequently applied,  with  similar  variations  of 
meaning,  to  the  Euphrates.  See  Introduo- 
tibn,  sect,  v.]  from  Tiphsall  [of.  2  Kings 
XV.  16,  apparently  the  town  on  the  west 
bank  of  the  Euphrates,  knovvn  to  the  Greeks 
as  Thapsaciis.  It  derived  its  name  from 
the  fact  that  the  river  at  that  point  was 
fordable  1103  =  pass  over;  riD?!?  =  crosbing. 
A  bridge  of  boats  was  maintained  here  by 
the  Persians,  It  was  here  that  the  river 
was  forded  by  Cyrus  and  the  Ten  Thousand, 
and  was  crossed  by  the  armies  of  Darius 
Codomimnus  and  Alexander]  to  Azzah  [i.e., 
Gaza,  now  called  Guzzeh,  the  southernmost 
city  of  Philistia,  ten  miles  from  the  Medi- 
terranean, and  the  last  town  in  Palestine 
on  the  Egyptian  frontier.  Cf.  ver.  21] ,  over 
all  the  kings  on  this  side  the  river  ["  Petty 
kings  were  numerous  at  this  time  in  aU  the 
countries  dependent  upon  Judaea"  (Eawlin- 
son).  Cf.  1  Sam.  vi.  16  ;  2  Sam.  viii.  3-10  ; 
1  Sings  XX  1.  The  "  kings  on  this  side  the 
river  "  were  those  of  Syria  (2  Sam.  viii.  6. 
Cf.  X.  19)  conquered  by  David,  and  of 
Philistia,  2  Sam.  viii.  1] :  and  he  had 
peace  on  all  sides  [Heb.  from  all  his 
servants]  round  about  him  [in  fulfilment 
of  1  Chron.  xxii.  9.  The  objection  of 
Thenius  that  this  statement  contradicts 
that  of  oh.  xi.  23,  sqq.,  is  hardly  deserving 
of  serious  notice.  The  reign  of  Solomon,  on 
the  whole,  was  undoubtedly  a  peaceful  one. 

Ver.  25. — And  Judah  and  Israel  [here  we 
have  the  copula,  the  absence  of  which  in 
ver.  20  suggests  a  corruption  or  confusion  of 
the  text]  dwelt  safely  [Heb.  confidently, 
Cf.  Judges  viii.  11 ;  1  Sam.  xii.  11],  every 
man  vmder  his  vine  and  under  his  fig  tree. 
[A  proverbial  expression  (see  2  Kings  xviii. 
81,  where  it  is  used  by  Rabshakeh  ;  Micah 
iv,  4 ;  Zech.  iii.  10)  to  denote  rest  and  the 
undisturbed  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  the 
earth,  not  necessarily,  as  Keil,  "  the  most 
costly  products  of  the  land."  In  invasions, 
raids,  &e.,  it  is  still  the  custom  of  the  East 
to  cut  and  carry  off  all  the  crops,  and 
fruitE.  Wordsworth  notices  that  the  vine 
often"  clustered  on  the  walls  of  houses {Psa. 
cxxviii.  3),  or  around  and  over  the  court- 
yards"] ,  from  Dan  even  to  Beersheba  [i.e., 
from  the  extreme  northern  to  the  extreme 
ponthern  (not  eastern,  as  the  American 
translator  of  Bahr)  boundary,  Judg.  xx.  1 ;  1 
Sam.  iii.  20 ;  2  Sam.  iii.  10]. 

Ver.  26.— And  Solomon  had  forty  thou- 
sand stalls  of  horses  [40,000  is  certainly  a 
clerical   error,    probably    foi    4000    [i.e., 


n»r3';iX  for  niJapN).  For  (1)  in  th« 
parallel  passage  in  Chronicles  the  number 
is  stated  as  4000.  (2)  4000  agrees,  and 
40,000  does  not,  with  the  other  numbers 
here  given.  The  chariots,  e.g.,  numbered 
1400  ;  the  horsemen  12,000.  Now  for  1400 
chariots  the  proper  allowance  of  horsea 
would  be  about  4000.  We  see  from  the 
monuments  that  it  was  clistomary  to  yoke 
two  horses  (seldom  three)  to  a  chariot ;  bat 
a  third  or  supernumerary  horse  was  pro- 
vided to  meet  emergencies  or  accidents. 
4000  horses  would  hence  be  a  Uberal  pro- 
vision for  Solomon's  chariots,  and  it  would 
also  agree  well  with  the  number  of  his 
cavalry.  12,000  cavalry  and  40,000  chariot 
horses  are  out  of  all  proportion.  As  to  stalls, 
it  seems  clear  that  in  ancient,  as  in  modern 
times,  each  horse  had  a  separate  crib  (Vege- 
tius  in  Boohart,  quoted  by  Keil).  Geseuius, 
however,  understands  by  iT("lS<,  not  stalls, 
but  teams,  or  pairs]  for  his  chariots  [or 
ehnrintry  :  the  word  is  singular  and  col- 
lective] and  twelve  hundred  horsemen 
[rather,  horses,  i.e.,  riding  or  cavalry,  as 
distinguished  from  chariot-horses  above. 
See  note  on  ch.  i.  6.  It  has  been  supposed 
that  this  warlike  provision  is  mentioned  to 
account  for  the  peace  ("  si  vis  pacem,  para 
bellum")  of  Solomon's  reign,  and  was  de- 
signed to  overawe  the  tributary  kings.  But 
it  is  more  probable  that  the  idea  of  the 
historian  was,  partly  to  exhibit  the  pomp 
and  circumstance  of  Israel's  greatest  king, 
and  partly  to  record  a  contravention  of  the 
law  (Deut.  xvii.  16),  which  was  one  of  the 
precursors  of  his  fall] .   • 

Ver.  27. — And  those  [rather,  these,i.e.,  the 
officers  n-entioned  v  v.  7-19]  officers  provided 
victual  for  [Heb.  nourished]  king  Solomon 
and  for  all  that  came  imto  king  Solomon's 
table  [we  can  hardly  see  here  (with  Keil) 
"  a  further  proof  of  the  blessings  of  peace." 
The  words  were  probably  suggested  by  the 
mental  wonder  how  the  cavalry,  &c.,  could 
be  maintained,  and  so  the  author  states  that 
this  great  number  of  horses  and  horsemen 
depended  on  the  twelve  purveyors  for  their 
food]  every  man  in  his  month ;  they  lacked 
nothiag  [nther,  suffered  nothing  to  be  lack- 
ing. So  Uesen. ;  and  the  coulext  seems  to 
require  it]. 

Var.  28. — Barley  also  [the  food  of  horses 
at  the  present  day  in  the  East,  where  oats 
are  not  grown.  (Cf.  Horn.  II.  v.  196)]  and 
straw  for  the  horses  and  dromedaries 
[marg.  mules  or  swift  beasts.  Coursers,  or 
fleet  horses  of  superior  breed  are  intended. 
B'3T=  Geim.  Renner.  These  coursers  were 
for  the  use  of  the  king's  messengers  or  posts. 
See  Esther  viii.  10,  14]  brought  they  unto 
the  place  where  tbe  officers  were  ["  officers  " 


78 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH,  IV.  20-84i 


is  not  in  the  Hebrew.  The  LXX.  and  Vulg. 
supply  ' '  king  "  (the verb  is  singular, "was"). 
But  the  true  meaning  is  to  Ije  gathered  from 
chap.  I.  26.  There  we  learn  that  the  horses 
were  distributed  in  different  towns  through- 
out the  land.  To  these  different  dep6ts, 
therefore,  the  purveyors  must  forward  the 
provender,  "  unto  the  place  where  it  should 
Le  "  (iTn'),  not,  as  Eawlinson,  "  where  the 
horses  were."]  every  man  according  to  bla 
charge. 

Ver.  29. — And  Ood  gave  Solomon  [in  ful- 
filment of  the  promise  of  chap.  iii.  12]  wis- 
dom and  Understanding  (ilDSn ,  wisdom, 
knowledge;  fli-IDJ^,  discernment,  penetration. 
The  historian,  after  describing  the  prosperity 
of  the  reahn,  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  per- 
sonal endowments  of  its  head]  and  largeness 
of  heart  exceeding  much  [the  Easterns 
speak  of  the  heart  where  we  should  talk  of 
head  or  intellect  (chap.  iii.  9,  12 ;  x.  24. 
Of.  Matt.  XV.  19  ;  Ephes.  i.  18  (Greek) ;  Heb. 
iv.  12).  The  "  large  heart "  is  the  ingenivm 
capax,  as  Thenius.  These  different  words 
indicate  the  variety  and  scope  of  his  talents, 
in  agreement  with  ver.  33]  as  the  sand  that 
is  on  the  sea  shore.  [Same  expression  in 
Gen.  xxii.  17  ;  xxxii.  12  ;  xli.  49  ;  Josh.  zi. 
4;  Judg.  vii.  12,&c.] 

Ver.  30. — ^And  Solomon's  wisdom  excelled 
[or  exceeded  ;  same  word  as  in  ver.  29]  the 
wisdom  of  all  the  children  of  the  east 
country  [By  the  Beni-Kedem  we  are  hardly 
to  understand  (with  Eawlinson)  a  distinct 
tribe  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates.  It  is 
true  that  the  laud  of  the  Beni-Eedem  is 
identified  with  Haran  or  Mesopotamia  (Gen. 
xxix.  1),  and  the  mountains  of  Eedem  (Num. 
xxiii.  7)  are  evidently  those  of  Aram.  It  is 
also  true  that  '■  the  children  of  the  East " 
are  apparently  distinguished  from  the 
Amalekites  and  Midianites  (Judg.  vi.  8,  33 ; 
vii.  12 ;  viii.  10).  It  is  probable,  nevertheless, 
that  the  name  is  here  employed  to  designate 
all  the  Arabian  tribes  east  and  south-east 
of  Palestine — Sabseans,  Idumeans,  Teman- 
ites,  Chaldeans.  What  their  wisdom  was 
like,  we  may  see  in  the  Book  of  Job.  Cf. 
Jer.  xlix.  7 ;  Obad.  8]  and  all  the  wisdom 
of  Egypt.  [The  learning  of  Egypt  was  of 
great  repute  in  the  Old  World.  It  differed 
very  considerably  from  the  wisdom  of 
Kedem,  being  scientific  rather  than  gnomic 
(Isa.  xix.  11, 12 ;  xxxi.  2,  3 ;  Acts  vii.  22)  and 
including  geometry,  astronomy,  magic,  and 
medicine.  See  Jos.,  Ant.  viii.  2. 5 ;  Herod,  ii. 
109.  160.  Wilkinson,  "Ancient  Egyptians" 
vol.  ii.  pp.  316 — 465. 

Ver.  81,— For  (Heb.  and)  he  was  wiser 
than  all  men  [Keil  adds  "  of  his  time,"  but 
we  have  no  right  to  restrict  the  words  to  his 
•pontemporaries  (see  note  on  chap.  iii.  12). 


It  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  names  men 
tioncd  presently  are  those  of  conteu)poraries] 
than  Ethan  the  Ezrahlte,  and  Eeman,  and 
Chalcol,  and  Darda  [It  is  impossible  to  say 
whether  these  are  the  same  persons  as  the 
Ethan  and  Heman  and  Chalcol  and  Dara 
of  1  Chron.  ii.  6,  or  the  Ethan  and  Heman 
who  were  David's  singers.  The  resemblance 
is  certainly  remarkable.  Not  only  are  the 
names  practically  the  same  {Dara  may  well 
be  a  clerical  error:  many  MSS.,  together 
with  the  Syr.  and  Arab.,  read  Darda),  but 
they  occur  in  the  same  order.  Our  first 
impression,  consequently,  is  that  the  two 
lists  represent  the  same  persons,  and  if  so, 
these  four  sages  were  the  "  sons"  of  Zerah, 
the  son  of  Judah  (Gen.  xxxviii.  30).  But 
against  this  it  is  urged  that  Ethan  is  here 
called  the  Ezrahite,  as  are  both  Ethan  and 
Heman  in  the  titles  of  Fsahns  Ixxxix.  and 
Ixxxviii.  respectively.  The  resemblance, 
however,  of  Ezrahite  (^^l^TS)  to  Zerahite 
{''jy\V)  is  BO  close  as  to  suggest  identity 
ratlier  than  difference.  There  is,  perhaps, 
more  weight  in  the  objection  that  Chalcol 
and  Darda  are  here  distinctly  said  to  be  "the 
sons  of  Mahol,"  though  here  again  it  has 
been  observed  that  Mahol  (7inD)  means  pipe 
or  dance,  and  the  "sons  of  Mahol,"  con- 
sequently, may  merely  be  a  synonym,  agree- 
ably to  Eastern  idiom  (Eccles.  xii.  4,  with 
which  cf.  2  Sam.  xix.  35),  for  "  musicians." 
We  may  tlierefore  allow  that  the  four  names 
may  be  those  of  sons  {i.e.,  descendants)  of 
Zerah.  But  the  question  now  presents 
itself :  Are  Ethan  and  Heman  to  be  identified 
with  the  well-known  precentors  of  David? 
Against  their  identity  are  these  facts:  1. 
That  Ethan  the  singer  (1  Chi  on.  vi.  81)  is 
described  as  the  son  of  Kisbi  (1  Chron.  vi. 
44),  elsewhere  called  Eushaiah  (i6.  xv.  17), 
and  of  the  family  of  Meraii ;  as  a  Levite 
that  is,  instead  of  a  descendant  of  Judah,  and 
that  Heman,  who  is  called  the  singer,  or 
musician  {ib.  vi.  33),  and  the  "  king's  seer  " 
ib.  XXV.  6)  is  said  to  be  a  son  of  Joel,  a 
grandson  of  the  prophet  Samuel,  and  one  of 
the  Kohathite  Levites  {ib.  xv.  17).  The  first 
impression  in  this  case,  therefore,  is  that 
they  must  be  distinct.  But  it  should  be 
remembered  (1)  that  the  sons— in  the  strict 
sense — of  Zerah  are  nowhere  else  named 
for  their  wisdom,  whereas  the  royal  singer 
and  seer  probably  owed  their  appointments 
to  their  genius,  and  (2)  that  though  Levites, 
they  may  have  been  incorporated  (possibly 
like  Jair,  through  marriage — see  note  on  ' 
ver.  13  above,  and  cf.  Ezra  ii.  61)  into  the 
tribe  of  Judah.  "  The  Levite  in  Judg.  xvii. 
7  is  spoken  o7  as  belonging  to  the  family  of 
Judah,  because  he  dwelt  in  Bethlehem  of 
Judah,  and  Elkanah  the  Levite  is  called  OB 


CH.  r7.  20—84.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


•n 


Ephraimite  in  1  Sam.  i.  1,  because  in  his 
civil  capacity ,he  was  incorporated  into  the 
tribe  of  Ephraim  "  (Eeil).  It  must  be  ad- 
mitted, however,  that  the  natural  interpre- 
tation of  1  Chron.  ii.  6  is  that  the  "  sons  " 
of  Zerah  there  mentioned  were  his  im- 
mediate and  actual  descendants,  and  not 
Levites  who  long  centuries  afterwards  were 
somehow  incorporated  into  his  family.  But 
the  question  is  one  of  so  much  nicety  that 
it  is  hardly  possible  to  come  to  a  positive 
conclusion]  and  bis  txme  [Heb.  name]  was 
in  all  [Heb.  all  the]  nations  round  about 
[Cf.  X.  24,  &o.] 

Yer.  32. — And  be  spalce  three  thousand 
proverbs  :  and  his  songs  were  a  thousand 
and  five.  [Of  the  former,  less  than  one- 
third  are  preserved  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs 
(see  i.  1 ;  xxv.  1) ;  the-  rest  are  lost  to  us. 
The  Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  even  if  the  com- 
position of  Solomon,  can  hardly  be  de- 
scribed as  proverbs.  Of  his  songs  all  have 
perished,  except  the  Canticles,  and  possibly 
Psalms  Ixzii.,  cxxvii.  (see  the  titles),  and, 
according  to  some,  cxxviii. 

Yer.  33. — And  be  spake  of  [i.e.,  discoursed, 
treated,  not  necessarily  wrote]  trees  [In  his 
proverbs  and  songs  he  exceeded  the  children 
of  the  East.  But  his  knowledge  was  not 
only  speculative,  but  scientific.  In  his  ac- 
quaintance with  natural  history  he  outshone 


the  Egyptians,  ver.  20],  ttom  the  cedar  tre« 
that  Is  In  Lebanon  [A  favourite  illustration. 
The  Jews  had  a  profound  admiration  for  all 
trees,  and  of  these  they  justly  regarded  the 
cedar  as  king.  Cf .  Judg.  ix.  15 ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  10 ; 
civ.  16 ;  Cant.  v.  15 ;  Ezek.  xxxi,  3]  unto 
tbe  hyssop  that  springetb  out  of  the  wall 
[His  knowledge,  i.e.,  embraced  the  least  pro- 
ductions of  nature  as  well  as  the  greatest. 
The  common  hyssop  (Exod.  xii.  22;  Lev. 
ziv.  4)  can  hardly  be  intended  here,  as  that 
often  attains  a  considerable  height  (two 
feet),  but  a  miniature  variety  or  moss-like 
hyssop  in  appearance,  probably  Orthotrichvm 
saxdtile] :  be  spake  alao  of  beasts,  and  of 
fowl,  and  of  creeping  things,  and  of  flsbes. 
["  The  usual  Biblical  division  of  the  animal 
kingdom  "  (Eawlinscn).  The  arrangement 
is  hardly  according  to  manner  of  motion 
(Bahr).  If  anything,  it  is  according  to 
elements — earth,  sky,  sea.  Both  Jewish  and 
Mohammedan  writers  abound  in  exaggerated 
or  purely  fabulous  accounts  of  Solomon's 
attainments  and  gifts.  We  may  see  the  be- 
ginning of  these  in  Jos.,  Ant.  viii.  2.  6. 

Ver.  34. — And  there  came  of  all  people 
(Heb.  the  peoples,  nations]  to  bear  the 
wisdom  of  Solomon  [ch.  x.  1] ,  from  all  the 
kings  of  tbe  earth  [i.e.,  messengers,  am- 
bassadora,  as  in  the  next  chapter],  wUcb 
had  beard  of  his  wisdom. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  20 — 25. — The  Golden  Age.  It  has  been  03mically  saii  that  men  always 
place  the  golden  age  in  the  past  or  in  the  future.  Possibly  they  are  not  so  far 
wrong  after  aU.  For,  if  our  historian  is  true,  there  has  been  such  a  period  in  the 
history  of  the  world.  And  if  the  Holy  Gospel  is  true,  there  will  be  such  a  period 
hereafter.  The  reign  of  Solomon  was  the  Augustan,  the  golden  age,  of  Israel.  The 
reign  of  Jesus,  of  which  Solomon's  empire  was  a  foreshadowing,  will  be  the  golden 
age  of  the  world.  Let  us  then  consider  what  light  the  first  period — the  past — throws 
upon  the  future  ;  in  what  respects,  that  is  to  say,  the  sway  of  Solomon  is  a  type 
and  preflgurement  of  the  holy  and  beneficent  rule  of  our  Redeemer.     Observe — 

I.  The  monarch.  1.  He  was  the  wisest  of  men.  This  was  the  root  of  the  uni- 
versal prosperity.  He  was  ca^ax  i/mperii  ;  he  had  the  imderstanding  to  judge  that 
great  people  (ch.  iii.  9).  From  a  throne  stablished  in  eqioity  and  intelligence  (Psa. 
Ixxii.  2)  flowed  a  tide  of  blessing  through  the  land.  But  "  Messiah  the  Prince  "  is 
the  Incarnation  of  Wisdom.  He  is  "  made  unto  us  wisdom  "  (I  Cor.  i.  30).  In 
Him  "  are  hid  aU  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  "  (Col.  ii.  3).  He  is  "  the 
wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  2.  He  ruled  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  The  precept 
of  his  father  (2  Sam.  xxiii,  3)  was  not  forgotten  (ch.  iii.  6 — 9).  Compare  the  account 
of  Messiah's  reign — the  reign  of  the  Branch  of  the  root  of  Jesse — in  Isaiah  ii.  2 — 5. 
This  "  King  shall  reign  in  righteousness  "  (Isa.  xxxii.  1). 

II,  The  empire.  1.  Its  extent.  He  had  dominion  from  "  the  river  to  the 
border  of  Egypt,"  "  from  Tiphsah  even  to  Azzah."  The  petty  kings  brought  pre- 
■ents  and  did  fealty.  Now  observe  how  Psalm  Ixxii.,  descriptive  or  prophetic  of  the 
reign  of  Solomon,  is  nl  !0  prophetic  of  the  reign  of  our  blessed  Lord.  Of  Him  alcn  a 
is  it  strictly  true  that  "  He  shaU  have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea,"  &c.  (ver.  8),  thst 
"  all  Idugs  shall  fall  down  before  Him,"  &c.    True,  His  enemies  do  not  yet  "  lick 


18  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  rr.  20—84. 

the  dust"  (ver.  9),  for  "  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  Him,"  but  we  know 
that  all  power  is  given  to  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth  (Matt.  xx-Wii.  18),  and 
that  "the  kingdoms  of  this  world  "  shall  "  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of 
his  Christ"  (Bev.  xi.  15).  2.  Its  duration.  Solomon's  was  a  long  reign,  and 
would  have  been  much  longer  (ch.  iii.  14)  had  he  been  faithful  But  He  who  shall 
possess  "  the  throne  of  his  father  David  "  "  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob /or 
ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end  "  (Luke  i.  '62,  33  ;  cf.  Dan.  ii.  44 ; 
vii.  14,  27 ;  Psa.  cxlv.  13  ;  Micah  iv.  7). 

in.  The  SUBJECTS.  1.  Their  number.  They  were  "  many,"  "  as  the  sand  which 
is  by  the  sea  in  multitude."  Compare  Dan.  vh.  10,  "  ten  thousand  times  ten  thou- 
sand stood  before  him,"  and  Rev.  v.  11 ;  vii.  9,  "  a  great  multitude  which  no  man 
could  number."  2.  Thei/r  character.  Solomon's  sway  extended  over  Gentiles  as 
well  as  Jews  (vers.  21,1 24).  A  foreshadowing  of  the  inclusion  of  Gentiles  in  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  In  the  one  fold,  two  flocks  (John  x.  16).  Compare  Acts 
xxvi.  28 ;  xxviii.  28 ;  Rom.  xL  15  ;  Ephes.  iii.  6 ;  ii.  14,  &o.  There  are  three 
particulars,  however,  in  which  the  subjects  of  our  Lord  wiU  differ  from  those  of 
Solomon.     (1)  There  will  be  no  bondage,  no  forced  labour,  none  to  bear  burdens. 

(2)  The  free  labour  of  love  wUl  require  no  rest  (ch.  v.  14).  The  servants  who  serve 
Him  "  rest  not  day  and  night '  (Rev.  iv.  8),  yet  keep  perpetual  sabbath  (Heb.  iv.  9.) 

(3)  All  shall  be  holy.  No  Jeroboam  shall  "  lift  up  his  hand "  against  the  Lord. 
He  shall  be  all  and  in  all. 

IV.  The  keign.  1.  It  was  peaceful  (ver.  24 ;  cf.  ch.  v.  4  and  1  Chron.xxii.  9). 
In  Messiah's  reign  they  shall  "  beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares,"  &c.  (Isa.  ii.  4). 
Into  His  oom^  "  neither  foe  entereth  nor  friend  departeth."  He  is  the  King  and 
Prince  of  Peace  (Heb.  vii.  2)  2.  It  was  joyous  and  prosperous.  "Eating  and 
drinking  and  making  merry.''  " Ibi  festivitas  sine  fine"  (Augustine).  And 
Athanasius  speaks  tuv  ayimv  Kai  t&v  dyyiXuiv  aii  toprajoiruv.  The  vine  and  the  fig- 
tree  may  remind  us  of  the  tree  of  hfe  with  its  twelve  manner  of  fruits ;  the  security 
(ver.  25)  of  the  pillars  in  the  temple  of  God  (Rev.  iii.  12).  "  In  his  days  Israel 
shall  dwell  safely  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  6 ;  cf.  Isa.  xi.  6—9).  That  golden  age  lasted  "  all  the 
days  of  Solomon"  (ver.  23).  That  which  is  to  come  shall  be  coetemal  with  the 
endless  Ufe  of  the  Son  of  God  (Heb.  vii.  16 ;  John  xiv.  19 ;  Psa.  xvi.  11). 

Ver.  31. — "  The  greatest,  wisest,  meanest  of  mankind."  It  is  a  spirited  and 
glowing  description  which  the  historian  here  gives  of  Solomon's  wisdom.  We  may 
believe  that  it  was  not  without  a  pardonable  pride  that  he  recounted  the  rich 
endowments  and  the  widespread  fame  of  Israel's  greatest  monarch.  But  it  is  really 
one  of  the  saddest  chapters  in  the  whole  of  Scripture — and  one  of  the  most  instruc- 
tive. Manifold  as  were  his  gifis,  marvellous  as  was  his  wisdom,  they  did  not  preserve 
him  from  falling.  It  is  a  strange,  shuddering  con'rast,  the  record  of  his  singular 
powers  and  faculties  (oh.  iv.  29 — 34),  and  the  story  of  his  shameful  end  (ch.  xi.  1 — 14) 
How  came  it  to  pass  that  a  man  so  highly  gifted  and  blessed  of  God  made  such 
complete  shipwreck  of  faith  and  good  conscience  ;  that  over  the  grave  of  the  very 
greatest  and  wisest  of  men  must  be  written,  "  PaUen,  fallen,  fallen,  fallen  from  his 
high  estate"?  Let  us  consider  (1)  The  cliaracter  of  his  wisdom;  and  (2)  Tht 
causes  of  his  fall.     As  to  (1),  observe  — 

I.  It  was  unphecedbnted  and  has  since  been  unequalled.  The  sages  of 
Hebrew  antiquity,  the  shrewd  Arabians,  the  sagacious  Egyptians,  he  has  ecUpsed 
them  all.  "  Wiser  than  all  men,"  such  was  the  judgment  of  his  contemporaries. 
And  such  is  also  the  verdict  of  posterity.  At  the  present  day,  among  Jews,  Chris- 
tians, and  Mohammedans,  no  fame  equals  his.  Among  the  wise  men  of  the  world 
Solomon  stands  facile  princeps. 

II.  Il  WAS  PBODiGious.  To  the  writer  it  seemed  inexhaustible,  illimitable.  He 
can  only  compare  it  to  "  the  sand  that  is  on  the  sea  shore; "  and  he  could  hardlj 
use  a  more  forcible  illustration  of  its  boundless  and  infinite  extent. 

III.  It  WAS  VARIED  AND  coMPEEHBNSiVE.  It  was  both  Scientific  and  sententious, 
He  was  at  once  philosopher  and  poet.  Nothing  was  too  great  and  nothing  too 
small  for  him.     It  is  seldom  that  a  man  excels  in  more  than  one  or  two  branches  of 


OH.  IV.  20— 84.J  THE  FliibT  BOOK  Oi'  KINGS.  7B 

knowledge,  but  Solomon  was  distingnighed  in  all.  He  could  discourse  with  equal 
profundity  of  the  cedar  and  the  hyosup,  of  beast  and  bird.  It  was  lofty,  it  was 
wide,  it  was  deep. 

IV.  It  was  true  wisdom.  Not  superficial,  and  not  mere  book  lenming.  Book- 
worms are  often  mere  pedants.  Students  ofteu  know  httle  of  the  world  and  know 
less  of  themselves.  But  Solomon  knew  man  ("  The  proper  study  of  mankind  is 
man")  knew  himself.  He  needed  not  the  charge,  yvHQi  aeavrov.  He  was  not  one 
of  the  iitTtiapoaoipwTai  whom  the  Attic  poet  justly  ridicules  (Aristoph.  Nub.  860).   His 

'  writings  proved  that  he  had  studied  the  world,  and  was  fomiliar  with  the  heart. 

V.  It  was  God-given  wisdom  (ver.  29;  of.  3,  12,  28:  Dan.  ii.  21).  Not  "  tl'.e 
wisdom  of  this  world  which  is  foolishness  with  God  "  (>  Cor.  iii.  8),  and  which 
"  deseendeth  not  from  above  "  (James  iii.  15),  but  that  which  the  Supreme  wisdom 
teaoheth.     (Of.  Prov.  ii.  6.)     Solomon  was  truly  SeoSiSaKTog. 

VI.  It  was  God-feaeing  wisdom.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord,"  he  says,  "  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom."  (Cf.  Prov.  i.  7 ;  ix.  10.)  There  is  a  wisdom  (falsely  so 
called)  which  dishonours  and  despises  God.  This  did  not  Solomon's.  The  Proverbs 
point  men  to  the  Lord. 

VII.  His  wisdom  still  warns  and  teaches  the  world.  Some  of  the  thousand 
and  five  songs  (Pss.  Ixxii.,  cxxvi.)  are  still  chanted  by  the  Cathoho  Church.  (It  is 
significant,  though,  how  few  of  this  vast  number  remain  to  us.  David  was  not  as 
wise  as  Solomon,  nor  so  proUfic  a  writer,  but  his  songs  have  survived  in  considerable 
ntmibers.  They  are  among  the  greatest  treasures  of  Christendom.  Piety  is  before 
wisdom.  "  Knowledge  shall  vanish  away,"  but  "charity  never  faileth.")  Some 
of  his  Proverbs  are  still  read  to  the  congreg„...jn.  He  still  warns  the  young  and 
the  sensual  (chs.  ii. — vii.)     He  is  fallen,  but  his  words  stand.     Now  turn  we  to 

(2)  The  causes  of  his  fall.  How  came  this  wisest  of  men,  without  fellow  before  or 
since,  whose  wisdom  was  so  profound,  so  real,  so  boundless,  whose  wisdom  came 
from  God  and  led  to  God,  and  who  though  dead  yet  speaketh,  how  came  he  of  all 
men  to  go  astray  ?    Was  it  not — 

I.  Because  the  heart  was  not  kept.  The  intellect,  i.e.,  was  developed  andi 
cultivated  at  the  expense  or  to  the  neglect  of  the  spiritual  life.  "  His  wives  turned 
away  his  heart."  But  how  came  one  of  so  much  wisdom  to  let  his  wives  turn  it 
away  ?  Because  the  wisdom  had  dwarfed  and  overshadowed  the  soul ;  because 
the  moral  did  hot  keep  pace  with  the  intellectual  growth,  and  it  became  flaccid 
ind  yielding.  It  is  dangerous  for  wisdom  to  increase  unless  piety  increases  with 
it.  The  higher  the  tower,  the  broader  should  be  its  foundations.  If  all  the  weight 
and  width  is  at  the  top,  it  will  come  to  the  gi'ound  with  a  crash.  Even  so,  if 
wisdom  is  not  to  destroy  its  possessor,  the  basis  of  love  and  piety  must  be  broadened. 
"  Knowledge  bloweth  up,  but  charity  buildeth  up."  The  head  of  a  colossus  needs 
the  trunk  of  a  colossus  to  sustain  it. 

II.  Because  his  own  precepts  were  not  kept.  It  was  because  he  leaned  to 
his  own  understanding  that  this  giant  form  fell  prostrate.  It  was  because  he  forgot 
his  warnings  against  the  strange  woman  that  he  feU  a  prey  to  strange  women. 
The  keeper  of  the  vineyards  did  not  keep  his  own  (Cant.  i.  6).  He  was  not  true  to 
himself,  and  he  soon  proved  false  to  his  God.  After  preaching  to  others,  he  him. 
self  became  a  castaway.  A  solenm  warning  this  to  every  preacher  and  teache* 
that  he  should  not  do 

•*  As  some  ungracious  pastors  do. 
Show  men  the  steep  and  thorny  road  to  heaven. 
While,  like  a  puffed  and  reckless  libertine, 
Himself  the  primrose  path  of  dalUance  tread 
And  recks  not  his  own  rede." 

in.  Beoattse  pride  poisoned  his  wisdom  and  perverted  his  gifts.  There 
was  no  decay  of  mental  power ;  the  force  was  unabated,  but  it  was  mis,directed. 
Pride  took  her  place  at  the  helm.  It  is  pride,  not  sensuality,  accounts  for  his  army 
of  wives  and  concubines.    But  if  pride  brought  them,  pleasure  kept  them.    And 


80  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  iv.  20—34. 

when  he  pnt  hie  heart  into  their  keeping,  they  turned  him  ahoTit  at  their  will  (cf, , 
James  iii.  8,  4).  The  heart  carries  the  intellect  along  with  it.  (Here  again 
compare  his  own  words,  Prov.  xvi.  18,  and  iv.  23 ;  cf.  Dan.  v.  20.)  Magnificent 
Solomon,  imequaUed  in  wisdom,  how  art  then  feJIen  from  heaven  1  Aye,  and  if  we 
could  but  draw  aside  the  veil ;  iJf  we  could  but  visit  the  spirits  in  prison  (1  Fet.  iii. 
19),  we  might  perchance  find  among  them  one  clothed  of  yore  "  in  purple  and  fine 
hnen "  (Lmke  xvi.  19 ;  of.  xii.  27),  and  who  "  fared  sumptaously  every  day,"  and 
looking  into  the  anguished  £ice  might  find  it  was  none  other  than  the  brilliant  and 
illustrious  son  of  David,  the  chosen  type  of  the  Messiah,  the  very  wisest  and 
greatest  of  mankind.  "  The  wisest,  greatest,  mecmeat  of  mankind."  We  know  of 
whom  these  words  were  spoken.  But  their  true  appUoation  is  not  to  England's 
greatest  chancellor,  but  to  Israel's  greatest  king. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  20 — 25. — A  Prosperous  Beign.  This  chapter  presents  a  general  view  of  the 
prosperity  of  Solomon's  reign,  much  of  which  was  owing  to  the  extraordinary  glory 
of  the  reign  of  David.  Such  a  rule  as  David's  sowed  seeds  of  blessing  in  the 
land  which  it  was  Solomon's  privilege  to  reap.  David  united  the  kingdoms  of 
Judah  and  Israel,  and  Solomon  came  into  quiet  possession  of  the  completed 
•commonwealth.  David  laid  the  foundation,  Solomon  developed  the  fabric  and 
adorned  it.  Each  succeeding  generation  inherits  the  good  stored  up  for  it  by 
those  that  went  before.  Happy  they  who  are  the  descendants  of  a  noble  ancestry. 
If  it  is  true  that  "  the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  on  the  children,"  &c.,  equally 
true  is  it  that  "  the  good  men  do  lives  after  them."  We  aU  reap  the  fruits  of  the 
care  and  toil  and  suffering  of  our  fathers.  "Other  men  labour  and  we  enter  into 
their  labours."    The  text  suggests — 

I.  The  grandeur  of  a  multitudinous  people.  "  Judah  and  Israel  were  many, 
&c.  What  is  the  secret  of  the  feeling  of  solemnity  akin  to  awe  with  which  we 
gaze  upon  a  vast  concourse  of  human  beings  ?  It  is  the  fulness  of  life — not  mere 
physical  force,  but  thinking,  emotional  hfe,  with  all  its  latent  capacities  that  im- 
presses UB.  But  think  of  a  great  nation — what  a  world  of  busy,  many-sided  hfe  is 
here  I  What  complex  relations  ;  what  slumbering  energies ;  what  rich  resources ;' 
what  mines  of  undeveloped  thought;  what  tides  of  'feehng;  what  boundless 
possibilities  of  good  orevU,  of  glory  or  of  shame  I  Consider  the  mutual  action 
and  reaction  of  the  individual  and  corporate  life  in  such  a  nation  ;  the  conditions 
of  its  well-being ;  the  tremendous  responsibility  of  those  who  are  set  to  guide  its 
forces,  to  guard  its  interests,  to  control  its  destinies.  We  can  understand  the 
trembling  of  spirit  Moses  felt  when  he  looked  on  the  thronging  host  of  Israel  in 
the  wilderness.  "Wherefore  layest  thou  the  burden  of  all  this  people  upon  me  ?  " 
&o.  (Numbers  li.  11).  So  with  Solomon — "Who  is  able  to  judge  this  thy  so 
great  a  people  ? "  (ch.  iii.  9).  Rulers  who  show  that  they  are  alive  to  the  dread 
sigmfieance  of  their  position  claim  our  deepest  sympathy.  Well  may  we  pray  for 
them  (1  Tim.  ii.  2)  ttiat  they  may  be  inspired  by  the  right  spirit,  prompted  by 
purest  motives,  never  allowed  to  fall  into  the  sin 

"  Of  making  their  high  place  the  lawless  penvh 
Of  winged  ambitions." 

n.   Tan  FAB-EEACHING  INFLUENCE    OF    A    WISE    AND    EIGHTEOTTS     RULE.       "  And 

Solomon  reigned  pver  aU  kingdoms,"  &c.  (ver.  21).  These  were  tributary  kingdoms. 
It  was  not  the  division  of  one  great  empire  into  many  provinces,  but  the  recognition 
oy  outlying  prmcipahties  of  the  superior  sovereignty  of  the  Hebrew  monarch. 
What  was  the  cause  of  this  wide- spread  mfluence  ?  Won  by  force  of  arms  m 
David's  reign,  it  was  retained,  probably,  by  force  of  good  government  and  beneficent 
pohcy.  Israel  presented  an  example  of  a  well-ordered  state— entered,  under 
Solomon,  on  a  remarkable  career  as  a  commercial  people— Solomon  himself  a  royal 
merchant.    Note  his  sagacity  in  "  making  afSnity  "  with  the  king  of  Egypt  (ch.  iiL 


OB.  IT.  ao— 84.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINQS.  §1 

1),  and  in  his  treaty  with  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre  (cb.  t.)  This  was  the  Beoret  of 
Solomon's  influence.  As  far  as  we  can  judge,  it  was  not  so  much  the  result  of 
overmastering  force,  but  of  a  polioy  by  which  the  bonds  of  mutual  confidence  and 
helpfulness  were  strengthened.  We  are  reminded  that  this  is  the  real  stability  of 
any  nation — the  spirit  of  justice,  integrity,  beneficence  that  inspires  it,  coupled 
with  the  disposition  to  form  friendly  and  helpful  relations.  The  influence  that 
arises  from  the  display  of  mUitary  strength  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  this^ 
"  Eighteousness  exalteth  a  nation"  (Prov.  xiv.  34).  "  The  throne  is  established  by 
righteousness"  (Frov.  xvi.  12).  Every  nation  is  strong  and  influential  just  in 
proportion  as  its  internal  order  and  external  relations  are  conformed  to  the  law  of 
righteousness. 

III.  The  peace  that  is  the  result  of  biqhteousness.  "  He  had  peace  on 
all  sides  round  about  him"  (ver.  24).  This  was  the  fulfilment  of  a  prophecy  that 
attended  his  very  birth.  David,  the  "  man  of  war,"  yearned  for  a  time  of  peace, 
and  the  yearning  expressed  itself  in  the  names  he  gave  his  sons — Absalom,  "  the 
father  of  peace ;  "  Shelomoh,  Solomon,  "  the  peacefiS.  one."  The  peacefulness  of 
Solomon's  reign  was  the  natural  outcome  of  ms  own  personal  characteristics,  and 
of  the  polioy  he  adopted.  "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he  maketh  even 
his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him"  (Frov.  xvi.  7).  False  maxim  of  international 
life,  "  If  yon  want  peace  prepare  for  war" — ^multiply  the  means  and  provocations 
of  strife  !  Maintain  an  attitude  of  distrust,  defiance,  menace  I  Men  have  strange 
confidence  in  the  pacifying  effect  of  desolating  force.  They  "  make  a  sohtude  and 
call  it  peace,"  forgetting  that  tranquillity  thus  gained  does  but  cover  with  a  deceptive 
veil  the  latent  seeds  of  hostility  and  revenge.  How  much  better  the  Scripture  idea, 
*'  The  work  of  righteousness  diall  be  peace,"  &o.  (Isa.  xxxii.  17) ;  "  The  fnut  oi 
righteousness  is  sown  in  peace  of  them  that  make  peace  "  (James  iii.  18). 

lY.  The  seoubitt  that  spbinos  fbom  peace  (ver.  25).  "  And  Jadah  and  Israel 
dwelt  safely,"  &o. — this  became  almost  a  proverbial  expression  (2  Kings  xvilL 
81 ;  Micah  iv.  4 ;  Zechariah  iii.  10).  Suggests  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  the  good  of 
life,  the  finiit  of  honest  labour,  under  the  protection  of  impartial  law.  This  is  the 
result  of  peace.  Often  urged  that  war  is  an  education  in  some  of  the  nobler 
elements  of  national  character;  safeguard  against  luxury  and  indolent  self-indul- 
gence, See.  Bat  may  not  these  good  results  be  bought  at  too  terrible  a  price  ?  Are 
there  no  other  fields  for  the  healthy  development  of  a  nation's  energies  ? — no  foes 
of  ignorance,  and  vice,  and  social  wrong,  to  say  nothing  of  forms  of  beneficent 
world-wide  enterprise,  that  call  them  forth  in  manl^  exercise  ?  It  is  the  reign  of 
peace  that  fosters  the  industries  that  enrich  the  life  of  a  people,  and  the  bene- 
ficent activities  that  beautify  it.  'Tis  this  that  "  makes  the  coimtry  flourish  and 
the  cify  smile."  The  happy  condition  of  things  here  described  is  said  to  have  lasted 
through  "  all  the  days  of  Solomon ;  "  chiefly  true  of  the  earUer  part  of  his  reign. 
Sins  and  disasters  involved  the  latter  part  in  gloom.  So  far,  however,  we  have  in 
it  a  prophecy  of  the  reign  of  David's  "  greater  Son."  Fsa.  Ixxii.  has  its  partial 
fulfilment  in  the  days  of  Solomon ;  but  the  grandeur  of  its  prophetic  meaning  is 
reaUzed  only  in  the  surpassing  glory  of  His  kingdom  who  is  the  true  "  Prince  of 
righteousness  and  peace." — ^W. 

Ver.  88. — The  voice  ofNatwre  speaking  for  Ood.  This  is  given  as  an  example 
of  the  wisdom  for  which  Solomon  was  justly  famed.  His  information  was  at 
once  accurate  and  far  reaching.  Nothing  escaped  the  notice  of  his  observant  eye, 
nothing  was  too  insignificant  to  deserve  his  attention.  The  "  hyssop  "  which  was 
remarkable  neither  for  size  nor  beauty,  neither  for  fragrance  nor  utiUiy,  as  well  as 
the  noble  "  cedar,"  was  the  subject  of  his  research  and  discourse. 

I.  The  oebm  of  his  KNOWLsnaE  was  fbom  God.  He  was  enriched  with  natural 
capacities  above  tiie  average,  as  the  preceding  chapter  shows.  Men  do  difier  widely 
in  keenness  of  perception,  in  retentiveness  of  memory,  in  power  of  imagination,  in 
love  or  dislike  for  the  studies  of  natural  soienoe.  A  remembrance  of  this  is  of 
peonliar  value  to  ns  in  the  training  of  children.  The  dullard  in  mathematics  may 
prove  the  scholar  in  classics,  &o.    The  wisdom  of  the  Divine  arrangement  whion 

1  KiNas.  o 


81  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch,  iv.  20—84 


makoB  dififerences  between  \is  in  onr  natural  tastes  and  capacities  is  seen  in  this, 
that  it  is  on  the  one  band  a  blessing  to  society,  enabling  all  spheres  of  life  to  be 
filled,  and  on  the  other  a  mecms  of  culture  to  character,  by  caUing  forth  our  sym- 
pathy, our  forbearance,  and  our  generosity  in  rejoicing  over  the  triumphs  of  others. 
II.  The  oeOwth  of  his  knowledge  was  feom  study.  Solomon  did  not  have  all 
the  mysteries  of  nature  unveiled  to  him  by  revelation.  No  "royal  road  to  learning" 
existed  then,  or  ever.  His  studiousness  as  a  youth  may  be  fairly  inferred  firom  his 
strennons  exhortations  to  diligence  and  his  frequent  rebukes  of  sloth.  Out  of  the 
depths  of  personal  experience  he  declared  that  the  "  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh 
rich  " — in  thought,  as  well  as  in  purse.  See  also  Proverbs  x.  5  ;  xix.  24 ;  xxvi.  IS, 
&o.  Press  home  on  the  young  the  value  of  habits  of  diligence.  Illustrate  by 
examples  from  biography.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  with  certainty  the  sub- 
stance of  Solomon's  discoiirses.  Probably  he  knew  more  than  any  other  of  his  own 
day  of  horticulture,  physiology,  and  kindred  topics.  But  the  reference  is  not  so 
much  to  scientific  treatises  and  orderly  classifications  as  to  the  ethical  use  he  made 
of  the  phenomena  of  nature.  This  may  be  inferred,  partly  froia  the  fact  that  in 
those  days,  and  in  Eastern  lands,  this  rather  than  that  would  be.  accounted 
"  wisdom ;''  and  partly  from  such  writings  of  his  as  are  stUl  extant — certain  of  the 
Psalms,  the  Canticles,  and  the  Proverbs.  Study  the  text  in  the  light  thrown  by 
these  books,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  through  Solomon's  wisdom  the  voice  of  Nature 
spoke  to  his  people  for  God,  in  the  same  fashion  as  in  fax  nobler  tones  it  spoke 
afterwards  through  Him  who  made  the  lilies  whisper  of  God's  care,  and  the 
fallow  fields  speak  of  Christian  duty.  Inanimate  things  and  dumb  creatures  spoke 
to  Solomon's  people  through  him,  and  should  speak  to  us. 

I.  The  ceeatxjees  of  God  speak  to  us  of  Divine  cabe.  Solomon,  like  his 
fisither,  oould  say,  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  Ood  ;  "  or  like  One  greater  than 
himself,  "  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,"  &c.  See  how  he  speaks  (Prov.  xvi.  15) 
of  the  cloud  of  the  latter  rain  that  fiUed  out  the  ears  of  com  ;  of  the  dew  upon  the 
grass  (Prov.  xix.  12) ;  of  the  gladness  of  nature,  when  the  winter  is  past  and  the  rain 
is  over  and  gone  {Cant.  ii.  11 — 13).  To  see  God's  hand  in  all  this  is  true  wisdom. 
The  phenomena  are  visible  to  pure  intellect,  but  He  who  is  behind  them  can  only 
be  "  spiritually  discerned."  Many  now  are  losing  sight  of  God  because  the  mental 
perception  only  is  employed,  and  believed  to  be  necessaiy.  Once  the  world  appeared 
to  men  as  the  expression  of  God's  thought,  the  outcome  of  His  will.  Now  some 
look  on  it  as  you  may  look  on  a  friend  who  is  not  dead  so  far  as  natural  Hfe  is  con- 
cerned, but  is  worse  than  dead,  because  intelligence  and  will  are  gone,  and  he  is  an 
idiot !  May  we  be  aroused  by  the  Divine  Spirit  to  yearn  for  the  lost  Father,  for  the 
vanished  heaven. 

II.  The  0RBATUEE8  OF  God  speak  to  us  of  human  dependence.  Neither 
"  hyssop  "  nor  "  cedar "  can  grow  without  Heaven's  benediction,  and  of  every 
"  beast,"  and  "  fowl,"  and  "  creeping  thing,"  and  "  fish,"  it  may  be  said,  "  these  all 
wait  upon  Thee."  Man,  with  all  his  attainments  and  powers,  cannot  create  » 
single  element  required  by  his  life.  He  can  use  God's  gifts,  but  they  are  God's 
gifts  still ;  and  because  He  is  good,  our  Lord  bids  us  learn  the  lessons  of  content  and 
trust  (1\1  att.  vi.  25—84),  We  depend  on  these  creatures  in  the  natural  world  for  food, 
clothing,  slielter,  &o.,  and  they  only  live  because  God  cares  for  them. 

III.  The  creatures  op  God  speak  to  us  of  daily  duties.  How  often  in 
Proverbs  we  are  reminded  of  that.  Agur,  who  had  wisdom  similar  to  that  of 
Solomon,  speaks  of  the  diligence  of  the  ant,  of  the  perseverance  of  the  spider,  of  the 
strengtij  m  union  of  the  locusts,  of  the  conscious  weakness  and  provided  shelter  of 
the  conies.  _  Solomon  speaks  of  the  blessing  that  came  to  the  keeper  of  the  fig  tree 
(n:ov.  xxvii.  18)  as  an  encouragement  to  servants  to  be  faithful  and  diligent. 
Adduce  similar  examples. 

^X*  THB^.cpATU^s  OF  GoD  SPEAK  TO  US  OP  MORAL  DANGERS.  Take  three  ex- 
wnples  of  this.  1.  In  Canticles  ii.  15  Solomon  aUudes  to  "  the  Httle  foxes  who  s» 
stealthily  approach  and  spoil  the  vines  and  their  tender  grapes"  as  iUustrations  of 
toe  small  evils  which  desolate  men's  hearts  and  homes.  Apply  this.  2.  Then  in 
Proverbs  xiiv.  80-84  he  draws  »  picture  of  a.  neglected  garden,  grown  over  with. 


OH.  V.  1—18.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


thorns  and  nettles,  and  Bhows  how  looking  on  it  he  "  received  instraction,"  and 
warning  against  sloth.  3.  Again  turn  to  Proverbs  xxiii.  82,  where,  speaking  of 
intoxicating  drink,  he  says,  "  at  last  it  bitetb  like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth  like  an 
adder."    It  was  in  this  way  he  referred  to  the  animals  and  plants  around  him. 

V.  The  ceeatukbs  ob'  God  speak  to  us  of  social  evils.  In  those  days,  as  in 
other  days,  foolish  favourites,  and  imworthy  men,  were  exalted  to  places  of  trust 
and  honour.  Seeing  it  Solomon  draws  again  on  his  observance  of  nature ;  and 
having  noted  the  disorder  and  injury  caused  by  untimely  storms,  says,  "  As  snow 
in  summer,  and  as  rain  in  harvest,  so  honour  is  not  seemly  in  a  fool "  (Prov.  xxvi.  1). 
Another  example  of  this  teaching  occurs  in  Proverbs  xxviLi.  3.  A  heavy  rain  after 
long  drought,  raising  the  streamlets  to  floods,  would  sweep  away  the  mud-built 
dwellings  of  the  poor  and  the  harvest  already  reaped ;  and  to  those  who  had  seen 
that  the  wise  king  said,  "  A  poor  man  that  oppresseth  the  poor  is  like  a  sweeping 
rain  which  leaveth  no  food." 

VI.  The  cbeatdbes  of  God  speak  to  us  of  noble  possibilities.  Solomon 
saw  growth  around  him  on  every  side.  The  seed  dropped  in  the  crevice  of  a  wall 
was  not  forgotten,  but  appeared  in  the  "  hyssop ; "  and  the  sapling,  which  a  child 
could  break,  at  last  became  the  great  "  cedar  of  Lebanon."  God's  benediction  and 
man's  toil  develoj)ed  Ufe  ;  and  the  feeblest  was  not  forgotten,  the  smallest  not  de- 
spised. We  can  imagine  how  from  such  &cts  Solomon  would  draw  lessons  of  trost 
and  hope. 

Ik  conolusion  let  us  learn  from  the  subject  the  following  lessons — 1.  Never  be 
afraid  of  the  teachings  of  natural  seienee.  Show  how  geology,  botany,  astro- 
nomy, &o.,  are  regarded  by  some  Christians  with  terror,  as  if  their  influence  would 
affect  the  spiritual  truths  revealed  of  God.  Demonstrate  the  folly  of  this.  Let  theology 
recognize  the  sisterhood  of  science.  2.  Never  become  absorbed  in  pursuits  which  are 
merely  intellectual.  The  soul  of  man  needs  more  than  his  intellect  can  win.  ^he 
"  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness  "  only  a  living  God  can  satisfy.  Use  the 
suggestions  of  nature  as  the  witnesses  of  God.  3.  Never  neglect  the  wonderful 
works  of  Qod.  Many  a  frivolous  life  would  be  redeemed  from  vacuity  and  ennui 
if  young  people  were  trained  to  observe  and  take  interest  in  the  habits  of  animal 
life  and  the  marvels  of  inanimate  existence.  Show  the  wholesomeness  of  such 
studies,  as  those  of  Charles  Kingsley  and  others.  But  let  us  walk  through  this  fair 
world  as  those  who  follow  Christ,  and  then  from  the  fragrant  hlies  and  golden 
harvest  fields  He  will  speaJk  to  us  of  our  Father  in  heaven. — ^A.  B. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V.  1—18. 

SoiiOUON  AND  HiBAM. — The  somewhat  de- 
tailed description  which  we  have  had  in 
chapter  iv.  of  Solomon's  pomp  and  power 
and  wisdom,  is  followed  in  chapters  v.  sqq. 
by  an  account  of  what,  in  Jewish  eyes,  was 
the  great  undertaking  of  his  reign,  and,  in- 
deed, the  great  glory  of  Hebrew  history — the 
erection  and  adornment  of  the  Temple.  And 
as  this  was  largely  due  to  the  assistance  he 
received — both  in  the  shape  of  materials  and 
labourers — from  the  Tyrian  king,  we  have 
in  the  first  place  an  account  of  his  alliance 
with  Hiram. 

Ver.  1. — ^And  Htram  [In  vers.  10, 18,  the 
name  is  speUed  Hirom  (On^ri),  whilst  in 
OhronioleB,  with   one  exception  (1  Chron. 


ziv.  1,  where  the  Keri,  however,  follows  the 
prevailing  usage),  the  name  appears  as 
Huram  (D'lJn).  In  Josephns  it  is  Et/ow;<oc. 
This  prince  and  his  friendly  relations  with 
the  Jews  are  referred  to  by  the  Tyrian  his- 
torians, of  whose  materials  the  Greek  writers 
Dius  and  Menander  of  Ephesos  {temp.  Alex- 
ander the  Great)  availed  themselves.  Ac- 
cording to  Dius  (quoted  by  Josephus  contr. 
Apion,  i.  17)  Hiram  was  the  son  of  AbibaaL 
Menander  states  that  the  building  of  th« 
temple  was  commenced  in  the  twelfth  year  of 
Hiram's  reign,  which  lasted  34  years  (Jos. 
Ant.  viii.  3.  1 ;  Contr.  Ap.  i.  18).  Hiram  is 
further  said  to  have  married  his  daughter 
to  Solomon  and  to  have  engaged  with  him 
in  an  iatellectual  encounter  which  took  the 
shape  of  riddles]  Mng  of  Tyre  [Heb.  "IIV, 
rock,  so  called  because  of  the  rocky  island  on 
which  old  Xyie  was  built,  sometimes  called 


M 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  T.  1— 1& 


nV  nS5P,  the  fortress  of,  or  fortified  Tyre 
(Josh.  jdx.  29 ;  2  Sam.  X3dv.  7,  &c.)  The 
capital  of  Phoenicia.  In  earlier  times,  Sidon 
would  seem  to  have  been  the  more  import- 
ant town ;  hence  the  Canaanites  who  in- 
habited this- region  were  generally  called 
Zidonians,  as  in  ver.  6]  sent  his  servants 
llegatos,  Vatablus]  unto  Solomon  [The  Vat. 
TiXX.  has  here  a  strange  reading,  "  To 
anoint  Solomon,"  (fee.  The  object  of  this 
embassy  was  evidently  to  recognize  and 
oongratulate  the  youthful  king  (the  Syiiao 
has  a  gloss,  "  and  he  blessed  him,"  which 
well  represents  one  object  of  the  embassy) 
and  at  the  same  time  to  make  overtures  of 
friendship.  An  alliance,  or  good  nnder- 
Btanding,  with  Israel  was  then,  as  at  a  later 
period  (Acts  zii.  20)  of  great  importance  to 
them  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Their  narrow 
•trip  of  seaboard  furnished  no  com  lands,  so 
that  their  country  depended  npon  Israel  for 
its  nourishment] ;  for  he  had  beard  that 
they  had  anointed  him  king  In  the  room  of 
David  his  father  [i.e.,  he  had  heajxl  of  the 
death  of  David  and  the  accession  of  Solo- 
mon; possibly  of  the  events  narrated  in 
ehap.  i._] :  for  Hiram  was  ever  [Heb.  all  the 
days :  i.e.,  of  their  reigns ;  so  long  as  th^ 
vere  contemporary  govereigns]  a  lover  ot 
David. 

Ver.  2. — And  Solomon  sent  to  Hiram. 
[According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  viii.  2.  6),  he 
wrote  a  letter,  which  together  with  Hiram's 
leply  (ver.  8)  was  preserved  among  the  pub- 
lic archives  of  Tyre.  The  account  of  2 
Chronicles  ii.,  which  as  a  rule  is  more  de> 
tailed  than  that  of  the  Kings,  begins  here. 
It  does  not  notice,  that  is  to  say,  the  prior 
embassy  of  the  Phcenician  king,  as  the 
object  of  the  chronicler  is  merely  to  narrate 
the  measures  taken  for  the  erection  of  the 
temple] ,  saying  [The  return  embassy  gave 
Solomon  the  opportunity  to  ask  for  die 
timber,  &e.,  that  he  desired.] 

Ver.  3.— Thou  knowest  how  that  David 
my  father  could  not  build  an  house  [Hiram 
could  not  fail  to  know  this,  as  his  relations 
with  David  had  been  close  and  intimate. 
Not  only  had  he  "  sent  cedar  trees  and  car- 
penters and  masons  "  to  build  David's  house 
(2  Sam.  v.  11),  but  "they  of  Tyre  brought 
much  cedar  wood  to  David  "  (1  Chron.  xxii. 
4)  for  the  house  of  tiie  Lord]  unto  the  name 
o(  the  Lord  [i.e.,  to  be  dedicated  to  the 
Lord  as  His  shrine  and  habitation  (of.  Deut. 
xii.  5, 11 ;  and  ch.  viii.  18, 19,  20,  &o.)]  for 
the  ware  [Heb.,  war.  As  we  have  singular 
noun  and  plural  verb,  Ewald,  Bawlinson,  al. 
assume  that  toar  stands  for  adversaries,  as 
the  next  clause  seems  to  imply.  Bahr  and 
Keil,  however,  with  greater  reason,  inter- 
pret, "for  the  war  with  which  they  sur- 
muided  him ;"  a  construction  (33^  with 


double  accusative)  wbich  is  justified  byPsa, 
cix.  3]  until  the  Lord  put  them  under  the 
soles  of  Ms  feet  [untU,  i.e..  He  trampled 
them  down.  The  same  image  is  found  in 
some  of  David's  psalms,  e.g.,  vii.  6 ;  Ix.  12 ; 
cf.  Psa.  viii.  6 ;  zci.  13 ;  Isa.  Iziii.  3 ;  Bom. 
xvi.  20  ;  Eph.  i  22 ;  Heb.  ii.  8.] 

Ter.  4.— But  now  the  Lord  my  God  hath 
gfiven  me  rest  [In  fulfilment  of  the  promise 
of  1  Chron.  xxii.  9.  David  had  had  a  brief 
rest  (2  Sam.  vii  1),  Solomon's  was  perma- 
nent. He  was  "  a  man  of  rest "]  on  every 
Bide  [Heb.  romid  about,  same  word  as  in 
ver.  3,  and  in  1  Chron.  xxii.  9] ,  so  that  there 
is  neither  adversajy  [Hadad  and  Bezon,  of 
whom  this  word  is  used  (1  Kings  zi.  14,  23), 
apparently  belonged  to  a  somewhat  later 
period  of  his  reign]  nor  evil  occurrent 
[Bather,  "  oeeurrence,"  or  "  plague  "  (S?3S), 
i.e.,  "  rebellion,  famine,  pestilence,  or  other 
suffering"  (Bahr).  David  had  had  many  sudi 
"occurrences"  (2  Sam.  xv.  14;  xx.  1;  xxL 
1 ;  xxiv.  16).] 

Ver.  6.— And,  behold,  I  purpose  [Heb.  he- 
hold  me  laying  (IDii^,  with  infin.  expresses 
purpose.  Cf .  Exod.  ii.  14 ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  16)]  to 
buUd  an  house  unto  the  name  oftheLordmy 
God,  as  the  Lord  spalce  imto  David  my 
father,  saying:  [2  Sam.  vii.  12,  13.  He  thus 
gives  Hiram  to  understand  that  he  is  carry- 
ing out  his  father's  plans,  and  plans  which 
had  the  Divine  sanction,  and  that  this  is  no 
fanciful  project  of  a  young  prince] ,  Thy  son 
whom  I  wUl  set  npon  thy  throne  In  thy 
room,  be  shall  bnlld  an  [Heb.  the]  house 
unto  my  name. 

Ver.  6. — Vo-v  therefore  command  thon 
that  they  hew  me  cedar  trees  out  of 
Lebanon  [Heb.  the  Lebanon,  i.e.,  the  White 
(sc.  mountain).  "  It  is  the  Mont  Blanc  of 
Palestine "  (Porter) ;  but  whether  it  is  so 
called  because  of  its  summits  of  snow  or  be- 
cause of  the  colour  of  its  limestone  is  oncer- 
tain.  Practically,  the  cedars  are  now  foimd 
in  one  place  only,  though  Ehrenbeig  is  said 
to  have  found  them  in  considerable  numbers 
to  the  north  of  the  road  between  Baalbek 
and  Tripoli.  "At  thehead  of  WfidyKadisha 
there  is  a  vast  recess  in  the  oentnl  ridge  of 
Lebanon,  some  eight  miles  in  diameter. 
Above  it  rise  the  loftiest  summits  in  Syria, 
streaked  with  perpetual  snow  ...  In  the 
very  centre  of  this  recess,  on  a  little  inegu- 
lar  knoll,  stands  the  dump  of  cedars  "  (Ibid., 
Handbook,  ii.  p.  684),  over  6,000  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea.  It  would  seem  as  it 
that  part  of  Lebanon  where  the  cedars  giew 
belonged  to  Hiram's  dominion.  "The 
northern  frontier  of  Oanaan  did  not  reach  as 
farasBjerreh  "  (Keil),  where  the  oedargrove 
is  now.  The  idea  of  some  older  writeti 
that  the  cedars  belonged  to  Solomon,  and 


CH.  ▼.  1—18.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


80 


that  he  only  asked  Hiram  for  artificers 
("that  they  heiv  me  cedar  trees,"  &o.)  is 
negatived  by  ver.  10.  It  is  true  that  "  all 
Lebanon  "  was  given  to  Israel  (Josh.  xiii.  5), 
bnt  they  did  not  take  it.  They  did  not  drive 
ont  the  Zidonians  (ver.  6 ;  Judg.  i.  31)  or 
possess  "  the  land  of  the  Giblites  "  (vei.  6 ; 
Jndg.  ill.  S).  It  shordd  be  stated  here,  how- 
ever, that  the  cedar  of  Scripture  probably 
included  other  varieties  than  that  which 
now  alone  hears  the  name  (see  on  ver.  8)] , 
and  my  servants  shall  be  with  thy  ser- 
vants [i.e.,  sharing  and  lightening  the 
work]  :  and  unto  thee  wUl  I  give  hire  for 
thy  servants  [Solomon  engaged  to  pay  and 
did  pay  both  Hiram  and  his  subjects  for  the 
services  of  the  latter,  and  he  paid  both  in 
kind.  See  below,  on  ver.  11]  according  to 
all  that  thou  shalt  appoint  [This  would 
seem  to  have  been  20,000  measures  of  wheat 
and  20  measures  of  pure  oil  annually,  ver. 
11]  :  for  thou  knowest  that  there  is  not 
among  us  any  that  can  skill  [Heb.  knoweth, 
same  word  as  before]  to  hew  timber  Ilka 
unto  the  Zidonians  [Propter  vicijia  nemora. 

Orotius,  Sidon  (Heb.  )h*V)i  means  "  fish- 
ing." See  note  on  ver.  18.  By  profane,  as 
well  as  sacred  writers,  the  Phoenicians  are 
often  described  by  the  name  Zidonians,  no 
doubt  for  the  reason  mentioned  in  the  note 
on  ver.  1.  See  Homer,  Iliad  vi.  290  ;  xxiii. 
743  ;  Odys.  iv.  84,  618 ;  xvu.  424.  Cf.  Virg. 
Mn.  i.  677,  678 ;  iv.  645,  &o.  Gen.  z.  15 ; 
Judg.  i.  31 ;  iii.  3 ;  1  Kings  zi.  1,  33,  &o. 
"The  mechanical  skill  of  the  Phoenicians 
generally,  and  of  the  Zidonians  in  particular, 
is  noticed  by  many  ancient  writers,' '  Bawlin- 
son,  who  cites  instances  in  his  note.  Bnt 
what  deserves  especial  notice  here  is  the 
fact  that  the  Zidonians  constructed  their 
houses  of  wood,  and  were  celebrated  from 
the  earliest  times  as  skilful  builders.  The 
fleets  which  the  Phoenicians  constructed  for 
purposes  of  commerce  would  ensure  them 
a  supply  of  clever  workmen.  Wordsworth 
aptly  remarks  on  the  part  the  heathen  thus 
took  in  rearing  a  temple  for  the  God  of  Jacob. 
Cf.  lea.  Iz.  10, 13.] 

Ver.  7. — ^And  It  came  to  pass,  when  Hiram 
heard  the  words  of  Solomon  [reported  by 
his  ambassadors] ,  that  he  rejoiced  greatly 
[see  note  on  ver.  1.  The  continuance  of 
the  entente  eordiale  was  ensured] ,  and  said. 
Blessed  he  the  Lord  [In  2  Chron.  ii.  12, 
"Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  that 
made  heaven  and  earth."  We  are  not 
warranted  by  the  expression  of  the  text  in 
concluding  that  Hiram  believed  in  the 
exclusive  divinity  of  the  God  of  Israel,  or 
"  identified  Jehovah  with  Melkarth  his  god  " 
(Bawlinson),  much  less  that  '^e  was  a 
proselyte  to  the  faith  of  David  and  Solomon. 


All  that  is  certain  is  that  he  believed  tbe 
Lord,  as  did  most  anoient  nations  ("  Ber 
Polytheism/us  ist  nicht  ausschiesslich.  Bahr), 
to  be  one  of  the  gods  many.  A  beUef  in 
Jehovah  as  God  was  quite  compatible  with 
the  retention  of  a  firm  faith  in  Baal  and 
Astarte.  It  is  also  possible  that  he  here 
adopts  a  language  which  he  knew  would  be 
acceptable  to  Solomon,  or  the  historian 
may  have  given  us  his  thoughts  in  a  Hebrew 
dress.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  LXX.  has 
simply  eiXo-piToe  o  fleoj]  which  hath  given 
unto  David  a  wise  son  [Compare  1  Kings 
i.  48 ;  ii  9.  The  proof  of  wisdom  lay  in 
Solomon's  fulfilling  his  wise  father's  pur- 
poses, and  in  his  care  for  the  worship  of 
God.  "  Wise,"  however,  is  not  used  here  is 
the  sense  of  "  pious,"  as  Bahr  affirms.  In 
Hiram's  lips  the  word  meant  discreet,  saga- 
cious. He  would  hardly  recognize  the  fear  of 
the  Lord  as  the  beginning  of  wisdom]  over 
this  great  people. 

Yer.  8. — And  Hiram  sent  to  Solomon 
[in  writing,  2  Chron.  ii.  11.  It  is  instructive 
to  remember  in  connexion  with  this  fact 
that,  according  to  the  universal  belief  of 
antiquity,  the  use  of  letters,  i.e.,  the  art  of 
writing,  was  communicated  to  the  Greeks 
by  the  Phoenicians.  Gesenius,  indeed,  holds 
that  the  invention  of  letters  is  also  due  to 
them.  See  the  interesting  remarks  of  Mr. 
Twisleton,  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  pp.  866—868] ,  say- 
ing, I  have  considered  the  things  which 
thou  sentest  unto  me  for  [Heb.  heard  the 
things  {i.e. ,  message)  which  thov  sentest  unto 
me] :  and  I  will  do  all  thy  desire  concerning 
[Heb.  in,  i.e.,  as  to]  timber  [or  trees]  ot 
cedar  [Heb.  cedars]  and  timber  of  flr 
[Heb.  trees  of  cypresses.  This  is,  perhaps, 
flie  proper  place  to  inquire  what,  tees  are 
intended  by  the  words  T^K,  and  t!T)3,  here 
respectively  translated  "  cedar  "  and  "fir." 
As  to  the  first,  it  ia  impossible  to  restrict 
the  word  to  the  one  species  (Pinu3  cedrus 
or  Cedrus  Libani)  which  is  now  known  as 
the  cedar  of  Lebanon,  or,  indeed,  to  any 
single  plant.  That  the  Cedrus  lAhani, 
one  of  the  most  magnificent  ot  trees,  is 
meant  in  such  passages  as  Ezekiel  xxxi., 
Psa.  xcii.  12,  &e.,  admits  of  no  manner  of 
doubt.  It  is  equally  clear,  however,  that  in 
other  passages  the  term  "  cedar "  must 
refer  to  some  other  tree.  In  Num.  xix.  6, 
and  Lev.  xiv.  6,  e.g.,  the  juniper  would 
seem  to  be  meant.  "  The  cedar  could  not 
have  been  procured  in  the  desert  without 
great  difficulty,  but  the  juniper  {Juniperas 
oxycedrus)  is  most  plentiful  there."  (The 
"cedar"  of  our  penoUs,  it  may  be  re- 
marked, is  a  kind  of  juniper — Junipenu 
Bermudiana.)  In  Bzekiel  xxvii.  5,  "  they 
have  taken  cedars  of  Lebanon  to  make  maste 
for  thee,"  it  is  probable  that  the  Pinm 


8« 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  V.  1-.1& 


Halepensis,  not,  as  was  formerly  thought, 
the  Scotch  fir  {Pinus  sylvestris),  is  intended. 
The  Gedrtts  Libani  appears  to  be  indiffer- 
ently adapted  to  any  such  purpose,  for 
which,  however,  the  Pinxu  Halepensis  is 
eminently  fitted.  But  in  the  text,  as 
throughout  .ch.  v. — viii.,  the  reference,  it 
can  hardly  be  doubted,  is  to  the  Cedrus 
Libani.  It  is  true  the  wood  of  this  species 
is  neither  beautiful  nor  remarkably  durable. 
Dr.  Lindley  calls  it  the  "  worthless,  though 
magnificent  cedar,"  but  the  former  adjective, 
however  true  it  may  be  of  English-grown 
cedar,  cannot  justly  be  applied  to  the  tree 
of  the  Lebanun  mountain.  The  writer  has 
some  wood  in  his  possession,  brought  by 
him  from  the  Lebanon,  and  though  it  has 
neither  fragrance  nor  veining,  it  is  unmis- 
takably a  hard  and  resinous  "wood.  And  it 
should  be  remembered  that  it  was  only 
employed  by  Solomon  in  the  interior  of  the 
temple,  and  was  there,  for  the  most  part, 
overlaid  with  gold,  and  that  the  climate  of 
Palestine  is  much  less  destructive  than  our 
own.  There  seems  to  be  no  sufficient 
reason,  therefore,  for  rejecting  the  tradi- 
tional and  till  recently  universal  belief 
that  the  Cedrus  Libani  was  the  timber 
chosen  for  the  temple  use.  Mr.  Houghton, 
in  Smith's  Diet.  Bib.,  vol.  iii.  App.  A.  p.  xl., 
who  speaks  of  it  "  as  being  kut'  i^oxr)",  the 
firmest  and  grandest  of  the  conifers,"  says 
at  the  same  time  that  "  it  has  no  particular 
quality  to  recommend  it  for  building  pur- 
poses ;  it  was  probably  therefore  not  very 
extensively  used  in  the  construction  of  the 
temple."  But  no  other  tree  can  be  sug- 
gested which  better  suits  the  conditions  uf 
Qie  sacred  narrative.  The  deodara,  which 
has  found  favour  with  some  writers,  it  is 
now  positively  stated,  does  not  grow  near 
the  Lebanon.  It  may  be  added  that,  under 
the  name  of  Eres,  ihe  yew  was  probably 
included.  The  timber  nsed  in  the  palaces 
of  Nineveh,  which  was  long  believed  to  be 
oedar,  is  now  proved  to  be  yew  (Diet.  Bib., 
art.  "  Cedar").  However,  it  is  certain  that 
t^^  is  a  nomen  generate  which  includes,  at 
any  rate,  the  pine,  the  cedar,  and  the  juniper, 
in  confirmation  of  which  it  may  be  men- 
tioned that  at  the  present  day,  "  the  name 
arz  is  applied  by  the  Arabs  to  aU  three  " 
(Eoyle,  iu  Kitto's  Cyclop.,  art.  "  Eres  "). 

The  Gtove  of  Cedars  now  numbers  abont 
4£0  trees,  great  and  small.  Of  these  about 
•  dozen  are  of  prodigious  size  and  consid- 
erable antiquity,  possibly  canying  ns  back 
(as  the  natives  think)  to  the  time  of 
Solomon.  Their  precise  age,  however,  oan 
only  be  a  matter  of  conjecture. 

The  identification  of  the  "fir"  is  even 
more  precarious  than  that  of  the  cedar. 
Celsius  would  see  in  this  the  true  cedar  of 


Lebanon.  Others  identify  it  with  the  juni- 
per [Juniperas  excelsa)  or  with  the  Pinui 
Halepensis,  but  most  writers  (amoug  whom 
are  Keil  and  Bahr)  believe  the  evergreen 
cypress  {Gupressus  lempervirens)  to  be  in- 
tended. Very  probably  the  name  Berosh 
comprehended  two  or  three  different  species, 
as  (he  cypress,  the  juniper,  and  the  savine. 
The  first  -  named  grows  even  near  the 
summits  of  the  mountain.  Bahr  says  it  is 
inferior  to  cedar  (but  see  above).  According 
to  Winer,  it  is  well  fitted  for  building  pur- 
poses, as  "  it  is  not  eaten  by  worms,  and  is 
almost  imperishable  and  very  light."  It  is 
certainly  of  a  harder  and  closer  grain,  and 
more  durable  than  the  Cedrus  Libani. 

It  shows  the  brevity  of  our  account  that 
Solomon  has  not  mentioned  his  desire  for 
"  fir  "  as  well  as  "  cedar."  This  is  disclosed 
in  Hiram's  reply,  and  in  the  parallel  passage 
of  the  chronicler.  It  is  also  to  be  noticed 
that  in  the  text  the  irequest  for  materials 
is  more  prominently  brought  to  view,  while 
in  Chronicles  the  petition  is  for  workmen, 

Ver.  9. — ^My  servants  BhaU  bring  them 
[No  word  in  the  Hebrew;  "Timber  of  Gpdai," 
&o.,  must  be-  supplied  or  understood  from 
the  preceding  verse]  down  [It  is  generally 
a  steep  descent  from  the  cedar  grove,  and 
indeed  all  the  Lebanon  district,  to  the 
coast]  from  Lebanon  unto  the  sea  [This 
must  have  been  a  great  undertaking.  The 
cedars  are  ten  hours  distant  from  Tripoli, 
and  the  road  must  always  have  been  a  bad 
one.  ("What  a  road  it  is  for  mortals.  In 
some  spots  it  seems  to  have  been  intended 

for  mountain  goats  only It  winds 

ap  sublime  glens,  and  zigzags  np  rocky 
acclivities,  and  passes  over  stone-strewn 
terraces,"  Ac.  (Porter,  Handbook,  p.  583.) 
To  the  vrriter  it  appeared  to  be  the  most 
ragged  and  dangerous  road  in  Palestine. 
It  is  possible  that  the  timber  was  collected 
and  floated  at  Gebal  (Biblus.  See  note  on 
ver.  18).  Beyrout,  the  present  port  of  the 
Lebanon,  is  27  hours  distant  vid  Tripoli. 
But  cedars  wonld  then,  no  doubt,  be  found 
nearer  the  sea.  And  the  ancients  (as  the 
stones  of  Baalbek,  &o.,  prove)  were  not 
altogether  deficient  in  mechanical  appli- 
ances. The  transport  of  cedars  to  the 
Mediterranean  would  be  an  easy  undertak- 
ing compared  with  the  carriage  of  them  to 
Nineveh,  and  we  know  from  the  inscrip- 
tions that  they  were  imported  by  the 
Assyrian  kings]  and  I  will  convey  them  l»y 
sea  In  floats  [Heb.  "  I  will  make  (or  put) 
them  rafts  in  the  sea."  This  was  the 
primitive,  as  it  was  the  obvious,  way,  of  con- 
veying timber,  among  Greeks  and  Bomans, 
as  well  as  among  Eastern  races.  The  reader 
will  probably  have  seen  such  rafts  on  th« 
Bhine  or  other  river]  unto  the  place  wbicli 


OB.  T.  1—18.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOS  OF  KINGS. 


87 


tboa  Shalt  appoint  [Heb.  tend]  me  [In  3 
Ohron.  ii.  16,    Hiram  assiunes    that  this 
place  mil  be  Joppa,  now  YMo,  the  port  of 
Jerusalem,  and  40  miles  distant  from  the 
Holy  City.     The  transport  over  these  40 
miles,  also  of  most  rugged  and  trying  road, 
must   have   involyed,    if  possible,  a    still 
greater  toil  than  that  from  Lebanon  to  the 
sea]  and  irill  cause  them  to  be  discharged 
there,  and  thou  ahalt  receive  them :  and 
thou  Shalt  accomplish  [Heb.  do,  same  word 
as  in  yer.  8,  and  probably  ased  designedly 
B  "  I  will  perform  thy  desire  .  .  .  and  thou 
shalt  perform  my  desire."    There  shall  be  a 
strict  quid  pro  quo]  my  desire,  In  giving 
food  for  my  household  [Hiram  states  in  hia 
reply  in  what  shape  he  would  prefer  the 
hire  promised  by  Solomon  (ver.  6).    The 
food  for  the  royal  household  must  be  care- 
fully distinguished  from  the  food  given  to 
the  workmen  (2  Chron.  ii.  10).    The  fact 
that  20,000  cors  of  wheat  formed  a  part  of 
each  has  led  to  their  being  confounded  {e.g. 
in  the  marginal  references).    It  is  noticeable 
that  when  the  sec&nd  temple  was  built, 
cedar  wood  was  again  brought  to  Jerusalem, 
vi&  Joppa,  in  return  for  "  meat  and  drink 
and  oil  nnto  them  of  Zidon  "  (Ezra  iii.  7). 
The  selection  of  food  as  the  hire  of  his 
servants  by  Hiram  almost  amounts  to  an 
nndesigned  coincidence.   Their  narrow  strip 
of  oomland,  between  the  roots  of  Lebanon 
and    the   coast — Phoenicia    proper   ("the 
great  plain  of  the  city  of  Sidon,"  Josephus, 
Ant.  V.  3, 1)  is  only  28  miles  long,  with  an 
average  breadth  of  one  mile — compelled  the 
importation    of   com    and   oil.      Ezeldel 
(zxvii.  17)  mentions  wheat,  honey,  oil,  and 
balm    as  exported  from  Palestine  to  the 
markets  of  Tyre.    It  has  been  justly  re- 
marked  that  the  fact  that  Phcsnieia  was 
thus   dependent    upon    Palestine    for   its 
breadstufEs    explains  the   unbroken   peace 
that   prevailed  between  the  two  countries 
(Heeren.    See  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  p.  865). 

Ver.  10.— So  Hiram  gave  [Heb.  kept 
giving,  supplied]  Solomon  cedar  trees  and 
fir  [or  cypress]  trees,  according  to  all  bis 
desire. 

Ver.  11.— And  Solomon  gave  Hiram 
twenty  thonsand  measures  [Heb.  con.  See 

ch.  iv.  22]   of  wheat  for  food  [n!?3D  for 

n^SKO]  to  his  household  [Bawlinson  re- 
marks that  this  was  much  less  than 
Salomon's  own  consumption  (ch.  iv.  22). 
But  he  did  not  undertake  to  feed  Hiram's 
entire  court,  but  merely  to  make  an  adequate 
return  for  this  timber  and  labour  he  received. 
And  the  feonsumption  of  fine  flour  in 
Solomon's  household  was  only  about  11,000 
cors  per  ahnum]  and  twenty  measures  of 
imro  oU  [tit.,  beaun  oil,  i.e.,  snoh  as  wai 


obtained  by  pounding  the  oUves,  when  not 
4uite  ripe,  in  a  mortar.  This  was  both  of 
whiter  colour  and  purer  flavour,  and  also 
gave  a  clearer  light,  than  that  furnished  by 
the  ripe  olives  in  the  press.  See  the 
authorities  quoted  in  Bahr's  Symbolik,  i. 
p.  419] :  thus  gave  Solomon  to  Hiram  year 
by  year  [probably  so  long  as  the  building 
lasted  or  timber  was  furnished.  But  the 
agreement  may  have  been  for  a  still  longer 
period.] 

Yer.  12. — And  the  Lord  gave  [Can  there 
be  any  reference  to  the  repeated  '*  gave  "  of 
the  two  preceding  verses?]  to  Solomon  wis- 
dom, as  he  promised  him  (ch.  iii.  12)  and 
there  was  peace  [one  fruit  of  the  gift.  Cf. 
James  iii.  17]  between  Trira,Tn  and  Solomon, 
and  they  two  made  a  league  together 
[Heb.  "  cut  a  covenant."  Cf.  iSpicut  rl/ivnv. 
Covenants  were  ratified  by  the  slaughter  of 
victims,  between  the  parts  of  which  the 
contracting  parties  passed  (Gen.  zv.  18; 
Jer.  xxxiv.  8,  18,  19).  Similarly  awovSii, 
"  libation,"  in  the  plural,  means  "league, 
truce,"  and  tnrovi&s  riiiveai  is  found  in 
classic  Greek.] 

Ver.  13.— And  King  Solomon  raised^  a 
levy  [Marg.,  tribute  of  men,  i.e.,  conscrip- 
tion] out  of  all  Israel  [t.e.,  the  people,  not 
the  land— Ewald]  and  the  levy  was  thirty 
thousand  men.  [That  is,  if  we  may  trust 
the  figures  of  the  census  given  in  2  Sam. 
zziv.  9  (which  do  not  agree,  however,  with 
those  of  1  Chron.  xxi.  6),  the  conscription 
only  affected  one  in  forty  of  the  male  popu- 
lation. But  even  the  lower  estimate  of 
Samuel  il  regarded  with  some  suspicion. 
Such  a  levy  was  predicted  (1  Sam.  viii.  16). 
Ver.  14. — ^And  he  sent  them  to  Lebanon, 
ten  thonsand  a  month,  by  courses  [Heb. 
changes] :  a  month  they  were  in  Leiianon, 
and  two  months  at  home  [they  had  to  serve, 
that  is  to  say,  four  months  out  of  the  twelve 
— ^no  very  great  hardship],  and  Adonlram 
[see  on  oh.  iv.  6;  xii.  18]  was  over  the  levy. 
Ver.  16. — ^And  Solomon  had  threescore 
and  ten  thonsand  that  bare  burdens,  and 
fourscore  thousand  hewers  In  the  moun- 
tains. [These  150,000,  destined  for  the 
more  laborious  and  menial  works,  were  not 
Israelites,  but  Canaanites.  We  learn  from 
2  Chron.  ii.  17,  18  that  "  all  the  strangers 
that  were  in  the  land  of  Israel "  were  sub- 
jected to  forced  labour  by  Solomon — ^there 
were,  that  is  to  say,  but  150,000  of  them 
remaining.  They  occupied  a  very  different 
position  from  that  of  ihe  80,000  Hebrews. 
None  of  the  latter  were  reduced  to  bond- 
age (ch.  iz.  22),  while  the  former  had 
long  been  employed  in  servile  work.  The 
Gibeonites  were  reduced  to  serfdom  by 
Joshua  (Josh.  iz.  27),  and  the  rest  of  mt 
Canaanites  as  they  were  oonqaend  (Josb-xvi 


88 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  V.  1—18, 


10 ;  xvii.  13  ;  Judg.  i.  29,  30).  In  1  Chron. 
xxii.  2,  we  find  some  of  them  employed  on 
public  works  by  David.  By  the  ".hewers" 
many  commentators  have  supposed  that 
stone-cutters  alone  are  intended  (so  Jos., 
Ant.,  viii.  2.  9)  partly  because  stone  is  men- 
tioned presently,  and  partly  because  DSri 
is  mostly  used  of  the  quarrying  or  cutting 
of  stone,  as  in  Deut.  vi.  11 ;  viii.  9 ;  2  Kings 
xii.  12,  &c.  Gesenius  understands  the 
word  both  of  stone  and  wood  cutters.  But 
is  it  not  probable  that  the  latter  alone  are 
indicated?  That  the  word  is  sometimeB 
used  of  wood-cutting  Isa.  x.  16  shows.  And 
the  words,  "tJi  the  mountain  "  (IHI)  almost 
compel  us  so  to  understand  it  here.  "  The 
mountain  "  must  be  Lebanon.  But  surely 
the  ttone  was  not  transported,  to  any  great 
extent,  like  the  wood,  so  great  a  distance 
overland  and  sea,  especially  when  it  abounded 
on  the  spot.  (The  tradition  that  the  stone 
was  quarried  at  Baalbek  is  quite  unworthy 
of  credence.  It  has  no  doubt  sprung  from 
the  huge  stones  found  there.  "  The  temple 
was  built  of  the  beautiful  white  stone  of  the 
country,  the  hard  missal"  (Warren,  p.  60.) 
It  is  true  the  number  of  wood-cutters  would 
thus  appear  to  be  very  great,  but  it  is  to  be 
lememoered  how  few  comparatively  were  the 
appliances  or  machines  of  those  days  :  al> 
most  everything  must  be  done  by  manual 
labour.  And  PUny  teUs  us  that  no  less  than 
360,000  men  were  employed  for  twenty  years 
on  one  of  the  pyramids.  It  is  possible, 
however,  that  the  huge  foundations  men- 
tioned below  (ver.  17)  were  brought  from 
.  Lebanon.] 

Ver.  16. — Beside  [without  counting]  tlie 
chief  of  Solomon's  officers  [Heb.  the  princes 
of  the  overseers,  i.e.,  the  princes  who  acted 
as  overseers,  nrincipes  qui  praefecti  erant 
(Vatabl.)  ]  which  were  over  the  work  three 
thousand  and  three  hundred  [This  large 
number  proves  that  the  "  chiefs  of  the  over- 
seers" cannot  be  meant.  Were  all  the 
3,800  superior  officers,  there  must  have  been 
quite  an  army  of  subalterns.  But  we  read 
of  n)ne.  In  ch.  ix.  23,  an  additional  num- 
ber of  650  "  princes  of  the  overseers  "  (same 
expression)  is  mentioned,  making  a  total  of 
3,850  superintendents,  which  agrees  with 
the  total  stated  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles. 
It  is  noteworthy,  however,  that  the  details 
differ  from  those  of  the  Kings.  In  2  Chron. 
ii.  17  we  read  of  a  body  of  3,600  "  overseers 
to  set  the  people  a  work,"  whilst  in  oh.  viii. 
10  mention  is  made  of  250  "  princes  of  the 
overseers."  These  differences  result,  no 
doubt,  from  difference  of  classification  and 
arrangement  (J.  H.  Michaelis).  In  Chron. 
the  arrangement  is  one  of  race,  i.e.,  3,600 
•Hen.    D'">3 ;  of.  2  Chron.  ii.  18)  and  250 


Israelites,  whilst  in  Kings  it  is  one  of  status, 
i.e.,  3,300  inferior  and  550  superior  officers. 
It  follows  consequently  that  aU  the  inferior 
and  300  of  the  superior  overseers  were 
.Canaanites]  which  ruled  over  the  people 
that  wrought  In  the  work. 

Yer.  17.— And  the  king  commanded  and 
they  brought  [or  cut  out,  quarried  (Gesen.), 
as  in  Eccles.  x.  9  ;  see  also  ch.  vi.  7  (Heb.)  ] 
great  stones,  costly  [precious,  not  heavy,  as 
Thenius.  Cf.  Psa.  xxxvi.  8 ;  xlv.  9  ;  Esth. 
i.  4  in  the  Heb.],  stones  and  [omit  and. 
The  hewed  stones  were  the  great  and  costly 
stones]  hewed  stones  [or  squared  (Isa.  iz.  10 ; 
cf.  ch.  vi.  36  ;  vii.  9  ;  xi.  12).  We  learn  from 
ch.  vii.  10  that  the  stones  of  the  foundation 
of  the  palace  were  squared  to  8  cubits  and 
10  cubits]  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  bouse. 
[Some  of  these  great  squared  stones,  we  can 
hardly  doubt,  are  found  in  situ  at  the 
present  day.  The  stones  at  the  south-east 
angle  of  the  waUs  of  the  Haram  (Mosque  of 
Omar)  are  "  unquestionably  of  Jewish  ma. 
sonry  "  (Porter,  Handbook,  p.  115).  "  One 
is  23  ft.  9  in.  long;  whilst  others  vary 
from  17  to  20  feet  in  length.  Five  courses 
of  them  are  nearly  entire  "  (ib.)  As  Herod, 
in  rebuilding  the  edifice,  would  seem  to  have 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  foundations,  we 
may  safely  connect  these  huge  blocks  with 
the  time  of  Solomon.  It  is  also  probable 
that  some  at  least  of  the  square  pillars, 
ranged  in  fifteen  rows,  and  measuring  five  feet 
each  side,  which  form  the  foundations  of 
the  Mosque  ElAksa,  and  the  supports  of  the 
area  of  the  Haram,  are  of  the  same  date 
and  origin  (of.  Ewald,  Hist.  Israel,  iii.  233). 
Porter  holds  that  they  are  "  coeval  with  the 
oldest  part  of  the  external  walls."  Many  of 
them,  the  writer  observed,  ^eie  monoliths. 
The  extensive  vaults  which  they  enclose  are 
unquestionably  "  the  subterranean  vaults  of 
the  temple  area "  mentioned  by  Josephus 
(B.  J.  V.  3.  1),  and  the  "  cavati  sub  terra 
mantes  "  of  Tacitus.  It  may  be  added  here 
that  the  recent  explorations  in  Jerusalem 
have  brought  to  light  many  evidences  of 
Phoenician  handiwork.] 

Ver.  18.— And  Solomon's  bnllders  and 
Etram'B  builders  did  hew  them,  and  the 
stone-squarers  :  [the  marg.  Gihlites,  i.t., 
people  of  Gebal,  is  to  be  preferred.  For 
Gebal  ( =mountain)  see  Josh.  xiii.  6  ( "  the 
land  of  the  Oiblites  and  Lebanon ") ;  Fa*. 
Ixxxiii.  7  ("Gebal  and  they  of  Tyre  ") ;  and 
Ezek.  xxvii.  9,  where  the  LXX.  translate  the 
word  Biblus,  which  was  the  Greek  name  of 
the  city  and  district  north  of  the  famous 
river  Adonis,  on  the  extreme  border  of 
Phoenicia.  It  is  nowknownas  Je2iet/.  It  has 
been  already  remarked  that  Tyre  and  Sidon, 
as  well  as  Oebal,  have  Hebrew  meanings. 
These  arc  among  the  proofs  of  the  practical 


OH.  V.  1—18.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


8S 


identity  ol  the  Hebrew  and  Phoenician 
tongues.  The  Aramsean  immigrants  (Deut. 
xxvi.  5;  Gen,  xii.  5)  no  doubt  adopted  the 
language  of  Canaan  (Diet.  Bib.,  art.  "  Phoeni- 
oiana").  Keil  renders,  "even  the  Giblites." 
He  would  understand,  t.  e. ,  that  the  Zidonian 
workmen  were  (iiblites ;  but  this  is  doubtful. 
The  Giblites  are  selected,  no  doubt,  for 
special  mention  because  of  the  prominent 
part  they  took  in  the  work.  Gebal,  as  its 
ancient  and  extensive  ruins  prove,  was  a 
place  of  much  importance,  and  lying  as  it 
did  on  the  coast,  and  near  the  cedar  forests, 
would  naturally  have  an  important  share  in 
the  cutting  and  shipping  of  the  timber.  In- 
deed, it  is  not  improbable  that  it  was  at  this 


port  that  the  land  transport  ended,  and  the 
rafts  were  made.  A  road  ran  anciently  from 
Gebal  to  Baalbak,  so  that  the  transport  was 
not  impracticable.  But  as  the  forests  were 
probably  of  great  extent,  there  may  have 
been  two  or  three  depdts  at  which  the 
timber  was  floated]  so  they  prepared 
timber  [Heb.  the  timber]  and  stones  [Heb. 
the  stones]  to  buUd  the  house.  [The  LXX. 
(Vat.  and  Alex,  alike)  add  here,  "  three 
yean."  It  is  barely  possible  that  these 
words  may  have  dropped  out  of  the  text, 
but  they  look  more  hke  a  gloss,  the  infer- 
ence from  the  chronological  statement  of 
ch.  vi.  1.] 


H0MILETI03. 

Vers.  7—12  eompared  with  ch.  xvi.  31  and  ch,  xviii.  4.  Tyre  and  Itrael — a 
lesson  on  personal  infiuence.  Twice  in  the  history  of  Israel  were  its  relations 
with  the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  Tyre  close  and  intimate.  Twice  did  the  Phoeni- 
cian race  exercise  an  important  influence  on  the  Hebrew  people.  In  the  days  ol 
Solomon  the  subjects  of  Hiram  famished  men  and  materials  to  build  a  house  to  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  The  Phoenicians  were  not  only  idolaters,  but  they  belonged  to 
the  accursed  races  of  Canaan,  yet  we  see  them  here  assisting  the  holy  people,  and 
farthering  the  interests  of  the  true  religion.  But  in  the  days  of  Aliab  these  relations 
were  reversed.  Then  the  kingdom  oi  Ethhaal  furnished  Israel  with  a  princess  who 
destroyed  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  and  sought  to  exterminate  the  religion  of  which 
the  temple  was  the  shrine  and  centre.  In  the  first  case,  tliat  is  to  say,  we  see  Israel 
influencing  Tyre  for  good ;  we  hear  from  the  lips  of  the  Tyrian  king  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  goodness  of  the  Hebrew  God ;  we  see  the  two  races  combining  to 
bring  glory  to  God  and  to  diffuse  the  blessings  of  peace  and  civilization  amongst 
men.  In  the  second  case,  we  see  Tyre  influencing  Israel  for  evil.  No  longer  do 
the  skilled  artificers  of  Zidon  prepare  timber  and  stones  for  the  Lord's  house,  but 
the  prophets  and  votaries  of  Phoenician  deities  would  fain  break  down  the  carved 
work  thereof  with  axes  and  hammers.  So  far  from  rearing  a  sanctuary  to  Jehovah, 
they  would  root  up  His  worship  and  enthrone  a  foul  idol  in  the  place  of  the  Divine 
Presence.  Such  have  been  at  different  times  the  relations  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  to  the 
chosen  race  and  the  true  religion. 

Now  why  was  this  fatal  diSerence  ?  Why  was  the  influence  in  one  age  so  whole- 
some, in  another  so  baleful  ?  It  may  be  instructive  to  mark  the  causes  of  this 
change.    But  observe,  first — 

I.  It  was  not  that  the  PHtENiciAN  CREED  WAS  CHANGED.  In  its  ossential  fea- 
tures that  was  the  same  b.o.  1000  (temp.  Solomon)  and  B.C.  900  (temp.  Ahab).  It 
was  always  idolatrous,  always  immoral,  always  an  infamous  cultus  of  the  reproduo- 
tive  powers.  The  gods  of  Hiram  were  the  gods  of  Etbbaal,  and  the  rites  oi  the 
latter  age  were  also  the  rites  of  the  former. 

II.  It  was  not  that  the  law  of  the  Lobd  was  changed.  The  idolatry  which 
it  forbade  at  the  first  period,  it  forbade  at  the  second.  It  never  tolerated  n  '■'\-il 
religion ;  it  always  condenmed  the  Phcenician  superstition.    That  is,  semper  eadcm. 

III.  It  was  not  that  Hiram  was  a  proselyte.  This  was  the  belief  of  the 
divines  of  a  past  age,  but  there  is  no  evidence  in  its  favour. 

We  see  then  that  it  was  no  change  in  either  of  the  religious  systems.  No  ;  it 
was  a  change  of  persons  made  this  difference.  It  was  brought  about  by  the  per- 
sonal influence  of  three  or  four  kings — of  Solomon,  Jeroboam,  Omri,  Ahab.  But 
before  we  trace  the  influence  they  respectively  exercised,  observe — 

I.  Thb  wholesome  eelations  between  Hiram  and  Solomon,  between  Tyre  un 


00 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  v.  1—18 


Ibbael,  ».«.,  WERE  DUB  TO  THE  piETT  OF  David.  "  Hiram  was  ever  a  lover  of 
David."  The  timber  he  supplied  for  the  temple  was  not  the  first  he  had  sent  (2 
Bam.  V.  11).  The  league  between  the  two  kings  (1  Kings  v.  12),  and  their  joint 
undertakings  (ch.  v.  18 ;  ix.  27),  were  the  fruits  of  David's  righteous  dealings. 

n.  The  kelatigns  continued  wholesome  and  beneficial  so  lomo  as  the  law 
OF  THE  LoED  WAS  KEPT.  During  David's  reign,  and  the  earlier  part  of  Solomon's, 
the  commerce  of  the  two  nations  was  to  their  mutual  advantage.  Then  the  Jew 
came  into  contact  with  idolatry  unhurt.  The  soil  was  not  ready  for  the  baleful 
seed.    At  u  later  period  (see  Homily  on  ch.  x.  22)  it  was  otherwise. 

III.  The  law  was  no  sooneb  violated  than  the  influence  of  Ttb^  beoauk 
HUETFUL.  The  Zidonian  women  in  Solomon's  harem  were  a  distinct  violation  ol 
the  law  (oh.  xi.  1),  and  that  trespass  bore  its  bitter  fruit  forthwith  (ch.  xL  7,  8). 

The  principal  factors,  consequently,  in  the  change  were  these— ^ 

I.  The  influence  of  Solomon.  If  he  built  altars  for  his  Tyrian  consorts,  what 
wonder  if  the  people  learnt  Urst  to  tolerate,  then  to  admire,  and  at  last  to  practise 
idolatry.  Who  can  tell  how  much  the  frightful  abominations  of  Ahab's  days  are 
due  to  the  example  of  wise  Solomon,  to  the  influence  of  the  builder  of  the  temple  ? 

II.  The  influence  of  Jeroboam.  The  cultus  of  the  calves,  though  it  was  not 
idolatry,  paved  the  way  for  it.  That  violation  of  the  law  opened  the  door  for  de- 
partures greater  BtUl.  It  was  no. great  step  from  the  calves  to  the  groves,  from 
schism  to  utter  apostasy. 

III.  The  influence  of  Ombi.  Nations,  like  individuals,  do  not  become  infiunous 
all  at  once  {Nemo  rejaente  iu/rpissimus  fuit).  They  have  their  periods  and  pro- 
cesses of  depravation.  Omri  carried  Jeroboam's  evil  work  a  step  further;  possibly 
he  organized  and  formulated  his  system  (Micah  vi.  16).  He  exceeded  all  his  pre- 
decessors in  wickedness,  and  so  prepared  the  way  for  his  son's  consummation  of 
impiety. 

IV.  The  influence  of  Ahab.  A  second  violation  of  the  Jewish  marriage  law 
opened  wide  the  gates  to  the  pestilent  flood  of  idolatries.  The  son  of  Omri  weds 
the  daughter  of  a  priest  of  Astarte ;  and  Phoenicia,  once  the  handmaid  of  Israel, 
becomes  its  snare.  Now  the  ancestral  religion  is  proscribed,  and  the  elect  people 
lends  itself  to  unspeakable  abominations  (1  Kings  xvi.  32 ;  cf.  2  Kings  x.  26,  27 ; 
Bev.  ii.  20).  It  may  be  said,  however,  that  all  this  was  the  work  of  Jezebel,  and 
due  to  her  influence  alone  (1  Kings  xxi.  25  ;  cf.  xviii.  13 ;  xix.  2,  &c.)  That  may 
be  so,  but  it  was  only  the  example  of  Solomon,  the  schism  of  Jeroboam,  and  the 
apostasy  of  Omri  made  this  marriage  possible,  or  enabled  Jezebel,  when  queen,  to 
do  these  things  with  impunity.     Hence  learn — 

I.  The  poweb  and  responsibility  of  personal  influence.  An  idle  word  may 
destroy  a  kingdom.  The  Crimean  war  sprung  out  of  the  squabbles  of  a  few  monks 
over  a  cupboard  and  a  bunch  of  keys.  "  There  is  not  a  child  .  .  .  whose 
existence  does  not  stir  a  ripple  gyrating  onward  and  on,  until  it  shall  have  moved 
across  and  spanned  the  whole  ocean  of  God's  eternity,  stirring  even  the  river  of  life 
and  the  foimtains  at  which  Hi  a  angels  drink."  And  our  responsibility  is  increased 
by  the  fact  that — 

II.  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them.  They  go  on  sinning  in  their 
graves.     Though  dead,  their  example  speaks.    Witness  Solomon  and  Jeroboam. 

III.  The  evil  that  kings  do  affects  whole  countries.  Their  own  king- 
doms, of  course,  and  neighbouring  kingdoms  too.  It  has  been  said  that  "  the  in- 
fluence of  one  good  man  extends  over  an  area  of  sixteen  square  miles."  But  who 
shall  assign  any  Umits  to  the  influence  of  a  wicked  prince  ?  It  may  plunge  a  con- 
tinent into  wars,  and  wars  that  shall  last  for  generations,  or  it  may  steep  it  for  ages 
in  sensuality  and  superstition.  Its  issues,  too,  are  in  eternity.  It  is  because  of  the 
influence  of  kings  that  we  are  so  plainly  commanded  to  pray  for  them  (1  Tim.  ii.  2 ; 
o£  Ezra  vi.  10 ;  Jer.  xxix.  7). 

IV.  In  keeping  of  God's  commandments  is  great  reward.  The  perfect  piety  of 
David  procured  the  friendship  and  help  of  Tyre.  The  disobedience  of  Solomon, 
Jeroboam,  and  Ahab  led  to  the  decay  and  dispersion  of  the  nation  and  the  destruo- 
tion  of  their  families. 


OH.  V.  1—18.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  U 

v.  Temptation  disciplines  the  faithful  soul,  but  destroys  the  sinnee. 
David  took  no  harm  from  his  commerce  with  Hiram,  nor  did  3oIomon  in  the  days 
of  his  piety.  A  good  man  will  choose  the  good  and  refuse  the  evil  in  a  corrupt 
system.  Bnt  the  wicked  wiU  choose  the  evil  and  refuse  the  good.  Ahab's  relations 
with  Tyre  were  altogether  to  his  hurt.  In  David's  loyal  heart  the  evil  seed  found 
no  lodgment ;  in  Ahab's  it  found  a  congenial  soil,  and  took  root  downwards  and 
bore  fruit  upwards. 

Yer.  17. — Sure  Fotmdatioru.  No  city  in  the  world  has  experienced  so  many 
vicissitudes  as  "  the  city  of  the  Great  King."  The  place  of  the  "vision  of  peace  " 
(or,  "foundation  of  peace  ")  has  known  no  peace.  It  has  been  sixteen  times  taken 
by  siege  since  our  blessed  Lord's  day,  and  conqueror  after  conqueror  has  cried, 
"  Base  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation  thereof"  (Fsa.  cxxxvii.  7).  It  has  been 
the  carcase  round  which  the  Itoman  "  eagles  "  have  repeatedly  gathered ;  it  has 
been  the  battle-field  of  Saracen  and  Crusader ;  now  the  Christian  has  wrested  it 
from  the  Moslem,  and  now  the  Moslem  has  torn  it  back  &om  the  Christian.  The 
consequence  is  that  it  is  a  mound  of  ruins,  a  heap  of  debris.  When  the  AngUcan 
church  was  bmlt,  it  was  necessary  to  dig  down  some  forty  feet,  through  the 
accumulated  rubbish  of  ages,  to  get  a  foundation.  The  Jerusalem  of  the  past  can 
only  be  reached  by  deep  shafts.  It  is  literally  true  that  not  one  stone  of  the 
ancient  city  is  "  left  upon  another  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  2).  With  one  exception.  Amid  the 
wreck  and  havoc  of  war,  amid  the  changes  and  chances  of  the  world,  the  colossal 
foundations  of  Solomon  remain  undisturbed.  His  "  great  stones  "  are  to  be  seen 
at  the  present  day  at  the  south-east  angle  and  underneath  the  temple  area  (see  on 
ver.  17).  Everything  built  upon  them  has  perished.  Not  a  trace  of  tower  or 
temple  remains ;  nay,  their  very  sites  are  doubtful.  But  "  through  all  these  great 
and  various  demohtions  and  restorations  on  the  surface,  its  foundations,  with  their 
gigantic  walls,  have  been  indestructibly  preserved  "  (Ewald).  After  the  lapse  of 
nearly  three  thousand  years,  "  The  foundation  standeth  sure." 

Let  us  learn  a  lesson  hence  as  to — I.  Christ.  II.  The  Church  of  Christ.  III. 
The  doctrine  of  Christ  and  His  Church.  We  may  see,  then,  in  the  Solomonic 
foundations  of  the  Temple — 

I.  A  picture  of  Christ.  He  compared  Himself  to  the  Temple  CJohn  ii.  19), 
and  to  the  foundations  of  the  Temple  (Matt.  xxi.  42_).  Yes,  to  these  very  comer 
ttonei  which  are  still  visible.  It  is  remarkable  that  Psalm  cxviii.  22 — "  The  stone 
which  the  builders  refused  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner  " — is  cited  by  our  Lord 
of  Himself  (Matt.  xxi.  42),  and  is  apphed  to  Him  by  St.  Peter  (Acts  iv.  11),  while  Isa. 
xxviii.  16,  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,"  &c. — words  which  were 
no  doubt  suggested  by  the  great  and  precious  stones  of  Solomon's  building — are 
interpreted  of  Him  both  by  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  ii.  6)  and  St.  Paul  (Eom.  ix.  33).  Wo 
have  consequently  "  most  certain  warrants  of  Holy  Scripture  "  for  seeing  in  these 
venerable  relics  an  image  of  the  Eternal  Son.  He  is  the  one  foundation  (1  Cor. 
iii.  11) ;  the  chief  corner  stone  (Axpoyutviaiot,  Eph.  ii.  20) ;  He  "  abideth  ever  ; " 
"  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  "  (Heb.  xiii.  8,  Gr.)  That 
"  sure  foundation  "  can  never  fail.  How  many  systems  of  philosophy,  how  many 
"  oppositions  of  science  "  have  "  had  their  day  and  ceased  to  be  "  ?  How  many 
proud  empires  have  tottered  to  their  fall;  bow  many  dynasties  are  extinct  and 
forgotten  ?  But  the  carpenter's  Son  stUl  rules  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  the  cross 
of  Christ  "  towers  above  the  wreck  of  time." 

II.  A  fiotube  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  As  surely  as  the  great  comer  stone 
images  our  Lord,  so  surely  do  the  huge  and  strong  foundations  pourtray  the  Church 
of  which  He  is  the  Founder.  It  is  to  the  Church  {UicKriaia  iiro  Oeov  rsSc/iEXibi/dvi)) 
those  words  refer,  "  The  firm  foundation  of  God  standeth  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  19,  Gk.) 
The  Church  is  "  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth ;  "  it  is  "  buut  upon  the  founda- 
tion of  apostles  and  prophets"  (Eph.  ii.  20  ;  cf.  Bev.  xxi.  14).  And,  like  the  founda- 
tions of  the  Temple,  its  base  shall  be  stable  and  permanent  "  The  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail  against  it  "  (Matt.  xvi.  18).    It  is  founded  on  a  rock  (ibid.) 


»<i  THE  FIKST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS.  [CH.  v.  1— Ift 


"  Crowns  and  thrones  may  perish. 
Kingdoms  rise  and  wane, 
But  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Constant  will  remain." 

It  was  the  boast  of  Voltaire  that  what  it  took  twelve  men  to  bmid  one  man  shotild' 
suffice  to  break  down.  But  the  Church  is  stronger  in  the  hearts  of  men  now  than 
it  was  in  the  eighteenth  century.  And  Voltaire's  ory  of  impotent  rage,  Ecrcuez 
Vinfdme,  seems  farther  than  ever  from  its  realization.  Its  enemies  assert  that 
Christianity  has  "  destroyed  two  civilizations  " — a  striking  admission  of  its  strength, 
and  vitality.  True,  the  Chnrch  has  a  legion  of  foes.  But  let  us  take  courage. 
There  is  at  Jerusalem  a  pledge  and  picture  of  her  stability.  Her_  fashions,  her 
excrescences,  hor  sects  and  schisms,  like  the  buildings  of  the  Holy  Oity,  shall  pass 
away.     But  her  foundation  is  sure. 

III.  A  picTUEE  OF  THE  DOCTRINE  ov  Christ  AND  THE  Chuboh.  As  there  are- 
twelve  foundations  of  the  Church,  so  are  there  six  foundation-truths,  six  "  prin- 
ciples of  the  doctrine  of  Christ "  (Heb.  vi  2).  And  of  these  it  may  justly  be  said, 
"  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid."  Some  of  these  doctrines 
may  have  been,  or  may  hereafter  be,  more  or  less  obscured — the  "doctrines  of 
baptism  and  of  the  laying  on  of  hands  "  are  often  ignored  or  repudiated  even  now 
— ^but  for  long  centuries  the  foundations  of  the  Temple  area  have  been  hidden. 
Obscured  or  not,  they  shall  never  be  shaken  or  removed.  This  "  firm  foundation 
standeth."  The  mpnoUths  beneath  the  Mosque  Bl  Akta,  standing  where  Solomon 
and  Hiram's  builders  placed  them,  are  silent  but  eloquent  pictures  of  the  eternal 
and  unchangeable  truth  of  God.  And  if  men  build  on  the  foundations  of  Christian 
doctrine,  or  on  the  one  foundation  of  "  the  personal  historical  Christ "  (Alford  on 
1  Cor.  iii.  11),  "  wood,  hay,  stubble,"  i.e.,  systems,  more  or  less  worthless,  of  their 
own,  like  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  these  shall  be  destroyed  by  fire  in  the  "  day  of 
visitation;"  but  the  foundation  shall  remain  unscathed,  strong  and  sore  and 
eternal  as  the  God  who  laid  it. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers,  2 — 6. — The  Temple.  Bead  also  2  Chron.  ii.  1 — 10,  where  additional  light  i* 
thrown  on  this  transaction.  It  marks  a  period  of  extreme  interest  and  importance  in 
Hebrew  history.  It  introduces  us,  by  anticipation,  to  that  which  was  the  crowning 
glory  of  the  reign  of  Solomon,  for  his  name  must  ever  stand  connected  with  the  mag- 
nificence of  the  first  Temple,  though  it  be  but  as  a  gorgeous  dream  of  the  far-distant 
past,  which  imagination  strives  in  vain  to  reproduce  with  distinctness  and  certainty. 
Whether  the  Hiram  who  entered  into  this  treaty  with  Solomon  is  the  same  as  the 
Hiram  who  was  the  friend  of  David  is  a  matter  of  doubt.  Menander  of  Ephesus 
(quoted  by  Josephus)  describes  him  as  a  man  of  great  enterprize,  a  lover  of  archi- 
tecture, noted  for  his  skill  in  building  and  adorning  the  temples  of  the  gods.  And 
in  this  we  have  a  valuable  indirect  confirmation  of  the  BibUcal  history.  Look  at 
this  purpose  of  Solomon  to  build  a  splendid  temple  to  the  Lord  in  two  or  three 
different  lights. 

I.  It  expresses  his  desibe  to  carry  out  the  oood  designs  of  bis  fathes 
DAvm.  FiUal  feeling  prompted  it.  It  drew  the  inspiration  of  its  enthusiasm  from 
the  warmth  of  a  filial  heart.  "  Thou  knowest  how  that  David  my  father  could 
not,"  Ac.  We  are  told  why  he  "could  not"  (1  Chron.  xxii.  7,  8;  xxviii.  6).  He 
bad  been  "  a  man  of  war,"  and  had  "  shed  much  blood."  Noble  purposes  may  be 
conceived  in  a  time  of  discord  and  confusion ;  they  can  be  actualized  only  in  a 
time  of  rest.  _  The  hands  must  be  free  from  the  blood  of  men  that  would  build  a 
worthy  dwelling-place  for  a  righteous  God.  Nothing  was  more  natural  than  that 
Solomon,  under  happier  auspices,  should  resolve  to  do  what  his  father  had  the 
"  heart  to  do,"  but  "  could  not."  To  how  large  an  extent  is  human  life  a  record  of 
thwarted  purposes  1  A  tale  cut  short  before  it  is  half  told  ;  a  laying  of  plans  that 
are  never  worked  out ;  a  reaching  forth  towards  fair  ideals  that  men  have  not  ^ 


OH.  V.  1—18.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  98 

power  or  the  time  to  turn  into  realities.  What  can  the  high  mission  of  eaeh 
succeeding  generation  be  but  just  to  take  up  the  good  purposes  that  a  previous 
generation  failed  to  accomplish  and  develop  them  to  their  ripe  issues  ?  This  is 
the  real  law  of  human  progress.  All  honoiu:  to  the  son  who,  knowing  what  wai 
ti'uest  and  deepest  in  his  father's  heart,  endeavours  worthily  to  fulfil  it. 

II.  It  is  the  spontaneous  outcome  of  his  own  devout  feeling.  Solomon 
never  had  the  pure  and  lofty  spirit  of  devotion  that  inspired  the  soul  of  David  ;  but 
as  yet,  at  least,  his  religious  sentiment  is  deep  and  true.  A  "house  great  and 
wonderful,"  dedicated  to  the  Lord,  in  the  royal  city,  will  give  it  fitting  public 
expression.  All  religious  feeling  instinctively  seeks  to  body  itself  forth  in  appro- 
priate forms.  I'orbidden  as  the  Jews  were  to  "  make  any  likeness  or  image  "  of  the 
great  Object  of  worship  (Exod.  xx.  4),  it  was  quite  in  harmony  with  the  Divine 
dispensation  of  the  time  that  the  spirit  of  worship  should  robe  itself  in  a  grand 
symboUo  garb.  Solomon  only  sought  to  develop  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  into 
a  system  more  imposing  and  enduring  (2  Chron.  ii.  4,  5).  In  every  age  symbolism 
has  its  place  as  the  spontaneous  and  natural  expression  of  religious  thought  and 
feeling.  Let  it  be  relied  on  as  the  means  of  a/uiahening  such  thought  and  feehng, 
as  the  prescribed  form  in  which  it  shall  move — an  artificial  substitute  for  it — and 
it  becomes  a  mockery  and  a  snare.  The  magnificence  of  Solomon's  design  for  the 
Temple  indicated  not  only  the  fervour  of  his  devotion,  but  the  breadth  of  his  view 
as  regards  the  essential  sacredness  of  all  natural  things.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's 
and  the  fulness  thereof."  All  things  beautiful  and  precious  are  turned  to  their  true 
use  when  dedicated  to  Him.  We  cannot  be  too  careful  to  give  Him  our  richest  and 
best.  The  true  heart  says,  "  I  wiUnot  offer  burnt  offering  to  the  Lord  of  that  which 
doth  cost  me  nothing."  Let  us  not  be  more  concerned  for  our  own  houses  than 
we  are  for  the  Lord's.  The  history  of  the  Temple,  however,  and  of  all  ecolesiology, 
shows  how  easily  the  wealth  of  outward  adornment  in  worship  may  become  Qie 
grave  of  the  spiritual  and  the  veil  of  th«  Divine.  In  proportion  as  care  for  the 
symbolic  form — the  mere  shrine  of  worship — ^has  increased,  the  living  reality — the 
worship  of  the  Father  "in  spirit  and  in  truth  " — has  passed  away. 

III.  It   expresses   his    sense    of     the     fact    that    the    AOENOWLEDOltlENT    01 

God  is  the  real  stbenoth  and  olory  of  a  nation.  The  Temple  was  to  be 
dedicated  "  to  the  name  of  Jehovah  " — the  visible  sign  and  symbol  of  the  sovereignty 
of  that  name  over  the  whole  Ufe  of  the  people.  There  was  worth  in  the  sign  just 
so  far  as  that  sovereignty  was  real.  The  Jewish  commonwealth  was  a  theocracy — 
the  Temple  the  palace  and  throne  of  the  great  invisible  King.  Judaism  was  not  the 
union  of  Church  and  State  as  two  separate  or  separable  powers,  but  their  identi- 
fication. No  distinction  between  the  pohtical  and  ecclesiastical,  the  secular  and 
spiritual  spheres.  The  two  were  one.  The  ideal  Christian  nation  is  a  theocracy  in 
which  Christ  is  king.  Not  made  so  by  its  institutions,  but  by  the  spiritual  Ufe 
that  pervades  it.  True  to  its  name  only  so  far  as  the  law  of  Christ  is  honoured  in 
the  homes  of  the  people,  moulds  the  form  and  habit  of  their  social  hfe,  controls 
commerce,  rules  in  Parliament,  strengthens,  ennobles,  glorifies  the  Throne.  Its 
Christian  Churches  are  thus  the  very  flower  of  a  country's  highest  life. 

**  Those  temples  of  His  grace. 

How  beautiful  they  stand  I 
The  honour  of  onr  native  place 

And  bulwark  of  our  land." 

Ab  the  graTeyarS — where  "  the  rude  forefathers  of  the  hamlet  sleep  ' — ^tells  of  the 
vanity  of  all  earthly  things,  how  the  pride  and  glory  of  man  must  one  day  moulder 
down  to  dust,  so  the  church  is  the  memorial  of  the  unfading  inheritance  of  truth 
ttnd  purity  and  love — the  blessed  fellowship  of  the  redeemed — the  "  House  of  God, 
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 

lY.  It  expresses  his  desire  that  Israel  should  havb  a  centre  of  reli- 
gious ATTHAOTION  AND  BOND  OF  BELioious  UNITY.  The  tabcmacle  had  been  the 
movable  sanctuary  of  a  wandering  people,  the  Temple  should  be  the  resting- 
place  of  the  Divine  presence  (Psa.  cxxxii.  14).    Hitherto  there  bad  been  a  divided 


M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  t,  1— !& 

worship,  connected  both  with  the  tabernacle  at  Gideon  and  the  ark  in  the  city  ol 
David  (1  Chron.  xvi.  37 — 39).  But  in  future  all  Bacred  asBoeiations  are  to  be 
gathered  up  in  the  central  glory  of  the  Temple.  One  nation,  one  faith,  one  God, 
one  sanctuary.  But  this  localization  of  the  highest  forms  of  worship  had  its 
dangers.  Men  came  to  think  of  "  the  Holy  Presence  as  belonging  to  the  building, 
instead  of  the  building  as  being  hallowed  aad  glorified  by  the  Presence."  Christ 
proclaims  the  infinite  Presence,  the  impartial  Love.  "  The  hour  oometh  when  ye 
shall  neither  in  this  mountain,"  &o.  (John  iv.  21).  "  One  greater  than  the  Temple 
is  here  " — in  whom  aU  its  sacred  symbols  are  fulfilled — ^the  attractive  centre  and 
bond  of  union  for  redeemed  souls  of  every  age  and  nation.  Our  thoughts  are  led 
on  to  the  glorious  vision  of  the  holy  city  of  which  it  is  written,  "  I  saw  no  temple 
therein,  for  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it "  (Bev.  xzL 
22),— W. 

Ver.  ff. — The  huildmg  of  the  Temple.  '*  Behold  I  purpose  to  build  an  house  unto 
the  name  of  the  Lord  my  God."  Every  man  has  some  special  work  given  him  by 
God.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  he  should  find  out  what  that  work  is,  if 
he  would  not  make  his  life  a  failure  and  come  short  of  the  purpose  of  God  for  him. 
In  the  case  of  Solomon  the  great  work  given  him  to  do  was  not  to  extend  the 
bonndaries  of  his  kingdom,  but  to  buUd  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  This  he  clearly 
understood,  as  is  evident  from  his  saying,  "  I  purpose  to  build  an  house  to  the  name 
of  the  Lord."  This  was  to  biTn  the  work  of  paramount  importance.  The  building 
of  the  Temple  was  to  give  a  religiotis  centre  to  the  theocracy.  This  was  part  of  the 
Divine  flan,  a  branch  of  the  education  of  the  people,  by  which  God  would  prepare 
tiie  way  for  the  new  covenant.  The  old  covenant  was  essentially  preparatory ;  it 
was  "  the  shadow  of  good  things  to  come  "  (Heb.  x."l).  The  Temple  was  to  form  • 
part  of  this  preparation. 

I.  It  was  a  vismLE  symbol  of  thb  fbesenoe  or  God  with  His  pbople.  This 
was  the  only  way  m  which  such  an  idea  could  be  brought  home  to  men  in  the  state 
ot  rude  infancy  in  which  they  then  were,  and  with  their  incapacity  to  apprehend 
directly  spiritual  graces.  The  material  was  thus  the  necessary  medium  of  the 
spiritual. 

II.  The  erection  of  a  holy  place  for  worship  reminded  men  that  the  eabth 
WHICH  THEY  INHABITED  WAS  DEFILED  ;  it  developed  in  them  the  sense  of  sin. 

III.  The  POSSIBILITY  of  dbawino  near  to  God  in  this  holy  place  pointed  to  the 
time  of  reconciliation,  when  every  spot  of  a  redeemed  earth  might  be  a  place  of 
prayer ;  when  there  should  be  no  fonger  one  sanctuary  for  one  nation  alone,  but 
when  all  the  nations  should  have  free  access  to  God  as  worshippers  in  spirit  and  in 
truth.  The  fact  that  Solomon  sought  out  workmen  for  the  Temple,  not  only  among 
the  Israelites,  but  among  the  Gentiles,  is  prophetic,  and  prefigures  the  time  when 
the  multitude  of  worshippers  shall  be  "  of  every  kindred,  and  nation,  and  people, 
and  tongue  "  (Rev.  v.  9). 

IV.  There  is  not  a  single  Christian  liviko  who  has  not  a  task  like  that  of 
Solomon  to  fulfil.  Every  Christian  ought  to  say,  "  I  purpose  to  build  an  house  to 
the  namn  of  the  Lord."  (a)  He  must  first  become  himself  a  living  stone  of  the  spiri- 
tual temple  (2  Pet.  ii.  61).  (6)  His  body  must  be  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1 
Cor.  vi.  19),  his  whole  being  a  sanctuary  (1  Cor.  ui.)  His  house  should  be  a  house 
of  prayer  (Josh.  xxiv.  15).  Are  not  these  human  temples  themselves  the  stones 
elect,  precious,  to  be  used  by  and  by  in  that  great  heavenly  temple  which  the 
Lord  shall  build  and  not  man  ?    (2  Cor.  v.  1.) — E.  de  P. 

Vers.  7 — 12. — Le»somfrom  the  conduct  of  a  heathen  prinoe.  Describe  the  con- 
dition of  Tyre  at  this  period,  alluding  to  its  commerce,  its  religious  beliefs,  its 
proximity  to  the  kingdom  of  Solomon  (the  capitals  being  distant  from  each  othef 
about  122  miles),  its  monarchical  institutions,  as  opposed  to  the  usual  republican 
government  of  Phoenician  settlements — as  exemplified  in  Carthage,  the  splendid 
daughter  of  Tyre,  founded  about  140  years  after  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple. 
Point  out  some  of  the  effects  of  the  intercourse  between  these  two  states,  as  suggested 


OH.  V.  1—18.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  «fi 

by  Old  Testament  history.  Suggest  from  this  the  responsibilities  and  the  perils 
accming  to  us  as  a  Christian  people,  from  the  fact  that  onr  own  destinies  are  so 
interwoven  with  distant  and  heathen  nations.  Allude  to  the  fearlessness  of  Scripture 
in  ascribing  what  is  good  and  commendable  to  those  whom  the  Jews  generally 
scorned.  Various  examples  may  be  given,  e.g.,  Abimeleoh  king  of  Egypt,  Cyrus, 
Hiram ;  and  in  the  New  Testament,  ComeUns,  Pubhus,  &o.  Compaxe  the  words 
of  our  Lord  (Matt.  viii.  11, 12). 
The  conduct  of  Hiram  teaches  as  the  following  lessons. 

I.  That  we  should  bejoiob  in  the  pbosfebit;  of  othebs  (ver.  7).  Hiram  '^as 
moved  to  joy,  partly  because  of  his  love  and  admiration  for  David.  It  is  an 
unspeakable  advantage  to  have  the  position  won  by  a  father's  toil,  the  afiection  and 
confidence  deserved  by  a  father's  worth.  In  our  material  possessions,  in  our  worldly 
occupation,  in  our  ecclesiastical  and,  above  all,  our  Christian  relationships,  how  much 
of  good  has  come  from  parentage  I  Contrast  the  possibilities  of  a  lad,  bom  of 
honoured  parents,  and  therefore  trusted  till  he  proves  untrustworthy,  whose  path  in 
life  is  smoothed  by  the  loving  hands  of  those  who  care  for  him,  for  his  father's  sake, 
with  the  terrible  disadvantages  of  the  child  of  a  convict,  who  is  distrusted  and  iU- 
treated  from  his  birth.  Hiram  was  well  disposed  to  Solomon  for  his  father's  sake. 
There  were  many  reasons  for  jealousy.  The  two  kingdoms  adjoined  each  other, 
and  national  pride  would  be  fostered  by  reUgiousdifferences.  It  is  easier  to  rejoice 
over  the  success  of  a  distant  trader  than  over  the  prosperity  of  a  neighbour  who  is 
our  competitor.  Nor  is  it  common  for  a  heathen  to  be  glad  over  the  welfare  of  a 
Christian.  Hiram  was  large-hearted  enough  to  overlook  barriers  which  were  erected 
by  the  hands  of  rivalry  and  reHgious  distinction. 

II.  Teat  we  should  fairly  consideb  tee  demands  of  others.  "  I  have  coti' 
sidered  the  things  which  thou  sentest  to  me  for"  (ver.  8).  The  request  of  Solomon 
was  bold.  It  would  require  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  Tyrians.  They  were  asked 
to  help  in  building  a  temple  for  another  nation,  and  for  the  worship  of  One  who 
was  to  them  a  strange  deity.  No  prejudice,  however,  interfered  with  Hiram's  fair 
consideration  of  Solomon's  request ;  and  as  it  was  more  fully  understood,  it  seemed 
more  and  more  feasible.  How  often  prejudice  prevents  men  from  looking  at  a 
novel  scheme  for  work,  from  welcoming  a  new  expression  of  old  truth,  &o.  A 
false  patriotism  sometimes  refases  to  see  any  excellency  in  another  people.  Sec- 
tarianism checks  Christians  in  learning  from  each  other.  There  is  much  presented 
to  us  which  we  cannot  at  once  welcome,  but  at  least  it  should  be  fairly  considered. 
"  Prove  aU  things,  hold  fast  that  which  is  good." 

III.  That  when  we  do  a  kindness,  it  should  be  done  without  oRUDoiNa.  "  I 
will  do  all  thy  desire."  It  is  not  right  to  ask  another  for  what  is  unreasonable,  or 
to  give  to  another  what  is  unreasonable  for  him  to  expect.  Sometimes  to  grant  a 
request  is  easier  than  to  refuse  it,  and  we  do  what  is  asked  to  save  ourselves  teouble. 
Every  demand  should  be  weighed  in  the  balance  of  equity.  But  if,  after  the  test, 
it  seems  right  to  accede  to  it,  we  should  not  do  it  reluctantly,  or  partially,  or 
murmuringly,  lest  we  should  mar  the  beauty  of  the  act  to  others,  and  rob  ourselves 
of  the  bhss  of  ministering  to  others  in  Christ's  spirit.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  it 
heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men,"  &o.  (Col.  iii.  23,  24).  -  "  Give,  and  it 
shall  be  given  unto  you ;  good  measure,"  &c.  (Luke  vi.  88). 

rv.  That  we  should  becoonize  and  recompense  the  abilities  of  the 
humblest.  In  2  Chron.  ii.  13  we  read  that  Hiram  chose  from  amongst  his 
subjects  a  skilful  man,  to  be  set  over  this  business.  Christians  can  serve  their 
Lord  in  this  way  amidst  their  ordinary  occupations.  In  the  counting-house,  or 
office,  or  factory  the  recognition  and  encouragement  of  diligence  and  skill  may  be 
a  means  of  grace  to  employer  and  employe.  We  should  devoutly  recognize  that 
knowledge,  sldll,  capacity  of  any  sort,  are  the  gifts  of  God ;  and  while  we  employ 
our  own  falthfolly,  we  should,  as  opportunity  serves,  aid  our  fellow  servants  in  the 
use  of  theirs. 

V.  That  wb  should  acknowledge  oub  mutual  dependence.  Solomon  and 
Hiram  were  not  independent  of  each  other.  It  was  for  the  good  of  these  kings  and 
of  their  peoples  that  they  should  be  associated  in  this  holy  work.    Solomon  eott- 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  yu  1— ua. 


fessed,  "  There  is  not  among  us  any  that  can  skiU  to  hew  timber  like  unto  the 
Sidonians  "  (ver,  6).  Each  nation,  each  individual  has  bis  own  sphere  to  fill  in  the 
economy  of  God.  Ko  one  of  these  can  serve  well  in  isolation.  See  St.  Faid's 
teaching  about  the  body  and  its  members.  Show  how  nations  are  mutually 
dependent,  commercially  knd  in  their  political  relations.  Point  out  the  special 
responsibility  of  God's  people  when  they  are  associated  with  heathen  nations. 
Suggest  the  possibility  that  each  section  of  Christ's  Church  may  be  doing  its  own 
appointed  service,  though  all  must  feel  that  they  are  mutually  dependent  if  the 
prayer  of  our  Lord  is  to  be  fulfilled  (John  xvii.  21).  Apply  the  principle  to  the 
association  of  Christians  in  Church  fellowship,  in  evangelistic  enterprize,  in  reli- 
gious worship,  &o.,  and  show  the  benefits  arising  to  the  individual  from,  the  fact 
that  be  is  one  of  many. 

VI.  That  each  should  lotallt  accept,  and  heartily  do,  his  own  beabe  in 
BuiLDiNa  THE  TEMPLE  OF  THE  LoBD.  (2  Cbron.  ii.  16.)  Christians  are  likened  to 
labourers  in  a  vineyard,  to  servants  in  a  household,  to  builders  of  a  temple  by  our 
Lord  and  His  apostles.  In  none  of  these  spheres  of  activity  is  the  work  of  all  the 
servants  alike  in  its  publicity,  in  its  honour,  in  its  immediate  effects,  in  its  pleasant- 
ness, &o.  Tet  to  every  "  good  and  faithful  servant "  the  recompense  will  come ; 
and  he  who  shaped  the  stone  in  the  quarry,  or  bore  the  burdens  for  more  distin- 
guished builders,  will,  in  the  great  day,  not  lose  bis  Fewaxd. — ^A.  B. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAFXEB  YL   1—88. 


Solomon's  temple. — The  preparations  for 
the  building  of  the  Temple  having  been 
related  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the  his- 
torian now  proceeds  to  describe  the  edifice. 
He  begins  his  narrative  with  a  precise  state- 
ment of  the  date  of  its  erection  (ver.  1); 
then  follows  (1)  a  description  of  the  shape, 
size,  and  arrangement  of  the  exterior  (vers. 
2 — 10),  and  (2)  a  detailed  account  of  its 
internal  fittings  and  adornments  (vers. 
16 — 36).  The  promise  made  to  Solomon 
during  its  erection  finds  a  place  in  vers. 
11 — 18 ;  while  the  vessels,  &o.,  used  in  the 
Temple  service  are  described  in  oh.  vii.  A 
parallel  though  briefer  account,  and  one 
differing  considerably  in  its  arrangement, 
is  found  in  2  Cbron.  iu.  iv. 

The  erection  of  this  splendid  sanctnaiy 
was  no  doubt  the  greatest  event,  both  in 
Jewish  and  Gentile  eyes,  in  the  history  of 
the  Holy  City.  It  made  Jerusalem  what  it 
had  not  been  till  then,  the  religious  capital. 
The  stronghold  of  the  Jebusites  now  be- 
eome  the  shrine  and  centre  of  the  Jewish 
system.  We  are  not  warranted,  however, 
in  believing  that  it  shaped  the  name  by 
which  the  city  was  known  to  the  Greeks, 
'ltpoao\vfiA  (Jos.,  B.  J.  6.  10)  and  'Itpbv 
SoXe/tfivoc  (Bapolemus  in  Bnseb.  Frasp.  Ev. 


ix.  84 ;  see  Stanley,  "  Jewish  Ohunh,"  ii. 
p.  193),  being  probably  mere  attempts  to 
"twist  Jerushalaim  into  a  shape  which 
should  be  intelligible  to  Greek  ears  "  (Diet. 
Bib.  i.  983). 

We  find  a  sufBoient  indication,  however, 
of  the  profound  importance  which  this 
undertaking  assumed  in  Jewish  eyes  in  the 
fact  that  four  chapters  of  our  history — and 
three  of  them  of  considerable  length — ^are 
occupied  with  an  account  of  the  materials, 
proportions,  arrangements,  and  consecration 
of  this  great  sanctuary.  To  the  historio- 
graphers of  Israel  it  seemed  meet  that  every 
measurement  of  the  holy  and  beautiful 
house  should  be  recorded  with  the  greatest 
exactness,  while  the  very  vessels  of  service, 
"  the  pots  and  the  shovels  and  the  basons," 
were  judged  worthy  of  a  place  in  the  sacred 
page. 

But  these  careful  and  detailed  dimensions 
are  not  only  proofs  of  the  tender  veneration 
with  which  the  Jew  regarded  the  Temple 
and  its  appointments;  they  are  also  (as 
Bahr  has  well  shown,  Symbolik,  i.  pp.  127, 
128)  indications  and  expressions  of  the 
belief  that  this  house,  so  "  exceeding  mag- 
nifical,"  was  for  the  Lord,  and  not  for  man. 
These  exact  measurements,  these  pteoise 
and  symboUo  numbers  all  point  to  a  plao* 
for  the  Divine  Presence ;  they  at*  **  th* 


CH.  TL  1—88.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


97 


first  reqaisite  for  every  space  and  structure 
which  has  a  higher  and  Divine  destination, 
and  they  impart  thereto  the  signature  of 
the  Divine  "  (Bahr).  Indeed  the  very  names 
templum  and  riitevos  (=a  space  measured 
off)  are  in  themselves  in  some  sort  attesta- 
tions to  the-  ancient  belief  that  the  dignity 
of  a  temple  of  the  Most  High  God  required 
that  the  length  and  breadth  and  height, 
both  of  the  whole  and  of  its  component 
parts,  should  be  carefully  recorded.  It  is 
this  consideration  explains  a  peculiarity  of 
Scripture  which  would  otherwise  cause  some 
difficoltj;  viz.,  the  detailed  and  repeated 
measorementa,  and  the  almost  rabbinical 
minuteness,  not  only  of  our  author,  but  of 
Ezekiel  and  of  the  Apocalypse.  "When  a 
"  man  with  a  measuring  reed "  (Ezek.  zl. 
3,  6 ;  Bev.  zi.  1 ;  zzi.  16)  appears  upon  the 
scene,  we  are  to  understand  at  once  that 
the  place  is  saored  ground,  and  that  we  are 
in  tbe  precincts  of  the  temple  and  shrine 
of  Jehovah. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  added  here 
that,  exact  and  detailed  as  is  the  descrip- 
tion of  this  edifice,  it  is  nevertheless  so 
partial,  and  the  account  is,  perhaps  neces- 
sarily, so  obscure  as  to  leave  us  in  consider- 
able doubt  as  to  what  Solomon's  Temple 
was  really  like.    In  fact,  though  "more  has 
been  written  regarding  the  temple  at  Jem- 
salem  than  in  respect  to  any  other  building 
in    the    known    world"    (Fergusson),    the 
authorities  are  not  agreed  as  to  its  broad 
features,  whUe  as  to  matters  of  detail  they 
are  hopelessly  divided.     On  one  point,  in- 
deed, until   recently,  there  was  a  pretty 
general  agreement,  viz.,  that  the  house  was 
"rectilinear  and  of  box-form."    But  it  is 
now  contended  that  this  primary  and  funda- 
mental conception  of  its  shape  is  entirely 
at  fault,  and  that  its  sloping  or  ridged  roof 
would  give  it  a  resemblance  to  the  ark  or  to 
a  tent.  Nor  have  we  the  materials  to  decide 
between  these  conflicting  views;    in  fact, 
nothing  perhaps  but  drawings  would  enable 
OB  to  restore  the  temple  with  any  approach 
tc  accuracy.    "It  is  just  as  easy  to  pour- 
tray  a  living  man  from  a  tolerably  well- 
preserved  skeleton  as  to  reproduce  a  building 
in  a  way  which  shall  correspond  with  reality 
when  we  have  only  a  few  uncertain  remains 
of  its  style  of  architecture  in  our  posses- 
1   KINCn. 


sion  "  (Romberg  and  Steger,  quoted  in  Bahr, 
"  Bibelwerk,"  p.  49).  And  the  difficulty  ii 
enhanced  by  the  fact  that  the  temple  was 
tui  generis.  It  was  purely  Jewish,  so  that 
no  information  as  to  its  structure  and 
arrangements  can  be  derived  from  the  con. 
temporary  architecture  of  Egyptians  or 
Assyrians.  In  the  absence  of  all  inalogiea 
restoration  is  hopeless.  It  is  weU  known 
that  all  the  many  and  varied  representations 
of  different  artists,  based  though  they  all 
were  on  the  Scripture  account  (Exod.  zzv. 
31 — 37)  of  the  seven-branched  candlestick, 
were  found  to  be  exceedingly  unUke  the 
original,  when  the  true  shape  of  that 
original  was  disclosed  to  the  world  on  the 
Arch  of  Titus.  It  is  equally  certain  that, 
were  a  true  representation  of  the  temple 
ever  to  be  placed  in  our  hands,  we  should 
find  that  it  differed  just  as  widely  from  all 
attempted  "  restorations "  of  the  edifice, 
based  on  the  scanty  and  impci  feet  notices 
of  our  hititorian  and  Ezekiel. 

The  mention  of  Ezekiel  suggests  a  brief 
reference  to  the  temple,  which  he  describes 
with  so  much  precision  and  fulness  in  his 
fortieth  and  following  chapters.  What  is 
its  bearing  on  the  description  we  have  now 
to  consider  f  Is  it  an  account  of  the  temple 
as  it  actually  ekisted  in  or  before  his  time ; 
is  it  a  plan  or  suggestion  for  its  restoration 
(Grotius),  or  is  it  wholly  ideal  and  ima- 
ginary? The  first  view,  which  long  found 
favour  with  commentators,  and  which  hag 
still  some  advocates,  is  now  pretty  generally 
abandoned.  For  while  many  of  Ezekiel'a 
measurements,  &o.,  correspond  exactly  with 
those  of  our  historian,  and  while  it  may  be 
conceded,  therefore,  that  this  delineation 
has  a  historical  basis,  there  are  featm-ea  in 
tbe  narrative  which  can  never  have  been 
reahzed  in  any  building,  and  which  prove 
the  account  to  be  more  or  less  ideal.  For 
example.  The  outer  court  of  his  temple 
(Ezek.  xlii.  16 — 20)  would  cover  not  only 
the  whole  of  Mount  Moriah,  but  more  than 
the  whole  space  occupied  by  the  entire  city 
of  Jerusalem.  He  speaks  again  of  ' '  waters 
issuing  out  from  under  the  threshold" 
(ch.  xlvii.  1),  and  flowing  down  eastward 
to  heal  the  pestilent  waters  of  the  Dead 
Sea,  where  a  literal  interpretation  is  mani. 
festly  impossible.    And  it  is  to  be  remein< 


9» 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  TI.  1 — 8& 


bered  that  the  prophet  himself  speaks  of 
his  temple  as  seen  in  vision  (ch.  xl.  2 ;  xliii. 
3,  8).  The  true  account  of  this  portraiture 
would  therefore  seem  to  be  that,  while  it 
borrowed  largely  from  the  plan  and  propor- 
tions of  Solomon's  Temple,  it  was  designed 
to  serve  as  "  the  beau  ideal  of  what  a  Se- 
mitic temple  should  be  "  (Fergusson,  Diet. 
Bib.  iii.  p.  1460.  In  a  paper  in  the  "  Contem- 
porary Eeview,"  vol.  xxvii.  p.  978,  FerguB- 
son  adopts  the  idea  that  it  was  designed  to 
serve  as  a  basis  foi  the  future  restoration  of 
the  temple.) 

Two  other  authorities,  whose  accounts 
have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  sacred  narra- 
tive, must  be  mentioned  here — Josephus  and 
the  Talmudio  tract  on  the  temple,  called 
Middoth  (i.e.,  measures).  Unfortunately, 
neither  is  of  much  avail  for  the  illustration 
of  the  text  we  have  now  to  consider. 
Josephus,  too  often  unreliable,  would  seem 
to  be  especially  so  here.  "  Templum  aedifi- 
cat,"  says  Clerions,  "  quale  animo  conceperat 
turn  quale  legerat  a  Salomone  conditum." 
"Inconsistency,  inaccuracy,  and  exaggera- 
tion are  plainly  discoverable  in  the  measure- 
ments given  by  Josephus"  (Conder," Hand- 
book to  Bible,"  p.  368).  ,  "  Wherever  the 
Misbna  is  not  in  accord  with  Josephus  the 
measurements  of  the  latter  are  untrust- 
worthy "  (ib.  p.  369).  The  writers  of  the 
Mishna,  again,  refer  generally,  as  might 
be  expected,  to  the  temple  of  Herod, 
or  confuse  in  their  accounts  the  three 
temples  of  Solomon,  Herod,  and  Ezekiel 
(Bahr).  The  student  of  temple  aiohi- 
tecture  consequently  derives  but  fcant 
assistance  in  his  work  from  the  writings  of 
uninspired  historians. 

Perhaps  this  is  the  proper  place  to  remark 
on  the  close  correspondence  between  temple 
and  tabernacle.  (See  Fergusson,  Diet.  Bib. 
iii.  p.  1455).  In  the  first  place,  in  plan  and 
arrangement  the  two  structures  were  identi- 
cal. Each  faced  the  east ;  each  had  three 
parts,  viz.,  porch,  holy  place,  and  holy  of 
holies,  while  the  side  chambers  of  the  temple 
(ver.  5)  were  analogous  to  the  verandah 
formed  by  the  projecting  roof,  or  curtains, 
which  ran  round  three  sides  of  the  taber- 
nacle. Secondly,  the  measurements  both  of 
the  whole  edifice  and  of  its  component  parts 


were  exactly  double  those  of  the  tabemaelt^ 
as  the  following  table  will  show : — 

Tabebnacle.    Teuplb. 
cubits,  cubits. 

EDtiT«  length 40 80 

,,     width   20 40 

„     height 15 30 

Length  of  Holy  Place..  20 40 

Width 10 20 

Height 10 20 

Length  of  Holy  of  Holies,  10 20 

Width  10 20 

Height 10 20 

Width  of  Porch 10 20 

Depth  5 10 

The  only  exception  to  this  rule  is  that  of 
the  side  chambers,  which  (on  the  lowest 
story)  were  but  five  cubits  wide,  i.e.,  they 
were  identical  in  vridth  with  the  verandah. 
It  is  held  by  some,  however,  that  with  the 
enclosing  walls,  they  were  ten  cubits.  If 
this  were  so,  it  follows  that  here  again  the 
same  proportions  are  exactly  preserved. 

It  will  be  clear  from  this  comparison  that 
the  temple  was  constructed,  not  after  any 
Egyptian  or  Assyrian  model,  but  that  it 
preserved  the  features  and  arrangement  of 
the  consecrated  structure,  the  pattern  of 
which  was  showed  to  Moses  in  the  Mount 
(Bxod.  XXV.  9,  40 ;  ef.  Acts  vii.  44 ;  Heb. 
viii.  5),  so  that  when  "  David  gave  to  Solo- 
mon his  son  the  pattern  of  the  porch,"  &e., 
"  and  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the 
spirit "  (1  Chron.  xxvui.  11,  12),  the  same 
arrangement  and  similar  proportions  were 
consciously  or  unconsciously  preserved. 
The  temple  differed  from  the  tabernacle 
only  so  far  as  a  large  house  necessarily 
differs  from  a  small  tent. 

It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  every 
dimension  of  the  temple  was  either  ten 
cubits — the  holy  of  holies  was  a  cube  of  ten 
cubits — or  a  multiple  of  ten,  just  as  the 
dimensions  of  the  tabernacle  are  either  five 
cubits  or  multiples  of  five.  Now  this  deci- 
mal arrangement  can  hardly  have  been 
accidental.  Not  only  had  the  Jews  ten 
fingers,  but  they  had  ten  commandments, 
and  a  system  of  tenths  or  tithes,  and  this 
number,  therefore,  was  to  them,  no  doubt, 
the  symbol  of  completeness  ("Symbol  da 
Vollendung  und  Vollkommenlieit."     Bibi, 


1—88.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


99 


Symbolik,  i.  p.  175),  just  as  fire  was  the 
sign  of  imperieotion  (ib.  pp.  183 — 187).  The 
very  dimensions,  consequently,  of  the  house 
are  a  testimony  to  the  perfections  of  the 
Being  to  whose  service  it  was  dedicated. 

Nor  is  the  recurrence  of  the  nuiuber  three, 
though  by  no  means  so  marked,  to  be  alto- 
gether overlooked.  Considering  its  Divine 
original — that  it  was  made  after  the  pattern 
of  things  in  the  heavens — it  is  not  wholly 
unworthy  of  notice  that  the  building  "  had 
three  compartments.  .  .  .  Each  of  the  three 
sides  was  flanked  by  an  aisle  formed  of 
three  stories,  and  the  holy  of  hoUes  was  of 
three  equal  dimensions  "  (Wordsworth).  And 
if  we  cannot  follow  him  further  and  see  any 
significance  in  the  fact  that  the  "length 
WM  3  X  30  cubits,  and  the  height  3  x  10," 
we  may  still  remember  that  this  house  was 
built,  though  Solomon  knew  it  not,  to  the 
glory  of  the  Triune  God.  Bahr,  however, 
who  also  shows  at  some  length  how  "  the 
nnmber  three  is  everywhere  conspicuous  in 
the  building  "  (p.  61),  accounts  for  it  on  the 
ground  that  "three  is  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment the  signature  of  every  true  and  com- 
plete unit"  {Wai  drei  Mai  geschieht  ist  dot 
reehte  Einmal ;  tea*  tn  drei  getheilt  ist  itt 
eitu  wakre  Einheit),  so  that  practically 
three  would  signify  here  much  the  same  as 
ten — it  would  stand  as  "  the  signature  of 
the  perfect  nnit,  and  ao  also  of  the  Divine 
Being." 

One  remark  more  may  be  made  here,  viz., 
that  in  the  temple  or  tabernacle  we  have 
the  archetype  of  the  Christian  Church.  The 
oorrespondenoe  is  so  obvious  as  to  strike  the 
most  oaanal  observer.  Porch,  or  steeple, 
nave,  ehancel,  altar,  side  aisles,  these  have 
succeeded  to,  as  they  were  suggested  by, 
porch,  temple  of  the  house,  oracle,  mercy 
seat,  side 'structure,  of  the  Jewish  sanctuary. 
Just  as  Christianity  is  built  on  the  founda- 
tions of  Judaism  (see  Homiletics),  so  has 
the  Jewish  temple  furnished  a  model  for 
the  Christian;  for,  considering  how  closely 
the  early  Church  fashioned  itself  after  the 
pattern  of  Judaism,  the  resemblance  can 
hardly  be  accidental. 

Yer.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass  In  the  four 
hundred  and  eightieth  year  after  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  were  come  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt  [Tbii  date  has  been  the  subject  of 


much  controversy,  which  cannot  even  now 
be  considered  {pace  Keil :  "  The  correctnesg 
of  the  number  480  is  now  pretty  generally 
admitted")  as  closed.  Grave  doubts  are 
entertained  as  to  its  genuineness.  Lord  A. 
Hervey  (Diet.  Bib.  vol.  ii.  p.  22)  says  it  is 
"  manifestly  erroneous."  Eawlinson  con- 
siders  it  to  be  "  an  interpolation  into  the 
sacred  text"  (p.  616).  And  it  is  to  be  ob- 
served, 1.  that  the  LXX.  reads  440  instead 
of  480  years — a  discrepancy  which  is  sus- 
picious, and  argues  some  amount  of  incer- 
titude. 2^  Origen  quotes  this  verse  without 
these  words  (Comm.  in  S.  Johann  ii.  20). 

3.  They  would  seem  to  have  been  un- 
known to  Josephus,  Clem.  Alex.,  and  others. 

4.  It  is  not  the  manner  of  Old  Testament 
writers  thus  to  date  events  from  an  era,  an 
idea  which  appears  to  have  first  occurred  to 
the  Greeks  temp.  Thucydides  (Bawlinson). 
It  is  admitted  that  we  have  no  other  in- 
stance in  the  Old  Testament  where  this  ii 
done.  6.  It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  this 
statement  with  other  chronological  notices 
both  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  For 
taking  the  numbers  which  we  find  in  the 
Hebrew  test  of  the  books  which  refer  to 
this  period,  they  sum  np  to  considerably 
more  than  480  years.  The  time  of  the 
Judges  alone  comprises  410  years  at  the 
least.,  It  should  be  stated,  however,  with 
regard  to  the  chronology  of  the  period  hut 
mentioned  (1)  that  it  only  pretends  to  tat' 
nish  round  numbers — 20,  40,  and  the  like— 
and  evidently  does  not  aim  at  exactitude; 
(2)  that  there  is  good  ground  for  suspecting 
that  the  periods  are  not  always  consecutive; 
that  in  some  cases,  i.e.,  they  overlap.  We 
are  not  justified,  therefore,  because  of  the 
dates  of  the  Judges  in  rejecting  this  state- 
ment. The  question  of  New  Testament 
chronology  is  somewhat  more  eomplicated. 
In  Acts  xiii.  20,  St.  Paul  states  the  period 
between  the  division  of  Canaan,  by  Joshua 
(Josh.  xiv.  1,  2),  and  the  time  of  Samuel 
the  prophet  as  450  years  (roi  furi  raira  <!if 
Ireai  TirpaKoaioiq  Kai  mvr^KOVTaiSotKev  Kpirig 
K.T.\.)  But  Lachmann,  on  the  authority 
of  A,  B,  C  (and  we  may  add  K),  considers  the 
received  text  to  be  corrupt,  and  would  place 
leal  ftcri  ravra  after  vevrtiKOvra,  Alford, 
however,  treats  this  reading  as  "  an  attempt 
at  correcting  the  difficult  chronology  of  the 
verse,"  and  says  that  "all  attempts  to  re- 
concile "  it  with  1  Kings  vL  1  "  are  arbitrary 
and  forced."  If,  then,  the  received  text  ia 
to  stand — and  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the 
reigns  of  the  Judges,  including  Samuel, 
sum  up  exactly  to  the  period  mentioned  by 
St.  Paul,  450  years— the  interval  between 
the  Exodus  and  the  erection  of  the  temple 
cannot  well  have  been  less  than  99  or  100 
years  longer,  >.«.,  680 — Josephoi  makes  it 


100 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  VI.  1—881 


692— instead  of  480  yean.  6.  The  chrono- 
logy of  Josephus  —  to  which  by  itself, 
perhaps,  no  great  weight  is  to  be  attached, 
agrees  with  St.  Paul's  estimate,  and  of 
ooorse  contradicts  that  of  the  text.  7.  Nor 
does  it  seem  to  be  a  valid  argument  for  the 
retention  of  the  suspected  words,  that  "  the 
precision  of  the  statement  is  a  voucher  for 
its  accuracy."  (Bahr,  who  adds,  ' '  Not  only 
is  the  whole  number  of  the  years  given,  but 
also  the  year  of  the  reign  of  the  king,  and 
even  the  month  itself,"  for  the  genuineness 
of  the  later  date,  "  In  the  fourth  year,"  &o., 
ii  not  questioned.)  The  remark  of  Keil 
that  the  building  of  the  temple  marked  a 
new  and  important  epoch  in  the  history  of 
the  chosen  people,  and  so  justified  an  ex- 
ceptional reference  to  the  birth  or  emanci- 
pation of  the  nation,  though  undoubtedly 
true,  will  hardly  avail  much  against  the 
considerations  alleged  above.  On  the  whole, 
therefore,  I  confess  to  the  belief  that  these 
irords  are  the  interpolation  of  a  later  hand 
(of  which  we  shall  find  traces  elsewhere), 
though  it  would,  perhaps,  be  premature, 
with  only  the  evidence  now  before  us,  to 
exclude  them  from  the  text.  It  is  certainly 
noteworthy  that  such  destructive  critics  as 
Ewald  and  Thenius  are  satisfied  as  to  their 
genuineness] ,  In  the  fourth  year  of  Solo- 
mon's reign  over  Israel  [according  to  the 
chronology  of  Usshor,  this  was  a.m.  3000] , 
In  tbe  month  ZIf  [i.e.,  May.  The  word  sig- 
nifies splendour.  The  month  was  pro- 
bably BO  called  because  of  the  brilliancy  of 
its  flowers  (Gesen.,  Eeil,  al.)] ,  which  Is  the 
■econd  month  [This  explanation  is  added 
because  before  the  captivity  the  months 
(with  the  exception  of  Ahih)  appear  to  have 
had  no  regular  names,  but  were  almost 
always  designated  by  numbers.  (See,  e.g., 
Qen.  vii.  11 ;  2  Kings  xxv.  1).  Only  four 
pre-oaptivity  names  are  recorded,  and  of 
these  three  are  mentioned  in  connexion  with 
the  building  of  the  temple,  viz.,  Zif  here 
and  in  ver.  37,  Bui  in  ver.  38,  and  Ethanim 
in  ch.  viii.  2.  It  has  hence  been  inferred 
that  these  names  were  not  in  general  use, 
but  were  restricted  to  public  documents, 
4o.  pict.  Bib.  ii.  416),  a  supposition  which, 
if  correct,  would  account  for  the  facility 
with  which  the  old  appellations  were  super- 
seded by  post-oaptivity  names.  The  later 
name  for  this  month  was  lyar  (Targum  on 
2  Chron.  xxx.  2)] ,  that  he  began  [not  in 
Heb.]  to  build  the  house  of  [Heb.  to]  the 
Lord.  [The  chronicler  mentions  the'  site 
(2  Chron.  iii.  1),  "In  Mount  Moriah,  .  .  . 
in  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman,"  &o.  We 
know  from  the  extensive  foundations  yet 
remaining  that  the  preparation  of  the  plat- 
form on  which  the  temple  should  stand 
moit  have  been  a  work  of  considerable  time 


and  labour,  and  see  Jos.,  Ant.  ^ii.  8.  9,  and 
Bell.  Jud.  V.  5.  1.  We  can  hardly  be  wrong 
in  identifying  the  remarkable  rook  known  as 
the  Sakrdh,  over  which  the  mosque  of  Omar 
{Kubbet-es-Sakrdh)  is  built — the  "  pierced 
rock  "  of  the  Jerusalem  Itinerary — ^with  the 
threshing-floor  of  Oman.  The  reader  will 
find  an  interesting  paper  on  the  site  of  the 
temple  in  "  Scribner's  Monthly,"  vol.  xi. 
pp.  257—272.  According  to  Mr.  Beswick, 
whose  measurements  and  conclusions  it 
gives,  the  porch  stood  on  the  Sakrdh.  Mr. 
Conder,  however,  urges  strong  reasons 
("Tent  Work,"  pp.  187—9)  for  placing  the 
Holy  of  Holies  on  the  rock.  We  should 
then  "  see  the  Holy  House  in  its  natural 
and  traditional  position  on  the  top  of  the 
mountain ;  we  see  the  courts  descending  on 
either  side,  according  to  the  present  slopes 
of  the  hill ;  we  find  the  great  rock  galleries 
dropping  naturally  into  their  right  places ; 
and  finally,  we  see  the  temple,  by  the  im- 
mutability of  Oriental  custom,  still  a  temple, 
and  the  site  of  the  great  altar  still  conse- 
crated [?]  by  the  beautiful  little  chapel  of 
the  chain."  But  see  Porter  i.  p.  125:  Pal. 
Explor.  p.  4,  a  JO  pp.  342,  843;  "  Our  Work 
in  Palestine,"  chs.  viii.  and  ix. ;  "Eecovery 
of  Jerusalem,"  oh,  xii.,  &o.  Quot  viatores, 
tot  sentential.'] 

Ver.  2.— And  the  house   [f.«.,  not  the 

whole  structure,  but  the  main  building,  ex- 
clusive of  porch  (ver.  3)  and  side  chambers 
(ver.  5)]  which  king  Solomon  built  for  the 
Lord,  the  length  thereof  was  threescore 
cubits  [But  what  was  the  length  of  the 
cubit  ?  (haX)  This  unfortunately  is  by  no 
means  certain,  as  the  Jews  would  seem  to 
have  had  three  different  cubits.  All  the 
ancient  measures,  both  Jewish  and  Gentile, 
were  taken  from  parts  of  the  body.  Thus 
we  find  a  "finger-breadth"  (Jer.  Iii.  21), 
"  hand-breadth"  (1  Kings  vii.  26),  "span" 
(1  Sam.  xvii.  24),  and  the  Greeks  had  their 
SaKTvXoc  TToie  and  wijxuc,  and  the  Bomans 
thwr  cubitus,  pes,  digitus,  &e,  nOJ5  is  used 
in  its  proper  sense  {ulna)  Deuteronomy  iii.  11. 
Probably  at  first  it  signified,  like  vrjxue,  the 
length  from  point  of  elbow  to  tip  of  little  or 
middle  finger.  But  it  is  obvious  that  this  was 
an  uncertain  measure,  and  hence  perhaps 
arose  cubits  of  different  length.  According  to 
Gesen.  the  cubit  here  mentioned,  which  was 
the  older  or  sacred  Mosaic  cubit  (2  Chron. 
iii.  3),  was  six  palms,  while  that  of  Ezekiel 
(Ezek.  xl.  5  ;  xliii.  IB),  the  royal  Babylonian 
cubit,  was  seven,  but  on  this  as  well  as 
other  points  the  authorities  are  very  far 
from  agreed.  "  The  length  of  the  cubit  is 
one  of  the  most  knotty  points  of  Hebrew 
archaeology"  (Diet.  Bib.  iii.  p.  1736).  Thers 
is  a  general  consensus  of  opinion,  however. 


OB.  TI.  1—88.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  EINQB. 


IM 


in  faTonr  of  nnderstanding  the  cubit  here 
mentioned  as  measuring  18  inches.  Fer- 
gnsson  (Diet.  Bib.  iii.  1451)  considers  this  to 
be  beyond  question.  It  is  certainly  note- 
worthy that  the  measurementB  of  Eings  and 
Chronicles,  of  Ezra  and  Ezekiel,  of  Jose- 
phus  and  the  Talmud,  all  agree,  and  we 
know  that  Josephus  always  uses  the  Greek 
cubit  of  18  inches.  Mr.  Conder,  however, 
maintains  that  the  Hebrew  cubit  amounts 
to  no  more  than  sixteen  inches.  He  says, 
"  Maimonides  tells  us  that  the  temple  cubit 
was  of  48  barleycorns,  and  any  one  who  will 
take  the  trouble  to  measure  barleycorns,  will 
find  that  three  go  to  the  inch  " — ^whioh  gives 
16  inches  for  the  cubit.  To  this  argument, 
which  is  not  perhaps  of  much  weight,  he 
adds,  what  is  of  much  greater  moment, 
that  "the  Galilean  synagogues,  measured 
by  it,  give  round  numbers  "  (pp.  187 — 8)] 
and  the  breadth  thereof  twenty  cubits, 
and  the  height  thereof  thirty  cubits.  [It 
tiius  appears  that  the  temple  was  but  a 
small — compared  with  many  churches,  a 
very  small — ^building.  But  its  purpose  and 
object  must  be  considered.  It  was  not  for 
assembUes  of  the  people.  The  congregation 
never  met  within  it,  but  the  worship  was 
offered  towards  it.  It  was  a  place  for  the 
Holy  Presence,  and  for  the  priests  who 
ministered  before  it.] 

Ver.  3.— And  the  porch  [D>1K,  forepart, 
projection  {Vorhalle,  Gesenius).  The  porch 
was  not  a  colonnade — that  is  called  a 
"porch  of  pillars"  (oh.  vii.  6),  but  was  formed 
by  simply  prolonging  the  side  walls,  and 
possibly  the  roof  (see  below).  Bahr  holds 
that  it  had  only  side  walls  and  cieling,  and 
was  entirely  open  in  front ;  and  the  fact  that 
no  mention  is  made  of  any  door  or  opening, 
though  the  doors  of  the  other  parts  of  the 
edifice  are  all  referred  to  (vers.  8,  81,  33), 
certainly  favours  this  view,  as  also  does  the 
position  of  the  pillars  of  ch.  vii.  21]  before 
the  temple  of  the  house  [The  house,  or  main 
building  (ver.  2),  had  two  parts.    (1)  "The 

temple  of  the  house"  (73'in  =  " spacious," 

hence  "magnificent  building,"  "palace,"  as 
inProv.  XXX.  28;  Dan.  i.  4.  Gesen.,  Thes. 
i.  375).  The  same  word  is  used  of  the  taber- 
nacle (1  Sam.  i.  9),  of  the  royal  palace  (1 
Kings  xxi.  1 ;  2  Kings  xx.  18 ;  Psa.  xlv.  8, 15), 
and  of  heaven  (2  Sam.  xxii.  7,  &o.)  This  was 
the  vabe  i'"''  excellence,  and  is  called  "  the 
great  bouse,"  because  of  its  superior  size  and 
height,  in  2  Chr.  iii.  5.  (2)  Tlie  oracle  (T??) 
see  on  ver.  5.  The  two  bore  a  rough  resem- 
blance to  the  nave  and  chancel  of  a  Gothic 
church],  twenty  cubits  was  the  length 
thereof  according  to  the  breadth  of  the 
bouse  [The  p<^rch,  i.e.,  extended  across  the 


entire  front,  or  east  end  of  the  temple]  and 
ten  cubits  was  the  breadth  [i.e.,  deptKi 
thereof  before  the  house.  [The  height  ol 
the  porch,  of  which  no  mention  is  made 
here,  is  stated  in  2  Chron.  iii.  4  as  120 
cubits  (say  180  feet),  but  there  is  surely 
some  mistake  in  the  figures.  For  (1)  This 
is  "  unUke  anything  we  know  of  in  ancient 
architecture  "  (Fergusson).  (2).  A  porch  of 
such  dimensions  would  surely  have  been 

called  ^JJD  not  D^IN  (TheniuB,Keil).  (3)  It 
is  doubtful  whether  an  erection  of  so  great 
a  height,  with  such  a  slender  basis,  would 
stand.  It  would  certainly  be  out  of  all  pro- 
portion. Towers  are  generally  built  about 
three  times  the  height  of  the  adjoining  nave, 
but  this  would  be  six  times  as  high,  and 
moreover  the  porch  did  not  taper  to  a  point 
like  a  Gothic  spire.  It  is  much  more 
probable,  therefore,  that  there  is  a  corrup- 
tion of  the  text  of  Chronicles  (see  on  2  Chron. 
iii.  4) — errors  in  numbers  are  by  no  means 
infrequent — than  that  such  a  column  could 
be  erected  to  serve  as  a  porch,  or  if  erected^ 
and  this  consideration  appears  to  me  to  be 
decisive — could  have  been  passed  over  by 
onr  author  without  notice.  It  is  im  possible, 
however,  to  say  positively  what  the  height 
of  the  porch  was.  Probably  30  cubits,  the 
height  of  the  house.  Stanley  character- 
istically puts  it  down  as  "  more  than  200 
feet."  It  may  be  remarked  here  that  Fer- 
gusson, following  Josephus  and  the  Talmud, 
contends  that  the  temple  had  another  build- 
ing of  the  same  height  above  it  See  Diet. 
Bib.  iii.  p.  1456,  and  note  on  Ver.  20.] 

Ver.  4. — And  for  the  house  he  made  win- 
dows of  narrow  lights.  [There  has  been 
much  disputation  over  these  words.  The 
older  expositors  generally  follow  (as  does 
the  marg.)  the  Chaldee  and  Babbins: "  win- 
dows broad  within  and  narrow  without ;  " 
windowri,  i.e„  somewhat  like  the  loopholes 
of  ancient  castles.  The  windows  of  the 
temple  would  then  have  resembled  those  of 
Egyptian  sacred  buildings.  (It  is  not  im- 
plied that  there  was  any  conscious  imitation 
of  Egypt,  though  Fergusson  surely  forgp'i 
the  affinity  with  Pharaoh  (ch.  iii.  l),the  trade 
with  Egypt  (oh.  x.  28),  and  the  favour  with 
which  some  Egyptian  fashions  were  re- 
garded (Cant.  i.  9),  when  he  contends  that 
the  chosen  people  would  nevor  take  the 
buildings  of  their  ancestral  enemy  for  a 
model.)  But  this  meaning  is  not  supported 
by  the  original  (D^DDS  D'Si^a*),  the  Uteral 
interpretation  of  which  is  "closed  beams" 
(cf.  chap.  vii.  4,  5),  and  which  the  most 
competent  scholars  now  understand  to  mean 
"  closed  or  fixed  lattices,  i.e.,  itie  lattices  ot 
the  temple  windows  were  not  movable,  al 
in  domestic  arohiteotore  (3  Kings  i.  2 ;  zili. 


loa 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  VI.  1— sa 


17  ;  Dan.  vl.  10).  So  Gesenins,  De  Wette, 
Keil,  Bahr,  al.]  , 

Ver.  5. — And  against  [or  upon,  73? ;  they 
rested  on  the  wall]  the  wall  of  the  house 
[here  meaning  both  temple  and  oracle  :  see 
below]  he  built  chambers  [Marg.  floors. 
The  Grig,  is  Jf-IV;  (Keri,  ys;)  singular= 
etratum  {VSl  ttravit,  spread  out).  Symm. 
translates  Karaarpioiia.  Geaenius  remarks 
that  the  word  is  used  here  and  in  ver.  10  ill 
the  masculine  oiihe whole oi  the  side  struo- 
ture,  while  in  ver.  6  it  is  used  in  the  femi- 
mine  of  the  single  stories.  The  floors  bore 
this  name,  V-1XJ,  because  they  were  spread 
upon,  not  inserted  into  the  walls.  Eawlinson 
has  evidently  confounded  this  word  with 

V7V  (see  below)  when  he  says,  "  The 
Hebrew  word  here  used  would  be  best  trans- 
lated a  lean-to."  Both  words  are  translated 
alike  ' '  chambers  "  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, but  the  first  means  stories  or  floors; 
the  second  may,  perhaps,  signify  lean-tosl 
round  about,  against  [It  is  doubtfal 
whether  ntjis  here,  as  commonly, merely  the 
sign  of  the  accusative,  or  is  the  preposition 
"with,"  meaning  "in  connexion  with,"  cum 
parietibus  (Seb.  Schmidt),  in  which  case  its 
meaning  would   approach  very  closely  to 

that  of  ?y  above.  Biihr  remarks  that  7^  and 
DK  are  used  elsewhere  as  almost  synony- 
mous, and  refers  to  Psa.  iv.  7  in  connexion 
with  Psa.  Ixvii.  2.  Keil  translates,  "  As  for 
the  walls "  {Anlangend  die  Wdnde),  but 
this  gives  us  an  unfinished  sentence.  It  is 
probably  an  accusative,  explicative  of  the 
preceding  clause  =  "  I  mean  the  walls,"  &a., 
the  singular,  wall,  having  being  used  above. 
This  additional  clause]  the  walls  of  the 
house  round  about  [would  then  mean  that 
the  term  "house"  is  to  be  understood  as 
including  both  temple  and  oracle  (and  ex- 
cluding porch),  as  the  next  words  define  it], 
both  of  the  temple  and  of  the  oracle  [The 
floors,  i.e.,  ran  round  the  south,  west,  and 
north  sides  of  the  building.  Stanley  aptly 
compares  them  to  the  little  shops  which 
nestle  nnder  the  continental  cathedrals; 
though  the  side  aisles  of  some  Gothic 
churches,  viewed  externally,  would  perhaps 
better  represent  their  proportions]  and  he 

made  ebambers  [nW7Vi  literally,  ribs, 
beams,  (Gesenius) ;  Bippen  (Biihr).  The  de- 
sign of  the  word  is  clearly  to  convey  that 
the  floors  were  "  divided  by  partitions  into 
distinct  compartments  "  (Merz).  According 
to  Ezek.  xli.  6  (where,  however,  the  reading  is 
doubtful)  there  were  tliirty-three  of  these  side 
ehambers;  according  to  Josepbus  (Ant.  viii. 
B,  2)  thirty.  Tlieniiis  is  probably  not  so  far 
Wrong  when  he  sees  in  these  chambers  bed- 


rooms. A  sort  of  monastery  would  seem  to 
have  been  attached  to  the  temple.  So  many 
chambers  could  hardly  have  been  required 
for  the  "  preservation  of  temple  stores  and 
utensils"  (Keil),  op  of  offerings  (Ewald). 
Whatever  their  use,  we  can  hardly  suppose 
that  they  were  wholly  without  light,  though 
nothing  is  said  about  windows.  They  may 
have  had  "  fixed  lattices."  It  is  to  be  re- 
membered that  the  priests  and  Levites  min- 
istered "  by  night  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  " 
(Psa.  cxxxiv.  1)]  round  about. 

Ver.  6. — The  nethermost  chamber  [Heb. 
floor;  of.  Ezek.  xli.  6]  was  Ave  cubits 
broad  [It  must  be  remembered  that  all 
the  measurements  are  those  of  the  interior], 
and  the  middle  was  six  cubits  broad,  and 
the  third  was  seven  cubits  broad  :  for  [Ex- 
planation how  these  differences  of  size 
arose]  without  [i.e.,  on  the  outside]  In  tlu 


(1)  ,  (2) 

Prepared  by  Capt.  Knoolcer  BJ« 
Scale, 4-„. 

wall  of  [Heb.  omits]  the  house  [main  build- 
ing— nave,  and  chancel]  he  made  [Heb.^t] 
narrowed  rests  [marg.  "narrowings  or  re- 
batements."  The  word  niJIlJO  means  lessen- 
ings, deductions;  Absiitze,QeBeii.  (Thesaurus, 
i.  304),  Balrr.  The  outside  of  the  temple 
wall  took  the  shape  of  three  (or  four)  steps, 
and  presented  three  ledges  for  the  beams  to 
rest  upon.  See  below]  round  about  [same 
word  as  in  ver.  6.  The  recesses  in  the  wall 
ran  round  the  north,  west,  and  south  sides 
of  the  building ;  they  were  eo-extensive,  i.e. , 
with  the  flats  or  side-chambers],  that  the 
beams  should  not  be  fastened  [Heb.  that  no 
fastening]  Into  the  walls  of  the  house,  [the 
meaning  is  perfectly  clear,  viz.,  that  the 
timbers  should  not  be  let  into  the  walls, 
( "  they  had  not  hold  in  the  wall  of  the 
house,"  Ezek.  xli.  6)  ;  but  why  this  was  for- 
bidden is  not  quite  so  certain.  According  to 
Baihr,  it  was  in  order  to  preserve  the  great 
and  costly  stones  of  the  temple  intact ;  but 
others,  with  greater  probability,  hold  that  it 
was  because  it  appeared  unseemly  to  have 
the  side-chambers,  which  were  for  semi- 


CH.  VI.  1—38.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


103 


Beciilar  purposes  (ctibicles,  perlmps),  made 
nn  actunl  part  of  the  sacred  etlifioe.  Any- 
how, it  is  clear  that  the  beams  rested  on 
ledges  made  in  the  walls ;  but  whether  in  the 
temple  wall  only,  or  in  the  outer  wall  oJ 
the  side  structure  also,  is  uncertain.  The 
pieceding  sketch  will  not  only  illustrate 
the  difference,  but  will  help  the  reader  to 
understand  the  description  preceding.  In 
drawing  (1)  rebatements  are  showed  only  in 
the  temple  or  inner  wall.  In  (2)  they  are 
showed  in  both  walls.  In  (1)  the  edifice  is 
represented  with  a  flat ;  in  (2)  with  a  span 
roof. 

Eeil  decides  in  favour  of  the  first  arrange- 
'  ment  (I),  and  Bahr  says  somewhat  posi- 
tively, "  The  outer  wall  of  the  structure  had 
no  rests."  In  fact,  he  suggests  that  the 
whole  of  this  side  building  may  have  been  of 
wood.  It  must  be  admitted  that  we  do  know 
that  there  were  rebatements  in  the  wall  a, 
whereas  nothing  is  said  as  to  the  outer  wall 
B.  It  may  also  be  reasonably  alleged  that 
the  considerations  of  fitness  and  sacredness 
which  forbade  the  insertion  of  the  beams 
into  the  sanctuary  wall  would  not  apply  to 
the  outer  wall,  which  was  a  part  of  the  side 
structure  only.  Against  this  view,  how- 
ever, may  be  urged  the  extreme  thickness  of 
wall  which  this  method  of  buildmg  would 
necessitate.  For  unless  we  suppuse  that 
the  floor  of  the  ground  story  rested  on  the 
rock,  and  so  was  quite  detached  from  the 
building,  we  must  suppose  four  rebatements, 
so  that  if  the  wall  at  the  top  were  two  cubits 
wide,  it  would  be  no  less  than  six  cubits  (or 
nine  feet)  at  the  bottom.  It  is  true  that  the 
walls  of  ancient  buildings  were  of  extra- 
ordinary thickness,  but  it  must  also  be  re- 
membered that  the  temple  was  not  fifty  feei 
high.  However,  Ezek.  xli.  9  suggests  that 
the  outside  wall  (b)  may  have  been  five  cubits 
in  thickness,  and,  if  so,  the  inner  waU  would 
hardly  be  less.  Fergusson,  therefore,  has 
some  justification  for  putting  each  wall 
down  as  five  cubits  wide  ;  but  on  the  whole, 
perhaps,  the  plan  represented  in  (1)  appears 
the  more  probable. 

The  historian  here  digresses  for  a  moment 
to  speak  of  the  remarkable  and,  indeed, 
unprecedented  way  in  which  the  temple 
was  built.  The  stories  were  shaped  and 
prepared  beforehand  in  the  quarry,  so  that 
there  was  nothing  to  do  on  their  arrival 
in  the  temple  area  but  to  fit  them  into 
their  place  in  the  building.] 

Ver.  7 And  the  house,  when  It  was  In 

building,  was  built  of  stone  made  ready 
[Heb.  perfect.     This  does  not  mean  unhewn, 

though  niD^K'  Q*;?K  is  undoubtedly  used 


in  Deut.  xxvii.  6  (cf.  Exod.  xx.  25)  of  un- 
hewn or  virgin  stone ;  ai)d  Gesenius  would 
so  understand  the  expression  here.  But 
the  context  seems  rather  to  convey  the  idea 
that  the  stones  were  not  shaped  on  the 
spot.  It  was  apparently  the  belief  of  tha 
ancients  that  stones  of  proper  shape  and 
size  were  provided  in  their  bed  by  God  (so 
Theodoret  and  Frocopius.)  It  is  incon- 
ceivable, however,  that  no  dressing  or  pre- 
paration of  any  kind  would  be  required ;  an 
idea,  moreover,  which  is  contradicted  by  ch. 
V.  18.  When  Gardiner  (in  Biihr,  American 
edition)  quotes  Keil  (in  his  earlier  work)  as 
understanding  "  all  unviolated  stones  of  the 
quarry,"  he  hardly  does  justice  to  that 
author,  who  straightway  adds,  "  that  is,  not 
altogether  unhewn  stones  .  .  .  but  stones 
that  were  so  hewn  and  wrought  in  the  quarry 
that  neither  hammer,"  &c.  (see  beluw). 
Similarly  Thenius  and  Bahr]  before  It  was 
brought  thither  [so  the  Authorized  Version 
renders  TBD  but  mistakenly.  It  means,  the 
quarry  (Gesenius,  Keil.  For  the  construc- 
tion, see  Ewald,  289a,  and  Gesenius,  Gram. 
ed.  Eodiger,  p.  170.)  The  verb  rp3  is 
used  of  quarrying  in  ch.  v.  31  (Heb.)  Where 
was  this  quarry?  The  general  idea  is  that 
it  was  in  the  Lebanon.  And  it  is  not  to  be 
denied  that  some  of  the  massive  substruc- 
tions and  comer-stones  of  the  temple  may 
have  been  brought  from  the  mountain,  along 
with  the  wood ;  but  the  bulk  of  the  stone, 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  was  found  much 
nearer  home.  Some  of  it,  according  to  the 
Mishna  (Middoth,  iii.  4),  came  from  Bethle- 
hem ;  but  we  can  hardly  be  mistaken  in 
bo^eving  that  for  the  most  part  it  was 
quarried  in  Jerusalem  itself,  under  the  very 
tebjple  rock,  and  out  of  the  vast  caverns 
recovered  some  years  ago  by  Dr.  Barclay 
(see  his  "City  of  the  Great  King"),  the 
"  Eoyal  Caverns  "  of  Josephus.  See  "  Quart. 
Journal,"  Pal.  Explor.  Fund  (No.  vii.),  pp. 
373,  374,  and  of.  p.  84.  There  are  un- 
mistakable evidences  of  these  extensive 
caverns  having  served  as  a  quarry.  Not 
only  are  the  walls  cut  straight,  but  rude 
ma«.se8  are  left  here  and  there  to  support  the 
roof,  and,  what  is  still  more  convincing, 
there  arc  stones  more  or  less  cut  out  of  the 
rock,  and  incisions  are  made  where  stones 
are  to  be  quarried.  There  was  no  reason 
why  the  workmen  should  go  far  afield  for 
stone  when  they  had  it,  and  of  very  excellent 
quality,  at  their  own  doors] :  so  that  there 
was  neither  hammer  [Heb.  and  hammers. 
Keil  understands  "finished  stones  of  the 
quarry,  and  hammer,  and  axe."  But  tha 
word  "was  built"  (n323),  coming  as  it 
does  between  "quarry"  and  "hammers," 
almost   forbids  this  connexion]    nor   axf 


104 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[oh.  vl  1— fl 


[Heb.  the  axe]  nor  any  tool  [Heb.  eveiy 
tool]  of  Iron  heard  In  the  honae,  while  It 
was  huilding.  [The  liistorian  remarks  on 
this,  not  only  because  it  was  so  unusual, 
but  with  the  evident  idea  that  it  was  a  ful- 
filment of  the  spirit  of  the  law  (Deut.  xxvii. 
5,  6),  which  required  the  altar  to  be  of 
virgin  stones,  untouched  by  tool  of  iron.  If 
the  quarries  are  to  be  identified  with  the 
"Boyal  Caverns,"  it  is  easy  to  understand 
how  the  temple  rose  up  in  silence. 

Ver.  8. — After  recording  this  interesting 
ani  singular  fact,  the  historian  resumes  his 
description  of  the  side-building.  The  door 
[or  entrance,  doorway.  nnS,  as  in  ver.  31] 
for  [Heb.  of]  the  middle  chamber  [gene- 
rally understood  to  mean  "  the  middle  side 
chamber  of  the  lower  story."    But  this  it 

by  no  means  necessary,  for  (1)  vbf  may 
signify  the  suite  of  rooms,  i.e.,  the  entire 
story  or  fiat,  as  well  as  a  single  lean-to  or 
compartment,  and  (2)  illb'ijin  is  used  in  the 
next  clause  of  the  middle  story.     This  has 
led  Thenius,  Keil,  Ewald,  Bahr,  al.  to  sub- 
stitute ruhnnn   (following  the  LXX.  and 
Targum),  which  would  give  the  sense  of 
"  lower  story  "  (as  in  Bzek.  xU.  7).    Bahr 
says    this    "must    necessarily   be    read." 
That  this  emendation  has   much   in  its 
favour  must  be  allowed,  but  it  seems  also 
certain  that  we  get  a  perfectly  clear  mean- 
ing from  the  text  aa  it  stands,  viz. ,  that  "  the 
door  (leading  to)  the  middle  fioor  was  (on 
the  ground  floor)  on  the  right  side,"  &c.    It 
is  hardly  likely  that  all  the  compartments 
on  the  ground  fioor  had  only  one  approach, 
and  the  doors  which  communicated  with 
them  may  well  have  been  passed  over  as 
requiring  no  special  notice.     But  the  his- 
torian feels  it  necessary  to  state  how  the 
second  and  third  stories  were  reached,  and 
the  staircase  which  led  to  them  Louses  him 
to  speak  of  the  position  of  the  door  which 
opened  upon  it]   was  In  the  right  side 
[Heb.  shoulder.    This  word  (flDS)  almost 
implies  that  the  door  was  in  the  external 
wall  of  the  side  structure,  not  in  the  wall  of 
the  holy  place  (as  Bottoher,  al.)    The  fact 
that  the  floor-joists  were  not  inserted  into 
the  temple  walls,  as  being  inconsistent  with 
the  dignity  of  the  sanctuary,  makes  it  almost 
a  certainty  that  there  was  no  direct  com- 
munication between  the  building  and  its 
dependance.      It  is  very  improbable  that 
the  walls  of  the  house  were  anywhere  broken 
through.     The  "  right  side  "  was  the  south 
side  (chap.  vii.  39),  i.e.,  the  right,  not  as 
one  faced  the  oracle,  but,  like  the  building, 
faced  east.     What  was  the  exact  position 
of  the  door,  whether  in  the  centre,  or  at 
either  angle,  it  is  impossible  to  say]  of  tbe 


house:  and  they  went  up  with  winding 
stairs  [D^7'17  is  only  found  here  and  in 
3  Chron.  iii.  The  staircase  was  obviously 
unlike  those  of  most  Eastern  buildings, 
within  the  side  structure.  Even  if  VJaa 
outer  waU  was  five  cubits  thick,  of  which  wa 
have  no  proof,  it  is  very  doubtful  whethei 
the  staircase  would  or  could  be  constructed 
within  it]  into  [Heb.  upon]  the  mlddla 
chamber  [or  story],  and  out  of  the  middle 
Into  the  third. 

Ver.  9. — So  be  built  the  house  and 
finished  It  [i.e.,  the  exterior  (see  on  ver. 
14)]  and  covered  [i.e.,  roofed,  same  word 
Deut.  xxxiii.  21 ;  Jer.  zxii.  li ;  Hag.  i.  4 
There  is  no  reference  to  the  lining  of  cedar 
which  was  applied  to  the  interior.  That  is 
described  in  ver.  15]  the  taonse  with  beams 
and  boards  [Heb.  raws,  ranks.  The  same 
word  is  used  of  soldiers  2  Kings  xi.  8,  IS] 
of  cedar.  [It  has  been  universally  iield  till 
quite  lately  that  the  roof  was  either  vaulted 
(Thenius)  or  flat  (Bahr,  Keil).  But  Mr. 
Fergusson  has  alleged  some  reasons  for 
believing  that  it  was  a  span  or  gable  roof. 
It  is  true  that  Oriental  buUdings  almost 
invariably  have  externally  flat  (internally 
arched)  roofs.  In  Palestine,  because  of  the 
scarcity  of  timber,  no  other  form  is  possible. 
But  the  temple,  as  we  have  seen,  was  con- 
structed after  the  model  of  the  tabernacle, 
and  the  latter,  as  the  name  almost  implies, 
and  as  necessity  would  require,  had  a  ridged 
roof  (see  Diet.  Bib.  iii.  p.  1453).  It  does 
not  necessarily  follow,  however,  as  Fergus- 
son  assumes,  that  the  temple  followed  the 
tabernacle  in  this  respect.  It  is  obvious 
that  when  a  "  hovse  was  built  unto  the  name 
of  the  Lord,"  the  form  of  the  tent  might 
be  abandoned  as  inappropriate.  It  is  true 
that  this  shape  would  be  consecrated  to 
them  by  many  centuries  of  use,  but  it  is 
also  possible  that  in  a  house  it  would  strike 
them  as  altogether  bizarre.] 

Ver.  10. — ^And  then  [Heb.  omits]  he  built 
chambers  [Heb.  the  floor  (i^lVJO).  The 
word  (masculine)  is  here  again  used  of  the 
entire  side  structure]  against  all  the  house, 
five  cubits  high  [i.e.,  each  story  was  five 
cubits  (74  feet).  The  three  stories  would 
altogether  measure  fifteen  cubits,  and  of 
course  something  must  be  allowed  for  joists, 
floors,  &o.  The  entire  height  of  the  side 
structure  (exterior)  would  consequently  be 
about  18  or  20  cubits.  And  as  the  house 
was  internally  30  cubits  high,  the  exterior 
measuiement  would  probably  be  about  32 
cubits.  It  has  hence  been  inferred  that 
between  the  side  structure  and  the  top  of 
temple  wall  there  would  be  a  clear  space  of 
12  or  14  cubits,  in  which  the  windows  were 
inserted.    But  this  is  based  on  the  assump- 


OE.  VI.  1—88.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


10* 


tion  that  the  side  structure  had  a  flat  roof, 
which  is  by  no  means  certain.  If  the  roof 
leaned  against  the  walls  of  the  house,  with 
a  low  pitch,  there  would  stUI  be  space 
amply  sufficient  for  the  clerestory  windows. 
BawUnson'B  diagram  (p.  611),  which  gives 
30  cubits  as  the  height  from  basement  to 
ridge  of  roof,  and  only  allows  20  cubits  for 
height  of  walls,  practically  makes  the  house 
20  instead  of  30  cubits  high,  for  it  is  hardly 
likely  that  it  had  an  open  roof.  In  (act,  we 
know  that  it  had  a  cieling  (ver.  14),  which 
must  have  been  at  the  height  of  80  cubits 
(see  the  diagrams  on  p.  102.  In  (1)  house 
and  side  structure  are  represented  with  flat, 
in  (2)  with  ridged  or  sloping  roofs),  un- 
less there  was  an  upper  chamber  above  the 
house,  as  to  which  see  ver.  20.  Bawlinson's 
diagram  has  this  further  defect,  that  he 
allows  nothing  for  thickness  of  joists,  floors, 
and  eielings.  If  we  allow  one  cubit  for  each 
floor,  then,  on  his  plan,  there  would  be  little 
or  no  room  left  for  the  windows.  This  verse 
is  hardly  to  be  considered  as  a  repetition  of 
ver.  6,  the  side  structure  being  here  men- 
tioned in  connexion  with  its  height  and 
the  materials  used  in  its  construction]  and 
they  rested  on  [the  meaning  of  the  Heb. 
TDK^  has  been  much  disputed.  It  is  un- 
certain what  is  the  nominative,  Solomon 
(as  in  )^?1),  or  the  "floor"  (just  referred  to  in 
iDDip).  Geseuius  understands  the  former, 
and  renders,  "  he  covered  the  house,"  &e. 
TheniuB,  "  he  fastened  the  floor,"  <feo.  Keil 
adopts  the  latter  alternative,  "it  held  to  the 
house  with  cedar  beams."  It  may  be  urged 
against  this  rendering  (as  also  against 
Theuius's)  that  beams  which  merely  rested 
on  the  walls  would  hardly  bind  or  hold  the 
side  structure  to  the  main  building.  But  it 
is  almost  impossible  to  decide  between  these 
interpretations.  We  may  eiiher  render  "he 
covered,"  Ac.  (with  Chald.,  Vulg.)  in  which 
case  ver.  10  would  agree  with  ver.  9  (each, 
»,«.,  would  refer  to  the  roofing;  ver.  9  to 
roof  of  temple;  ver.  10  to  roof  of  side 
structure  and  its  stories) ;  or  we  may  take 
the  words  to  mean  "  it  laid  hold  of,  i  e., 
rested  on]  the  house  with  timber  of  cedar. 

At  this  point  the  historian  interrupts  his 
description  of  the  building  to  record  the 
grafious  promise  made  to  the  king  during 
its  erection.  It  should,  perhaps,  be  stated 
tnat  this  (vers.  11 — 14)  is  omitted  in  the 
Vat.  LXX.  But  it  has  every  mark  of  genuine. 
ness.] 

Yer.  11. — And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
to  Solomon  [probably  through  the  prophet 
Nathan.  It  cannot  well  have  been  a  dii  eot 
communication,  for  the  second  direct  revela- 
tion is  mentioned  in  chap.  iz.  2  (of.  iii.  5). 


The  original  promise  was  made  by  Nathan 
(2  Sam.  vii.  12).  It  seems  exceedingly 
probable  that  the  promise  would  be  renewed 
through  him  if  he  were  still  alive]  saying, 

Ver.  12. — ConcemtDg  [or,  a>  to.  There 
k  nothing,  however,  in  the  Hebrew]  this 
house 'Which  thou  art  In  huUdlng  [nj3. 
Cf.  |3?1,  vers.  5,  9, 10]  if  thou  wilt  walk  In 
my  statutes  [the  connexion  of  ideas  seems 
to  be  this,  "  Thou  art  doing  well  to  build 
the  house  ;  thou  art  fuUilling  my  good 
pleasure  (2  Sam.  vii.  13) ;  if  thou  wilt  go  on 
and  in  other  matters  wilt  keep,"  &a.  It  is  to 
be  observed  that  this  promise  contains  a 
faint  note  of  warning.  Possibly  Solomon 
had  already  betrayed,  some  slight  tokens  of 
declension] ,  and  execute  my  Judgments,  and 
keep  all  my  commandments  to  walk  la 
them;  then  will  I  perform  [literally,  con- 
firm. Same  word  as  in  ch.  ii.  3.  The 
"  word  of  the  Lord  "  is  the  echo  of  the  word 
of  David]  my  word  with  thee,  which  I 
spake  unto  David  thy  father  [i.e.,  the  word 
mentioned  oh.  ii.  4  and  found  2  Sam.  vii. 
12  sqq.] . 

Ver.  13.— And  I  will  dwell  amons  tb« 
dilldren  of  Israel,  and  will  not  forsake  mj 
people  Israel  [cf.  Deut.  xzxi.  6.  A  fresh 
element  is  here  introduced  into  the  promise, 
arising  out  of  the  erection  of  the  temple. 
Qod  had  pledged  His  presence  to  the  taber- 
nacle (Exod.  XXV.  8 ;  xxix.  45  ;  cf.  Levit. 
xxvi.  11).  And  the  temple  was  reared  to 
be  His  dwelling-place,  (ch.  viii.  1 3  ;  2  Chron. 
vj.  2).  He  now  assures  the  royal  builder 
that  he  will  occupy  it.  "  Jelwvah  Shanvnah  " 
(Ezek.  xlviii  35).  The  covenant  relation 
shall  be  more  firmly  established. 

Ver.  14.—  So  Solomon  built  the  honse  and 
finished  It  [though  these  words  are  a  repe- 
tition of  ver.  9,  yet  they  are  not  without 
significance.  Encouraged  by  the  promise 
just  made,  he  proceeded  with  the  interior, 
of  which  the  narrative  henceforth  treats. 
Ver.  9  speaks  of  the  finishing  of  the  shell. 

Ver  15. — And  he  built  [i.e.,  constructed, 
covered]  the  walls  of  the  house  within 
[b^t  not  without  also,  as  Stanley  affirms, 
"  Its  massive  stone  walls  were  entirely  cased 
in  cedar,  so  as  to  give  it  the  appearance  of 
a  rough  log-house  "]  with  boards  [or  beams 

(nW?V)  '■  same  word  as  in  vers.  6—8]  of 
cedar  [Heb.  cedars.  The  practice  of  cover- 
ing stone  walls  with  a  lining  of  wood,  which 
in  turn  was  ornamented  with  gold  or  colour 
(Jer.  xxii.  14),  seems  to  have  had  its  origin 
in  Phoenicia  (Bahr),  and  may  have  been 
suggested  to  Solomon  by  his  Zidonian  work- 
men (Cf.  2  Chron.  ii.  14),  both  1ho  floor  of 
the  house  and  the  walls  of  the  ciellng  [This 
gives  no  sense  and  is  against  the  Hebrew, 
which  is  as  the  marg. — "from  the  floor  ',  ,  . 


106 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  VI.  1—38. 


unto  the  walh,"  (to.    The  expression  „  walls 

01  the  deling,"  though  it  may  be  talcen  to 
mean  "  the  walls  where  they  join  the 
dehng,"  is  peculiar,  and  the  suggestion  that 
for  nil'i?  walls,  we  should  read  Jimp 
beams — the  word  of  the  parallel  verse  in 

2  Chron. — ^has  everything  in  its  favour. 
The  LXX.  reads  i&s  rHv  Iokwv]  :  ajid  [omit] 
he  covered  them  on  the  inside  with  wood 
[This  is  apparently  a  mere  repetition.  The 
A.  Y.  would  lead  qb  to  suppose  that  a  fresh 
particular  was  stated.  We  learn  from 
S  Chron.  iii.  6  that  not  only  were  the  walls, 
or  their  wooden  lining,  covered  with  plates 
of  gold,  "gold  of  Parvaim,"  but  they  were 
likewise  ornamented  with  precious  stones] , 
and  he  covered  the  floor  of  the  house  with 
planks  of  fir  [see  on  ch.  v.  8] . 

Ver.  16.— And  he  huilt  twenty  cubits  on 
[Heb. /)-om]  the  sides  of  the  house  both  the 
floor  and  the  walls  [Heb.  as  iu  ver.  15, 
"from  the  floor  to  the  walls"  (or  beams). 
If  n'n*i?  is  a  copyist's  error,  it  is  repeated 
here]  with  boards  of  cedar  [He  is  now  speak- 
ing of  the  wooden  partition  which  separated 
the  oracle  from  the  temple  of  the  house.  At 
a  distance  of  20  cubits,  measured  along  the 
sides  from  the  west  end  of  the  house,  he 
erected  a  cedar  wall  which  reached  from  the 
floor  to  the  cieling]  he  even  built  them  ]  i.e., 
the  20  cubits]  for  it  [the  house]  within 
[The  meaning  is  clear,  though  the  construc- 
tion is  somewhat  involved,  viz.,  that  he 
reared  this  partition  inside  the  house  to 
separate  a  portion  for  the  oracle]  even  for 
the  oracle  [Heb.  an  oracle]  even  for  the 
most  holy  place  [Heb.  for  the  holy  of 
holies] . 

Ver.  17. — ^And  the  house,  that  la,  the 
temple  before  it  [or,  the  anterior  temple. 
The  portion  of  the  structure  before  the 
oracle  is  sometimes  called,  as  here,  "the 
house ; "  sometimes  (as  in  ver.  5)  "  the 
temple ; "  sometimes  (as  in  ver.  4)  "  the 
temple  of  the  house ; "  or,  as  here  again, 

"  the  front  temple,"  'JS?  is  supposed  to  be 
an  adjective  formed  from  'jJQp.  Theiiius, 
however,  supposes  that  T^'?  {oracle)  has 
fallen  out  of  the  text.  Our  author  now 
describes  the  division  of  the  building  into 
holy  and  most  holy  place]  was  forty  cubits 
long. 

Ver.  18.— And  the  cedar  of  the  house 
within  [Tit.  cedar  (wood)  was  placed  against 
the  house  imide]  was  carved  with  knops 
[Heb.  sculptvre  of  gourds.  The  sculpture 
is  in  apposition  to  cedar.  The  authorities 
•re  divided  as  to  the  kind  of  sculpture  in- 
tended. Keil  thinks  they  were  hassi  relievi; 
BShi  contends  that,  Hke  those  of  the  Egyp- 
tian mouumentg,  thej-  were  sunken.   D'Vp§ 


is  generally  assumed  to  be  synonymous  with 
nj?pS  "squirting  cucumbers"  (2  Kings  iv. 
89,  note).  Bahr,  however,  justly  observes  that 
a  deadly  fruit,  such  as  this  is  described  to 
have  been,  was  hardly  likely  to  be  employed 
in  the  decoration  of  the  sanctuary,  and  he 
would  render  the  word  "  buds."  Zeil  thinks 
the  gourds  were  oval  ornaments,  something 
like  the  wild  gourd,  which  ran  in  rows  along 
the  walls.  See  the  illustration,  "  Slab  from 
Kouyunjik,"  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  p.  49]  and  open 
flowers  [lit.  burstings  of  flowers.  These 
words  again  are  very  variously  interpreted, 
Thenius:  festotns  of  flowers;  Keil:  open 
flower  buds ;  Oesen. :  expanded  flowers] : 
all  was  cedar;  there  was  no  stone  seen. 
[Eeally,  the  cedar  was  no  more  seen  than 
the  stone,  for  this  in  tnrm  was  overlaid  with 
gold  (ver.  22.)] 

Ver.  19. — And  the  oracle  [Heb.  an  oracle. 
Heb.  Ta''!  jrobably  from  13'!}  speak.  Sc 
Jerome,  oracitZum ;  and  Aquila  and  Symm, 
XPllioriOTiipiov.  Geneuius,  Bahr,  at.,  how- 
ever, interpret  the  word  to  mean  the  hinder 
part,  adytum]  he  prepared  in  the  house 
within  [fit.  in  the  midst  of  the  house  within, 
i.e.,  between  the  Huly  Place  and  the  end 
structure]  to  set  there  [the  principal  purpose 
which  the  oracle  served.  IBH  =  nFl  with  re- 
peated syllable.  Cf.  1  Kings  xvii.  14,  Keri\ 
the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  20. — And  the  oracle  in  the  forepart 
[or,  the  interior  of  the  oracle.    Keil,  after 

Eimchi,  maintains  that  ^;]&p  is  the  con- 
struct of  the  noun  D'JQ?.  See  ver.  29, 
where  it  clearly  means  interior,  as  its  oppo- 
sition to  "  without "  shows.  The  A.  V. 
yields  no  sense]  was  twenty  cubits  in  lengrth, 
and  twenty  cubits  in  breadth,  and  twenty 
cubits  in  the  height  thereof  [that  is  to  say, 
it  was  a  perfect  cube.  When  we  consider 
that  the  oracle  of  tlie  tabernacle  was  a  cube 
of  ten  cubits  and  the  Holy  City  (Rev.  xxi. 
16 ;  cf.  Ezek.  xlviii.  8—35,  especially  ver.  20) 
is  a  cube  of  12,000  furlongs,  we  cannot  but 
regard  these  measurements  as  significant. 
To  the  ancients  the  square  seemed  the  most 
appropriate  shape  to  express  the  idea  of 
moral  perfection.  The  idea  of  the  cube 
consequently  was  that  of  entire  complete- 
ness, of  absolute  perfection.  A  little  light 
is  thrown  on  this  subject  by  the  nse  of 
TCTpaymoQ  among  the  Greeks.  See  the 
quotation  from  Simonides  in  Plat.  Frotog. 
334  a;  Arist.  Ehet.  iii.  11 ;  Eth.  Nio.  i.  10, 
11,  and  compare  the  familiar  "totus  teres 
atque  rotuntlns."  The  height  of  the  oracle 
(internally)  being  only  twenty  cubits,  while 
that  of  the  house  was  thirty  (ver.  2),  several 
questions  of  some  interest  suggest  them- 
selves  for   consideration.     It   ia   perhapi 


OH.  yi.  1—88.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  IQNGS. 


107 


impossible  in  the  present  state  of  our  know- 
ledge to  arrive  at  any  very  positive  conclu- 
sions, but  it  may  be  well,  nevertheless,  if 
only  to  show  in  how  much  uncertainty  the 
arcbitectare  of  the  temple  is  involved,  to 
state  them.  First  among  them  is  this: 
Was  the  roof  of  the  temple  flat  or  ridged? 
(See  above  on  ver.  9).  (2)  In  either  case, 
was  the  height  of  thirty  cubits,  or  any  uni- 
form height,  maintained  throughout,  or 
was  the  roof  of  the  oracle  some  ten  cubits 
lower  than  that  of  the  house?  The  analogy 
of  the  tabernacle,  of  which  the  temple  was 
d  copy,  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the 
ridge — if  there  was  a  ridge — of  the  entire 
building  was  level  and  unbroken,  though  the 
analogy  of  the  Gothic  church,  which,  we 
have  already  seen,  is  almost  a  reproduction 
of  the  temple,  suggests  that  the  oracle  (like 
the  chancel,  and,  it  may  be  added,  like  the 
adytum  of  Egyptian  temples)  may  possibly 
have  had  a  lower  roof.  But  (3),  supposing 
the  same  height  was  maintained  from  end 
to  end,  to  what  use',  if  any,  was  the  vacant 
space  of  ten  cubits  (15  feet)  between  deling 
and  roof  of  oracle  applied?  It  has  been 
held  by  some  that  there  was  B  chamber 
here,  but  that  it  was  empty,  being  formed, 
in  fact,  not  for  use,  but  in  order  to  procure 
the  onbioal  shape  of  the  oracle.  Others 
contend  that  this  upper  room,  or  one  which 
ran  the  entire  length  of  the  building,  wafi 
designed  to  serve  as  a  receptacle  for  the 
reliquei  of  the  tabernacle,  and  they  would 

identify  it  with  the  Dlv^  (LXX.  ri  virsp^ov) 

of  2  Chron.  iii.  9.  And  nntrastworthy  m 
Josephus  is  when  not  supported  by  inde- 
pendent evidence,  it  is  worth  mentioning 
here  that  both  he  and  the  Talmud  "per- 
sistently assert  that  there  was  a  superstruc- 
ture on  the  temple  equal  in  height  to  the 
lower  part "  (Fergusson,  who,  con  scquently ,  ia 
of  opinion  that  there  uodoubtedly  was  some 
saoh  superstructure,  ai  in  the  tomb  of 
Darius,  near  Fersepolis  (see  Diet.  Bib.  iii. 
pp.  14S6,  1457),  and  that  it  was  used  for 
worship  (2  Kings  xxiii.  12),  where  see  note). 
Bahr,  however,  argues  forcibly  against  this 
id«s.  He  says,  inter  alia,  that  there  was  no 
approach  provided  to  these  chambers ;  but 
our  aocount  ia  so  manifestly  imperfect  that 
this  argument  is  at  the  best  a  precarious 
one.  He  sees  in  the  "upper  chambers" 
(the  Hebrew  word  is  plural)  the  upper 
stories  of  the  side  structure.  He  agrees, 
however,  with  Ewald  that  there  ivot  a 
chamber  over  the  oracle,  but  thinks  it  was 
nnoccupied.  Eeil  identifies  this  space  with 
the  "upper  chambers"  of  2  Chron.  iii.  9, 
and  upon  the  whole  this  appears  to  be  the 
most  feasible  view.  (4)  How  was  the  cieling, 
whether  with  or  without  thii  upper  ohambei, 


and  whether  at  the  height  of  twenty  or  thirty 
cubits — how  was  it  supported?  For  "no 
oedar  beam  could  be  laid  across  a  space  of 
twenty  cubits  without  sinking  in  the  centre 
by  its  own  weight."  Fergusson  hence  argues 
that  the  roof- must  have  been  carried  on 
pillars — four  in  the  sanctuary  and  ten  in  the 
hall.  He  remarks  that  they  were  used  in 
the  house  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon,  where 
they  were  Imb  suitable  than  here] :  and  he 
overlaid  It  (lit.  made  it  shine]  with  pure 
gold  [marg.  shut  up  (from  'I^O  clausit). 
Of.  Job  xxviii.  15  (Heb.)  The  same  gold. is 
described  as  liriD  (Ezod.  xxt.  11)  and  3it3 
(2  Chron.  iii.  8).  ft  is  called  "  shut  up  gold," 
not  because  it  was  concealed  (i:«i/«l\(oi/),  but 
because  of  the  exclusion  of  impure  ingre- 
dients (Vnlg.a«7Timj)«nsstmum).  The  lavish 
use  of  gold  in  the  interior  of  the  temple — its 
weight  600  talents  (75,000  lbs.),  its  value 
almost  incalculable — was  not  for  mere  dis- 
play (for  most  of  it  was  never  seen  except  by 
the  priests),  but  was  symbolical  of  light  and 
purity  (Job  xxxvii.  22,  23;  Rev.  xxi.  18), 
and  stamped  the  place  as  the  abode  of  Him 
who  dwelleth  in  light  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).  See 
Bahr  in  loc.  The  palace  of  the  Lord  must  be 
"  exceeding  magniflcal."  The  overlaying  was 
not  gilding,  but  laminae  of  gold  were  attached 
to  the  woodwork  with  naile.  This  art  was 
probably  derived  from  Egypt  (Exod.  xxv.  11, 
13).  Egyptian  figures  ornamented  with  gold 
plates  are  found  bo  thin  the  Louvre  and  British 
Museum.  See  Wilkinson,  "Ancient  Egyp- 
tians,"  iL  p.  233  sqq.)  Eawlinson .  remarks 
that  "  such  ornamentation  was  common  in 
Babylon,  in  Assyria,  and  in  Media."  See  Isa. 
xlvi.  6 ;  Herod,  i.  98 ;  Layard,  ii.  264.  In 
addition  to  the  gold,  the  house  was  garnished 
with  precious  stones  (2  Chron.  iii.  6).  Cf. 
1  Chron.  zxiz.  2,  8];  and  so  covered  the 
[Heb.  an]  altar  which  was  of  cedar.  [The 
italics  in  the  A.  V.  lead  us  to  suspect  a  mis- 
translation, and  such  it  proves  to  be.  What 
the  writer  means,  supposing  the  present  text 
to  be  retained,  is,  not  that  Solomon  covered 
the  cedar  altar  with  gold,butthathe  overlaid 
the  (stone?)  altar  with  cedar.  It  is  true  the 
article  is  wanting,  but  this  may  perhaps  be 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  altar  is 
now  mentioned  for  the  first  time  (Keil).  It 
ig  much  more  probable,  however,  that  the 
text  has  been  slightly  corrupted.  The  LXX. 
reads,  xal  liroiriae  Svaiaarijpiov  (Cod.  Alex, 
adds  isSpov),  which  proves  that  the  Seventy 
had  \if^Ji  instead  of  dV!!  in  their  text.  If 
so,  the  absence  of  the  article  is  at  once  ex- 
plained, and  an  unmeaning  repetition  in 
ver.  22  avoided.  The  mention  of  the  altar 
— of  course  it  is  the  altar  of  incense  that  ia 
meant:  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice  was  out- 
aide  the  building — in  connexion  with  tha 


lOB 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  VI.  1— 3tJ. 


oracle  is  significant.  In  ver.  22  it  is  called 
the  "altar  that  (belonged)  to  the  oracle," 
because  it  stood  jnst  outside  it.  In  the 
tabernacle  it  was  placed  "before  the  vail" 
(Exod.  zzx.  6;  zl.  6,  26 ;  Levit.  zvi.  12—18), 
and  it  occupied  this  position  because  the 
incense  burned  upon  it  was  offered  before 
the  Invisible  Presence  within.  It  is  an 
argmnent  in  favour  of  the  textual  emenda- 
tion suggested  above  that  the  altar  in  the 
tabernacle  was  of  wood  (Exod.  xxx.  1),  and 
that  Ezekiel  speaks  of  the  "  altar  of  wood" 
(oh.  zli.  22),  the  altar  of  sacrifice  being  of 
earth,  stones  (Exod.  xx.  24,  25),  or  brass 
(2  Ghron,  iv,  1).  If  we  retain  the  Beceived 
Text  we  are  almost  compelled  to  believe  that 
this  altar  was  also  of  stone,  as  they  would 
hardly  cover  a  wooden  altar  with  wood. 

Ver.  21. — So  [Heb.  And,  The  ornamen- 
tation of  the  holy  place  is  next  mentioned] 
Solomon  overlaid  the  house  [as  well  as  the 
oracle]  within  with  pure  gold :  and  be  made 
a  partition  by  the  chains  of  gold  before  the 
oracle  [These  words  are  extremely  obscure. 
The  prevailing  view  is  that  of  Gesenins,  aU, 
that  13^:="  he  bolted,"  Ac  But,  if  bo, 
what  did  the  chains  boltf  BShr  says,  the 
boards  of  the  cedar  partition,  just  as  the 
bars  fastened  together  the  boards  of  the  taber- 
nacle (Exod.  xxvi.  26—29).  Gesen.  himself 
(together  with  Eeil,  marg.,a2.)  understands 
the  door$,  "he  bolted  the  doors  of  the 
oracle,"  so  M  to  keep  them  closed,  except 
on  the  day  of  atonement.  But  the  literal 
rendering  is,  "  he  carried  over  with  chains 
of  gold  before  the  oi  acle,"  where  nothing  is 
said  of  either  boards  or  doors.  The  more 
natural  interpretation,  therefore,  would  per- 
haps be :  he  carried  on  the  gold  plates  of  the 
house  in  chains  of  gold  across  the  partition, 
and  so  fastened  it  to  the  side  walls.  Per- 
haps this  was  done  to  avoid  any  fracture  of, 
or  insertion  into,  the  stonework] ;  and  he 
overlaid  It  [What?  Keil  says,  the  cedar 
altar  last  mentioned  at  the  end  of  ver.  20. 
But  the  altar  has  now  dropped  out  of  the 
reader's,  and  therefore  presumably  out  of 
the  writer's  mind.  It  would  be  more  natural 
to  understand  the  words  of  the  oracle  just 
mentioned,  but  the  adornment  of  the  oracle 
has  already  been  related  (ver.  20),  and  it  is 
hardly  likely  that  having  stated  that  it  was 
covered  with^re  gold  in  one  verse,  he  would 
mention  that  it  was  overlaid  with  gold  in 
the  next.  It  looks  as  if  the  cedar  partition 
were  referred  to,  the  boards  "  befoie  the 
oracle  "]  with  gold. 

Ver.  22. — And  the  whole  house  he  over- 
laid with  gold  [This  no  uieie  repetition, 
more  Hebraico,tLB  Bahr  and  Keil  would  have 
"ns  think.  Something  additional  must  surely 
be  referred  to,  and  2  Chron.  iii.  4  warrants 
na  in  nndeistanding  this  statement  to  in- 


clude the  porch,  the  interior  of  which  wai 
gilded.  Because  the  porch  is  elsewhere  (ver. 
3)  distinguished  from  the  "  house,"  it  does 
not  follow  that  it  can  never  be  comprehended 
under  that  term]  nntU  he  had  finished  all 
the  house :  also  [Heb.  and]  the  altar  that 
was  by  [Heb.  to.  See  on  vex.  20]  the  oracle 
be  overlaid  with  goUL 

Ver.  23.— And  within  tbe  orade  [The 
description  now  passes  on  to  the  mysterious 
symbolic  figures  which  were  placed  in  the 
holy  of  hoUes]  he  made  two  cherublms 
[As  to  the  nature,  composition,  and  signifi- 
cance of  the  cherubim,  see  notes  on  Exod. 
XXV.  19 ;  xxxvii.  7.  The  only  particulars 
which  will  require  notice  here  are  those 
in  which  the  cherub  of  the  temple  differed 
from  that  of  the  tabernacle]  of  olive  tree 
[Heb.  trees  or  wood  of  oil.  The  oleaster 
(wild  olive)  is  supposed  to  be  intended,  the 
proper  name  for  the  oUve  tree  being  DJI 
(Neh.  viii.  15).  The  wood  of  the  oleaster, 
which  is  firm,  fine-grained,  and  durable, 
was  used  by  the  Greeks  for  the  images  of 
their  gods  (Winer).  The  cherubim  of  the 
tabernacle  were  of  solid  gold ;  those  of  the 
temple,  on  account  of  their  great  size 
(fifteen  feet  high)  were  necessarily  of  less 
costly  material.  But  though  of  wood,  yet 
the  most  durable  •wd  beautiful  of  wood, 
the  olive,  was  employed  in  their  construc- 
tion. It  is  noticeable  how  olive  wood  is 
employed  for  the  cherubim  and  doors  of 
oracle,  and  for  the  posts  of  the  temple 
doorway ;  the  less  precious  cedar  was  used 
for  lining  the  walls  and  for  beams,  &o., 
while  for  the  floor  and  doors  of  house,  the 
commoner  cypress  sufficed] ,  each  ten  cubits 
high.  [Half  the  height  of  the  oracle.  They 
occupied  its  entire  width  (ver.  24). 

Ver  24. — And  five  cubits  was  the  one  wing 
Of  the  cherub,  and  five  cubits  the  other 
wing  of  the  cherub :  from  the  uttermost 
part  of  the  one  wins  unto  the  uttermost 
part  of  the  other  were  ten  cubits.  '  [As  the 
four  wings  alone  covered  the  whole  extent 
of  the  oracle,  each  pair  must  clearly  have 
been  in  contact  on  the  body  of  the  chemb.] 

Ver.  25. — And  the  other  cherub  was  ten 
cubits ;  both  the  cherublms  were  of  one 
measure  and  one  size  [or  sliape']. 

Ver.  26.— The  height  of  the  one  chemb 
was  ten  cubits,  and  so  It  was  of  the  other 
cherub.  [The  constant  recurrence  of  the 
number  ten,  the  symbol  of  completeness 
and  perfection,  is  not  to  be  overlooked.] 

Ver.  27.— And  he  set  the  cherublms 
within  the  Inner  house :  and  they  stretched 
forth  the  wings  of  the  cherublms  [The 
maig.  reading,  the  cherubim  stretched  forth 
their  wings,  is  altogether  inadmissible] ,  so 
that  the  wing  of  the  one  touched  the  one 
«aU,  and  the  wing  of  the  other  chemb 


OB.  VL  1— 38.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


109 


touched  the  other  wa)I,  and  their  wings 
touched  one  another  in  the  midst  of  the 
house.  [In  2  Chron.  iii.  10  we  are  told 
that  the  cherubim  were  of  "  image  work  " 
(the  meaning  ot  the  Heb.  word  is  unknown). 
We  also  learn  that  they  "stood  on  their 
feet "  and,  unlike  the  cherubim  of  the  taber- 
nacle, which  faced  each  other  (Exod.  zxvii. 
9),  faced  the  throne,  i.e.,  the  cedar  partition, 
and  the  east.  The  object  of  this  arrange- 
ment probably  was  to  enable  the  wings  to 
be  stretched  out  across  the  sanctuary.  In 
the  tabernacle  the  wings  were  "  spread  out 
on  high"  (Exod.  xxv.  20;  xxvii.  9).  In 
both  cases  the  ark  and  mercy-seat  were 
placed  under  the  overshadowing  wings  (ch. 
viii  6).  There  would  be  a  clear  space  ol 
eight  or  nine  cubits  between  the  bodies  of 
the  cherubim,  and  the  ark  only  measured 
2}  cubits  (Exod.  xxv.  10)  in  length  and  1} 
cubits  in  breadth.  Unlike  Ezekiel'soherubim 
(Ezek.  chs.  1.  x ;  cf.  Bev.  iv.  7),  these  had 
appareutly  but  one  face.  The  cherub  was 
not  a  simple,  bat  a  complex  being,  having 
no  unalterable  and  fixed  form.  See  Bahr, 
Symbolik,  i.  pp.  313,  314;  Diet.  Bib.  vol.  i. 
pp.  301—803.] 

Yer.  28.— And  he  overlaid  the  cheruhlma 
with  gold. 

Yer.  29. — And  he  carved  all  the  walls  ot 
the  house  round  about  with  carved  figures 
of  cherublms  [lit.  orpeninqs,  i.e.,  gravings 
or  indentations  of  cherubim.  D^l-IDS  is 
used  of  gravings  in  stone,  Kxod.  xxviii.  11 ; 
zxxix.  6:  in  metal,  xzviii.  36;  xxxix.  30J 
and  palm  trees  and  open  flowers  [The  open 
flowers  may  well  have  been  lilies  (ch.  vii. 
19,  22,  26).  It  is  uncertain  whether  there 
were  one  or  more  rows  of  cherubim  and 
palms.  Eeil,  arguing  from  the  analogy  of 
Egyptian  temples,  contends  for  two  or  three 
rows,  but  it  is  doubtful  how  far  the  Israel- 
ites, notwithstanding  their  new  and  inti- 
mate relations  with  the  country,  would  take 
Egypt  and  its  idolatrous  shrines  for  a 
model.  Ezek.  xli.  18  tends  to  show  that 
the  palm-trees  alternated  with  the  cherubs. 
The  cherubim  may  have  had  two  faces,  such 
as  he  describes  (ver.  19),  the  face  of  a  man 
on  the  one  side,  and  the  face  of  a  young  lion 
on  the  other  side ;  but  if  so,  they  must  have 
differed  in  form  from  those  of  the  oracle. 
Possibly  the  open  flowers  formed  a  border, 
or  were  sculptured  in  festoons,  above,  and 
the  gourds  (or  buds)  formed  a  border  below 
(as  in  the  Eouyunjik  slab).  But  as  to  this 
the  text  is  silent. 

But  while  we  are  ignorant  of  the  precise 
form  and  of  the  arrangement  of  these 
ornamental  carvings,  we  are  not  wholly  in 
the  dark  as  to  their  symbolism.  For  every- 
thing in  the  temple,  we  may  be  sure,  had  a 
meaning.    Let  us  inquire,  then,  into  the 


significance  of  the  eherubim,  the  palnu^ 
and  the  flowers. 

1.  The  Cherubim  have  been  regarded  bj 
some  as  symbols  of  the  invisible  Godhead, 
by  others  as ' '  representations  of  the  heavenly 
spirits  which  surround  the  Lord  of  glory 
and  set  forth  psychical  life  at  its  highest 
stage"  (Keil) ;  but  it  seems  best  to  view 
them  as  symbols  of  all  animal  life,  includ- 
ing the  highest  and  perhaps  not  excluding 
the  thought  of  Him  who  is  the  source  and 
spring  of  life,  the  Anima  animantium  (cf. 
ch.  xii.  28).  Hence  they  are  spoken  of  at 
nvnn  (Ezek.  i.  6, 13,  15,  <feo.)  "the  living 
things  "  (compare  r<J  Jwa,  Eev.  iv.  6,  8,  9), 
and  even  as  njnn  "  the  life  "  (Ezek.  x.  14, 
15,  &o.)  The  cherubim  conseqnently  speak 
of  the  great  animal  kingdom  before  its 
Creator.  "  Creaturely  being  reaches  its 
highest  degree  in  those  which  have  an 
anima,  and  among  these,  the  lion,  the  bull, 
the  eagle,  and  the  man  are  the  highest  and 
most  complete"  (Bahr).  These  shapes, 
accordingly,  were  not  inappropriate  or  on. 
meaning  in  a  temple  raised  by  the  creature 
to  the  glory  of  the  Creator. 

3.  Just  as  the  cherubim  speak  of  animal, 
so  do  the  Palma  of  vegetable  life.  They  are 
"  the  princes  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  " 
(Linueeus).  "  Amongst  trees  there  is  none 
BO  lofty  and  towering,  none  which  has  such 
a  fair  majestic  growth,  which  is  so  ever- 
green, and  which  affords  so  grateful  a  shade 
and  such  noble  fruits  —  fruits  which  are 
said  to  be  the  food  of  the  blessed  in 
paradise — as  the  palm  "  (Bahr),  who  also 
adds  that  it  is  said  to  have  as  many  ex- 
cellent properties  as  there  are  days  in  the 
year,  and  cites  Humboldt  as  designating  it 
the  "  noblest  of  plants-forms  to  which  the 
nations  have  always  accorded  the  meed  of 
beauty.  "  Judaa,  he  further  remarks,  is 
the  fatherland  of  the  palm,  so  much  so  that 
the  palm  in  later  days  became  the  symbol  of 
Palestine  (as  on  the  well-known  coin  with 
the  legend  Juiaa  ca'gld).  The  palms, 
therefore,  tell  of  the  vegetable  world,  and  of 
Him  who  fashioned  its  noble  and  graceful 
forms. 

8.  And  very  similar  was  the  testimony  of 
the  Flowers.  "  Flowers  and  bloom  have 
been,  from  ancient  times  to  our  own,  the 
usual  symbols  of  Ufe-fulness.  ...  So  then 
by  the  flower-work,  as  well  as  by  the  cheru- 
bim and  the  palm-trees,  was  the  dweUing  of 
Jehovah,  which  was  adorned  therewith,  de- 
signated as  an  abode  of  life"  (Biihr).  On 
the  earthly  dwelling-place  of  the  Eternal, 
that  is  to  say,  were  everywhere  pourtrayed 
the  various  tokens  of  His  Almighty  power 
and  goodness.  And  the  significance  ot 
each  is  the  same.  "  Thou  hast  created  a3\ 
things,  and  for  thy  pleasure  they  are,  and 


110 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  Ti.  1— S 


were  created."  They  were  graved]  within 
and  wltbout.  [These  words,  here  and  in  ver. 
30,  are  generally  taken  to  mean  "in  the 
oracle  and  in  the  house."  But  it  is  worthy  of 
consideration  whether  they  do  not  rather 
signify,  "  in  the  house  and  in  the  porch," 
The  latter  was  oyerlaid  with  gold  (2  Chron. 

iil  4).  It  ia  doubtful  whether  |W^n?  on 
the  outside,  can  be  applied  to  any  part  of 
the  interior,  and  here  its  application  would 
be  to  the  oracle  (Thenius)] . 

Ver.  30.— And  the  floor  of  the  house  h» 
overlaid  with  gold,  within  and  without. 

Ver.  31. — And  for  the  entering  of  the 
oracle,  he  made  doors  [which  hung  on 
golden  hinges  (ch.  vii.  60]  of  olive  tree 
[see  on  ver.  23)],  the  Untel  and  side 
posts  were  a  fifth  part  of  the  vall.  [The 
meaning  of  the  Hebrew  words  has  been 
much  disputed.  See  Geeen.  Thesaur,  i. 
pp.  43 — 45.  Gesen.  himself  interprets  as 
A.  v. :  crepido  cum  postibiis  erat  quinta 
pars,  i.e.,  quintam  parietis  partem  occu- 
pabat.  The  Eabbins  :  tie  "  entablature 
with  side  posts  and  threshold  formed  a 
pentagon. "  But  a  pentagonal  doorway  is 
without  example  in  Eastern  architecture. 

Thenius:  "the  strength  (7*K  ia  generally 
taken  as  an  architectural  term  =  crepido 
portae,  or  entablature)  of  the  posts  was 
a  fifth."  Bawlinson  :  "  the  lintel  was  one- 
fifth  of  wall,  and  each  door  post  one-fifth 
of  its  height ; "  in  which  case  the  doorway 
would  of  course  be  a  square  of  four  cubits. 
But  perhaps  the  rendering  of  A.  V.  (with 
which  Eeil  and  Bahr  also  agree)  is  more 
natural.  The  meaning,  consequently, 
would  be  that  the  entrance  to  the  oracle, 
inclusive  of  the  side  posts  which  helped  to 
form  it,  occupied  one-fifth  of  the  extent  of 
the  cedar  partition.  The  entrance  to  the 
house  (ver.  33)  was  one-fourth  of  the  wall 
of  the  house.] 

Ver.  32.  —  The  two  doors  also  were 
[Bather,  perhaps,  "  And  he  made  "  is  to  be 
supplied  from  ver.  81,  as  Keil.  Bawlinson 
remarks  that  such  doors  as  these  are  cha- 
racteristic of  Assyrian  gateways]  of  oUve 
tree ;  and  he  carved  upon  them  carvings  of 
cherublms  ^d  palm  trees  and  open  flowers, 
and  overlara  them  with  gold,  and  spread 
[l^M  ffiph.  of  ni"J]  gold  [Heb.  the  gold] 
upon  the  cherublms  and  upon  the  palm 
trees  [The  writer  means,  not  that  the  carv- 
ing alone  was  gilded — as  Thenius  thinks,  who 
remarks  on  the  effective  contrast  which  the 
dark  red  cedar  and  the  bright  gold  would 
furnish) — but  that  the  gilding  did  not  con- 
ceal the  character  of  the  carvings.  It  is 
clear  from  ver.  22  that  "  all  the  house " 
blazed  with  gold  in  every  part.   If  ihejloors 


were  covered  with  gold,  we  may  be  sure  both 
walls  and  doors  would  not  be  without  their 
coating  of  the  precious  metal.  Our  author 
does  not  mention  the  curtain — it  is  clear  that 
the  doors  would  not  dispense  with  the  neces- 
sity for  a  vail — but  the  chronicler  does  (2 
Chron.  iii.  14).  It  was  necessary  in  order 
to  cover  the  ark  (Exod.  xl.  3,  21) ;  hence 
it  was  BometimeB  called  "  the  vail  of  the 
covering."  But  for  this,  when  the  doors 
were  opened  on  the  day  of  atonement,  the 
priest  in  the  holy  place  might  have  gazed 
into  the  oracle.  See  on  ch.  viii.  8.  The  doors 
opened  outwardly  (into  the  house).  The 
vail  was  suspended  within  the  oracle.] 

Ver,  33. — So  also  [i.e.,  similarly]  made 
he  for  the  door  [or  entrance,  doorway]  of 
the  temple  posts  of  olive  tree,  a  fourth 
[Heb.  from  a  fourth]  part  of  the  wall.  It 
is  uncertain  whether  we  are  to  understand 
the  "  fourth  part "  of  .the  height  or  of  the 
breadth  of  the  doorway,  though  the  latter  is 
probably  meant.  The  height  of  the  wall  is 
variously  estimated ;  generally  at  30  (ver.  2), 
but  by  Bawlinson  at  20  cubits.  But  the 
breadth  is  beyond  dispute.  It  was  20  cubits. 
The  doorway,  consequently,  would  be  five 
cubits  wide.  The  effect  of  the  preposition, 
"from  a  fourth,"  is  probably  this:  The 
entrance  with  the  side  posts  subtracted 
one-fourth  from  the  space  of  the  wall. 

Ver.  34. — And  the  two  doors  were  [As  in 
ver.  32,  the  verb  is  to  be  supplied  from  the 
verse  preceding.  "  And  he  made  two  doors, 
&c.]  of  flr  tree  [B'ina  see  note  on  ch.  v.  8] : 
the  two  leaves  [Ut.  ribs,  same  word  as  in 
vers.  5, 8, 10]  of  the  one  door  were  folding 

[Heb,  roUing] ,  and  the  two  leaves  [D*»^p 
is  probably  a  clerical  error  for  D'VPV  arising 
out  of  the  V7\)  in  vers.  32,  35]  of  the  other 
[Heb.  second]  door  were  folding.  [It  seems 
more  natural  to  suppose  that  the  leaves 
were  formed  by  a  vertical  than  by  a  hori- 
zontal   division.     Indeed,   it  is  doubtful 

whether  the  word  7v|  would  be  applied  tc 
the  latter  arrangement.  KeU  objects  to  the 
former  on  the  ground  that  the  leaves  would 
thus  be  only  one  oubit  broad  each,  and  the 
opening  of  one  leaf,  consequently,  would 
be  insufficient  to  admit  of  any  person's  pass- 
ing through.  But  to  this  it  may  be  replied 
(1)  that  the  opening  of  two  leaves  would  in 
any  case  form  a  S'lificiently  wide  entrance, 
and  (2)  that  it  is  not  said  that  all  the  leaves 
were  of  uniform  width.  Besides,  the  other 
arrangement  is  without  precedent  in  the 
public  buildings  of  the  East.] 

Ver.  35. — And  he  carved  thereon  cheru- 
blms and  palm  trees  and  open  flowers  [The 
constant  reouiTence  of  the  same  forms  is  in 


CH.  VI.  1—88.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


Ill 


itself  a  proof  that  they  must  have  been  sig- 
nifioant] ,  and  covered  them  with  gold  fitted 
upon  the  caxved  work  [Heb.  made  straight 
upon  the  engraved  work.  That  is  to  say,  the 
gold  fitted  closely  to  all  the  uneven  and  in- 
dented surface  of  the  figures.  Elsewhere, 
laminae  were  simply  laid  upon  the  level 
walls,  Ac] 

Ver.  36. — ^The  description  of  the  buildings 
concludes  with  a  brief  reference  to  the  en- 
ceinte or  court.  And  he  built  the  inner  court 
[The  mention  of  an  inner  court,  called  in 
2  Chron.  iv.  9  the  "  court  ol  the  priests," 
presupposes,  of  course,  the  existence  of  an 
outer  court.  Our  author  does  not  mention 
this,  but  the  chronicler  does,  under  the  name 
of  "the  great  court."  In  Jer.  xxxvi.  10,  the 
former  is  called  the  "  higher  court,"  because 
it  occupied  a  higher  level]  with  three  rows 
of  hewed  stone  and  a  row  of  cedar  beams. 
[These,  it  is  thought,  formed  the  enclosing 
wall  of  the  court  (the  LXX.  adds  KVKkodev). 
The  oedar  beams  were  instead  of  coping- 
stones.  It  has  been  supposed,  however  (J. 
D.  Michaelis),  that  these  three  rows  of  stjne, 
boarded  with  cedar,  formed  the  pavement  of 
the  court.  But  the  question  at  once  suggests 
itself,  Why  pile  three  rows  of  stones  one 
upon  another  merely  to  form  a  pavement, 
and  why  hew  and  shape  them  if  they  were 
to  be  concealed  beneath  a  stratum  of  wood  ? 
It  is  a  fair  inference  from  2  Chron.  vii.  3, 
that  the  wall  was  low  enough  to  permit  men 
to  look  over  it.  Fergusson,  on  the  contrary, 
argues  that  it  must  have  been  twice  the  height 
of  the  enclosure  of  the  tabemacje,  which 
would  give  ns  an  elevation  of  ten  cubits 
(Exod.  xxvii.  18).  It  is  worth  suggesting, 
however,  whether,  the  inner  court  being 
raised  above  the  outer,  which  surrounded 
it,  these  stones  may  not  have  formed  the 
retaining  wall  or  sides  of  the  platform.  As 
the  outer  court  had  gates  <2  Kings  xi.  6; 
xii.  9;  2  Chron.  Iv.  9;-xxiii.  5;  xxiv.  8), 
it  also  must  have  had  waJls.  Erom  2  Kings 
xxiii.  11 ;  Jer.  xxxv.  2 ;  xxxvi.  10,  we 
gather  that  there  were  yarious  chambers 
in  the  forecourt.  Such  were  certainly 
contemplated  by  David  (1  Chron.  xxviii. 
12)  ;  but  it  is  not  recorded  that  Solomon 
built  them.  Nor  have  we  any  warrant, 
except  the  bare  assertion  of  Josephus, 
for  the  belief  that  he  built  a  colonnade 
or  eloistei  on  the  east  side,  suoh  as  was 


known  to  later  ages  by  the  name  of  "Solo- 
mon's Porch "  (John  x.  23  ;  Acts  iii.  11 ; 
T.  12).  As  to  the  dimensions  of  these 
spaces,  we  are  left  to  conjecture.  If,  as  in 
everything  else,  the  dimensions  of  the 
tabernacle  were  doubled,  then  the  court  of 
the  priests  would  measure  200  cubits  from 
east  to  west,  and  100  cubits  from  north 
to  south.  It  should  be  stated,  however, 
that  in  the  temple  of  Ezekiel,  the  propor* 
tions  of  which,  in  the  present  instance, 
may  well  be  historical,  both  courts  are  re- 
presented as  perfect  squares.  Bawlinsou 
inadvertently  puts  down  the  length  (along 
the  side  of  temple)  at  100  cubits,  and  the 
breadth  (ends  of  temple)  at  200.  The  outer 
court  would  probably  be  twice  as  large  as 
the  inner,  i.e.,  400x200  cubits.  But  all 
this  is  necessarily  uncertain.] 

Ver.  87. — ^In  tbe  fourth  year  was  the 
foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  laid. 
In  the  month  Ztf  [see  on  ver.  1] . 

Ver.  88. — And  In  the  eleventh  year,  in  the 

jttontb  Bui  [>13=rain.  Hence  Bui  would 
be  the  month  of  rain  (Gesen.)  Keil  under- 
stands it  to  signify  produce  {proventus),  and 
sees  in  it  the  month  of  fruits.  It  extended 
from  the  November  to  the  December  full 
moon] ,  which  Is  the  eighth  month,  was  the 
house  finished  throughout  all  the  parts 
thereof  [Heb.  V^^'^] ,  and  according  to  all 

tbe  fashion  of  It  [Heb.  VDQ^D].    So  was 

be  seven  years  tn  building  it.  [As  Bnl  was 
the  eighth  month,  and  Zif  the  second,  the 
house  was  precisely  seven  and  a  half  years 
in  building — a  short  period,  if  we  consider 
the  magnitude  of  the  undertaking,  but  long 
enough,  if  we  remember  the  enormous 
number  of  hands  employed  upon  it,  the 
preparations  made  by  David,  and  the  modest 
dimensions  of  the  edifice  (ver.  2).  The 
commentators  aU  cite  Pliny's  statement  that 
all  Asia  was  building  the  temple  of  Diana 
at  Ephesus  200  years,  but  the  cases  are  not 
at  all  parallel.  We  learn  from  2  Chron. 
iii.  2,  tl  a':  it  was  on  the  second  day  of  the 
month  that  the  building  was  commenced. 
Bishop  Wordsworth,  who  assigns  seven 
years  and  seven  months  as  the  time  occu- 
pied in  this  work,  sees  in  this  hebdomatio 
period  an  analogy  to  the  seven  da^s  of  tha 
creation.] 


E0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  2,  8,  20.  —  Chriatiamty  bidlt  on  the  FounSaUotu  of  Judaism.  The 
Jewish  temple  in  its  resemblance  to  the  Gothio  church  is  a  not  inapt  illus- 
tration of  the  relations  of  Christianity  to  Judaism.  The  temple  of  Solomou  was 
not  only   architecturally   the  exact   reproduction  on  a  largor  scale,  and  in  • 


lis  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  vi.  1—88. 

more  permanent  form,  of  the  tabernacle  of  witness  (see  p.  98),  it  was  also  the 
model  and  archetype  of  the  sacred  buildings  of  the  Christian  faith.  In  appearance, 
no  doubt,  it  was  somewhat  different — the  purposes  for  which  the  two  edifices  were 
designed  were  different  (p.  101),  but  the  ground-plan  and  general  arrangement 
were  the  same  (p.  99).  The  porch,  "  temple  of  house,"  oracle,  side  chambers  of 
the  one,  correspond  with  the  porch  (or  tower),  nave,  chancel,  and  side  aisles  oi 
the  other.  Nor  was  this  resemblance  accidental.  The  architects  of  earlier  times — 
times  when  men  had  not  come  to  think  that  they  most  honoured  Christianity  by 
going  as  tax  as  possible  away  from  Judaism,  times  when  the  first  dispensation 
was  regarded  as  full  of  significance  and  guidance  for  the  children  of  the  second — 
the  architects  of  those  days  thought  they  would  best  serve  the  God  of  Jews 
and  Christians  by  adhering  as  closely  as  possible  to  the  Divine  "  pattern  which  was 
shewed  in  the  mount,"  the  pattern  which  had  served  for  tabernacle  and  temple 
alike. 

Now  this  fact,  that  the  place  of  Divine  worship  has  been,  in  nearly  all  ages,  built 
after  one  model,  may  suggest  the  thought  that  the  principles  of  Divine  worship, 
and  indeed  of  religion,  have  been  in  all  ages  the  same.  And  for  the  good  reason 
that  God  and  man,  the  worshipped  and  the  worshipper,  are  in  all  ages  the  same. 
If  the  successive  generations  of  men  who  "  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray"  went  up 
to  an  edifice  aomeihimg  hke  ours,  they  also  carried  with  them  hearts,  sins,  sorrows, 
needs,  infirmities,  altogether  like  ours.  The  Gothic  churob,  then,  was  modelled 
after  the  Jewish  temple.  Even  so  the  Christian  rehgion  has  been  oast  in  the 
mould  of  Judaism.  It  is  not  a  brand-new  religion,  utterly  diverse  from  the  dispen> 
sation  which  preceded  it,  but  it  is  built  on  the  old  foundations.  Its  proportions  are 
much  statelier,  its  uses  are  much  nobler,  but  still  the  Christian  Church  is  the  copy 
of  the  Jewish,  and  Christianity  is  the  child  of  Judaism.  There  are  some  of  our 
cathedrals — York  Minster,  e.g. — which  occupy  the  site,  and  parts  of  which  follow 
the  outlines,  of  the  old  Saxon  church  of  wood — another  illustration  of  the  relations 
of  our  holy  religion  to  the  religion  which  it  has  replaced.  And  that  Christianity 
was  never  designed  to  be  destructive  of  Judaism,  but  was  meant  to  be  a  develop- 
ment, an  outgrowth  and  expansion  of  it,  our  Lord's  words  (Matt.  v.  17)  and  His 
apostle's  (Eom.  iii.  31 ;  Col.  ii.  17)  clearly  show.  The  law,  i.e.,  was  the  outline  of 
which  Christianity  is  the  filling  up  and  completion.  But  observe :  the  filling  up,  if 
it  be  true  to  its  name,  must  keep  vnthin  the  lines  of  the  sketch. 

It  is  one  of  the  tendencies  of  the  age  to  throw  over  Judaism  and  its  teaching  (see, 
e.g., "  Scribner's  Magazine,"  vol.  xii.  pp.  724  sqq.,  and  the  lettersof  Charles  Dickens). 
Men  say  they  want  "  Christianity  without  Judaism.  "  They  speak  of  the  latter  as 
a  dead  letter.  But  surely  it  is  an  unworthy  conception  of  the  Supreme  Wisdom 
—  the  idea  that  a  faith  which  was  adapted  to  the  men  of  one  age  has  absolutely  no 
lessons  or  no  guiding  principles  for  the  men  of  a  later  age,  but  must  be  cast  aside 
as  whoUy  antiquated  and  effete.  A  piinciple  of  contirmity  can  be  distinctly 
traced  operating  in  the  kingdom  of  nature ;  are  we  forbidden  to  believe  that  there 
is  any  such  law  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  ?  Let  us  now  consider,  then,  in  what 
ways  Christianity  is  built  on  the  foundations  of  Judaism,  and  how  the  religion  of 
the  New  Testament  foUows  the  Unes  laid  down  in  the  Old. 

I.  The  fundamental  idea  of  Judaism  was  that  of  a  visible  Chubor.  It  was  that 
God  had  "  taken  a  nation  from  the  midst  of  another  nation"  (Deut.  iv.  82—34)  to 
be  a  peculiar  people  to  Himself,  a  "kingdom  of  priests,  a  holy  nation"  (Exod.  xix. 
6,  6).  His  purposes  of  grace,  i.e.,  were  to  be  manifested  to  the  world  through  a 
society.  Here,  then,  was  a  KKrinq  and  an  ImcXijiria.  Precisely  similar  is  the  root 
idea  of  our  religion.  The  Son  of  God  came  to  found  a  Church  (Matt.  xvi.  18  ; 
Ephes.  ii.  20),  to  regenerate  humanity  through  a  brotherhood.  Behold  the  prin- 
ciple  of  continuity  in  this  "  great  Church  truth  of  God's  word."  The  very  words 
used  of  the  Jewish  people  are  transferred  to  the  Christian  Church  (1  Peter 
u.  9 ;  Eey.  L  6 ;  v.  10).  The  composition  of  the  two  societies  was  different  (one 
nation,  all  nations),  the  rites  of  admission  were  different  (circumcision,  baptism), 
but  the  principle— a  visible  Church— was  the  some.  Every  Jew  was  a  nnesb 
Every  Christian  is  the  same. 


OH.  VI.  l-au.J  THE  FIKBT  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  118 

II.  The  OFFICERS  of  the  Jewish  Church  correspond  with  the  oflScers  of  the 
Christian  Church.  "  It  is  an  apostoUcal  tradition  that  what  Aaron  and  his  sons 
and  the  Levites  were  in  the  temple,  that  our  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons  claim 
to  be  in  the  Church  "  (Jerome) .  No  society  can  exist  without  at  least  (1)  laws, 
and  (2)  oflScers.  The  Jewish  Church  had  as  its  of&cers,  high  priest,  priests,  and 
Levites.  The  Christian  Church  has '  a  great  High  Priest  in  the  heavens  (Heb. 
iv.  14),  and  its  earthly  oflScers  are  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons.  The  analogy  is 
not  imperfect,  for  just  as  the  high  priest  was  of  the  order  of  the  priests,  so  are 
bishops  but  superintending  presbyters.  The  bishop  is  primus  presbyter;  the  high 
priest  was  summus  sacerdos.  The  Jewish  Church  had  also  its  prophets  (see 
Introduction,  Sect.  III.,  note),  corresponding  with  the  preachers  of  the  Christian 
economy.  A  prophet  need  not  be  a  priest ;  a  preacher  need  not  be  a  presbyter. 
Of  course,  the  nature  and  functions  of  these  ofl&cers  of  the  two  dispensations 
differ,  as  do  the  dispensations  themselves,  but  the  same  outlines  are  preserved. 

III.  The  SERVICES  of  the  Christian  Church  are  derived  from  the  service  of  the 
Jewish  synagogue.  "  Widely  divergent  as  the  two  words  and  the  things  they 
represented  afterwards  became,  the  Ecclesia  had  its  starting  point  in  the  Syna- 
gogue "  (Plumptre).  The  earliest  assemblies  of  Christians  were  composed  of  men 
who  had  worshipped  in  the  synagogue  (Acts  xiii.  14  ;  xiv.  1 ;  xviii.  4,  26 ;  xxii. 
19.  Cf.  Luke  iv.  16;  John  xviii.  20,  &c.),  and  who,  in  default  of  directions  to  the 
contrary,  naturally  preserved  under  the  new  dispensation  the  form  of  worship  to 
which  they  had  been  accustomed  under  the  old.  St.  James,  indeed  (oh,  ii.  1), 
speaks  of  the  Christian  assembly  as  a  "synagogue."  The  use  of  fixed  forms  of 
prayer,  the  reading  of  the  two  lessons  (Lme  iv.  18 ;  Acts  xiiL  15,  27 ;  xv.  21),  and 
the  cycle  of  lessons ;  the  sermon  or  exposition  (Acts  xiii.  16 ;  Luke  iv.  21) ; 
the  chanting  of  the  Psalms  of  David ;  the  very  prayers  for  the  departed  which 
"have  found  a  place  in  every  early  liturgy  in  the  world"  (Ellioott),  all  these 
have  come  to  us  from  the  synagogues  of  the  Jews.  The  Catholic  Church  has  not 
disregarded  the  principle  of  continuity.  She  has  not  thought  fit  to  devise  a  hturgy 
of  her  own  heart,  or  to  disregard  Uturgical  forms  altogether.  She  has  simply  per- 
petuated, or  adapted  to  its  new  and  more  blessed  conditions,  the  form  of  service 
delivered  unto  her  by  the  Jew. 

IV.  The  PRINCIPLES  of  Christian  worship  are  the  principles  of  Jewish  worship. 
It  has  been  said  that  the  true  idea  of  worship  as  a  Divine  service,  as  the  sebf- 
forgetting  adoration  of  the  ever-blessed  God,  was  obscured,  if  not  altogether  lost, 
in  the  Church  of  England  at  least,  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries. 
Men  went  to  church — too  often  they  go  stUl — not  for  the  service,  but  for  the 
sermon  ;  not  for  the  glory  of  God,  but  for  their  own  edification  and  instruction. 
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  it  is  here  intended  to  depreciate  edification.  If  men 
were  perfect,  the  sermon  might  indeed  be  dispensed  with.  But  so  long  as  they  are 
what  they  are,  then  those  who  have  "  any  word  of  exhortation  for  the  people  " 
must  "  say  on."  But  all  the  same,  edification  is  not  the  primary  reason  for  our 
assembling.  The  first  Christians  "  oame  together  to  breaH  bread  "  (Acts  xx.  7),  to 
"  show  the  Lord's  death "  upon  the  Lord's  day  (Eev.  i.  10).  And  God  surely 
should  ever  come  before  man.  Praise  must  take  precedence  either  of  prayer  or 
preaching.  The  true  idea  of  worship  is  the  glory  of  God,  not  the  profit  of  men. 
And  if  this  idea  was  lost,  or  was  obscured,  it  was  because  men  ignored  or  despised 
the  lessons  and  principles  of  Judaism.  The  worship  of  the  temple,  its  psalms  and 
sacrifices,  its  holocausts  and  hecatombs,  all  were  designed  for  the  glory  and  honour 
and  worship  of  Jehovah — all  were  primarily  to  exalt  and  magnify  the  Incommuni- 
cable Name.  And  such  should  be  the  aim  of  all  Christian  worship.  Our  holj 
rehgion  was  never  meant  to  dethrone  the  Deity,  nor  can  Christians  owe  Him  less, 
or  less  profound,  adoration,  than  did  Jews.  Was  their  service  solemn  and  stately  ? 
so  should  be  ours.  Did  they  never  come  before  Him  empty  t  neither  should  we. 
Was  the  altar,  not  the  pulpit,  the  centre  of  their  worship?    the  altar,  not  the 

Eulpit,  should  be  the  centre  of  ours.     The  principles  of  Divine  service  know  of  no 
reak.     They  are  governed  by  the  same  law  of  continuity. 

V.  The  SACBAMGNIB  of  Christianity  are  foimded  upon  the  rites  of  Jadaism. 
1  KUias.  > 


114  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [pa.  ti.  1—88. 

Baptism  (practised  among  the  Jews  before  onr  Lord's  time)  takes  the  place  ol 
ciroumoision ;  the  Lord's  Supper  of  the  Paschal  Supper.  Just  as  the  rite  ol 
eircmncision  brought  the  Jewish  child  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant,  into  the 
visible  Church,  so  does  baptism  the  Christian  child ;  otherwise  our  children  would 
be  worse  off  than  the  chililren  of  the  Hebrews.  And  as  for  the  Lord's  Supper,  it 
was  instituted  in  the  very  midst  of  the  Passover  (Luke  xxii.  1,  7,  16 — 20),  and  was 
clearly  designed  to  take  its  place.  The  rites  of  Judaism  warrant  our  belief  in  a 
sacramental  religion  ;  they  help  to  explain  how  it  was  that  our  Lord  incorporated 
into  His  new  and  spiritual  dispensation  two  outward  and  visible  signs.  The  Law 
was  full  of  these  :  the  Gospel  could  hardly  discard  them  altogether. 

VI.  The  PRECEPTS  and  commandments  of  Judaism,  again,  "the  law  and  the 

5rophets,"  are  not  abolished,  but  fulfilled  (Matt.  v.  17 ;  Eom*  iii.  81)  in  Christianity, 
'he  Sermon  on  the  Mount  has  given  a  new  meaning  to  the  covenant  of  Mount 
Sinai,  even  the  ten  commandmen's  (Deut.  iv.  13).  Out  of  the  law  of  the  two 
tables  has  been  developed  the  Christian  law  of  love  (Matt.  xxii.  36 — 40;  Luke  x.  27 ; 
Eom.  xiii.  8 — 10).  The  "  new  commandment"  of  Christ  (John  xiii.  34)  is  practi- 
cally "  the  old  commandment "  which  we  Lad  from  the  beginning  (1  John  ii.  7,  &c.) 

VII.  And — to  descend  to  minor  matters— we  might  show  how  even  the  festivalb 
of  Christendom  follow  the  lines  of  the  Jewish  feasts.  True,  Christianity  has  one 
blessed  festival  peculiar  to  itself — Christmastide,  the  feast  of  the  Holy  Incarnation — 
but  the  rest — Easter,  Whitsuntide,  Harvest  Festival — correspond  severally  with  the 
Jewish  Passover,  Pentecost,  and  Tabernacles.  The  tvmes  themselves  are,  perliaps, 
of  no  great  moment — though  the  synchronism  is  remarkable — but  the  principles 
on  which  they  are  based,  the  principle,  e.g.,  of  setting  apart  certain  seasons  for  the 
oommemoration  of  certain  facts,  or  the  acknowledgment  of  certain  gifts,  these  are 
common  to  both  dispensations.  It  is  this  principle  which  gave  the  Jew  his 
sabbath  :  it  is  the  same  principle  justifies,  and  indeed  requires,  the  observance  of 
the  Lord's  day.  Christianity  has  not  discarded  the  day  of  rest,  though  it  observes 
the  sabbath  no  longer.  It  has  changed  the  day  of  rest  into  a  day  of  worship,  the 
seventh  day  into  the  first,  the  memorial  of  the  creation  into  a  memorial  of  the 
resurrection  and  redemption. 

VIII.  But  it  will  be  said,  Surely  Christianity  is  utterly  nnhke  Judaism  in  one 
cardinal  point,  viz.,  it  has  no  sacrifice.  But  is  it  so  ?  Truly,  we  offer  no  longer  either 
bullocks  or  goats.  The  Christian  priest  neither  pours  the  blood  nor  bums  the  fat, 
but  all  the  same  he  ofEers  sacrifice  (1  Peter  ii.  5),  the  saciifice  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving  (Heb.  xiii.  151,  the  sacrifice  of  alms  and  oblations  (Phil.  iv.  18),  the 
sacrifice  of  soul  and  body  (Eom.  xii.  1).  Nor  is  that  all.  For  observe:  The  Holy 
Supper  in  the  Christian  scheme,  both  as  an  oflering,  as  a  feast,  and  as  a  memorial, 
corresponds  with  the  sacrifices  of  the  law.  For  what,  let  us  ask,  was  the  meaning 
of  all  those  sacrifices  which  the  Jews  "  offered  year  by  year  continually"  ?  They 
could  not  take  away  sin.  They  could  not  make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect. 
Why  then  were  they  offered  ?  One  reason  was,  that  they  might  serve  as  memorials 
before  God  of  the  death  of  Christ.  They  were  silent,  but  eloquent,  reminders  of 
Him  who  should  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  Perhaps  tlie  Jew  knew 
it  not  Perhaps  the  high  priest  himself  did  not  realize  it,  but  we  know  that  all 
those  countless  thousands  of  victims,  offered  year  after  year  and  century  after 
century,  were  so  many  mute  pleadings  of  the  one  priceless  death.  And  as  they 
spoke  to  the  eternal  Father  of  the  Lamb  who  should  die,  precisely  so  do  the  bread 
and  the  wine  of  Christ's  sacrament  of  love  speak  of  the  Lamb  who  has  died.  The  fat 
and  the  blood  were,  the  bread  and  the  wine  are,  all  dvafiviiatie  (Num.  x.  10 ;  cf. 
Levit.  xxiy.  7;  Luke  xxii.  19;  1  Cor.  xi.  25;  cf.  Heb.  x.  8).  Our  Lord  Himself 
calls  the  wine  "my  blood  of  the  new  covenant"  (to  alfia  fiov  rtjc  Kaivtjs  Sia%Ktie),  and 
we  are  surely  justified,  with  many  divines — John  Wesley  among  them — ^in  oaUing 
the  Holy  Eucharist  "  the  Christian  sacriflee.'" 

But  sacrifice  and  sacrament  have  another  point  of  contact.  For  some  at  least  of 
the  Jewish  sacrifices,  the  peace  offerings  (see  on  ch.  viii.  63—65)  afforded  a,  feast  to 
the  worshippers.  In  like  manner,  the  sacramental  species  serve  not  only  as  a 
memorial  of  Christ's  death  (1  Cor.  xi.  26),  but  they  are  also  food  to  the  faithfol 


OH.  VI  1-38.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  IIS 

soul  (1  Gor.  X.  16, 17 ;  Heb.  xiii.  10 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  28 ;  John  vi.  54,  55).  If,  there- 
fore, the  Holy  Communion  is  not  a  sacrifioe,  properly  so  called  (inasmuch  as  there 
is  no  death),  it  has  these  marks  of  a  sacrilice,  that  it  is  an  oblation,  a  memorial,  and 
a  feast.  And  when  we  consider  these  remarkable  analogies,  we  can  hardly  doubt 
iibat  even  the  laerificea  of  Judaism  have  their  counterpart  in  the  institutions  of 
Christianity. 

It  was  said  by  one  of  the  Beformers  that  the  man  who  can  rightly  distiugnisb 
between  the  Law  and  the  Gospel  should  thank  God  and  be  assured  that  he  is  a  true 
theologian.  But  theologians  too  often  treat  them  as  if  they  were  antagonistic  or 
irreconcilable,  and  one  of  the  dangers  to  which  the  Eeformed  Churches  ore 
specially  obnoxious  is  to  forget  the  continuity  of  gospel  and  law  :  to  forget  that  the 
Church  is  buUt  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets  (Ephes.  iL  20).  If 
it  is  true  that  "  Vetus  Testa/mentum  in Ntyoo patet," it  is  also  true  "Novum  Testa- 
mentum  in  Veiere  latet." 

Vei.  19. — The  Ark  of  the  Covenant  of  the  Lord.  This  temple  of  Solomon,  m 
"exceeding  magnifical,  "  this  "holy  and  beautiful  house,"  "  of  fame,  and  glory 
throughout  all  lands " — why  was  it  built  ?  what  its  primary  purpose  ?  It  was 
above  everything  else  a  home  for  the  ark  (ch.  viiL  1,  6),  a  place  for  the  Divine 
Glory  which  hovered  over  it. 

In  this  temple,  unlike  the  shrines  of  Paganism,  there  was  no  statne,  no  simili- 
tude of  a  God.  Here  was  no  "  image  which  fell  down  from  Jupiter,"  no  Baal  or 
Asherah,  no  Apis  or  Osiris.  We  raay  imagine  how  this  would  impress  the  Phoeni- 
oian  workmen.  We  know  how  it  impressed  Pompeius  and  the  Bomans.  There 
is  deep  significance  in  those  words  of  the  Eoman  historian ;  Inania  arcana,  vacua 
sedes.  Nothing  but  the  ark.  And  this  ark,  what  was  it?  It  was  a  coffer,  a  chest. 
It  was  nothing  in  itself;  but  it  was  meant  to  contain  something.  It  was  the  casket 
of  a  rare  jewel.  "There  was  nothing  in  the  ark,  save  the  two  tables  of  stone,"  &o, 
(oh.  viii.  9).  It  was  the  "  ark  of  the  testimony."  So  that  the  temple  was  properly 
and  primarily  the  shrine  and  depository  of  the  tables  of  the  law  graven  with  th« 
"ten  words,"  "the  words  of  the  covenant"  (Deut.  iv.  18). 

Now  we  have  just  seen  that  the  temple  was  the  archetype  of  the  Church :  we 
have  seen,  too,  that  everything  in  Judaism  has  its  analogue  in  Christianity.  Wliat, 
then,  let  us  ask,  was  the  significance  of  the  ark  ?  To  what  does  it  correspond  in 
the  new  dispensation  ? 

In  the  Church,  to  nothing.  The  "  words  of  the  covenant "  are  no  longer  kept  in 
the  dark.  No  ;  we  now  inscribe  them  on  our  chancel  walls.  In  the  "  sanctuary" 
of  the  Gothic  church  the  ten  commandments  are  "  writ  large"  for  men  to  see. 

But  if  Judaism  was  really  the  outline  of  Christianity,  then  there  must  be  some- 
thing in  Christianity  answering  to  that  ark  which  was  the  core  and  centre  of  the 
Mosaic  system.  Certainly.  .But  it  is  to  be  found,  not  in  "  temples  made  with 
hands,"  but  in  those  other  "  temples"  of  the  Christian  faith,  the  bodies  of  behevers, 
the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  iii.  16  ;  vi.  19).  The  ark  was  the  soul  of 
Judaism.  It  may  fittingly  represent  the  souls  which  Christ  has  redeemed.  Temple, 
ark,  tables  of  the  law — these  severally  correspond  to  the  "  body,  soul,  spirit"  of  the 
Christian  man.  Within  the  temple  was  the  ark ;  within  the  ark  the  tables.  Within 
the  iT(3/*n  is  the  <|/t;x4  J  within  the  4"'X'J  ^^^  irvivfia. 

Nor  is  this  so  fanciful  as  it  seems.  For  are  not  our  bodies  the  "  temples  of  the 
Holy  Ghost "  ?  And  are  not  our  hearts— i.e.,  our  inmost  being,  our  spiritual  part 
(1  Peter  iii.  4) — the  fleshy  tables  on  which  He  writes  His  law  ?  Yes,  in  the  "  new 
covenant "  God  writes  His  law  in  the  heart,  and  puts  it  in  the  inward  parts  (see 
Jer.  xxxi.  S3  ;  c£  Ezek.  xi.  19,  20 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  3).  In  the  face  of  these  scriptures, 
who  can  deny  that  the  ark  end  its  tables  have  their  analogues  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment? 

Such,  then,  being  the  symbolism  and  significance  of  temple,  ark,  and  tables  of 
law,  what  are  their  lessons  ?    Among  others  these : 

1.  That  God  dwells  within  ua.  No  longer  in  temples  made  with  hands,  but 
"with  him  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit"  (Isa.  Ivii  16),    Did  the  She- 


11«  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vi.  1— 8b 

chinah  brood  over  the  mercy  seat  ?  Not  less  truly  does  God's  Spirit  dwell  (Rom. 
viii.  9)  and  witness  (ver.  16)  with  our  spirit.  Men  say  the  Sheohlnah  has  left  thO' 
world.  On  the  contrary.  It  has  enshrined  Itself  in  the  soul.  "  Christ  in  you " 
(Col.  i.  27) ;  God  dwelliag  in  u»  (1  John  iv,  12) ;  this  is  the  last  best  gospel  of  our 
religion.  The  Old  Testament,  Neander  says,  tells  of  a  God  who  is  for  man.  In 
the  Gospels  we  hear  of  Emmanuel,  God  with  man.  But  the  Epistles  speak  to  n» 
of  God  in  man. 

2.  That  Ood  writes  His  Iww  upon  us.  We  have  seen  that  in  the  Church  there 
is  neither  ark  nor  tables  of  stone.  It  is  because  there  is  no  need  of  either.  This 
is  the  age  of  that  "  new  covenant"  of  which  the  prophet  spoke,  when  the  finger  ol 
God  should  write  the  law  upon  the  spirit,  and  when  the  Bath  Kol  should  speali 
within.  The  laws  of  our  country  are  so  voluminous  that  no  man  can  hopei  to  know 
or  to  remember  them,  and  their  "  glorious  uncertainty  "  is  proverbial.  But  God'a 
law  is  but  one  (Bom.  xiii.  9,  10 ;  Heb.  viii.  10  ;  x.  16) ;  and  that  sweet  and  blessed 
statute  the  Spirit  graves  within  us.    Now  observe — 

8.  The  ark,  led  by  Ood,  conducted  Israel  to  victory  and  rest.  In  the  joumeyingg- 
of  Israel  the  ark  went  before  them  (Num.  x.  83).  At  the  Jordan  it  opened  a  way 
for  them  (Josh.  iii.  14 — 17).  Before  Jericho  it  led  them  on  to  victory  (Josh.  vi. 
9 — 11).  Even  so  the  soul,  guided  and  taught  of  God,  passes  safely  tlirough  its  pil- 
grimage, conquers  its  foes,  and  gains  its  heavenly  rest.  Let  us  yield  ourselves  tfr 
be  "  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God"  (Bom.  viii.  14). 

4.  The  a/rk,  led  by  man,  conducted  Israel  to  disaster  and  defeat.  When  the 
Israelites,  instead  of  following  the  ark,  would  lead  it  (1  Sam.  iv.  8),  it  landed  them 
in  a  "  very  great  slaughter."  It  proved  to  be  no  fetish,  as  they  had  hoped ;  it  only 
led  them  to  a  shameful  death.  "  It  is  one  thing  to  want  to  have  truth  on  our' side  ; 
another  to  want  to  be  on  the  side  of  truth  "  (Whately).  It  is  of  no  avail  to  have 
the  commandments  of  God,  unless  we  keep  them ;  to  know  His  will,  unless  we  do- 
it. And  if  we  lean  to  our  own  understandings,  the  soul  wiU  make  shipwreck. 
Beason,  it  is  true,  is  "  the  candle  of  the  Lord ;  "  but  revelation  is  the  "  lamp  to  oiu" 
feet  and  the  Ught  to  our  path"  (Psa.  cxix.  105 ;  of.  Prov.  iii.  5,  6). 

6.  The  o/rTe,  the  pride  of  Israel,  on  two  occasions  became  its  plague.  The  men 
of  Bethshemesh  looked  into  it,  and  died.  Uzzah  put  forth  his  hand  to  steady  it,, 
and  was  smitten  for  his  error  (2  Sam.  vi.  7).  So  the  ark  teaches  the  much-needed 
lesson  of  reverence — reverence  for  God  and  the  things  of  God.  It  also  suggests 
that  dishonour  done  to  God,  or  disregard  of  His  law,  has  a  siire  retribution.  If 
we  stifle  our  convictions  or  quench  the  Spirit's  light,  tiie  law  written  within  may 
hereafter  becom.e  the  "  instrument  to  scourge  us." 

6.  In  the  second  temple  there  was  no  arh.  A  stone  is  said  to  have  taken  its- 
place.  The  venerable  relio  of  the  wUdernesS  life,  the  sacred  chesJ,  and  its  still 
more  sacred  contents,  both  perished  in  the  sack  of  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xxv.  9  sqcj.) 
May  we  not  see  here  a  lesson  against  impenitence?.  Over  how  many  souls  may 
"  Ichabod  "  be  written  ?  The  ark  of  God  is  taken  1  The  soul  is  led  captive  of  tlje 
devil._  The  heart  of  flesh,  the  "  fleshy  tables  "  on  which  the  Spirit  loves  to  write, 
has  given  place  to  a  heart  of  stone — a  heart  as  cold,  as  hard,  as  senseless,  as  void 
of  all  grace  and  blessing  as  this  stone  which  stood  in  tiie  oracle  in  the  room  of  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Ver.  1. — The  Purposes  of  the  Temple.  The  three  chapters  thus  introduced 
describe  the  erection  and  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple.  Magnificent  as  the 
building  was,  architecturally  and  artistically,  it  deserves  more  consideration  as  that 
which  was  the  divinely  appointed  centre  of  true  worship.  Its  significance  to 
Christians  can  hardly  be  overrated.  This  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  clearly  shows. 
While  it  stood  it  was  for  all  nations  a  witness  for  Jehovah  ;  and  now  that  in  suli- 
stance  it  has  passed  away,  the  spiritual  truths  it  embodied  are  a  heritage  for  us. 
Essentially  it  was  one  with  the  tabernacle,  the  erection  and  ritual  of  which  wei» 


«H.  71.  1—38.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  117 

directly  revealed  by  God  on  Sinai.  Neither  in  principle  nor  even  in  minute  detail 
were  the  directions  of  Jehovah  about  its  construction  to  be  disobeyed.  From  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  down  to  the  hooks  for  the  curtains  the  command  ran,  "  See 
that  thou  make  all  things  according  to  the  pattern  showed  thee  in  the  mount." 
There  are  far-reaching  issues  ever  flowing  from  the  smallest  details  of  Divine  law. 
Great  meanings  are  wrapped  by  God  in  trifling  things.  (Give  examples  of  this.) 
Solomon  was  right  in  superseding  the  tabernacle  by  the  temple.  The  tent  was 
suitable  for  the  wandering  life  of  an  unformed  nation,  but  the  stately  and  stable 
temple  for  an  organized  people  whose  pilgrimage  had  ended.  God's  utterances 
both  to  David  and  Solomon,  and  the  presence  of  the  Sheehinah  on  the  day  of  con- 
secration, prove  that  the  erection  of  the  temple  was  according  to  the  will  of  God. 
The  temple  had  meanings  which  no  other  building  subsequently  erected  could  have. 
It  was  "  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come."  It  symbolized  much  that  was  revealed 
in  the  person  of  Christ  (Heb.  ix.  11,  &o.),  and  much  that  is  now  existing,  not  on 
earth,  but  in  heaven  (Heb.  ix.  24,  &o.)  But,  though  its  symbolism  is  a  thing  of 
the  past,  some  of  its  purposes  and  uses  are  things  of  the  present,  known  in  the 
places  set  apart  by  Christian  men  for  the  worship  of  God.  To  some  of  those  we 
now  refer. 

I.  The  temple  was  a  place  of  sacrifice  (2  Obron.  vii.  12).  The  sin-offering 
typified  the  atonement  made,  by-the  Lnmb  of  God,  who  once  was  offered  for  the 
sins  of  the  world.  This  is  the  fact  made  known  by  the  ministry  of  the  Word  and 
represented  by  the  broken  bread  and  outpoured  wine  of  the  Euoharistie  feast.  No 
time  and  no  place  can  be  more  suitable  than  the  sanctuary  for  the  acknowledgment 
of  tin,  and  the  expression  of  faith.    There  each  Christian  sings— 

"My  faith  would  lay  her  hand 
On  that  dear  head  of  Thine." 

II.  The  temple  was  a  place  for  prayer  akb  praise.  Solomon  nsed  It  thM 
(oh.  viii.)  Incense  typified  it.  In  Isaiah  Ivi  7  we  read,  "  My  house  shall  be  called 
a  house  of  prayer,  for  all  people."  The  Lord  Jesus  referred  to  this  when  the  temple 
was  used  for  other  purposes  (Matt.  xxi.  13).  Describe  the  praise  of  the  temple. 
Many  there  understood  the  words,  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord  ;  for  it  is  good  to  sing 
praises  unto  our  God ;  for  it  is  pleasant,  and  praise  is  comely."  Show  the  advan- 
tages of  united  praise,  the  promises  given  to  comhinaiion  in  prayer,  e.g.,  sympathiei 
enlarged,  weak  faith  invigorated  by  contact  with  stronger  faith,  &c. 

III.  The  temple  was  a  place  for  the  consecration  of  persons  and  things. 
There  priests  were  set  apart ;  there  sometimes  prophets  were  called  (Isa.  vi.) ;  there 
dedicated  things  were  laid  before  the  Lord  (2  Chron.  v.  1).  Show  how  in  modern 
days  this  is  still  true  of  the  assembly  of  God's  people.  Men  are  there  roused  to  a 
sense  of  responsibility,  and  there  consecrate  themselves  to  the  service  of  God. 
Resolutions  and  vows  are  made  there  which  carry  with  them  the  impress  of  Divine 
approval.  The  cares  of  life,  its  purposes,  its  companionships  are  there  made  to 
appear  in  their  Godward  aspect.  Through  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary  heavenly 
light  falls  on  daily  toil,  and  men  learn  to  caU  nothing  that  God  has  cleansed  com- 
mon or  unclean. 

IV.  The  temple  was  a  place  for  remembering  the  law  of  the  Lord.  The 
temple  was  incomplete  until  the  ark  of  the  covenant  was  brought  in;  and  "  there 
was  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables  of  stone  which  Moses  put  there  at  Horeb, 
when  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with  the  children  of  Israel  "  (1  Kings  viii.  9). 
Show  the  importance  of  organized  Christian  worship  as  a  perpetual  witness  for  the 
law  of  God.  [q  the  busy  week  there  are  temptations  to  forget  it ;  to  put  expediency 
in  the  place  of  liglitoousness,  &c.  The  whole  tone  of  English  society  is  raised  by 
the  faithful  exhibition  of  God's  requirements  each  sabbath  day. 

V.  The  temple  was  a  place  for  the  union  of  the  people.  The  Psalms  of 
the  Ascents  (Songs  of  Degrees)  show  this.  The  people  overlooked  their  social  dis- 
tinctions and  the  tribes  ignored  their  tribal  jealousies  when  they  ascended  the  sacred 
hiU  to  unite  as  a  nation  in  the  worship  of  the  one  true  God.    Jeroboam  was  shrewd 


H8  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vi.  1—38. 

enough  to  see  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  two  separate  kingdoms  to  exist  while 
all  the  people  met  in  the  one  temple.  Henoe  the  calves  at  Bethel  and  Dan,  and 
hence  in  our  Lord's  day  the  temple  on  Q-erizim.  Show  how  in  the  Christian  Church 
the  rich  and  the  poor  meet  together,  and  how  essential  Christian  principle  is  to 
fuse  together  the  various  classes  of  society.  There  are  many  disintegrating  forces 
at  work — the  capitalists  and  the  working  classes,  for  example,  are  seriously  divided. 
Common  meeting-ground  cannot  be  found  in  the  home,  but  in  the  Church.  The 
reoogaition  of  the  one  Fatherhood  precedes  the  realization  of  the  one  brotherhood. 
Christians  are,  unhappily,  divided  amongst  themselves.  Sectarianism  has  increased 
the  division  of  society.  Relief  is  to  be  found  not  in  form,  but  in  spirit ;  not  in 
union,  but  in  unity.  As  we  worship  together  and  work  together,  the  oneness  of 
which  we  dream  may  become  a  reality. 

VI.  The  temple  was  a  place  fob  the  eevelation  or  God  (see  vers.  10,  11; 
1  Chron.  v.  13 ;  vii.  2).  His  presence  is  not  confined  to  any  temple  made  with 
hands  ;  but  wherever  His  people  meet,  there  He  reveals  Himself  as  he  does  not  do 
unto  the  world.  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  My  name  there  am 
I  in  the  midst  of  them."  It  was  when  the  disciples  were  assembled  with  one 
accord  for  prayer  that  the  Holy  Spirit  came.  So  may  our  assemblies  be  blessed ; 
and  sinners  will  find  pardon,  the  careworn  will  find  rest,  the  doubters  will  find 
iaith,  the  weakly  will  find  strength,  and  the  despondent  will  find  hope  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord  our  God. — A.  R. 

Ver.  7. — Building  in  silence.  This  was  due  partly  to  the  reverential  feelings  of 
those  engaged  in  so  holy  a  work.  "  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple,  let  all  the 
earth  keep  silence  before  him."  If  we  are  upbuilding  Christian  character  in  our- 
selves, or  in  our  children ;  if  we  are  helping  to  rear  the  spiritual  temple  of  God, 
such  reverence,  as  opposed  to  thoughtlessness,  flippancy,  &c.,  should  characterize 
vs.  The  silence  of  the  building  was  not  only  the  outcome  of  devout  feeling,  but  it 
was  (like  the  temple  itself)  symbolical  of  spiritual  truth  ;  as  we  propose  to  show. 
A  noble  temple  is  being  reared  (1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17 ;  Eph.  ii.  22 ;  1  Peter  ii.  6).  This 
temple  is  imperishable  and  unassailable  ;  that  of  Solomon's  was  pillaged  (1  Kings 
liv.  25 ;  2  Kings  xiL  17),  polluted  by  the  unworthy  (2  Kings  xxi.  4—7),  burnt  by  the 
enemy  (2  Kings  xxv.  9).  The  erection  described  in  our  text  teaches  us  something 
of  the  work  which  is  still  carried  on  by  the  builders  of  the  true  temple. 

I.  The  builders  of  God's  house  are  often  doing  a  secret  work.  Picture 
the  workmen  ia  the  quarries,  the  moulders  in  the  clay,  the  artist  with  his  graving 
tool,  &o.  Their  names  were  unknown,  they  were  unrecognized  by  the  multitudes 
who  would  worship  in  the  temple  they  were  helping  to  buUd.  Illustrate  from  this 
the  work  of  mothers  influencing  their  children ;  of  visitors  to  haunts  of  sin  and 
sorrow,  whose  ministry  of  love  is  not  known  to  their  nearest  friends ;  of  literary 
men  in  obscure  rooms  who  are  influencing  the  destinies  of  a  people,  &o.  Draw 
encouragement  from  this,  e.g.,  that  we  do  not  see  all  the  good  that  is  going  on  in 
England  and  abroad,  in  the  Churohes  and  outside  them.  So  Elijah  was  cheered 
by  the  revelation  that  there  were  seven  thousand  in  Israel  who  had  not  bowed  the 
knee  to  Baal,  when  he  thought  he  alone  was  left  to  witness  for  Jehovah.  Refer  to 
the  Lord's  teaching  about  the  secret  progress  of  His  kingdom ;  the  leaven  hid  in 
three  measures  of  meal ;  the  seed  cast  into  the  earth  and  left  buried  by  the  man 
who  sleeps  and  rises,  unconscious  that  it  is  spring  ug  and  growing  up  he  knows  not 
how. 

II.  The  builders  of  God's  house  do  varied  work.  Enumerate  some  of  the 
different  kinds  of  labour  and  of  skill  which  were  required  for  the  temple.  Show 
that  the  work  varied  in  dignity,  in  arduousness,  in  remunerativeness,  &c.  None  of 
it,  however,  was  without  its  value  or  final  effect.  Describe  the  multitudinous  forms 
of  Christiau  activity,  and  the  advantages  of  such  diversity.  It  demands  self- 
abnegation,  it  calls  forth  all  graces  and  gifts,  it  makes  one  Claristian  dependent  on 
another,  and  so  evokes  syinpatliy  and  u-ves  place  for  co-operation,  &o.  Let  none 
despise  his  own  work,  nor  envy  another  his. 

III.  Ths  builders  or  God's  house  do  theib  work  wiib  careful  oomfleib* 


CH.  VI,  1—88.]  THE  FIllST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  119 

KESS.  How  exact  tlie  measurementB,  how  perfect  the  finish  of  work,  which  only 
required  to  be  brought  together  in  order  to  laake  a  complete  whole.  Piece  joined 
piece  in  the  woodwork,  and  every  separate  casting  found  its  appropriate  niche. 
Nothing  hut  painstaking  accuracy  could  have  insured  such  a  residt.  Yet  probably 
no  workman  knew  the  whole  design ;  he  was  only  intent  on  finishing  his  own 
appointed  work.  Observe  the  carefulness  of  God  in  little  things,  whether  in  crea- 
tion or  in  moral  law.  Small  infringements  of  Divine  ordinances  bring  lamentable 
results.  Illustrate  from  the  consequences  of  disobedience  to  natural  law  in  pain, 
disease,  &o.  Argue  from  this  to  the  higher  in  mental  and  moral  spheres.  Care- 
lessness is  not  tolerated.  How  much  less  in  concerns  of  the  soul.  NegHgeuce  ia 
sin.  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  There  must  be 
care  in  laying  the  foundations  of  heavenly  hopes  (see  Matt.  vii.  24 — 27).  Care  also 
is  required  in  doing  work  for  our  Lord.  "But  let  every  man  take  heed  how  h« 
buildeth  thereupon  "  (1  Cor,  iiii  10 — 15). 

IV.  The  builders  of  God's  house  are  uorb  anxious  fob  thoroughness  than 
FOB  NOISE.  No  sound  of  hammer  or  axe  was  heard  to  call  the  attention  of  passers 
by  to  the  noble  work  going  on ;  but  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  kingdom  saw  the 
effects  of  the  quiet  labour.  Quietude  is  hard  to  obtain  in  the  activities  of  the  pre- 
sent day,  yet  God's  servants  must  have  it,  Christ  saw  His  disciples  were  excited, 
and  said,  "  Coma  ye  yourselves  apart  into  the  desert  and  rest  awhile."  Moses 
needed  the  solitude  of  Midian  and' of  Sinai;  Elijah  the  loneliness  of  Horeb,  &o. 
Great  souls  are  fashioned  in  silence.  Our  lonely  times  are  our  growing  times. 
Exemplify  by  reference  to  a  man  laid  aside  by  illness,  to  a  mother  or  wife  who 
is  for  a  time  absorbed  in  ministry  to  some  invalid.  The  busy  workers  need  quiet 
most.  They  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  so  renew  their  strength.  Some  of  the  best 
work  done  for  Christ  is  silent.  It  is  not  proclaimed  by  large  organization,  or 
applauding  crowds,  but  lies  in  the  whispered  counsel,  the  interceding  prayer,  &c, 

v.  The  BUILDERS  of  God's  house  will  see  their  laboub  issue  in  the  Divinb 
IDEAL.  The  work  was  widely  distributed,  secretly  done,  &c.,  but  aU  was  tending 
to  an  appointed  end — the  temple.  The  building  existed  in  the  mind  of  the  master 
builder  before  it  had  material  existence.  So  with  God's  work.  A  Divine  purpose 
is  controlling  all,  appointing  all ;  and  out  of  what  seems  confusion  and  contradic- 
tion He  will  bring  forth  "  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth."  Faithfully 
doing  each  one  what  lies  to  his  hand,  we  shall  all  find  that  what  we  have  done  has 
its  place  and  results  ;  that  our  "  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord,"  Forgotten  and 
obscure  workers  will  have  their  reward  from  Him  who  noticed  the  widow's  mite, 
and  gratefully  accepted  Mary's  offering.  We  shall  do  more  than  we  expect,  if  W9 
do  what  we  can. 

VI.  The  builders  of  God's  house  find  their  reward  in  the  gloet  of  theis 
God.  Describe  the  temple — complete  at  last — resounding  with  songs  of  praise, 
crowded  with  worshippers,  overwhelmed  by  the  Divine  presence — and  use  it  as  a 
type  of  the  temple  not  made  with  hands,  where  the  redeemed  serve  God  day  and 
night  The  wish  of  God's  noblest  servant  is  that  God  may  be  glorified  whether  by 
life  or  by  death. 

Apply  the  idea  of  silent  worJeing  to  what  Ood  is  doing  in  each  Christian  heart 
by  the  discipline  of  life  and  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  felt  within,  but 
it  is  not  known  or  heard  without. — A.  R. 

Ver.  23. — The  Mystery  of  the  Cherubim.  That  the  cherubim  were  symbolio 
no  one  denies.  They  are  so  often  mentioned  in  Scripture  that  their  meaning  has 
been  frequently  discussed.  Enumerate  some  of  the  opinions  held.  The  view  we 
accept  is  that  they  were  symbolic  representations  of  redeemed  h/u/mamity.  They 
were  intended  to  inspire  men  with  hope  of  redemption,  frorii  the  day  when  the 
Lord  placed  them  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  tiU  the  vision  of  John  (Rev, 
xxi,)  is  fulfilled  in  the  "  new  heavens  and  new  earth,"  wherein  the  cherubim  are  no 
longer  seen,  having  vanished  before  the  reality  they  symbolically  represented.  In 
the  cherubim  we  are  reminded  of  the  following — 

I.  Ths  pfiBFEOTiNa  OF  BUUANiiT.    Some  obsoiuitv  lingers  about  the  foimi  of 


120  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vi.  1—88. 

these  beings.  They  are  introduced  in  Genesis  witliout  a  word  of  description  ;  and 
in  Exodus  (xxv.  and  xxxvii.)  little  is  said  beyoud  this,  that  they  had  "wings  and 
faces."  Turning  to  their  visionary  appearances — to  Ezekiel  and  to  John — there  is 
variety  in  foim.  But  whatever  latitude  there  may  be  in  detail,  the  leading  form 
was  always  that  of  a  man — e.g.,  Ezekiel  says  (ch.  i.  5),  "  they  had  the  likeaess  of  a 
man."  With  this,  other  creature  forms  were  combined,  viz.,  the  lion,  the  ox,  and 
eagle.  These  were  selected  for  special  reasons.  They  belonged  to  the  noblest  kmg- 
dom,  that  of  animal  life,  as  distinguished  from  that  which  was  vegetable  or  mineral. 
They  were  amongst  the  highest  after  man  in  the  nature  of  their  hfe ;  very  different, 
for  example,  from  sea-anemones,  &o.  They  had  loftier  attributes  than  those  of 
other  creatures ;  greater  powers  or  wider  usefulness.  Hence,  combined  with  the 
image  of  man  to  form  the  cherubim,  they  suggested  the  addition  to  him  of  the 
powers  they  specially  represented.  The  lion,  especially  to  the  Hebrews,  was  a  type 
of  kingly  majesty  and  glorious  strength.  Give  quotations  from  Scripture.  The 
eagle,  with  its  keen  vision  and  swift  flight,  was  a  type  of  rapidity  of  thought  and 
movement  (Deut.  xxviii.  49  ;  Job  ix.  26 ;  Prov.  xxiii.  5).  The  ox,  used  in  plough- 
ing, harrowing,  carrying  home  the  sheaves,  and  treading  out  the  corn,  represented 
patient  and  productive  activity.  In  the  cherubim  all  these  were  grafted  on 
man — an  ideal  combination,  to  show  that,  though  man  was  the  highest  creatvu:* 
of  God  (he  alone  having  a  moral  and  a  rational  nature),  he  could  be,  and  would  be, 
ennobled  by  having  hereafter  the  powers  bestowed,  of  which  in  creature  life  these 
animals  were  representatives.  Show  the  Scripture  evidence  for  expecting  in 
heaven  the  faculties  for  knowiug,  for  serving,  for  enjoying,  which  we  have  not 
here. 

II.  The  fulness  of  life.  In  Ezekiel  and  Eevelation  the  cherubim  are  Ire- 
qneiitly  spoken  of  as  "theUving  ones"  {ani/mantia,  Swo).  This  expression  is  obscured 
in  our  translation  by  the  unhappy  rendering  "beasts"  (Eev.  iv.  6),  &o.  The 
expression  denotes  life  in  its  highest  and  most  active  form.  In  harmony  with 
this,  Ezekiel  speaks  of  their  "  running  and  returning."  John  says,  "  they  rest  not 
day  nor  night."  Though  the  chsrubim  in  the  temple  and  tabernacle  were  of 
necessity  stationary,  the  same  idea  was  there  expressed  by  the  outspread  wings.  The 
cherubim  pointed  on  to  the  plenitude  of  hfe,  Divine  and  spiritual,  over  which  weari- 
ness should  have  no  power,  and  towards  which  death  would  never  approach. 
"  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,"  &o.  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and 
that  they  might  have  it  more  abundantly,"  &o. 

III.  The  dwelling  with  God.  The  cherubim  were  always  associated  with  the 
Divine  Presence.  After  man  was  driven  from  Eden,  the  cherubim  was  placed 
there  to  occupy  the  place  he  had  forfeited  ;  where  life  was  full,  and  where  holiness 
was  a  necessity.  When  the  tabernacle  was  constructed,  all  the  inner  curtains 
were  inwoven  with  cherubic  figures,  and  images  of  cherubim  appeared  on  the 
sacred  ark,  which  was  the  throne  of  Jehovah.  This  was  repeated  in  the  temple,  as 
the  passage  before  us  shows  ;  for  the  magnificent  eherubim,  each  ten  cubits  high, 
were  stationed  in  the  "  oracle,"  the  place  where  the  Sheohinah  proclaimed  God's 
presence.  We  must  add,  therefore,  to  the  ideas  we  have  dwelt  on — this  thought, 
that  the  life  represented  was  life  essentially  connected  with  Ood  Himself.  Not 
only  will  the  life  of  the  future  be  full,  but  it  will  be  holy.  Holiness  will  be  its 
essence.  "  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God."  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see 
the  Lord."     "  Neither  shall  there  enter  into  it  anything  that  defileth,"  &o. 

IV.  The  bliss  of  the  future.  A  careful  reading  of  Genesis  iii.  24  shows  that 
the  "sword"  and  the  "  cherubim"  were  not  only  distinct,  but  had  different  functions. 
The  sword  "  kept"  the  way  to  the  treeof  life,  so  that  it  was  more  accessible  to  fallen 
man.  It  was  a  symbol  of  repulsion  and  alarm.  The  cherubim  "  kejjt"  the  garden 
in  a  different  sense.  They  did  not  defend  it  against  man,  but  occupied  it  for  man, 
and  therefore  gave  to  those  who  were  shut  out  the  hope  of  that  which  the  promis* 
of  Jehovah  had  already  announced.  The  presence  of  the  cherubim  said  to  fallen 
man :  "  This  region  of  life  is  not  destroyed,  it  is  not  given  over  to  other  creatures, 
but  it  is  occupied  and  kept  provisionally  for  you  by  a  being  in  whom  your  natur* 
predominates;  and  hereafter,  you  yourself  changed,  euriohed  with  new  powanii 


OH.  VI.  1— 88.J  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  121 

restored  by  redemptive  love  to  holiness,  shall  share  Paradise  regained."  The 
means  of  realizing  this  became  more  clear  as  the  ages  rolled  by.  The  hope  that 
ideal  humanity  would  inherit  bliss  did  not  die  out,  but  the  method  of  its  fullihnent 
was  unfolded  in  the  Mosaic  institutions.  Not  only  did  the  cherubim  in  the  oracle 
witness,  as  the  cherubim  in  Eden  had  done,  but  once  a  year  the  high  priest, 
as  the  representative  of  the  people,  went  in,  and  stood  with  the  cherubim  in  the 
presence  of  Jehovah.  He  entered  not  "  without  blood,"  but  after  atonement  had 
been  made  for  the  sins  of  the  people.  Apply  this  to  the  truth  revealed  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Show  how  Christ,  who  has  atoned  for  the  world's  sin, 
has  entered  as  our  High  Priest  into  the  hoUest  of  all,  and  how  He  has  opened  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers.  No  wonder  that  in  the  Eevelation  "  the  Lamb 
that  was  sltiin  "  is  depicted  as  being  the  object  of  heaven's  praise ;  the  link  between 
man's  guilt  and  God's  mercy. 

[For  justification  of  this  use  of  the  chernbim,  see  Fairbaim's  "  Typology  of 
Scripture."]— A.  B. 

Ver.  2. — The  temple  is  described  ss  "  the  house  which  King  Solomon  huili  for 
the  Lord."  This  iiiea  of  consecration  ran  through  the  whole  plan  of  the  building. 
"Without  having  recourse  to  a  minute  and  fanciful  symbolism,  we  see  clearly  that 
everytliing  is  so  disposed  as  to  convey  the  idea  of  the  holiness  of  God.  In  the 
CENTBE  IS  THE  ALTAR  OP  SACRIFICE.  'The  holy  of  hoUes,  hidden  from  gaze  by  its 
impenetrable  veil,  strikes  with  awe  the  man  of  unclean  heart  and  lips,  who  hears 
the  seraphim  cry  from  beneath  their  shadowing  wings,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord 
God  Almit;hty  I"  (Isa.  vi.  8.)  The  temple  of  holiness  is  not  the  temple  of  nature 
of  colossal  proportions,  ai  in  the  East,  nor  is  it  the  temple  of  SBsthetic  beauty,  as  in 
Greece.  It  is  the  dwelling  place  of  Him  who  is  invisible,  and  of  purer  eyes  than 
to  behold  evil  (Hab.  i.  13.)  Hence  its  peculiar  character.  It  answers  thus 
to  the  true  condition  of  religious  art,  which  never  sacrifices  the  idea  and  sense 
of  the  Divine  to  mere  form,  but  makes  the  form  instinct  with  the  Divine  idea. 
Let  us  freely  recognize  the  claims  of  religious  art.  The  extreme  Puritanism 
which  thinks  it  honours  God  by  a  contemptuous  disregard  of  the  sesthetio,  Ib 
scarcely  less  mistaken  than  the  idolatrous  materialism  which  makes  beauty  of 
form  the  primaiy  consideration.  It  was  not  for  nothing  that  God  made  the  earth 
so  fair,  the  sky  so  glorious ;  and  it  was  under  Divine  inspiration  that  the  temple 
of  Jerusalem  was  reared  in  such  magnificence  and  majesty  as  to  strike  all 
beholders.  Only  let  us  never  forget  to  seek  the  Divine  idea  beneath  the  beauty  of 
the  form.  When  we  admire  merely  the  beautiful,  whether  in  a  temple,  as  did  the 
disciples,  or  in  the  great  world  of  nature,  the  warning  words  of  Christ  fall  upon 
upon  our  ear :  "  As  for  these  things  which  ye  behold,  the  days  vill  come  in  the 
which  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone  upon  another"  (Luke  ixi.  6).  "  Tout  lea 
cieux  et  leur  splendeur  ne  valent  pas  le  loupir  d'v/n  seul  cosur."  Love  is  the 
crowning  beauty.  It  is  like  the  precious  vase  of  ointment  which  Mary  of  Bethany 
broke  over  the  feet  of  Christ.  Beauty  is  the  fit  associate  of  worship,  so  long  as  it 
is  kept  subordinate,  and  does  not  distract  our  minds  from  the  higher  spiritual 
realities  of  which  it  is  but  symbolic.  Let  us  seek  in  the  temple  of  nature  the 
high  and  holy  God,  of  whom  it  is  said,  that  "  the  invisible  things  of  Him  are 
clearly  seen  from  the  creation  of  the  world,  being  understood  by  the  things  that 
are  made"  (Horn.  i.  19).  Let  us  recognize  His  presence  beneath  the  arches  of  the 
medisBval  cathedral,  among  the  memorials  of  a  worship  which  we  ourselves  have 
left  behind.  Let  us  seek  Him  in  the  great  monuments  of  Christian  art,  whether 
reared  by  poet,  musician,  painter,  or  sculptor.  Let  it  be  our  aim  to  glorify  Him 
in  the  forms  of  our  worship,  while  we  sedulously  guard  against  the  worship  of  the 
form,  which  is  sheer  idolatry.  Such  are  the  principles  of  Christian  sesthetics,  which 
are  one  branoTi  of  Christian  morals.  "  The  beautiful  is  the  glory  of  the  true,"  says 
Plato.  When  one  corner  of  the  veil  which  hides  heaven  from  us  is  lifted,  the 
Divine  life  shines  forth  in  aU  its  radiance  of  purity  and  beauty.— E.  de  P. 

Vers.  S7|  88l — The  Gloriout  House  of  the  Lord.    In  comparison  with  othei 


128  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  ti.  1-88 

Baered  shrines  of  antiquity  the  temple  of  Solomon  was  small  in  its  dimen-iinns 
and  lirief  in  the  time  of  its  building.  Nor  will  the  mere  fact  of  its  matei-ial 
splenJonr  account  for  the  extraordinary  interest  with  which  it  has  ever  been 
re,<,'arded  —  an  interest  in  which  Jew,  Mohammedan,  and  Christian  alike  partici- 
pate. The  place  it  occupied,  the  part  it  performed  in  the  religious  history 
of  the  world,  will  alone  account  for  this.  If  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  any 
pre-existing  model  as  suggesting  the  plan  of  its  structure,  iJ  is  to  Assjnia  and 
not  to  Egypt,  as  some  have  thought,  that  we  should  look  for  such  a  type. 
But  however  this  may  be,  it  has  a  deep  Divine  meaning  which  raises  it  above 
comparison  with  any  other  temple  that  the  hand  of  man  has  ever  reared.  Let 
us  look  on  it  now  as  the  ancient  symbol  of  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  that 
fellowship  of  new-born  souls  of  whom  St.  Peter  says,  "  Ye  also  as  living  stones  are 
built  up  a  spiritual  house,"  &o.  (1  Peter  ii.  5).  Note  certain  points  of  special 
interest  in  this  analogy — those  features  of  the  temple  which  are  suggestive  of 
similar  features  in  the  spiritual  fabric  of  the  redeemed  Church. 

I.  The  FiEMNEsa  of  its  foundation.  The  thresliing-floor  of  Araunah,  the  site 
of  the  temple,  was  part  of  the  plateau  on  the  top  of  Mount  Moriah  (2  Ghron.  iii.  1). 
Solomon,  as  we  are  told  by  Josephus,  in  order  to  enlarge  the  area,  bnUt  massive 
walls  on  the  sloping  sides  of  the  mountain,  fiUing  in  the  spaces  with  earth  ;  and 
the  foundations  of  these  walls  were  composed  of  huge  stones  bedded  and,  as  it 
were,  mortised  in  the  solid  rock.  How  forcibly  are  we  reminded  of  the  word  of 
Christ  to  Peter,  "  Upon  this  rook  vdll  I  build' my  Church,  and  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail  against  it"  (Matt,  xvi  18).  Whatever  the  bearing  of  this  word  on 
the  disciple  himself  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  it  cannot  refer  to  him  apart  from  the 
grand  confession  he  has  just  made — "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  son  of  the  living 
God."  Peter  may  be  one  of  the  great  foundation  stones,  but  Christ  Himself  is  the 
solid,  primary,  unhewn  Book  on  which  the  fabric  rests.  Not  so  much  any  truth 
about  Him,  but  the  personal  Christ  in  the  grandeur  of  His  being,  the  integrity  of 
His  righteousness,  the  strength  and  fldelity  of  his  wondrous  love,  is  the  Church's 
firm  foundation. 

II.  The  silent  process  of  its  structure.  "  There  was  neither  hammer,  nor 
axe,  nor  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house  while  it  was  in  building  (ver.  7).  This 
was  probably  in  obedience  to  the  prohiliition  recorded  in  Exodus  xx.  26  and 
Deuteronomy  xxvii.  5.  It  expressed  the  king's  sense  of  the  sanctity  of  the  work. 
The  tranquillity  of  the  scene  must  not  be  broken  by  the  elang  of  inharmonious 
sounds.  "  Like  some  taU  palm,  the  noiseless  faliric  gi-ew."  Tke  fact  is  suggestive. 
The  building  up  of  the  Church  of  God  is  a  silent,  hidden  process.  Outward  visible 
agencies  must  be  employed,  but  the  real  constructive  forces  are  out  of  sight.  Truth 
works  secretly  and  silently  in  the  souls  of  men.  "  The  kuigd»B»  of  God  cometh 
not  with  observation."  Noise  and  show  are  out  of  harmony  with  the  sanctity  of  it. 
Clamour  and  violence  only  hiuder  the  work.  Let  us  not  mistake  a  restless,  busy, 
fussy  zeal  for  the  externalities  of  Church  life  for  true  spiritual  serrige.  This  is  often 
in  inverse  ratio  to  the  amount  of  real  edification.  The  best  machinery  works  with 
least  friction  and  noise.  The  quiet,  thoughtlul  workers,  who  move  on  steadily  by 
the  inspiration  of  their  holy  purpose,  without  much  public  recoguition,  may  after 
all  be  the  most  efficient  builders  of  the  temple  of  God. 

III.  The  variety  op  the  aoencies  b¥  which  the  work  was  done.  Foreign 
power  was  enlisted  in  the  service — Hiram  and  his  artificers.  Cedars  from  Lebanon, 
gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones  from  Opbir  and  Parvaim,  brass  "  without 
weight"  from  the  foundries  of  Succoth  and  Zarethan — all  were  consecrated  to 
it.  So  also  with  the  spiritual  fabric.  The  resources  of  the  world  are  at  the 
command  of  Him  who  rears  it.  "  All  things  serve  His  might."  All  beings,  with 
all  their  faculties,  are  at  His  disposal.  All  streams  of  human  interest,  and  thought, 
and  speech,  and  activity  may  be  made  tributary  to  the  great  river  of  His  purpose. 
Our  faith  rests  in  the  assurance  that  it  is  so— that  just  as  our  physical  life  is 
nourished  by  all  sorts  of  ministries,  near  and  remote,  so  the  kingdom  of  truth  and 
righteousness  iu  the  world  is  bein<r  biiUt  up  by  a  vast  variety  of  agencies  which  it 
is  beyond  our  power  to  trace.    All  human  affairs  ai-e  but  m  the  soafiuklin'g  within 


OB.  vn.  1—61.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


129 


which  the  structure  of  God's  great  house  is  slowly  rising  to  its  completion.  To 
this  structure  it  is  that  the  prophetic  word,  in  its  deepest  meaning,  may  be 
applied,  "The  sons  of  strangers  shall  build  up  thy  walls"  (Isa.  Ix.  10).  And  in 
its  final  consummation  sliaU  be  fulfilled  the  apocalyptic  picture,  "  The  kings  of  the 
eaith  do  bring  their  glory  and  honour  into  it."  (Eev.  xxi.  22). 

IV.  The  mingled  strength  and  beauty  of  the  fabric.  The  blocks  of  stone 
were  lined  with  cedar  planks,  and  the  cedar  overlaid  with  plates  of  gold  ;  the 
waUs  covered  with  carved  "  cherubims  and  palm  trees  and  open  flowers  ;"  the 
brazen  pillars  crowned  witli  "  lily-work."  The  building-  was  not  of  large  dimen- 
sions, but  wonderful  for  its  combination  of  solidity  and  adornment,  partaking  of 
the  firmness  of  the  rocky  mount  on  which  it  stood,  gUttering  in  the  sunUght,  the 
crowning  glory  of  tlie  royal  city.  How  much  more  truly  may  we  say  of  the 
spiritual  temple,  "  Strength  and  beauty  are  in  His  sanctuary."  There  is  no  strength 
like  that  of  truth  and  righteousness ;  no  beauty  like  that  of  holy  character  : — 
strength  drawn  from  Christ,  the  living  Foundation,  the  reflected  beauty  of  that 
purer  heaven  which  is  the  eternal  home  of  God. 

V.  The  orderly  arrangement  of  its  parts  and  appurtenances.  The  temple 
was  framed  apparently  after  the  model  of  the  tabernacle,  but  with  doubled  dimen- 
sions and  more  enduring  materials,  and  that  was  "  after  the  pattern  shown  to 
Moses  in  the  mount " — all  regulated  with  regard  to  the  due  administration  of  the 
service  of  God.  Courts,  chambers,  galleries,  altars,  lavers,  utensils — all  consecrated 
to  some  sacred  use,  or  meant  to  enshrine  some  high  symbolic  meaning.  The 
gathering  up  of  a  complex  variety  of  parts  in  one  grand  structural  unity.  Such 
is  the  Church — an  aggregate  of  various  but  harmonious  and  mutually  helpful 
parts.  "There are  diversities  of  gifts  and  administrations  and  operations,  but  the 
same  Spirit ''  (1  Cor.  xii.  4).  "  All  the  building  fitly  framed  together,"  &c.  (Ephes. 
ii.  18).  "The  whole  body  fitly  joined  together  and  compacted  by  that  which  every 
joint  supplieth,"  &o.  (Ephes.  iv.  16).  It  would  seem  necessary  that  the  social 
religious  life  should  assimie  some  visible  organized  form ;  and  though  there  may 
be  no  such  form  or  forms  eoclesiaslioal  that  can  claim  to  have  the  stamp  of  distinct 
Divine  approval,  yet  all  are  Divine  so  far  as  they  minister  to  the  general  edifica- 
tion and  preserve  "  the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."  They  each  and 
all  have  their  jplace  in  the  Divine  order,  if  they  help  to  fulfil  the  holy  uses,  and  to 
heisjbten  the  glory  of  the  great  temple  of  the  Lorl. 

VI.  Its  sublime  distinction  as  the  habitation  of  God  (see  vers.  12,  18,  &c.) 
This  was  but  the  repetition  of  a  more  ancient  promise  (Bxod.  xxv.  8  ;  xxix.  45). 
And  what  are  all  these  promises,  with  all  the  marvellous  mauifestations  that  veri- 
fied them,  but  typical  foreshado wings  of  the  riclier  grace  by  viitiie  of  which  the 
Church  becomes  "the  hal)itai;on  of  God  thi-caigh  the  Spirit"?  "  The  Most  High 
dwells  not  in  templi's  made  with  hands  j "  His  dwelling-place  is  the  fellowship  of 
redeemed  souls. — W> 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  VII.     1—51. 
Solomon's  palaces  and  the  pbepabation 

01  THE   TEMPLE  VESSELS. — The   first  twclVB 

verses  of  this  chapter  constitute  a  break  in 
the  long  account  of  the  Temple,  its  furni- 
ture and  its  consecration.  The  historian 
having  described  the  Temple  buildings,  be- 
fore be  passes  on  to  speak  of  their  contents 
pauses  for  a  moment  to  record  a  few  par- 
ticulars as  to  the  building  of  the  suite  of 
palaces  which  next  occupied  Solomon's  at- 
tention.   The  LXX.,  possibly  following  an 


older  arrangement,  but  more  probably  (see 
next  note)  adopting  an  apparently  more 
logical  and  methodical  order,  relegates  this 
section  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 

Ver.  1. — But  Solomon  was  liuUdlng  his 
own  house  thirteen  years  [There  is  no  con- 
trast implied  between  the  time  spent  upon 
the  temple  and  that  occupied  in  the  building 
of  the  palace,  as /he  word  "  but "_ seems  to 
suggest.  The  clc^e  connexion  which  exists 
in  the  original  is  interrupted  by  the  division 
of  chapters.  In  ch.  vi.  38  we  read,  "So 
was  he  seven  years  in  building  it."  Ch.  vii.  \ 
then  proceeds,  "  And  he  was  bnilding  hi8 


124 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  vn.  1 — 5L 


own  house  thirteen  years.''  The  much 
longer  period  occupied  in  the  erection  of  the 
royal  palace  is  easily  accounted  for.  In  the 
first  place,  the  buildings  were  much  larger, 
and  the  undertaking  altogether  was  a  much 
more  extensive  one  (ver.  2).  Then,  though 
seven  years  only  were  consumed  in  the 
actual  building  of  the  temple,  yet  prepara- 
tions for  the  work  had  been  made,  both  by 
David  and  Solomon,  for  a  long  time  before- 
hand. Lastly,  a  special  force  of  labourers 
would  appear  to  have  been  employed  on  the 
temple,  while  it  is  probable  that  they 
wrought  at  the  palaces  in  greatly  diminished 
numbers.  So  that  the  longer  period  spent 
over  Ills  own  house  does  not  argue  selfish- 
ness or  worldliness  on  Solomon's  part.  On 
the  contrary,  it  speaks  well  for  his  piety  that 
he  built  the  temple  first  and  urged  on  that 
sacred  work  with  so  much  vigour.  The 
thirteen  years  date  from  the  completion  of 
the  siiven  years  of  ch.  vi.  38.  That  is  to 
say,  the  building  of  the  temple  and  palace 
together  occupied  twenty  years,  as  is  ex- 
pressly stated  in  ch.  ix.  10.  It  is  therefore 
one  of  Stanley's  reckless  statements  that 
the  palace  "  was  commenced  at  the  same 
time  as  the  temple,  but  not  finished  till 
eight  yeais  afterwards " ] ,  and  he  finished 
all  Ms  house.  [By  Solomon's  "house "  we 
are  not  to  understand  his  private  palace,  or 
residence  proper,  alone  (see  ver.  8),  but  a 
range  of  palaces,  more  or  less  connected, 
including  the  "house  of  the  forest  of  Le- 
banon "  (ver  2),  "  the  porch  of  pillars  " 
(ver.  6),  the  throne-room  or  judgment  hall 
(ver.  7),  his  own  house  and  the  house  of 
]?haraoh'B  daughter  (ver.  8).  That  all 
these  are  comprehended  under  the  term 
"house"  is  evident  from  ch.  ix.  1,  10,  16; 
X.  12,  where  Solomon's  buildings  are  always 
spoken  of  as  two,  viz.,  "  the  house  of  the 
Lord  "  and  the  "  king's  house." 

The  situation  of  this  string  of  palaces  is 
by  no  means  certain.  Josephus  says  it  stood 
over  against  (or  opposite)  the  temple,  which 
is  highly  probable ;  but  this  still  leaves  the 
question  of  site  open,  for  the  palace  would 
be  justly  described  as  avrtKpve  ixutv  vabv, 
whether  it  stood  west  or  south  of  the 
sanctuary.  Ewald  places  it  on  the  opposite 
ridge  of  Ophel,  i.e.,  on  the  south  prolonga- 
tion of  the  tempie^bount;  while  Fergusson, 
Bahr,  &c.,  locate  it  on  the  north-east  side  of 
Zion,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Tyropoean 
valley,  and  overlooking  it  and  the  whole 
city  of  David.  Eecent  explorations  seem  to 
favour  Ewald's  view.  See  "Recovery  of 
Jerusalem,"  pp.  319  sqq.,  and  "  Our  Work  in 
Palestine,"  p.  159  sqq.  When  we  remem- 
ber that  the  very  site  of  Zion  is  disputed,  it 
will  not  surprise  the  reader  that  questions 
of  this  kind  should  be  involved  in  uncer- 


tainty. And  when  it  is  further  considered 
that  the  accumulated  dSbris  of  Jerusalem 
at  one  point  reaches  a  depth  of  120  feet,  it 
wiU  be  readily  understood  what  i  bstacles 
stand  in  the  way  of  their  settlement.] 

Ver.  2. — He  tullt  also  [Heb.  and  he  huilt. 
The  A.  V.  rendering  almost  contradicts  the 
view  just  advanced,  viz.,  that  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  part  of  "  all  the 
house  "  (ver.  1)]  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  [so  called,  not  because  it  was  a 
summer  residence  in  Lebanon,  as  some  have 
supposed,  nor  yet  merely  because  it  was 
built  of  Lebanon  cedar,  but  because  it  dis- 
played a  perfect  thicket  or  forest  {ISl)  of 
cedar  pillars] ;  the  length  thereof  was  one 
hundred  cubits  [the  temple  proper  was  60] , 
and  the  breadth  thereof  fifty  cubits  [The 
temple  was  but  20.  It  does  not  follow  that 
this  space  of  100  x  50  cilbits  was  all  rooted 
in,  for  it  would  seem  as  if  the  house  was 
built  round  a  com-tyard.  Eawlinson  re- 
marks that  a  roof  of  75  feet  is  "  much  greater 
than  is  ever  found  in  Assyria."  But  it  is  by 
no  means  certain  that  there  was  any  such 
roof  here] ,  and  the  height  thereof  thirty 
cubits  [the  same  as  the  temple] ,  upon  four 
rows  of  cedar  pUlars  [How  these  were 
disposed  of,  or  what  was  their  number,  it  ii 
impossible  to  say.  Thenius  says  they  were 
400,  but  this  is  pure  conjecture.  The  de- 
scription is  so  meagre  and  partial  that  it  il 
impossible  to  form  a  correct  idea  of  the 
building.  The  remark  made  above  (ch.  vi. 
Introd.  Note)  as  to  the  temple  applies  with 
still  greater  force  to  the  palaces.  "  There 
are  few  tasks  more  difficult  or  puzzling  than 
the  attempt  to  restore  an  ancient  building 
of  which  we  possess  nothing  but  two  verb^ 
descriptions ;  and  these  difficulties  are  very 
much  enhanced  when  one  account  is  written 
in  a  language  like  Hebrew,  the  scientific 
terms  in  which  are,  from  our  ignorance, 
capable  of  the  widest  latitude  of  interpreta- 
tion, and  the  other,  though  written  in  a 
language  of  which  we  have  a  more  definite 
knowledge,  was  composed  by  a  person  who 
could  never  have  seen  the  building  he  was 
describing  "  (Fergusson,  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  p.668)] , 
with  cedar  beams  [niJTIS,  cut  or  hewn 
beams]  upon  the  pillars/  [This  palace, 
according  to  Fergusson,  was  "  the  great 
hall  of  state  and  audience  "  and  the  princi- 
pal building  of  the  range.  But  if  it  was 
this,  which  is  very  doubtful,  for  the  throne 
was  in  the  ball  of  judgment  (eh.  v.  7),  it 
would  seem  to  have  served  other  purposes 
beside,"^  that  of  an  audience-chamber.  Among 
other  things,  it  was  certainly  an  armoury 
(ch.  X.  17.  Cf.  Isa.  xxii.  8).  The  Arab. 
Vers,  calls  it  "the  house  of  his  arms." 
Possibly  it  was  also  the  resideuoa  of  the 


OH.  vn.  1—51.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


125 


bodygiiard  (cf.  xiv.  28  with  x.  17).  Bahr 
observes  that  the  arrangement  of  the  palaces 
accords  with  the  Jewish  conceptions  of  the 
kingly  office.  The  first,  the  armoury,  re- 
presents him  iu  his  militant  character  (1 
Sam.  viii.  20),  the  second  iu  his  judicial 
function  (1  Sam.  viii.  6,  6 ;  2  Sam.  xv.  4j 
1  Kings  ill.  9),  while  the  third  shows  him  in 
his  private  capacity.] 

Yer.  8. — And  It  was  covered  [or  roofed] 
with  cedar  above  [cf.  vi.  9,  16]  upon  the 
beams  [niyjV  lit.,  ribs,  the  word  used  in 
di.  vi.  5  of  the  side  chambers,  and  In  vi.  34 
(in  the  masculine)  of  the  leaves  of  the  doors] , 
that  lay  on  lorty-flve  pillars,  fifteen  In  a 
row.  [EawHnson,  al.  are  much  exercised  to 
reconcile  this  statement  with  that  of  ver.  2, 
which  speaks  ot  fow  rows,  But  the  ex- 
planation is  very  simple,  viz.,  that  the 
"  forty-five,  fifteen  in  a  row  "  does  not  refer 
to  the  pillars  but  to  the  side  chambers  or 
compartments  (A.  V.,  "beams  ").  The  de- 
scription is  so  very  loose  and  general  that 
positive  statements  are  out  of  place,  but  the 
meaning  certainly  appears  to  be  this,  that 
there  was  a  roofing  of  cedar  over  the  side 
chambers  (which  rested  upon  the  pillars 
mentioned  in  ver.  2)  forty-five  in  number, 
fifteen  in  a  row.  It  is  true  the  Masoretic 
punctuation  is  against  this  view.  It  is  also 
clear  that  the  LXX.  understood  the  numbers 
forty-five  and  fifteen  to  refer  to  the  pillars, 
for  they  have  essayed  to  cut  the  knot  by 
reading  tftree  rows  instead  of  "/our  rows," 
in  ver.  2.  Similarly  the  Arab,  in  ver.  3  reads 
sixty  instead  of  forty- five  ;  obviously  another 
desperate  attempt  to  solve  the  difficulty  by 
a  corruption  of  the  text.  But  the  solution 
suggested  above  is  so  simple  and  natural 
that  we  can  hardly  be  wrong  in  adopting  it. 
Bahr  says  positively  that  forty-five  pillars 
could  not  have  supported  a  structure  100 
cubits  by  50  cubits,  "  nor  could  the  building 
have  been  named  '  forest  of  Lebanon  '  from 
forty-five  scattered  pillars."  It  would  follow, 
hence,  that  there  were  side  chambers  only 
on  three  sides  of  the  building,  as  was  the 
case  in  the  temple.  And  if  (as  has  been 
inferred  from  vers.  4, 6)  a  three-storied 
structure  is  here  described ;  if,  that  is  to 
say,  the  forty-five  chambers  were  divided 
fifteen  to  a  tier  or  story,  it  is  highly  prob- 
able that  they  would  be  distributed  six  to 
each  long  side  and  three  to  the  rear  (Bahr). 
This  arrangement — a  court  surrounded  by  a 
colonnade  and  galleries — is  stiU  found  in 
the  East;  as  all  travellers  know.  And  in 
its  favour  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  such  as 
to  have  been  suggested  by  the  plan  of  the 
temple.  The  ground-plan  is  the  same,  with 
this  difference,  that  a  courtyard  occupies  the 
place  of  tlie  temple  proper.] 


Ver.  4.-And  there  were  windows  [D'Sp^ 
sarne  word  as  iu  ch.  vi.  4,  i.e.,  beams  or 
lattices.  Keil  understands,  beam  layers;  and 
Bahr,  iibergelegte  Balken.  The  LXX.  has 
TrXfupw)']  in  three  rows  [or  tiers.  All  we 
can  fay  is  that  there  is  a  possible  reference 
to  three  stories  formed  by  the  three  rows 
of  beams],  and  light  [lit.,  outlook,  njno 
probably  means  a  wide  outlook.  LXX. 
Xwprt,  aspectus,  prospectus']  was  against 
light  In  three  ranks  [Heb.  three  times. 
The  meaning  is  that  the  side  chambers 
were  so  built  and  arranged  that  the  rooms 
had  their  windows  exactly  vis-a-vis  in 
each  of  the  three  stories.  Josephus  ex- 
plains, 9vp(!)fiaai  TpiyXi^oit,  windows  in  three 
divisions,  liut  this  is  no  explanation  of 
the  words  "light  against  light,"  &c.  Fer- 
gusson  understands  the  three  outlooks  to 
mean,  first,  the  clerestory  windows  (that 
there  wasa  clerestory  he  infers  from  Joeephus 
(Ant.,  vii.  5.  2),  who  describes  this  palace  as 
"in  the  Coriu*.Lian  manner,"  which  cannot 
mean,  he  sajs,  "  the  Ooriuthian  order,  which 
was  not  then  invented,  but  after  the  fashion 
of  a  Corinthian  oecus,  which  was  a  hall  with 
a  clerestory");  (2)  a  range  of  openings 
under  the  cornice  of  the  walls ;  and  (3)  a 
range  of  open  doorways.  But  all  this  is 
conjecture. 

Ver.  5.— And  all  the  doors    an4   posts 

[For  nt-irp  posts,  Thenius  would  read  mtnO 
outlooks,  after  ver.  4,  which  seems  a  natural 
emendation,  especially  as  the  LXX.  has 
xHpai.  We  should  then  get  the  sense  of 
"  doors  and  windows  "]  were  square  of  beam. 
[The  word  translated  "windows  "  in  ver. 4; 
the  proper  rendering  is  beam,  and  the  mean- 
ing apparently  is  that  all  these  openings 
were  square  in  shape.  Nothing  is  said 
about  the  height  of  the  rooms,  and  as  the 
commentators  are  not  agreed  whether  there 
was  one  story  or  three,  that  can  ob^ously 
be  only  matter  of  conjecture.  Eawlinsou, 
who  thinks  of  but  one  hall,  with  three  rows 
of  windows,  supposes,  after  Houbipant,  that 
one  row  was  placed  in  a  wall  which  ran 
down  the  middle  of  the  apartment.  Such  an 
arrangement,  he  observes,  was  found  by 
Layard  at  Nimrud.] 

Ver.  6. — And  he  made  a  porch  of  pillars 
[Heb.  the  porch  of  pillars.  This  was  no 
doubt  a  covered  colonnade,  i.e. ,  it  had  a  roof 
but  no  sides.  The  pillars  were  its  only  walls. 
But  here  the  question  presents  itself,  W."  = 
this  porch  the  vestibule  of  the  house  of  thr 
forest  of  Lebanon,  just  described?  Froui 
the  correspondence  between  its  width  au  I 
that  of  this  palace,  Eawlinson  infers  that  it 
was  (cf.  ch.  vi.  2,  8).  Biihr  believes  it  to 
have  been  the  porch  or  entrance  to  the  hall 
ol  judgment  mentioned  in  the  next  verse, 


126 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH.  VII.  1 — 61. 


while  Fergusson  again  assigns  it  an  inde- 
pendent position,  separate  from  either.  The 

term  porch  {D>1S),  the  meaning  of  which  ia 
surely  determined  by  its  use  in  oh.  vi.,  almost 
implies   that  it  must  have  served  as  the 
entrance  or  vestibule  to    some    building. 
But  the  size,  and  the  fact  that  it  had  itself 
a  porch  (see  below) ,  favour  the  idea  that  it 
was  an  independent  structure,  though  Eaw- 
linson  shows  that  "  most  of  the  Persepolitan 
porches  had  small  pillared  chambers  at  some 
little  distance  in  front  of  them,"  and  refers 
to  the  Egyptian  propylaea.     Keil  argues 
that  this  pillar  hall,  as  he  calls  it,  stood 
between  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
and  the  judgment  hall.    Bahr,  as  remarked 
above,  sees  in  it  the  anterior  part  of  the 
judgment  hall,  which  latter,  he  adds,  bore 
to  it  the  same  relation  that  the  oracle  did  to 
the  temple-house.     He  observes  that  as  the 
ark  was  in  the  oracle,  so  the  throne  (ch.  x. 
18)  found  a  place  in  the  hall  of  judgment. 
This  structure,  therefore,  with,  its  porch, 
mentioned  presently,  would  reproduce  the 
main  features  of  the  temple  arrangement. 
We  see,  consequently,  that  both  the  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  and  the  porch  of 
pillars  followed  in  their  outline  the  ground- 
plan  of  the  temple.     Nor  is  this  at  all  sur- 
prising, considering  that  all  these  edifices 
probably  had  the  same  architect  or  designer] ; 
the  length  thereof  was  fifty  cvibits  [the 
length,  i.e.,  according  to  the  view  last  ad- 
vanced of  the  two  divisions  of  the  building, 
viz.,  the  porch  of  pillars  and  the  porch  of 
judgment.    But  the  correspondence  of  the 
length  (or  width — the  same  word  is  used  of 
the  width  of  the  temple  porch  ch.  vi.  3)  of 
this  porch  with  the  width  of  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon  is,  to  say  the  least, 
remarkable,  and  suggests  that  after  all  it 
may  have  been  the  porch  of  that  building. 
If  BO,  the  resemblance  to  the  temple  would 
be  still  more  striking],   and  the  breadth 
[depth  ?]   thereof  thirty  cubits :  and  the 
porch  [Heb.  a  porch]  was  before  them  [i.e., 
the  pillars.    The  words  can  only  mean  that 
a  smaller  porch  stood  before  the  porch  of 
pillars,  or  colonnade] :  and  the  other  [omit] 
pillars  [i.e.,  the  pillars  of  the  minor  vesti- 
bule or  fore  porch]  and  the  thick  beam  [Heb. 
threshold]  were  before  them.     [The  broad 
threshold,  approached  by    steps,  and  the 
pillars  which  it  supported,  together  with  the 
roof  which  covered  them,  formed  the  front 
part  and  approach  to  the  larger  porch  or 
colonnade.] 

Ver.  7.— Then  he  made  a  porch  [or  the 
porch]  for  the  throne  where  he  mlghtjudge 
[i.e.,  it  was  at  once  audience-chamber 
(throne-room,  ch.  x.  18)  and  court  of  justice] , 
•veu  the  porch  of  Judgment  [Stanley  re- 


marks that  this  "  porch,  or  gate  of  justice, 
still  kept  ahve  the  likeness  of  the  old 
patriarchal  custom  of  sitting  in  judgment  at 
the  gate."  He  then  refers  to  the  "gate  of 
justice "  at  Granada  and  the  "  Sublime 
Porte  "  at  Constantinople.  It  is,  perhaps, 
not  quite  so  certain  that  "  this  porch  was 
the  gem  and  centre  of  the  whole  empire,"  or 
that  because  it  was  so  much  thought  of  a 
similar  but  smaller  porch  was  erected  for 
the  queen  (ver.  8)  ("  Jewish  Ch.,"  ii.  p.  195)] : 
and  it  was  covered  with  cedar  from  one 
side  of  the  floor  to  the  other.  [Heb.  from 
the  floor  to  the  floor,  as  marg.  Gesenius  under- 
stands these  words  to  mean,  "  from  one 
floor  to  the  other,"  i.e.,  to  the  cieling  (the 
floor  of  the  other  story)  j  in  other  words, 
the  walls  from  bottom  to  top.  So  the  Vulg., 
a  pavimento  usque  ad  summitatem,  and  Syr., 
a  fundamento  ad  coelum  ejus  usque,  which 
have  led  Thenius  to  suggest  the  reading 
n'nip.  IS  (unto  the  bearm)  instead  of 
"SISi]  "IJ?-  Keil  thinks  the  cieling  served 
as  the  floor  of  an  npper  story,  built  over 
the  porch  of  judgment,  but,  as  Bahr 
observes,  no  such  upper  story  is  even  hinted 
at  elsewhere. .  It  seems  to  me  that,  on  the 
whole,  the  A.  V.  rendering  is  to  be  retained, 
the  meaning  being  that  the  whole  space, 
both  of  wall  and  cieling,  from  one  side  of 
the  floor  to  the  opposite  side,  was  covered 
with  cedar.] 
Ver.  8. — And  his  house  where  he  dwelt 

[<.«.,  his  private  residence.  Not  to  be 
identified  with  the  "  house  "  of  ver.  1.  The 
term  is  here  expressly    restricted   to    his 

dwelling-house.  There  it  as  clearly  includes 
all  the  several  palaces]  had   [or  was.  The 

"  court"  is  apparently  in  apposition  to  "his 
house."  The  words  in  italics,  here  as  else- 
where, merely  darken  the  sense]  another 

[Heb.  the  hinder]  court   within  [For  the 

use  of  7  n''3D  =  viithin,  compare  oh,  Tl. 

16 ;  Num.  xviii.  7,  and  see  Gesen.,  Thesaur. 
i.  193]  the  porch,  which  was  of  the  lite 
work  [i.e.,  the  walls  were  covered  with 
cedar.  The  reference  is  clearly  to  materials, 
adornment,  &a.,  not  to  size].  Solomon 
made  also  an  house  for  Pharaoh's  daughter, 
whom  he  had  taken  to  wife  [Heb.  he  made 
also  a  house  for  .  .  .  whom  Solomon  had 
taken,  i.e.,  married] ,  like  unto  this  porch. 
[This  would  seem  to  have  been  the  private 
residence  of  the  queen,  not  the  harem 
where  all  the  wives  and  concubines  (oh.  xi. 
3)  were  collected.  It  was  evidently  distinct 
from  and  behind  the  residence  of  the  king, 
an  arrangement  which  still  prevails  in 
Eastern  palaces.] 

Ver.  9. — All  these  [i.e., huildiiigs, palaces] 
were  of  costly  [or  precious ;  of.  ch.  v.  81 


OH.  vn.  1—51.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


127 


and  vers.  10,  11]  stones,  according  to  the 
measures  of  hewed  stones  [lit.,  of  t,quarivg 
or  hewing,  same  word  in  ohs.  v.  31  (Heb.),  vi. 
86,  and  Isa.  ix.  9,  &o.  All  the  stones  in  these 
SBTeral  buildings  vrere  shaped  to  certain 
specified  dimensions] ,  sawed  with  saws 
roi  is  obviously  an  ouomatopoetio  word, 
,  like  our  soui.  Gesenius  cites  (raipiD,  serro,  &o. 
I  The  Egyptians,  whose  saws  were  apparently 
all  single-handed,  do  not  seem  to  have 
applied  this  instrument  to  stone,  but  part 
of  a  double-handed  saw  was  foimd  at  Nim- 
rud  (Layard,  p.  195,  and  Diet.  Bib.,  art. 
"  Saw  ").  That  saws  were  in  common  use 
and  were  made  of  iron  is  implied  in  2  Sam. 
xii.  31] ,  within  and  without  [It  is  not  quite 
clear  whether  the  meaning  is  that  the  two 
surfaces  exposed  to  view,  one  within  and  the 
other  without,  the  building  were  shaped 
with  saws,  or  that  the  inner  and  hidden 
surface  of  the  stone  was  thus  smoothed  as 
well  aa  the  exposed  parts] ,  even  from  the 
foundation  unto  the  coping  [or  corbels.  It 
is  generally  agreed  (Gesen.,  Keil,  Bahr)  that 
the  reference  is  to  the  "  projecting  stones 
on  which  the  beams  rest,"  though  Thenius 
would  understand  battlements  (Deut.  xxii.  8) 
to  be  intended.  But  for  these  a  different 
word  is  always  used,  and  the  LXX.  yeio-oj 
signifies  the  projection  of  the  roof,  not  an 
erection  upon  it] ,  and  so  on  the  outside 
toward  Uie  great  court  [i.e.,  the  pavement 
of  the  court  was  of  sawed  stones  (see  ver.  12).] 

Ver.  10.— And  the  foundation  was  of 
costly  stones,  even  great  atones  [Bahr  says, 
"  Even  the  foundations  which  from  without 
were  not  seen,  were  composed  of  these  great 
stones."  But  the  meaning  evidently  is  that 
the  foundation  stones  were  larger  than  those 
reaied  upon  them],  stones  of  ten  cubits 
[t.e.,  ten  cubits  long,  and  of  proportionate 
width,  &o.] ,  and  stones  of  eight  cubits  [The 
foundations  of  the  palaces,  consequently, 
were  much  less  than  those  of  the  temple 
platform,  some  of  which  would  measure 
16  cubits.    See  note  on  ch.  v.  17.] 

Ver.  II. — ^And  above  [i.e.,  upon  the 
foundation  stones  just  described]  were 
costly  stones,  after  the  measures  of  hewed 
stones  [It  is  implied  here  that  the  stones  of 
the  superstructure  were  less  than  those  of 
the  foundation.  It  is  also  implied  that  the 
former  were  more  carefully  smoothed  and 
faced  than  the  latter]  and  cedars.  [Heb. 
cedar."] 

Yer.  12. — And  the  great  court  round 
about  [The  palace,  again  like  the  temple, 
had  two  courts.  The  lesser  is  referred  to 
in  ver.  8,  and  was  enclosed  among  the 
buildings.  The  great  court  probably  sur- 
rounded the  entire  structure]  was  [enclosed 
by  a  wall]  with  three  rows  of  hewed 
stones,  and  a  row  of  oedax  beams   [The 


latter  formed  the  eqping.  The  wall  of  the 
court  of  the  palace  thus  resembled  that  of 
the  temple.  See  on  ch.  vi.  36.  In  all 
these  coincidences  we  have  tokens  of  the 
same  designing  hanfl ,  both  for  the  innor 
court  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  [This  sudden 
digression  from  the  court  of  the  palace  to 
the  temple  is  suspicious,  and  suggests  either 
a  mistranslation  or  corruption  of  the  text. 
The  historian  evidently  meant  tb  say  that 
the  wall  of  the  court,  in  its  three  rows  ol 
stones  and  its  cedar  coping,  resembled  the 
inner  court  of  the  temple ;  and,  according 
to  some  grammarians  (Gesen.,  Ewald),  this 
meaning  may  well  be  conveyed  by  the  text 
as  it  stands,  1  in  Hebrew  serving  sometimes 
to  institute  a  comparison  (Prov.  xxv.  3,  12, 
20  ;  xxvi.  14,  &c.)  "  As  in  the  court,"  &c. 
But  the  instances  just  cited,  being  proverbs  or 
apophthegms,  are  not  strictly  parallel  with 
our  text.  It  seems  better,  on  the  whole, 
however,  to  retain  the  text  in  this  sense  than 
to  replace  1  by  3,  reading  lVn73  or  "ISn3 
for  "IXnh.  nSnnD  (Horsley)  is  quite  inad- 
missible, as  the  constr.  case  never  has  the 
art.] ,  and  for  the  porch  of  the  house.  [It 
is  almost  impossible  to  decide  whether  the 
porch  of  judgment  (ver.  7)  or  the  porch  of 
the  temple  is  here  meant.  The  inmiediate 
context  favours  the  latter.  But  this  does 
not  seem  to  have  had  any  court  or  enclosing 
wall  other  than  the  inner  court.  Bawhnson 
decides  for  the  porch  of  judgment, "  which," 
he  says,  "  had  a  planking  of  cedar  over 
the  stone  pavement "  (ver.  7).  But  ver.  7 
(where  see  note)  rather  excludes  than  in- 
cludes the  pavement.  The  reference  is 
probably  to  the  "  court  within  the  porch," 
mentioned  in  ver.  8.] 

After  this  brief  account  of  the  royal 
palaces,  the  author  proceeds  to  mention  the 
vessels,  &o.,  used  in  the  temple  service,  pre- 
facing his  description  by  a  few  words  re- 
specting the  great  Tyrian  artist,  by  whom 
they  were  for  the  most  part  cast,  and  pos- 
sibly designed  also. 

Yer.  13. — ^And  king  Solomon  sent  [rather, 
had  sent  (2  Chron.  ii.  18)]  and  fetched  Hiram 
out  of  Tyre.  [This  is  our  historian's  brief 
version  of  the  transaction  which  is  recorded 
in  2  Chron.  ii.  7 — 14.  He  has  not  men- 
tioned before  (ch.  v.  6)  Solomon's  request 
for  a  master-builder.  Hiram,  like  his 
namesake  the  king,  is  elsewhere  (2  Chron. 
ii.  13 ;  It.  11,  16)  called  Euram  or  Ilirom 
(ver.  40).  See  note  on  ch.  v.  1.  In  the 
first  of  these  passages  the  king  calls  him 
"  Huram  my  father  "  (see  note  there) ;  in 
the  last  he  is  designated  "  Huram  his 
father."  The  title  "Ab"  (of.  Gen.  xlv.  8, 
41,  43  ;  2  Kings  U.  12  ;  T.  18 ;  yi.  21 ;  of. 


128 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  vu.  1— 61 


nil.  9)  shows  the  high  esteem  in  which  he 
was  held.  It  can  hardly  be,  as  some  have 
supposed,  a  proper  name.  It  may  signify 
' '  counsellor,"  or  master,  i.e.,  master-builder. 
The  Tyrians  evidently  regarded  him  with 
some  pride.] 

Ver.  14. — He  was  a  widow's  son  of  tli» 
tribe  of  Naphtall  [In  2  Cliron.  ii.  14  be  is 
described  as  the  "  son  of  a  woman  oi  the 
daughters  of  Dan."  The  discrepancy  is 
only  apparent  For  in  the  first  place  it  is 
not  absolutely  necessary  to  understand  by 
Dan  the  tribe  of  that  name.  It  may  weU 
refer  to  the  town,  formerly  Leshem  (Josh, 
xix.  47),  or  Laish  (Judg.  xviii.  7,  27),  colo- 
nised by  the  Danites,  and  thenceforward 
bearing  their  name  (ver.  29),  which  was 
situated  within  the  Dorders  of  Naphtali. 
If,  however,  it  is  preferred  to  see  in  the 
"  daughters  of  Dan  "  a  tribal  reference,  we 
may  suppose  (with  Eeil,  al.)  that  the  woman 
was  originally  a  Danite,  but  became,  through 
her  first  husband,  "  of  the  tribe  of  Naph- 
tali." Bat  the  first  explanation  is  the  mora 
simple  and  obvious] ,  and  his  father  was  a 
man  of  Tyre  [i.e.,  Hiram  was  the  son  (not 
stepson,  or  adopted  son,  as  the  Babbins)  of 
a  mixed  marriage.  In  earlier  times  Laish 
had  but  little  intercourse  with  the  Zido- 
nians  (Judg.  xviii.  28).  It  is  nowhere  stated 
that  the  inhabitants  were  of  Phcenician 
extraction ;  nor  can  it  be  justly  inferred 
from  this  passage] ,  a  worker  In  brass  [or 
copper.  Brass  is  a  compound  of  copper 
and  zino ;  but  IV^ni  originally  and  strictly 

signifies  a  pure  metal  (Dent.  viii.  9  ;  xxxiii. 
25,  &o. ;  Job  xxviii.  2).  There  were  copper 
mines  in  Palestine,  and  the  art  of  working 
this  metal  was  known  at  a  very  remote 
period  (Gen.  iv.  22,  Heb.,  and  see  Wilkin- 
son's "  Ancient  Egypt,"  vol.  iii.  p.  243 ; 
and  De  Sougemout,  "  Age  du  Bronze,"  p. 
180).  In  later  times  the  word  sometimes 
denoted  brass  (xaXicot),  or  copper-bronze 
(a  mixture  of  copper  and  tin).  Cf.  Jer. 
vi.  28.  From  2  Ghron.  ii.  14  we  learn  that 
Hiram  was  "  skilful  to  work  in  gold  and  in 
silver,  in  brass,  in  iron,  in  stone,  and  in 
timber,"  &e.  From  the  mention  of  brass 
only  in  this  passage,  and  in  ver.  45,  it  has 
been  somewhat  hastily  concluded  that  "  the 
work  that  he  personally  did  for  Solomon  " 
was  "limited  to  works  in  brass"  (Eawlin- 
son).  It  is,  perhaps,  safer  to  say  that  brass 
only  is  mentioned  here,  because  the  follow- 
ing section  treats  exclusively  of  the  brazen 
ornaments,  (fee,  of  the  sanctuary  (Keil). 
It  would  almost  seem,  however  (see  note  on 
ver.  48),  as  if  he  was  not  employed  to  make 
the  vessels  of  gold.  Nor  does  this  suppo- 
sition really  contradict  the  statement  made 
below,  vis.,  that  he  wrought  all  Solomon's 


work] ;  and  he  was  filled  with  wisdom,  and 
understanding,  and  cunning  [or  knowledge, 
as  the  same  word  is  rendered  Exod.  xxxi,  8, 
where  similar  language  is  used  of  Bezaleel. 
It  is  noticeable,  however,  that  the  words 
"  filled  with  the  spirit  of  Ood,"  nsed  of  the 
Hebrew,  are  not  applied  to  the  Tyrian 
workman]  to  worK  all  works  In  brass.  And 
be  came  to  king  Solomon  [probably  with  a 
considerable  number  of  assistants] ,  ail4 
wrought  all  his  work. 

Ver.  15. — For  he  cast  two  pillars  of  brass 
[The  process  of  casting,  as  practised  by  the 
ancients,  receives  considerable  Ulastratiou 
from  the  paintings  of  Thebes  (see  Wilkinson, 
"Anc.  Egypt."ii. pp.  234, 256;  Kitto,  "DaUy 
Bib.  nius."  Sol.  and  Kings,  pp.  72,  78)] ,  of 
eighteen  cubits  high  apleoe  [Heb.  eighteen 
cubits  was  the  height  of  the  one  column. 
This  was  the  height  of  the  shaft  (of.  2  Kings 
XXV.  17 ;  Jer.  Iii.  21).  To  this  must  be  added 
the  capital  (vers.  16,19),  which  measured  five 
(or,  according  to  some,  nine)  cubits,  and  prob- 
ably the  pedestal.  The  pillars  were  hollow, 
the  metal  being  four  finger  breadths  thick 
(Jer.  Iii.  21).  In  2  Chron.  iii.  15  the  height 
IS  given  as  thirty-five  cubits — a  discrepancy 
which  has  been  variously  explained.  Ac- 
cording to  some  writers  [e.g.,  Abravanel, 
Movers,  Wordsworth),  this  represents  the 
total  length  of  the  two  pillars  (each  pillar 
consequently  being  17i  cubits)  —  an  idea 
which,  perhaps,  finds  some  slight  support 
in  the  word  employed  'i]^^*  length.     Here  it 

is  npip  height.  By  others  it  has  been  sup- 
posed that  the  total  height  of  base,  column, 
and  capital  was  thirty-five  cubits,  which,  if 
not  incredible,  is  very  improbable.  Others 
think  it  a  part  of  that  systematic  reduplica- 
tion of  the  heights  of  edifices  by  the 
chronicler,  of  which  we  have  already  had 
an  instance  in  ch.  vi.  (where  see  note).  But 
the  true  explanation  would  seem  to  be  that, 

by  a  clerical  error,  thirty-five  (n?)  has  been 
substituted  in  the  text'  for  eighteen  (IT). 
So  EeU  and  Bahr]  :  and  a  line  [or  thread] 
of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  either  of 
them  [Heb.  the  second  column']  about.  [It 
must  not  be  supposed,  from  the  fact  that 
the  height  of  the  one  column  is  given,  and 
the  circumference  of  the  other,  that  they 
were  dissimilar  in  height  and  breadth  or 
girth.  There  has  probably  been  an  acci- 
dental abbreviation  of  the  full  expression, 
"  Eighteen  cubits  was  the  height  of  the  one 
pillar,  and  eighteen  cubits  was  the  height 
of  the  other  pillar;  and  a  Une  of  twelve 
cubits  compassed  the  one  pillar,  and  a  Une 
of  twelve  cubits  compassed  the  other  pillar." 
It  is  just  possible,  however,  that  the  pecu- 
liarity results  from  the  actual  systeiu  d 


OH.  VII.  1 — 51.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


129 


measurement  employed  in  this  case.  As 
they  were  castings,  it  would  be  needless  to 
measure  both  pillars,  and  so  the  length  may 
have  been  ascertained  from  the  first,  and 
the  breadth  from  the  second.  The  columns 
would  thus  be  about  twenty -seven  feet  high, 
and  about  six  feet  in  diameter.] 

Ver.  16. — And  he  made  two  chapiters  [or 
oapitals]  of  molten  [Heb.  poured]  brass,  to 
put  upon  the  tops  [Heb.  heads]  of  the 
pillars  :  the  height  of  the  one  chapiter  was 
Ave  cubits,  and  the  height  of  the  other 
chapiter  was  Ave  cubits  [In  2  Kings  xxv. 
17  the  height  is  given  as  three  cubits ;  but 
this  is  obviously  a  clerical  error.  Bee 
2  Chron.  iii.  16 ;  Jer.  lii.  22.  A  much 
more  important  question  is  whether  the 
chapiter  (JTllja  same  word,  akin  to  IJJ^' 
orown)  of  four  cubits  mentioned  in  ver.  l9 
is  to  be  understood  as  a  part  of  this  chapiter, 
or  something  additional  and  superposed, 
the  entablature,  e.g.  The  former  appears 
the  more  probable.  See  note  on  ver. '  19. 
But  it  is  not  a  fatal  objection  to  the  latter 
view  that  it  would  make  the  entire  chapiter, 
or  both  members,  nine  cubits  high ;  no 
less,  that  is,  than  one-half  the  length  of 
the  shaft.  No  doubt  to  modem  ideas  this 
appears  wholly  disproportionate;  but  a 
double  chapiter,  bearing  the  same  propor- 
tion to  the  shaft,  is  found  in  some  of  the 
buildings  of  Persepolis  (Fergusson,  Diet. 
Bib.  iii.  p.  1457).  From  the  expression  of 
vers.  41,  42,  "  the  bowls  of  the  chapiters  " 
(of.  2  Chron.  iv.  12,  13 ;  Jer.  lii.  23),  and 
the  word  "belly"  (1^2)  in  ver.  20,  we  gather 
that  the  chapiters  were  bowl-shaped,  or 
bellied  out  something  like  the  so-called 
"  cushion  capital "  in  Norman  architecture. 

Ver.  17. — And  nets  [Gesen.,  lattice ;  Keil, 
plait.  "  It  seems  almost  in  vain  to  try  and 
speculate  on  what  was  the  exact  form  of  the 
■decoration  of  these  celebrated  pillars.  The 
nets  of  checker-work,  and  wreaths  of  chain- 
work,  &e.,  are  all  features  applicable  to 
metal  architecture ;  and  though  we  know 
that  the  old  Tartar  races  did  use  metal 
architecture  everywhere,  and  especially  in 
bronze,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  mate- 
rial, every  specimen  has  perished,  and  we 
have  now  no  representations  from  which  we 
•can  restore  them "  (Fergusson,  Diet.  Bib. 
I.e.)]  of  checker  work  [the  Hebrew  repeats 
the  word :  netsof  nct-worfc,  or  plaits  of  work  of 
plait'],  and  wreaths  [or  cords,  twisted  work, 
i.e.,  festoons]  of  chain  work  [the  wreathed 
or  twisted  festoon  probably  resembled  a 
chain] ,  for  [or,  to,  i.e.,  were  on]  the  cha- 
piters which  were  upon  the  top  of  the 
pillars;  seven  for  the  one  chapiter,  and 
seven  for  the  other  chapiter  [The  LXX. 
having  here  S'uctvov,  it  is  clear  that  the  text 
they  had  read  naat?  "a  net,"  and  not  nj;3B' 

1  KINGS. 


"seven."  Some,  accordingly,  would  read,  "a 
net  for  the  one  chapiter,  and  a  net,"  &c. 
But  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  the 
chauge.  "  This  decoration  consisted  of 
seven  twists  arranged  as  festoons,  which 
were  hung  round  the  capitals  of  the  pillars  " 
(Keil).  The  comparison  with  "  chain  work  " 
was  probably  suggested  by  the  fact  that  the 
intertwined  threads,  which  crossed  and  re- 
crossed  each  other,  bore  a  rough  resemblance 
to  the  linki  of  a  chain. 

Yer.  18. — And  he  made  the  pillars  [There 
is  evidently  a  confusion  of  the  text  here. 
Probably  we  should  read,  with  some  MI5S. 
D''JDin,  the  pomegranates  (so  LXX.),  in- 
stead of  DniD5?n,  or  rather,  we  shonid 
transpose  the  two  words,  reading  pome- 
granates where  theMasoretio  text  has  pillars, 
and  vice  vend.  "  The  pomegranate  was  one 
of  the  commonest  ornaments  of  Assyria. 
...  It  is  doubtful  whether  a  symbolical 
meaning  was  attached  to  it,  or  whether  it 
was  merely  selected  as  a  beautiful  natural 
form  "  (Eawhnson).  Wordsworth  charac- 
teristically sees  in  its  many  ripe  seeds,  "  an 
expressive  emblem  of  fruitfulness  in  good 
works."  According  to  Bahr,  it  is  an  image 
of  the  law  or  covenant  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
seeds  represent  the  separate  commands 
(Symbolik,  ii.  122, 128).  In  the  tabernacle  it 
was  pourtrayed  in  works  of  divers  colours  on 
the  hem  of  the  robe  of  the  ephod  (Exod. 
xxviii.  33,  84 ;  xxxix.  24).  All  the  Scrip- 
ture notices  of  this  fruit  prove  its  great 
abundance  in  Palestine  (Num.  xiii.  23; 
Josh.  XV.  32 ;  xxi.  25 ; — ^m  the  two  last 
passages  it  appears  as  the  name  of  a 
town — Cant.  iv.  3,  13  ;  viii.  2 ;  Joel  i.  12 ; 
Haggai  ii.  9,  &e.)  It  was  also  well  known 
to  the  Egyptians  (Num.  xx.  5)],  and  [or 
even]  two  rows  round  about  upon  tiie 
one  network  ["  The  relation  between  the 
two  rows  of  pomegranates  and  the  plaited 
work  is  not  clearly  defined,  but  it  is  gene- 
rally and  correctly  assumed  that  one  row 
ran  round  the  pillars  below  the  plaited 
work  and  the  other  above"  (Keil).  The 
pomegranates,  one  hundred  in  number  in 
each  row  (2  Chron.  iii.  16),  four  hundred  in 
all  (2  Chron.  iv.  13;  Jer.  lii.  23),  would 
thus  form  a  double  border  to  the  chain 
work] ,  to  cover  the  chapiters  that  were 
upon  the  top,  with  pomegranates  [rather, 
071  the  top  of  the  pillars,  as  the  transpositujn 
mentioned  above  and  the  sense  require]  i 
and  so  did  he  for  the  other  chapiter. 

Ver.  19. — ^And  the  chapiters  that  wer« 
upon  the  top  of  the  pUlars  [It  is  difficult  to 
believe  that  these  words,  which  are  iden- 
tical vrith  those  in  vers.  16, 17, 18,  can  refer 
to  a  different  —  a  second  and  superposed 
capital  (Bawlinson),  or  to  the  entablature 
(Fergusson)]  were  of  lUy  work  [i.«.,  boMi* 


180 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  vn.  1— 6L 


relievi  in  imitation  of  flowering  lilies.  Prob- 
ably the  bowl-shaped  chapiter  was  treated 
as  a  fall-blown  lUy,  jnst  as  the  capitals  of 
Egyptian  pillars  took  the  form  of  the  lotus. 
The  molten  sea  was  similarly  treated  (ver. 
26).  The  lily  dg'-IB',  from  B'-IB',  to  be  white), 
was  undoubtedly  an  emblem  of  purity. 
Bahr  observes  that  it  may  justly  be  named 
"  the  flower  of  the  promised  land,"  and  that 
as  the  lotus  was  the  religious  flower  of  the 
Indian  and  Egyptian  religions,  so  was  the 
lily  of   the    Jewish]  in  tlie  porcll   [These 

words,  D7'1K3,  are  very  obsonre.  Eeil 
understands  •'  as  in  the  hall "  (ef.  icord  rb 
aiXd/t,  LXX.)    Bat  that  idea  would  have 

been  expressed  by  D74K3,  and  nothing  is 
said  elsewhere  about  any  lily-work  in  the 
porch  (Bahr).  Ewald,  too,  thinks  the 
decoration  of  the  porch  is  referred  to,  and 
holds  that  a  description  of  this  lily-work 
must  once  have  preceded  this  statement, 
though  it  is  now  wanting.  Thenius,  al. 
suppose  them  to  refer  to  the  popitiou  of  the 
pillars  within  the  porch,  and  the  "four 
cubits"  mentioned  presently,  they  take 
to  indicate  the  diameter  of  the  capitals. 
Wordsworth  would  render  "  iiiside  or  to- 
ward  the  porch,"  and  understands  that  the 
lily- work  was  only  on  the  inside  of  the 
pillars.  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible  to  arrive 
at  any  certain  conclusion],  four  cubits. 
[This  may  either  mean  that  of  five  cubits 
(which  was  the  height  of  the  entire  capi- 
tal), four,  and  these  the  upper  four  (ver. 
22),  were  covered  with  lily -work,  while  one 
cubit  at  the  bottom  of  the  capital  was  orna- 
mented with  chain-work  or  festoons — ^we 
can  hardly  believe  that  nets,  chains,  and 
lily-work  were  all  combined  in  the  same 
space,  or  it  may  refer  to  the  position  of  the 
pillars  in  the  portico.] 

Ver.  20. — And  the  chapiters  upon  the  two 
piUars  had  pomegranates  [Instead  of  the 
italics,  KeU  would  supply  Hiram  made,  but 
it  is  doubtful  whether  this  is  any  improve- 
ment. We  have  already  heard  more  than 
once  that  he  made  the  chapiters.  It  is 
better  to  supply  projected  or  were,  as  in  the 
preceding  verse.  This  verse  is  extremely 
obscure  ;  but  its  design  appears  to  be  to  ex- 
plain how  the  bowl  of  the  chapiter  projected 
above  its  base]  also  above  [i.e.,  above  the 
neck,  or  lowest  cubit,  on  which  was  the  net 

and  ohain-work],  over  against  [nisyjipwith 
two  prefixes  is  a  rare  form]  the  belly  [or 
"bowl"  (ver.  41)]  which  was  by  [Heb. 
beyond,  on  the  other  side  of,  i.e.,  as  it 
appeared  to  a  spectator  standing  below]  Mio 
network :  and  the  pomegranates  were  two 
bundred  In  rows  [This  agrees  with  the  total 


of  four  hundred,  as  given  in  ver.  42,  and  in 
2  Chronicles,  and  with  tiie  "  hondred  round 
about "  (i.e.,  the  number  in  each  row)  men- 
tioned in  Jer.  lii.  23.  We  gather  from  tins 
latter  passage  that  ninety-six  out  of  tha 
hundred  faced  the  four  quarters,  for  this  is 
apparently  the  meaning  of  nh-ll,  wind- 
wards; see  Ezek.  xlii.  16 — 18,  not  that  the 
pomegranates  could  be  "set  in  motion  by 
the  play  of  the  wind,"  as  Ewald  confidently 
affirms.  The  remaining  four  pomegranates, 
of  course,  occupied  the  four  comers.  The 
necessary  inference  from  this  statement, 
viz.,  that  this  part  of  tie  capital  was  fonr- 
square,  seems  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of 
the  commentators]  round  about  npon  the 
other  chapiter.  [Some  words  have  evidently 
dropped  out  of  the  Hebrew  here,  as  in  ver. 
16.  The  text,  no  doubt,  originally  stood 
"  two  hundred  in  rows  round  about  the  one 
chapiter,  and  two  hundred  in  rows  round 
about  upon  the  other  chapiter."  There  has 
been  no  intentional  compression — ^that  is 
not  the  genius  of  the  Semitic  languages — 
1>ut  an  accidental  omission,  occasioned  by 
the  recurrence  of  almost  identical  words. 

Yer.  21— And  he  set  np  the  pillars  In  tb» 
porCU  [We  are  now  confronted  by  the  much 
vexed  questions,  (1)  What  was  the  position, 
and  (2)  what  the  purpose,  of  these  two 
columns?  Were  they  in  the  porch,  or  be- 
fore it?  And  were  they  architectural  or 
monumental?  Did  they  support  the  roof  of 
the  porch,  or  were  they  isolated  and  detached, 
after  the  manner  of  obelisks  ?  I  incline  to 
the  opinion  of  Bahr,  that  they  stood  in  the 
porch,  but  that  they  formed  no  part  of  the 
building,  i.e.,  that  they  were  not  for  any 
structural  use,  but  simply  for  ornament. 
This  appears  to  me,  on  Uie  whole,  to  result 
from  the  following  considerations :  (1)  The 
language  used  favours  a  position  wiuun  the 

porch.  We  have  here  DPS?  {="at  or  in 
the  porch,"  perhaps /or  the  porch,  as  Bahr), 
and  in  ver.  19  (where  see  note)  Dp-IKS.  And 
with  this  agree  the  expression  of  the  Chron. 
"before  (*;)B?)  the  house,"  and  "before 
CSfho)  the  temple  "  (2  (Jhron.  iii.  16, 17). 
The  pillars  would,  however,  be  "before  the 
temple,"  whether  they  stood  within  or  in 
front  of  the  porch,  and  it  may  be  safely 
allowed  that  the  language  of  the  historian  is 
not  decisive  one  way  or  the  other.  The  pre- 
positions of  the  text,  however,  seem  to  lend 
some  support  to  Bahr's  view.  (2)  We  know 
that  "  the  Phoenicians  used  isolated  metal 
columns  as  sacred  ornaments,  so  that  Hiram 
would  be  familiar  with  such  a  mode  o( 
ornamentation  "  (Eawlinson).  "  Whenevef 
in  coins  or  histories  we  get  m  iepresenta< 


CH.  vn.  1 — 61.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


181 


tion  of  a  Phoenician  temple,  it  always  has 
a  pillar  or  piUars  standing  within  or  before 
it"  (Stanley).  (3)  It  is  extremely  doubt- 
ful whether  these  columns,  twenty-three 
feet  in  height,  were  adapted  to  serve  as 
supports  to  the  roof  of  the  porch.  The 
height  of  the  latter  has  been  variously 
estimated  at  twenty,  thirty,  and  sixty  cubits, 
and  whichever  estimate  is  preferred,  the 
columns  would  appear  to  be  of  an  unsuitable 
altitude.  Fefgusson  says  they  were  "  appro- 
priate to  support  the  roof  of  the  porch,"  but 
then  he  conceives  the  columns  to  be  in  all 
twenty-seven  cubits  high  (see  on  ver.  19),  and 
allows  the  remaining  three  cubits  for  the 
slope  of  the  roof).  But,  as  we  cannot  be 
certain  either  of  the  height  of  the  porch  or 
of  the  colunm,  this  is  an  argument  of  which 
very  little  can  be  made.  (4)  If  the  pillars 
were  part  of  the  building,  they  would  almost 
certainly  have  been  of  the  same  material, 
i.e.,  wood  or  stone.  Their  metaUio  com- 
position is  certainly  an  argument  for  their 
monumental  character.  It  can  hardly  be 
alleged  in  favour  of  this  view,  however, 
that  they  are  mentioned  amongst  the 
vessels  or  articles  of  furniture,  for  the  his- 
torian might  fittingly  describe  the  pillars 
here,  as  being  the  principal  of  the  "  works 
in  brass "  which  Hiram  wrought,  even  if 
they  did  form  the  supports  of  the  roof  of 
the  porch.  Nor  are  we  justified,  consider- 
ing the  extreme  brevity  and  the  partial  cha- 
racter of  the  description  of  the  temple,  in 
affirming  that  they  would  have  been  men- 
tioned in  connexion  with  the  building,  had 
they  formed  part  of  the  edifice.  (S)  The 
remark  of  Stieglitz  (cited  by  Bahr)  that  "  it 
was  their  separate  position  alone  which 
gave  these  pillars  the  impressive  aspect  they 
were  designed  to  wear,"  lends  some  little 
support  to  this  view.  So  also  does  (6)  The 
fact  that  these  columns,  and  these  alone, 
received  special  names.  "  No  architectural 
portion  of  the  building  received  a  name  " 
(Eeil).  But  this  argument,  again,  is  not  to 
be  unduly  pressed,  for  to  some  it  may  seem 
that  the  names  they  bore  would  have  a 
special  propriety  and  an  enhanced  signi- 
ficance, if  the  columns  contributed  to  the 
strength  and  stability  of  the  edifice.  The 
question,  therefore,  is  one  of  considerable 
complexity,  the  more  so,  as  it  is  maintained 
that  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  con- 
struct a  roof  thirty  feet  in  width  without 
some  such  pUlars  to  support  the  beam  (Fer- 
gusson);  but  the  balance  of  evidence  appears 
to  favour  the  view  that  Jaohin  and  Boaz 
were  monuments  erected  in  the  porch,  to 
dignify  the  sanctuary,  and  to  symbolize  the 
power  and  eternity  of  the  Being  to  whom  it 
was  dedicated] :  and  be  set  up  the  right 
ptllaZi  and  called  the  name  thereof  Jachla 


\i.e.,  he  shall  estahlish,  as  marg.  The  nam* 
expressed  the  belief  that  God  would  preserve 
and  protect  the  new  fane.  It  is  true  that  a 
Jachin  is  mentioned  (1  Chron.  ix.  10 ;  xxiv. 
17),  as  head  of  the  21st  course  of  priests 
in  the  reign  of  David,  while  a  Boaz  was  one 
of  Solomon's  ancestors,  but  the  columns 
could  hardly  be  named  after  them,  or  an 
private  persons.  Ewald  suggests  that  th^ 
were  named  after  "  some  favourites  of  the 
time,  perhaps  young  sons  of  Solon  on." 
The  idea  of  Thenius  that  these  name  s  were 
engraved  upon  the  pillars  is  not  wholly  im- 
probable, though  of  course  it  finds  no  sup- 
port in  the  text]  and  \e  set  np  the  left 
pillar  [the  left  as  one  faced  them  from 
the  housa.  The  right  hand  is  iden .  ified  with 
the  south  in  ver.  39] ,  and  called  the  name 
thereof  Boaz.  ^axg.init  is  strength.  Prob- 
ably "  in  Him,  i.e.,  God,  is  its  strength" 
(of.  Isa.  xlv.  24).  The  thought  of  Jachin, 
"  He  win  estabhsh,"  is  thus  continued ;  and 
the  two  pillars  pointed  alike  to  the  God  of 
Israel  as  the  true  support  and  upholder  of 
Hia  lauetuaiy.  The  LXX.  interpretation 
of  thesa  two  names,  KaropBoKne  and  'lajfis 
(3  Ghron.  iU.  17),  success  and  strength, 
though  very  far  from  literal,  preserves  their 
fundamental  ideas. 

Ver.  33.— And  upon  the  top  of  the  i^lUars 
•was  Illy  work  [a  repetition,  in  the  Hebrew 
manner,  of  ver.  19.  The  "  lily  work,"  which 
probably  involved  two  things,  (1)  that  the 
capital  had  a  rude  resemblance  to  a  "  fall 
blown  Uly-cup  "  (Bahr),  and  (2)  that  repre- 
sentations of  the  leaf  of  the  lily  were  pour- 
trayed  upon  it  (as  in  the  cornice  of  I  ersepolis, 
an  illustration  of  which  wiU  be  found  Diet. 
Bib.  iii.p.  1457),  was  a  not  unfitting  finial  to 
the  column,  as  it  formed  a  sort  of  crown  or 
chaplet  upon  it.  The  two  pillars  would 
thus  resemble  two  giant  plants,  the  column 
answering  to  the  stalk,  the  capital  to  the 
flower.  The  ideas  of  architecture,  it  is  well 
known,  have  very  frequently  been  derived 
from  the  vegetable  kingdom. 

Ver,  33. — The  writer  now  passes  on  to 
describe  the  brazen  vessels  made  by  Hiram 
for  the  temple  use.  And  he  made  a  [Heb. 
the]  molten  sea  [so  called  on  account  of  its 
unprecedented  size  and  capacity.  It  was 
designed,  like  the  laver  of  brass  in  the 
tabernacle  (Exod.  xxx.  18 — 20),  to  contain 
the  water  necessary  for  the  ablutions  of  the 
priests.  For  its  size  and  shape  see  below] , 
ten  cubits  &om  the  one  brim  to  the  other 
[Heb.  from  his  lip  to  his  lip]  round  all 
about  [i.e.,  circular] ,  and  Ms  height  was 
five  cubits  [this  was  the  depth  of  the  vessel, 
exclusive  of  its  foot  or  base]  :  and  a  line  of 
thirty  cubits  did  compass  It  round  about. 
[The  historian  obviously  uses  round  num- 
bers when  lie  s]peaks  of  the  diameter  as  ten 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  VII.  1 — 61. 


and  the  circumfeience  as  thirty  cubits.  If 
the  diameter  was  exactly  ten,  the  circamfer- 
«nce  would  of  course  be  about  31^  cubits. 
But  the  sacred  writers  seldom  aim  at  pre- 
cision. 

Ver.  24. — And  under  the  brim  of  It  round 
about  [The  edge  of.  the  laver  was  curved 
outwards  (ver.  26)]  there  were  knops  [see 
note  on  ch.  vi.  18.  The  text  of  2  Chron. 
iv.  3,  Dnp3  ("  the  similitude,  of  oxen"),  is 
obviously  a  clerical  error  for  D*rpS  (KeU), 
but  whether  niDl  is  an  interpolation  may 
well  be  doubted.  Eeil  thinks  it  was  intro- 
duced to  explain  the  mention  of  oxen] 
compassing  [Heb.  surrounding,  some  word] 
It)  ten  In  a  cubit  [It  does  not  follow  from 
this  that  each  gourd  or  knop  was  "  a  little 
over  two  inches  in  diameter"  (Eeil),  for  they 
may  not  have  been  in  close  contact,  and, 
moreover,  the  cubit  was  probably  18  inches] , 
compassing  the  sea  round  about  :  the 
knops  were  cast  In  two  rows,  when  It  was 
cast.  [Lit.,  two  rows  ;  the  knops  were  east 
in  its  casting.  The  "  brass,"  of  which  the 
laver  was  composed,  had  been  taken  by 
David  from  the  cities  of  Hadarezer  (1  Chron. 
sviii.  8 ;  1  Sam.  viii.  8,  LXX.)] 

Ver.  25. — It  stood  [Heb.  standing']  npon 
twelve  oxen  [The  import  of  the  number 
twelve  is  well  explained  by  Bahr,  Symbohk, 
i.  201  sqi}.  Like  seven,  it  is  compounded  out 
of  three  and  four.  But  the  primary  reference 
here  is  to  the  twelve  tribes] ,  three  looking 
toward  the  north,  and  three  looking  toward 
the  west,  and  three  looking  toward  the 
south,  and  three  looking  toward  the  east 
[So  the  tribes  in  the  camp  formed  a  square 
round  the  tabernacle,  three  on  each  side — 
east,  south,  west,  and  north  (Num.  ii.)] :  and 
the  sea  was  set  above  upon  them,  and  aU 
their  hinder  parts  were  Inward.  [The  same 
regard  of  the  cardinal  points  (see  Bahr, 
SymboHk,  i.  210  sqq.)  has  been  noticed  in 
the  pomegranates  on  the  capitals  of  the  two 
columns.  See  note  on  ver.  20.  Keil  sajs 
the  feet  of  the  oxen  no  doubt  rested  on 
a  metal  plate,  so  that  they  were  fixed  and 
immoveable;  but  this  lacks  proof.  The 
oxen  would  be  immoveable  in  any  case, 
owing  to  the  weight  of  the  metal  and  the 
M  ater.  AU  conjectures  as  to  the  height  and 
size  of  the  oxen  are  necessarily  of  little 
value. 

Yer.  26. — And  It  wasahandbreadththick 
[i.e.,  three  inches] ,  and  the  brim  thereof 
was  wrought  like  the  brim  of  a  cup  [Heb. 
and  his  lip  like  the  work  of  the  lip  of  a  cup, 
i.e.,  curved  outwards] ,  with  flowers  of  lilies 
[Ut., "  a  blossom  of  lily."  Keil  understands 
"ornamented  with  lily  flowers,"  but  the 
strict  interpretation — the  "  lily  blossom" 
being  in  apposition  to  "cup" — requires  ua 
to  refer  the  words  to  the  shaperather  than 


to  the  ornamentation  of  the  laver.  The  lip 
was  curved  like  a  lily] :  It  contained  two 
thousand  [In  Chron.  and  by  Josephus  the 
number  is  given  as  3000.  This  may  have 
resulted,  as  Eeil  thinks,  from  confounding 
i  and  3  but  it  is  suspicious  that  so  many  of 
the  numbers  of  the  Chronicles  are  exagge- 
rations. The  common  explanation  of  the 
discrepancy,  viz.,  that  it  held  2000  baths 
"  when  filled  to  its  ordinary  height,  but 
when  filled  to  the  brim  3000  "  (Wordsworth), 
appears  to  me  hardly  ingenuous]  baths. 
["  The  data  for  determining  the  value  of 
the  bath  or  ephah  are  both  scanty  and  con- 
flicting "  (Diet.  Bib.  iii.  p.  1741).  Josephus, 
the  only  authority  on  the  subject,  says  that 
it  equalled  the  Attic  metretis  (about  8 J  gals.), 
but  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  he  was 
"  really  fainiliar  with  the  Greek  measures  " 
(ib.)  At  any  rate,  if  this  statement  is 
correct,  his  other  statement  as  to  the  shape 
of  the  laver  must  be  altogether  erroneous, 
since  2000  baths  would  equal  17,000  gals., 
and  a  hemispherical  laver  could  not  possibly 
have  contained  more  than  10,000.  Tha 
attempt  has  been  made,  on  the  assumption 
that  the  sea  was  a  hemisphere,  as  Josephus 
affirms,  to  calculate  from  its  capacity  the 
value  of  the  bath,  which  in  that  case  would 
be  about  four  gallons.  But  there  is  good 
reason  for  doubting  whether  the  laver  was 
hemispherical — such  a  shape  would  be  ill 
adapted  to  its  position  on  the  backs  of 
oxen — and  some  have  maintained  that  it 
was  cylindrical,  others  that,  like  the  laver 
of  the  tabernacle,  it  had  a  foot  (Exod.  xxx. 
18)  or  basin.  The  prevailing  opinion  of 
scholars,  however,  appears  to  be  that  it  was 
30  cubits  in  circumference  only  at  the  Up, 
and  that  it  bellied  out  considerably  below. 
While  the  shape,  however,  must  remain  a 
matter  of  uncertainty,  we  are  left  in  no 
doubt  as  to  its  purpose.  It  was  "  for  the 
priests  to  wash  in"  (2  Chron.  iv.  6) — not,  of 
course,  for  immersing  their  whole  persons, 
but  their  hands  and  feet  (Exod.  xxx.  19,  21). 
The  priests  (after  Exod.  iii.  5;  Josh.  v.  15, 
&o.)  ministered  barefoot.  It  was,  accord- 
ing to  Babbinical  tradition,  provided  with 
taps  or  faucets  (Bahr).  It  has,  however, 
been  held  by  some  that  the  water  issued 
forth  (as  in  the  Alhambra)  from  the  Uons' 
mouths.  It  is  probable  that  a  basin  of  some 
sort  was  attached  to  it.  Whether  the  laver 
was  filled  by  the  hand  or  by  some  special 
contrivance,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  say. 
We  know  that  provision  was  made  for  storing 
water  hard  by.  The  present  writer  was  privi- 
leged in  1861  to  explore  the  great  reservoir, 
the  Bahr  el  Khebir,  still  existing  underneath 
the  Haram  area,  at  a  time  when  very  fe4 
Europeans  had  seen  it  (see  Pal.  Ezplor. 
Fund,  No.  vii.;  Barclay,  "City  of  the  Great 


OB.  VII.  1 — 51.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


133 


King;"  Porter,  Handbook,  L  pp.  134,  138)., 
The  water  was  probably  brought  from  Solo- 
mon's pools  at  Bethlehem,  though  "  a 
fountain  of  water  exists  in  the  city  and  is 
ninning  unto  this  day,  far  below  the  sur- 
face" ("  Our  Work  in  Palestine,"  p.  103). 
Tacitus  mentions  the  fma  peremm  aquae 
and  the  jnsciTuie  eUtemaeque  servandit  im- 
bribia. 

Yet.  27..— And  he  made  ten  bases  [or 
Btandt,  n'uiStp,  from  ]-13,  erectut  stetit.  The 
description  of  both  the  bases  and  the  layers 
which  they  supported  (vers.  27 — 39)  is  ex- 
tremely obscure.  We  know,  however,  that 
the  bases  (as  the  name  implies)  were  simply 
stands  or  pediments  for  the  lavere]  of 
brass ;  four  cubits  was  the  length  of  one 
base  and  four  cubits  the  breadth  thereof, 
and  three  cubits  the  height  of  It  [they 
were  rectangular,  or  box-shaped,  six  feet 
s^'caie  and  four  and  a  half  feet  high. 

Yer.  28. — And  the  work  of  the  bases  was 
on  this  manner  [Heb.  and  this  the  work  of 
the  base} :  they  had  borders  [Dh^SpD  (from 
13D,  clausit)  means  strictly  enclosings,  i.e., 
sides,  forming  the  stand.  They  were  panels, 
because  of  the  borders  or  ledges  meiitioned 
presently,  but  this  was  the  accident  of  their 
construction.  The  translation  "  border" 
gives  a  totally  wrong  impression],  and  the 
borders  were  between  the  ledges  [Heb.  the 
sides  were  between  the  borders,  i.e.,  were 
enclosed  by  ledges  or  frames. 

Ver.  29. — ^And  on  the  borders  [panels] 
that  were  between  the  ledges  were  lions 
[t.c., figures  or  bas-rehefs  of  lions],  ozen, 
and  cherublms  ["  The  lion  and  the  ox  are 
the  two  animal  forms  which  occur  most  fre- 
quently in  Assyrian  decoration"  (Eawlinson). 
They  have  also  found  a  place  through  the 
cherubim,  in  the  symbolism  of  Christianity]: 
and  upon  the  ledges  there  was  a  base  above 
[i.e.,  there  was  a  pedestal  or  stand  ()3  ;  see 
ver.  81)  of  some  sort  for  the  layer,  upon  the 
square  basis] :  and  beneath  the  Uons  and 
ozen  were  certain  additions  [Heb.  wreaths, 

fettoom,  Tfjp.  (of.  Prov.  i.  9),  coronal  made 
of  fhln  work.  [Heb.  pensile  or  hanging 
work,  TjID  from  T1J  descendit  ;  Vulgate, 
dependentia.  It  would  seem  that  on  the 
panel,  beneath  the  figures  of  animals,  &c., 
were  sculptured  hanging  festoons  of  flowers. 
Ver.  30. — And  every  base  bad  four  brazen 
wheels  [As  the  layers  were  used  for  washing 
"  such  things  as  they  offered  for  burnt 
offering  "  (2  Ghron.  iv.  6),  and  consequently 
would  require  to  be  contmually  emptied  and 
refilled,  they  must  of  necessity  be  move- 
able, so  that  they  could  be  taken,  now  to 
the  sea,  or  other  reservoir,  now  to  the  altar] , 
and  plates  [Heb.  axles]  of  brass  :  and  the 


four  comers  [Heh.  feet;  DJJS  signifies  step, 
thence  foot,  and  is  here  used  of  artificial 
feet.  These  were,  no  doubt,  at  the  four 
corners,  and  served  to  raise  the  stand  above 
the  wheels,  so  that  the  foliage,  iic,  was  not 
hidden]  thereof  had  undersetters  [Heb. 
shoulders.  "  The  bearings  of  the  axle " 
(Gesen.)  must  be  meant.  The  bases  had  four 
feet,  which  apparently  terminated  in  a  sort 
of  socket  or  fork,  into  which  the  axletrees 
were  inserted] :  under  the  layer  were  under- 
setters [Heb.  the  shoulders]  molten  [or 
cast],  at  the  side  of  every  addition.  [Lit., 
opposite  to  a  man  (i.e.,  each)  were  wreaths. 
The  explanation  of  Keil  is  that  "  from  the 
feet  .  .  .  there  ascended  shoulder  pieces, 
which  ran  along  the  outside  of  the  chest  and 
reached  to  the  lower  part  of  the  basin,  which 
was  upon  the  lid  of  the  chest,  and,  aa 
shoulders,  either  supported  or  helped  to 
support  it. "  He  thus  understands  the 
"  shoulder "  to  extend  from  the  foot,  or 
axletree,  to  the  bottom  of  the  layer.  But 
it  seems  quite  as  likely  that  these  shoulders 
were  within  the  stand ;  that  they  started 
from  its  upper  comers,  i.e.,  "from  under 
the  layer"  (as  in  the  Hebrew),  passe,; 
down  along  its  inner  angles,  and  emerged 
below — the  stand  may  well  have  had  no 
bottom — in  the  shape  of  feet  or  forks, 
which  rested  on  the  axletrees,  and  sup- 
ported both  stand  and  laver.  Over  against 
this  internal  shoulder-blade  or  support  was 
placed  externally  a  wreath.  But  Bahr  de- 
spairs of  arriving  at  any  just  and  adequate 
understanding  of  this  arrangement,  and, 
in  the  absence  of  drawings,  it  is  perhaps 
hopeless  that  we  shall  ever  interpret  the 
words  with  certainty.] 

Ver.  81.— And  the  mouth  of  It  [Heb. 
his  mouth.  I  incline,  with  Eeil,  to  think 
the  mouth  of  the  laver  just  mentioned 
(1^3  masc.)  is  referred  to  rather  than  the 
stand  (Thenius),  which  would  require  a  fern. 
sufiSx]  within  the  chapiter  [By  this  wo 
are,  perhaps,  to  understand  a  round  orna- 
ment, resembling  the  capital  of  a  pillar, 
which  stood  in  the  centre  of  the  dome- 
shaped  covering  (see  ver.  35)  of  the  stand, 
and  on  which  the  laver  rested  (so  Eeil, 
Bahr).  Bawlinson  says,  "  No  commentator 
has  given  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  this 
passage "]  :  and  above  [Heb.  upwards] 
was  a  cubit  [i.e.,  the  neck  or  foot  of  the 
laver  measured  uniformly  one  cubit,  in 
width  apparently]  :  but  the  mouth  [Heb. 
and  her  mouth,  tern.  This  last-mentioned 
mouth  is  probably  the  mouth  of  the  capital 
(fem.)  The  neck  or  mouth  of  the  laver 
would  appear  to  have  been  fitted  into  the 
mouth  of  the  crown-shaped  pedestal]  was 
round  after  the  work  of  the  base  [Heb. 


184 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cu.  VII.  1 — 6L, 


ttand-worh,  p  here  fixes  the  meaning  of  the 
word  in  ver.  29,  i.e.,  it  decides  it  to  be  the 
substantive  (Kail,  after  Chald.),  not  the  ad- 
yerb  (as  Thenius,  Bahr,  al.)  a  cubit  and  a 
half  [so  that  the  first  mouth  would  fit  easily 
into  the  second] ,  and  also  upon  the  mouth 
Of  It  [fieb.  her  mouth,  thaj}  of  the  capital, 
which  waB  external.  The  mouth  of  the 
laver  was  partially  concealed]  were 
gravlngB  [Eeil  tmderstands  this  of  the 
carving  of  the  stand  already  mentioned,  ver. 
29.  But  a  mouth  is  mentioned,  which  the 
square  stand  lacked.  Besides  the  word 
"  also  "  points  to  additional  carvings.  I 
understand  the  chapiter  which  formed  the 
mouth  of  the  stand  to  be  meant]  with 
[Eeb.  an<f|  their  borders,  foursquare,  not 
round,  [i.e.,  the  capital  had  panels  like  the 
stand,  and  the  former,  like  those  of  the 
latter,  were  square.] 

Yer.  32. — And  under  the  borders  [i.«., 
paneUI  were  four  [Heb.  the  fonis  i.e.,  those 
mentioned  in  ver.  30]  wheels  ["  The  wheels 
reached  no  higher  than  that  portion  of  the 
sides  of  the  base  which  was  ornamented  with 
garlands  "  (Bawlinson).  It  would  be  more 
correct  to  say  that  the  wheels  did  not  cover 
any  portion  of  the  sides  ;  they  were  under 
them]  ;  and  the  axletrees  [Ueb.  hands,  as 
holding  the  wheel  to  the  base  or  stand. 
Axletrees  is  altogether  misleading.  The 
hands  were  the  parts  connecting  the  wheels 
and  axles]  of  the  wheels  were  Joined  to 
[Heb.  in,  as  marg.]  the  base :  and  the 
helgbt  of  a  wheel  was  a  cubit  and  half  a 
cubit.  [i.e.,  27  inches.] 

Ver.  33. — ^And  the  work  of  the  wheeli 
was  like  the  work  of  a  chariot  wheel  [Heb. 
the  chariot,  i.e.,  the  ordinary  chariot] :  their 
axletrees  [Heb.  hands],  and  their  naves 
[Gesenius  understands  rirns.  He  derives 
34,  gibbus,  from  33|,  curvatus  est] ,  and 
their  felloes  [or  fellies,  as  the  word  is  now 
written.  These  are  the  parts  which  com- 
pose the  circumference  of  the  wheel ;  but 
Gesen.  translates  spokes,  because  they  are 
the  joinings  (p^n  conjunxit)  of  nave  and 

rim] ,  and  their  spokes  [D'lB'riGosen.  would 
render  naves,  because  the  spokes  collect  at 
that  part] ,  were  all  molten. 

Ver.  34. — And  there  were  four  under- 
letters  [It  seems  probable  that  this  is  not 
a  repetition  of  ver.  30  (Eawlinsonj,  but  that 
the  reference  is  to  the  upper  part  (of.  ver. 
35)  of  the  shoulder  pieces,  which,  accord- 
ing to  Keil's  view,  supported  the  laver]  to 
the  four  comers  of  one  base :  and  the 
nndersetters  were  of  the  very  base  Itselt 
[Heb.  from  the  base,  its  shoulders.  Whether 
these  words  mean  that  the  shouldors  pro- 
jected from  the  base,  that  "they  rose  above 
the  comers  with  a  slight  curve"  (KeU),  or 


that  they  were  oast  with  the  base,  i.e.,  from 
the  same  mould,  as  in  the  next  verse,  it  ig 
impossible  to  say.] 

Ver.  36.— And  in  the  top  [Heb.  head]  ot 
the  base  was  there  a  round  compass 
[Probably  "  the  base  above "  (ver.  29)  or 
stand  for  the  laver.  This  was  apparently 
arched  to  the  height  of  nine  inches  above 
the  top  of  the  base]  of  half  a  cubit  high : 
and  on  the  top  of  the  base  the  ledges 
[Heb.  hands.  These  can  hardly  be  either 
"  the  hands  of  the  wheels  "  (ver.  32)  or  the 
"  shoulders  "  of  ver.  30  or  ver.  34,  but  what 
they  were  it  is  difficult  to  say.  They  may 
have  been  arms  or  projections  supporting 
the  laver]  thereof  and  the  borders  thereof 
were  of  the  same.  [Heb.  from  it,  sc,  of  one 
piece  or  casting.] 

Ver.  36.— For  on  the  plates  of  the  ledges 
[hands]  thereof  and  on  the  borders  [sides, 
panels]  thereof,  he  graved  cberublms,  Uons, 
and  palm  trees,  according  to  the  propor- 
tion [Heb.  nakedness,  hence  naked  space, 
void.  The  meaning  is  that  he  filled  all  the 
spaces  with  carvings]  of  every  one,  and 
additions  [wreaths,  festoons]  round  about, 

Ver.  37.— After  this  manner  he  made  the 
ten  bases :  all  of  them  had  one  casting,  one 
measure,  and  one  size. 

Ver.  38. — Then  made  he  ten  lavers  of 
brass :  one  laver  contained  forty  baths  [i.e., 
about  340  gals.,  if  we  accept  the  account 
of  Josephus,  Ant.  viii.  2.  9.  But  see  on  ver. 
26] :  and  every  laver  was  four  cubita  [It  is 
uncertain  whether  the  height  or  the 
diameter  is  meant.  £eil  deciles  for  the 
latter — and  four  cubits,  the  width  of  the 
sides  of  the  stand,  may  well  have  been  also 
the  diameter  of  the  basin — on  the  ground 

that  as  '  *  the  basins  were  set  npon  (7tf)  the 
stands,"  it  can  hardly  refer  to  the  height. 
But  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  "  the  height 
of  all  the  other  parts  has  been  mentioned  " 
(Eawlinson).  See  vers.  27,  32,  36,  and  with- 
out this  particular  we  could  not  calculate  the 
entire  height,  which,  if  the  laver  were  four 
cubits,  would  be  about  thirteen  feet.  This 
surprising  size  is  accounted  for  by  remem- 
bering the  height  of  the  altar,  to  which  the 
fat  and  other  sacrificial  portions  had  to  be 
transferred  from  the  laver] :  and  upon  every 
one  of  the  ten  bases  one  laver.  [Ten  lavers 
would  not  be  at  all  too  many  when  we  re- 
member the  prodigious  number  of  victims 
which  were  occasionally  offered.] 

Yer.  39. — ^And  he  put  five  bases  on  the 
right  side  [Heb.  shoulder]  of  the  house, 
and  five  on  the  left  side  of  the  house 
[i.e.,  on  the  south  and  north  sides  of  the 
court  of  the  priests]  :  and  he  set  the  sea  on 
the  right  side  of  the  house  eastward  over 
against  the  south.     [This  passage  is  deoi- 


OH.  VII.  1 — 61.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


lU 


rive  as  to  which  was  the  right  and  which 
the  left.  The  right  side  was  the  south. 
It  was  probably  for  conTenience  that  the 
sea  did  not  stand  due  east  of  the  honse,  i.*., 
between  the  porch  and  altar.] 

Ver.  40. — And  Hiram  made  tbe  lavera 
[So  the  Bee.  Text.  But  perhaps  we  ought 
to  read  n'lT'D,  i.e.,  pots,  here,  as  in  ver.  45 
and  2  Ohron.  iv.  11.  This  word  is  joined  with 
shovels  and  basons,  not  only  in  these  two 
passages,  but  also  in  Exod.  xxvii.  3, 
2  Kings  XXV.  14,  Jer.  lii.  18;  in  other 
words,  the  appropriate  term  in  this  con- 
nexion would  be  "pots,"  while  "lavers," 
having  been  just  mentioned  in  ver.  38,  would 
involve  an  idle  repetition,  idtogether, 
therefore,  there  can  be  little  doubt  tiiat  we 
should  here  read  nn'Dn  for  JllTSn.  It  is 
apparently  the  reading  of  the  Ghald.,LXX., 
and  some  MSS.  These  "  pots  "  were  used,  not 
for  carrying  away  the  adies  (Keil),  but,  as 
the  name  implies  (VD,  effervescere),  for  boil- 
ing the  flesh  of  the  peace  offering  (1  Sam. 
ii.  13, 14),  and  the  Uiovels  [these,  again,  as 
the  name  implies^ p)|^  f rom  UJi'^abstulit;  see 
Oesen.,  Thesaiuraa,  p.  607),  were  used  for 
takiiig  away  the  ashes  from  the  altar  (Exod. 
xxvii.  3 ;  Num.  iv.  14),  and  the  basona.  [The 
sacrificial  bowls  for  receiving  the  blood  of 
the  victims  (Exod.  xxxviii.  3  ;  Num.  iv,  14).] 
So  Hiram  made  an  end  of  doing  aU  the 
work  [the  writer  now  recapitulates  the  work 
of  Hiram.  The  repetition  may  be  due  to 
the  fact  that  the  history  was  compiled  from 
various  lists  and  documents]  that  lie  made 
klngr  Solomon  for  [Heb.  omits  the  prep.] 
the  house  of  the  Lord. 

Yer.  41. — The  [Heb.  omits  the  art.  and 
reads  pillars,  two]  two  pillars,  and  the  two 
bowls  of  the  chapiters  that  were  on  the 
top  of  the  two  pillars;  and  the  two  net- 
works to  cover  the  two  bowls  of  the 
Chapiters  which  were  upon  the  top  of  the 
pillars.    [See  on  verses  16 — 20.] 

Ver.  42. — ^And  four  hundred  pome- 
granates [Heb.  the  pomegranates,  400]  for 
the  two  networks,  even  two  rows  of  pome- 
granates for  one  network,  to  cover  the  two 
bowls  of  the  chapiters  that  were  upon  the 
pillars  [Heb.  upon  the  face  of  the  pillars^  . 
A  chapiter  could  hardly  be  correctly  de- 
scribed as  "Vn  ^J^*?!^.  It  is  probable  that 
this  is  a  clerical  error,  and  that  we  should 

read  'yn  'Jg'-^y  (Bahr,  Keil), "  upon  the  two 
pillars."  So  IiXX.  lit"  i/t^oripoie  c.r.X.  This 

is  a  more  likely  emendation  than  E!>kl  7^.  It 
is  true  this' latter  is  the  reading  of  some 
MSS.,  and  is  followed  by  the  Syr.  and  Vulg., 
but  it  can  easily  be  accounted  for,  being  a 
repetition  of  the  last  words  of  ver.  41,  while 


it   fails   to   aooonnt,  bb   the   flist>named 
emendation  does,  for  the  yS"?y. 

Ver.  43.  And  the  ten  bases  and  the  ten 
lavers  [Heb.  *■  the  bases,  ten  and  the  laven, 
ten  "]  on  the  bases.  [See  on  vers.  27 — 87.] 

Ver.  44. — And  one  [Heb.  the  one]  sea  and 
twelve  ozen  [Heb.  the  oxen  twelve]  under 
the  sea  [vers.  23—26]. 

Ver.  46.— And  the  pots  [see  on  ver.  40], 
and  the  shovels,  and  the  basons,  and  till 
these  vessels  [according  to  the  Eeri]  wbltib 
Hiram  made  [There  is  no  mention  of  the 
altar,  as  in  2  Chron.  iv.  1,  possibly  because 
it  was  not  made  by  ]ffiram  (Bahr)]  to 
[rather,  for]  king  Solomon  for  [Heb.  omiia] 
the  house  of  the  Lord,  were  of  bright  brass. 
[Marg.  Tnade  bright,  i.e.,  polished  aitei 
casting.] 

Ver.  46.— m  the  plain  [Heb.  Cicear,  i.e., 
circle  or  circuit,  the  word  used  only  of  the 
Ghor  or  Jordan  valley.  This  tract  is  called 
"The  Oicear"  Gen.  xiii.,  11,  xix.  17,  4o. 
See  Stanley,  "  Sinai  and  Palestine,"  App., 
§  12]  of  Jordan  [in  the  Heb.  this  river  ("  the 
descender  ")  always  takes  the  art.]  did  the 
king  cast  them,  In  the  clay  ground  [Heb. 
as  marg.  in  the  thickness  of  the  ground. 
Whether  the  soil  was  made  thick  by  stamp, 
ing  (KeU)  it  is  impossible  to  say.  It  looks 
as  if  tiiis  site  had  been  chosen  because  the 
soil  was  suitable]  between  Succoth  [Gen. 
xxxiii.  17.  It  appears  from  Judg.  viii.  5 
that  it  lay  east  of  the  Jordan  (cf.  Josh,  xiii 
27,  where  it  allotted  to  the  tribe  of  Gad) ; 
"  and  indeed  it  has  been  recovered,  under  its 
later  name  Tarala,  at  Tell  Dar'ala,  north- 
east of  the  Dftmieh  ford"  (Conder, p.  229). 
As  Zarthan  was  almost  certainly  west  of  the 
Jordan,  and  as  the  casting — from  the  na- 
ture of  the  county — must  as  certainly 
have  been  done  to  the  west  of  tbe  river,  it 
is  somewhat  surprising^  to  find  a  trans- 
Jordanio  town  mentioned  as  one  of  the 
landmarks  defining  the  site.  It  is  possible 
that  there  was  a  western  Succoth — a  place 
named  Sdktit  was  discovered  by  Eobinson 
and  Van  de  velde,  a  few  iniles  south  of 
Bethshean  ;  but  this  name  is  radically  dif- 
ferent (Conder).  It  is,  therefore,  more  prob- 
able that,  being  near  the  ford  of  the  river, 
this  place  was  so  well  known  that  it  would 
serve  better  than  any  of  the  less  familiar 
western  towns  to  identify  the  site  of  the 
foundry]  and  Zarthan.  [See  note  on  chap, 
iv.  12.] 

Ver.  47. — And  Solomon  left  all  the  ves- 
sels unweighed  [the  interpretation  of  the 
A.  V.  italics  is  justified  by  the  next  clauses] 
because  they  were  exceeding  many :  neither 
was  the  weight  of  the  brass  found  out. 
[Marg.  searclied.  So  Geseu.  at.  This 
does  not  mean  that  the  "brass  for  eac^ 


ise 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH.  VII.  1 — Ola 


vessel  was  not  weighed  out "  (Bahr),  but 
that  the  total  weight  of  the  metal  was  not, 
perhaps  could  not,  be  ascertained.] 

The  sacred  record  now  proceeds  to  enu- 
merate the  vessels,  &o.,  used  inside  the 
temple — those  hitherto  described  having 
been  for  external  use.  These  latter,  as 
became  tiie  lumituro  of  a  house  which 
blazed  in  gold,  were  all  of  gold,  while  the 
former  were  of  brass.  It  would  seem  to  be 
a  fair  inference,  from  the  omission  of 
Hiram's  name,  that  he  was  not  employed 
on  the  manufacture  of  these  latter  vessels. 

Ver.  48. — And  Solomon  made  all  the  ves- 
sels which  pertained  unto  [neither  word  in 
Heb.]  the  house  of  the  Lord :  the  altar  of 
gold  [the  altar  of  incense.  See  on  chap. 
•n.  20,  22]  and  the  table  of  gold  [The  Heb. 
shows  the  meaning  to  be.  He  made  the 
table  out  of  gold,  not  ' '  He  made  the  golden 
table,"  as  Keil.  2  Chron.  iv.  8  (cf.  ver. 
19  and  1  Chron.  xxviii.  16)  speata  of  ten 
tables]  whereupon  the  shewbread  was. 

Ver.  49. — And  the  candlesticks  [Exod. 
txv.  31 — 37  ;  xxxvii.  17 — 24.  According 
to  Jewish  tradition,  the  seven-branched 
candlestick  was  preserved  in  the  temple  m 
addition  to  the  ten  named  here]  of  pure 
[Heb.  shui]  gold,  five  on  the  right  side 
and  five  on  the  left,  before  the  oracle 
["  These  are  said  to  have  formed  a  sort 
of  railing  before  the  vail,  and  to  have 
been  connected  by  golden  chains  under 
which,  on  the  day  of  atonement,  the 
high  priest  crept"  (Diet.  Bib.  i.  249). 
The  idea  that  the  ten  candlesticks  rested 
on  the  ten  tables  mentioned  in  the  Chro- 
nicles is  entirely  groundless.  Eleven  tables 
would  in  that  case  have  been  necessary 
(Bahr).  Besides  we  are  distinctly  told 
that  the  tables  were  for  the  shewbread 
(2  Chron.  iv.  19),  not  for  the  candlesticks], 
with  the  flowers  [ornaments  of  the  candle- 
stick (Exod.  XXV.  31)] ,  and  the  lamps  [the 
seven  extremities  of  the  candlestick  which 
held  the  oil  »nl  the  wicks  (ver.  37).  It  is 
highly  probable  that  the  temple  candle- 
sticks were  fashioned  after  that  of  the  taber- 
nacle] ,  and  the  tongs  [ib.  ver.  38.  Heb.  two 
taken]  of  gold. 

Ver.  60. — ^And  the  bowls   [same  word  in 


Exod.  xii.  22.  The  "dishes "  of  Exod.  xxv. 
29,  and  xxxvii.  16,  vrith  which  Eawlinson 
identifies  them,  are  expressed  by  a  different 
word.  He  thinks  they  were  for  the  oil — 
which  the  connexion  would  seem  to  imply 
— but  they  may  have  been  for  the  blood], 
and  the  snuffers  [Heb.  knives,  ^Dt,  carpsit. 
The  word  is  used  of  the  pruning-hook  in 
Isa.  ii.  4;  cf.  Levit.  xxv.  3.  They  served 
the  purpose  though  they  had  not  the  shape 
of  our  snuffers] ,  and  the  basons  [same  word 
as  in  vers.  40,  45.  These  latter,  however, 
were  of  brass,  while  those  of  the  text  were 
of  pure  gold.  According  to  2  Ohron.  iv.  8, 
they  were  a  hundred  in  number.  At  the 
root  (pDp  signifies  to  sprinkle,  they  were 
probably  either  for  the  water  or  the  blood 
of  sprinkling.  Keil  thinks  they  were  for  the 
■wine  of  the  libations],  and  the  spoons 
[niS3,  lit.,  palms  (of  hands),  hence  used 
of  shallow  vessels  (Exod.  xxv.  29;  Num. 
vii.  84,  86.  The  last  cited  pasage  (cf. 
vers.  14,  20,  26)  shows  that  they  were  used 
for  the  incense  (Lev.  xxiv.  7,  &c.),  USX. 
Qviaimi],  and  the  censers  [or  snvffen,  ex- 
tinguishers ;  marg.  ash-pans.  In  Exod.  xxv. 
38  the  word  is  translated  snuf -dishes.  In 
Num.  iv.  14,  xvi.  6,  it  signifies  censers, 
which  may  well  be  the  meaning  here]  of 
pure  gold ;  and  the  hinges  [or  sockets  of 
the  hinges  (Gesen.,  Keil)]  of  gold,  both 
for  the  doors  of  the  Inner  house,  the 
most  holy  place  [Heb.  for  the  holy  of 
holies'] ,  and  for  the  doors  of  the  house,  to 
wit,  of  the  temple.  [These  were  evidently 
of  inferior  (not  pwre)  metaL] 

Yer.  SI. — So  was  ended  all  the  work 
that  king  Solomon  made  for  the  house 
of  the  Lord.  And  Solomon  brought  In  the 
things  which  David  his  father  had  dedi- 
cated [marg.  holy  things  of  David  (3  Sam. 
viii.  8,  10,  11;  1  Chron.  xxii.  3,  14,  16; 
xxviii.  14—18).  Cf.  xxvi.  26—28]  ;  even  the 
silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  vessels,  did 
he  put  among  the  treasures  of  the  hoiu* 
of  the  Lord.  [So  that  all  the  store  of  pre- 
cious metal  and  the  brass  that  David  had 
prepared  was  not  absorbed  in  the  decora- 
tion and  furniture  of  the  temple.  There 
would  seem  to  have  been  a  considerable 
overplus,  which  was  stored  in  the  temple 
treasury. ] 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  15 — 22. — The  Pillars  of  Brass.  If,  as  some  think,  the  importance  of  any 
ScriptuTe  subject  is  to  be  gauged  by  the  space  assigned  to  it  in  the  sacred  page,  then 
surely  the  fact  that  eight  long  verses  of  this  chapter  are  occupied  with  the  descrip- 
tion of  these  two  columns  and  their  capitals  proves,  first,  their  importance  in  the 
eyes  of  Jewish  vnriters,  and,  secondly,  ^at  they  must  have  a  significance  for  th* 
minds  of  Christian  readers. 


OH.  VII.  1—61.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  187 


But  the  importance  of  these  monviments  (which  is  also  attested  (1)  by  theh 
position — in  the  very  forefront  of  the  temple — the  first  objects  that  wotild  strike  the 
eye  of  the  beholder — and  (2)  by  their  isolation — they  were  apparently  unconnected 
with  the  edifice  and  served  a  purpose  of  their  own)  is  not  due  to  what  they  were  in 
themselves.  No  doubt  they  were  regarded  in  that  age  as  wonderful  works  of  art. 
Probably  they  were  the  largest  castings  either  accomplished  or  attempted  up  to  that 
date.  And  from  the  minute  details  of  their  capitals,  the  chequer- work,  chain-work, 
net-work,  hly-work^-detaUs  evidently  recorded  with  some  degree  of  pride  and 
wonderment  on  the  part  of  the  historian — we  may  reasonably  infer  that  there  "  were 
not  the  like  made  in  any  kingdom  "  (oh.  x.  20).  But  it  is  not  because  of  this  that 
BO  much  prominence  is  accorded  to  them  in  Scripture ;  it  is  because  of  their  con- 
nexion with  the  temple.  Their  glory  is  reflected  on  them  from- the  sanctuary.  They 
are  mentioned  "  because  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  our  God,"  of  which  they  were  the 
handmaids  and  ornaments.    We  are  led,  therefore,  to  inquire — 

I.  What  meanins  they  had  for  the  Jew? 

II.  What  lessons  they  have  for  ourselves  ? 

I.  But  in  order  to  arrive  at  their  meamng,  we  must  first  consider  their  purpose. 
We  have  seen  that  they  were  not  structural,  but  monumental  (note  on  ver.  21) ;  in 
fact  they  served  instead  of  an  inscription  upon  the  building.  The  Western  world, 
with  its  love  of  the  concrete,  often  stamps  its  great  edifices  with  appropriate  legends. 
But  the  children  of  the  Easthave  ever  preferred  the  mystical  teaching  of  symbolism. 
For  them  there  has  always  been  a  charm  in  ^'the  view  of  things  half  seen."  And 
so  the  Jewish  temple  bore  no  letters  on  its  front,  but  its  representative  piUars  stood 
forth,  embodiments  in  themselves  of  the  ideas  of  the  building,  and  silently  pro- 
claimed its  object  and  character.    And  this  is  the  teaching  they  had  for  the  wise — 

1.  That  the  temple  was  strong  and  firm  and  lasting.  Their  very  materials 
proclaimed  this.  They  were  not  of  perishing  wood  or  stone,  but  of  enduring  bronze. 
Then,  they  were  of  unusual  girth  in  proportion  to  their  height,  for  whereas  the 
shaft  was  12  cubits  in  circumference,  it  was  but  18  cubits  high  (Jer.  hi.  21).  The 
first  impression  they  gave,  consequently,  would  be  that  of  strength,  of  fixity,  and 
so  they  spoke,  by  their  very  character  as  well  as  by  their  names,  of  the  stability  of 
the  house.  It  was  no  longer  a  tent  (of.  Isa.  xxxviii.  12),  it  was  a  house  of  cedar 
(2  Sam.  vii.  2),  it  was  a  icr^/iu  is  aei.  The  two  columns,  that  is  to  say,  served  instead 
of  these  two  inscriptions,  "  /  ha/oe  surely  built  thee  a  house  to  dwell  in,  a  settled 
place  for  thee  to  abide  in  for  ever"  (ch.  viii.  13),  and  "  This  it  my  rest  for  ever, 
here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it "  (Psa.  cxxxii.  14). 

2.  That  its  strength  amd  stability  were  in  Ood.  Of  course  this  is  an  idea 
which  symbolism  could  only  express  imperfectly.  And  yet  it  may  be  (as  some 
have  thought)  that  the  brazen  pillars  would  recall  to  some  minds  the  piUar  of  cloud, 
the  token  of  God's  presence.  And  if  we  may  see  in  the  steeple  a  "  sUent  finger 
pointing  to  the  sky,"  then  surely  these  erect  columns  may  have  carried  men's 
thoughts  upwards  to  the  throne  of  God.  But  if  not,  the  names,  Jachin,  Boae,  at 
any  rate,  VTitnessed  for  Him  and  proclaimed  Him  to  aU  as  the  hope  and  stay  of  the 
new  sanctuary.  It  was,  therefore,  as  if  in  the  place  of  pillars  these  superscriptions 
also  had  been  conspicuous  on  the  temple :  for  Jachin — "  Ood  is  in  the  midst  of 
her;  she  shall  not  be  removed;"  and  ioxBoaz — "Except  the  Lordbuild  the  house, 
they  labov/rinvain  that  build  it  "  (Psa.  cxxvii.  1.  Note.  This  psalm  is  ascribed  to 
Solomon.    And  these  words  were  inscribed  on  the  late  Eddystone  hghthouse). 

3.  That  it  was  the  shrine  of  a  holy  Ood.  The  two  colimins,  standing  as 
sentinels  over  the  house,  confronted  all  who  came  into  its  courts  with  the  idea  of 
consecration.  We  have  seen  that  column  and  chapiter  together  bore  a  rough 
resemblance  to  a  lUy — the  column  the  stalk,  the  chapiter  the  flower.  Now  the  hly  is 
the  emblem  of  purity  (see  on  ch.  vii.  19).  The  "  Uly- work  in  the  porch  "  proclaimed 
the  house  as  belonging  to  the  All-'Holy  One  of  Israel.  The  columns,  therefore,  in 
their  esoteric  symbolic  language,  spoke  to  the  same  effect  as  if  these  words  had  been 
blazoned  on  the  temple's  front  (as  on  the  high  priest's  mitre)  ;  "  Holiness  unto  the 
Lord"  (Exod.  xxviii.  86;  xxsix.  30),  or  these,  "I  the  Lord  your  God  am  holy" 
(Levit.  zix.  2 ;  xxi.  8). 


138  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vii.  1—61 

4.  That  it  was  for  the  worship  of  a  holy  people.  The  chapiters  were 
&shioned  after  a  lily-cup.  The  columns,  i.e.,  blossomed  into  purity  iinder  the 
shelter  of  the  sanctuary,  and  so  proclaimed  that  holiness  was  to  be  the  produot  of 
the  temple  services  and  ritual.  They  served  accordingly  as  memoramda  both  to 
priests  and  worshippers.  It  is  said  that  on  the  front  of  the  second  temple  words 
were  inscribed,  viz.,  these:  "Enow  before  whom  thou  art  going  to  stand."  In 
this  first  temple  the  two  columns  spoke  to  the  same  purport.  _  To  the  priests  they 
cried,  "  Be  ye  clean  that  hear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord"  (Isa.  Hi.  11) ;  to  the  people 
they  spoke,  like  the  "frioge  with  the  ribband  of  blue,"  "Be  ye  holy  unto  yowr 
Qod"  (Num.  XV.  38,  40). 

6.  That  it  was  for  a  people  zealous  of  good  works.  On  the  columns  were 
400  pomegranates.  Pomegranates  are  said  to  be  emblems  of  frwitfulness.  If  so, 
they  taught  the  Hebrew  worshipper  this  last  lesson — ^they  served  instead  of  this 
inscription,  "  Thou  shalt  not  delay  to  offer  the  first  of  thy  ripe  fruits  "  (Exod.  xxii. 
29);  or  this,  "He  looked  that  Ms  vineyard  should  bring  forth  grapes  "  (Isa.  v.  2). 

n.  But  what  lessons  have  Jachin  and  Boaz  for  ourselves  ?  Co  they  not  speak  to 
us  (1)  of  the  Church,  the  "pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth"  (1  Tim.  iii.  15) ;  (2)  of 
the  Christian,  who  shall  be  "&pilla/ria  the  temple  of  God  ?  "  (Bev.  iii.  12.) 

1.  Of  the  Church.  The  lessons  these  brazen  coltunns  had  for  the  Hebrew 
people,  the  same  they  have  for  ourselves,  with  this  difference,  that  they  also  speak 
to  us  by  their  fall.  They  image  forth  the  stability  of  the  Church — that  the  gates 
of  heU  shall  not  prevail  against  it;  that  its  strength  is  in  God — its  weapons  are  not 
carnal,  but  spiritual  (2  Cor.  x.  4;  Matt,  xxviii.  20:  John  xv.  4);  that  its  object  is 
holiness  (Ephes.  v.  27 ;  i.  4 ;  Titus  ii.  12)  and  frmtfulnest  (John  xv.  8 ;  2  Cor.  ix, 
10;  Phil.i.  11).  But  they  have  an  additional  lesson  for  us,  derived  from  their  de- 
struction. For  why  were  these  splendid  works  of  art  removed  out  of  their  place,  broken 
up,  and  carried  to  Babylon  ?  (Jer.  Iii.  17,  21.)  It  was  because  their  lessons  were  un- 
heeded, because  the  people  were  not  pure  amd  holy  (Jer.  xxii.  8,  9  ;  v.  31 ;  Acts  vii. 
48).  And  so  we  learn — not  that  the  Oathoho  Church  will  "  likewise  perish : "  that 
can  never  be  (Matt.  xvi.  18) ;  of  that  it  might  be  said,  with  a  propriety  of  which  the 
Latin  poet  was  all  unconscious,  "  Exegi  monumentum  acre  perennius" — the 
columns  lasted  423  years,  the  Church  1800  already — ^^but  that  particular  churches, 
if  unfaithful,  shall  have  their  candlesticks  removed  out  of  their  places  (Bev.  ii.  6). 
"If  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches,"  See.  (Bom.  xi.  21). 

8.  Of  the  CJvristiam..  He  may  learn  hence — (1)  To  be  rooted  and  grounded  in 
feith  and  love  (Eph.  iii.  17 ;  Col.  i.  23).  (2)  Not  to  be  carried  about  by  every  wind 
of  doctrine  (Eph.  iv.  14;  James  i.  6;  note  on  ver.  20).  (3)  That  "God  is  ow 
refuge  and  strength  "  (Phil.  iv.  18 ;  Col.  i.  11 ;  1  Peter  v.  10).  (4)  That  we  are  to 
"wear  the  white  lily  of  a  blameless  life"  (cf.  2  Peter  ui.  14).  (6)  And  to  "bring 
forth  much  firiit,"  and  (6)  that  if  we  overcome,  we  shall  be  pillars  in  the  heavenly 
temple,  not  to  be  broken,  or  cast  into  the  fire,  or  to  share  in  the  destruction  of 
Babylon  (Bev.  xviii.  2),  but  to  "  go  out  no  more  for  ever"  (Bev.  iii.  12). 

Vers.  23,  24.—  The  Molten  Sea  amd  the  Brazen  La/uers,  If  the  two  piUars  teach 
the  lesson  of  piuity,  of  personal  holiness,  how  much  more  the  sea  and  bases  t  For 
observe — 

1.  Sea  and  bases  had  the  same  end  in  view,  viz.,  purification.  The  first  was 
for  the  cleansing  of  the  priests.  The  second  for  the  cleansing  of  the  sacrifices 
offered  by  the  priests. 

2.  The  extraordinary  provision  of  water  for  the  service  of  the  temple.  Under- 
neath the  temple  area  was  a  great  reservoir  (it  is  said  to  be  some  fifty  feet  deep), 
no  doubt  the  same  which  exists  at  the  present  day,  near  the  Mosque  el  Aksa  (note  on 
ver.  26).  This  was  connected  by  an  aqueduct  (which  can  still  be  traced)  with  Solo- 
mon's Pools  at  Etham,  near  Bethlehem.  "Whether  these  great  works  were  purely 
for  the  use  of  the  temple,  or  whether  the  city  also  shared  in  their  benefits,  may  be 
doubtful,  but  that  the  temple  occupied  the  first  place  in  the  scheme  is  beyond  all 
question.  From  this  subteiTanean  sea— whether  by  pipes  or  by  the  labours  of  the 
Netldnim,  we  cannot  be  certain — both  molten  sea  and  brazen  laven  were  filled. 


OB.  TO.  1—61.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  189 

But  here  a  distinction  must  be  made.  The  priests  were  commanded  to  wash, 
under  pain  of  death  (Bxod.  xxx.  19  sqq.;  xxix.  4;  xl.-SO— 32),  but  there  was  no 
such  command  with  respect  to  the  victims.  No;  the  sacrifices  would  seem  to  have 
been  washed  because  the  Jewish  mind  instinctively  felt  that  this  was  right  and 
fitting.  And  that  it  was  right  and  fitting  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  service  was 
accepted,  and  here  enjoys  the  Divine  sanction.  We  should  hardly  have  had  twelve 
verses  of  Scripture  devoted  to  the  description  of  the  lavers  and  their  bases,  had  not 
God  Himself  approved  of  the  washing  of  "the  work  of  the  burnt  offering  "  (2  Chron. 
iv.6,Heb.) 

Hence  we  may  learn — 

I.  That  Christiaa  priests  mMBt  be  washed. 

II.  That  Christian  sacrifices  should  be  cleansed. 

1.  Christian  priests  must  be  washed.  Here  two  questions  arise.  (1)  Who  are 
GhriiUan  priests?    (2)  What  is  this  washing  ? 

_  1.  By  ChrisUcm  priests  we  may  understand  here  all  Christians.  For  all  Chris- 
tians a/re  priests,  precisely  as  all  Jews  were  priests  (cf.  1  Peter  ii.  5,  9,  with  Exod. 
xix.  6).  Of  course,  there  is  a  priesthood  among  Christians,  just  as  there  was  a  priest- 
hood among  the  Jews  (see  page  113).  It  is  ofiien  said,  and  said  truly,  that  the  word 
UptvQ,  sacerdos,^  is  nowhere  applied  to  the  ministers  of  the  New  Testament ;  but  the 
answer  is  that  it  could  not  have  been  so  applied,  so  long  as  the  Levitioal  priesthood 
existed,  without  risk  of  confusion.  It  is  also  true  that  the  fanctions  of  the  Christian 
presbyterate  are  very,  very  different  from  those  of  the  Jewish  priesthood ;  but  all 
the  same,  if  Christianity  is  filling  up,  and  not  the  reversal  or  the  negation  of 
Judaisrn  (Col.  ii.  17;  Matt.  v.  17),  then,  assuredly,  it  must  not  only  have  its  altar, 
(Heb.  xiii.  10),  but  its  priesthood.  But  let  us  understand  the  word  here  of  the  body 
of  behevers :  for  clearly,  if  we  can  prove  that  all  Christians  must  be  washed,  how 
much  more  those  who  minister  in  holy  things,  and  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  ? 
(Isa.  lii.  11.) 

2.  By  Christian  washing  we  may  understand,  primarily,  the  washing  (ear* 
Uox^")  of  the  New  Testament,  "  the  washing  of  regeneration  "  (Titus  ui.  5  ;  cf. 
(1  Cor  vi.  11;  Eph.  v.  26;  Heb.  x.  22;  cf.  vi.  2).  For  to  all  Christians  is  the  com- 
mand addressed,  "Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins  "  (Acts  xxii.  16; 
of.  ch.  ii.  88).  Of  all  may  our  holy  Lord  "be  heard  to  say,  "If  I  wash  thee  not, 
thou  hast  no  part  with  me  "  (John  xiii.  8 ;  cf.  iii.  5 ;  Mark  xvi.  16). 

But  is  this  all?  Are  we  only  to  find  here  a  lesson  as  to  Christian  baptism? 
Certainl;^  not.  For  observe,  (1)  by  baptism,  the  initial  rite  of  our  religion,  men  are 
made  priests  (Bev.  i.  6,  6).  (2)  The  washing  of  the  priests  was  a  washing  of  the 
hands  and  the  feet  (Exod.  xxx.  19) ;  and  (3)  it  was  to  be  repeated  as  often  as  they 
"went  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  or"  came  near  unto  the  altar  (ver.  20 ; 
eh.  zl.  82).  Clearly,  then,  the  "one  baptism"  af  Christianity  cannot  respond  to 
this  exclusively.  No ;  that  rather  corresponds  to  the  washing  of  the  whole  person 
(Levit.  xvi.  4,  24),  which  the  Babbins  say  was  performed  in  the  molten  sea,  or  in  its 
basin;  but  which  may  possibly  have  been  performed  in  private.  That  there  was 
such  complete  ablution  on  the  part  of  the  priests  needs  no  proof;  it  is  presupposed 
in  the  directions  about  the  hands  and  feet.  It  would  have  been  mockery  to  wash 
the  extremities  of  the  body,  while  the  body  itself  remain  unclean.  But  the  priest 
who  went  to  the  temple  pure  might,  perhaps,  contract  some  defilement  on  the  way; 
the  exposed  parts,  the  hands  and  the  feet,  might  be  stained  and  so  become  unfit  for 
the  service  of  the  AU-Holy.  It  was  for  this  the  molten  sea  was  provided,  and  this 
helps  to  illustrate  our  Lord's  words,  "  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  save  to  wash 
his  feet"  (John  xiii.  10).  Even  so  we,  though,  as  St.  Paulsaj-s,  we  "were  washed" 
(&vi\ovaacF9t,  aor.)  "in  the  laver  of  rogeneration,"  have  sullied  our  baptismal  robes 
in  our  passage  through  and  contact  with  the  world  (James  iii.  2),  and  need,  day  by 
day.  cleansing  and  forgiveness  (Matt.  vi.  12).  The  text  teaches,  then,  that  we  are 
luifit  for  the  service  of  the  Most  Pure  until  we  have  washed  our  hands  and  feet ; 
until,  i.e.,  we  are  pur^'ed  from  the  soils  and  stains  of  tliis  wicked  world.  Not  only 
must  "  our  bodies  be  washed  with  pure  water,"  our  "  hearts "  must  also  be 
"  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,"  before  we  can  draw  neixr  with  npcpptance  to 


140  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vu.  1—51. 

God  (Heb.  x.  22).  "  I  cannot  pray,  but  I  sin ;  I  cannot  hear,  or  preach  a  sermon, 
but  I  sin ;  I  cannot  give  an  alms  or  receive  the  sacrament,  but  I  sin ;  nay,  I  cannot 
so  much  as  confess  my  sins,  but  my  very  confessions  are  still  aggravations  of  them  ; 
my  repentance  needs  to  be  repented  of,  my  tears  want  washing,  and  the  very  wash- 
ing of  my  tears  needs  still  to  be  washed  over  again  in  the  blood  of  my  Redeemer" 
(Bp.  Beveridge). 

What,  then,  let  ns  now  ask,  is  the  "sea,"  what  the  "laver,"  for  the  washings 
away  of  these  daily  sins  and  defilements  ?  It  is  a  fountain  of  blood  ("  Not  by  water 
only,  but  by  water  and  blood,"  1  John  v.  6) ;  it  is  the  other  sacrament  of  our 
rehgion,  the  "  blood  of  the  new  covenant  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins  " 
(Matt.  xxvi.  28).  "The  one  baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins  "  (Nicene  Creed)  can- 
not apply  to  the  sins  of  later  life.  For  this,  other  provision  is  needed,  and  in  th* 
mercy  of  God  other  provision  is  made  in  the  sacrament  of  love  and  the  ministry 
of  reconciliation.    (Of.  also  Matt.  xvi.  19 ;  xviii.  18 ;  John  xx.  28  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  20.) 

But  here  one  word  of  caution  may  possibly  be  needful.  It  must  not  be  supposed 
for  a  moment  that  there  is  any  other  source  or  ground  of  cleansing  and  forgive- 
ness than  the  free,  unmerited  mercy  of  God  in  Christ ;  that  there  is  any  hope  for 
the  sinner  except  in  the  "full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation,  and  Batisfac> 
tion"  once  made  by  the  one  Saviour  "for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world;"  or  that 
any  rites  or  ordinances  can  have  any  virtue  or  efficacy  apart  from  His  meritorious 
death  and  His  now  victorious  life.  The  sacraments  are  not,  cannot  be,  the 
sources  or  the  grounds  of  forgiveness,  nor  do  they  work  like  a  charm — ex  opere 
operato.  But  in  the  aU-wise  appointnaont  of  God,  they  are  the  means  of  grace,  the 
channels  through  which  His  infinite  mercy  ordina/rily  flows  {gratia  non  Ugatur 
mediis)  to  the  penitent  and  believing  soul. 

Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  the  generous  provision  made  by  God  for  the 
cleansing  of  all  sin  obviates  the  need  for  striving  against  sin  (Heb.  xii.  4).  We  are 
to  "cleamse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit"  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  We 
are  to  "purify  ourselves,  even  as  He  is  pure"  (1  John  iii.  3).  The  priests  of  lih» 
Holy  God  must  "live  a  clean  life"  (Wyclif). 

II.  Christian  sacrifices  should  be  cleansed.  Here  again  two  qaestions 
arise.     (1)  What  are  Christian  locW^ces  .^     (2)  H.o'm  can  they  he  cleansed  f 

1.  Christiam,  sacrifices.    Those  whiob  all  Christian  mMi  are  ordained  to  offer 

il  Peter  ii.  8)  are  these — (1)  The  living  sacrifice  of  body  and  sovX  (Rom.  xii.  1). 
2)  The  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  (Heb.  xiii.  15).     (8)  The  sacrifice  of 
alms  and  oblations  (Heb.  xiii.  16 ;  Phil.  iv.  18). 

2.  The  Cleansing  of  these  sacrifices  is  that  which  takes  place  in  a  "pure  heart 
and  good  conscience."  It  is  a  matter  of  motive,  of  intention.  The  quality  of  the 
sacrifice  depends  on  the  spirit  of  the  sacrificer.  It  is  a  sacrifice,  howsoever  offered 
—there  is  such  a  thing  as  "  the  sacrifice  of  fools" (Eccles.  v.  1) — but  it  may  be,  and 
often  is,  a  maimed,  or  unclean,  or  unworthy  sacrifice.  If  our  praise,  for  example, 
be  prompted  by  the  love  of  music  rather  than  the  love  of  God ;  if  our  alms  be 
offered  for  the  praise  of  men  (Matt.  vi.  1)  and  not  "for  His  name's  sake,"  then  the 
sacrifice  is  unclean.  The  Christian  priest,  consequently,  should  "  interrogate  his 
heart  "—"Interroge  viscera  tua"  (Augustine) — before  he  enters  on  Divine  service. 
It  has  been  well  said  that  we  ought  to  wash  our  prayers  and  praises  in  our  hearts 
before  we  put  them  into  our  hps.  The  customary  "prayer  before  service"  and 
the  self-examination  before  communion  (1  Cor.  xi.  28),  if  made  more  real,  would 
ensure  the  cleansing  of  the  eaciifice.     (Compare  James  i  27.) 

Ver.  46. — The  Clay  Ground  in  the  circuit  of  the  Jordan.  These  things  are  an 
allegory.  These  words  suggest  some  thoughts  as  to  the  soil  in  which  the  King  of 
Heaven  moulds  the  vessels  for  His  service  (2  Tim.  ii.  20,  21 ;  Acts  ix.  15 ;  Rom.  ix. 
21,  23).    They,  too,  are  prepared  in  ^e plain:  they  are  cast  in  the  clay  grovmd. 

Observe  (1)  that  both  pillars  and  vessels,  i.e.,  Jachin  and  Boaz,  as  well  as  "  the 
pots  and  the  shovels  and  the  basins,"  were  cast  in  this  same  clay  ground.  In  the 
two  pUlars  we  may  fitly  see  foi  our  present  piu-pose  emblems  of  those  two  "pillars 
and  basements  of  the  truth"  (1  Tim.  iii.  15),  the  Jewish  and  Christian  churches; 


CH.  vu.  1—51.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  141 

in  tlie  vessels,  emblems  of  those  "  vessels  unto  honour,"  the  "  messengers  of  the 
churches,''  Prophets,  Apostles,  Martyrs,  &c.  (2  Cor.  viii.  23  ;  Acts  ix.  15).  We 
shall  find  that  the  great  Master  Builder  has  prepared  them  all  in  the  plain ;  that 
all  alilce  have  been  moulded  in  the  clay. 

As  to  the  plain,  the  figure  is  obvious  enough,  a,nd  a  few  words  will  snfiice  to 
expound  it.  From  the  Mesopotamian  immigrants  into  Palestine,  the  first  fathers  of 
the  Jewish  people,  down  to  the  peasants  and  fishermen  of  Galilee,  aye,  and  to  the 
poor  monk,  Luther,  and  the  poor  servitor,  Whitfield,  history  constantly  teaches  the 
same  lesson — ^that  not  many  wise  men  or  mighty  or  noble  (1  Cor.  i.  26)  are  the 
vessels  chosen  of  Heaven  to  do  God's  work  in  the  world.  The  apostles  did  not 
issue  forth  from  "king's  houses"  (Matt.  xi.  8).  Just  as  "the  gentle  rain  fi:om 
heaven"  leaves  the  mountains  and  descends  into  the  vales,  so  does  the  grace  of 
God  ever  condescend  to  men  of  low  degree.  Not  "the  princes  of  this  world" 
(1  Cor.  ii.  8),  not  its  rich  men  (James  ii.  6),  but  the  "  poor  of  this  world  "  hath  God 
chosen  (ib.  ver.  5).  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees  believed  on  him  ?  " 
(John  vii.  48).  No,  it  was  the  "common  people" — the  despised  amhaa/retz — 
"heard  him  gladly''  (Mark  xii.  37).  The  early  adversaries  of  Christianity  used  to 
sneer  at  the  humble  origin  and  occupations  of  its  champions,  and  the  apologists 
Would  not  and  could  not  deny  the  charge. 

Now  as  to  the  "  clay  ground,"  observe  that  while  the  text  gives  this  rendering, 
the  margin  has,  "  thiohness  of  the  ground."  It  is  not  a  distinction  without  a 
difference,  for  the  latter  rendering  would  import  that  the  soil  had  been  made  thick, 
for  the  purpose  of  casting,  by  stamping  or  puddling.  And  which  of  these  transla- 
tions is  the  true  one;  whether,i.e.,  the  soil  was  naturally  clayey — ^perhaps  from  the 
overflow  of  the  Jordan  (Josh.  iii.  15,  Heb.),  perhaps  from  the  springs  which  make 
much  of  the  Jordan  valley  into  a  swamp  (Conder,  pp.  226 — 229) — or  whether  it  was 
artificially  prepared  for  castings,  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  say.  Nor  need  we 
wish  to  decide,  since  for  our  purpose  both  meanings  are  true.  Whatever  Hiram 
did,  God  oasts  His  vessels,  some  in  the  clay,  i.e.,  in  the  most  unpromising  soil,  with 
the  most  ungenial  surroundings ;  some  "  in  the  thickness  of  the  ground,"  i.e.,  in 
soil  which  has  been  trodden  by  the  iron  feet  of  the  persecutor ;  and  some  in  both. 

I.  Let  us  now  see  how  (1)  the  Churches — we  regard  them  as  two  for  our  present 
purpose,  though  strictly  the  Christian  isKkriaia  is  but  the  development  of  the  Jewish 
(see  p.  112) — and  (2)  theib  messengers  have  both  been  prepared  in  the  clay  ground. 
But  first,  let  us  carry  our  thoughts  to  that  foundry  in  the  Jordan  valley.  We  now 
assume  that  it  was  a  bed  of  clay  in  which  the  castings  were  made.  If  so,  it  is 
probable  this  tract  of  land  had  hitherto  laid  waste.  The  ox  had  not  drawn  the 
plough  through  it;  it  had  yielded  neither  seed  to  the  sower,  nor  bread  to  the  eater; 
the  &rmer  had  not  planted  it  with  olive  or  vine.  And  in  a  land  so  small — Palestine 
is  about  the  same  size  as  Wales — and  so  densely  populated  as  the  Holy  Land;  in  a 
country  where  every  available  yard  was  cultivated,  and  where  even  the  steep  hill 
sides  were  laid  out  in  terraces  to  increase  the  acreage ;  in  a  land,  too,  of  great 
fertility  (Deut.  viii.  7-9) — for  the  whole  realm  was  remarkably  prolific,  and  "  the 
plain  of  the  Jordan"  was  the  garden  of  the  whole  (Gen.  xiii.  10) — this  barren  tract 
could  not  fail  to  be  noticed.  It  had  long  been  an  eyesore,  we  may  well  believe,  to 
the  fellahin  who  tilled  the  neighbouring  fields.  The  traveller  who  passed  it  on  his 
way  to  the  fords  of  the  Jordan  (Judg.  viii.  5;  xii.  6 ;  Gen.  xxxiii.  17)  pronounced  it 
unprofitable,  and  altogether  it  was  "nigh  unto  cursing  "  (Heb.  vi.  8). 

And  so  it  lay,  century  after  century,  a  marsh,  or  piece  of  scrub,  a  blot  on  the 
landscape.  Men  thought  it  was  irreclaimable.  But  now  the  temple  is  being  built, 
the  vessels  of  brass  have  to  be  cast,  and  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  Palestine 
they  find  no  spot  so  suited  to  the  purpose  as  the  "  clay  ground  between  Suoooth 
and  Zarthan."  Here  shall  the  foundry  be.  And  so  from  this  despised  and  desolate 
tract  the  burnished  brass  went  forth  to  adorn  the  temple  of  the  Lord.    Even  so — 

1.  The  Jewish  Church  was  moulded  in  the  clay.  Where  was  it  constituted? 
In  the  desert  of  Sinai,  in  the  "  great  and  terrible  wilderness."  In  the  Red  Sea  was 
its  baptism  (1  Cor.  x.  2) ;  at  Horeb  (lit.,  dry  ground)  it  entered  into  the  covenant. 
Fromljie  "backside  of  tiie  desert,"  from  the  plain  of  Rdhah,  where  "desolation 


142  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  vu.  1— 51 

keeps  unbroken  sabbath ;  "  from  a  "frozen  tempest  of  black,  weather-worn,  rugged 
moTintain  peaks,"  the  Hebrew  Church  went  forth  to  witness  for  God.  Nowhere, 
perhaps,, under  the  whole  heaven  is  there  a  more  arid  and  rugged  and  desolate  and 
oninhabitable  laud.  Yet  God  chose  it  to  be  the  school  and  training -ground  of  His 
Church. 

2.  The  Christicm  Church  was  cast  in  the  clay.  Not  in  Greece,  amid  the  schools 
of  philosophy,  not  in  Borne,  among  senates,  and  armies,  and  subject  kings,  but 
in  Palestine,  a  despised  comer  of  the  empire,  among  Jews,  who  were  hated  of 
all  men.  And  in  what  part  of  Palestine  ?  Not  in  Jerusalem,  among  the  scribes 
and  doctors,  but  in  the  provinces,  in  "  Galilee  of  the  Goim."  The  question  was 
often  asked.  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  (John  i.  46.)  The  answer 
was  often  given,  "  Out  of  GalUee  ariseth  no  prophet "  (John  vii.  62).  Surely  this 
was  clay  ground.  Tet  there  it  pleased  God  to  found  the  Holy  Catholic  Church. 
And  this,  which  is  true  of  the  Church,  is  equally  true  of  its  vessels.    For — 

8.  The  la/wgmers  and  prophets  of  the  Jewish  Church  were  shaped  in  the  cla/y. 
Moses,  it  is  true,  was  bred  in  the  court,  but  he  was  not  prepared  there  for  his  work. 
No,  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  lea/ve  the  court  in  order  to  become  a  "vessel  meet 
for  the  Master's  use."  It  was  in  this  same  desert  of  Sinai,  amid  the  Bedouin, 
while  keeping  an  Arab's  flock,  and  leading  a  nomadic  Ufe,  after  forty  years  of  soli- 
tude, that  God  appeared  unto  him.  The  lawgiver  himself  came  from  the  clay. 
So  did  Elijah,  the  restorer  of  the  law.  He  was  a  GUeadite.  It  was  a  wild,  im- 
settled,  semi-civUized,  trans-Jordanic  region  gave  to  the  world  the  greatest  of  the 
prophets.  And  he  too  must  go  into  the  desert,  and  must  be  trained  for  his  work 
at  Horeb — the  " dry  grovmd"  (1  Kings  zix.  8).  And  the  same  remark  applies  to 
nearly  all  the  prophets,  judges,  &c.  Occasionally  we  have  a  Jeremiah,  the  son  of 
a  high  priest  (Jer.  i.  1),  or  a  Daniel  of  the  royal  seed  (Dan.  i.  3),  but  more  fre- 
quently a  herdman,  a  gatherer  of  sycamore  fruit  (Amos  vii.  14 ;  1  Kings  zix.  19), 
or  a  captive  by  the  river  Chebar  (Ezek.  i.  3),  rises  up  to  spe^k  for  God. 

4.  The  apostles  and  preachers  of  Christia/nity  were  fashioned  a/tid  prepared  in 
clay  ground.  (1)  The  founder  of  Christianity  was  well  called  a  "root  out  of  a  d/ry 
groumd  "  (Isa.  Uii.  2).  "  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son?  "  (Matt.  xiii.  55).  "Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  the  <ion  of  Joseph"  (John  i.  45).  "How  knoweth  this  man  letters, 
having  never  learned  ?''  {ib.  vii.  15.)  (2)  The  apostles,  too,  came  from  the  fisher- 
man's boat  at  Bethsaida  (John  i.  44),  and  from  the  receipt  of  custom  (Matt.  ix.  9)  in 
Capernaum.  Only  one  out  of  the  entire  college  had  studied  in  the  schools  (Acts 
xxii.  3).  They  were  justly  described  as  "  ignorant  and  unlearned  men"  {ih.  iv.  13). 
(3)  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  nearly  all  the  early  Christians  and  confessors. 
It  was  a  most  unpromising  and  unlikely  soil  in  which  the  Church  first  took  root. 
"  Pubhoans  and  sinners."  M.  Benan.  has  given  a  graphic  description  of  the  early 
Christians  of  Borne — a  "longshore  population,"  sleeping  on  the  straw,  "clad  in 
malodorous  stable  slops,"  "smelling  of  garlic,"  "with  fetid  breath  like  that  of 
iU-fed  peojple,"  &c.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  bulk  of  the  early  Christians  were 
men  of  this  sort,  tentmakers  like  Aquila,  slaves  like  Onesimus,  gaolers  like  him  of 
Philippi,  soldiers  like  those  of  Csesar's  household.  And  eighteen  centuries  have 
only  served  to  establish  more  firmly  the  truth  that  "not  many  mighty,"  &o.  It  is 
curious  and  suggestive  that  so  many  of  the  saints  of  the  Boman  calendar  are  said  to 
have  been  of  noble  birth.  It  is  easy  thus  to  glorify  dead  saints,  but  if,  with 
Chateaubriand,  we  ask  to  see  living  ones,  we  frequently  find  them  in  the  homes  of 
the  poor,  and  almost  invariably  amid  cares,  worries,  temptations,  hindrances,  per- 
eecutions  of  every  kind.     The  saints  are  still  fashioned  in  the  clay. 

II.  But  let  us  now  assimie  that  this  foundry  of  the  Jordan  valley  was  not  a  bed 
of  natural  clay,  but  that  the  soil  had  been  prepared  by  stamping.  We  shall  find 
that  both  (1)  the  Churches  and  (2)  the  messengers  of  the  Churches  have  been  pre- 
pared "in  the  thicTmess  of  the  ground"  under  the  heel  of  persecution  and  oppres- 
sion.   And  first  of  the  Chwrches. 

1.  The  Jewish  Church  came  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  ■  "  Out  of  the  iron 
famace"  (Deut.  iv.  20;  1  Kings  viii.  61:  cf.  Exod.  v.)  "Dealt  subtiUy  with  on* 
Eindred,  and  evil  entreated  our  fathers"  (Actf  vii.  19).     It  was  among  the  brioJe- 


OH.  TO.  1^61.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  148 

fields— i^e  thick  Nile  mud — of  Egypt,  and  their  hardships  and  oppressions,  that 
Gcd  disciplined  and  prepared  His  people. 

2.  The  Christicm  Church  haa  come  out  of  great  tribulation.  Its  history  begins 
with  a  sharaeful  crucifixion,  and  it  is  a  history  written  in  blood,  a  histoiy  of  "stripes" 
(Acts  xvi.  23;  2  Cor.  vi.  6),  beatings  (Acts  v.  40),  stonings  (ib.  vii.  59;  xiv.  19),  the 
sword  {ib.  xii.  2),  "great  persecution"  (ib.  'viii.  1),  and  the  like.  Nero,  Decius, 
Aurelian,  Diocletian — ^what  tragedies  are  connected  with  these  names!  Yet  "the 
blood  of  the  martyrs  has  been  the  seed  of  the  Church,"  and  in  the  reign  of  Con- 
stantine  the  empire  awoke  to  find  itself  Christian.  Persecution  only  evolved 
progress  (Phil.  i.  12, 18).  And  what  is  true  of  the  pillars  is  also  true  of  the  vessels. 
For— 

8.  TJie  heroes  of  the  Jewish  Church  passed  through  fire  and  sword.  Moses 
must  flee  his  country,  must  learn  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered. 
Elijah — they  sought  his  life  (1  Kings  xix.  10).  Jezebel  sought  to  slay  the  prophets 
of  the  Lord.  Daniel  is  cast  into  the  lions'  den ;  the  Hebrew  children  into  the  fire ; 
Jeremiah  into  the  mire  and  clay  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6).  Isaiah  is  sawn  asunder  (Heb. 
xi.  37).  Zechariah  is  slain  between  the  temple  and  the  altar,  &c.  See  Heb.  xi. 
84—38.  What  evidences  of  stamping  are  here  I  Surely  the  ground  bears  the 
marks  of  a  struggle  I 

4.  The  saints  of  the  new  dispensation  ha/oe  been  made  perfeet  through  suffering. 
For  St.  Paul,  see  2  Cor.  xi.  28 — 83,  and  remember  that  this  list  only  extends,  at  the 
latest,  to  A.D.  68.  That  "  chosen  vessel"  was  first  showed  "  what  great  things  he 
must  suffer  "  (Acts  ix.  16).  For  the  early  Christians  see  Rev.  ii.  10. 13 ;  vi.  10 ;  vii.  14, 
&o.;  1  Cor.  iv.  13;  2  Cor.  vi.  6 — 10.  Polycarp,  Augustine,  Cyprian,  Chrysostom — 
the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  those  bright  vessels  of  grace,  some  in  the  dark 
ages,  some  in  oxu:  own  time,  who  were  prepared  for  the  ministry  and  the  inherit- 
ance of  the  saints  in  "  the  thickness  of  the  ground,"  and  who,  "  after  they  had  suf- 
fered awhUe,''  were  made  perfect. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

_  Ver.  21. — Jaehvn  amd  Boag.  No  features  in  Solomon's  temple  have  given 
rise  to  so  much  controversy  as  these  two' famous  pUlars;  the  beauty  of  which 
Jewish  writers  are  never  tired  of  recounting.  They,  were  marvels  of  the  glyptic 
skill  for  which  the  Phoenician  workmen  were  distinguished.  Homer  speaks  ol 
such  metallio  work.  In  II.  xxiii.  741 — 744,  he  thus  describes  the  prize  assigned 
lijy  Achilles  for  the  foot-race  at  the  funeral  of  Fatroclus — 

•  A  bowl  of  solid  silver,  deftly  wrought, 
That  held  six  measures,  and  in  beauty  far 
Surpassed  whatever  else  the  world  could  boast  | 
Bince  men  of  Sidun,  skilled  in  glyptic  art, 
Had  made  it,  and  Phcmician  mariners 
Had  brought  it  with  them  over  the  dark  sea." 

(See  bIbo  Wb  description  of  Menelaus'  gift  to  Telemachus,  Od.  iv.  614 — 618.) 
Hiram,  the  Phoenician  artificer,  lent  by  the  king  of  Tyre  to  Solomon,  was  specially 
skilled  in  such  work  (2  Chron.  ii.  14).  "In  the  plain  of  Jordan,  in  the  clay 
ground  between  Siiccoth  and  Zarthan,"  he  cast  these  two  great  bronze  pillars, 
each  17J  cubits  high,  with  capitals  five  cubits  high,  adorned  with  pomegranates, 
and  "  nets  of  checker-work,  and  wreaths  of  chain- work."  They  were  placed  on  the 
right  and  left  of  the  porch  of  the  temple,  and  probably  were  not  obelisks,  but  were 
necessary  as  "pillars"  to  support  the  roof,  which  was  thirty  feet  in  width.  That 
these  were  symbolic  is  evident  from  their  names,  which  may  be  rendered,  "  Sta- 
bility" and  "  Strength."  The  reference  is  not  so  much  to  the  material  building,  but 
to  the  kingdom  of  God  in  Israel,  which  was  embodied  in  the  temple.  They 
pointed  then,  and  now,  to  the  beauty  and  strength  of  the  dwelling  of  God. 
I.  Thk  fasbionino  of  the  pillabb.    Made  of  bronze  cast  in  the  earth.    Nona 


144  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vn.  1—51. 

but  the  initiated  would  expect  such  an  issue  from  such  a  process.  Picture  the 
anxiety  of  those  in  charge  when  the  mould  was  constructed,  when  the  metal  wag 
molten,  &c.    Apply  to  the  anxiety  and  care  of  those  rearing  the  spiritual  temple. 

1.  They  were  theproduct  ofhumcm  sJcill.  This  skill  was  devoutly  recognized  as  the 
gift  of  God.  Compare  ver.  14  with  the  description  of  Bezaleel's  artistic  "  gifts."  If 
wisdom  of  that  kind  is  from  God,  how  much  more  is  the  highest  wisdom  needed 
for  the  upbuilding  of  the  true  temple  (1  Cor.  iii.  12 — 17).  Turn  to  the  promises  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  apostles,  and  of  wisdom  to  aU  who  seek.  Refer  to  times  of 
difficulty  and  anxiety  in  which  only  this  heavenly  help  could  avail  the  teachers  and 
rulers  of  the  Church.  Observe  such  expressions  as  that  in  which  Paul  speaks  of 
himself  as  "  a  wise  master  builder."  Indicate  special  gifts  still  required  by  those 
who  succeed  to  this  work.     "If  any  man  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  of  God,"  &o. 

2.  They  were  the  result  of  mwrvellous  diligence.  Years  and  generations  of  effort 
had  made  these  artificers  what  they  were,  and  now  daily  they  applied  themselves 
to  their  toil,  nor  was  it  without  reward.  Nothing  great  can  be  attained  in  this 
world  without  work.  God  has  not  made  things  pleasant  by  ordaining  that  the  way 
to  them  should  be  easy,  but  He  has  made  them  precious  by  ordaining  that  the  way 
should  be  hard.  The  hardships  endmred  by  miners,  pearl  divers,  agricultural 
labourers,  &o.  The  strenuous  toil  of  the  student,  the  man  of  business,  the  explorer, 
the  scientist,  &c.  No  wonder  that  in  the  highest  sphere  diligence  is  essential.  It 
is  required  for  the  upbuilding  of  our  Christian  character ;  e.g.,  "  Give  diligence  to 
to  make  your  calling  .  .  .  sure,"  4c.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation,"  &c., 
"  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,"  fto.  Similar  diligence  is  required  by  the 
Church  for  the  evangelization  of  the  world.  Contrast  the  diligence  shown  in  other 
pursuits  with  the  indolence  in  this.  8.  They  were  the  product  of  combined  effort. 
The  wealth  of  Solomon  was  added  to  the  skill  of  Hiram.  Observe  the  diversity  of 
workmen  essential  for  the  designing,  moulding,  fashioning,  uprearing  of  these 
pillars.  Each  did  his  own  work,  did  it  heartily,  completely.  All  was  not  equally 
honourable,  easy,  remunerative ;  yet  none  neglected  his  share  of  the  toil.  Speak 
of  the  miUions  now  constructing  God's  spiritual  temple ;  how  the  various  races  of 
men,  how  the  differing  sects  of  Christians,  how  the  peculiar  tastes  and  gifts  of 
individuals,  are  rearing  "  the  house  not  made  with  hands,"  "  the  habitation  of  God, 
through  the  Spirit." 

II.  The  symbolism  of  the  pillabs.  1.  Stability  (Jachin).  In  this  the 
temple  was  a  contrast  to  the  tabernacle.  Yet  even  the  temple  and  aU  that  was 
material  of  the  old  worship  passed  away  to  make  room  for  the  spiritual  realities 
which  abide  eternally.  In  Hebrews  (xii.  27)  we  read  of  "  the  removing  of  those 
things  that  are  shaken,  as  of  things  that  are  made,  that  those  things  which  cannot 
be  shaken  may  remain."  Show  how,  amidst  the  fall  of  empires,  the  Church  has 
lived,  in  spite  of  all  that  evil  powers  could  do  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  Speak  of  the  safety, 
for  time  and  eternity,  of  those  who  are  in  Christ  (John  x.  28),  &c.  2.  Strength. 
The  Church  needs  more  than  endurance,  it  wants  vigour.  Resistance  must  be 
supplemented  by  aggression.  Far  more  than  the  Jevrish  Chm-ch  the  Christian 
Church  is  to  be  characterized  by  this.  The  apostles  were  not  merely  to  hold  their 
own,  but  to  go  "  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Only 
the  active  Church,  only  the  active  Christian,  has  a  robust  and  wholesome  hfe.  Let 
"  Boaz  "  stand  beside  "Jachin."  8.  BeoMty.  The  lUies  and  pomegranates  adorning 
the  pUlars  not  only  showed  that  there  should  be  beauty  in  the  worship  of  God,  and 
that  the  noblest  art  should  be  consecrated  to  Him,  but  symbolized  the  truth  de- 
clared in  Psa.  xcvi.  6,  "  Strength  and  beauty  are  in  His  sanctuary."  Starength  needs 
beauty_  to  adorn  it.  Beauty  needs  strength  to  support  it.  Illustration :  the  ivy 
clustering  round  the  oak.  Let  the  courageous  man  be  gentle ;  the  stalwart  man 
tender ;  the  sweet  girl  morally  strong,  &c.  If  we  would  have  it  so,  we  shall  find 
those  graces  in  the  holy  place  of  God,  the  sacred  place  of  prayer,  whether  public 
or  secret,  for  strength  and  beauty  are  in  His  sanctuary.  Emblems  of  stabilify  and 
strength,  yet  exquisite  in  their  beauty,  let  Jachin  and  Boaz,  in  the  porch  of  the 
temple,  remind  us  of  what  God  would  see  in  the  Christian  Cbuioh,  and  ia  •Tery 
Cbristian  character. — ^A.  B. 


OH.  vm.  1—66.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS 


145 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VIII.  1—66. 


Thb  dedication  op  the  temple.  —  The 
stately  and  impressive  service  with  wMoh 
the  Temple,  the  character  and  contents  of 
which  have  now  been  described,  was  dedi- 
cated, is  related  in  this  chapter,  and  divides 
itself  into  four  sections.  'We  have  (1)  the 
removal  of  the  ark  and  Solomon's  ascrip- 
tion of  praise  on  the  ocoanon  (vers.  1 — 22). 

(2)  The  prayer  of  consecration  (vers.  23 — 54). 

(3)  The  benediction  cjt  the  congregation 
(vers.  -55 — 61),  and  (4)  the  festal  sacrifices 
which  followed  on  and  completed  the  dedi- 
cation (vers.  02—66).  The  inaugural  rites, 
it  is  clear,  were  on  a  scale  corresponding 
with  the  magnitude  and  renown  of  the 
undertaking  (1  Chron.  zzii.  5). 

Seoiion  I. — The  Removal  of  the  Arh, 

Ver.  1.— Then  [i.e.,  when  the  work  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord  was  practically  ended, 
as  stated  in  ch.  vii.  51.  But  the  precise 
date  of  the  dedication  is  a  matter  of  dispute 
and  uncertainty.  We  know  that  it  took 
place  in  the  seventh  month  of  the  year,  but 
of  what  year  we  cannot  be  so  sure.  Was  it 
the  same  year  in  the  eighth  month  of  which 
(ch.  vi.  38)  the  house  was  finished  (Ewald)  1 
Was  the  dedication,  that  is  to  say,  one 
month  anterior  to  the  completion  oif  the 
house  and  its  appointments  ?  Or  are  we  to 
understand  "  the  seventh  month  "  to  mean 
the  Kthajrim  of  the  following  year  (Bahr)  ? 
are  we  to  assign  the  dedication,  that  is,  to 
a  date  eleven  months  after  completion? 
Or,  finally,  are  we  to  believe  with  the  Vat. 
LXX.  liera  hkobi  in)  (the  LXX.  text  is 
here,  however,  in  great  confusion),  that  the 
temple  was  not  dedicated  until  the  palaces 
were  also  built  (see  ch.  ix.  1 — 9) ;  are  we  to 
hold,  i.e.,  that  though  finished  and  ready 
for  use,  it  remained  unused  for  a  period  of 
thirteen  years  (Thenius,  Keil)  ?  These  are 
questions  which  we  cannot  perhaps  answer 
with  absolute  certainty,  but,  to  my  mind, 
eve:7  consideration  is  in  favour  of  the  date 
first  mentioned,  i.e.,  the  seventh  month  of 
the  eleventh  year  of  Solomon's  reign.  It  is 
true  Bahr  says  that  this  opinion  "  needs  no 
refutation,"  while  Keil pronouncesit  "directly 
St  variance  with  chap.  vii.  61,"  But  it  is 
worth  while  to  inquire  whether  this  is  so  7 
And,  first,  as  to  the  bearing  of  the  passage 
just  cited,  "So  was  ended  all  the  work 
which,"  &c.,  taken  in  connexion  with  oh. 

1    KINGS. 


viii.  1,  "  Then  Solomon  assembled,"  Ac,  To 
the  cursory  reader  it  appears  no  doubt  as  ii 
this  "then"  must  refer  to  the  completion 
of  the"work  of  which  we  have  just  heard, 
and  which  was  not  effected  until  the  eighth 
month  of  the  year  (ch.  vi.  38).  But  (1)  tX 
though  probably  a  mark  of  time  {  =  tunc), 
is  clearly  a.  word  of  great  latitude  of  mean- 
ing, and  may  apply  as  well  to  one  month 
before  completion  (the  time  specified  in  ch. 
vii.  61)  as  to  eleven  months  after  ;  and  (2) 
it  would  be  quite  consistent  with  the  usu> 
loquendi  of  the  sacred  writers  to  describe 
the  temple  as  finished,  when  in  reality  it 
was  incomplete  in  a  few  minor  particulars 
(De  minimis  non  curat  scriptura).  Further 
more,  if  the  temple  was  finished  in  everj 
detail,  and  in  all  its  furniture  and  appoint, 
meuts,  in  the  eighth  month,  as  we  learn  from 
ch.  vi.  88,  we  may  be  perfectly  sure  it  would 
or  could  be  practically  finished — finished 
BO  as  to  be  ready  for  consecration — by  the 
seventh  month.  Indeed,  it  is  not  an  un- 
reasonable presumption,  that  it  hardly  would 
be  perfect  and  complete  on  the  day  of  dedi- 
cation. Those  who  have  bnilt  or  restored 
churches,  not  to  speak  of  cathedrals,  which 
would  perhaps  afford  a  closer  analogy  to  the 
temple,  know  how  extremely  difficult,  if  not 
impossible,  it  is  to  have  every  detail  finished 
and  arranged  for  the  day  of  consecration. 
Some  few  accidental  omissions  will  have  to 
be  supplied  afterwards,  or  experience  will 
suggest  certain  alterations  and  improve- 
ments which  have  to  be  made.  There  is  no 
inherent  improbability,  therefore,  that  the 
temple  should  be  dedicated  in  the  seventh 

month,  though  it  was  not  finished  Vl^"!  7^7 
until  the  eighth  month,  i.e.,  three  or  four 
weeks  later.  And  there  was  a  strong  reason 
why  the  dedication  should  take  place  at  the 
earliest  possible  date.  There  hfid  been  a  long 
period  of  preparation,  extending  back  into 
the  preceding  reign  (1  Chron.  xxviii.,  xxix.) ; 
the  dedication  consequently  had  long  been 
eagerly  looked  for;  moreover,  the  erection 
had  evidently  been  hurried  forward,  a  pro- 
digious number  of  labourers  having  been 
employed  in  order  to  expedite  the  work.  It 
is  almost  inconceivable,  therefore,  that, 
after  these  energetic  measures  had  been 
taken,  either  the  king  or  the  nation  should 
have  been  content  to  wait  thirteen  years — 
nearly  twice  the  time  it  had  taken  to  build 
the  temple — until  the  palaces,  which  were 
entirely  independent  and  secular  buildings, 
were  also  completed.  If  the  great  national 
sanctuary,  which  was  the  glory  of  the  land, 
was  ready  for  nse,  as  we  Imow  it  was,  we 


146 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  vni.  1—66. 


can  hardly  believe,  considering  the  natural 
eagemesB  and  impatience  of  men,  that  the 
tribes  of  Israel,  or  their  ambitious  monarch, 
would,  of  their  own  choice,  defer  the  con- 
secration  for  an  indefinite  number  of  years. 
It  would  appear  consequently  that  it  j^  the 
view  that  the  dedication  was  postponed  for 
thirteen  years  "hardly  needs  discussion" 
(see  below  on  ch.  ix.  1).  And  the  same  con- 
siderations apply,  though  perhaps  with 
diminished  force,  to  their  waiting  one  year. 
For  if  it  be  said  that  the  delay  was  occa- 
sioned by  the  desu"e  to  connect  the  dedica- 
tion with  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  which  was 
par  excellenee  the  feast  of  the  year  (JnjI) 
the  answer  is  that  it  is  more  likely  that  the 
work  would  be  hurried  on  by  the  employ- 
ment of  additional  hands,  if  need  be,  or  that 
the  edifice  would  be  consecrated,  though  not 
complete  in  all  its  details,  at  the  feast  of 
the  eleventh  year,  than  that,  for  the  sake  of 
one  mon^h,  they  should  wait  eleven  months. 
And  if  the  objection  be  raised  that  a  feeling 
of  religions  awe  would  forbid  the  dedication 
of  an  imperfect  building,  or  of  a  perfect 
building  with  imperfect  arrangements,  it  is 
easy  to  reply  that  both  building  and  fur- 
niture may  have  been  practically  complete, 
and  may  have  been  believed  at  the  time  to 
be  perfect,  but  that  the  experience  of  the 
fiist  few  days  suggested  a  few  alterations  or 
additions  which  threw  the  completion  of  the 
work  in  all  its  particulars  into  the  eighth 
month.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  Josephus 
distinctly  states  that  the  dedication  was  in 
the  seventh  month  of  the  eighth  year  (Ant. 

viii.  4.  1)]  Solomon  assembled  [7ni?J-  See 
Ewald,  233  V]  the  elders  of  Israel  and  all  the 
heads  of  the  tribes,  the  chief  [Heb.  princes] 
of  the  Cithers  of  the  children  of  Israel. 
[This  great  assembly  (compare  Dan.  iii.  2) 
can  hardly  be  said  to  have  been  suggested 
to  Solomon  by  the  precedent  afforded  by 
David  (Eeil),  when  bringing  up  the  ark 
(2  Sam.  vi.  1),  for  it  was  only  natural  that 
he  should  summon  the  representatives  of 
the  people  to  witness  an  event  of  such  pro- 
found importance  in  the  national  history, 
as  the  dedication,  after  years  of  waiting 
(2  Sam.  vii.  6 — 13),  of  a  national  sanctuary 
intended  to  supersede  the  tabernacle,  at 
which  for  fiive  centuries  their  forefathers 
had  worshipped.  And  the  more  so,  as  they 
had  been  called  together  by  David  to  con- 
sult about  the  erection  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  1), 
and  had  offered  willingly  of  their  treasures 
{ib.  xxix.  6 — 9)  towards  its  decoration.  It 
is  inconceivable,  therefore,  that  the  temple 
of  the  Jews  could  have  been  formally 
opened,  except  in  the  presence  of  the 
"elders  and  heads  of  the  tribes."  Nor  can 
we  (with  Bawliuson)  see  a  contrast  between 


the  more  popular  proceedings  of  David,  who 
"  gathered  together  all  the  chosen  men  of 
Israel,  thirty  thousand  (2  Sam.  vi.  1),  and 
the  statelier,  more  aristocratic  system  of  bis 
son,  who  merely  summons  the  chief  men ;" 
for  Solomon's  "elders,"  &a.  (Deut.  xvi.  18; 
1  Sam.  xvi.  4 ;  xxx.  26—31),  may  well  have 
equalled  David's  "  chosen  men  "  in  number. 
It  is  quite  likely  that  there  was  more  for- 
mality and  Etateliness  in  this  latter  case, 
but  it  was  practically  the  same  class  of 
persons,  i.e.,  the  leading  men  by  birth, 
talents,  or  prowess,  that  were  present  on  both 
occasions.  In  fact,  it  was  the  Jewish  Church 
by  representation]  unto  King  Solomon  in 
Jerusalem,  that  they  might  bring  up  [Heb. 
to  bring  up]  the  axk  of  the  covenant  of  the 
Lord  [so  called  because  it  contained  the 
tables  of  the  covenant  which  the  Lord  made 
with  the  children  of  Israel  (ver.  9).  The 
temple  being  really,  or  principally,  a  re- 
ceptacle for  the  ark,  the  removal  of  this 
venerated  relic  to  its  place  in  the  oracle  is 
narrated  first,  as  being  of  the  first  import- 
ance] out  of  the  dty  of*  David,  which  Is 
Zlon.  [Cf.  2  Sam.  vi.  12,  17.] 

Yer.  2. — ^And  all  the  men  of  Israel  [not 
all  the  heads  of  the  tribes  just  mentioned 
(ver.  1),  as  Eeil,  but  all  who  came  to  the  feast, 
as  every  male  Israelite  was  under  obligation 
to  do  (Deut.  xvi  16)]  assembled  themselves 
onto  King  Solomon  at  the  feast  [the  Heb. 
word  Jnn  (with  the  art.)  always  means  the 
feast  of  tabernacles.  The  same  word  is  used 
of  the  feast  of  passover  (Exod.  xxiii,  15) 
andpentecost  {ib.  ver.  16),  but  "the  feast" 
here  can  only  mean  that  of  tabernacles.  As 
the  "feast  of  ingathering"  (Exod.  xxiii.  16), 
as  commemorating  the  deliverance  from 
Egypt  (Levit.  xxiii.  43),  and  as  peculiarly  a 
social  festival  (ib.  vers.  40 — 42 ;  Num.  xxix. 
12  sqq.),  it  was  the  most  joyous  as  well  as 
the  greatest  (lopr4  ayturani  Kal  /leyiorij. 
Jos.,  Ant.  viii.  4.  1)  gathering  of  the  year. 
(CotQpare  the  Jewish  saying  of  a  later 
date  :  "  He  who  has  never  seen  the  rejoic- 
ing at  the  pouring  out  of  the  water  of 
Siloam,  has  never  seen  rejoicing  in  his  life. ") 
It  was  doubtless  for  this  reason  that  taber- 
nacles was  selected  for  the  dedication.  A 
special  feast  of  dedication,  however,  was 
held  for  seven  days  before  the  feast  of  taber- 
nacles proper  commenced  (see  on  ver.  65). 
It  did  not  displace  that  great  feast,  however 
(Stanley),  but  simply  preceded  it.  It  is 
worthy  of  notice  that  Jeroboam  selected  the 
same  feast  (ch.  xii.  82)  for  the  inauguration 
of  his  new  cultus.  The  idea  of  Josephus, 
that  tlie  feast  of  tabernacles  "happened  to 
coincide  with  the  dedication  "  hardly  seems 
probable]  in  the  month  Ethanlm  [variously 
interpreted  to  mean  gifts,  i.e.,  fruits 
(Thenius),   flowing  ttreams  (Oesenius)— it 


OH.  VIII.  1 — 66.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


U1 


falls  about  the  time  of  the  early  rains — and 
equinox  (Bdticher)] ,  wMch  Is  the  seventli 
month.  [This  is  added  because  the  month 
was  subsequently  known  as  Tisri  (see  on 
cb.  vi.  1),  or  to  show  that  "  the  feast "  was 
the  feast  of  tabernacles.] 

Ver.  3. — And  all  the  elders  of  Israel  came 
[Not  a  mere  repetition.  TLe  men  who  were 
summoned  to  Jerusalem  (ver.  1)  were  all 
present,  of  their  own  accord,  to  witness  the 
removal] ,  and  the  priests  took  up  the  ark. 
[In  the  parallel  account  in  2  Chron.  v.  4, 
we  read  that  "  the  Levites  took  up  the  ark." 
But  there  is  no  contradiction,  as  has  been 
too  readily  supposed.  For  ver.  7  of  the 
Chronicles,  "the  priests  brought  in  the  ark," 
<&c.,  confirms  the  statement  of  the  text. 
And  the  explanation  is  suggested  in  ver.  5 
of  the  same  chapter,  "  These  did  the  priests, 
the  Levitea  (so  the  Heb.)  bring  up."  Same 
expression  in  Josh.  iii.  S.  All  the  priests 
were  Levites — Eeil  translates,  "  the  Leviti- 
cal  priests  "—4Uid  this  somewhat  singular 
expression  is  no  doubt  used  to  remind  us 
that  such  was  the  case.  Nor  need  it  cause 
us  any  surprise  to  find  the  priests  employed 
in  this  service.  It  is  true  that  the  ark  was 
given  into  the  charge  of  the  Kohathite 
Levites  (Num.  iii.  30,  31)  ;  and  it  was  their 
duty  to  bear  it  (ib.  iv.  16  ;  vii.  9 ;  x.  21 ; 
<sf.  1  Chron.  xv.  2,  11,  12).  But  the  real 
care  and  supervision  of  the  ark  always 
belonged  to  the  sous  of  Aaron.  It  was 
'their  office,  e.g.,  to  put  on  or  take  off  the 
covering  of  the  ark  and  of  the  vessels,  which 
the  Levites  were  forbidden  directly  to  touch 
^Num.  iv.  6 — 15).  It  was  quite  in  accord- 
ance with  the  spirit  of  these  provisions  that 
Solomon  now  entrusted  the  carriage  of  the 
Ark  to  the  superior  order.  But  more  than 
that,  Solomon  was  not  without  precedent  to 
justify  his  choice.  Indeed,  we  may  see  in 
his  selection  of  the  priests  a  minute  mark 
of  truth,  amounting  almost  to  an  tmde- 
sigued  coincidence.  For  we  find  that  on 
occasions  of  extraordinary  solemnity  —  at 
the  crossing  of  the  Jordan,  e.g.  (Josh.  iii. 
6,  15,  17),  and  at  the  siege  of  Jericho  (Josh, 
vi.  6),  the  priests  had  borne  the  ark  (ct 
1  Sam.  iv.  4  ;  1  Chron.  xv.  11,  12).  It 
was  no  doubt  these  familiar  precedents 
guided  Solomon,  or  the  ecclesiaBtical  au- 
thorities, in  their  selection  of  the  priests  on 
this  occasion.  A  "  settled  place, "  a  "  house 
of  cedars"  (2  Sam.  vii.  7),  "  having  now  been 
found  for-  the  ark"  to  abide,  in,  after  it  had 
"  dwelt  in  curtains  "  for  500  years,  it  was 
taking  its  last  journey,  and  in  order  to 
mark  this  journey  as  exceptional,  in  order 
to  show  both  the  ark  and  the  house  the 
^greater  reverence,  it  was  determined  that  it 
should  be  borne  for  the  last  time  by  the 
priesti.    Eeil  suggests  that  the  ark  may 


have  been  uncovered,  but  this  is  very  im- 
probable. Why,  we  may  ask,  were  cover- 
ings provided,  and  their  use  prescribed 
(Num.  iv.  5 — 15),  if  they  were  to  be  arbi- 
trarily dispensed  with  ?  He  also  adds  that 
Levites  were  not  allowed  to  enter  the  most 
holy  place.  But  neither,  it  may  be  added, 
was  this  lawful  for  the  priests.  Levites  and 
priests  might  enter  that  day,  because  the 
house  was  not  then  dedicated.  The  cloud 
(ver.  10)  claimed  it  for  Uod. 

Ver.  4. — And  they  brought  up  the  ark  of 
the  Lord  [which  had  now  been  for  nearly 
40  years  "  in  the  tabernacle  that  David  had 
pitched  for  it  "  on  the  Mount  Zion  (2  Sam. 
vi.  17)] ,  and  the  tabernacle  of  the  congre- 
gation [Heb,  "  the  tabernacle  of  macimj  " 
(Exod.  xxix.  42,  48.  See  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  p. 
1414 ;  Bahr,  Symbolik,  i.  80,  81).  This  had 
been  for  many  years  at  Gibeon.  (Cf .  ch.  iii. 
4  ;  2  Chron.  i.  3  ;  1  Chron.  xvi.  39.  See 
note  on  ch.  iii.  4.)  The  tabernacle  of  Mount 
Zion  is  never  called  "  the  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation" — indeed,  it  is  expressly  dis- 
tinguished from  it,  2  Chron.  i.  3,  4.  Ihe 
ark  and  the  tabernacle  were  now  reunited 
in  the  temple  of  Solomon,  thus  "  mark- 
ing the  identity  and  continuity  of  the  life 
and  ritual  of  the  Hebrew  Church"  (Words- 
wortb),] ,  and  all  the  holy  vessels  that  were 
In  the  tabernacle  [Perhaps  the  brazen  altar. 
Certainly  the  altar  of  incense,  the  table  of 
shewbread,  the  candlestick,  and  also  the 
brazen  serpent  (Stanley)],  even  those  did 
the  priests  and  Levites  bring  up.  [We  are 
hardly  justified  in  saying  (as  Eeil,  al.)  that 
the  Levites  carried  all  but  the  ark.  The 
text  rather  favours  the  view  that  the  priests 
assisted  in  bringing  up  the  tabernacle  and 
its  furniture.  So  2  Chron.  v.  5.  Neither 
the  tabernacle  nor  its  vessels  were  designed 
for  further  use  in  the  temple  ;  the  latter 
had  been  replaced  by  vessels  better  suited 
to  the  enlarged  sanctuary — they  were  simply 
preserved,  so  far  as  we  know,  as  relics  of  the 
past,  in  the  treasury  or  side-chambers. 

Ver,  5. — And  king  Solomon,  and  all  the 
congregation  of  Israel,  that  were  assembled 
unto  Mm  were  with  him,  before  the  ark 
[Prayers  and  sacrifices  alike  were  offered 
toward  the  mercy  seat  (Psa.  xxviii.  2  ;  cf. 
Exod.  XXV.  22)  ] ,  sacrificing  sheep  and  oxen 
[apparently  the  ark  rested  en  route  (cf. 
2  Sam.  vi  13)  whilst  the  sacrifices  were 
offered.  The  object  of  the  sacrifice  was  to 
testify  the  grateful  joy  of  the  people  at  the 
proximate  realization  of  their  hopes.  There 
may  have  been  also  in  the  background  the 
idea  of  averting  the  Divine  auger,  of  making 
a  propitiation  for  possible  errors  and  imper- 
fections in  their  service.  There  were  trage- 
dies connected  with  the  removal  of  the  ark 
in  time  past  (1  Sam.  iv.  17  ;  vi.  19  ;  3  Sam. 


148 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  vni.  1— 66l 


vi.  7)  which,  we  may  be  anre,  were  not 
altogether  forgotten  on  this  occasion]  tbat 
could  not  be  told  or  numbered  for  multi- 
tude. [Of.  2  Sam.  vi.  13.  But  the  Bacrifices 
on  that  occasion  were  on  a  much  smaller 
scale  (1  Cliron.  xv.  26).  Josephus  adds 
(Ant.  viii.  4.  1),  that  a  vast  quantity  of  in 
cense  was  burnt,  and  that  men  preceded  the 
ark,  singing  and  dancing,  until  it  reached  itB 
destination] . 

Ver.  6.— And  the  priests  brought  In  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  unto  his  [i.e.,  its. 
But  this  word  is  never  found  in  the  A.  V. 
It  has  come  into  use  since  the  date  of  our 
translation]  place  [of.  ch.  vi.  19]  into  the 
oracle  of  the  house,  to  the  most  holy  place 
[Heb.  holy  of  holies] ,  even  under  the  wings 
of  the  cherubims  [ch.  vi  27.  Whether  the 
ark  stood  with  its  length  east  and  west,  or 
north  and  south,  it  is  somewhat  difiScult  to 
decide.    But  see  on  ver.  8] . 

Ver  7. — For  the  cherubims  spread  forth 
their  two  wings  over  the  place  _  of  the 
ail^  and  the  cherubims  covered  [-130*  from 
■njp,  texit !  hence  nSD,  iootA;  LXX.  a-epi- 
cKoKvvTov,  i.e.,  overshadowed  and  concealed. 
This  word  is  of  some  importance  as  show- 
ing that  the  ark  would  thenceforward  and 
always  be  in  complete  darkness,  under  the 
outstretched  wings  of  the  cherubim — a  fact 
which  suggests  the  true  explanation  of  the 
following  verse]  the  ark  and  the  staves 
thereof  above  [Heb.  froM  above] . 

Ver.  8. — ^And  they  drew  out  [It  is  uncer- 
tain whether  •13")N1  is  transitive,  as  our  A.  V. 
renders  it,  and  as  in  ch.  iii.  14  =  lengthen, 
in  which  case,  however,  it  should  almost 
be  followed  by  D^,  or  intransitive,  as  in 
Ezod.  XX.  12  ;  Deut.  v.  16  ;  zxv.  16,  when 
the  meaning  would  be,  "  The  staves  were 
long,"  but  the  latter  rendering  has  the  sup- 
port of  most  scholars.  As  the  oracle  in  the 
tabernacle  was  a  cube  of  ten  cubits,  they 
cannot  have  been  more  than  eight  or  nine 
cubits,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether,  the  ark 
being  only  2^  cubits,  they  would  be  so  long. 
Their  length  is  mentioned  in  order  to  ac- 
count for  the  ends  being  seen.  It  is  im- 
material to  the  meaning  of  the  passage, 
however,  which  interpretation  we  put  upon 
this  verb.  If  we  adhere  to  the  A.  Y.  then 
we  must  understand  that,  as  it  was  for- 
bidden to  remove  the  staves  from  the  rings 
at  the  comers  of  the  ark  (Exod.  zxv.  12 — 
16),  they  drew  the  staves  forward  towards 
one  end  of  the  ark  ;  that  they  removed  the 
staves  altogether  from  the  ark  (Stanley)  is  a 
view  to  which  the  text  lends  no  support] 
the  staves,  tbat  the  ends  [Heb.  heads.  It 
is  possible  the  ends  of  the  staves  were 
fitted  with  knobs.  This  would  prevent  their 
mnoval]   at  the  staves  were  seen  out  In 


[Heb.  froni]  the  holy  place  [Marg.  ark, 
the  word  found  in  the  Chron.  v.  9.  It  is 
questionable,  however,  whether  E'lisn  is 
ever  used,  by  itself,  of  the  ark  (Uesen., 
Thesaurus,  s.v.)  It  may  be  used  of  the 
most  holy  place  (see  on  ver.  10),  but  here 
it  would  appear  to  designate  the  73'in  (oh. 
vi.  17),  the  body  or  "  temple  of  the  house" 
(Exod.  xxvi.  33  ;  Heb.  ix.  2).  Its  meaning 
appears  to  be  so  defined  by  the  next  words] 
before  the  oracle  [i.e.,  a  person  standing  tn 
the  holy  place,  but  at  the  west  end,  near 
the  entrance  to  the  oracle  (ch.  vi.  31),  could 
see  the  ends  of  the  staves.  Several  questions 
of  considerable  nicety  suggest  themselves 
here.  1.  What  was  the  position  of  the 
ark  7  Did  it  stand,  that  is  to  say,  east  and 
west,  or  north  and  south  under  the  wings 
of  the  cherubim?  2.  What  was  the  posi- 
tion of  the  staves  t  Were  they  attached  to 
the  ends  or  to  the  sides  of  the  ark  ?  3.  How 
could  the  ends  of  the  staves  be  seen,  and  by 
whom  and  when — on  the  occasion  of  the 
dedication  only  or  in  later  years  ?  4.  Why 
has  our  author  recorded  this  circumstance? 
As  to  1,  the  balance  of  evidence  is  in  favour 
of  the  ark  having  stood  north  and  south,  in 
a  line,  that  is,  with  the  wings  of  the  cheru- 
bim. For  (1)  only  thus  apparently  could 
the  cherubim  have  "covered  the  ark  and 
the  staves  theriof. "  (2)  If  it  had  been 
otherwise,  the  "  cherubim  overshadowing 
the  mercy  seat,"  presuming  that  they  were 
retained  in  the  temple,  would  have  had  an 
unequal  and  onesided  position,  for  instead  of 
being  equally  prominent,  they  would  have 
stood,  one  with  the  back,  the  other  with 
the  face  to  the  entrance  and  the  holy  place. 
(8)  Had  the  ark  stood  east  and  west  the  pro- 
jecting staves  would  surely  have  been  in  the 
high  priest's  way  in  the  performance  of  his 
solemn  functions  (Levit.  xvi.  12 — 16).  That 
they  served  to  guide  him  to  the  mercy 
seat  is  of  course  mere  conjecture,  and  as 
such  of  no  weight.  2.  As  to  the  staves;, 
Josephus  states  (Ant.  iii.  7.  6)  that  they  ran 
along  the  sides  of  the  ark,  and  this  would 
appear  to  be  the  natural  and  proper  ar- 
rangement. It  follows  hence  again  that 
they  cannot  have  been  more  than  eight  or 
nine  cubits  long,  inasmuch  as  they  found  a 
place  between  the  bodies  of  the  cherabim, 
which  cannot  have  bee»  more  than  nine 
cubits  apart.  3.  The  explanation  of  the 
Babbins  is  that  the  ends  of  the  staves  were 
not  really  seen,  but  that  they  projected  into 
the  curtain  and  so  made  two  visible  protru- 
sions or  prominences.  But  this  view  hardly 
satitifies  the  requirements  of  the  text,  and  it 
assumes  that  the  ark  stood  east  and  west, 
which  we  have  found  good  reason  to  doubt 
But  even   if  this  were  so,  it  is  doubtful 


OH.  vni.  1—06.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


148 


whether  the  staves,  so  long  as  they  remained 
in  the  rings,  could  be  made  to  reach  to  the 
door  of  the  oracle,  unless  indeed  they  were 
lengthened  for  the  purpose.  How  then  icere 
they  seen  ?  The  foUuwing  considerations 
may  assist  us  to  answer  this  question.  (1) 
The  oracle,  of  course,  in  its  normal  state 
was  in  perfect  darkness  (ver.  12).  Once  a 
year,  however,  a  gleam  of  light  was  ad- 
mitted, when  the  curtain  was  drawn  par- 
tially aside  to  permit  of  the  high  priest's 
entrance.  (2)  When  the  curtain  was  drawn 
to  one  (probably  the  left)  side,  the  light 
would  fall,  not  on  the  ark,  but  on  the  ends 
of  the  staves  projecting  bovcC  the  light  or 
north  eml  of  the  ark,  which  would  thus  be 
distinctly  visible  to  the  high  priest.  But 
(8)  at  this  time  the  high  priest  was  not 
alone  in  the  holy  place.  It  was  not  required 
that  "  there  should  be  no  man  in  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation,"  except  when  the 
high  priest  went  in  to  make  an  atonement 
fur  the  holy  place  (Levit.  xvi.  17).  At  an 
earlier  stage  of  the  service  he  would 
Boem  to  have  required  assistance.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Mishiia  (Yoma),  a  priest  held  the 
basin  of  blood  and  stirred  it  to  prevent 
coagulation,  at  the  time  of  his  first  entiy. 
Moreover  (4)  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether 
the  high  priest  can  have  drawn  aside  the 
curtain  himself.  Whether  he  entered  three 
or  four  times  on  that  day,  at  his  first  entry 
his  hands  were  certainly  full.  If  he  carried 
"a  censer  full  of  burning  coals  of  fire  "  .  .  . 
"and  his  hands  (VJSn,  both  fists)  full  of 
sweet  incense  beaten  small"  {ib.  ver,  12),  it 
is  clear  that  some  other  person  mast  have 
drawn  aside  the  veil  for  him.  It  is  to  this 
person,  I  take  it,  the  priest  who  was  privi- 
leged to  draw  aside  the  curtain,  andpnssihly 
to  others  standing  near — certainly  to  the 
high  priest — that  the  ends  of  the  staves 
were  visible.  Nor  would  a  reverent  look 
diiccted  townrds  these  objects — madeorigiu- 
ally  for  the  Levites  to  handle  —  involve 
unhallowed  curiosity.  And  if  this  were  so, 
it  would  help  to  explain  (4)  the  mention  of 
this  circumstance  by  our  author.  If  it  were 
a  tact  that  year  by  year  a  gleam  of  light  fell 
upon  the  staves,  and  if  priest  after  priest 
testified  of  wliat  he  had  seen,  up  to  the  time 
of  writing  ("  unto  this  day;"  see  below),  we 
can  readily  understand  why  a  circumstance 
of  so  much  interest  should  be  recorded.  A  nd 
we  have  not  an  adequate  explanation  of  its 
mention  here,  if  we  are  to  understand  that 
the  staves  were  seen  on  the  day  of  deilioa. 
tion,  when  of  course  they  must  have  been 
visible,  and  never  afterwards,  or  that  the 
staves  were  partially  drawn  out  of  their 
rings  in  order  to  show  that  the  ark  was  now 
at  rest] ,  and  there  they  are  unto  this  day. 
[Same  expression  ch.  ix.  31 ;  xii.  19  ;  2  Kings 


viii.  22.  At  the  date  of  the  publication  of 
this  book,  the  temple  was  of  course  de- 
stroyed (2  Kings  XXV.  9),  so  that  at  that 
day  the  staves  were  not  there.  But  the  ex- 
planation is  very  simple.  Our  historian 
has  copied  the  words  he  found  in  the  MS. 
he  was  using.] 

Ver.  9. — There  vaa  nothing  in  the  anc 
save  the  two  tables  of  stone  which  Moses 
put  there  [Exod.  xxv.  16 ;  xl.  -20  ;  Deut.  x. 
5.  This  statement  appears  to  be  at  vari- 
ance with  Hebrews  ix.  4,  which  mentions 
"the  golden  pot  that  had  manna,  and 
Aaron's  rod  that  budded,"  as  in  the  ark, 
along  with  "  the  tables  of  the  covenant." 
And  it  is  to  be  observed  that,  while  our  text 
excludes  these  relics  from  the  ark  {temp. 
Solomon),  no  other  scripture  save  that  just 
cited  expressly  includes  them.  In  Exod. 
xvi,  34  and  Num.  xvii.  25  (Heb.  A.V.,  xvii. 
10)  they  are  commanded  to  be  laid  up 
"  before  the  testimony,"  words  which  no 
doubt  may  mean,  as  they  were  long  inter- 
preted to  mean,  "  before  the  tables  of  testi- 
mony in  the  ark" — observe,  the  words  are 
"  before  the  testimony,"  not  "  before  the 
ark  " — but  which  are  now  generally  thought 
to  import  "  in  front  of  the  ark  which  con- 
tained the  testimony."  We  know  the  book 
of  the  law  was  put  "  at  the  side  OVD)  of 
the  ark  "  (Deut.  xxxi.  26),  and  hence  it  is 
held  by  some  that  the  golden  pot,  &c.,  occu- 
pied a  similar  position.  It  seems  prefer- 
able, however,  considering  the  distinct 
statement  of  St.  Paul,  or  the  author  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  which,  to  say  the 
least,  embodies  Jewish  tradition,  to  adhere 
to  the  ancient  interpretation  that  the  golden 
pot  of  manna  and  Aaron's  rod  were  in  the 
ark.  And  this  in  no  wise  conflicts  with  the 
statement  of  the  text,  for  these  treasures 
might  well  have  been  removed  by  the  Philis- 
tines, whose  first  thought,  we  may  be  sure, 
would  be  to  open  their  new  acquisition.  It 
is  not  improbable,  indeed,  that  the  object  of 
the  men  of  Bethehemesh  in  looking  into 
the  ark  was  to  see  whether  these  treasures 
were  still  there.  For  if  the  golden  pot  ever 
was  in  the  ark,  we  can  hardly  suppose  it 
would  escape  the  rapacity  of  the  Philistines, 
who  would  leave  the  two  tables  of  stone  as 
tilings  of  no  value.  Indeed,  it  is  just  pos- 
sible that  the  trespass  offering,  the  golden 
mice,  &c.,  were  designed  as  a  return  for  the 
golden  pot  which  had  been  removed.  And 
the  statement  of  the  text,  "there  was 
nothing,"  &c.,  almost  implies  that  there 
had  been  something  there  at  one  time  (sea 
Alford  on  Heb.  ix.  4).  It  seems  probable, 
therefore,  that  the  golden  pot  and  Aaron's 
rod  were  originally  deposited  "before  the 
testimony "  in  the  ark ;  that  they  were 
removed  daring  its  captivity  (1  Sam.  v.,  vi.)  | 


160 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  vm.  1— 6S 


and  that  the  sacrilege  was  discoTered  at 
Bethshemesh  (1  Sam.  vi.  19).  This  last- 
mentioned  episode  explains  how  it  oarne  to 
be  known  that  "  there  was  nothing, "  &e.  It 
is  hardly  likely  after  that  memorable  visita- 
tion that  Solomon  could  have  opened  the 
ark  and  taken  out  the  two  relies,  as  Eawlin- 
son  suggepts.  Nor  have  we  any  warrant  for 
the  view  that  the  mercy  seat,  with  the 
cherubs,  was  removed  to  make  way  for  a 
new  lid  without  them,  and  so  the  interior  of 
the  ark  was  disclosed  to  view  (Stanley)] 
at  Eoreb  [See  Exod.  iii.l ;  zvii.  6  ;  xxxiii.  6; 
1  icings  xix.  8.  This  name,  which  means 
dry  ground,  desert,  would  appear  to  have 
belim^ed  to  two  or  three  different  places  in 
the  wilderness.  But  as  the  name  of  the 
place  where  the  law  was  given  and  the  cove- 
nant with  God  made  (Deut.  iv.  10,  13)  it 
became  subsequently  a  nomen  generate  for 
the  whole  of  the  Sinaitio  region  (Uict.  Bib. 
ill.  p.  1326).  Here  the  mount  of  the  law 
if  clearly  meant]  when  [Heb.  which,  "WV, 
is  occasionally  found  in  the  sense  of  quura, 
as  in  Deut.  xi.  6 ;  Psa.  cxxxix.  15 ;  2  Chron. 
XXXV.  20 ;  cf.  ch.  ix.  10  (Gesen.,  Thes.,  s.v,)] 
tbe  Lord  made  a  covenant  [Heb.  cut;  see 
note  on  ch.  v.  12.  n^°13  is  to  be  understood. 
Same  ellipsis  in  1  Sam.  xx.  16 ;  xxii.  8]  with 
the  children  of  Israel  when  they  came 
[Heb.  in  their  coming']  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt.  [Exod.  xxxiv.  27,  28 ;  Deut.  iv.  13.] 
Ver.  10. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the 
pilests  were  come  out  [llatlier,  as  the 
priests  came  out]  of  the  holy  place  [It  has 

been  supposed  that  "  the  holy "  (B'lji'j'ri)  is 
here  put  for  the  most  holy  place,  as  in 
Ezek.  xli.  23.  But  this  is  not  by  any  means 
the  necessary  interpretation.  The  cloud 
may  obviously  have  filled  the  entire  building 
only  as  the  priests  left  it.  It  would  seem, 
however,  from  verse  11  as  if  the  priests, 
having  left  the  oracle,  were  about  to  min- 
ister in  the  holy  place],  that  the  cloud 
[Observe  the  article  ;  the  well-known  cloud 
which  betokened  the  Divine  presence.  It 
had  rested  upon  the  tabernacle  on  the  day 
that  it  was  dedicated  (Exod.  xl,  84),  had  ac- 
companied it  in  its  journeys  {ib.  ver.  38), 
and  had  apparently  been  specially  displayed 
at  certain  junctures  in  the  history  of  Israel 
(Num.  xii.  6,  10 ;  xvi.  42 ;  Deut.  xxxi.  15). 
It  was  thus  the  acknowledged  symbol  of 
God's  presence,  and  as  such  was  a  visible 
sign  that  He  now  accepted  the  temple,  as 
He  had  formerly  accepted  the  tabernacle, 
as  His  shrine  and  dwelling-place.  It  is 
hardly  correct  to  identify  the  cloud  with 
"  the  Shechinah  of  the  Targums  "  (Eawlin- 
•on),  for  it  is  noticeable  that  the  Targums 
never  render  "the  cloud  "  or  "  the  glory  "  by 
"  the  Sbechiuah."    In  fact,  as  regards  the 


use  of  the  word  by  Jewish  writers,  it  would 
seem  to  be  a  periphrasis  for  God  (Diet. 
Bib.  iii.  p.  1241).  We  may  see  in  the  cloud, 
however,  the  seat  of  the  Shechinah  (Kitto, 
Cyelopredia,  iii.  p.  821)  filled  the  house  of 
the  Lord. 

Ver.  11.— So  that  the  priests  could  not 
stand  to  minister  because  of  the  cloud 
[They  were  overpowered  by  the  manifusta- 
tion,  precisely  as  Moses  had  been  before 
(Exod.  xl.  35).  It  was  at  the  moment  when 
the  singers  and  trumpeters,  standing  at  the 
east  end  of  the  altar,  began  their  service  of 
praise — and  the  re-appearance  of  the  priests 
may  well  have  been  the  signal  for  them  to 
begin  (2  Chron.  v.  13) — that  "the house  was 
filled  with  a  cloud."  Possibly  the  priests  were 
about  to  burn  incense.  Evidently  ministra- 
tions of  some  sort  were  intended  and  were 
interrupted.  The  exact  correspondence  with 
Exod.  xl.  35  (cf.  Ezek.  xliv.  4)  is  not  to  be 
overlooked.  The  idea  obviously  is  that  the 
Divine  approval  vouchsafed  to  the  taber- 
nacle was  now  in  turn  granted  to  the 
temple],  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had 
fiUed  the  house  of  the  Lord.  [Is  the 
"  glory  of  the  Lord "  identical  with  the 
cloud,  or  is  something  additional  intended 
by  these  words  ?  It  is  certainly  noticeable 
that  what  ver.  10  says  of  the  cloud — that  it 
"filled  the  house — ver.  11  says  of  the  glory. 
It  is  also  true  that  there  is  no  mention  of 
any  light  or  fire.  And  the  "  darkness  "  of 
ver.  12  might  naturally  seem  to  refer  to  the 
cloud,  and  therefore  to  exclude  the  idea  of 

light.  But  surely  the  words  )\  *li33  are  to 
be  interpreted  here  by  their  signification  and 
use  elsewhere,  and  we  find  "  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  elsewhere  mentioned  as  something 
distinct  from  the  cloud.  We  must  remem- 
ber that  what  by  day  was  a  pillar  of  cloud,  by 
night  was  a  pillar  of  ^re  (Exod.  xiii.  21,  22). 
In  Exod.  xix.  9,  16,  the  mention  of  the 
"  thick  cloud"  is  followed  by  the  statement 
that  "  Mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a 
smoke  because  the  Lord  descended  upon  it 
in  fire"  (ver.  18).  Similarly,  in  Exod.  xxiv., 
we  are  told  that  "the  glory  of  the  Lord 
appeared  upon  Mount  Sinai,  and  the  cloud 
covered  it  (the  glory?)  six  days;  and  the 
seventh  day  He  called  unto  Moses  out  of 
the  midst  of  the  cloud.  And  the  sight  of 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  was  like  devowringfire  " 
(vers.  16,  17).  But  perhaps  the  most  de- 
cisive passage  in  this  connexion  is  Exod. 
xl.  34,  where  we  are  told  that  "  the  cloud 
abode  upon "  the  tent  of  meeting,  while 
"  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  (interior 
of  the)  tabernacle."  Compare  Exod.  xvL 
7, 10 ;  Levit.  ix.  6,  23 ;  Num.  xiv.  10 ;  xvi.  19, 
42.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  '  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  "  was  not  the  cloud,  but. 


CB.  vm.  1—66.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


Ul 


M  the  word  almost  seems  to  imply,  a  "  light 
from  heaven  above  the  brightness  of  the 
ran"  (Acts  xxvi.  13;  of.  Eev.  1.  14,  16). 
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  the  glory, 
though  apparently  resident  in  the  cloud,  was 
not  always  luminous;  the  cloud  veiled  it 
from  the  eyes  of  men. 

Ver.  12. — Then  spake  Solomon  [in  a 
transport  of  emotion  at  the  sight.  The 
oloud  and  the  glory  proved  that  his  pious 
work  was  accepted.  These  blessed  tokens 
assured  him  that  "  the  Lord  was  there  " 
(Ezek.  xlviii.  35) ;  that  the  incomprehen- 
sible Godhead  had  entered  the  earthly 
shrine  he  had  prepared,  and  would  dwell 
there] ,  The  Lord  said  that  he  would  dwell  In 

the  tliltik  darlmesi.  [Heb.  7S^y.  lit.,  dark- 
ness of  clouds.  When  did  God  speak  of 
dwelling  in  dark  cloud  f  The  reference, 
probably,  is  to  Exod.  xix.  9  ;  xx.  21 ;  Dent. 
iv.  11  ;  V.  22  (note  that,  in  the  three  last 
cited  passages,  this  same  word  is  used,  and 
in  the  last  two  in  connexion  with  cloud, 
which  would  appear  to  be  a  practically 
synonymous  term),  but  especially  to  Levit. 
xvi.  2,  "  I  wUl  appear  in  the  cloud  upon 
the  mercy  seat."  Solomon  had  thus  every 
warrant  for  connecting  a  theophany  with 
the  thick  dark  oloud.  Cf.  Fsa.  xviii.  11 ; 
xcvii.  2.  The  words  cannot  refer  to  "  the 
holy  of  hoUes  not  lighted  by  windows " 
(Wordsworth). 

Ver.  13. — I  have  surely  built  [Heb.  to 
build,  I  have  builf]  thee  a  house  to  dwell 
In,  a  settled  place  for  thee  to  abide  in  for 
ever.  [The  temple  was  primarily,  as  already 
remarked,  a  shrine  for  the  ark,  between  the 
cherubim  of  the  mercy  seat  of  which  God 
dwelt.  This  was  a  psb  (from  ]'13,  statuit), 
a  settled  place.  The  tabernacle  was  but  a 
poor  and  transitory  abode,  partaking  of  the 
feaUty  of  the  shepherd's  tent  (Isa.  xxzviii. 

12).  For  d^pViy  (aiUvet),  ef.  Isa.  xxvi.  4 ; 
11.  9 ;  Dan.  ix.  24 ;  Fsa.  cxlv.  13. 

Ver.  14.— And  the  king  turned  his  face 
about  [He  had  been  earnestly  gazing  toward 
the  house  where  the  cloud  appeared.  He 
now  faced  the  congregation]  and  blessed 
[This  word  here,  and  in  ver.  55,  is  used 
somewhat  loosely.  The  blessing  was  in  both 
cases  addressed  to  God.  The  Hebrew  Mug 
was  not  authorized  to  bless  the  people — 
that  was  the  prerogative  of  the  priests 
(Num.  vi.  23 ;  cf.  Levit.  ix.  22),  and  he  is 
only  said  to  bless  here  as  felicitating,  as 
wishing  them  a  blessing.  Dean  Stanley 
I"  Jewish  Ch.,"  vol.  ii.  p  218)  characteristi- 
cally asserts  that  Solomon  "  performed  the 
■  highest  sacerdotal  act  of  solemn  benedic- 
tion." Bat  the  same  word  is  used  in  ver. 
66,  of  the  people  blessing  the  king.     "  Did 


the  people,"  as  Wordsworth  pertinently 
asks,  "  also  perform  a  priestly  act  ?  "  The 
word  is  elsewhere  used  of  saluting.  See 
note  on  ver.  66,  and  Gesen.  s.v.]  all  the 
congregation  of  Israel:  (and  all  the  con- 
gregation of  Israel  stood) ;  [Heb.  were 
standing  {It}}}) ;  "  stood  "  conveys  the  idea 
that  the  congregation  rose  as  Solomon 
spoke,  whereas  they  were  standing  already 
in  the  temple  courts. 

Ver.  15. — And  he  said,  Blessed  be  the 
lord  God  of  Israel  [ch.  i.  48] ,  which  spake 

with  his  month  unto  [or,  concerning;  7K 
after  verbs  of  speaking  has  the  force  of  de 
(Gen.  XX.  2;  Jer.  xl.  16;  Psa.  IxLx.  27). 
David  my  father  [The  words  were  really 
spoken  to  Nathan],  and  hath  with  his  hand 
{i.e.,  power ;  of.  Job  xxxiv.  20  ;  Acts  iv.  28  ; 
xiii.  11 ;  Ezra  vii.  6]  fulfilled  it  [the  spoken 
word  He  has  fulfilled  in  deed] ,  saying, 
[The  reference  is  to  2  Sam.  vii.,  of  which 
Solomon  merely  gives  the  substance.  Much 
of  what  he  says  here  is  not  recorded  there.] 

Ver.  16.— Since  the  day  that  I  brought 
forth  my  people  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  I  chose 
no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  to 
build  a  house,  that  my  name  might  be 
therein  [The  chronicler  adds  here,  "Neither 
chose  I  any  man  to  he  ruler,"  &e.  Prob- 
ably our  account  comes  nearer  to  the  words 
actually  spoken.  The  speech  in  the  Chron. 
looks  as  if  it  had  been  somewhat  ampUfied, 
though  it  only  completes  the  sense  (Baw- 
linsou)] ,  but  I  chose  David  to  be  over  niy 
people  Israel.  [Cf.  Psa.  Ixxviii.  70.  This 
psalm  pursues  much  the  same  line  of 
thought  as  this  address.] 

Ver.  17. — And  it  was  in  the  heart  of 
David  my  father  [2  Sam.  viL  2  ;  1  Chron. 
xvii.  1]  to  buUd  an  house  for  the  name  of 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel. 

Ver.  18. — ^And  the  Lord  said  unto  David 
my  father  [Not,  perhaps,  totidem  verbis. 
The  Divine  approval  was  implied  in  2  Sam. 
vii.  11 — 16,  and  it  may  have  been  expressed 
at  the  same  time.  The  narratives  of  Scrip- 
ture are  necessarily  greatly  condensed] , 
Whereas  it  was  in  thine  heart  to  build  an 
house  unto  my  name,  thou  didst  well  that 
it  was  in  thine  heart. 

Ver.  19. — Nevertheless  thou  shalt  not 
build  the  house  [Wordsworth  observes  that 
it  was  filial  reverence  prevented  Solomon's 
mentioning  the  cause  of  this  prohibition, 
which,  however,  is  mentioned  with  appro- 
priate humility  by  David  himself  (1  Chron. 
xxii.  8)];  but  thy  son  that  shall  come 
forth  out  of  thy  loins,  he  shall  buU  d  the 
house  tinto  my  name.  [2  Sam.  vii.  11,  12. 
The  recurrence  of  "  the  name  "  of  the  Lord 
is  to  be  noticed  (see  vers.  16,  17,  18,  29,  43, 


16S 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  Tin.  1 — 6Si 


Ac.)  The  name  of  Ood  is  the  expression  to 
man  of  His  nature,  attributes,  <fej.] 

Ver.  20. — ^And  tlie  Lord  bath  performed 
[Same  word  as  in  ch.  ii.  4.  Lit.,  "  hath 
raised  up  "  (LXX.  aviaTtiae).  Also  same  word 
as  "  risen  up  "  (LXX.  aviaTrjv)  below,  and 
as  "  set  up  "  in  2  Sam.  vii.  12.  We  might 
translate  "established"  throughout]  his 
word  that  be  spalie,  and  I  am  risen  up  in 
the  room  of  David  my  father,  and  sit  on 
the  throne  of  Israel  [ch.  i.  48] ,  as  the  Lord 
promised  [2  Sam.  yli.  12],  and  have  built 
an  house  for  the  name  of  tbe  Lord  Ood  of 
Israel  [ib.  ver.  13] . 

Ver.  21. — And  I  hare  set  there  a  place 
for  the  ark,  wherein  is  the  covenant  of  the 
Lord  [Hence  its  name,  "the  ark  of  the 
covenant  "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  28 ;  of.  Deut.  ix. 
11)]  which  he  made  with  our  forefathers 
when  he  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt  [vers.  9, 16] . 

Section  H, — The  Prayer. 

The  prayer  of  dedication,  properly  so 
called,  now  begins.  This  solemn  and  beau- 
tiful composition  was  probably  copied  by  our 
author  from  the  "  Book  of  the  Acts  of  Solo- 
mon "  (1  Kings  xi.  41),  possibly  from  the 
"  Book  of  Nathan  the  prophet "  (2  Chron. 
ix.  29).  It  was  evidently  committed  to 
writing  beforehand,  and  would,  no  doubt, 
as  a  matter  of  course,  be  religiously  pre- 
served. The  later  criticism  objects  to  its 
authenticity  that  the  many  references  to 
the  Pentateuch  (compare  ver.  12  with  Exod. 
zix.  9;  ver.  31  with  Exod.  xxii.  11,  Levit. 
V.  1;  ver.  33  with  Levit.  xxvi.  17,  Deut. 
zxviii.  25 ;  ver.  36  with  Levit.  xxvi.  25 ; 
ver.  50  with  Levit.  xxvi.  40,  42 ;  ver.  51  with 
Deut.  iv.  20,  <6c.)  prove  it  to  be  of  a  later 
date.  Ewald  assigns  it  to  the  seventh  cen- 
tury B.C. ;  but  this  is  simply  to  beg  the 
question  of  the  date  of  the  Pentateuch.  It 
is  obviously  open  to  reply  that  these  re- 
ferences only  prove  that  the  king  was 
acquainted,  as  he  was  bound  to  be  (Deut. 
xvii.  18),  with  the  words  of  the  law.  It 
divides  itself  into  three  parts.  The  first 
(vers.  22—30)  is  general;  the  second  (vers. 
81—  63)  consists  of  seven  special  petitions  ; 
the  last  (vers.  50 — 53)  consists  of  a  general 
oonclusion  and  appeal  to  God's  covenant 
mercy. 

Ver.  22. — And  Solomon  stood  [i.e.,  took 
his  stand  (LXX.  ivcarti).  Not  "  was  stand- 
ing." It  was  but  for  a  moment,  however, 
for  we  find  him  presently  kneeling  (ver.  54 ; 


2  Chron.  vi.  13).  The  latter  passage  informs 
us  that  he  both  stood  and  knelt  upon  a 
"  brazen  scaffold,"  three  cubits  high]  be- 
fore the  altar  of  the  Lord  [i.e.,  the  brazen 
altar  of  sacrifice.  The  platform  or  scaffold 
was  "  set  in  the  midst  of  the  court "  (2 
Chron.  I.e.")  All  these  rites  took  place  in 
the  open  air.  The  king  had  no  place  with- 
in the  edifice]  In  the  presence  [the  word  is 
not  to  be  pressed  to  mean  "facing  the 
people."  It  is  hardly  likely  he  would  pray 
iowards  the  people  —  he  was  their  irpo- 
ipnTtie,  i.e.,  he  spoke  for  them  to  God — or 
turn  his  back  on  the  sacred  Presence  just 
manifested],  and  spread  forth  his  huids 
towards  heaven:  [one  attitude  of  earnest 
prayer  thoughout  the  East,  as  may  be  seen 
at  the  present  day  amongst  the  Mohamme- 
dans. (See  Lane's  "  Modern  Egyptians," 
ch.  iii.,  "Beligion  and  Laws.")  So  com- 
pletely was  this  posture  identified  with  sup- 
pUcation  that  to  "  lift  up  the  hands  "  came 
to  be  a  synonym  for  prayer  (Exod.  ix. 
29,  33;  Psa.  xliv.  20;  cxliii.  6;  Isa.  L  16; 
Ixv.  2.)] 

Ver.  23. — And  he  said,  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
there  Is  no  God  like  thee  [Similar  words 
are  found  in  Exod.  xv.  11 ;  Psa.  Ixxxvi.  8, 
&B.  They  do  not  at  all  imply  the  existence 
of  other  gods,  but  are  explained  by  other 
passages  [e.g.,  ver.  60  ;  Deut.  iv.  39,  "the 
Lord  He  is  God  and  none  else ;  "  2  Sam.  vii. 
22 ;  xxii.  32)  as  meaning  that  the  God  of 
Israel  stands  alone,  and  alone  is  God.  It 
would  be  strange,  indeed,  if  the  people 
whose  great  peculium  was  the  unity  of  the 
Godhead  (Deut.  vi.  4 ;  Isa.  xlii.  8)  recog- 
nized other  deities.  Observe :  Solomon  be- 
gins his  prayer  with  an  act  oi  praise;  with  a 
recognition  at  once  grateful  and  graceful  of 
God's  past  mercies  (cf.  Psa.  Ixv.  1,  2 ;  Fliil. 
iv.  6).  Exaudit  Dominus  invocantem,  quern 
laudantem  vidit  "  (Augustine)] ,  In  heaven 
above,  or  on  earth  beneath  [Josh.  ii.  11] , 
who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy  [same 
words  iu  Deut.  vii.  9]  with  thy  servants 
that  walk  before  thee  with  aU  their  heart. 
[Cf.  ch.  ii.  4.] 

Ver.  24.  —Who  hast  kept  with  thy  sw- 
vant  David  my  father  [Solomon  sees  in 
this  a  special  pledge  of  God's  faithfulness 
and  truth]  that  thou  promisedst  [Heb. 
spakest,  same  word  as  below.  The  alteration 
in  the  A.  V.  obscures  the  connexion] :  thou 
spakest  also  [Heb.  and  thou  spakest,  i.e., 
"yea,"  or  "for  thou  spakest"]  with  thy 
mouth  and  hast  fulfilled  it  with  thine  hand 
[ver.  15,  and  ch.  iii.  6.  The  completion 
of  the  house,  following  the  establishment  of 
Solomon  upon  the  throne,  waa  to  him  proof 
conclusive  that  the  promise  of  2  Sam  vii!  • 
had  received  its  fulfilment] ,  as  it  ia  this 
day. 


OB.  vm.  1—66.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


153 


Ver.  25.— Therefore  now  [Heb.  And  now. 
The  promise  hau  been  but  partially  fulfilled. 
The  house  is  built ;  be  now  prays  that  the 
succession  may  be  continued  in  David's 
line]  keep  [of.  ver.  24,  "thou  hast  keptl'] 
with  thy  servEmt  David  my  father  that  thou 
promisedst  [Heb.  spakest  to,  as  above] 
him,  saying  [The  reference  is  of  course  to 
the  great  promise  of  2  Sam.  vii.  12 — 16], 
There  shall  not  fall  thee  a  man  in  my  sight 
to  Bit  on  ths  throne  of  Israel  [cf.  ch.  ii.  i] , 
so  that  [marg, ,  if  only.  As  to  the  condition, 
see  note  on  ch.  ii.  '4,  and  cf.  ch.  vi.  12,  13] 
thy  children  take  heed  to  [Heb.  kee]^. 
Same  word  as  above.  The  repetition  is 
suggestive.  God's  keeping  His  promise  was 
contingent  on  their  keeping  His  command- 
ments] their  way,  that  they  walk  before  me 
as  thou  hast  walked  before  me. 

Ver.  26.— And  now,  0  God  [The  LXX., 
Vulg.,  Syr.,  and  Arab,  read,  O  Lord  God,  as 
do  many  MSS.  But  the  word  is  more  likely 
to  have  been  inserted  (in  conformity  with 
vers.  23,  25)  than  to  have  been  left  out]  let 
thy  word  [The  Eeri  has  thy  words.  Eeil 
sees  here  a  reference  to  "  all  the  words  "  of 
2  Sam.  vii.  17 ;  but  this,  especially  when 
the  reading  is  doubtful,  is  somewhat  too 
remote],  I  pray  thee,  be  verified  [1D8<* 
optative  form.  Gesen.,  Gram.  126.  2] 
which  thou  spakest  [Psa.  cxxzii.  14]  nnto 
thy  servant  David  my  father. 

Ver.  27. — But  [*3.  Bahr  refers  for  this 
use  of  the  word  to  1  Sam.  xxix.  8 ;  1  Kings 
xi.  22  ;  2  Kings  viii.  13  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  18]  will 
God  Indeed  [lleb.  verily  ;  same  root  as  th.at 
of  preoediug  verb,  "  verified."  The  repeti- 
tion shows  the  connexion  of  thought.  "  But 
can  these  words  be  verified?  Will  God 
yerily,"  &c.]  dwell  on  the  earth?  behold 
'he  heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  [Same 
■  xpression  Deut.  x.  14.  Cf.  Psa.  cxv.  16 ; 
.:xlviii.  4  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  1.  The  Jewish  belief 
leapeotiug  the  seven  heavens  (!~ee  Wetstein 
on  2  Cor.  xii.  2 ;  Stanley,  "  Corinthians," 
i.e.)  is  of  much  later  date,  and  a  reference 
t')  it,  or  to  the  belief  of  some  Babbins  in  two 
heaveus  (after  Deut.  X..14),  is  altogether  out 
of  the  question.  The  "  heaven  of  heavens  " 
=  "aU  the  spaces  of  heaven,  however  vast 
aud  infinite"  (Gesen.,  cf.  Psa.  cxlviii.  4).  The 
analogy  of  "  holy  of  holies  "  would,  however, 
suggest  that  not  all  the  heavens,  but  the 
highest  heavens  are  intended]  cannot  con- 
tain thee ;  how  much  less  [^3  ^^(  :  Ewald, 
3S4  e]  this  house  that  I  have  builded  7 
[Two  points  are  to  be  noticed  here.  (1) 
Sulomou  never  denies  for  a  moment  that 
the  temple  was  a  real  habitation  of  Jehovah, 
or  that  a  real  presence  was  manifested  there. 
He  only  denies  that  the  Deity  is  contained 
tn  earthly  temples       (3)  TTe  bad   oo  on- 


worthy  ideas — such  ai  were  prevalent  in 
that  age— of  God  as  a  local  deity,  limited  to 
space.  The  words  clearly  prove  his  grasp 
of  the  omnipresence  and  infinity  of  Godl 
With  this  passage  compare  Psa.  oxxxiz. 
7 — 10  ;  Isa.  Ixvi,  1  (quoted  in  Acts  vii.  49), 
and  Acts  xvii.  24.] 

Ver.  28. — Yet  have  thou  respect  unto  the 
prayer  of  thy  servant  [=the  prayer  I  now 
offer,  which  is  that  thou  wilt  hear  all  future 
prayers  offered  here,  mine  and  my  people's] 
and  to  his  supplication,  0  Lord  my  God,  to 
hearken  unto  the  cry  and  to  the  prayer 

[Three  words  are  used  here,  HPSri,  n^np, 

and  nJT.  The  first  (from  72Sr\i),  precatus 
est ;  see  ver.  29)  is  apparently  a  general  term 
for  prayer ;  the  second  (from  )in,  propitius 
fait)  is  properly  a  cry  for  mercy  ;  hence  an 
earnest  prayer  or  supplication ;  while  the 
third  signifies  a  joyful  cry ;  hence  a  mournful 
cry  or  prayer]  which  thy  servant  prayeth 
before  thee  to-day. 

Ver.  29. — That  thine  eyes  may  be  open 
[This  aathropomorohism  does  not  conflict 
with  what  was  said  under  ver.  27]  toward 
this  house  night  and  day  [not  so  much  to 
watch  over  it  as  to  see  the  worship  and 
prayer  offered  there] ,  even  toward  the  place 
of  which  thou  hast  said,  My  name  shaU  be 
there  [cf.  Ezek.  xlviii.  85,  and  vers.  18.  19, 
20,  (feo.  When  had  God  said  this?  Never, 
perhaps,  in  so  many  words.  Kdl  says  the 
reference  is  to  2  Sam.  vii.  13  implicite  ("  He 
shall  build  an  house  for  my  name  "),  while 
Eawlinson  thinks  the  "reference  is  not  to 
any  single  text,  but  to  the  many  passages  in 
Deuteronomy  where  God  speaks  of  a  place 
which  He  will  choose  to  'set  his  name  ' 
there  (Deut.  xiL  6,  11,  18,  &a. ;  xiv.  23  ; 
XV.  20;  xvi.  2,  &c.)"  But  it  is  very  prob- 
able that  a  revelation  was  made  to  David 
respecting  the  sanctuary,  the  tenus  of  which 
are  not  preserved  to  us.  This  is  almost 
implied  by  Psa.  Ixxviii.  68;  cxxxii.  10;  1 
Chron.  xxii.  1 — passages  which  prove  that 
David  claimed  to  have  Divine  sanction  for 
placing  the  temple  on  "Mount  Zion."  Psa. 
cxxxii.  is  unmistakeably  Davidic,  and  em- 
bodies some  features  of  the  message  of  God 
{e.g.,  the  condition,  ver.  12)  not  preserved 
in  2  Sam.  vii.] :  that  thou  mayest  hearken 
unto  the  prayer  which  thy  servant  shall 

moke  toward  [Morg.  in,  but  Heb.  7tjl  sup- 
ports the  A.  V.  rendering.  Now  that  God 
had  revealed  His  presence  in  the  temple, 
the  Jew,  wherever  he  might  be,  would,  and 
as  a  matter  of  fact  did,  pray  towards  it 
(Dan.  vi.  10  ;  Psa.  v.  7  ;  Jonah  ii.  4),  jast 
as  the  Mohammedan  has  his  Kibleh  in 
Mecca]  this  place. 
Ver.  30. — And  hearken  thou  to  the  su]^ 


164 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[oh.  vin.  1 — 66. 


plication  of  thy  servant,  and  of  thy  people 
Israel,  when  they  shall  pray  tov/ard  this 
place  :  and  hear  tttou  In  heaven  [Heb.  unto 

heaven,  D*jp^n"7X,  a  pregnant  construetion 
=  hear  the  prayer  that  ascends  unto  heaven. 
The  chronicler  here,  as  elsewhere,  eimpliries 
the  meaning  by  reading  "from  heaven," 
'B'D'tP]  tHy  dwelling  place  [Here,  and  in 
vers.  39,  43,  and  49,  heaven  is  described  as 
the  true  dwelling  place  of  Deity.  Con- 
fidently as  Solomon  believes  that  he  has 
built  a  habitation  for  the  Lord,  he  never 
dreams  that  the  "Most  High  dwelleth  not 
in  temples  made  with  bands  "  (Acts  vii.  48 ; 
xvii.  4)J  :  and  when  thou  hearest,  forgive. 
[There  is  possibly  a  play  of  words  here— 

With  the  next  verse  the  special  or  par- 
ticnlar  supplications  begin.  Like  those  of 
the  Lord's  prayer,  they  are  seven  in  num- 
ber, and  no  doubt  for  the  same  reason,  viz., 
because  seven  was  the  number  of  covenant, 
the  number  which  expressed  the  relation- 
ship between  the  Lord  and  His  people  ("  die 
Signatur  der  Verbindimg  Gottes  und  der 
TTelt  "—Biihr,  Symbolik,  i.  187  sqq.)  In 
fact,  to  the  Jew  the  number  "  seven  "  was 
something  Uke  the  sign  of  the  cross  to  a 
large  portion  of  Catholic  Christendom,  for 
it  spoke  to  bim  of  God's  covenant  of  mercy 
and  peace. 

And  the  first  of  the  seven  concerns  oath). 
The  king  implores  the  covenant- keeping 
God  to  watch  over  the  covenants  of  words 
made  in  the  now  consecrated  sanctuary,  and 
to  protect  their  sanctity  by  punishing  the 
false  swearer.  There  were  cases  in  which 
the  Mosaio  law  provided  that  an  oath 
should  be  administered  to  suspected  per- 
sons (Ezod.  xxii.  11 ;  Levit.  v.  1,  4,  &o.) 
And  there  were  other  cases  in  which  men  of 
their  own  accord,  for  "  an  end  of  all  strife," 
would  make  oath.  Now  every  oath,  what- 
ever its  form  (Matt,  xxiii.  16—22),  is  in 
reality  an  affirmation ' '  by  the  God  of  truth  " 
(Isa.  Ixv.  16) ;  it  is  an  appeal  to  the  know- 
ledge and  power  and  justice  of  the  Most 
High  (Levit.  xix.  12 ;  Deut.  vi.  13  ;  x.  20 ; 
Isa.  xlviii.  1 ;  Jer.  xU.  16 ;  xliv.  26).  A  false 
oath,  consequently,  dishonoured  the  Divine 
name,  and  polluted  the  sanctuary  dedicated 
to  that  name,  and  if  it  went  unpunished, 
contradicted  the  principles  and  provisions 
«( the  dispensation  of  temporal  punishments, 


and  so  encouraged  falsehood  and  impiety. 
God  is  here  entreated,  consequently,  to  take 
cognizance  of  the  oaths  sworn  bet  >re  His 
altar  (ver.  31),  and  to  he  a  swift  witness 
against  the  false  swearers  (Mai.  iii.  6).  It 
is,  perhaps,  because  of  the  direct  dishonour 
which  perjury  ofiers  to  the  Divine  name 
that,  as  Bahr  suggests,  this  prayer  stands 
first  among  the  seven,  thus  corresponding  to 
the  ' '  Hallowed  be  Thy  name  "  in  the  Lord's 
prayer,  and  to  the  third  among  the  ten 
commandments. 

Ver.  31. — If  any  man  trespass  [The  force 
of  the  Hebrew  (which  begins  somewhat 
abruptly)  lE'X  DX  (I<XX.  oaa  &v  iftapry)  is 
probably,  As  for  that  which,  or  in  all  cases  in 
which,  i.e.,  when  (as  Ewald,  333  a).  The 
chronicler,  as  usuiil,  simplifies  by  reading 
DK]  against  his  neighbour,  and  an  oath  be 
laid  [Heb.  and  he  (the  neighbour)  lay  an 
oath,  i.e.,  prescribe  a  form  of  adjuration, 
such  as  that  in  Deut.  xxi.  7]  upon  him  to 
cause  him  to  swear,  ajid  the  oath'  come 
[This  translation  cannot  be  maijilaiiied. 
For  in  the  Heb.  there  is  no  def.  art.,  as  there 

would  be  if  n7K  were  nonn  and  nominative ; 
and,  moreover,  in  that  case  the  verb,  to 
agree  with  the  feminine  noun,  would  be  nN3. 
And  as  no  other  meaning  can  be  extracted 
from  the  words  as  they  stand,  we  are  driven 
to  sui-pcct  a  slight  corruption  of  the  text, 
either  (1)  the  omission  of  1  between  the 
words,  which  in  that  case  would  have  stood 

nPKI  ^%^V  t^id  woold  mean,  "and  he  (the 
accused)  come  and  swear " — a  conjecture 
which  is  supported  by  the  LXX.,  cai  cXdy 
Kai  i^ayopiiay,  or  (2)  the  omission  of  the 

preposition  3,  which  would  yield  n7H3  N31 
=and  he  (the  accui'ed)  enten  into  the  oath, 
an  expression  found  in  Neh.  x.  29  and  £zek. 
xvii.  13]  before  thine  altar  In  this  house. 
[Despite  the  last  words,  the  altar  of  sacri- 
fice he}ore  the  house  is  probably  meant. 
This  was  the  altar  of  the  Jewish  layman, 
and,  moreover,  it  was  one  visible  sign  of  the 
covenant.  Psa.  1.  5  ;  Exod.  xxiv.  6 — 8 ;  ct. 
XX.  24.  The  altar  which  afforded  shelter  to 
the  manslayer,  in  the  same  way  lent  sanctity 
to  the  oath.  The  practice  of  swearing  by 
the  altar  (Matt,  xxiii.  18)  is  of  later  date. 

Ver.  32. — Then  bear  thou  In  heaven 
[Heb.  and  thou,  thou  wilt  hear  the  heavens. 
The  same  expression,  DJDtS'n  WDSyp,  is 
found  in  vers.  34,  36, 39.  See'  Ewald,'  300  a. 
Keil  sees  in  it  the  adverbial  use  of  the 
accusative.  Most  of  the  versions  read 
"  from  heaven,"  as  does  the  Chronicles  and 
one  MS.] ,  and  do  [i.e.,  act]  and  judge  tby 


OH.  vin.  1—66.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK.  01"  KINGS. 


16& 


lervantB,  condemnlngr  [Heb.  to  make  {i.e., 
prove)  wicked]  the  wicked,  to  bring  [Heb. 
give,  same  word  as  below]  his  way  [i.e., 
works,  fruits]  upon  his  head  [cf.  Ezek.  is. 
10 ;  zi.  21 ;  same  espression]  and  Justify- 
ing [Heb.  to  make  righteous.  Cf.  SiKatovv 
in  N.  T.  and  justum  facere]  the  righteous 
[cognate  words  are  used  in  both  cases] ,  to 
give  him  according  to  his  righteousness. 

The  second  specisd  petition  contemplates 
the  case,  which  was  morally  certain  to  occur, 
of  Hebrews  taken  captive  in  war  and  carried 
to  a  foreign  land.  To  be  separated  from 
the  commonwealth,  the  rites  and  the  bless- 
ings of  Israel,  was  one  of  the  greatest 
calamities  which  could  befal  a  Jew  (Deut. 
iv.  27,  28 ;  Ijevit.  zxvi.  33  ;  Psa.  cxxxvii.), 
and  as  such  Solomon  gives  it  a  prominent 
place  in  his  prayer.  The  connexion,  how- 
ever, which  some  have  imagined  to  exist 
between  this  prayer  and  the  preceding,  viz., 
that  that  referred  to  internal,  this  to  exter- 
nal dangers,  is  too  artificial  to  have  found 
a  place  in  Solomon's  thoughts. 

Ver.  83.— When  thy  people  Israel  be 
smitten  down  before  the  enemy  [cf.  Levit. 
xxvi.  7,  17 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  25.  There  is  a 
constant  reference  to  these  two  chapters 
throughout  this  prayer,  or,  if  no  direct  re- 
ference to  them,  there  are  unmistakeable 
reminiscences  of  them] ,  because  Hihey  have 
sinned  against  thee,  and  shall  turn  again 
to  thee,  and  confess  [or  praise.  Psa.  liv. 
8  Heb. ;  cvi.  47 ;  czxii.  4]  thy  name,  and 
pray,  and  make  supplication  unto  thee  in 
this  house,  [The  marg.  towards  is  a  mis- 
taken attempt  at  avoiding  the  difficulty 
which  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  text,  viz., 
that  persons  in  a  foreign  land  could  not 
pray  in  the  temple.  But  the  king  obviously 
is  speaking  here,  not  of  those  taken  captive, 
but  of  the  nation  at  large  ("  thy  people 
Israel ")  by  its  representatives  (of.  Joel  ii. 
ii.  17),  supplicating  after  its  defeat.  The 
idea  of  captives  does  not  come  in  until  the 
next  verse.  Under  the  term  house  the 
courts  are  obviously  included  (Acts  ii  46; 
Luke  xviii.  10).  Into  the  edifice  the  priests 
alone  were  admitted. 

Ver.  34. — Then  hear  thou  in  heaven,  and 
forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel,  and 
bring  fhem  [i.«.,  the  captives  of  Israel, 
those  carried  oft  by  the  enemy.  There  is 
uo  thought  here  of  the  captivity  of  the 
nation — that  is  referred  to  in  vers.  46-^0 — 
as  the  prayers  to  be  offered  in  the  temple 
prove.  This  petition  is  in  exact  accordance 
with  the  promises  and  threatenings  of  the 
law,  for  the  former  of  which  see  Levit.  xxvi. 
40 — 14;    Deut.  zxz.  1 — 6;    for  the  latter. 


Levit.  xxvi.  83 ;  Deut.  iv.  27  ;  xxviii.  64  sqq.] 
again  unto  the  land  which  thou  gayest 
unto  their  fathers. 

The  third  petition  concerns  the  plague  of 
drought.  Just  as  rain,  in  the  thirsty  and 
snnbumt  East,  has  ever  been  accounted  one 
of  the  best  gifts  of  God  (Levit.  xxvi.  4  ;  Deut. 
xi  11 ;  Job  V.  10,  and  passim ;  Psa.  Ixviii. 
9 ;  cxlvii.  8 ;  Acts  xiv.  17),  so  was  drought 
denounced  as  one  of  His  severest  scourge* 
(Levit.  xxvi.  19  ;  Deut.  xi.  17  ;  xxviii.  23,  24, 
&o.)  This  petition  finds  an  illustration  in 
the  public  supplications  which  are  still 
offered  in  the  East,  and  by  men  of  all 
creeds,  for  rain. 

Ver.  35. — When  heaven  is  shut  up,  and 
there  Is  no  rain,  because  they  have  sinned 
against  thee;  If  they  pray  toward  this 
place  [toward,  because  the  inhabitants  of 
the  land  everywhere  would  direct  tlieir 
prayers  toward  the  holy  oracle  in  JerusaUm 
(Psa.  xxviii.  2)] ,  and  confess  [praise]  thy 
name,  and  turn  from  their  sin,  when  [or 
because,  ^S]  thou  affllctest  them.  [LXX. 
irav  raireiviiatis  airoie — Humbling  should 
be  the  result  of  affliction.] 

Ver.  36. — Then  hear  thou  tn  heaven  [seer 
on  ver.  32],  and  forgive  the  sin  of  tky 
servants,  and  of  thy  people  Israel,  that 
thou  teach  them  [rather,  because  thou  art 
teaching  them,  &o.  The  thought  is,  "  For- 
give, because  they  have  learned  the  lesson 
Thy  discipline  of  drought  was  meant  to- 
teach ;  "  because  the  chastisement  has  ful- 
filled its  purpose]  the  good  way  [1  Sam. 
xii.  23]  wherein  thsy  should  walk,  and 
give  rain  upon  thy  land,  which  thou  hast 
given  to  thy  people  for  an  Inheritance. 

The  fourth  petition  refers  to  the  various 
plagues  mentioned  in  the  law  (Levit.  xxvi. ; 
Deut.  xxviii),  as  the  punishment  of  apos. 
tasy  or  infidelity. 

Ver.  37. — If  there  be  In  the  land  famine 
[Heb.  Famine  should  there  be,  &c.  The 
word  is  emphatic  by  position.  Famine 
is  denounced,  Levit.  xxvi.  20,  26 ;  Deut. 
xxviii.  33],  If  there  be  pestilence  [Levit, 
xxvi.  25  ;  ijer  xiv.  12  ;  xxiv.  10 ;  Amos  iv. 
10;  Ezek.  vi.  12,  &c.],  blasting  [same 
word  Gen.  xli.  6 ;  Amos  iv.  9 ;  Deut. 
xxviii.  22],  mildew  [Mt.  paleness,  xX<>»- 
portjQ,  Deut.  I.  c],  locust,  or  If  there  be 

caterpillar  [It  is  uncertain  whether  7^pri, 
lit.,  devourer,  here  rendered  "  caterpUlar,''^ 
is  not  an  adjective  and  an  appellation  of 
the  locust  =  devouring  locust.  Deut.  xxviii. 

38  (n|nxn  -U^pni  -the  locust  shalj 
consume  it ")  certainly  favours  this  view. 


ise 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  Tin.  1 — 6& 


But  the  Chron.  ancl  the  Versa.  diBtuigmsh 
It  here  (by  ttie  introduction  of  "  and  "  be- 
tween the  two  words)  as  a  separate  plague. 
It  is  also  similarly  distinguished,  Joel  i.  4  ; 
Psa.  Ixxviii.  46.  Gesen.  considers  it  to  be  a 
species  of  locust]  ;  If  their  enemy  besiege 
them  In  the  land  of  their  dtlea  [Heb.  his 
gates,  but  "  the  land  ot  his  gates  "  hardly 
yields  sense.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the 
LXX.  (with  most  of  the  Verss.)  reads  Iv  ju^ 
tCiv  vSKvov  airou.  Thenius,  consequently, 
to  bring  the  Hebrew  text  into  harmony, 
would  substitute  VTJ?  nnK3  for  V^S^ 
Visa.  Another  suggested  emendation  is 
VlBB'3,  pS3,  "  in  the  land,  even  in  their 
gates."  But  it  is  doubtful  whether  any 
alteration  is  really  required.  "  The  land 
of  their  gates"  (cf.  "land  of  their  captivity," 

2  Chron.  vi.  37 ;  Jer.  xxx.  10,  &c.)  may 
perhaps  be  interpreted  the  land  where  their 
gates  (t.e.,  fortified  cities)  are.  The  marg. 
"JitrwdJctton"— the  gate  being  the  place 
of  judgment  (Euth  iv.  11 ;  Prov.  xxii.  22 ; 

3  Sam.  XV.  2) — is  altogether  out  of  the 
question]  ;  whatsoever  plague,  whatsoever 
[Heb.  every  plague,  &o.]  siclmess  there  be. 

Ver.  38. — ^What  prayer  and  supplication 
■oever  [There  is  here  a  studied  reference  to 
the  preceding  words.  Lit.,  every  prayer, 
4c.  We  might  render  in  ver.  37,  "  What- 
soever the  plague,"  &o.,  and  here,  "  What- 
soever the  prayer,"  &o.]  be  made  by  any 
man,  or  by  all  thy  people  Israel,  wMcb 
shall  know  every  man  the  plague  of  his 
ovni  heart  [Here  again  there  is  an  unmis- 
takeable  reference  to  the  "plague"  (same 
word)  of  ver.  37.  The  plague  ot  the  heart 
is  the  inner  smart  of  the  conscience  corre- 
sponding with  and  perhaps  more  painful 
than  the  smiting  of  the  person.  The  mean- 
ing obviously  is  that  the  prayers  will  vary 
according  to  the  various  mpntal  and  physi- 
cal sufferings  of  men] ,  and  spread  forth  blB 
hands  [see  on  ver.  22]  toward  this  house. 

Ver.  39. — Then  hear  thou  In  heaven  thy 
dwelling  place,  and  forgive,  and  do,  and 
give  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways, 
whose  heart  thou  knowest ;  (for  thou,  even 
thou  only,  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  the 
children  of  men ;)  [Jer.  xvii.  10.  Cf.  o  icop- 
SwyviiitTtis  9ebe  (Acts  xv.  8 ;   also  ib.  i.  24). 

Ver.  40. — That  they  may  fear  thee  all 
the  days  that  they  live  in  the  laud  which 
thou  gavest  unto  their  fathers.  [Solomon 
anticipates  that  a  godly  fear  will  be  the 
result  of  forgiveness  and  restoration.  We 
find  the  same  thought  in  Psa.  cxxx.  4.  The 
mercy  and  goodness  of  God  sliould  lead  to 
repentance,  but  unhappily  it  not  unseldom 
(aUs  to  do  so.] 

The  fifth  petition  contemplates  the  prayers 
which  foreigners,  attracted  by  the  fame  of 


Jerusalem,  of  its  religion  and  sanctuary 
could  offer  towards  the  house.  The  Gentiles 
who  should  visit  Jerusalem  would  assuredly, 
with  their  polytheistic  ideas  and  their  be- 
lief in  local  or  tribal  deities,  invoke  the  aid 
and  blessing  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob. 
This  mention  of  aliens  from  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel  in  the  prayer  of  dedication, 
especially  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  the 
exclusiveness  and  bigotry  which  character- 
ized the  Jews  of  later  days,  is  especially  to 
be  noticed.  As  Eawlinson  {in  loco)  observes, 
■ '  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  in  the  Mosaic 
law  than  its  liberality  with  regard  to 
strangers."  He  then  quotes  Exod.  xxii. 21 ; 
Levit.  XXV.  35  ;  Deut.  x.  19 ;  xxxi.  12 ;  Num. 
XV.  14 — 16 ;  and  adds  :  "  It  is  quite  in  the 
spirit  of  these  enactments  that  Solomon, 
having  first  prayed  God  on  behalf  of  his 
fellow  countrymen,  should  next  go  on  to  in- 
tercede for  the  strangers,"  &o.  The  inter- 
course of  the  Hebrews  at  this  period  with 
foreign  nations,  and  the  influence  they 
exercised  on  the  Jewish  thought  and 
manners  (see  Stanley, ' 'Jewish  Ch."  ii.  Lect. 
xxvi.),  are  also  to  be  remembered.  These 
new  relations  with  the  stranger  would  no 
doubt  have  widened  Solomon's  views. 

Ver.  41. — Moreover  concerning  a  stranger, 
that  is  not  of  thy  people  Israel,  but  Cometh 
out  of  a  far  country  for  thy  name's  sake ; 
[Solomon  takes  it  for  granted  that  such 
will  come,  and  not  without  good  reason, 
for  the  house  was  "exceeding  magnifical" 
and  destined  to  be  "  of  fame  and  glory 
throughout  all  countries"  (1  Chron.  xxii.  6J. 
And  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  in  the  visit 
of  the  Queen  of  Sheba  we  are  to  see  one 
fulfilment  of  this  anticipation.  (Note  the 
expression  of  ch.  x.  1  "  concerning  the  Tiame 
of  the  Lord."\  One  who  blessed  God,  as 
she  did  (ver.  9),  would  certainly  pray  towards 
the  house.  In  the  time  of  the  second 
temple  there  were  several  instances  of 
strangers  {e.g.,  Alexander  the  Great,  Ptolemy 
Philadelphus,  and  Seleucus;  seeKeilin  loe.) 
worshipping  the  God  of  Jacob  in  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  42.— (For  they  shall  hear  01  tbj 
great  name  [Cf .  Josh.  vii.  9  ;  Psa.  Ixxvi.  1 ; 
xcix.  3] ,  and  of  thy  strong  hand  [of.  Exod. 
vi.  6 ;  xiii.  9  ;  Deut.  ix.  26,  29  ;  cf.  vii.  19. 
They  had  heard  at  a  much  earUer  date 
(Exod.  XV.  14 ;  xviii.  1 ;  Josh.  v.  1).  The 
reference  is  not  so  much  to  the  marvels  of 
the  Exodus — that  was  long  past — as  to  the 
wondrous  works  which  Solomon  assumes 
will    hereafter  be  wrought],  and   of  tliy 


OB.  vm.  1—66.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


167 


•tretcbed  out  arm;)  when  he  Bhall  come 
and  pray  toward  this  house. 

Ver.  43. — Hear  thou  In  heaven  thy  dwell- 
ing place,  and  do  according  to  all  that  the 
stranger  calletb  to  thee  for :  that  all  people 
of  the  earth  may  know  thy  name  [It  is 
mteresting  to  notice  this  foreshadowing  of 
the  inclusion  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  one 
fold.  The  same  thought  is  found  in  some 
of  the  PsaJms  and  in  Isaiah,  as  St.  Paul 
witnesses  (Bom.  zv.  9  sqq.)  Cf.  Fsa.  zxii, 
27 ;  Ixxii.  11 ;  Izxxvi.  9  ;  zcviii.  3  ;  cii.  15 ; 
czvii.  1 ;  Isa.  zliz.  6 ;  lii.  10]  to  fear  thee, 
as  do  thy  people  Israel ;  and  that  they  may 
know  that  this  house,  which  I  havebullded, 
Is  called  hy  thy  name.  [Heb.  that  thy 
name  is  called  (or,  has  been  called,  K^i??. 
LXX.  iiriKeKXtirai)  upon  this  home,  i.e„  that 
God  has  taken  this  house'  for  His  habita- 
tion: that  He  dwells  there,  works,  bears, 
answers  there.  Same  ezpression,  jer.  vii. 
10,  11,  U  ;  zzT.  29 ;  Deut.  zzviii  10  ;  Isa. 
iv.  1.  In  Num.  vi.  27  we  have,  "  they 
shall  put  my  name  upon  the  children  of 
Israel."  In  Deut.  zii.  6,  and  zvi.  6  (cf. 
1  Kings  zi.  36),  we  read  of  the  place  God 
has  ' '  chosen  to  put  his  name  there." 

So  far  the  royal  suppliant  has  spoken  of 
prayers  offered  in  or  at  the  temple.  He 
now  mentions  two  oases  where  supplications 
will  be  offered  by  penitents  far  distant  from 
the  holy  city  or  even  from  the  Holy  Land. 
And  first,  he  speaks  of  the  armies  of  Israel 
on  a  campaign. 

Ver.  44. — If  thy  people  go  out  to  battle 
against  their  enemy,  whithersoever  [Heb. 
in  the  way  which']  thou  Shalt  send  them 
[These  words  clearly  imply  that  the  war, 
whether  defensive  or  offensive  (i.e.,  for  the 
chastisement  of  other  nations),  is  one  which 
had  God's  sanction,  and  indeed  was  waged 
by  His  appointment] ,  and  shall  pray  unto 
the  Lord  toward  [Heb.  in  the  way  of.  Same 
ezpression  as  above.  The  repetition  is  sig- 
nificant. "  They  have  gone  in  God's  way. 
They  may  therefore  look  the  way  of  God's 
honse  for  help."  Ezecuting  God's  commis- 
sion, they  might  justly  ezpeet  His  blessing] 
the  city  which  thou  hast  chosen,  and  toward 
the  honse  thiut  I  have  built  for  thy  name. 

Ver.  4S. — ^Then  hear  thou  In  heaven  their 
prayer  and  their  supplication,  and  main- 
tain their  cause.  [Heb,  do  their  judgments, 
i.€.,  secure  them  justice,  defend  the  right. 
Same  words.  Dent.  z.  18 ;  cf .  Fsa.  iz.  6,  Heb.] 

The  last  petition — ^the  second  of  those 
which  speak  of  prayers  addressed  towards 
the  temple,  or  the  Holy  Fresenoe  which 
dwelt  there,  from  a  foreign  land— coniem- 
pl«tM   M   possible   the   captivity   of  the 


Hebrew  nation.  It  has  hence  been  too 
readily  inferred  that  this  portion  of  the 
prayer,  at  least,  if  not  the  preceding  peti- 
tion also,  has  been  interpolated  by  a  post- 
captivity  writer.  But  there  is  really  no 
solid  reason  for  doubting  its  genuineness. 
ISoi  only  is  it  the  seventh  petition  (see  on 
ver.  81),  but  the  captivity  of  Israel  had 
been  denounced  as  the  punishment  of  per- 
sistent disobedience  long  before  by  Moses, 
and  in  the  chapters  to  which  such  constant 
reference  is  made  (Levit.  zzvi.  33,  44 ; 
Deut.  zzviii.  25,  36,  64  j  cf.  iv.  27)— a  fact 
which  is  in  itself  an  indirect  proof  of 
genuineness,  as  showing  that  this  petition 
is  of  a  piece  with  the  rest  of  the  prayer. 
Aud  when  to  this  we  add  that  the  carrying 
of  a  conquered  and  refractory  race  into  cap- 
tivity was  an  established  custom  of  the 
East,  we  shall  be  inclined  to  agree  with 
Bahr,  that  "it  would  have  been  more  re- 
markable if  Solomon  had  not  mentioned  it." 

Ver.  46. — If  they  sin  against  thee  (for 
there  Is  no  man  that  slnneth  not),  and  thou 
be  angry  with  them,  and  deliver  them  to 
the  enemy  [Heb.  give  them  hefore  an  enemy'] , 
so  that  they  carry  them  away  captives  unto 
the  land  of  the  enemy,  far  or  near ; 

Ver.  47. —  Yet  If  they  shaU  bethink 
themselves  [Heb.  as  marg.,  iring  back  to 
their  heart.  Same  phrase,  Deut.  iv.  39 ; 
zzz.  1.  The  latter  passage,  it  should  be 
noticed,  treats  of  the  captivity,  so  that 
Solomon,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  em- 
ploys some  of  the  veiy  words  used  by 
Hoses  in  contemplating  this  contingency. 
These  repeated  coincidences  lead  to  the 
belief  that  the  prayer  was  based  upon  and 
compiled  from  the  Pentateuch]  In  the  land 
whither  they  were  carried  captives,  and 
repent,  and  make  supplication  unto  thee 
in  the  land  of  them  that  carried  tbem  cap- 
tives, sasrlng,  We  have  sinned,  and  have 
done  perversely,  we  have  committed  wicked- 
ness. [This  verse  is  full  of  paronomasia, 
n^ETl,  UB*:,  UB',  &o.  Words  almost 
identical  with  this  confession  were  used 
(Dan.  iz.  5 ;  Psa.  cvi.  6)  by  the  Jews  in 
their  captivity  at  Babylon,  from  which  it 
has  been  concluded  that  this  part  of  the 
prayer  must  belong  to  the  time  of  the  cap- 
tivity. But  surely  it  is,  to  say  the  least, 
just  as  likely  that  the  Jews,  when  this  cap- 
tivity of  which  Solomon  spoke  befel  them, 
borrowed  the  phrase  in  which  their  great 
king  by  anticipation  ezpressed  their  peni- 
tence. Seeing  in  the  captivity  a  fulfilment 
of  his  prediction,  they  woold  naturally  see 


168 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS, 


[oh.  vul  1 — 66. 


in  this  formula,  which  no  doubt  had  been 
preserved  in  the  writings  of  the  prophets, 
a  confession  specially  appropriate  to  their 
case,  and  indeed  provided  for  their  use. 

Yer.  48. — And  so  return  unto  thee  with 
all  their  heart  [almost  the  words  of  Dent. 
XXX.  ver.  2,  as  those  in  ver.  47  are  of  ver.  1] , 
and  with  all  their  soul.  In  the  land  of  their 
enemies,  which  led  them  away  captive 
[observe  the  •paronomasia — 13E}'  is  here 
used  in  two  senses] ,  and  pray  nnto  thee  to- 
ward THeb.  the  way  of]  their  laud  [see 
Dan.  vi.  10]  which  thou  gravest  unto  their 
fathers,  the  city  which  thou  hast  chosen, 
^nd  the  house  which  I  have  built  for  thy 
name.  [There  is  apparently  a  climax  here, 
"land,"  "city,"  "house."] 

Ver.  49. — ^Then  hear  thou  their  prayer 
and  their  supplication  In  heaven  thy  dwell- 
ing place,  and  maintain  their  cause.  [Heb. 
do  their  judgments,  as  in  ver.  45.] 

Ver.  50.— And  forgive  thy  people  that 
have  sinned  against  thee,  and  all  their 
transgressions  wherein  they  have  trans- 
gressed against  thee,  and  give  them  com- 
passion [Heb.  to  compassion  or  bowels 
Q'pni=rd  (nrXdyx»«,  2  Cor.  vi.  12;  Phil, 
i.  8;  ii.  l,&o.]  before  them  who  carried  them 
captive,  that  they  may  have  compassion 
on  them.  [For  the  fulfilment  of  this 
prayer,  see  Ezra  i.  3,  7 ;  vi  13  ;  Keh.  ii.  6. 
Compare  Pea.  cvi.  46.] 

In  the  three  following  verses  we  have  a 
sort  of  general  conclusion  to  the  dedication 
prayer.  It  is  hardly  correct  to  say  that 
these  last  words  apply  to  all  the  preceding 
petitions — the  plea  "they  are  thy  people" 
manifestly  cannot  apply  in  the  case  of  vera. 
41 — 43.  On  the  other  hand,  as  little  are 
they  to  be  limited  to  the  persons  last  men- 
tioned in  vers.  46 — 60,  though  it  is  highly 
probable  they  were  suggested  by  the  thought 
Of  the  captives.  They  are  manifestly  in 
islose  connection  with  the  preceding  verses. 

Ver.'Sl. — For  they  be  thy  people  [a  cita- 
tion or  reminiscence  of  Deut.  iv.  10] ,  and 
thine  Inheritance,  which  thou  broughtest 
forth  out  of  Egypt  [of.  vers.  21,  58.  There 
is  a  constant  recurrence  throughout  the  Old 
Testament  to  this  great  deliverance,  and 
with  good  reason,  for  it  was  the  real  birth- 
day of  the  nation,  and  was  also  a  pledge  of 
future  help  and  favour.  God  who  had 
"wrought  such  great  things  for  them  in 
Egypt  "  could  not  well  forsake  them.  Solo- 
mon's constant  plea  is  that  they  are  the 
elect  and  covenant  race]  from  the  midst  of 
the  furnace  of  Iron  [i.e.,  a  furnace  for  iron, 
heated  and  fierce  as  for  smelting.  Same 
•phrase,  Deut,  iv.  20] . 


Ver.  52. — That  thine  eyes  may  be  open 
[of.  ver.  29]  unto  tlie  supplication  of  thy 
servant,  and  unto  the  supplication  of  thy 
people  Israel  [of.  vers.  28,  30] ,  to  hearken 
unto  them  in  all  that  they  call  for  unto  thee. 

Ver.  53. — For  thou  didst  separate  them 
from  [Levit.  xx.  24,  26 ;  cf.  Exod.  xix.  5, 6] 
among  all  the  people  of  the  earth,  to  be 
thine  Inheritance  [same  expression,  Deut. 
iv.  20 ;  ix.  26,  29.  This  is  no  idle  repetition 
of  ver.  51.  The  idea  of  that  verse  is  de- 
liverance, of  this  election.  Cf.  Num.  xvi.  9  ; 
viii.  14] ,  as  thou  spakest  by  the  hand  [see 
note  on  ch.  ii.  25]  of  Moses  thy  servant 
[Exod.  xix.  5,  6  ;  Deut.  ix.  26,  29  ;  xiv.  2] , 
when  thou  broughtest  our  fathers  out  of 
EKTPt,.  0  Lord  God. 

In  Chron.  (oh.  vi.  41,  42)  the  prayer  ends 
somewhat  difierently.  "  Now  therefore 
arise,  0  Lord  God,"  &o. — ^words  which  are 
found  in  substance  in  Psa.  cxxxii.  8 — 10. 
These  two  verses  look  like  an  addition,  and 
were  probably  inserted  by  the  chronicler  to 
form  a  connecting  link  with  ch.  vii.  1 — B 
(Bahr).  The  LXX.  has  an  extremely 
curious  addition,  said  to  be  taken  from  the 
"Book  of  the  Song."  Stanley  sees  in  its 
very  abruptness  and  obscurity  an  evidence 
of  its  genuineness  ("  Jewish  Ch."  ii  218). 

Section  III. — The  Concluding  Bletsing. 

The  service  of  dedication  concludes,  as 
it  commenced,  with  a  benediction  (ver.  14). 

Ver.  54. — And  It  was  so,  that  when  Solo- 
mon had  made  an  end  of  praying  all  this 
prayer  and  supplication  unto  the  Lord,  he 
arose  from  before  [see  note  on  ver.  22]  the 
altar  of  the  Lord,  from  kneeling  on  his 
knees  [tbe  first  mention  of  this  posture  in 
the  sacred  history  (Stanley).  The  Jews 
usually  stood  in  prayer  (Luke  xvui.  11, 13)] 
with  [Heb.  and]  his  bands  spread  up  to 
heaven. 

Ver.  55. — ^And  he  stood  [this  does  not 
necessarily  imply  that  he  drew  nearer  to 
the  congregation,  as  Eeil] ,  and  blessed  [of. 
2  Sain  vi.  18,  and  see  note  on  ver.  14.  The 
words  of  blessing,  which  are  presently 
given  (vers.  56 — 61),  prove  that  he  did  not 
assume  priestly  fonotions  and  put  any 
blessing  upon  the  people,  Num.  vi.  27]  ail 
the  congregation  of  Israel  with  a  loud 
[Heb.  great]  voice,  saying, 

Ver.  66.— Blessed  be  the  Lord,  that  hath 
given  rest  unto  his  people  Israel,  according 
to  all  that  he  promised  [a  distinct  reference 
to  Deut.  xii.  9,  10  (of.  iii.  20),  where  we 
read  that  when  the  Lord  should  have  given 
rest  to  Israel,  then  a  place  for  saorifioe,  &c., 


OH.  vm.  X— 66.J 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


1^9 


should  be  appointed  (ver.  11).  That  plaee 
is  now  dedicated,  and  the  king  sees  in  this 
circumstance  a  proof  that  the  rest  is  now 
at  last  fully  attained.  The  permanent 
sanctuary  is  a  pledge  of  settlement  in  the 
land.  The  rest  hitherto  enjoyed  (Josh. 
xxi.  44)  had  been  but  partial.  Only  under 
Solomon  were  the  Philistines  brought  into 
•complete  subjection  (1  Kings  ix.  16),  and 
hitherto  the  ark  had  dwelt  in  curtains]  ; 
there  hath  not  failed  [Heh.  fallen;  cf. 
1  Sam.  in.  19]  one  word  [a  clear  reference 
to  Josh.  xxi.  45,  as  the  preceding  words  are 
to  ver.  44]  of  all  his  good  promise,  wMch 
be  promised  by  tlie  hand  [cf.  ver.  5.S]  of 
Moses  his  servant  [yiz.,inljevii.  xxvi.3 — 13, 
and  in  Deut.  xxviii.  1 — 14,  i.e.,  in  the 
chapters  which  are  the  sources  of  this 
prayer,  &o. 

Ver.  57. — Tlie  Lord  our  God  be  with  us, 
as  he  was  with  our  fathers :  let  him  not 
leave  us,  nor  forsake  us.  [Solomon  in- 
sensibly glides  again  into  prayer ;  here  for 
the  presence  of  God,  in  ver.  59  for  His 
help.  There  is  probably  a  reference  to 
Deut.  xxxi.  6, 8  ;  Josh.  i.  5,  where,  however, 
"  forsake  "  is  represented  by  a  different  word. 

Ver.  68. — ^That  he  may  Incline  our  hearts 
unto  him  [Psa.  czix.  26 ;  cxH.  4],  to  walk  In 
all  his  ways  [ver.  25 ;  ch.  ii.  4.  The  condi- 
tion on  which  God's  blessing  was  insured 
was  at  this  time  printed  on  Solomon's  mind], 
and  to  keep  his  commandments,  and  his 
statutes,  and  his  Judgments  [see  note  on 
ch.  ii.  3,  to  which  ver.  there  is  not  improbably 
a  reference],  which  be  commanded  our 
fathers. 

Ver.  59. — And  let  these  my  words,  where- 
with I  have  made  supplication  before  the 
Lord,  be  nigh  unto  the  Lord  our  God  day 
and  night,  that  he  maintain  the  cause  of 
[Heb.  to  do  the  judgment  o/]  his  servant) 
and  the  cause  of  his  people  Israel  at  all 
times,  as  the  matter  shall  require  [Heb. 
the  thing  of  a  day  in  his  day.  Same  phrase 
Exod.  V.  13  ;  xvi.  4] : 

Ver.  60. — That  all  the  people  of  the  earth 
may  know  that  the  Lord  Is  God,  and  that 
there  Is  none  else.  [See  ver.  22.  We  have 
here  a  recurrence  to  the  thought  of  ver.  43, 
■which  was  evidently  prominent  in  Solomon's 
mind.  He  hopes  the  house  now  dedicated 
will  be  fraught  with  blessing  for  the  world, 
and  that  the  Gentiles  will  come  to  its  light. 
Cf.  Isa.  ii.  2,  3.] 

Ver.  61. — Let  your  heart  therefore  he 
perfect  with  the  Lord  our  God  [An  instruc- 
tive commentary  on  these  words  is  found  in 
ch.  xi.  4,  where  it  is  said  of  this  Solomon, 
"Ria  heart  was  not  perfect,"  &c. — same 
words.  Similarly,  ib,  vers.  3,  9  are  a  com- 
ment on  the  prayer  of  ver.  68.  Having 
preached  to  others,  he  himself  became  a 


castaway],  to  walk  In  his  statutes,  and  to 
keep  his  commandments,  as  at  this  day 
[That  day  the  nation  proved  its  piety  by  the 
dedication  of  the  house. 

At  the  close  of  this  prayer  (omitted  in 
Chron.),  according  to  2  Chron.  vii.  1,  "  fire 
came  down  from  heaven  and  consumed  the 
burnt  offering  and  the  sacrifices,  and  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house,"  but 
Bali  rejects  these  words  as  an  interpo- 
lation. He  maintains,  indeed,  that  the 
chronicler  contradicts  himself,  for  we  can 
hardly  think  that  the  glory  which  we  are 
told  (ch.  V.  14)  had  already  filled  the  house, 
left  it  and  then  returned.  It  is  certainly 
suspicious,  and  a  much  stronger  argument 
against  the  words  in  question,  that  no  men- 
tion of  the  fire  is  made  by  our  author,  for, 
brief  as  this  history  is,  it  is  difficult  to 
believe  that  so  signal  an  interposition  could 
have  remained  unnoticed,  if  it  leally  oo- 
cuned. 

Sbotion  rV.— TAe  Festal  8aerifie€$. 

The  ceremonial  of  dedication  was  fol- 
lowed, as  would  naturally  be  the  case,  by 
sacrifices  on  a  scale  of  unusual  grandeur. 
Apart  from  their  rehgious  use  and  signifi- 
cance, the  sacrifices  testified  to  the  devotion 
of  the  giver,  who  on  this  of  all  days  must 
not  appear  before  the  Lord  empty,  and  they 
also  afforded  materials  for  the  great  and 
prolonged  feast  by  which  this  auspicious 
event  in  the  history  of  Israel  must  be  com- 
memorated. 

Ver.  62. — ^And  the  Idng,  and  all  Israel 
with  him  [Another  indication  (see  on  ver.  2) 
that  practically  the  whole  Israelitish  nation 
(i.e.,  its  males)  assembled  to  witness  this 
great  function  (ver.  65.  But  see  on  ch.  xvi. 
17).  The  words  also  prove  that  the  sacri- 
fices mentioned  presently  were  offered  by  the 
people  as  well  as  by  the  king],  offered  sacri- 
fice before  the  Lord.  [See  note  on  ch.  ix.  25  ] 

Ver.  63. — And  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice 
[Solomon  is  mentioned  as  chief  donor,  and 
as  the  executive.  But  others  shared  in  the 
gift]  of  peace  offerings  [Levit.  vii.  11  sqq. 
This  was  especially  the  sacrifice  of  praise — it 
ia  called  "the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  of 
his  peace  ofierings,"  ib.  vers.  13,  16.  See 
Bahr,  Symh.  ii.  868  sqq.  In  the  peace  offer- 
ing, the  fat  was  burnt  on  the  altar,  but  the 
fiesh  was  eaten  (ver.  15;  cf.  Deut.  xii.  7),  so 
that  this  form  of  offering  was,  in  every  way, 
adapted  to  a  festival.  The  idea  that  "  ox 
after  ox,  to  the  number  of  22,000,  and  sheep 
after  sheep,  to  the  number  of  120,000,  were 
comwmed,"  sc.  by  fire  (Stanley),  is  expressly 
excluded],  which  he  offered  unto  the  Lord, 


160 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[oa.  Tm.  1 — 60. 


two  and  twenty  thousand  oxen,  and  an 
hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sbeep,  [It 
is  very  possible  that  these  numbers  haye 
been  altered  in  coarse  of  transcription,  as 
is  th"  case  with  numbers  elsewhere,  but 
there  is  no  ground  for  suspecting  exaggera- 
tion or  mistake.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the 
Chronicles  and  all  the  Versions  agree  with 
th'e  text,  and,  secondly,  the  numbers,  com- 
pared with  what  we  know  of  the  sacrifices 
offered  on  other  occasions,  are  not  unduly 
large,  nor  were  they  such  that  (as  has  been 
alleged)  it  would  be  impossible  to  offer  them 
within  the  time  specified.  If,  at  an  ordi- 
nary Passover,  a  quarter  of  a  million  of 
lambs  could  be  sacrificed  within  the  space 
of  two  or  three  hours  (Jos.,  Bell.  Jnd. 
vi.  9.  3),  there  can  obviously  have  been  "no 
difficulty  in  sacrificing  3000  oxen  and 
18,000  sheep  on  each  of  the  seven  days  of 
the  festival  •'  (Keil).  (Bat  were  not  the  sacri- 
fices spread  over  fourteen  days?  ver.  65.) 
And  it  is  to  be  remembered  (1)  that  "  pro- 
fasion  was  a  usual  feature  of  the  sacrifices 
of  antiquity.  .  .  .  Sacrifices  of  a  thousand 
oxen  (^iXto^jSai)  were  not  infrequent.  Ac- 
cording to  an  Arabian  historian  (Koto- 
beddyn),  the  Caliph  Moktader  sacrificed 
during  his  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  .  .  .  40,000 
camels  and  cows  and  50,000  sheep.  Taver- 
nier  speaks  of  100,000  victims  as  offered  by 
the  King  of  Tonqnin  "  (Kawlinson,  Stanley); 
and  (2)  that  the  context  insists  on  the  ex- 
traordinary number  of  victims.  They  were 
BO  numerous,  we  are  told,  that  the  brazen 
altar  was  quite  inadequate  to  receive  them 
(ver.  64).  It  has  been  already  pointed  out 
(note  on  ver.  62)  that  the  people  joined  the 
king  in  the  sacrifices.  Indeed  it  is  against 
not  only  ver.  62,  but  vers.  63, 65,  to  suppose 
that  all  the  victims  were  offered  by  Solomon 
alone  (Ewald,  Stanley).  If  these  numbers, 
therefore,  include  those  offered  by  the 
people,  we  can  the  more  readily  understand 
them.  For,  by  the  lowest  computation, 
there  could  hardly  be  less  than  100,000 
heads  of  houses  present  at  the  feast  (Bahr, 
Sell),  and  if  the  numbers  of  David's  census 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  9)  may  be  trusted,  there  may 
very  well  have  been  four  or  five  times  that 
number,  and  on  such  an  occasion  as  that, 
kn  occasion  altogether  without  precedent, 
every  Israelite  would  doubtless  offer  hi8 
sacrifice  of  thanksgiving — ^the  more  so  as  a 
large  number  of  victims  would  be  required 
for  the  purposes  of  the  subsequent  feast. 
And  as  to  the  impossibility  of  the  priests 
offering  so  prodigious  a  number  withiu  the 
specified  time  (Thenius,  al,),  we  have  only 
to  remember  (1)  that  if  there  were  38,000 
Levites  (men  over  thirty  years  of  age)  in  the 
time  of  David  (1  Ohron.  xxiii.  8),  or  any- 
thing like  that  nunber,  there  must  have 


been  at  the  very  least  at  this  period  two  oi 
three  thousand  priests  (Keil),  and  we  can 
hardly  think  that  at  the  dedication  of  so 
glorious  a  temple,  in  which  they  were  so 
profoundly  interested,  many  of  them  would 
be  absent  from  Jerusalem.  But  if  there 
were  only  one  thousand  present,  that  num- 
ber would  have  been  amply  sufficient  to 
perform  all  the  priestly  functions.  For  it 
was  no  necessary  part  of  the  priests'  office 
either  to  slay  the  victim,  or  to  prepare  it 
for  sacrifice — that  any  Israelite  might  do 
(Levit.  i.  6,  6, 11 ;  iii.  2,  S,  <to.) ;  the  duly  of 
the  priest  was  strictly  limited  to  "  sprink- 
ling the  blood  round  about  upon  the  altar  " 
(Levit.  iii.  2, 8  ;  ct  i.  5),  and  burning  the  f^t, 
the  kidneys,  &e.,  upon  the  altar  (ib.  iii.  5). 
It  is  clear,  consequently,  that  there  ii  no 
difficulty  whatsoever  as  to  the  manual  acts 
required  of  the  priests.  It  only  remains  to 
notice  one  other  objection,  viz.,  that  the 
people  could  not  possibly  have  eaten  all  the 
flesh  of  these  peace  offerings.  But  here 
again  the  answer  is  conclusive,  viz.  (1)  that 
it  was  not  necessary  that  all  should  be  eaten, 
for  the  law  expressly  provided  that  if  any  of 
the  flesh  remained  over  until  the  third  day, 
it  should  be  burnt  with  fire  (Levit.  vii.  16 ; 
xix.  6),  and  (2)  no  one  can  say  what  the 
number  of  people  may  not  have  been  (see 
below  on  ver.  65),  and  (3)  the  sacrifices  were 
spread  over  fourteen  days.]  So  the  Mng 
and  all  the  children  ot  Israel  dedicated  the 
house  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  64. — The  same  day  did  the  king 
hallow  the  middle  of  the  court  [i.e.,  the 
entire  area  of  the  court  of  the  priests  (oh. 
vi.  36).  Ewald  (287  g)  translates  "the 
inner  court."  The  whole  space  may  have 
been  regarded  as  "  one  huge  altar"  (Eawlin- 
Bon),  or  temporary  altars  may  have  been 
erected  all  over  the  area.  As  already  ob- 
served, this  fact  alone  points  to  an  enor- 
mous number  of  victims]  that  was  before 
the  house  of  the  Lord :  for  there  he  offered 
burnt  offerings  [Heb.  the  burnt  offerings, 
i.e.,  either  the  usual  daily  burnt  offerings 
(Num.  xxviiL  3),  or  more  probably,  those 
appropriate  to  such  a  special  function  (Num. 
xxix.  13  sqq. ;  cf.  1  Kings  iii.  4)],  and  meat 
offerings  [Heb.  the  meat  offering.   Both  this 

and  the  preceding  word  {iVVQ)  are  singular 
(generic)  in  the  original] ,  and  the  fat  of  the 
peace  offerings:  because  the  brazen  altar 
that  was  before  the  Lord  [i.e.,  house  of  the 
Lord]  was  too  little  to  receive  the  burnt 
offerings,  and  meat  offerings,  and  the  fat 
of  the  peace  offerings  [and  yet  it  was  20 
cubits  (30  feet)  square,  and  so  would  offer 
a  surface  of  100  (Keil  144)  square  yards] . 

Ver.  65.— And  at  that  time  Solomon  hslS 
a  feast   [the  necessary  sequel  to  such  a 


cH.  viii.  1— 66.J 


THE  FliitJT  BOOE  OF  KINGS. 


16: 


number  of  peace  ofieringa  (cf,  oh.  iii.  16). 
All  the  flesh  that  could  be,  must  be  eaten 
(Levit.  xiz.  6,  6)],  and  all  Israel  with  Mm, 
u  great  congregation  [see  note  on  ver.  64. 
"  All  Israel "  would  hardly  be  an  exaggera- 
tion] ,  from  tbe  entering  In  of  Hamath  [the 
northern  boundary  of  Palestine  (Num. 
xxKir.  8  ;  cf.  xiii.  31 ;  Josh.  xiii.  6  ;  Judg.  iii. 
* ;  Ezek.  xlvii.  16 ;  Stanley,  S.  and  P,  p. 
407 ;  Diet.  Bib.  i.  p.  644 ;  Porter,  pp.  620, 

^21]  unto  the  river  [Heh.  7113,  i.e.,  torrent 
bed,  watercourse,  wSdy  {river  is  "inj).  See 
Stanley,  S.  and  P.  pp.  14, 505,  506]  of  Egypt 
[i.e.,  the  southern  Umit  of  the  Holy  Land. 
Sje  Num.  xxxiv.  5 ;  Josh,  xv,  4, 47 ;  2  Kings 
xxiv.  7 ;  Gen.  xv.  18,  where  the  word  is  nnj 
refers  to  the  Nile.  The  Wady  el  Artsh  must 
be  intended  (Diet.  Bib.  vol.  iii.  p.  1046,  1047, 
and  Gesen.,  Thesaurus,  vol.  ii.  p.  872,  Porter, 
p.  267)],  before  the  Lord  our  God,  seven 
'days  and  seven  days,  even  fourteen  days 
[The  two  periods  are  thus  distinguished, 
because  they  were  properly  distinct,  the  first 
being  the  feast  of  dedication,  the  second 
the  feast  of  tabernacles.  This  is  more 
-clearly  explained  in  2  Chron.  vii.  9,  10,] 
Ver.  66. — On  the  eighth  day  he  sent  the 


people  away  [i.e.,  on  the  eighth  day  of  the 
second  feast,  the  "  three  and  twentieth  day 
of  the  month  "  (ib.,  ver.  10).  The  first  im- 
pression is  that  the  eighth  day  of  the  period 
of  fourteen  days  is  meant,  but  the  context, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  Chron.,  contradicts 
this.  The  feast  of  dedication  began  on  the 
eighth  day  of  the  month  Ethanim  (ver.  2), 
and  lasted  until  the  fourteenth.  The  feast 
of  tabernacles  began  on  the  fifteenth  and 
lasted  till  the  twenty-first.  On  the  even- 
ing of  the  twenty-second,  the  "  day  of  re- 
straint "  (Levit.  xxiii.  36  marg.),  he  dismissed 
the  people,  who  would  depart  to  their  homes 
next  morning]  :  and  they  blessed  [i.e., 
felicitated,  saluted  (on  taMng  leave).  Cf. 
Prov.  xxvii.  14;  2  Kings  iv.  29;  1  Bam, 
XXV.  6, 14.  Marg.  thanked.  See  note  on 
ver.  14]  the  king,  and  went  unto  their 
tents  [i.e.,  homes — an  archaic  expression, 
dating  from  the  times  of  the  desert  wander- 
ings. Josh.  xxii.  4 ;  Judg.  vii.  8 ;  2  Sam.  xx. 
1 ;  1  Kings  xii.  16]  Joyful  and  glad  of  heart 
for  all  the  goodness  that  the  Lord  had  done 
for  David  his  servant  [the  real  founder  of 
the  temple.  Solomon  had  but  carried  out 
his  ide.as  and  had  entered  into  his  labour*], 
and  for  Israel  his  people. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  8—11. — TJie  Dedication  of  the  Temple  and  its  Teaching.  The  eighth 
day  of  the  seventh  month  of  the  year  1004  B.C.,  or,  according  to  some,  B.0,  1000, 
was  one  of  the  brightest  days  of  Jewish  history — 

"  a  day  in  golden  letters  to  be  set 
Among  the  high  tides  of  the  calendar ; " 

for  on  that  day  the  holy  and  beautiful  house,  which  had  been  seven  and  a  balf  yearn 
in  bmlding,  for  which  preparations  had  been  made  for  a  much  longer  period 
iX  Chron.  xxii.  6),  and  on  which  a  force  of  some  one  hundred  and  sixty  thousand 
workmen  had  been  in  different  ways  employed ;  on  that  day  of  days  this  liouse  of 
houses  was  solemnly  dedicated  to  the  service  of  Almighty  God.  Let  us  carry  our 
■thoughts  back  to  that  day ;  let  us  join  the  procession ;  let  us  try  to  realize  the  scene, 
for  we  may  learn  a  lesson  thence,  first,  as  to  the  consecration  of  our  churches, 
and  secondly,  as  to  the  dedication  of  our  souls  and  bodies  to  God. 

It  is  an  enormous  concourse  that  is  gathered  in  and  about  the  holy  city.  From 
■"the  entering  in  of  Hamath  to  the  river  of  Egypt "  (ver.  65)  every  town  and  hamlet 
-had  sent  up  its  tale  of  men.  No  Israelite  who  oould  be  present — and  in  the  seventh 
month  the  labours  of  the  field  were  well-nigh  over — ^would  be  absent.  We  must 
not  think  of  the  heads  of  the  tribes  alone ;  it  is  a  nation  keeps  festival  to-day.  And 
such  a  nation,  with  such  a  history  I  And  its  glory  culminates  to-day  in  the  dedica- 
tion of  its  temple.    What  child  of  Israel,  then,  but  would  be  there  ? 

With  early  morning  aU  Jerusalem,  and  its  neighbouring  hills  and  valleys  (Fsa. 
«xxv.  2),  was  instinct  with  life.  The  Easterns  always  rise  early,  and  that  day  was 
■%  high  day.  It  is  still  early  when  the  great  procession  is  marshalled.  At  its  head 
is  "  Solomon  in  aU  his  glory."  The  dignitaries  of  the  State,  of  the  Church  (oh.  iv, 
X — 19) ;  all  are  there.  Then:  rendezvous  is  the  Mount  Zion ;  their  object  to  escort 
-the  ark  of  God,  with  all  the  honour  they  can  render  it,  on  its  last  journey,  to  its' 
•last  resting-place.      And  so  the  white-robed  priests  (2  Chron.  v.  12)  take  up  tht 

I    KINGS.  M 


162  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS  [oh.  viii.  1— Bft 

consecrated  structure  and  bear  it  tenderly,  yet  proudly,  to  its  home.-  To-day  the 
Levites  may  not  carry  it.  As  at  the  Jordan  (Josh.  iv.  10),  as  at  Jericho  (Josh.  vi.  4), 
as  in  Mount  Bbal  (Josh:  viii.  83),  so  on  its  last  journey  it  must  be  borne  on  the 
shoulders  of  priests.  The  procession — we  cannot  follow  its  course,  for  it  is  probable 
that,  for  the  sake  of  effect,  it  would  make  a  considerable  detour,  perhaps  a  circuit 
of  the  city ;  nor  can  we  speak  of  its  psalms — and  we  may  be  sure  if  psalms  (Pss. 
XV.,  xxiv ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  7 — 36)  were  chanted  at  the  removal  of  the  ark,  they  would 
not  be  wanting  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple — or  its  sacrifices  (ver.  5) — the  pro- 
cession (cf.  1  Kings  i.  38)  at  last  reaches  the  temple  precinct;  it  passes  through  the 
gate ;  here  the  crowd  is  checked,  but  the  priests  and  princes  pass  on  ;  they  reach 
the  inner  court ;  here  the  princes  stop,  but  the  priests  pass  on.  The  whole  temple 
platform  is  now  choked  with  worshippers,  while  thousands  who  cannot  gain 
admittance  witness  the  august  ceremonial  from  without,  many,  no  doubt,  having 
found  a  coign  of  vantage  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.  The  priests,  with  their  precious 
burden,  pass  through  the  porch,  pass  through  the  holy  place,  pass  through  the  veil 
Into  the  thick  darkness  of  the  oracle.  There  they  lay  down  the  ark,  the  outward 
and  visible  sign  of  the  covenant,  under  the  overshadowing  wings  of  the  colossal 
cherubim.  They  leave  it  wrapped  in  darkness;  they  leave  it  to  begin  at  once  their 
ministrations  before  the  new  slirine.  At  this  point  of  the  ceremonial  it  had  been 
arranged  that  priests  and  Levites,  singers,  trumpeters,  and  harpists  should  burst  into 
a  song  of  praise  (2  Chron.  v.  12,  18).  But  ere  they  can  ^illy  accomplish  their 
purpose,  the  dedication  has  become  a  true  consecration,  for  the  awfal  cloud,  the 
token  of  the  Divine  presence,  the  cloud  which  veiled  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  ha& 
filled  the  house,  and  the  priests  cannot  stand  to  minister.  As  at  the  dedication  of 
the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xl.  84)  so  now,  the  incommunicable  Godhead  has  "  come  in  a 
thick  cloud"  (Exod.  xix.  8),  and  has  driven  them,  as  it  drove  Moses,  from  the 
sanctuary.  The  king,  who  sees  the  portent  from  without,  recognizes  at  once  that 
his  and  his  father's  hope  is  realized ;  that  his  and  his  people's  offering  is  accepted ; 
that  his  and  their  projects  and  labours  are  now  crowned ;  and,  overcome  with  joy, 
he  cries, "  I  have  surely  built  thee  a  bouse  to  dwell  in,  a  settled  place,"  &o. 

"  Majestic  eilence  I  then  the  harp  awoke, 
The  cymbal  clanged,  the  deep-voiced  trumpet  spoke. 
And  Salem  spread  her  suppliant  hands  abroad. 
Viewed  the  descending  flame,  and  blessed  the  pzesent  God." 

Snoh,  in  brief,  was  the  dedication  of  this  house.  It  is  true  prayers  and  sacrifices 
followed,  but  of  these  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly.  The  essential  parts  of 
the  consecration  were  (1)  the  solemn  and  formal  setting  apart  of  the  edifice  by 
the  king  and  the  representatives  of  the  people,  to  be  the  house  of  God,  and  (2)  the 
formal  entry — to  use  the  language  of  men — by  the  Godhead,  concealed  under  the 
thick  cloud,  upon  His  new  shrine. 

So  that  in  this  service,  as  in  all  true  services,  there  were  two  parts,  man's  and 
God's.  It  was  man's  part  to  offer  the  house  with  appropriate  ceremonial  to  the 
Most  High  ;  it  was  God's  part  to  accept  it  with  appropriate  signs.  Now  both  of 
these  ore  commonly  and  correctly  called  consecration.  It  will  be  for  our  con- 
venienoe,_however,  if  we  now  call  the  first  of  these  dedication  and  restrict  the  term 
consecration  to  the  second.  And,  using  the  words  in  these  senses,  let  us  see  in 
tins  imposing  ceremonial  a  lesson,  first,  as  to  our  churches.  As  to  which,  we  learn : 
_  I.  That  OHUKCHEs  should  be  formally  dedicated  to  God.  For  if  a  formal  ser- 
vice of  dedication  was  fitting  in  the  case  of  the  temple,  how  can  it  be  inappropriate  in 
the  case  of  the  church  ?  Is  the  latter  less  worthy  of  care  and  reverent  regard  than 
the  former  ?  Is  it  built  for  objects  of  less  importance,  or  objects  less  Divine  ?  Is  it 
less  dear  to  God,  or  less  truly  "God's  house,"  because  man  is  admitted  to  a  place 
therein?  Or  may  men  build  houses  for  God  and  retain  the  ownership  for  them- 
selves ?  "  Can  we  judge  it  a  thing  seemly  for  any  man  to  go  about  the  building  of 
an  house  to  the  God  of  heaven  with  no  other  appearances  than  if  his  end  were  to 
rear  up  a  kitchen  or  parlour  for  his  own  use?   Or,  when  a  work  of  such  a  nature  ia 


CH.  vni.  1—66.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  168 

finished,  remaineth  there  nothing  but  presently  to  use  it  and  so  an  end  ?  "  (Hooker.) 
Alas,  that  churches  and  chapels  should  ever  have  been  offered — sometimes  by 
public  auction — to  the  pewholders,  or  dedicated  by  brass  plates,  &o.,  to  the  service 
of  opulent  parishioners.  Too  often  have  they  become  congeries  of  petty  freeholds, 
temples  of  exclusiveness,  God's  house  in  nothing  but  name.  But  this  could  not 
have  been  if  the  true  idea  of  de^cation  had  not  been  obscured  or  lost. 

II.  How  CHUBCHES  SHOnLD  BE  DEDICATED  TO  GoD.  This  history  tells  ns  that  it 
should  be  with  all  possible  solemnity  and  stateHness.  There  may  surely  be  a  pro- 
cession. If  this  was  light  for  the  Jew,  it  cannot  be  wrong  for  us.  There  may  be  pro- 
cessional hymns — the  psahn  which  was  acceptable  in  their  lips  cannot  be  unbecoming 
in  ours ;  the  dignitaries  of  the  State  may  join  the  ranks,  even  "  Icings  of  the  earth  " 
may  "  bring  their  glory  and  honour  into  it "  (Rev.  iii.  24) ;  in  fact,  it  cannot  be  too 

_  stately,  provided  it  be  done  not  for  self-glorification  but  for  the  glory  of  God.  For 
is  not  God  the  same  now  as  then ;  is  He  not  still  a  great  king  ?  And  is  not  man 
the  same?  Does  he  not  still  owe  the  profoundest  homage  he  can  render  to  his 
IVIaker  ?  And  if  it  be  heartfelt,  why  may  it  not  be  public  ?  The  history  teaches 
that  an  august  ritual  befits  the  dedication  of  a  church,  and  that,  inter  alia,  there 
should  be  sacrifices  (vers.  6,  62 ;  cf.  2  Sam.  xsiv.  24 — we  should  not  come  before 
the  Lord  empty),  rrmsie  (2  Chron.  v.  12,  18 — the  language  of  heaven,  the  one 
tongue  that  escaped  confusion  at  the  building  of  Babel),  and  that  the  book  of  the 
covenant  should  be  borne  (as  it  is  in  Germany,  and  as  the  ark  was)  in  procession 
to  its  place.  "  These  things  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  did  not  account  superfluous  " 
(Hooker). 

It  is  to  be  remembered  here  that  our  Lord  by  His  presence  sanctioned  the 
observance  of  a  feast  of  dedication  (John  x.  22). 

III.  That  ohtteches  must  be  consecrated  by  God.  The  bishop,  or  other  officer, 
can  only  consecrate  in  the  sense  of  dedicating — of  setting  apart  from  profane  uses. 
And  this  is  what  the  "  consecration  "  of  churches  and  churchyards  really  means — no 
more  and  no  less  (see  Hooker,  Eccles.  Pol.  v.  12.  6),  If  either  is  to  be  "  hallowed  " 
(eh.  ix.  2),  it  must  be  by  the  Divine  presence.  The  Moslems  say  that  wherever 
their  great  Caliph  Omar  prayed  is  consecrated  ground.  We  hold  that  holy  ground 
(Exod.  iii.  5)  must  derive  its  sanctity  from  the  All-Holy.  The  God  who  filled  the 
temple  must  also  haUow  the  church. 

rv.  That  churches  sincerely  dedicated  id  God  will  be  consboratbd  by  God. 
Was  the  Ineffable  Presence  granted  to  the  temple  ?  Then  why  not  to  the  church 
also  ?  God  has  no  favourites,  nor  is  His  arm  shortened.  The  Presence  wiU  not  be 
revealed,  but  it  will  be  there;  none  the  less  real,  all  the  more  real,  because  it  is 
spiritual.  It  woidd  be  strange  if,  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  we  disbeUeved  in 
the  presence  of  Him  who  fills  heaven  and  earth,  who  is  "  in  the  midst  of  the  seven 
candlesticks "  (Bev.  i.  13),  and  who  has  promised  His  presence  to  companies  of 
"  two  or  three"  sincere  souls  (Matt,  xviii.  20,  Ubi  tres,  ihi  ecclesia).  Our  churches 
indeed  are  "  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer  "'  (1  Tim.  iv.  6),  and  if  there 
is  no  cloud,  yet  we  may  "  behold  the  glory  of  the  Lord"  (2  Cor.  hi.  18) ;  but  they 
receive  their  full  and  perfect  consecration  in  the  Koiviavia  of  Christ's  body  and  blood 
(1  Cor.  X.  16).  Men  forget  that  if  there  is  not  a  Eeal  Presence  then  there  must  be  a 
real  absence.  Some  vrill  allow  God  to  be  present  everywhere — except  in  His  church 
and  sacraments. 

As  to  the  Christian  Ufe,  this  dedication  of  the  temple  reminds  us — 

I.  That  oue  bodies  are  TEftLBS  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  iii.  16, 17  ; 
2  Cor.  vi.  16).  "  God  has  bmlt "  the  "  temple  of  the  body  "  (John  ii.  21)  to  be  His 
shrine  (Eom.  viii.  9,  11 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 ;  Epii.  iii.  17). 

II.  That  we  should  dedicate  them  to  God  (Eom.  vi.  18,  19 ;  xiii  1 ;  1  Cor.  vi. 
18—29  ;  Matt.  xxii.  21).  This  is  done  in  baptism,  may  be  done  in  confirmation, 
and  must  be  done  in  conversion  (the  turning  to  God). 

III.  That  if  wb  dedicate  them,  God  will  consecrate  them.  If  we  "  open 
the  door"  (Bev.  iiL  20;  John  xiv.  23)  He  will  enter  in  and  dwell  there.  We  have 
but  to  give  the  heart — the  innermost  recess  of  the  house,  the  adytwn — to  Him, 
and  He  will  possess  and  glorify  the  whole  body  (Luke  xi.  84,  36). 


164  THJli  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  viu.  1—66. 

Chap.  Ti.  ver.  7,  and  chap,  viii  ver.  12. — The  Silence  cmd  the  Darkness.  In  the 
first  of  these  passages  we  are  told  that  the  house,  huilt  for  the  habitation  of  the 
Most  High,  was  reared  in  profound  silence  ;  in  the  eecond,  that  the  Most  High 
Himself  dwelleth  in  the  thick  darkness. 

Now  observe,  first,  that  darkness  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  sight  that 
silence  does  to  hearing.  In  the  one,  nothing  is  seen;  in  the  other,  nothiog  ia 
heard.  And,  secondly,  that  the  cloud  and  the  house  were  alike  the  shrine  and  the 
dwelling-place  of  Deity :  the  cloud  the  inner,  the  temple  the  outer  abode.  We 
learn,  therefore,  that  the  Q-od  who  appears  in  the  cloud  (Levit.  xvi,  2),  and  dwells  in 
the  thick  gloom  of  the  oracle,  is  One  who  shrouds  Himself  in  sileuce  and  darkness. 
Hence,  let  us  learn — 

I.  That  He  is  a  God  that  hedeth  Himself  (Isa.  xlv.  16).  "  No  man  hath  seen 
God  at  any  time  "  (John  i.  18 ;  Matt.  xi.  27 ;  Deut.  iv.  12).  "  Thick  darkness  is 
under  his  feet "  (Fsa.  zviii.  9,  Heb.)  "  Darkness  is  his  secret  place ;  dark  waters 
and  thick  clouds  his  paviUon"  (ch.  viii.  11 ;  cf.  Fsa.  xcvii.  2).  And  He  hides  Him- 
self, not  as  Eastern  kings  have  done  (oomp.  Esther  i.  14,  and  Herod,  hi.  84), 
to  enhance  their  renown  and  dignity,  and  to  increase  the  awe  and  reverence  of 
their  subjects — otmie  ignotum  pro  magnifico — ^but  because  we  cannot  see  His 
face  and  Uve  (Ezod.  xzxiii.  20).  "  Whom  no  man  hath  seen  or  can  see " 
(1  Tim.  vi.  16).  "  DweUing  in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto  "  (i&.) 
Cf.  Acts  zxiL  11. 

II.  That  wb  OAmtoT  bt  SEABOHiNa  FtNO  ottt  God  (Job  zi.  7).  In  one  sense 
those  are  not  so  far  wrong  who  speak, of  Him  as  "the  Unknowable."  The 
Quicumque  vult  describes  Him  as  "Incomprehensible"  (Latin,  invmensus,  i.e., 
immeasureable).  Man  cannot  understand  the  mysteries  of  his  own  existence,  how 
much  less  the.  being  of  the  Godhead.  If  we  could  understand  God,  we  should  be 
intellectually  equal  with  God  (Gen.  iii.  22).  It  is  no  argument  against  the  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity,  or  the  eternal  generation  of  the  Son,  or  the  procession  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  that  each  is  a  mystery.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  We  have  "  nothing  to 
draw  with,  and  the  weU  is  deep." 

III.  Teat  _His  ways  are  wrapped  in  oabkness.  See  Bom.  n,  83 ;  Deut.  xxiz. 
29  ;  Eccles.  zi.  6.  His  judgments  are  an  abyss  of  which  we  caimot  see  the  bottom 
(Fsa.  zzzvL  6).  His  footsteps  are  not  known  (Fsa.  Ixxvii.  19).  As  He  dwells  in  the 
thick  cloud,  so  are  His  judgments  iax  above  out  of  sight  (Fsa.  x.  6).  "  It  is  the 
glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing  "  (Frov.  xxv.  2).  Hence  it  is  that  His  dealings  are 
often  Bo  mysterious  and  painful,  because  what  He  does  we  know  not  now  (John 
xiii.  7).  The  disciples  "  feared  when  they  entered  into  the  cloud  "  (Luke  ix.  34). 
"_  Now  we  know  in  part."  We  only  see,  it  has  been  said,  as  it  were,  the  under- 
side of  the  carpet,  and  so  life  is  a  confused  and  meaningless  mixture.  It  is  not 
God's  will  that  we  should  see  the  plan  and  pattern  yet.  (Cf.  Col.  i.  26 ;  Ephes. 
iii  9.) 

IV.  That  His  works  abb  wrought  ik  silence.  He  is  Himself  a  God  that 
keepeth  silence  _;  Psalm  1.  8,  21  recognizes  this.  If  silence  be  golden,  the  Eternal 
has  observed  this  golden  rule.  Men  blaspheme  Him,  defy  Him,  challenge  Him  to 
smite  them  dead — as  a  well-known  atheist  is  said  to  have  dono--&c.,  and  He  keeps 
silence.  Amid  "  earth's  many  voices,"  amid  its  everlasting  Babel,  His  voice  is  never 
heard.  Similarly,  He  works  in  the  silence.  At  the  creation,  *'  He  spake  and  it  was 
done."  "  God  said.  Let  there  be  Hght,  and  there  was  light."  Creation  moves  in 
silence.  We  speak  of  "  the  music  of  the  spheres ;  but  it  is  but  a  beautiful  conceit. 
On  the  contrary,  "  there  is  no  speech, no  language;  their  voice  ia  not  heard"  (Psa. 
xix.  8,  Heb.)    Much  truer  is  that  exquisite  conception — 

"  And  nightly  to  the  liiteniTig  earth 
Bepeats  the  stoiy  of  her  birth." 

Thefaot  U  tha^ 

"In  tolemn  tiUnee,  all 
UoT«  round  this  dark  terrestrial  balL* 


OH.  vm.  1—66.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  IM 

And  in  silence,  too,  in  this  planet  sustained  and  ordered.    How 

"  silently  the  springtime 
Her  crown  of  verdure  weaves, 
And  all  the  trees  on  all  the  hilla 
Open  their  thousand  leaves," 

Or  as  another,  not  less  beautifully,  puts  it — 

'■  Soundless  as  chariots  on  the  snow 
The  saplings  of  the  forest  grow 

To  trees  of  mighty  girth  : 
Each  nightly  star  in  silence  burns. 
And  every  day  in  silence  turns 
The  a^e  of  the  earth. 

••  The  silent  frost,  with  mighty  hand. 
Fetters  the  rivers  and  the  land 

With  universal  chain ; 
And,  smitten  by  the  silent  sun. 
The  chain  is  loosed,  the  rivers  run. 

The  lands  are  free  again." 

But  for  the  discordant  din  of  men,  and  but  for  the  voices  of  beasts  and  birds,  this 
earth  would  be  a  temple  of  silence.  And  it  is  in  the  silence  that  God  reveals 
Himself.  Not  in  the  great  and  strong  wind,  not  in  the  earthquake,  not  in  the 
fire,  but  in  the  still  small  voice  (1  Kings  xix.  12,  13).  "  Let  us  be  silent,"  says 
one,  "  that  we  may  hear  the  whispers  of  the  gods."  In  the  silence,  too.  His  Church 
has  grown.  His  kingdom  "  cometh  not  with  observation  "  (Luke  xvii.  20).  As 
silently  as  the  seed  grows,  day  and  night,  in  the  soil ;  as  silently  as  the  leaven  works 
in  the  meal.  And  in  the  silence  our  Holy  Lord  will  come  again — as  a  thief  in  the 
uight,  as  a  snare,  as  the  lightning, 

V.  That  all  the  eabth  should  keep  silence  before  Him  (Hab.  ii.  20).  It 
is  not  meant  to  preach  here  "  the  eternal  duty  of  silence,"  nor  that  all  worship 
should  be  "  of  the  silent  sort ; "  but  that,  in  reaHzing  the  awful  presence  of  God, 
men  should  be  hushed  into  the  profoundest  awe.  When  we  do  "  take  upon  bur- 
selves  to  speak  unto  our  Lord,"  we  should  remember  that  "  we  are  but  dust  and 
ashes  "  (Gen.  xviii.  27).  Our  finger  on  our  lips,  our  Ups  in  the  dust.  It  was  this 
feeling,  in  part,  led  Solomon  to  bmld  the  temple  in  silence.  And  the  feeling  which 
found  this  expression  in  act  he  has  elsewhere  translated  in  words  (see  Eccles.  v. 
1,  2).  It  was  with  a  similar  feeling  that  our  Lord  acted  (Mark  xi.  16).  And  it  b 
significant  that  we  read  of  "  silence  in  heaven  "  (Kev.  viii.  1). 

VI.  That  God's  woek  must  be  done  in  silence.  "  All  real  work  is  quiet  work. 
It  must  be  unobtrusive  if  it  is  to  be  fruitful.  "  The  temple  was  thrown  down  with 
axes  and  hammers,  and  they  that  did  it  roared  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation 
(Fsa.  Ixxiv.  4,  6),  but  it  was  built  up  in  silence  "  (M.  Henry).  A  temple  of  the  Lord, 
a  temple  of  "  living  stones,"  is  now  being  buUt.  "  O  God,  that  the  axes  of  schism  or 
the  hammers  of  furious  contention  sliould  be  heard  within  Thy  sanctuary"  (Hall). 
It  is  because  of  our  unseemly  cries  and  wranglings,  because  of  the  clash  of  contro- 
versy and  the  shouts  of  heated  partizans,  that  this  temple  has  made  such  poor 
progress.  Not  until  we  have  been  first  hushed  into  silence  can  the  headstoue  be 
brought  forth  with  shouting  (Zeoh.  iv.  7). 

Ver.  2 ;  of.  vi.  16. — The  Holy  of  Holies  and  the  Heaven  of  Heavens.  Else, 
where  (pp.  99, 112)  we  have  spoken  of  the  correapondence  of  the  Jewish  temple 
with  the  Christian  Church.  But  let  us  now  trace  a  truer  and  higher  resemblance. 
For  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  tells  us  that  the  "  holy  places  made  with  hands  " 
are  "  the  figures  (avrirvira,  i.e.,  copies)  of  the  true  "  (Heb.  ix.  24).  The  temple  of 
Solomon,  therefore,  must  correspond  to  things  in  the  heavens.  It  does  this, 
first,  in  its  structure ;  secondly,  in  its  furniture  ;  thirdly,  in  its  services. 


168  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vni.  1—66. 

I.  In  its  BTRtJCTnRB.  The  temple,  we  have  seen,  was  a  reproduoj;ion,  on  an 
enlarged  scale,  and  in  a  more  permanent  form,  of  the  tabernacle.  And  the 
tabernacle  was  fashioned  after  a  heavenly  pattern  (Bxorl .  xxv.  40 ;  xxvi.  30 ;  xxvii.  8 ; 
Heb.  viU.  5).  Thrice  was  Moses  admonished  to  make  it  "  according  to  the  fashion 
which  was  showed  him  in  the  momit."    It  has  been  well  said  that  earth  is 

«  But  the  shadow  of  heaven,  and  things  therein 
Are  to  each  other  like." 

But  this  is  tme  in  a  special  sense  of  the  earthly  and  heavenly  temples.  Their 
resemblance  is  recognized  in  the  very  language  used  of  the  temple.  "  Heaven  thy 
dwelling-plaoe  "  is  constantly  found  in  close  connexion  with  "  this  house  "  (ch.  viii. 
30,  84,  39,  43).  The  same  word — Zehul — ^used  of  the  temple  in  ch.  viii.  13  is  used 
of  heaven  in  Isa.  Ixiii.  15.  Compare  also  ver.  13,  "  a  settled  place  for  thee  to  dwell 
in,"  &c.,  with  vers.  30,  89,  43,  &c.  (Heb.)  The  same  word — Haycal — again,  used 
of  the  temple  in  ch.  vi.  5, 33 ;  vii.  50 ;  2  Kings  xxiv.  13,  is  elsewhere  used  of  heaven 
(Psa.  xi.  4 ;  xviii.  7  ;  xxix.  9,  &o.)  But  can  we  trace  the  resemblance  ?  Can  we 
suggest  any  points  of  contact  ?  Let  us  try,  premising,  first,  that  a  "  general  analogy 
is  all  that  we  can  look  for"  (Alford  on  Eev.  viii.  3). 

1.  The  temple  was  tripartite  (see  ch.  vi  Introduction).  It  was  composed  of  porch, 
holy  place,  and  oracle  (the  side  chambers  were  hardly  integral  parts  of  the  structure ; 
see  note  on  ch.  vi.  6).  Now  it  is  remarkable  that  though  the  Jewish  fathers  spoke 
of  "seven  heavens" — some  held  that  there  were  two — Holy  Scripture  speaks  of 
three,  and  three  only.  When  St.  Paul  would  describe  the  very  dwelling-place  of 
Deity,  he  calls  it "  the  third  heaven  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  2).  What  are  the  three  heavens — 
whether  atmospheric  (nubi/erum),  sidereal  {astriferum),  and  angelic  (angeliferum), 
or  what — ^it  does  not  concern  us  to  say  ;  it  is  enough  ifor  our  purpose  that  there 
are  three.    And  three,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  the  number  and  signature  of  God. 

2.  All  the  temple  was  God^s  dAvellmg-place.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the 
oracle  was  the  abode  of  God,  the  holy  place  the  abode  of  the  people.  In  the  temple 
the  people  had  noplace.  It  was  the  "house  of  the  great  God"  (Ezra  v.  8) ;  apalace 
for  God,  and  not  for  man  (1  Chron.  xxix.  1).  "  As  the  whole  house,  so  also  each 
compartment  ._ .  .  is  called' the  dwelling-place '"  (Bahr).  Again,  the  holy  place,  as 
well  as  the  entire  sanctuary,  is  called  the  palace  (ch.  vi.  6  with  2  Kings  xxiv.  13). 
The  primary  design  of  the  temple,  as  of  the  tabernacle,  was  to  afford  a  habitation 
for  the  ark  and  for  Him  whose  covenant  it  contained. 

8.  But  the  itmer  temple  was  Ood's  shrine.  In  the  holy  of  holies.  He  was 
revealed.  He  dwelt  "  between  the  cherubim  "  (Bxod.  xxv.  22  ;  1  Sam.  iv.  4 ;  2 
Kings  xix.  15,  &c.)  The  word  Shechinah,  which  is  used  to  denote  the  Presence,  is 
derived  from  ahachan,"  he  dwelt."  So  it  is  in  heaven.  Heaven  is  God's  throne. 
(Isa.  Ixvi.  1 ;  Acts  viL  49) ;  but  there  is  a  "  heaven  of  heavens,"  where  He  is 
revealed.  True  "  the  heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  "  cannot  contain  Him,  any 
more  than  the  holy  and  the  holy  of  holies,  but  in  each  He  has  His  special  habi- 
tation.    Here  again  temple  and  temple  not  built  with  hands  are  alike. 

4.  The  temple  blazed  with  gold  amd  gems.  It  was  "  exceeding  magnifical "  as 
the  palace  of  the  Godhead.  Everything  was  appropriate  to  a  great  king.  "  Pure 
gold,"  "  gold  of  Uphaz,"  cedar,  oUve  wood,  aU  was  "for  glory  and  beauty  "  (Exod. 
xxviii.  2).  Compare  the  description  of  heaven  in  Rev.  xxi  9  sqq.  Like  a  jasper 
stone  (ver.  11) ;  pure  gold  (vers.  18,  21) ;  precious  stones  (vers.  19,  20)  ;  twelve 
pearls  (ver.  21). 

II.  In  its  furniture.  Observe  :  the  furniture  and  appointments  outside  the 
house,  in  the  court  of  the  priests— brazen  altar,  molten  sea,  lavers,  &c.—  have  no 
counterparts  in  heaven.  They  are  "  of  the  earth,  earthy."  In  the  holy  place  were 
the  altar  of  incense,  the  table  of  shewbread,  the  ten  candlesticks,  &o.  (ch.  vii. 
48—50).  In  the  most  holy  place  were  the  mercy-seat,  the  cherubim  of  glory, 
the  ark,  the  golden  censer,  &o.  And  heaven  has  its  golden  altar  (Rev.  vi.  9  ;  viii. 
8;  ix.  13),  its  incense  (Eev.  vui.  3,  4),  its  seven  lamps  (Rev.  iv.  5  ;  cf.  Exod.  xxvii. 
28  .  Zeoh  iv.  2'>.     And  for  the  table  of  shewbread,  see  Eev.  xxii.  2.     Or  if  it  be  said 


■OH.  viii,  1—66.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  167 

ihat  the  "  table  of  the  face  "  has  no  oonnterpart  in  heaven,  we  may  reply  that  it  is 
not  needed,  because  His  servants  "  see  his  face "  and  feast  upon  His  presence 
(Rev.  xxiv.  4).  Similarly  heaven  has  its  mercy-seat— the  Fount  of  Meroy  dwells 
ihere — its  cherubim  and  seraphim  (Isa.  vi.  2;  Rev.  iv.  7;  of.  Ezek.  L  10),  and  its 
golden  censer  (Rev.  viii.  8,  6).  It  has  no  ark — the  covenant  is  writ  in  the  heart  of 
the  Eternal,  as  He  now  writes  it  on  the  hearts  of  men  (Heb.  viii.  10).  But  it  has 
its  throne  (Rev.  iv.  2  ei passim),  and  the  ark  was  the  throne  of  God  (of.  Isa.  vi.  2) . 
III.  In  its  services.  Here  we  must  distinguish  between  (1)  the  service  of  the 
lioly  place,  and  (2)  the  service  of  the  Holiest  of  all.  As  to  the  former,  it  must  here 
suffice  to  say  that  it  centred  round  the  altar  of  incense.  Morning  and  evening, 
year  in,  year  out,  incense  was  burnt  upon  the  golden  altar.  And  we  have  already 
seen  that  incense  is  offered  in  heaven.  As  to  its  meaning,  lessons,  &o.,  we  have 
spoken  elsewhere  (pp.  199,200).  Let  us  turn,  therefore,  to  the  worship  of  the  most 
holy  place.    And  here  we  observe — 

1.  The  cherubim  of  glory  overshadowed  the  mercy-aeai  (Heb.  ix.  5).  Thej' 
were,  as  it  were,  choirs  on  either  side  of  the  place  of  the  Presence.  Now  the 
4:herubim  were  symbolical  representations  of  all  created  existences  (see  note  on 
ch.  vi.  29)  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  But  especially  did  they  shadow  forth  the 
highest  forms  of  intelligence,  the  celestial  beings  who  surround  the  Lord  of  glory  ; 
they  were  earthly  counterparts  of  the  heavenly  seraphim  (Isa.  vi.  2),  and  so  they 
pourtrayed,  as  far  as  was  possible,  the  worship  of  the  heavenly  hosts.  It  is  true  they 
were  silent — they  could  not  be  otherwise — but  still  they  conveyed  the  idea  of 
>eeaseless  contemplation,  of  the  most  profound  and  reverent  homage,  of  awestruck 
adoration.  Indeed,  we  only  understand  what  they  symbolized  by  comparing  the 
shadow  with  the  substance.  For  we  find  that  heaven  has  its  cherubim.  The  "foui 
beasts  (?wa)  round  about  the  throne,  fuU  of  eyes  before  and  behind  "  (Rev.  iv.  6 — 8), 
tire  clearly  the  "  very  substance"  of  those  things  of  which  Isaiah's  and-  EzekielV 
winged  oreatiures  (Isa.  vi.  2 ;  Ezek.  i.  10 ;  x.  14)  were  the  likeness,  and  of  which 
Solomon's  cherubim  were  the  copies.  The. silent,  stately  cherubim  consequently 
were  adumbrations  of  the  mysterious  hierarchy  who  ceaselessly  praise  the  Un- 
created Light  and  lead  the  worship  of  the  skies  (Rev.  iv.  8 — 11 ;  T.  8,  9, 14), 
•'  raising  their  Trisagion  ever  and  aye." 

2.  The  high  priest  entered  the  most  holy  place  onee  a  year.  The  ceremonial  of 
the  day  of  atonement  (Levit.  xvi.)  foreshadowed,  as  we  are  expressly  told  in  Heb.  ix. , 
the  entry  of  our  great  High  Priest  into  heaven  itself.  The  Jewish  high  priest, 
robed  in  spotless  white  vestments,  passed  through  the  veil  of  blue  and  purple  and 
scarlet  (Exod.  xxvi.  31)  into  the  holy  oracle,  with  the  blood  of  calves  and  goats,  &c. 
Even  so  our  unspotted  Lord,  "the  High  Priest  of  our  profession"  (Heb.  ii.  1), 
passed  through  (not  into,  SitKriKvdora)  the  blue  heavens  (Heb.  iv.  14)  into  the 
presence  of  the  Eternal,  with  His  own  blood  (ch.  ix.  12).  And  as  the  high  priest 
presented  the  tokens  of  death— as  he  sprinkled  the  blood  (which  is  the  life  of  the 
-flesh)  seven  times  before  the  mercy-seat  eastward  (Levit.  xvi.  15),  and  so  in  figure 
pleaded  the  meritorious  death  of  Him  who  should  come  to  put  away  sin,  so  does 
our  great  High  Priest  present  his  pierced  and  wounded  form — He  stands  before  the 
throne  as  a  "  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain  "  (Rev.  v.  6) — and  pleads  His  passion,  the 
•death  of  One  who  haa  come,  for  the  salvation  and  life  of  the  world.  It  may  be 
that,  like  the  high  priest,  He  utters  no  articulate  words  ;  it  may  be  that,  like  him, 
He  simply  appears  as  the  representative  of  man  to  show  the  tokens  and  pledges  of 
-atonement ;  or  it  may  be  that  as  the  incense  was  burned  when  the  blood  was 
sprinkled,  so  His  powerful  intercession,  of  which  the  incense  was  a  type,  is  joined  to 
the  silent  pleading  of  His  wounds.  But  whichever  way  it  is,  it  is  clear  that  the 
ritual  of  the  holy  of  hohes  has  its  blessed  counterpart  in  the  ritual  of  the  heaven 
of  heavens. 

Vers.  23—53. — The  Prayer  of  Dedication.  In  how  many  and  varied  ways  is 
Solomon  a  type  of  the  Divine  Solomon,  the  true  Son  of  David  (see  pp.  63,  77,  &o.) 
Even  in  this  respect  they  are  aUke— that  each  has  "  taught  us  how  to  pray  "  (Luke 
xi.  1  sqq.) 


tea  THE  FlliST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch,  viii.  1-68. 

For  we  may  be  sure  that  the  Prayer  of  Dedication  is  for  our  instruction  an4 
imitation,  otherwise  it  would  hardly  have  been  recorded,  and  recorded  at  such 
length,  in  Scripture.    "  Afterthis  manner  therefore  pray  ye"  (Matt.  vi.  9). 

I.  Laymen  may  offer  public  prayer.  This  is  no  monopoly  of  priests,  Th» 
Hebrew  king  might  not  sacrifice  or  burn  incense  (2  Chron.  xxvl.  18),  but  he  might 
lead  the  prayers  both  of  priests  and  people,  and  that  on  the  greatest  day  in  tbe 
history  of  Israel.  Even  so,  though  "  we  give  not  to  our  princes  the  ministering 
either  of  God's  word  or  of  the  sacraments  "  (Art.  xxxvii.),  still  we  do  not  deny  them 
any  "  prerogative  which  we  see  to  have  been  given  always  to  aU  godly  princes  in 
Holy  Scripture  "  (ib.),  and  least  of  all  the  prerogative  of  prayer  exercised  by  David, 
Solomon,  Asa  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11),  Jehoshaphat  {ib.,  xx.  6 — 12),  and  Hezekiab 
(i6.,  XXX.  18 — 20).    It  was  Constantino,  a  layman,  presided  at  the  Council  of  Nice. 

II.  KiNOS   SHOULD   BE   PROUD  TO  TAKE  PART  IN  RELI0I0U3   FUNCTIONS.      Whatever 

divinity  doth  hedge  them  about,  they  are  not  greater  or  wiser  than  Solomon,  and 
the  proudest  moment  of  his  life  was  when  he  led  the  ark  to  its  resting-place  ;  the 
happiest,  when  he  "  blessed  all  the  congregation  of  Israel "  (ver.  14).  Never  is 
king  so  great  as  when  he  takes  his  proper  place  before  God.  Alas  I  that  religion 
should  have  ever  been  brought  into  such  contempt  that  kings  should  be  ashamed 
or  ahraid  to  be  the  "  nursing  fathers  "  of  the  Church  (Isa.  xhx.  23).  Solomon's 
prayer  is  "  a  testimony  that  a  wisdom  which  can  no  longer  pray  is  foUy  "  (Bahr). 

III.  Prayer  should  be  preceded  by  praise.  It  was  not  until  Solomon  had 
"blessed  God  "  (ver.  15)  that  he  prayed  to  God  (vers.  23 — 53).  "  Praerrmsa  Iwude, 
invocatio  sequi  solet."  This  was  the  rule  of  the  early  Church  (see  Psa.  Ixv.  1,  2  for 
the  scriptural  order ;  of.  Phil,  i  3,  4  ;  iv.  6,  and  see  Howson's  Hulsean  Lectures, 
No.  iv.,  for  the  combination  of  thanksgiving  and  prayer  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles).  And 
Solomon  not  only  began  but  ended  with  blessing  (ver.  56). 

IV.  True  prayer  is  asking  God  for  what  we  need.  Not  rhetorical  display, 
not  sesquepedalia  verba,  not  a  mere  string  of  texts  and  hymns,  but  the  simplest, 
humblest  cry  of  the  heart.  Which  of  us  has  not  heard  prayers  like  the  Pharisee's — 
without  one  word  of  prayer  (i.e.,  petition)  in  them  ?  And  how  many  prayers  are 
made  painful  by  their  pretentiousness.  Perhaps  a  child  has  been  ordained  our 
pattern  (Matt,  xviii  2 — 4),  that  from  it  we  should  learn  to  pray.  "  In  prayer  it  is 
better  to  have  a  heart  without  words  than  words  without  a  heart "  (Bunyan). 

V.  Prayer  should  be  offered  for  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men.  Not  for 
self  only.  It  is  not  "my  Father,"  but  '^  our  Father."  Perhaps  aelfishnesa  is 
nowhere  more  conspicuous  or  more  hateful  than  in  our  prayers.  We  are  members 
one  of  another.  It  is  in  the  Pharisee's  prayer  that  we  find  so  much  "  I."  Notice 
bow  varied  were  Solomon's  petitions,  and  et  1  Tim,  ii.  1,  2,  8.    Tennysou  sa^a— 

"  For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats 
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain, 
If,  knowing  Qod,  they  lift  not  hands  in  prayer 
Both  for  themselves  and  those  u>Ao  call  them  friend  t* 

And  be  does  not  stop  there,  but  adds  that  thus 

"  the  whole  round  world 
Is  bound  by  golden  chains  around  the  feet  of  God," 

This  prayer  of  dedication  was  a  veritable  Litany  (vers.  81,  33,87,  41,44,  &o.) 

VI.  Prayer  should  be  scriptural,  i.e.,  conceived  in  the  spu-it  and  expressed  In 
the  words  of  Scripture.  This  prayer  was  pre-eminently  so  (see  notes  on  vers.  22  sqq.) 
What  St.  Cyprian  says  of  the  Lord's  prayer,  "  Quanta  efficacius  impttramus  quod 
petimus  in  Christi  nomine,  ai  petwmus  ipsiua  oratione,"  may  suggest  to  us  that 
that  prayer  is  most  likely  to  move  God's  hand  which  is  based  on  God's  Word. 
Supplication  should  be  shaped  by  revelation. 

VII.  Prayers  may  be  LiTURaiOAL.  The  Scripture  references,  its  artificial 
structure,  and  indeed  its  very  preservation,  prove  that  this  prayer  was  a  pre- 


OB.  Tiu.  1—66.]  THE  FIKSX  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  16» 

eomposed  form.    A  form  need  not  involye  formalism.    All  ChrlBtians  use  forms  of 
praise;  why  not  forms  of  prayer?  (See  Hooker,  V.  xxvl.  2.  8.) 

VIII.  OuTWABD  FORMS  ARE  NOT  TO  BE  DESPISED.  Solomoa  "  kneeled  upou  his 
knees,  with  his  hands  stretched  out  towards  heaven  "  (of.  Dan.  vi.  10  ;  Acts  vii.  60 ; 
ix.  40  ;  XX.  86  ;  xxi  5  ;  Ephes.  iii.  14,  and,  above  all,  Luke  xxii.  41  and  xxiv.  50. 
Also  Fsa.  xxviii.  2  ;  Ixiii.  4  ;  cxxxiv.  2).  BituaUsm  is  a  question  of  degree,  for  we  all 
use  some  rites.  So  long  as  we  have  bodies,  we  can  never  have  a  pii/rely  spiritual 
reUgion,  but  must  "  glorify  God  in  our  bodies  and  spirits  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  That 
forms  have  their  foundation  in  human  nature,  and  may  be  impressive  and  edifying, 
is  proved  by  the  faot  that  "  no  nation  under  heaven  either  doth  or  ever  did  suffer 
public  actions  which  are  of  weight  to  pass  without  Bome  visible  solemnity  "  (Hooker^ 
IY>  L  8),  and  for  this  reason,  that 

"  Sounds  yrhich  address  the  ear  are  lost  and  aie 
In  one  sbort  hour ;  while  that  which  strikes  the  eyt 
Lives  long  upon  the  mind  :  the  faithful  eight 
Graves  on  the  memory  with  a  beam  of  light." 

It  is  only  when  forms  usurp  the  place,  or  mar  the  reality,  of  spiritual  worship  (John 
IT.  24)  that  they  are  reaUy  reprehensible. 

Vers.  62 — 66. — The  Feast  on  the  Saeriflcea.  In  this  prodigious  number  of 
sacrifices — in  round  numbers  150,000  victims — 8,000  oxen  and  18,000  sheep  for  every 
day  of  the  festival  (Keil) ;  five  oxen  and  twenty-five  sheep  for  every  minute  of  each 
day  (Thenius) — in  this  wholesale  slaughter,  which  converted  the  court  of  the 
priests  into  one  great  shambles,  and  almost  choked  the  sewers  of  the  temple  with 
blood,' one  feature  is  liable  to  be  overlooked  (note  on  ver.  64),  namely,  that  all  these 
sacrifices  were  "peace  offerings,"  with  the  exception,  of  course,  of  the  usual  burnt 
offerings.  In  all  these — and  king  and  princes  and  people  ahke  brought  their 
thousands—  all  was  first  given  to  God,  but  the  bulk  was  given  back  by  God  to 
the  Bacrificers.  With  the  exception  of  the  fat,  &c.,  burnt  on  the  altar,  and  the 
blood  (which  was  the  life),  poured  out  at  its  base,  and  the  customary  portion  of  the 
priests  (Levit.  viL  14,  21 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  13),  all  the  rest  was  carried  home  by  the  offerer 
to  provide  a  feast  for  him  and  his  family.  The  peace  offering  was  thus  a  social 
festival  {die  feierliche  und  formliehe  Mahlneit  (Biihr,  see  his  Symbolik,  ii.  368  sqq.) 
And  the  same  remark  applies  to  the  still  greater  number — a  quarter  of  a  mUlion — of 
paschal  lambs  offered  year  by  year  in  later  times.  The  blood  was  sprinkled  as 
a  memorial  before  God,  but  the  lamb  was  roasted  entire  to  provide  a  supper  for  the 
household  (Deut.  xvi.  1 — 7).  In  all  these  sacrifices  God  graciously  entertained 
those  who  offered  them  witii  their  own  oblations — which  He<had  first  given  them — 
at  His  own  table.  And  herein  we  have  an  illustration  of  God's  gracious  way  of 
dealing  with  our  gifts  and  offerings.  He  accepts  them  at  our  hands,  but  gives  them 
back  for  our  use  and  enjoyment.  We  present  our  sacrifice,  and  He  spreads  a 
banquet  for  our  souls.  It  is  a  curious  circumstance,  and  one  that  shows  how 
entirely  this  principle  has  been  overlooked,  that  "  sacrifice,"  which  properly  means 
"something  made  sacred,"  " consecrated,"  has  come  to  be  a  synonym  for  "loss," 
"privation."  But  this  a  true  sacrifice  can  never  be.  There  is  no  such  thing  as 
giving  at  a  loss  to  the  liord  of  all.  He  insists  on  paying' us  back  a  hundred  fold. 
All  our  offerings  are  in  this  sense  peace  offerings.  He  sends  us  away  laden  with 
our  own  gifts,  "joyful  and  glad  of  heart  for  all  the  goodness  of  the  Lord"  (ver 
66).    Let  us  now  see  how  this  holds  good. 

I.  Of  the  sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Christ.  This  is  the  one  veritable  sacri- 
fice of  the  world.  Of  aU  others  it  may  be  said,  "  Of  thine  own  have  we  given 
t  hee."  He  alone  "  offered  himself  "  (Heb.  ix.  14).  "  With  his  own  blood  "  (ver.  12). 
Behold  how  this  oblation  comes  back  to  us  charged  with  blessing.  "  Onee  offered 
to  bear  the  sins  of  many  '  (ver.  28) ;  "  Having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us  " 
(ver.  12).  "  By  the  obedience  of  one  many  are  made  righteous  "  (Bom.  v.  19). 
Compare  Heb.  iL  9,  10  ;  xiL  2  ;  Phil.  ii.  6 — 11  ;  and  especially  John  x.  11, 17,  and 
Ti.  61. 


170  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  tiii.  1— (i6. 

II.  Of  the  sacrifice  of  our  bodies  (Horn.  xii.  1).  If  in  separating  the  body 
ti-om  comrDon  uses  and  yieWing  our  bodies  instruments  of  righteousness  to  God 
(Rom.  vi.  13),  we  seem  to  suffer  inconvenience,  privation,  &c.,  it  is  not  really  so. 
This  sacrifice  brings  "joy  and  gladness  of  heart."  Not  unseldom  are  we  conscious 
■of  the  present  gain.  "Virtue  is  its  own  reward."  The  "testimony  of  the  con- 
science "  is  ao  slight  recompense.  How  great,  for  example,  ia  the  guerdon  of 
purity  i 

•'  So  dear  to  Heaven  is  saintly  chastity 
That  when  a  soul  is  found  sincerely  so 
A  thousand  liveried  angels  lacquey  her, 
Driving  far  off  each  thing  of  sin  and  guilt, 
And  in  clear  dream  and  solemn  vision 
Tell  her  of  things  that  no  gross  ear  can  hear,"  &a. 

There  ia  a  story  toM  of  George  Herbert  which  shows  how  little  sacrifioeB  become 
great  feasts.  On  his  way  to  a  musical  gathering,  he  stopped  by  the  way  to  help 
a  poor  waggoner  out  of  the  ruts.  Arriving  late  and  bespattered  with  mud,  he  was 
commiserated  for  the  loss  and  inconvenience  he  had  sustained.  But  he  would  d  ot 
allow  that  it  was  loss.  "  The  remembrance,"  be  said, "  will  bring  musio  into  the 
heart  at  midnight." 

III.  Of  the  sacrifice  of  our  alms.  True,  they  are  loss  when  given  to  serve 
self,  or  for  the  praise  of  men.  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  they  hare  (i.e.,  eu-hoMst, 
cmixovaiv)  their  reward"  (Matt.  vi.  2).  Such  givers  get  what  they  bargai ned  for ; 
they  receive  "  their  good  things"  (Luke  xvi.  25).  But  then  there  was  no  oblation  to 
Ood.  A  Scottish  laird  having  put  a  crown  piece  by  mistake  into  the  plate,  asked 
for  it  back  again.  On  being  told  that  he  might  put  what  he  chose  in,  but  take 
nothing  out,  he  said,  "  Well,  well,  I  suppose  I'll  get  credit  for  it  in  heaven." 
"  Na,  na,"  was  the  just  reply,  "ye'll  only  get  credit  for  the  penny."  But  if  the  alms 
be  true  offerings  to  God,  then  they  have  both  a  present  and  an  eternal  reward. 
Present,  in  hearing  the  widow's  heart  sing  for  joy,  and  in  the  blessing  of  him  that 
wis  ready  to  perish  "  (Job  xxix.  13) ;  eternal,  in  that  "  God  is  not  unrighteous  to 
forget,"  &o.  (Heb.  vi.  10),  and  that  a  "  cup  of  cold  water  only  "  shall  in  no  wise  lose 
its  reward  (Matt.  z.  42).  Such  gifts  are  the  truest  and  safest  investmeuts  (ProT. 
xix.  17). 

••  We  lose  what  on  ourselves  we  spend, 
We  have  as  treasure  ■without  end 
Whatever,  Lord,  to  Thee  we  lend." 

There  is  on  record  an  admirable  prayer  of  Thomas  Sutton,  the  picas  founder  of 
the  Charterhouse,  "0  'Lord,  Thou  hast  given  me  a  large  estate,  give  me  a  la/rge 
hewrt."    We  cannot  lose  what  we  give  away. 

IV.  Of  the  sacrifice  of  our  oblations.  We  use  "  oblations "  here  in  the 
liturgical  sense  of  the  word,  i.e.,  of  the  oblations  of  bread  and  wine  in  the  Holy 
Communion.  For  these  were  anciently,  and  should  be  stiU,  solemnly  offered  to 
■God,  as  our  thank-offerings,  as  a  sort  of  first-fi-uits  of  His  creatures.  And  now  con- 
sider how  they  are  given  back  to  us.  "  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not 
the  communion  {mivotvia,  the  joint  participation  in)  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  the  brea  d 
which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  conununion  of  the  body  of  Christ?  "  (1  Cor.  x.  16.) 
We  have  presented  to  the  Divine  Majesty  bread  and  wine,  and  He  gives  us  in 
return  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  (i6.,  xi.  24,  25). 

V.  Or  THE  sacrifice  of  worldly  prospects,  &o.  Men  often  speak  of  the 
aucrifices  they  have  had  to  make  for  the  sake  of  their  religion.  And  time  was 
when  great  sacrifices  were  demanded ;  these  are  sometimes  demanded  still.  But 
they  involve  no  loss,  no  real  and  abidinp;  injury.  On  the  contrary,  they  are 
actually,  and  in  the  long  run,  a  gain.  "  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  houses, 
or  brethren,  or  sisters,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands,  for  my 
flake  and  the  gospel's,  but  he  shall  receive  an  hundredfold  now  in  this  time, 
houses,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  and  mothers,  and  children,  and  lands,  with  per- 
secutions ;  and  in  the  world  to  ccme  eternal  life  "  (Mark  x.  29,  30).    On  which 


OH.  vnL  1—66.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  171 

Bengel  beautifully  remarks  that  nature  gives  us  each  but  one  father  and  one 
mother,  but  the  Church  gives  us  many.  (Of.  Bom.  xvi.  13.)  "  What  shall  I  do," 
said  Amaziah,  "  for  the  hundred  talents  which  I  have  given  to  the  army  of 
Israel?  "  "And  the  man  of  God  answered,  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much 
more  than  this  "  (2  Chron.  xxv.  9).  Who  had  made  more  sacrifices  than  St. 
Paul  ?  And  yet  who  was  it  wrote  of  "  having  nothing,  yet  possessing  all  things  ?  " 
(2  Cor.  vi.  10).  The  man  who  had  such  loved  and  loving  Mends  as  Bom.  xvi. 
proves  him  to  have  had,  cannot  be  called  poor.  Well  might  he  write,  "I  have 
all  and  abound  "  (Phil.  iv.  18).  The  sacrifices  he  had  made  procured  him  a  con- 
tinual feast.  It  is  the  same  with  all  our  sacrifices.  The  Great  King  cannot  receive 
gifts,  but  he-  must  return  them  "according  to  his  royal  bounty"  (1  Kings  x.  13). 
The  Greatest  Giver  in  the  world  will  never  be  outdone  in  generosity  by  king 
Solomon.  (A  beautiful  illustration  of  the  leading  thought  of  this  homily  wiU  be 
found  in  one  of  Mrs.  Gatty's  "  Parables  from  Nature,"  called  "  The  Circle  of  Bless- 
ing," 2ud  series,  6th  ed.,pp,  6  sqq.) 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  6. — The  Ark  of  the  Covenant.  The  ark  was  the  heart  of  the  temple.  For 
it  the  shrine  was  erected.  It  was  regarded  as  the  throne  of  Jehovah.  Hence 
the  reverence  with  which  it  was  approached.  In  itself  the  ark  was  not  very  re- 
markable. It  was  a  chest  2^  cubits  long,  and  1^  cubits  deep  and  broad,  made  of 
wood  covered  with  gold ;  the  lid,  called  "  the  mercy-seat,"  being  of  pure  gold, 
having  the  cherubim  at  its  ends.  For  its  construction  see  Exod.  xxv.,  where  it  is 
placed  first  as  the  most  important  of  aU  the  furniture  of  the  tabernacle.  Describe 
its  coimeotion  with  the  people's  entrance  to  Canaan,  leading  them  through  the 
Jordan,  and  heading  the  procession  round  Jericho.  A  superstitious  sanctity  was 
attached  to  it  later.  The  outward  symbol  was  supposed  to  have  the  efiicacy  which 
belonged  only  to  that  which  it  symbolized.  It  was  carried  into  battle  (1  Sam.  iv.) 
under  this  delusion,  but  the  ark  could  not  save  a  people  fi:om  whom  God  had 
withdrawn.  Their  superstition  was  rebuked  by  the  defeat  of  the  army,  and  the 
capture  by  the  Philistines  of  the  ark  itself.  Show  how  often  in  Church  history  the 
sign  has  been  substituted  for  the  thing  signified,  to  the  injury  of  God's  cause. 
Though  the  superstitious  belief  in  the  ark  was  always  rebuked,  its  sanctity  was 
vindicated :  by  its  avenging  progress  through  the  cities  of  PhiUstia,  and  by  the 
punishment  of  Uzzah.  Moreover,  a  blessing  came  with  it  to  those  who  received  it 
aright,  e.g.,  to  the  house  of  Obed-Edom.  The  ark  had  been  brought  up  to  Jerusalem 
by  David  amid  national  rejoicing  and  placed  in  a  tent  prepared  for  it ;  now  it 
found  its  abiding  place  in  Solomon's  temple.  Thfowing  on  the  ark  the  hght  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  let  us  remind  ourselves  of  certain  religious  truths  to  which 
it  bore  silent  witness.  These  wiU  be  suggested  by  the  contents  of  the  ark,  by  its 
covering,  by  the  mode  of  approaching  it,  and  by  its  uses  in  worship. 

I.  The  akk  suggested  that  the  covenant  bested  on  law.  The  safe  custody  of 
the  material  tables  of  stone  impUed  the  moral  observance  of  the  precepts  inscribed 
on  them.  "  There  was  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables  of  stone,"  &c.  (If 
we  are  to  understand  Heb.  ix.  4  as  asserting  that  Aaron's  rod  and  the  pot  of 
manna  were  actually  inside  the  ark,  they  had  probably  disappeared  by  Solomon's 
time.)  The  term  "  a  covenant "  is  only  used  by  way  of  accommodation,  when  applied 
to  the  relation  between  man  and  God.  Such  a  "  covenant"  is  merely  a  promise, 
which  God  makes  dependent  on  the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions  ;  e.g.,  the 
promise  after  the  flood  is  called  a  "  covenant."  So  the  covenant  of  Sinai  was  a 
promise  on  God's  part,  conditioned  by  the  observance  of  the  ten  commandments  on 
man's  part.  This  was  proclaimed  by  the  presence  of  the  tables  of  the  law  in  the 
ark  of  the  covenant.  Show  from  Scripture  and  experience  that  bliss  is  conditioned 
by  obedience.     There  is  nothing  lawless  either  in  morals  or  in  nature. 

II.  The  ark  proclaimed  that  uebct  came  between  man  and  the  bboken  law. 
"  The  mercy-seat "  covered  "  the  tables."     The  value  of  mercy  was  typified  by  the 


172  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  vm.  1— CU. 

pnre  gold  of  the  oapporeth.  Exhibit  the  necessity  of  mercy  to  men  who  are  prone 
to  evQ  and  forgetful  of  good.  Illustrate  it  from  God's  dealings  with  Israel,  and 
Christ's  goodness  to  His  disciples.  The  publican  struck  the  keynote  of  true  prayei 
when  he  exclaimed,  "God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner!"  Compare  Psalm  H 
Show  how  the  sense  of  our  want  of  mercy  grows  with  our  sensibility  to  the  sinful- 
ness of  sin.     Paul  the  apostle  an  example  of  this  :  "  of  sinners  I  am  the  chief 

III.  The   ABE  DECLARED  THAT   AN   ATONEMENT   UADE   MERCY   POSSIBLE.      DeSClibe 

the  day  of  atonement ;  the  sacrifice  offered ;  the  high  priest  entering  the  holy  of 
holies  with  the  blood  which  he  sprinkled  on  the  mercy-seat.  Even  he  could  only 
draw  near  to  the  meroy-seat  after  the  sacrifice  (compare  Eeb.  ix.)  "  Without  the 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  Apply  this  to  the  sacrifice  of  "  the  Lamb 
of  God,"  who  was  "  wounded  for  our  transgressions,"  whose  "  blood  cleanseth  from 
all  sin."  Describe  him  as  the  High  Priest  in  the  Holiest  of  all,  having  opened  the 
way  for  all  sinners  to  the  abounding  mercy  of  God. 

IV.  The  abk  ENConsAOED  men  to  draw  neab  to  Goo.  The  law  (represented  by 
ihe  tables)  was  broken ;  but  the  mercy  of  God  (represented  by  the  capporeth)  was 
revealed  ;  and  the  atonement  ^represented  by  the  sprinkled  blood)  was  provided ; 
so  that  God  fulfilled  His  promise  about  the  meroy-seat.  "  There  will  I  commwne 
with  thee." 

Apply  the  teaching  of  this  subject  to  those  conscious  of  guilt,  burdened  by 
sorrow,  &c.  "  Let  us,  therefore,  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we 
may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need." — A.  B. 

Vers,  10, 11. — TJie  Presence  of  the  Lord  in  the  House  of  the  Lord.  The  Shechinah, 
which  is  here  referred  to,  was  a  most  brilliant  and  glorious  light,  usually  concealed 
by  a  cloud ;  a  fit  emblem,  therefore,  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  light  and  of  glory, 
who  is  veiled  from  His  creatures.  As  the  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence, 
"  the  pUlar  of  cloud  and  fire,"  had  gone  before  Israel  in  the  vyilderness,  proving  theii 
guide  and  defence.  Suddenly  and  mysteriously  it  appeared  in  the  new  temple  of 
Solomon,  at  the  festival  of  dedication,  giving  Divine  sanction  to  the  work,  and 
assuring  all  beholders  that  Jehovah  had  made  that  His  dwelling-place.  Not  only 
was  the  holy  of  holies  filled  vidth  the  cloud,  but  the  holy  place  also,  indeed,  the 
whole  building  was  permeated  by  it,  so  that  all  the  building  was  henceforth  holy. 
The  signs  of  the  Divine  presence  are  different  now,  but  the  reahty  of  it  may  be  con- 
sciously felt.  "  Where  two  or  three  are  met  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the 
midst  of  them."  The  New  Testament  counterpart  of  this  manifestation  is  found  in 
the  upper  room  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  "  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from 
heaven  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  it  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were 
sitting "  (Acts  ii.  2).  Compare  these  two  manifestations :  the  splendour  of  the 
temple,  with  the  poverty  of  the  upper  room ;  the  narrowness  of  national  rejoicing, 
with  the  breadth  of  world-wide  preaching,  &o.  Let  us  seek  the  changeless  inward 
truth  underlying  the  changeful  outward  form  which  embodies  it. 

I.  The  pebpaeation  fob  the  Divine  presence.  Bead  the  account  of  that 
which,  on  the  part  of  the  people,  had  preceded  this  display.  1,  Sacred  memories 
were  recalled.  The  worn  tent,  the  ark,  the  holy  vessels,  had  just  been  brought  in 
(ver.  4),  and  glorious  yet  tender  associations  were  connected  with  each.  The 
revival  of  old  impressions  made  in  youth,  &o.,  makes  the  heart  sensitive  to  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Give  examples.  2.  Divine  law  was  enthroned.  "  Nothing  in  the 
ark  save  the  two  tables  of  stone  "  (ver.  9).  Disobedience  to  God's  commands,  for- 
getfulness  of  them,  unfits  us  for  seeing  Him.  It  deteriorates  character,  debases  the 
heart.  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  ?  he  that  bath  clean  hands 
and  a  pure  heart,"  &c.  8.  Ood's  claiins  were  recognized.  By  the  completion  oi 
the  temple,  by  the  multitudinous  sacrifices  (ver.  5).  The  willingness  to  give  our- 
selves up  to  God  prepares  us  to  see  Him  as  our  God.  Not  the  intellectual  research, 
but  the  rev  erent  submission  discovers  Him.  "  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become 
as  Uttle  ch  ildren,  ye  shall  not  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  "  He  that  doeth 
Uie  wiU  of  ™y  Father  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  "  We  beseech  you,  there- 
fore, brethi  ^^t  ^7  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  yoorBelTes  a  living  sacrifice," 


CH.  vni.  1—66.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  178 

&o.  4.  Earnest  prwyers  were  offered.  Solomon's  prayer,  which  follows,  was  but 
the  formal  and  public  utterance  of  many  secret  prayers  on  the  part  of  himself 
and  others.  See  how  often  he  spoke  to  God  about  this  building,  and  how  often 
God  spoke  to  him.  He  and  his  people  prayed  above  all  things  that  the  special 
glory  of  the  tabernacle  might  be  granted  to  the  temple.  Now  the  prayers  were 
answered.  "  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,"  &c.  The  apostles  expected  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  but  in  order  to  receive  the  fulfilment  of  the  Lord's  promise,  "  they  continued, 
with  one  accord,  in  prayer  and  supplication." 

II.  The  effects  of  the  Divine  presence.  We  do  not  refer  to  the  special  and 
immediate  effects  of  the  cloud,  but  to  the  moral  and  religious  effect  of  the  presence 
thus  symbolized.  1.  H  restored  significance  to  old  symbols.  The  ark  had  lost 
much  of  its  SQUotity  in  the  eyes  of  the  people,  as  the  conduct  of  Uzzah  showed. 
This  naturally  arose  from  its  frequent  removals,  its  uncovering,  its  capture  by  the 
Philistines,  and  most  of  all  from  the  absence  of  the  Shechinah.  Now  the  old 
veneration  was  restored  to  it,  because  its  real  significance  was  re-established. 
Apply  this  thought  to  churches,  to  their  organizations,  to  their  sacraments,  &c. 
How  often  these  are  like  the  cloudless  ark.  They  want  the  realized  presence  of 
God  to  make  them  vivid  with  life.  2.  It  testified  to  God's  acceptance  of  the  new 
building.  Eeverence  and  awe  fell  on  all  the  worshippers.  True  "  consecration  " 
arises  from  the  signs  of  the  Divine  presence  given  to  the  faithful.  The  conversion 
of  a  sinner,  the  uplifting  of  a  fallen  disciple,  &c.,  these  are  the  evidences  we  look 
for  that  worship  and  work,  place  and  people,  are  accepted  of  God.  S.  It  confirmed 
the  faith  of  some,  and  inspired  foAth  in  others.  From  childhood  they  had  been 
told  of  the  appearance  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  olden  days.  Now,  for  the  first 
time,  they  saw  it,  and  doubt  vanished  before  the  Ught.  A  great  turning  to  God  on 
the  part  of  the  unrighteous,  or  some  similar  spiritual  evidence  of  the  Divine  power 
amongst  us,  would  do  more  than  all  controversy  to  destroy  scepticism.  4.  It  pro- 
claimed  Ood's  readiness  to  hear  prayer.  With  what  confidence  Solomon  ccAikl 
pray  after  this  I  The  realization  that  God  is  near  us  is  oiu:  highest  encourage- 
ment to  speak  to  Him.  "  Because  he  hath  heard  me  in  time  past,  therefore  will  1 
caU  upon  him  as  long  as  I  live." 

If  such  be  the  glory  and  bliss  of  God's  presence  on  earth,  what  will  it  be  to 
stand  before  His  throne  in  heaven  ? — ^A.  B. 

Vers.  10,  llo — The  Glory-cloud. — Never  did  Solomon  appear  so  much  "in 
all  bis  glory  "  as  on  this  memorial  day  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple.  The 
solemnities  of  the  service,  the  procession  of  the  sacred  ark  from  the  city  of  David 
into  its  resting-place,  the  robed  priests,  the  rapturous  multitude,  the  unnumbered 
sacrifices,  the  music  and  the  songs,  must  have  formed  altogether  a  marvellous 
spectacle.  But  of  all  the  incidents  of  the  day  none  could  be  compared  with  that 
of  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  Shechinah — the  glory-cloud.  This  introduced  a 
new  supernatural  element.  The  rest  was  human — man's  handiwork,  man's  wor- 
ship, man's  glory;  this  was  Divine — the  miraculous  sign  of  the  present  and 
approving  God.  It  raises  the  scene  above  comparison  with  any  similar  scene  in  the 
history  of  any  other  nation.  Other  peoples  have  reared  their  gorgeous  temples,  and 
kings  and  priests  have  gone  in  solemn  pomp  and  circumstance  to  consecrate  them. 
But  what  shrine  has  ever  been  honoured  like  this  ?  Altars  to  false  gods  innumer- 
able have  been  reared,  but  where  has  been  the  fire  from  heaven  to  kindle  their 
sacrifices?  Idol  temples  dedicated — ^where  the  radiant  cloud  of  the  Divine  pre- 
sence ?  The  priests  were  too  much  dazzled  by  the  shining  splendour  to  continue 
their  ministrations.  Solomon  might  well  be  filled  with  .adoring  wonder.  "  Bui 
will  God  indeed?"  &c.  (ver.  27).  Many  Scripture  examples  of  the  way  in  which 
miraculous  revelations  of  the  presence  of  God  overawe  the  spirits  of  men :  Jacob 
at  Bethel,  Moses  before  the  burning  bush,  Elijah  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  the 
disciples  of  Christ  on  the  Mount  of  Transfigm'ation,  &c.  Solomon's,  however,  was 
not  so  much  an  emotion  of  fear,  but  of  sacred  reverence  and  glad  surprise.  The 
appearance  of  the  elond  set  the  seal  of  Divine  acceptance  on  the  temple  and  its 
service,  linking  it  with  all  the  glorious  associations  of  the  past — the  climax  and 


174  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  vm.  1—66. 

crown  of  a  long  series  (900  years  long,  perhaps)  of  miracnlotis  Divine  manifesta- 
tions. But  look  on  it  now  as  prophetic  of  a  more  glorious  future,  as  imaging  forth 
to  the  men  of  that  age  higher  forms  of  Divine  manifestation  that  in  the  fulness  of 
time  should  come  to  pass. 

I.  The  incaenation  of  Christ.  When  the  eternal  Son  of  the  Father  laid 
aside  the  "  form  of  God,"  and  took  upon  Him  "  the  Ukeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  He 
filled  the  temple  of  a  human  body  with  the  Divine  glory.  God  came  to  dwell  in 
very  deed  "  amongst  men  upon  the  earth."  The  Infinite  Unseen  submitted  to  the 
conditions  of  a  finite  visible  personality.  The  Light  insufferable,  "  which  no  man 
can  approach  unto,"  veiled  itself  in  a  cloud  of  mortal  flesh.  "  We  beheld  his 
glory,"  &c.  (John  i.  14).  When  the  second  temple  was  being  built,  many  of  the 
people  were  troubled  at  the  thought  that  it  would  be  so  inferior  to  the  first.  The 
old  men  who  had  "  seen  the  first  house  "  wept  (Ezra  iii.  12 ;  Haggai  ii.  3).  But 
the  prophets  of  the  time  were  commissioned  to  comfort  them  with  the  assurance 
that,  though  the  old  s3mibolic  grandeur  was  gone,  the  glory  of  the  latter  house 
shonld  be  greater  than  that  of  the  former.  It  would  contain  no  ark,  no  mercy 
seat,  no  Shechinah,  no  heaven-kindled  fire,  no  Urim  and  Thummim,  no  prophetic- 
spirit  ;  "  Ichabod  "  would  be  written  on  its  walls.  But  a  nobler  Presence  than  had 
ever  been  seen  on  earth  before  would  irradiate  it  in  the  coming  time  :  "  Behold  I 
will  send  my  messenger,"  &e.  (Mai.  iii.  1);  "Yet  once,  it  is  a  wbUe,  and  I  will 
shake  the  heavens,"  &c.  (Haggai  ii.  6,  7).  Every  time  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Father's  glory,"  entered  the  temple — as  a  babe  in  His  mother's  arms, 
as  a  boy  girding  Himself  for  His  "  Father's  business,"  as  a  man  in  the  fulness  o( 
His  Divine  authority,  purging  it  from  defilement,  expounding  in  it  the  law  of 
acceptable  worship,  making  it  the  centre  of  His  beneficent  healing  ministry — He 
verified  in  some  new  form  these  prophetic  words.  The  manifestations  of  the 
present  Deity  in  the  olden  times  "  have  no  glory  in  this  respect  by  reason  of  tlie 
glory  that  excelleth,"  even  "the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ."  Do  we  ask,  "  Will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  ?  "  &c.,  the  answei 
comes  back  to  us,  "  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,  God  was  manifest,"  &c. 
(1  Tim.  iii.  16),  "  Immanuel,  God  with  us "  (Matt.  L  23).  That  outshining 
radiance  in  the  temple  was  dazzling,  almost  repellent,  deepening  the  sense  oJ 
distance,  creating  fear ;  this  Divine  apocalypse  is  infinitely  attractive,  gives  un- 
mistakable proof  of  sympathetic  personal  uearnesB,  awakens  grateful,  trustful,  and 
adoring  love. 

IL  The  gift  of  the  Spirit.  The  manifestation  of  God  in  the  person  of  His 
Son  was  preparatory  to  the  richer  grace — the  actual  impartation  of  Himself  by 
His  Spirit  to  the  individual  souls  of  men  (see  Eph.  iv.  8  sqq. ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16). 
The  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  is  the  ultimate  fact.  In  this  God  communieates 
Himself  in  the  highest  form  of  revelation,  and  the  most  intimate  fellowship  of 
which  man  is  capable.  The  "  dwelling "  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  every  new-born 
soul,  in  every  assembly  of  true  spiritual  worshippers,  in  the  "  one  body  "  of  the 
universal  Church,  is  prefigured  in  the  scene  before  us.  The  day  of  the  dedication 
of  the  temple  finds  its  antitype  in  the  "  day  of  Pentecost."  Place  these  manifesta- 
tions side  by  side.  As  you  trace  the  lines  of  comparison  between  them,  how 
glorious  does  the  Christian  fact  appear  I  The  one  was  material  in  its  nature — a 
bright  and  beautiful  vision  for  the  eye,  appealing  indirectly  through  the  senses  to 
the  soul ;  the  other  intensely  spiritual — a  blessed  ovei-poweiing  influence,  seizing  at 
once  on  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  people,  the  flowing  in  of  a  Divine  Ufa.  And 
though  there  was  something  for  the  eye  and  ear,  its  form  was  such  as  to  suggest 
most  strikingly  that  hving  word  of  truth  and  holy  fire  of  love  which  the  heart 
alone  can  know.  The  one  was  diffuse,  general,  indiscriminate — a  bright,  scattered 
cloud  filling  the  place ; — the  other  was  distinct  and  personal.  The  Spirit  of  God 
deals  not  with  companies  of  men,  but  with  isolated  souls.  There  was  a  separate 
tongue_  of  flame  on  the  head  of  each.  Not  the  place  merely,  but  the  men,  each 
according  to  his  own  individuality,  was  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  one 
manifestation  concealed  more  than  it  revealed.  It  was  the  sign  of  God's  presence, 
but  it  made  the  people  feel  that  He  is  indeed  a  "  God  that  hideth  himself."    They 


flB.  vui.  1—66.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  174 

eould  not  really  "  behold  Lis  glory."  They  "  saw  through  a  glass  " — a  cloud — 
"  darkly."  The  "  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,''  though  it  did  not  remove  fleshly 
restrictions,  brought  in  that  blessed  condition  of  things  in  which  the  soul  has  such 
a  thrilling  sense  of  Divine  communion  as  scarcely  to  need  any  material  help  to  the 
apprehension  of  it,  and  almost  to  forget  the  intervening  veil.  The  one  manifesta- 
tion was  local  and  exclusive,  confined  to  the  central  shrine  of  Jewish  worship,  dis- 
tinguishing the  Jewish  people  from  aU  the  world  besides ;  "  to  them  belonged  the 
glory."  The  grace  of  the  Spirit  is  God's  free  gift  to  all  mankind,  "  shed  on  ua 
abundantly"  (Joel  ii.  28;  Acts  x.  45  ;  Titus  iii.  5).  The  Spirit  is  the  exclusive 
possession  of  none  of  the  churches,  owns  no  human  creed,  or  ritual,  or  ecclesi- 
astical boundary  rather  than  another,  dwells  with  all  who  call  upon  the  same 
redeeming  Lord.  The  one  manifestation  was  transitory,  served  a  temporary  pur- 
pose. The  "  glory  "  soon  departed  again,  and  returned  to  the  heaven  from  whence 
it  camb.  The  other  is  an  enduring  reality.  The  Comforter,  the  Spirit  of  Truth, 
"  abides  with  us  for  ever,"  the  spring  of  an  imperishable  life,  the  pledge  and  pro- 
phecy of  the  unfading  glory  of  God's  unveiled  presence. — W. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — The  Unfulfilled  Purposes  of  Life.  Men  often  take  credit  to 
themselves  for  the  designs  of  others.  An  inventor  is  forgotten,  having  died  in 
obscurity,  while  others  make  fortunes  from  that  secret  which  he  won  by  the  sacri- 
fices of  ease,  strength,  and  time.  [Give  other  examples  of  the  non-recognition  by 
men  of  purposes  and  schemes  which  were  unfulfilled  by  their  originators.]  Solomon 
showed  himself  to  be  truthful  and  magnanimous  when,  in  the  presence  of  his 
people,  he  ascribed  to  his  father  the  inception  of  the  building  which  now  stood 
before  them  in  its  splendour.  How  much  more  ready  is  God,  who  knows  the 
hearts  of  all  men,  to  recognize  and  reward  the  imfulfiUed  longings  of  men  to  serve 
Him  I  Briefly  indicate  the  reasons  which  made  it  unsuitable  that  David  should 
personally  do  this  special  service  (compare  2  Sam.  vii.  with  1  Chron.  xxii.  8).  He 
stood  not  alone  in  his  disappointment,  therefore  the  following  thoughts  which  arise 
from  considering  it  may  help  others  to  bear  the  unfulfilled  purposes  of  their  lives. 

I.  David  peoposed  to  do  some  great  thing  foe  his  God.  We  too  often  seek  to 
effect  great  things  for  ourselves,  or  for  our  children,  rather  than  for  God.  David 
wiished  to  erect  the  temple.  It  was  to  be  (1)  an  expression  of  his  own  gratitude  for  his 
election,  protection,  and  exaltation.  (2)  A  memorial  to  the  people  of  the  Divine 
goodness  which  had  so  wondrously  constituted  them  as  a  nation.  (3)  A  recognition 
that  God  was  the  centre  of  the  nationality,  as  His  temple  was  of  the  city.  As  to 
it  all  the  tribes  should  repair,  so  to  Him  should  all  their  hearts  be  turned.  Suggest 
some  of  the  tendencies  which  binder  men  from  indulging  and  accomplishing  great 
purposes  for  God  ;  e.g.)  the  love  of  money,  self-indulgence,  materialism,  scepticism. 

II.  David  had  it  in  his  heaet  to  do  much  foe  the  benefit  of  others.  He 
lived  for  his  people.  He  shrunk  neither  from  the  perils  of  war  nor  the  anxieties  of 
rule  that  they  niight  become  a  strong  and  noble  nation.  He  did  not  wish  to  build 
the  temple  for  himself,  but  for  them  and  their  children.  Had  he  been  allowed  to 
begin  it  (when  alone  he  was  able  to  do  so)  in  extreme  old  age,  he  would  probably 
never  have  seen  its  completion ;  but  he  was  content  that  generations  yet  to  come 
should  have  that  as  their  place  of  worship.  Rebuke  the  tendency  of  men  to  ignore 
their  responsibility  to  posterity.  Sometimes  in  national  finance,  in  ecclesiastical 
arrangements,  &c.,  the  fact  that  the  benefit  would  only  lie  in  the  future  and  not  in . 
the  present,  is  enough  to  check  effort  and  sacrifice.  Who  has  not  heard  the 
question,  "  What  has  posterity  done  for  us  ?  "  Show  the  fallacy  of  this  reasoning, 
and  its  sinfalness,  because  of  the  selfishness  and  ingratitude  it  reveals.  Indicate 
some  of  the  blessings  we  enjoy  as  a  nation,  and  as  churches,  from  the  labours  and 
sacrifices  of  our  predecessors  who  did  not  count  even  life  dear  to  them. 

III.  David  was  prevented  by  cieoumstanoes  from  FUiFiLLiNa  his  purpose. 
Wars,  unsettlement,  infirmities  of  age,  &c.,  were  some  of  these.  They  were  beyond 
his  control,  but  not  beyond  God's.  Still  the  purpose  was,  as  we  have  said,  a  right 
one.  Give  examples  firom  modern  life  :  e.g.,  (1)  The  young  man  who  longs  to  be- 
come a  minister  of  God' s  truth,  but  is  compelled  to  labour  for  the  support  of  himself 


176  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [ch.  viii.  1— 6«. 

and  others.  (2).  The  Christian  whose  heart  goes  out  with  yearning  over  the  lost, 
who  lies  a  helpless  invalid  in  some  solitary  room.  (3)  The  child-disoiple,  stirred 
with  noble  enthusiasm,  with  splendid  promise  of  future  power  in  the  Lord's 
kingdom,  taken  away  in  youth  from  the  home  and  the  world  which  seemed  so 
•orely  to  want  him,  &c. 

IV.  David  made  it  possible  foe  othebs  to  do  what  he  could  not  do.  See 
an  account  given  of  the  treasures  he  accumulated  for  the  house  of  the  Lord,  the 
musicnl  service  he  prepared,  the  plans  for  the  building,  &c.  How  unlike  those  who 
say,  "  if  I  cannot  do  this  no  one  else  shall ; "  or,  with  less  selfishness,  "  /  cannot  do 
it,  let  others  take  aU  the  burden  if  they  are  to  have  all  the  honour.  "  Show  how 
we  can  help  others  in  doing  their  work,  and  so  indirectly  serve  otur  God.  It  may  not 
be  possible  for  you  to  go  abroad  amongst  the  heathen  ;  but  you  can  support  those 
to  whom  it  is  possible.  Perhaps  you  cannot,  from  want  of  time,  or  suitability,  teach 
the  children  or  visit  the  sick ;  but  you  cam  invite  others  to  do  this,  or  encourage 
and  sustain  them  in  it. 

V.  David's  noble  purpose  was  fulfilled  by  his  son.  This  was  God's  design 
and  promise  (ver.  19).  (1)  Encouragement  to  pa/rents.  We  live  again  in  our 
children.  "  Instead  of  the  fathers  shall  be  the  children,"  &c.  By  training  a  child 
for  God,  we  may  carry  out,  through  him,  the  wish  we  could  not  execute.  Parents 
multiply  tiius  the  possibilities  of  their  own  hves.  Special  encouragement  here  for 
weak  and  overburdened  mothers.  They  cannot  do  public  work  for  Christ,  but 
through  their  children  they  can,  e.g.,  Eunice  and  Monica  moved  the  world  through 
Timothy  and  Augustine.  (2)  Lesson  to  children.  What  your  parents  used  to  do 
for  God,  you  are  to  continue ;  what  they  could  not  do,  you  are  to  fulfil. 

VI.  David's  unaccomplished  purpose  was  recognized  and  recompensed  by 
the  Lord.  "  Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  Tiear^."  God  knows  what  is  in 
us  of  good  as  well  as  of  evU.  He  approves  the  motive  eTen  when  the  effort  fails. 
He  sees  the  issue  of  every  right  purpose  in  all  its  width  and  depth.  When  Mary 
anointed  her  Lord  she  did  more  than  she  imagined ;  for  she  was  the  high  priest 
anointing  the  Priest  and  King  of  Israel.  In  the  day  of  judgment  the  righteous  will 
be  amazed  at  the  issues  and  the  rewards  of  their  humble  services,  and  with 
astonishment  will  ask,  "Lord,  when  saw  we  thee?"  &c.  "And  the  king  shall 
answer,  and  say  unto  them.  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it 
onto  one  of  the  least  of  these,  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me." — A.  B. 

Vers.  28. — The  Prayer  of  Dedication.  Describe  the  scene  at  the  dedication  of 
the  temple.  Note  the  tact  that  it  is  a  king  who  leads  his  people  to  God's  footstool. 
Show  the  influence  of  earthly  rulers,  who  not  only  affect  surrounding  nations  by 
their  policy,  but  degrade  or  exalt  the  moral  life  of  their  people  by  their  personal 
character,  and  by  the  tone  of  their  court.  Our  reasons  for  thankfulness  in  the  present 
reign.  Contrast  the  influence  of  Victoria  vrith  that  of  Charles  II.  or  George  IV. 
Apply  the  same  principle  to  other  kings  of  men,  i.e.,  to  rulers  of  thought  in  litera- 
ture and  science.  How  heavy  the  responsibility  of  those  who  use  their  kingliness 
to  lead  men  from  God  into  the  dreariness  of  scepticism ;  how  glorious  the  powers 
they  may  employ  to  exalt  the  Lord  our  God.  Solomon  is  a  proof  that  wisdom 
is  better  than  knowledge.  On  this  occasion  he  prayed  as  the  representative  and 
leader  ot  others.  A  prayer  so  prominent  in  Scripture,  so  remarkable  in  circum- 
stances, so  acceptable  to  God,  deserves  consideration,  that  we  may  see  its  elements 
It  presents  the  following  characteristics  : 

I..  Grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  past.  "In  everything  give  thanks'' 
(1  Thess.  V.  18).  "  By  prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  make  your 
requests  known"  (PhU.  iv.  6).  "  It  is  a  good  thing  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord" 
(Psa.  xcii.  1).  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits  " 
(Psa.  ciii.  2.)  Notice  the  causes  of  Solomon's  thanksgiving :  (1)  Ood?s  goodness  to 
his  father  (ver.  24).  Home  blessings  so  whoUy  unmerited,  so  richly  beneficial. 
(2)_  Divine  delvoerance  from  bondage  (ver.  61).  Eg^t  a  type  of  sorrow,  slavery  to 
evil  habit,  *0;  (3)  Separation  amd  consecration  for  Qod^s  purposes  (ver.  63).  The 
honour  of  this.     Its  responsibilities.    Its  ficns.     (4)  Tiest  and  quietude  (ver.  56). 


OH.  vm,  1— 66.J  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  177 

"  He  hath  given  rest  unto  his  people  Israel."  The  blessedness  of  peace  to  a  conntry, 
exemplified  by  the_  contrast  between  Solomon's  and  David's  reigns.  The  freedom 
from  harassing  anxieties  experienced  by  many  is  from  God.  The  rest  of  heart,  which 
may  be  ours  amidst  the  distresses  of  life,  is  from  Him.  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you  " 
(John  xiv.  27).  "  Heart  quiet  from  the  fear  of  evil"  (Prov.  i.  83).  See  also  2  Cor.  iy. 
8.    For  all  saoh  blessings  we  should  give  God  thanks. 

II.  CoNFiDENOB  IN  THE  PBOMisES.  (See  ver.  29  as  example.)  Show  how  the 
patriarchs  ever  reminded  God  of  His  promises.  Illustrate  also  from  the  pleadings 
of  Moses  and  the  prophets.  Prove  from  Christ's  own  words  that  the  promises  are 
renewed  and  enlarged  for  us,  and  that  only  on  them  can  our  expectancy  of  blessing 
be  founded.  The  utility  of  prayer  cannot  be  demonstrated  by  reason,  but  by  reve- 
lation. In  the  spiritual  realm  we  know  Divine  laws  by  Divine  declaration,  the  truth 
of  which  is  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  those  who,  fulfilling  the  required  condi- 
tions, test  them.  "  Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you  "  (Matt.  vii.  7)  is  a  promise.  But 
appended  to  it  is  the  requirement  of  faith.  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God  "  (Heb.  xi.  6).  "  According  to  your  feith,  so  be  it  vmto  you."  See  also 
James  i.  6 — ^  ;  Matt.  xxi.  22,  &c. 

III.  Enlargement  of  heart  (ver.  41,  "  moreover  concerning  a  stranger,  "  &o.) 
The  prayer  is  remarkable  on  the  part  of  a  Jewish  king.  Give  evidences  of  the 
narrowness  and  selfishness  of  the  nation.  We  might  expect  this  feeling  in  all  its 
intensity  on  such  an  occasion  as  the  consecration  of  this  temple.    But  Solomon's 

rpathies  overflowed  national  prejudices.  The  tendency  of  prayer  is  to  enlarge 
heart.  Christians  pray  together  who  never  work  together.  They  who  are 
nearest  to  God's  throne  are  nearest  to  each  other.  As  we  pray,  our  yearnings  go 
further  afield,  and  we  think  kindly  of  the  erring,  pitifully  of  the  lost,  forgivingly  of 
the  wrong-doers. 

IV.  LoNGiNa  FOR  THE  QLORT  OF  GoD.  Solomou's  ohief  wish  in  regard  to  the 
temple  is  expressed  in  verse  60,  "  that  all  the  people  of  the  earth  may  know  that 
the  Lord  is  'God,  and  that  there  is  none  else."  Our  Lord's  prayer  is  like  Solomon's 
in  this,  that  it  ends  in  an  ascription  of  "  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the 
glory,"  to  God.  So  with  all  true  prayer.  It  ends  in  praise.  See  how  David,  in 
file  Psalms,  prayed  himself  out  of  sadness  into  joy ;  out  of  confession  into  thank- 
fulness and  praise.  If  we  ask  something  for  ourselves,  or  for  others,  it  should  be 
with  the  implied  wish  that  it  may  be  granted  or  withheld,  as  may  be,  for  our  wel- 
fare and  God's  glory.  The  yearning  of  each  Christian  should  be  that  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  "  Father,  glorify  thy  name." — A,  B. 

Vers.  38,  39. — The  Praying  King.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  this 
scene  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple  is  the  place  occupied,  the  part  performed,  in 
it  by  Solomon  himself.  He  is  the  central  figure,  the  chief  actor.  Both  priest  and 
prophet  give  place  to  him.  The  dedicatory  prayer  is  a  spontaneous  effusion  of  his 
own  deTout  feeling,  and  it  is  he  who  pronounces  afterwards  the  benediction  on  the 
people.  He  stands  before  us  here  as  a  true  type  of  that  greater  "  Son  of  David," 
who  is  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  tone  of  this 
prayer  that  betokens  a  soul  fully  alive  to  the  solemn  and  momentous  meaning  I'f 
what  was  taking  place  in  Jerusalem  that  day.  It  is  not,  indeed,  to  the  service  of  the 
ancient  Jewish  temple  that  we  should  look  for  the  most  perfect  models  of  devotion. 
New  Testament  revelations  multiply  and  strengthen  immeasurably  our  motives  to 
prayer,  enlarge  its  scope,  open  to  us  new  grounds  of  assurance  in  it.  "  One  greater 
than  Solomon  "  has  taught  ns  how  to  pray,  and  revealed  to  us  the  path  fo  accept- 
ance in  the  merit  of  His  own  mediation.  But  as  the  life  of  religion  in  the  soul  of 
man  is  essentially  the  same  in  all  ages,  so  the  principles  involved  in  prayer  as  the 
expression  of  it  are  the  same.  Two  such  rudimentary  principles  appear  in  this 
passage,  viz.,  the  sense  of  need  prompting  the  suppliant  to  look  heavenwards,  and 
the  recognition  of  something  out  of  himself  as  the  ground  of  hope  for  acceptance. 

I.  The  SENSE  OF  NEED,  &0.  It  is  the  "  plague  of  the  heart " — the  burden  rest- 
ing heavy  there,  the  haunting  sense  of  want  or  sadness  in  the  secret  soul,  coupled 
with  some  kind  of  faith  in  Divine  power — that  moves  men  to  pray.     AU   true 

1  KINOS.  N 


178  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  viil  1—6 


prayer  is  the  utterance  of  these  inward  impresBions.  If  much  of  our  so-called  pray- 
mg  -were  subjected  to  this  test,  it  is  to  he  feared  that  it  would  he  found  very  hollow 
and  unreal,  mere  "  words,"  a  mere  formal  homage  to  custom — ^no  deep,  earnest, 
irrepressihle  longing  of  the  soul  inspiring  it.  Solomon  begins  to  enumerate  dif- 
ferent calamities  that  may  impel  the  people  to  pray,  and  then,  as  if  overpowered 
by  the  mere  vague,  distant  imagination  of  these  possibilities,  he  says,  "  Whatsoever 
plague,  whatsoever  sickness,"  &o.  How  soon  are  we  lost  in  the  attempt  to  realize 
the  manifold  troubles  of  human  life.  We  can  understand  and  sympathize  with 
individual  griefs,  but  who  can  comprehend  at  all  adequately  the  general  sum  of 
human  woe,  and  take  the  weight  of  it  sympathetically  upon  himself?  Every  man, 
however,  knows  where  the  universal  evil  specially  touches  himself.  "  Every  heart 
knows  its  own  bitterness."  And  with  God  there  is  both  an  infinite  acquaintance 
with  the  whole  and  a  special  sympathy  with  each.  There  are  some  grie&  that  von 
lock  up  in  your  own  bosom  as  secrets  that  none  else  must  look  uponi 

"  Not  e'en  the  dearest  heart,  and  next  our  own, 
Knows  half  the  reasons  why  we  smile  or  sigh." 

But  there  Is  no  grief  you  can  conceal  from  Him.  He  became  in  the  person  of  His 
Son  "  the  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,"  that  we  might  feel  how  He 
follows  us,  or  rather,  goes  before  us,  in  every  path  of  suffering.  There  is  room  in 
the  great  fatherly  heart  of  God  for  us  all,  with  all  our  burdens,  and  we  can  never 
measure  the  uplifting  and  sustaining  power  that  comes  to  us  by  casting  ourselves 
and  them  upon  it — "In  everything  by  prayer  and  supphcation,"  &c.  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7) ; 
"Oast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,"  &c.  (Psa.  Iv.  22).  But  this  expression,  "the 
plague  of  his  own  heart,"  has  a  deeper  meaning.  It  opens  to  us  all  the  dark  sad 
mystery  of  personal  sinfulness,  the  moral  disease  that  lurks  within.  There  are 
times  when  the  most  careless,  reckless  spirit  has  glimpses  of  the  unwelcome  truth 
that  this,  after  all,  is  the  deepest  cause  of  its  disquietude.  The  multiform,  mys- 
terious evil  of  the  world  has  its  central  root  in  the  world's  heart.  Something  of 
that  "root  of  aU  bitterness"  is  in  every  human  heart.  Here  lies  the  fatal  mischief. 
It  is  not  the  tribulations  of  outward  life,  it  is  yourself  you  have  most  reason  to 
mourn  over.  Not  so  much  from  them,  but  from  something  in  yourself  you  have 
need  to  pray  to  be  delivered.  Christ  always  taught,  by  word  and  deed,  the  vital 
connection  between  the  external  calamities  and  the  internal  "  plague."  He  took 
upon  Him  our  sicknesses  and  sorrows,  not  only  to  show  us  how  they  may  be  nobly 
borne,  but  that  He  might  bring  His  power  as  the  Great  Physician  of  souls  to  bear 
upon  the  seat  of  our  deadly  disease,  and  by  the  efficacy  of  His  blood  might  heal 
and  save  us  all.  Go  penitently  in  His  name  to  the  mercy-seat  with  the  "  plague  of 
your  heart,"  and  you  shall  be  redeemed  from  it. 

II,  The  RBCoaNiTiON  of  somethino  out  op  one's  self  as  the  ground  op  hope. 
This  essential  element  in  true  prayer  is  suggested  by  the  words,  "  And  shall  stretch 
forth  his  hands  towards  this  place."  An  interesting  view  is  here  given  us  of  the 
relation  of  the  temple  to  the  individual  religious  life  of  the  people.  It  was  intended 
to  be  a  witness  to  the  unseen,  a  help  to  faith,  an  incentive  to  all  holy  thought  and 
feeling.  It  stood  through  all  the  changes  of  time,  the  shifting  lights  and  shadows 
of  the  world  around  it,  as  an  impressive  symbol  of  the  "  everlasting  covenant."  It 
enshrined  the  "  sure  mercies  of  David."  Within  its  hallowed  enclosure  were 
gathered  the  sacred  historic  records  and  rehcs,  and  the  types  and  shadows  of 
"  better  things  to  come."  It  told  both  of  what  God  had  done  and  what  He  had 
promised — the  monument  of  the  glorious  past,  the  prophecy  of  the  brighter  future. 
There  was  deep  meaning,  then,  in  the  suppliant  "stretching  forth  his  hands 
towards  that  house,"  as  expressive  of  the  attitude  of  his  soul  towards  that  which  it 
symbolized.  When  some  lonely  worshipper  in  a  distant  corner  of  the  land,  some 
patient  sufferer,  some  soldier  in  his  agony  on  the  field  of  battle,  some  captive,  Uke 
Daniel,  in  a  strange  country,  directed  his  eyes  towards  the  holy  place,  it  was  a 
sort  of  pathetic  appeal  to  God's  own  faithfulness,  a  silent  but  eloquent  plea  that  He 
would  not  forget  His  covenant,  woiild  fulfil  the  hopes  that  He  Himself  had 


OH.  vm.  1—66.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  179 


awakened,  and  not  for  their  sakes  alone,  but  for  His  own  truth  and  meroy'a  sake, 
would  hear  and  save.  In  all  this  the  temple  was  a  type  of  something  nobler, 
■diviner  than  itself.  The  temple  was  the  shadow,  the  substance  is  in  Christ.  "  In 
him  are  hid  all  the  treasures,"  &o.  The  cross  of  Christ,  in  which  all  the  promises 
are  confirmed  and  sealed ;  the  cross,  which  is  both  the  altar  of  the  Eedeemer's 
sacrifice  and  the  throne  of  His  sovereignty,  is  the  shrine  of  "  truth  and  grace"  to 
men.    The  glory  ahke  of  the  past  and  of  the  future  is  centred,  fooussed  there. 

••  All  the  light  of  sacred  story 
Gathers  round  its  head  sublime," 

•nd  from  it  there  streams  forth  an  ever-brightening  radiance  into  the  otherwise 
dark  futurity.  It  stands  the  connecting  link  between  heaven  and  earth,  the  meet- 
ing-place of  God  and  man,  the  key  to  all  human  history,  the  basis  of  our  immortal 
hope.  Here,  then,  on  this  central  object  alike  of  Divine  and  human  interest,  must 
the  eye  of  the  suppliant  be  fixed.  It  is  that  pledge  of  Divine  love  and  faithfulness, 
external  to  ourselves,  embodied  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  that  we  must  plead  if  we 
would  find  acceptance  in  our  prayer.  When  God  has  thoroughly  taught  us  what 
the  "plague  of  our  own  heart"  means,  and  has  unveiled  to  us  the  blessed  mystery 
of  His  mode  of  curing  it,  it  will  be  the  sustained  habit  of  our  life  to  stand  as 
suppliants  before  Him  "  in  the  name  of  Jesus."  Thus  alone  can  we  so  link  our- 
selves with  the  sanctities  of  a  higher  world  as  to  make  our  common  life  Divine. — W. 

Ver.  88. — The  consecration  of  the  temple  was  the  grandest  religious  oeremony  of 
the  old  covenant.     It  is  important — 

I.  Because  it  centralizes  the  worship  of  the  theocracy. 

II.  Because  it  supplies  a  type  of  the  spieitual  temple  which  is  to  be 
reared  in  the  Church  and  in  every  Christian  soul.  Solomon,  as  the  king  chosen  of 
Ood,  represents  in  this  service  of  consecration  the  entire  theocracy.  The  temple 
is  essentially  a  house  of  prayer,  as  is  manifest  from  the  words  of  the  consecration. 
"  What  prayer  and  supplication  soever  be  made  by  any  man,  or  by  all  thy  people 
Israel,  which  shall  know  every  man  the  plague  of  his  own  heart  .  .  .  hear 
thoa  in  heaven."  It  is  the  sanctuary  of  the  invisible  God,  and  its  gates  stand 
open  to  the  multitude,  who  come  to  worship  and  to  offer  sacrifice.  Instead 
of  a  statue,  such  as  was  found  in  the  idol  temples,  the  priests  of  the  true  God  place 
m  their  sanctuary  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  containing  the  law,  the  Divine  expression 
of  the  holy  will  of  God.  The  altar  of  sacrifice,  placed  in  fi:ont  of  the  sanctuary, 
reminds  the  people  of  their  transgressions,  while  at  the  same  time  the  sacrifice  of 
the  victims  is  prophetic  of  the  future  redemption.  The  consecrating  prayer  opens 
and  closes  with  adoration.  It  spreads  before  God  all  the  wants  of  the  people,  and 
asks  from  Him  deliverance  in  every  time  of  need  (oh.  ix.  8).  It  enumerates  first 
■temporal  distresses,  but  the  whole  petition  culminates  in  the  ever-recurring  plead- 
ing for  forgiveness.  This  is  the  bm-den  of  the  whole  temple  service,  and  this 
-character  is  reproduced  in  Christian  worship.  In  the  time  of  its  highest  spiritu- 
ality there  were  no  properly  consecrated  Christian  temples.  Aras  non  habemug 
said  MinutiuB  Felix.  A  temple  is  nevertheless  a  necessity  of  worship  ;  and  we  are 
free  to  recognize  this  apart  from  any  superstitious  notion,  and  remembering  that 
while  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  the  Most  High,  He  yet  condescends  to 
dwell  in  the  humble  and  contrite  heart.  There  has  been  no  longer  a  sanctuary  in 
the  old  exclusive  sense,  since  the  blood  was  shed  which  has  redeemed  the  whole 
■earth  to  God.  Our  houses  of  prayer  are  not  now  more  holy  in  themselves  than  our 
homes.  Let  us  consecrate  them  by  consecrating  ourselves  to  God,  and  rendering 
■to  Him  the  worship  which  is  His  due — the  sacrifice  of  our  whole  being.  Let  our 
prayers,  like  that  of  Solomon,  begin  and  end  with  adoration,  and  let  the  burden  of 
them  be  the  expression  of  our  repentance  for  sin.  Let  them  have,  like  the  prayer 
-of  the  theocratic  king,  a  breadth  of  intercession  for  the  whole  people  of  God,  and 
let  them  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  the  burden  of  the  woes  of  humanity  and  tli« 
seeds  of  the  Church. — E.  de  P. 


180  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [cii.  viii.  1—66. 

Vers.  41 — 43.—  The  8tr<mger'»  Interest  in  t\e  Tern/pie.  Kindly  human 
sympathy  is  one  of  the  most  marked  characteristics  of  this  prayer  of  Solomon. 
This  is  seen  in  the  way  in  which  he  enters  into  various  supposed  conditions  of 
need  and  suffering  among  his  people ;  takes  the  hurden  and  the  "  plague  "  upon 
himself  as  if  it  were  his  own ;  a  true  intercessor  on  their  behalf.  His  royalty 
assumes  here  the  aspect  of  fatherhood.  The  model  king  is  one  in  heart  and 
interest  with  those  over  whom  he  rules.  We  are  reminded,  too,  that  before 
th*  "mercy-seat"  of  God  all  human  distinctions  are  lost.  All  suppliants  stand 
on  one  common  level,  subject  to  the  same  dangers  and  necessities.  All  true 
prayer,  therefore,  is  thus  broad  in  its  sympathies.  But  in  this  passage  the  king's 
supplications  take  a  wider  range  than  the  needs  of  his  own  people.  He  pleads  for 
the  "stranger,"  the  foreigner  from  a  "  far  country."  This  is  strictly  in  harmony 
with  the  Divine  economy  of  the  time,  however  much  it  may  seem  to  be  otherwise. 
It  is  remarkable  how  much  there  was  in  the  Mosaic  law  that  was  expressly  intended 
to  enforce  on  the  people  a  generous  regard  for  those  who  were  beyond  their  pale. 
They  were  commanded  not  to  "  vex  a  stranger  "  (Exod.  xxii.  21),  to  reheve  his 
poverty  (Levit.  xxv.  83),  even  to  "  love  "  him  as  "  God  loveth  him  in  giving  him 
food  and  raiment"  (Deut.  x.  18,  19),  and  all  this  in  memory  of  the  fact  that  they 
themselves  were  once  "  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  Strangers,  moreover, 
were  to  be  permitted  to  hear  the  solemn  reading  of  the  law  in  the  "  year  of  release  " 
(Deut.  xxxi.  12),  and  to  offer  sacrifices  on  the  same  conditions  as  themselves. 
"  One  law  and  one  manner  shall  be  for  you  and  for  the  stranger  that  sojoumeth  with 
you  "  (Num.  xv.  16).  So  that  Solomon  gave  expression  to  the  spirit  of  the  dispen- 
sation to  which  he  belonged  when  he  thus  prayed.  Certain  broad  truths  underlie 
this  prayer — 

I.  Jehovah's  universal  sovbreigntt.  He  is  the  "  God  of  the  whole  earth," 
and  not  merely  of  any  particular  portion  of  it  (Isa.  liv.  5).  "  Is  he  the  God  of  the 
Jews  only  and  not  of  the  Gentiles  ?  "  (Eom.  iii.  29.)  "  "The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all 
flesh"  (Num.  xvi.  22).  The  whole  Mosaic  economy  was  built  on  the  grand  truth  of 
the  unity  and  absolute  world-wide  supremacy  of  Jehovah.  The  heathen,  according 
to  their  principle  of  local  deities,  might  acknowledge  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  as 
having  authority  over  his  own,  but  a  Hebrew  who  shoxdd  in  any  way  recognize  the 
gods  of  other  nations  and  think  of  Jehovah  merely  as  a  national  deity  would  be  a 
traitor  to  the  conmionwealth.  The  only  living  and  true  God  can  have  no  rival.  The 
gods  of  the  nations  are  idols,  and  "  an  idol  ia  nothing  in  the  world" — "  a  lying 
vanity,"  a  vile  "  abomination."  "  The  things  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice  they 
sacrifice  to  demons  and  not  to  God"  (1  Cor.  viii.  4,  5  ;  x.  20).  To  "know  God," 
to  have  "  him  whom  they  ignorantly  worship  "  declared  to  them,  is  "  eternal  life  " 
to  men.  The  absence  of  this  knowledge  is  death.  The  curse  and  misery  of  the 
world  is  that  it  "  knows  not  its  God. "  Solomon  here  dimly  recognizes  this  truth ; 
and  the  case  he  contemplates  is  that  of  some  child  of  the  Universal  Father  in  whom 
the  sense  of  need  has  been  awakened,  "  coming  from  a  far  country  "  to  "  seek  the 
Lord,  if  haply  he  may  feel  after  him  and  find  him  "  (Acts  xvii.  27,  28). 

II.  The  BEPBESENTATrvE  CHARAOTER  OF  ISRAEL.  They  Were  a  representative 
people  in  two  respects.  (1)  Inasmuch  as  they  were  called  to  bear  witness  to  the 
glory  of  the  "  great  name  of  Jehovah.  His  name  is  the  symbol  of  Hispersonahty, 
Qie  attributes  of  His  being  and  character — spirituality,  purity,  righteousness,  love, 
Ac.  Their  mission  was  to  make  known  to  mankind  the  God  who  had  revealed 
Himself  in  wondrous  forms  to  them.  How  they  failed  to  rise  to  the  height  of  this 
mission  their  national  history  only  too  sadly  teUs.  The  utterances  of  the  psalmists 
and  prophets  are  fall  of  the  spirit  of  it,  but  all  this  was  far  above  the  comprehension 
of  the  great  mass  of  the  people.  They  utterly  mistook  the  meaning  of  the  distinc- 
tion conferred  upon  them,  and  God  taught  them  by  the  discipline  of  subjection  and 
captivity  the  lesson  that  in  the  day  of  their  national  glory  they  failed  to  learn.  In 
this  mission  as  a  witness  Israel  was  a  type  of  the  Christian  Church.  Christ  declared 
the  Father's  name  to  His  disciples  and  He  sent  them  forth  on  an  errand  like  His 
own  (John  xvii.  18 — 26).  How  grand  a  vocation,  to  reflect  the  glory  of  His  "  great 
name"  on  th«  world's  darkness,  to  say  to  the  nations,  "  Behold  your  God  I "  (2)  They 


oa.  -mt.  1—66.1  THE  FIB  ST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  181 

were  a  representative  people  also  in  the  sense  that  in  their  history  God  illustrated  the 
general  method  and  the  unifonn  laws  of  His  moral  government.  The  "  stronghand 
and  the  stretched  out  arm  "  here  suggests  the  marvellous  manifestation  of  Divine 
power  that  marked  the  career  of  the  people  from  the  beginning,  the  whole  course  of 
providential  training  and  moral  discipline  through  which  they  passed.  But  the 
principles  on  which  God  deals  with  one  nation  are  the  principles  on  which  He  deals 
with  aU.  He  is  no  "  respecter  of  persons."  The  history  of  the  "  chosen  people  " 
unfolds  His  universal  purpose  and  plan,  illustrates  unvarying  laws,  the  conditions  of 
all  personal,  social,  and  national  life.  And  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  after  every 
review  of  Israel's  experiences  we  may  say,  "  Now  all  these  things  happened  unto 
them  for  ensamples,"  &o.  (1  Cor.  x.  11). 

III.  The  attraction  of  the  temfls  fob  all  LONama  huuan  hearts  ab  the 
SCENE  OF  ORAcions  DiviNE  MANIFESTATION.  That  which  made  it  the  centre  of 
interest  to  pious  Jews  made  it  so  also  to  earnest  souls  of  other  lands.  The  truth 
and  mercy  symboUzed  and  enshrined  there — promises,  atoning  sacrifices,  benedic- 
tions— answered  to  universal  needs  of  humanity.  Solomon  supposes  a  case  in 
which  the  vague  sense  of  this  should  lead  the  "  stranger  in  a  far-off  land"  to  look 
with  longing  eyes,  or  to  bend  his  steps,  towards  "  the  house  over  which  God's  name 
is  called."  We  have  no  historical  record  of  strangers  actually  worshipping  in  the 
first  temple  as  they  did  in  that  built  after  the  captivity ;  but  God  said,  "  My  house 
shall  be  called  a  house  of  prayer  for  aU  people  "  (Isa.  Ivi.  6,  7  ;  Mark  xi.  17)  ;  and 
there  may  have  been  many  who,  with  a  far-reaching  hand  of  faith,  "took  hold  of 
His  covenant "  as  estabhshed  there. 

IV.  The  response  God  gave  to  every  true  suppliant,  whoever  he  hioht 
BE.  "  Hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwelling-place,"  &c.  This  intercessory  prayer,  we 
may  be  sure,  was  answered.  God  does  not  awaken  holy  yearnings  in  any  soul  that 
He  will  not  satisfy.  "  In  every  nation,  he  that  feareth  him,"  &c.  The  sovereignty 
that  reigns  over  all  lands  is  that  of  Almighty  Love.  There  is  room  in  the  infinite 
Father's  heart  for  all,  even  the  far-off  "stranger,"  and  "the  same  Lord  over  all 
is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him." — W. 

Ver.  49. — Occasions  for  Prayer.  In  the  prayer  of  dedication  Solomon  suggests 
■occasions  on  which  it  would  be  natural  for  men  to  turn  to  their  God.  The  Divine 
Presence  is  constant,  but  our  reaUzation'of  it  is  not.  Many  require  the  shook  of 
some  unexpected  or  lamentable  occurrence  to  rouse  them  to  prayer.  This  effect, 
however,  will  only  be  seen  in  those  who  have,  underlying  their  forgetfulness  and 
sensuousness,  an  abiding  (though  sometimes  inoperative)  belief  in  God.  This 
Israel  for  the  most  part  had.  Hence  Solomon's  belief  that  in  their  future  times 
of  distress  and  diflSculty  they  would  turn  to  Him  who  dwelt  between  the  cherubims. 
Analyze  the  prayer,  and  see  the  following  occasions  suggested  as  those  in  which 
supplication  would  be  natural. 

'  I.  When  men  make  vows  and  promises.  Compare  ver.  81  with  the  ordinances 
of  Moses  (Exod.  xxii.  7— 9).  The  oath  was  taken  in  the  presence  of  God,  because 
the  thought  of  Him  as  the  Searober  of  hearts  would  induce  serious  consideration 
and  careful  exactitude,  and  because  He  was  tacitly  invited  by  His  providence  to 
confirm  or  to  punish  the  spoken  word.  Show  how  the  principle,  right  in  itself, 
became  abused  and  vitiated,  so  that  Christ  condemned  the  practices  of  His  day 
(Matt.  V.  33 — 37).  Learn  from  the  ancient  practice  (1)  that  our  utterances  should 
■be  made  as  by  men  conscious  of  ihe  nearness  of  the  God  of  truth.  Apply  this  to 
the  immoralities  of  some  business  transactions,  to  the  prevalence  of  slander  in 
society,  &o.  (2)  That  ov/r  resolutions  should  be  formed  in  a  spirit  of  prayer. 
How  vain  the  pledge  and  promise  of  amendment,  unless  there  be  added  to  the 
human  resolve  the  help  of  God's  providence  in  circumstances,  and  the  grace  of 
His  Spirit  in  the  heart  I     Give  examples  of  each. 

II.  When  men  are  injured  or  defeated  by  their  adversaries.  "  When  thy 
people  Israel  be  smitten  down  before  the  enemy  '■  (ver.  38).  National  defeat  in  -viax 
should  lead  to  self-examination  on  the  part  of  those  smitten.  Too  often  the  investi- 
gation is  applied  only  to  material  resources  :  incompetent  oflicials  are  dismissed, 


163  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  Tm.  1— 6flL 

weakened  regimentg  are  strengthened,  new  allianoea  are  formed,  fto.  The  mischief 
may  lie  deeper.  Sometimes  God  is  calling  the  people  not  to  redeem  national 
honotur,  hut  to  seek  national  righteousness.  The  teaching  of  the  verse  may  be 
applied  figiuratively  to  defeats  suffered  by  Christian  controversialists  or  by  philan- 
thropic workers,  &o.  Every  check  in  onward  progress  is  a  summons  to  thought 
and  prayer.  "  In  the  day  of  adversity  consider."  Illustrate  by  examples  in 
Scripture,  e.g.,  by  the  defeat  of  Israel  at  Ai,  and  its  issues. 

III.  When  men  are  ibemblino  under  natural  caIiAmities.  Beference  is 
made  in  ver.  85  to  the  withholding  of  rain;  in  ver.  87  to  "famine,  pestilence, 
blasting,  mildew,  locust,  and  caterpillar."  Such  troubles  were  sent  in  vain  to  bring 
the  Egyptians  to  repentance.  Compare  those  plagues  with  Elijah's  message  to 
Ahab,  and  with  the  threats  of  other  prophets.  Such  statements  as  Deut.  xi.  17 
enshrine  an  abiding  truth.  In  the  long  run  the  violation  of  God's  laws  do  bring 
disasters  of  the  very  kind  specified  here.  If  the  law  of  industry  be  violated,  the 
harvests  fail ;  if  the  law  of  mutual  dependence  be  ignored  by  nations,  commerce 
is  crippled,  and  impoverishment  comes ;  if  the  laws  against  self-indulgence,  pride, 
ambition,  &o.,  be  defied,  the  spendthrift  has  the  result  in  poverty,  the  proud  nation 
in  the  miseries  of  war,  &o.  Even  the  disasters  which  are  accounted  "  natural 
phenomena,"  then,  should  lead  the  wise-hearted  to  prayer,  the  sinful  to  penitence; 
and  God  will  hear  in  heaven  His  dwelling- place,  and  answer  and  forgive.  Show 
how,  during  the  ministry  of  otir  Lord,  the  cripples,  the  blind,  the  diseased  came  to 
Him.  Their  misery  made  them  feel  their  need  of  what  He  alone  could  give,  and 
many  of  them  became  conscious  of  their  spiritual  wants  from  considering  first  the 
want  that  was  physical.  As  they  were  thus  led,  so  the  Church  has  been  which  in 
the  Old  Testament  was  oppressed  most  by  the  earthly  wants,  and  in  the  New  by 
the  spiritual.  Those  in  the  far  country  learn,  by  beginning  to  "  be  in  want,"  that 
God  is  calling  them  to  arise  and  return  to  Him. 

ly.  WEtEN  MEN  ABE  CONSCIOUS  ov  THEIR  SIN.  All  through  this  prayer  reference 
is  made  to  sin  and  to  the  consequent  necessity  for  pardon  (vers.  38,  46 — 50).  Point 
out  the  climax  in  ver.  47  :  (1)  "We  have  sinned" — have  not  kept  in  the  ways  of 
God — sin  in  its  negative  aspect;  (2)  "  have  done  perversely  " — acts  of  perversity ; 
(8)  "have  committed  wickedness" — the  overwhelming  passion  which  drives  into- 
ooiruption.  The  necessity  of  humble  confession  as  an  integral  part  of  prayer  from 
the  Ups  of  fallen  man  can  readily  be  shown  from  Scripture.  Examples  of  con- 
science of  sin  impelling  to  prayer  seen  in  David  (Psa.  li.),  the  publican  (Luke 
xviii.  18),  "  If  we  confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins, 
and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness  "  (1  John  i.  9). 

V.  When  men  abb  ooma  forth  to  conflict  in  God's  name.  ••  If  thy  people 
shall  go  out  to  battle  against  their  enemy  whithersoever  thou  shalt  Bend  them,""  &o. 
(ver.  44).  _We  must  not  forget  that  Israel  was  a  theocracy.  David,  for  example, 
spoke  of  his  foes  as  being  God's  foes.  So  had  it  been  with  Moses,  Joshua,  &o, 
The  consciousness  of  that  gives  almost  superhuman  power.  "  Man,  being  linked 
with  Omnipotency,  is  a  kind  of  omnipotent  creature,"  says  Bacon.  Even  when 
the  beUef  that  one  is  on  God's  side  is  false,  the  belief  itself  is  an  inspiration. 
Examples  from  history  of  such  belief  well  or  iU  founded — Joan  of  Arc,  the 
Puritans,  &o._  In  actual  war  no  nation  can  fairly  put  up  this  prayer  imless  the 
canse  of  war  is  that  of  which  we  can  say,  "  whithersoever  thou  shalt  send."  No 
mistake  need  exist  in  reference  to  foes  whom  Christ  came  to  destroy.  The  promise, 
"Lo  I  I  am  with  you,"  was  the  inspiration  of  the  apostles  as  they  confronted  false 
philosophies,  crass  ignorance,  brutal  customs,  degrading  superstitions.  Hence,  if 
they  were  going  forth  to  battle  with  such  evils,  the  praj^ers  of  the  Church  went  up 
on  their  behalf.  Men  were  set  apart  for  their  Christian  mission  by  prayer  (give 
examples),  and  in  thefr  work  they  often  turned  to  their  intercessors,  saying, 
"  Brethren,  pray  for  us  I "  Feeling  our  insufficiency  to  overcome  the  adversaries 
of  the  gospel,  let  us,  like  the  apostles,  "  continue  in  prayer  and  suppUcatiou "  till 
we  are  "  endued  with  power  from  on  high." — A.  B. 

Ver.  61. — A  Royal  Benediction.     The  prayer  of  Solomon  is  followed  by  ft 


CH.  vra.  1—66.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KIKGS.  188 

benediction.  "  He  stood  and  bleeeed  all  the  congregation,"  &c.  (vers.  64,  66).  But 
though  he  asBumed  for  the  time  the  priestly  function,  his  utterance  was  not  cast 
into  the  usual  form  of  priestly  benediction.  It  was  rather  an  ascription  of  praise 
to  the  God  who  had  fulfilled  His  promises  and  given  rest  to  His  people,  and  an 
exhortation  to  them  that  they  on  their  part  ^ould  follow  that  path  of  life  in 
vhich  alone  they  could  hope  to  realize  the  further  fulfilment  of  those  promises,  and 
enjoy  the  heritage  of  blessing  that  was  theirs.  Lessons  are  suggested  here  that  are 
of  force  and  value  for  all  time. 

I.  The  relation  between  true  prayer  and  personal  righteousness.  Solomon 
felt  that  all  the  impassioned  supplications  that  he  had  been  pouring  out  before  the 
Lord,  and  all  the  S3Tiipatbetio  enthusiasm  of  the  people  in  these  temple  services, 
would  be  but  a  mockery  unless  he  and  they  were  prepared  to  walk  with  all  fidelity 
in  the  way  of  God's  commandments.  They  would  soon  be  leaving  the  sacred 
shrine  of  worship.  They  could  not  always  be  amid  the  ecstatic  and  rapturous 
associations  of  die  temple.  They  must  go  back  to  the  matter-of-fact,  prosaid 
world,  to  their  posts  of  honour  and  responsibiUty,  to  the  privacy  of  their  homes,  to 
their  haunts  of  busy  life,  to  their  paths  of  commerce  and  of  labour.  Let  them 
worship  there.  Let  them  dwell  with  God  there.  Let  them  embody  there,  in  all 
the  forms  of  practical  virtue,  the  spirit  of  devotion  that  has  inspired  them  amid 
these  hallowed  scenes.  The  "  statutes  and  commandments "  of  the  Lord  had 
reference  in  great  part  to  the  due  observance  of  the  ritual  of  temple  worship,  but 
they  also  claimed,  as  much  then  as  now,  to  control  the  whole  spirit  and  conduct  of 
human  life  in  all  its  aspects.  The  relation  between  prayer  and  conduct  is  of  a 
twofold  character.  They  act  and  react  the  one  on  the  other.  True  prayer  sheds 
a  hallowing  influence  over  the  entire  field  of  a  man's  daily  activity.  When  his 
soul  has  been  face  to  face  with  God,  absorbed  in  Divine  communion,  the  inspiration 
of  holy  thought  and  feeling  of  which  he  has  been  conscious  will  inevitably  betray 
itself  in  the  way  in  which  he  acts  when  he  mingles  with  the  things  and  the  beings 
of  earth.  The  glory  of  heaven  that  has  shone  upon  him  cannot  fail  to  be  reflected 
in  the  beauty  of  his  character  and  deed.  A  prayerful  spirit  is  an  earnest,  pvire, 
upright,  loving  spirit,  and  such  a  spirit  will  govern  the  whole  form  and  method  and 
aim  of  a  man's  life.  Prayer  solves  diflculties,  clears  one's  vision  of  the  path  of 
duty,  draws  strength  from  Divine  sources  for  all  toil  and  suffering,  raises  the  tone 
and  level  of  moral  action,  fortifies  the  spirit  for  any  emergency,  fills  the  heart  with 
the  peaceful  joy  of  a  better  world.  On  the  other  hand,  the  conduct  of  hfe  neces- 
sarily affects  for  good  or  iU  the  spirit  and  efficacy  of  prayer.  If  it  is  needful  to 
pray  in  order  that  we  may  live  as  Christians,  it  is  equally  needful  that  we  should 
live  as  Christians  in  order  rightly  to  pray.  The  importance  of  prayer  as  one  chief 
function  of  spiritual  life  doubles  the  importance  of  all  our  actions,  because  our 
prayers  are  so  much  as  our  doings  are.  According  as  we  stand  towards  the  world, 
with  all  the  social  relationships  and  duties  that  belong  to  our  place  in  it,  so  do  we 
stand  before  the  mercy-seat.  Think,  for  instance,  how  the  beneficial  effect  oifamiVy 
prayer  may  be  nullified  by  the  prevailing  spirit  of  family  Hfe.  By  the  discord  that 
may  be  allowed  to  reign  in  it,  by  its  lack  of  the  graces  of  mutual  respect  and  loving 
self-sacrifice,  by  the  worldliness  of  its  associations,  the  meanness  of  its  ambitions, 
the  frivolity  of  its  pleasures,  the  vanity  of  its  cherished  societies — how  completely 
may  the  soul  of  domestic  devotion  be  destroyed.  Let  a  man  be  morally  reckless  in 
the  intercourse  and  transactions  of  daily  hfe,  and  all  freedom,  "  boldness,"  gladness 
in  prayer  is  at  an  end.  Anything  like  loving,  confiding  converse  with  the  "  Father 
who  seeth  in  secret "  is  impossible  to  him.  If  he  cannot  look  without  fear  and  shame 
in  the  face  of  his  fellow  man,  how  shall  he  dare  to  look  in  the  face  of  God  ?  The 
"  heavens  become  as  brass  "  above  his  head  which  no  voice  of  prayer  can  penetrate. 
When  Saul's  heart  is  thoroughly  set  in  him  to  do  evil  it  is  vain  for  him  to  inquire 
of  the  Lord.  "  The  Lord  answers  him  no  more,  neither  by  Urim,  nor  by  prophet, 
nor  by  dream."  Let  there  be  a  Divine  unity  and  harmony  in  our  life.  Let  our 
conduct  in  all  human  relationships  show  us  to  be  what,  in  om:  hours  of  devotion, 
we  seem  to  ourselves  to  be.  Let  it  be  our  ambition  every  day  "  to  live  more  nearly 
as  we  pray." 


184 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  IX.  1 — 9 


II.  The  relation  between  pbactical  virtue  and  the  state  op  the  secret 
HEART.  A  man's  heart  must  be  "  perfect  with  the  Lord  "  before  he  can  walk 
acceptably  in  the  path  of  His  commandments.  The  old  legal  economy  was  not 
after  all  so  superficial  as  it  seemed  to  be,  God's  commandment  was  "exceeding 
broad."  Literal  as  the  moral  laws  were,  and  formal  as  the  ceremonial  precepts, 
they  touched  at  every  point  the  Ufe  of  the  spirit  within.  "  Moses  desoribeth  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  the  law.  That  the  man  who  doeth  these  things  shall  live 
by  them"  (Bom.  x.  5),  but  the  righteousness  was  not  in  the  mere  doing.  David, 
the  noblest  representative  of  the  spirit  of  the  law,  well  knew  that  as  it  is  from  the 
fountain  of  the  evil  heart  that  aU  transgression  proceeds,  so  from  the  purified 
heart  springs  aU  practical  righteousness.  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God," 
&o.  (Psa.  li.  10).  The  glory  of  Christianity  is  that  it  not  only  recognizes  this  prin- 
ciple, but  actually  brings  to  bear  on  the  heart  the  renewing,  healing  power.  It 
cleanses  the  fountain  of  life  within.  The  law  could  disclose  the  secret  evil,  convince 
of  sin,  rebuke,  restrain,  but  it  could  not  make  men  righteous.  The  gospel  does. 
"  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness,"  &c.  (Bom.  x.  4).  "  What  the  law 
could  not  do,"  &o.  (Bom.  viiu  8,  4).  Keep  your  heart  in  habitual  contact  with 
the  highest  sources  of  spiritual  inspiration — in  famUiar  converse  with  Him  who 
is  the  fountain  of  truth  and  purity  and  love.  Watch  over  its  most  secret  thoughts 
and  impulses.  Guard  its  seusibilities  from  the  contaminations  of  the  world  and 
the  hardening  influences  of  life.  Seek'  to  preserve  the  freshness  of  its  Divine 
affections  and  the  integrity  of  itg  allegiance  to  Christ,  if  you  would  walk  as  He 
did,  "  in  lovehness  of  perfect  deeds." 

III.  The  beneficial  influence  of  a  sacred  memory.  "  As  it  is  this  day." 
Solomon  would  have  that  day  to  dwell  in  their  memories  and  hallow  all  their  days. 
Times  of  special  Divine  manifestation  and  highest  religious  consciousness  show  us 
what  we  may  be,  what  God  would  have  us  to  be,  what  ia  the  true  level  of  our 
spirit's  life. — W. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  IX.  1—9. 


TaB  4HSWEB  TO  Solomon's  pbateb. — 
This  chapter  opens  with  an  account  of 
God's  second  appearance  to  Solomon.  It 
must  not  be  supposed,  however,  from  the 
apparent  close  connexion  of  this  relation 
with  the  preceding  narrative,  that  it  stands 
to  it  in  equally  close  chronological  order. 
It  probably  finds  a  place  here  because  the 
historian  has  grouped  together  all  the 
suitable  materials  in  his  possession  which 
related  to  the  temple.     But  see  on  ver  1. 

Ver.  1. — And  It  came  to  pass  when 
Solomon  had  flnlsbed  tbe  building  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king's  house 
[ch.  vii.  1] ,  and  all  Solomon's  desire 
which  he  was  pleased  to  do  [By  "  desire  " 
we  are  not  to  understand  "  pleasure  build- 
ings" (of.  vers.  10,  19).  The  chronicler 
gives  the  true  meaning  :  "  aU  that  came 
into  Solomon's  heart."  It  is,  however, 
somewhat  doubtful  what  works  are  com- 
prehended under  this  term.  2  Chron. 
vii.  11  limits  it  to  the  two  great  erec- 
tions already  described — "all  that  came 
into  his  heart  to  make  in  the  house  of  the 


Lord  and  in  his  own  house."    But  it  is  by 

no  means  certain  that  our  author  intended 
the  word  to  be  thus  restricted ;  it  is  quite 
possible,  e.j. ,  that  some  of  the  buildings  men- 
tioned below  (vers.  15 — 19)  are  to  be  included. 
But  another  question  of  much  greater  import- 
ance presents  itself  here.  In  the  Divuie 
communication  of  vers.  3 — 9  there  is  constant 
and  unmistakeable  reference  to  the  prayer 
of  dedication  (see  especially  ver.  3) ;  in  fact, 
this  message  is  the  answer  to  that  prayer.  It 
has  been  held,  consequently,  that  the  answer 
must  have  followed,  it  not  immediately,  yet 
soon  after  the  petitions  were  uttered ;  it  so, 
the  dedication  must  clearly  have  taken 
place,  not  on  the  completion  of  the  temple 
(chap.  vi.  38),  but  on  the  completion  of  the 
palace,  &o. ;  m  other  words,  the  temple  must 
have  been  finished  fully  thirteen  years  before 
it  was  consecrated  and  occupied.  Rawlinson 
suggests  that  the  delay  was  perhaps  occa- 
sioned by  the  circumstance  that  the  furni- 
ture of  the  temple  was  not  till  then  ready; 
but  ch.  vi.  88,  Heb.,  seems  to  state  distinotiy 
that  all  the  vessels  and  appointments  of 
the  sanctuary  were  finished  at  the  date 
there  given.  Beasons  have  been  given 
elsewhere  (see  note  on  ch.  viii.  1)  in  support 
of  the  position  that  the  dedication  oannot 


OH.  IX.  1—9.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


IW 


posBibly  have  been  delayed  for  bo  long  a 
period,  especially  after  the  strenuous  efforts 
which  bad  been  made  to  hurry  on  the  under- 
taking. Nor  does  the  text,  when  carefully 
examined,  really  require  this  hypothesis; 
indeed,  it  suggests  some  reasons  for  thinking 
that  a  considerable  period  must  have  inter- 
vened between  the  prayer  and  the  response. 
For  the  tone  of  this  response  is  onmistake- 
ably  foreboding,  if  not  minatory.  Vers.  6 — 9 
contain  a  stem  warning.  But  there  was 
nothing,  so  far  as  we  know,  in  the  attitude 
of  Solomon  or  of  Israel  at  the  time  of  the 
dedication  to  call  for  any  such  denunciation. 
At  that  time,  as  the  prayer  surely  proves, 
Solomon's  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord 
his  God,  But  the  response  has  unmis- 
takeably  the  appearance  of  having  been 
eUcited  by  signs  of  defection.  The  wide 
difference,  consequently,  between  the  spirit 
of  the  prayer  and  the  tone  of  tlie  answer 
suggests  that  some  time  must  have  elapsed 
between  them,  and  so  far  supports  the  view 
that  the  dedication  was  not  delayed  until 
the  palace,  &o.,  was  completed.  And  it  is 
also  to  be  remembered  that  the  prayer  of 
dedication  had  not  been  without  acknow- 
ledgment at  the  time.  The  excellent  glory 
which  filled  and  took  possession  of  the 
house  was  itself  a  significant  and  sufficient 
response.  No  voice  or  vision  could  have 
said  more  plainly,  "  I  have  heard  thy  prayer, 

1  have  hallowed  this  house."  But  when, 
some  thirteen  years  later — about  the  very 
time,  that  is,  when  he  was  at  the  height  of 
his  prosperity,  and  when,  owing  to  the  com- 
pletion of  his  undertakings,  we  might  fear 
lest  his  heart  should  be  Ufted  up  with  pride — 
when  Solomon  and  his  court  began  to  de- 
cline in  piety  and  to  go  after  other  gods,  then 
this  merciful  message  opportunely  refers  him 
to  the  prayer  which  he  was  in  danger  of  for- 
getting, and  warns  him  of  the  consequences 
of  the  apostasy  to  which  he  was  tending,] 

Yer.  2. — That  the  Lord  appeared  to 
Solomon  the  second  time  [see  on  ch.  vi.  11, 
and  cf.  xi,  9 ;  Solomon  had  received  a 
metsage  during  the  building  of  the  temple], 
as  he  bad  appeared  unto  blm  at  Gibeou 
[i.e.,  in  a  dream  (oh.  iii.  6)] . 

Yer.  3. — And  the  Lord  said  unto  blm 
[This  message  is  given  at  greater  length  in 

2  Chron.  vii,  12—22.  Yers.  13,  14,  e.g., 
contain  a  reference  to  that  part  of  the  prayer 
which  related  to  drought  and  rain] ,  I  have 
heard  thy  prayer  and  thy  supplication 
[These  two  words  are  found  similarly  united 
in  Solomon's  prayer,  vers.  38,  45,  54],  that 
thon  hast  made  [Heb.  supplicated]  before 
me;  I  have  hallowed  this  bouse  which 
thon  hast  built  [<c,  by  the  manifestation 
described  oh,  viii,  11.  Cf.  Exod.  xxix.  43 : 
"  the  tabernacle  ahaU  be  lanctified  "  (same 


word)  "by  my  glory."  In  2  Chron.  we  read, 
"  I  have  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  a 
house  of  sacrifice,"  where,  however,  it  is 
worth  considering  whether  instead  of  the 
somewhat  singular  PUJ  n*3  the  original  text 
may  not  have  been  73t  n'3,  as  in  ch.  viii. 
13]  to  put  my  name  there  [ch.  viii.  29; 
cf.  vers.  16,  17,  18,  19 ;  also  Dent.  xii.  11 ; 
Luke  xi.  12]  for  ever  [ch.  viu.  13,  As 
Solomon  offered  it,  so  God  accepted  it,  in 
perpetuity.  That  the  house  was  subse- 
quently "  left  desolate  "  and  destroyed  (2 
Kings  XXV.  9)  was  because  of  the  national 
apostasy  (vers.  8,  9)] ,  and  mine  eyes  and 
mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually.  [In 
ch.  viii.  29  Solomon  asked  that  God's  "eyes 
may  be  open  .  .  ,  towards  the  house."  The 
answer  is  that  not  only  His  eyes  sh  all  be  open, 
but  eyes  and  heart  shall  be  there  (Ephea. 
iii.  20  ;  see  Homiletios  on  oh.  iii.  5) ; — the 
eye  to  watch,  the  heart  to  cherish  it.] 

Yer.  4. — And  [Heb.  And  thou,  emphatic] 
If  Ibou  wUt  walk  before  me  as  David  thy 
father  walked,  In  Integrity  of  heart  before 
me  and  In  uprightness  [cf .  ch.  iii.  6, 14 ;  xi. 
34.  David  was  not  perfect,  as  our  author 
tells  us  elsewhere  (ch.  xv.  5 ;  of.  ch.  i.  6  ; 
2  Sam.  xxiv.  10).  His  integrity  consisted 
in  his  unvarying  loyalty  to  the  true  God. 
Even  when  overcome  by  that  fierce  tempta- 
tion (2  Sam.  xi.)  he  never  faltered  in  his 
allegiance  to  the  truth.  There  was  no 
coquetting  with  idolatrous  practices  ;  of.  Psa. 
xviii.  20—24] ,  to  do  according  to  all  that 
I  have  commanded  thee,  and  wilt  keep 
my  statutes  and  my  Judgments  [the  echo 
of  David's  last  words,  ch.  ii.  3, 4.  It  is  prob- 
able, however,  that  the  historian  has  only 
preserved  the  substance  of  the  message.  It 
is  doubtful  whether  Solomon  himself  would 
remember  the  exact  words] : 

Yer.  6.— Then  I  will  establish  [same 
word  as  in  oh.  ii.  4,  where  see  note.  Surely 
he  would  remember  this  word  as  it  would 
recall  his  father's  charge  to  his  mind]  the 
throne  of  thy  kingdom  upon  Israel  for 
ever  [this  is  the  answer  to  the  prayer  of 
ch.  viii,  26]  ai  I  promised  to  David  thy 
fiither,  Saying,  There  shall  not  is.Q.  tbea 
a  man  upon  the  throne  of  Israel.  [2  Sam. 
vii.  12,  16 ;  1  Kings  ii.  4 ;  vi.  12 ;  Psa.  cxxxii. 
12.  But  the  primary  reference  is  to  oh.  viii. 
25  ;  see  Introduction,  sect.  III.] 

Yer.  6. — But  If  ye  shall  at  all  [rathei 
altogether,  or  assuredly']  turn  from  foUowln^f 
me  [The  A.  Y.  entirely  misreprest  nts  the 
force  of  the  Hebraism,  If  to  turn,  ye  shall 
turn,  which  must  mean  aoiaplete,  notpartial, 
apostasy.  Cf.  2  Chron.  vii.  19,  and  2  Sam. 
vii.  14,  15],  ye  or  your  children  [as  the 
promises  of  God  are  to  us  and  our  children 
(Acts  ii.  39),  so  are  His  threatenings],  and 
will  not  keep  my  oommandmenta  and  my 


]88 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  IX.  1 — a 


statutes  wMchI  [LXX.  Muvaij^;  Qui  facit 
per  alium,  &o.]  have  set  before  you,  but 
go  and  serve  other  gods  and  worsblp 
tbem  [Exod.  xx.  6 ;  Deut.  7.  9  ;  xiii.  2] : 

Ver.  7. — Tben  wUl  I  cut  off  Israel  out  of 
tbe  land  which  I  have  given  them  [Cf. 
Deut.  iv.  26,  27 ;  and  for  tbe  fulfilment  see 
2  Kings  XXV.  11, 21 ;]  and  this  house  which 
I  have  hallowed  for  my  name  [Jer.  vii.  14] 
will  I  cast  out  of  my  sight  [same  expres- 
sion, 2  Kings  xxiv.  20] ;  and  Israel  shall  be  a 
proverb  and  a  byword  among  all  people 
[the  exact  words  of  Deut.  xxviii.  37.  Similar 
words  in  Isa.  xiv.  i ;  Micah  vi  16.  Much 
the  same  punishment  is  denounced  in  Levit. 
xxvi.  U— 38,  and  Deut.  iv.  45,  63] : 

Yer.  8. — And  at  this  house,  which  Is  high 
[Heb.  And  this  house  shall  be  high,  njnj 

jV?}/.  Our  translators  were  probably  in- 
fluenced by  2  Chron.  vii.   21,  the  text  ot 

which  is  jivr  n^H  T^'X  which  would  seem 
to  be  an  emendation,  designed  to  clear  up 
the  difficulty  rather  than  an  accidental  vari- 
ation of  the  text.  But  here  the  literal 
rendering  is  probably  the  truer,  the  meaning 
being  "  this  house  shall  be  conspicuous,  as 
an  example  " — so  the  Vulg.  donms  haec  erit 
in  exemplum.  The  LXX.  accords  with  the 
Hebrew  text,  o  olxoi;  oJroj  larai  6  ii/<7)\6f, 
but  the  Syriao  and  Arabic  read,  "  this 
house  shall  be  destroyed."  Eeil  sees  in  the 
words  an  allusion  implicite  to  Deut.  xxvi.  19, 
and  xxviii.  1,  where  God  promises  to  make 

Iirael  )V7\!,  and  says  "  the  blessing  will  be 
turned  into  a  curse."  The  temple  should 
indeed  be  "high,"  should  be  what  Israel 
would  have  been,  but  it  shall  be  as  a 
warning,  &a, ;  but  this  connexion  is  some- 
what far-fetched  and  artificial.  Thenius 
would  read  for  \V^^^  C^y  "tains,"  after 


Micah  iii.  12 ;  Jer.  xxvi.  18 ;  Paa.  Izziz.  1 ; 

but  it  is  hardly  right  to  resort  to  conjectures, 
unsupported  by  a  single  version  or  MS.,  BO 
long  as  any  sufficient  meaning  can  be  ex- 
tracted from  the  words  as  they  stand,  and 
no  one  can  deny  that  "  high  "  may  surely 
signify  "  conspicuous."  Cf.  Matt.  xi.  23] , 
every  one  that  passetb  by  it  shall  be 
astonlEhed.  [  DQ^  primarily  means  to  be 
dumb  with  astonishment,  Gesen.,  Thes,  iii. 
p.  1435]  and  shall  hiss  [plB*,  like  "hiss," 

is  an  onomatopoetio  word.  It  does  not 
denote  the  hissing  of  terror  (Bahr)  but  of 
derision ;  cf .  Jer.  xix.  8 ;  xlix.  17 ;  Job  xxvii. 
23;  Lam.ii.15,16.  Bawlinson  aptly  remarks, 
as  bearing  on  the  authorship  of  the  Kings, 
that  this  is  a  familiar  word  in  Jeremiah  (see 
oh.  xviii.  16 ;  xxv.  9 ;  zxix.  18 ;  1.  13 ;  li. 
37,  in  addition  to  the  passages  cited  above), 
and  that  the  other  prophets  rarely  use  it. 
The  fact  that  much  of  this  charge  is  in 
Jeremiah's  style,  confirms  the  view  taken 
above  (note  on  ver.  4],  that  the  ipsissima 
verba  of  the  dream  are  not  preserved  to  us. 
The  author  indeed  could  hardly  do  more 
than  preserve  its  leading  ideas,  which  he 
would  naturally  present  in  his  own  dress] ; 
and  they  shall  say.  Why  hath  the  Lord 
done  thus  unto  this  land  and  to  this  house  7 
[Similar  words  Deut.  xxix.  24,  25 ;  Jer. 
xxii.  8.] 

Yer.  9. — And  they  shall  answer.  Because 
they  forsook  the  Lord  their  God  who 
brought  forth  their  fathers  oat  of  the  land 
of  Egypt  [Based  on  Deut.  xxix.  25.  Sulomon 
in  his  prayer  referred  repeatedly  to  this 
great  deliverance,  vers.  16,  21,  51,  53],  and 
have  taken  hold  upon  other  gods  and  have 
worshipped  them  and  served  them ;  there- 
fore hath  the  Lord  brought  upon  them  all 
thisevj 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 9. — TTie  Second  Appearance  to  Solomon,  "Behold  the  goodness  and 
•everity  of  God  "  (Bom.  xi.  22).     To  Solomon  goodnesB,  to  Israel  severity. 

I.  The  GOODNESS  OP  God  is  manifested — 

1.  In  revealing  Himself  to  Solomnn.  The  greatest  favour  God  can  show  us  is 
to  show  us  Himself;  the  greatest  gift  is  to  give  us  Himself. 

"  Give  what  Thou  wilt,  without  Thee  I  am  poor, 
And  with  Thee  rich,  take  what  Thou  wilt  away." 

"  I  will  love  him  and  will  manifest  myself  unto  him  "  (John  xiv.  21).  "  I  will 
come  in  to  him  and  sup  with  him  "  (Rev.  iii.  20).  "  We  will  make  our  abode  witli 
him  "  (John  xiv.  23).  There  are  no  richer  promises  than  these.  Well  may  we 
exclaim,  "  0  altitudo  I  "  (Bom.  xi.  83.)  "  0  why  should  heavenly  God  to  men 
have  such  regard  I  " 

Yes,  the  riches,  honour,  glory,  Ac,  given  to  Solomon  were  of  small  account 
compared  with  the  good  thoughts  and  hiph  aspirations  bestowed  upon  him.   Bichei 


OH.  nt.  1—9.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  187 

are  such  third-rate  blessings  that  God  bestows  them  indisorirninately  on  the  evil 
and  the  good.  But  noble  resolves  and  high  purposes — "  courtliness  and  tlie  desire 
of  (true)  fame,  and  love  of  truth,  and  all  that  makes  a  man  " — these  He  reserve* 
for  His  children.  Solomon's  riches  and  glory  proved  his  ruia ;  the  revelations  h» 
received  were  the  true  source  of  his  greatness. 

2.  In  warning  Solomon.  The  very  kindest  thing  a  friend  can  do  for  us  is  to 
admonish  us  when  we  are  going  wrong.  "  Thou  mayest  be  sure  that  he  that  will 
in  private  tell  thee  of  thy  faults  is  thy  friend,  for  he  adventureth  thy  dislike  and 
doth  hazard  thy  hatred"  (Sir  W.  Ealeigh).  God  showed  this  proof  of  love  to- 
Solomon.  In  the  night  watches,  in  the  darkness  and  silence,  away  from  the 
glamour  and  flattery  of  the  court,  the  Divine  voice  was  heard  in  his  secret  soul. 
And  iheplmnness  of  the  warning  was  a  part  of  its  mercifulness.  The  trumpet  gave 
no  uncertain  sound  (vers.  6 — 8).  God  set  before  him  that  day  "  life  and  good, 
death  and  evil "  (Deut.  xxx.  15).  By  one  to  whom  such  wisdom  had  been  vouch- 
safed, warnings  should  have  been  unneeded,.  But  tliey  were  needed — and  they 
were  mercifully  granted.  The  good  Shepherd  goes  "  o'er  moor  and  fell,  o'er  crag 
and  torrent "  to  bring  back  the  straying  sheep. 

II.  The  SEVEEiTY  OF  GoD  is  exhibited — 

1.  In  the  punishment  denounced  aga/inst  Israel.  "  Cut  off;  "  ■'  oast  out  of  my 
sight ;  "  "  a  proverb  and  a  byword  ;  "  "  shall  be  astonished  and  shall  hiss  " — these 
are  its  terms.  But  observe:  (1)  None  of  these  things  needed  to  have  befallen  them. 
God  had  no  pleasure  in  the  death  or  dispersion  of  His  elect  people.  It  was  their 
own  fault  if  they  were  cut  off.  (2)  These  things  were  denounced  in  kindness  to  stay 
them  in  their  sin  and  so  to  prevent  their  dispersion.  These  were  the  sanations  of 
that  dispensation.  "  The  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,  but,"  &c.  (1  Tim.  i.  9). 
(8)  There  was  no  disproportion  or  undue  rigour  in  these  penalties.  What  seems  to 
us  severity  is  really  exact  justice,  or  rather  mercy,  to  the  world.  As  Israel  had  been 
favoured  above  all  peoples,  so,  in  strict  equity,  should  it  be  punished  above  all. 
"  The  glory,  and  the  adoption,  and  the  covenants,"  &o.  (Eom.  ix.  4),  could  not 
appertain  to  them  without  bringing  with  them  "  many  stripes  "  for  the  disobedient. 
Those  exalted  to  heaven  shall  be  brought  down  to  hell  (Matt.  xi.  23).  It  was 
necessary  for  our  admonition  that  the  chosen  people  should  not  afford  the  world . 
the  spectacle  of  a  nation  sinning  unpunished  (1  Cor.  x.  11). 

2.  In  the  punishment  inflicted.  For  how  literally  have  these  words  been 
fulfilled  I  What  an  evidence  of  the  truth  of  God  the  history  of  Israel  supplies  ! 
This,  at  any  rate,  is  no  vaticirdum  ex  eventu.  "  This  day  is  this  scripture 
falfiUed  in  your  ears"  (Luke  iv.  21).  "A  proverb  and  a  byword  "—eighteen 
centuries  at  least  testify  to  the  truth  of  these  words.  "  Cast  out  of  my  sight ;  "let 
the  horrors  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  (see  Jos.,  B.  J.  v.  ch.  x. — xiii.,  vi.  passim. 
"  Never,"  he  says,  "  did  any  other  city  suffer  such  miseries")  explain  to  us  these 
words.  And  there  is  not  a  country  of  Europe,  there  is  hardly  a  city,  in  which  the 
history  of  the  Jew  is  not  traced  in  blood,  written  within  and  without  in  "  mourning 
and  lamentation  and  woe."  Claudius  expelled  them  from  Eome  (Acts  xviii.  2) ;  our 
Edward  I.  drove  them  out  of  Guienne  and  England.  "  Ivanhoe  "  gives  some  idea  of 
their  treatment  in  this  country ;  but  a  romance  could  not  record  a  tithe  of  the  horrors 
of  which  Clifford's  Tower  in  York  or  the  Jews'  house  in  Lincoln  could  tell.  And 
yet  it  is  allowed  that  they  have  always  been  treated  more  tenderly  in  England  than 
in  the  rest  of  Europe.  But  even  here,  and  down  to  the  present  day,  the  word 
"  Jew  "  is  too  often  a  name  ^f  hate.  In  Servia,  in  Moldavia  and  WaUachia,  they 
are  still  the  objects  of  fierce  persecution  and  not  always  unmerited  obloquy.  Even 
the  "  Anti-Semitic  League,"  now  (1880)  being  organized  in  Germany,  is  a  part  of 
the  "severity"  of  God,  a  proof  of  the  "sure  wcH  of  prophecy."  lu  Jerusalem, 
again,  the  metropolis  of  their  race,  they  are  accounted  the  filth  and  oft'scouring 
of  all  things.  At  the  Greek  Easter  the  refrain  is  often  heard  in  the  Church  of  the 
Holy  Sepulchre,  "O  Jews,  0  Jews,  your  feast  is  a  feast  of  apes."  What  a  com- 
mentary, too,  is  the  Jews'  "place  of  wailing"  on  this  scripture  1  The  "holy  and 
beautiful  house  "  a  desolation,  the  temple  precincts  trodden  under-foot  of  the 
Gentiles  I    Conqueror  after  conqueror,  pilgrim  after  pilgrim,  has  asked  the  question. 


188  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  ix.  1—9. 

"Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  thus?"  &o.,  while  the  "ever-extending  miles  of 
gravestones  and  the  ever-lengthening  pavement  of  tombs  and  sepulchres  "  answWi 
"  Because  they  have  forsaken  the  Lord  their  God,"  &c.  (ver.  9  ;  Jer.  xxiL  8,  9). 

*'  Tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary  breast. 
When  will  ye  fly  away  and  be  at  rest  ? 
The  wild  dove  hath  its  nest,  the  fox  its  cave, 
Mankind  their  coontry — Israel  but  the  grave." 

Application.  Bom.  ii.  21.  In  the  history  of  the  Israelitish  nation  we  may  bm 
the  principle  of  God's  dealing  with  individual  souls  (see  Keble's  Occasional  Papers, 
&c.,  pp.  435  sqq.)  But  we  may  also  read  in  it  a  warning  for  the  Christian  Churoh 
(Bev.  ii.  E). 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  Benewed  Covenwnt.  This  Divine  manifestation  was  probably 
similar  in  form  to  that  with  which  Solomon  was  favoured  at  the  beginning  of  his 
reign,  of  which  it  is  said,  "In  Gibeon  the  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  in  a  dream  by 
night  "  (ch.  iii.  60).  We  have  no  means  of  judging  as  to  the  precise  time  of  this 
occurrence ;  but  the  close  connection  of  thought  between  what  God  here  says  to 
Solomon  and  the  prayer  at  tlie  dedication  {seen  most  clearly  in  2  Ghron.  vii.  14,  15) 
leads  us  to  suppose  that  it  took  place  immediately  after  that  event.     It  illustrates : 

I.  The  fidelity  of  God  and  the  blessed  eesults  that  attend  it.  God's 
faithfulness  is  seen  (1)  in  the  answering  of  the  prayer — "  I  have  heard  thy  prayer," 
Ac.  The  vision  was  itself  an  instant  and  very  gracious  Divine  response.  All  true 
prayer  is  heard.  No  pure  breath  of  suppHcation,  the  incense  of  the  heart,  ever 
ascends  to  Heaven  in  vain.  God  does  not  disappoint  the  hopes  and  longings  He 
has  Himself  awakened.  As  the  vapours  that  rise  from  land  and  sea  sooner  or 
later  return  again,  distilling  in  the  silent  dew,  descending  in  fruitful  showers 
upon  the  earth — ^not  one  fluid  particle  is  lost---so  every  cry  of  filial  faith  that 
goes  up  to  the  great  Father  of  all  comes  back  in  due  time  in  some  form  of  heavenly 
•  benediction.  And  more,  the  answer  is  often  far  larger  and  richer  than  our  expecta- 
tions. He  "  doeth  exceeding  abundantly,"  &c.  (Eph.  ui.  20).  Solomon  had  prayed 
"  That  thine  eyes  may  be  open  towards  this  house."  God  answers,  "  Mine  eyes 
and  mine  hea/ri  shall  be  there  perpetually."  The  very  heart  of  God  dwells  where 
His  suppliant  people  are.  This  anthropopathic  mode  of  speech  is  a  gracious  Divine 
accomnxodation  to  our  human  wants  and  weaknesses.  God  condescends  to  us  that 
we  may  the  better  rise  to  Him.  It  is  the  nec6ssarily  imperfect  yet  most  welcome 
expression  of  a  sublime  reaUty  that  we  could  not  otherwise  know.  God  has  a 
tender  "heart"  towards  us  as  well  as  an  observant  "  eye."  And  wherever  we 
seek  Him  with  all  our  hearts  there  His  heart  responds  to  the  throbbing  of  oxirs — 
a  sympathetic  personal  Presence,  meeting  our  approach,  pitying  our  necessities, 
giving  love  for  love.  Note,  too,  the  constancy  of  this  grace — "  for  ever,"  "  per- 
petually." "  The  gifts  and  caUing  of  God  are  without  repentance."  Wherever 
He  records  His  name  there  He  "  dwells."  When  He  blesses,  when  He  gives  or 
forgives,  it  is  "for  ever."  If  the  grace  is  cancelled,  if  the  benediction  is  with- 
drawn, the  fault  is  ours,  not  His.  "  Though  we  beheve  not,  yet  He  abideth  faith- 
ful; He  cannot  deny  Himself"  (2  Tim.  ii.  13).  (2)  In  the  repetition  of  the 
promise,  "If  thou  wilt  walk  before  me,"  &c.  (vers.  4,  5).  The  promise  is  reite- 
rated as  a  sacred  and  inviolable  engagement  which  God  on  His  part  will  never 
break.  "  The  sure  mercies  of  David."  AH  Divine  promises  are  sure.  We  have 
but  to  place  ourselves  in  the  Hne  of  their  fulfilment  and  all  is  well  with  us.  They 
are  steadfast  as  the  ordinances  of  heaven  and  earth.  Natural  laws  are  God's  pro- 
mises in  the  material  realm.  Obedience  to  them  is  the  sure  path  to  physical 
well-being.  Are  His  counsels  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  sphere  likely  to  be  less 
steadfast  and  reliable  ?  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the  promises  oi 
His  grace  can  never  fail.  "  They  stand  fast  for  ever  and  «ver,  and  are  done  in 
truth  and  uprightness  "  (Fsa.  cxi.  S). 


OH.  IX.  10—28.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


189 


n.  The  infidelitt  of  mam  and  thb  fatal  oonseqttences  that  follow  it. 
"  Bnt  if  ye  shall  at  all  turn  from  following  me,"  &c.  Here  is  a  solema  note  ot 
warning,  the  presage  of  that  guilty  apostasy  by  which  the  Jewish  people  became 
in  after  years  the  most  signal  example  to  men  and  nations  of  the  waywardness  of 
human  nature  and  the  reteibutive  justice  of  God.  We  are  reminded  that  the  faith- 
fulness of  God  has  a  dark  as  well  as  a  bright  side  to  it.  As  the  cloud  that  guided 
the  march  of  the  IsraeUtes  out  of  Egypt  was  hght  to  them,  but  a  source  of  blinding 
confusion  and  miserable  discomfiture  to  their  adversaries,  so  this  and  every  other 
attribute  of  God  bears  a  different  aspect  towards  us  according  to  the  relation  in 
which  we  stand  to  it,  the  side  on  which  we  place  ourselves.  Be  true  to  Him,  and 
every  perfection  of  His  being  is  a  joy  to  you,  a  guide,  a  glory,  a  defence  ;  forsake 
Him,  and  they  become  at  once  ministers  of  vengeance.  Even  His  love,  in  its 
infinite  rectitude  and  purity,  dooms  you  to  the  penalty  from  which  there  can  be  no 
escape.  Whether  in  the  physical  or  the  spiritual  realms,  one  feature  of  the  very 
beneficence  of  God's  laws  is  that  they  must  avenge  themselves.  Learn  here  (1) 
that  all  human  loss  and  misery  spring  from  forsahing  Ood.  "  If  ye  shall  at  all 
turn  from  following  mo,  ye  or  your  children,"  then  shall  all  these  woes  come  upon 
you.  All  sin  is  a  departure  from  the  living  God.  "  My  people  have  committed 
two  evils,  they  have  forsaken  me,"  &o.  (Jer.  ii.  13).  Adam  cast  off  his  allegiance 
to  God  when  He  listened  to  the  voice  of  the  tempter.  Idolatry  in  its  deepest  root 
has  this  meaning  (see  Bom.  i.  21 — 28).  Every  sinful  life  is  a  more  or  less  in- 
tentional and  deUberate  renunciation  of  God,  and  its  natural  results  are  shame, 
and  degradation,  and  death.  The  course  of  the  prodigal  in  Christ's  parable  is  a 
picture  of  the  hopeless  destitution  of  every  soul  that  forsakes  its  home  in  God. 
"  They  that  are  far  from  thee  shall  perish  "  (Pea.  Ixxiii.  27).  (2)  That  according 
to  the  height  of  privilege  so  is  the  depth  of  the  condemnation  when  thai  privilege 
is  abused.  The  very  height  of  the  "  hallowed  house  "  shall  make  the  ruin  the 
more  conspicuous  and  the  more  terrible.  There  is  no  heavier  judgment  that  God 
pronounces  upon  men  than  when  He  says,  "  I  will  curse  thy  blessings."  The  best 
things  are  capable  of  the  worst  abuse.  And  when  the  highest  sanctities  of  life  are 
violated  they  become  the  worst  grounds  of  reproach  and  sources  of  bitterness. 
The  greater  the  elevation,  the  deeper  and  more  dreadful  the  fall.  "  Thou  Caper- 
naum, which  art  exalted  to  heaven,"  &c.  (Luke  x.  15).  (3)  That  one  inevitable 
penalty  of  trcmgression  is  contempt  and  scorn.  "  Israel  shall  be  a  proverb  and  a 
byword  among  all  people."  "  He  that  passeth  by  shall  be  astonished  and  shall 
hiss."  "  When  the  salt  has  lost  its  savour  it  is  henceforth  good  for  nothing  but  to 
be  cast  out  and  trodden  under-foot  of  men  "  (Matt.  v.  13).  The  wicked  may  be  in 
honour  now,  but  the  time  is  coming  when  they  "  shall  awake  to  shame  and  ever- 
lasting  eontempt." — "W, 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  IX.  10—28. 


BoLOMOK'S  BUILDINaS  AND  VNDEBTAEIKaS. 

— So  far  the  historian  has  spoken  exclu- 
sively of  the  two  greatest  works  of  Solomon's 
reign,  the  Temple  and  the  Palace,  and  prin- 
cipally of  the  former.  Even  the  message 
just  related  was,  as  we  have  seen,  the  re- 
sponse to  the  prayer  offered  when  the  temple 
was  consecrated.  But  he  now  proceeds  to 
mention  other  proofs  of  Solomon's  great- 
ness, and  of  the  prosperity  of  his  reign — 
doubtless  because  the  glory  of  Israel  then 
leaohed  its  climax,  and  the  author  would  be 
tempted  to  linger  over  these  details  because 


of  the  dark  contrast  which  his  own  time 
supplied — and  this  leads  him  to  speak  of  the 
means  by  which  all  these  enterprises  were 
accomplished.  The  particulars  here  given 
are  but  fragmentary,  and  are  grouped  to- 
gether in  a  somewhat  irregular  manner.  It 
would  seem  as  if  both  this  account  and  that 
of  the  chronicler  had  been  compiled  from 
much  more  copious  histories,  each  writer 
having  cited  those  particulars  which  ap- 
peared to  him  to  be  the  most  interesting  and 
important.  But  the  design  of  the  historian 
in  either  case  is  evident,  viz.,  (1)  to  recount 
the  principal  undertakings  of  this  illustrious 
king,  and  (2)  to  indicate  the  resources  which 


190 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  IX.  10—28. 


enaWedhim  to  acoompUsli  Buch  amWtioris 
find  extensive  designs.  These  latter  were 
{1)  the  alliance  with  Hiram,  which  secured 
hiTti  the  necessary  materials  (vers.  11 — 14) ; 
(2)  the  forced  labour  of  the  subject  races 
<vers.  20—23) ;  and  (3)  the  voyage*  of  his 
fleet  (vers.  26—28). 

Ter.  10. — And  It  came  to  pass  at  the  end 
of  twenty  years  [seven  of  which  were  occu- 
pied on  the  temple  and  thirteen  on  the 
palace  (oh.  vU.  1)] ,  when  [or,  during  which. 
LXX.  iv  olc  iiKoSo/x^ae-  This  may  well  be 
the  meaning  of  nj3  "ISyS,  though  IK'S,  qui, 
undoubtedly  sometimes  has  the  sense  of 
quuni]  Solomon  bad  bnllt  the  two  boases, 
the  bouse  of  the  Lord  and  the  king's  house. 
[Observe  how  all  the  palaces  are  regarded 
as  one  honse.    Note  on  ch.  vii.  1.] 

Ver.  11. — (Now  Hiram  the  Mng  of  Tyre 
tHere  we  have  a  parenthesis  referring  us 
back  to  ch.y.  8 — 10]  had  furnished  Solomon 
with  cedar  trees  and  with  fir  trees  and 
with  gold  [The  gold  is  here  mentioned  for 
the  first  time.  No  doubt  Hiram's  shipping 
had  brought  it  in  before  the  Jewish  navy 
was  built.  It  was  this  probably  that  led  to 
the  construction  of  a  fleet]  accordli^  to  all 
bis  desire),  that  then  [this  is  the  apodosis 
to  ver.  10]  king  Solomon  gave  Hiram 
twenty  dtles  [really  they  were  mere  viU 
lages.  "It  is  a  genuine  Eastern  trick  to 
dignify  a  small  present  with  a  pompous 
name  "  (Thomson).  But  "Vil  is  a  word  of 
very  vj4e  meaning]  In  the  land  of  GalUeei 

r}\  lit,  circuit,  region   (like  Cicear,  ch, 

vli.  46),  hence  often  found  as  here  with  the 
ikrt.  =  the  region  of  the  Gentiles  (Isa.  ix. 

1  ;  1  Mace.  y.  16;  Matt.  iv.  19),  so  called 
because  it  was  inhabited  by  Phoenicians  (see 
2Sam.xxiv.7,andStrabo,xvi.  ti  Ig"'*  origin- 
ally designated  but  a  small  part  c.  ._e  con- 
siderable tract  of  country  later  known  as  the 
province  of  "  Galilee,"  viz.,  the  northern 
part  in  the  tribe  of  NaphtaU  0osh.  zx.  7 ; 

2  Eings  xv.  29;  Isa.  ix.  1.  Gf.  Jos.,  Ant.  T. 
1.  18).  It  is  easy  to  see  why  this  particn- 
lai  region  was  surrendered  to  Hiram.  (  ^ 
It  was  near  his  country  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  7);  (-) 
the  people  were  Phcenicians,  allied  to  Hiram, 
but  strangers  to  Solomon,  both  in  race  and 
religion ;  (3)  Solomon  could  not  with  pro- 
priety alienate  any  part  of  Inunanuel's  land, 
or  convey  to  a  foreigner  the  dominion  over 
th«  people  of  the  Lord.  Levit.  xxv.  23  for- 
bade  the  alienation  of  the  laud ;  Deut.  xml 
IS  the  rule  of  a  stranger. 

Ver.  12.— And  Hiram  came  out  ftomTyre 
to  see  the  cities  which  Solomon  had  given 
him;  and  they  pleased  bim  not.  [Heb. 
were  not  right  in  his  eyes.    It  has  been  con- 


jectured that  Hiram  had  hoped  for  the  noble 
bay  of  Aoeo  or  Ptolemais  (Milman,  Kaw- 
linson),  but  surely  he  had  seaboard  enough 
already.  It  was  rather  com  lands  he  would 
most  need  and  desire.  His  disappointment 
is  amply  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the 
country  assigned  him  was  a  hungry  and 
mountainous,  and  therefore  comparatively 
useless,  tract.  "  The  region  lay  on  the 
summit  of  a  broad  mountain  ridge  " 
(Porter).] 

Ver.  13.— And  he  said,  What  dtles  are 
these  which  thou  hast  given  me,  my 
brother  7  [Of.  chap.  xx.  32.  It  would  seem, 
at  first  sight,  as  if  this  form  of  speech  was 
then,  as  now,  the  usage  of  courts.  But  the 
Fellahln  of  Palestine,  the  "  modem  Canaan- 
ites,"  still  address  each  other  as  "my 
father"  or  "my brother."  See  Conder,"Tent- 
work, "  p.  332] .  And  be  called  them  the 
land  of  Cabul  [The  meaning  of  this  word  is 
quite  uncertain.    The  LXX.  reads  "<9|Ihov, 

which  shows  that  they  must  have  read  7U3 

instead  of  713D ;  indeed,  it  is  possible  that 
the  words  have  the  same,  meaning  (Gesen.) 
Stanley  (S.  and  P.  p.  364)  thinks  these  cities 
formed  the  boundary  between  the  two  king- 
doms, and  refers  to  the  use  of  Spin  in  Matt. 
XV.  21;  Luke  vi.  17,  &o.  According  to 
Josephus,  XajSoXciv  is  a  Phoenician  word, 
meaning  displeasing ;  but  his  etymologies 
are  to  be  received  with  caution,  and  Gesenins 
justly  pronounces  this  a  mere  ccinjecture 
from  the  context.  Thenius  and  Ewald  re- 
gard the  word  as  compounded  of  3  and  73 
•3  at  nothing;   Keil  connects  it  with  the 

toot  h^n,  which  wonld  yield  the  meaning 
pawned  or  pledged,  and  hence  concludes  that 
this  strip  of  territory  was  merely  given  to 
Hiram  as  a  security  for  the  repayment  of  a 
loan  (see  below  on  ver.  14) ;  while  Bahr  de- 
rives it  from  733,  an  unused  root,  aMn  to 
the  preceding  =  vinxit,  eonstrinxit,  and 
would  see  in  it  a  name  bestowed  on  the 
region  because  of  its  confined  geographical 
position.  He  does  not  understand  the  word, 
howe-^er,  as  a  term  of  contempt.  "How," 
he  asks,  "  could  Hiram  give  the  district  a 
permanent  name  which  contained  a  mockery 
of  hmiself  rather  than  of  the  land?  "  But 
the  word  was  obviously  an  expression  of 
disparagement,  if  not  disgust,  which,  fall- 
ing from  Hiram's  lips,  was  caught  up  and 
repeated  with  a  view  to  mark  not  so  much 
his  displeasure  as  Solomon's  meanness.  But 
it  is  not  necessary  to  find  a  meaning  for  the 
word,  for  it  is  to  be  considered  that  a  city 
bearing  this  name  existed  at  that  time  and 
in  this  neighbourhood  (Josh.  xix.  27),  the 
site  of  which,  in  all  probability,  is  marked  by 
the  modem  Kabul,  eight  nules  east  of  Aoohc 


OH.  IX.  10— 28.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OS"  KINGS. 


191 


{Eobinson,  iii.  87,  88 ;  Diet.  Bib.  i.  237  ; 
Thomson,  "Land  and  Book,"  i.  281,  511). 
It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  it  may  haye  been 
one  of  the  "  twenty  cities  "  (ver.  11)  given 
to  Hiram.  And  if  this  city,  whether  within 
or  without  the  district  of  Galilee,  were  no- 
torious for  its  poverty  or  meanness,  or  con- 
spicuous by  its  bleak  situation,  we  can  at 
once  understand  why  Hiram  should  transfer 
the  name  to  the  adjoining  region,  even  if 
that  name,  in  itself,  had  no  special  signifi- 
cance] unto  this  day.     [See  on  ch.  viii.  8.] 

Ver.  14. — ^And  Htrajn  sent  [n7B';i  must  be 
understood  as  pluperfect,  "  Now  Hiram 
had  sent,"  referring  to  verse  11.  This 
fact  is  mentioned  to  explain  the  gift  of  the 
cities,  viz.,  that  they  were  in  payment  for 
the  gold  he  had  furnished.  The  timber  and 
stone  and  labour  had  been  paid  for  in  corn 
and  wine  and  oil.  See  on  ch.  v.  11]  to  the 
king  sizacore  talents  of  gold.  [This  sum 
is  variously  estimated  at  from  half  a  million 
to  a  million  and  a  quarter  of  our  money. 
(Eeil,  in  loc,  and  Diet.  Bib.  iii.  1734.  It 
equalled  3000  shekels  of  the  sanctuary 
(Exod.  xxxviii.  24 — 26).  Eeil,  who,  as  we 
have  seen,  interprets  Cabul  to  mean  pledged, 
says  somewhat  positively  that  these  120 
talents  were  merely  lent  to  Solomon  to 
enable  him  to  prosecute  his  undertakings, 
and  that  the  twenty  cities  were  Hiram's  se- 
curity for  its  repayment.  He  further  sees 
in  the  restoration  of  these  cities  (2  Chron. 
viii.  2,  where  see  note)  a  proof  that  Solomon 
mast  have  repaid  the  amount  lent  him. 
The  "  sixscore  talents  "  should  be  compared 
with  the  120  talents  of  oh.  z.  10,  and  the 
666  talents  of  ch.  x.  14.] 

Ver.  15. — ^And  this  Is  the  reason  [or  man- 
ner, account,  ^5'''■  ^^^  '•  ' '  -^^^  ^  "**  "'*" 
with  regard  to,"  &c.  The  historian  now 
proceeds  to  speak  of  the  forced  labour.  The 
LXX.  inserts  this  and  the  next  nine  verses 
after  oh.  x.  22]  of  the  levy  [see  on  ch. 
V.  13,  and  xii.  18]  which  Solomon  raised ; 
for  to  build  [The  punctuation  of  the  A.V. 
is  misleading.  The  Hebrew  has  no  break — 
"  which  Solomon  raised  for  building,"  &o.] 
the  house  of  the  Lord  and  his  own  house 
and  Mllo  [Heb.  invariably,  the  Millo,  as  in 
2  Sam.  V.  9 ;  1  Kings  xi.  27 ;  2  Kings  xii. 
20 ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  5 ;  LXX.  ij  dxpa.  The 
import  of  the  word  is  much  disputed,  but 
Wordsworth  has  but  slight  warrant  for  say- 
ing  that  it  means  fortress.  According  to 
some  it  is  an  archaic  Canaanitish  term, 
"  adopted  by  the  Israelites  when  they  took 
the  town  and  incorporated  into  their  own 
nomenclature"  (Diet.  Bib.  ii.  p.  367),  an 
idea  which  finds  some  support  in  Judges 
iz.  6,  20.  Mr.  Grove  would  further  see  in 
it  a  name  for  Mount  Zion,  dgpa  being  the 


invariable  designation  of  that  part  of  the 
city  in  the  Maccabees.  But  see  Jos.,  B.  J.  v. 
.4.  1 ;  Ant.  xv.  11.  5  ;  and  Porter,  i.  pp.  96, 
109.  Lewin  ("  Siege  of  Jerusalem,"  p.  266) 
identifies  it  with  the  great  platform  on  which 
temple  and  palace  alike  were  built.  But 
the  word  yields  a  definite  meaning  in  the 

Hebrew  (-Si^D,  "the  filling  in").  Gesemns 

consequently  understands  it  to  mean,  s 
rampart  (agger)  because  this  is  built  up  and 
filled  in  with  stones,  earth,  &e.  ,  And  the 
name  would  have  a  special  fitness  if  we 
might  suppose  that  it  was  applied  to  that 
part  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  which  crossed 
the  Tyropaeon  valley.  This  ravine,  which 
practically  divided  the  city  into  two  parts, 
would  have  been  the  weakest  spot  in  the 
line  of  circumvallation,  unless  it  were  partly 
filled  in — ^it  is  now  completely  choked  up  by 
d^ria,  &o. — and  protected  by  special  fortifi- 
cations ;  and,  if  this  were  done,  and  we  can 
hardly  doubt  it  was  done  (see  on  ch.  xi. 
27),  Hammillo,  "  the  fiUing  in,"  would  be  its 
natural  and  appropriate  name.  And  its 
mention,  here  and  elsewhere,  in  connexion 
with  the  wall,  lends  some  support  to  this 
view]  and  the  waJl  of  Jerusalem  [We  learn 
from  2  Sam.  v.  9  that  David  had  already 
built  Millo  and  the  wall.  Bawliuson  argues 
from  chap.  xi.  27  that  these  repairs  had 
been  "hasty,  and  had  now — fifty  years 
later — ^fallen  into  decay,"  and  that  Solomon 
renewed  them.  More  probably  the  words 
indicate  an  enlargement  of  the  Tyropaeon 
rampart,  and  an  extension  of  the  walls. 
See  note  there  and  on  chap.  iii.  1. 
Solomon,  no  doubt,  wished  to  strengthen 
the  defences  of  the  capital,  on  which  he  had 
expended  so  much  labour,  and  where  there 
was  so  much  to  tempt  the  rapacity  of  pre- 
datory neighbours]  and  Hazor  [For  the 
defence  of  the  kingdom  he  built  a  chain  of 
fortresses  "to  form  a  sort  of  girdle  round 
the  land"  (Ewald).  The  first  mentioned, 
Hazor,  was  a  place  of  great  importance  in 
earlier  times,  being  the  "head  of  all  those 
(the  northern)  kingdoms  "  (Josh.  xi.  10).  It 
stood  on  an  eminence — as  indeed,  for  the 
sake  of  security,  did  all  the  cities  of  that 
lawless  age  (ib.,  ver.  l.S  marg.) — overlooking 
Lake  Merom.  It  was  at  no  great  distance 
from  the  north  boundary  of  Palestine,  in 
Naphtah  (Josh.  xix.  86),  and  being  favoured 
by  position,  it  was  strongly  fortified — Hazor 
means  fortress — and  hence  Joshua  made  a 
point  of  destroying  it.  It  appears,  however, 
to  have  speedUy  regained  its  importance,  for 
in  Judg.  iv.  2,  17  we  find  it  as  the  capital 
of  Jabin,  king  of  Canaan.  It  was  selected 
by  Solomon  as  the  best  site  for  a  stronghold, 
which  should  protect  his  northern  border, 
and   as   commanding  the  approach  from 


191 


THE  MEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  a.  10—28 


Sjria.  Aa  it  is  not  mentioned  in  ch.  xv. 
20,  it  would  appear  to  have  escaped  in  the 
invasion  of  Benhadad.  Possibly  it  was  too 
strong  for  him]  and  Meglddo  [Josh.  xii.  21 ;  ' 
xvii.  11 ;  Judg.  v.  19.  This  place  was  chosen 
partly  because  of  its  central  position — ^it  stood 
on  the  margin  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon, 
the  battle-field  of  Palestine,  and  the  battles 
fought  there  prove  its  strategical  importance, 
Judg.  y.  19  (cf.  1  Sam.  zxxi.  1) ;  2  Eings 
zziii.  29 ;  Judith  iii.  9,  10 — and  partly,  per- 
haps, because  the  high  road  from  Egypt  to 
Damascus  passed  through  it.  It  dominated 
the  passes  of  Ephraim  (see  Judith  iv.  7).  It 
has  till  recently  been  identified  vnthel-Lejj&n 
|from  Legio.  Compare  our  Chester,  &c.) 
(Eobinson,  ii.  116  sqq. ;  Stanley,  S.  and  P., 
p.  347 ;  Porter,  286, 287);  but  Conder  {"  Tent- 
work,  "  p.  67)  gives  good  reasons  for  fixing 
the  site  at  the  "  large  ruins  between  Jezreel 
and  Bethshean,  which  still  bears  the  name 
of  Mujedd'a,  i.e.,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
plain]  and  Gezer  [This  commanded  the  ap- 
proach from  Egypt,  and  would  protect  the 
southern  frontier  of  Solomon's  kingdom .  See 
Josh.  X.  33 ;  xii.  12  ;  xxi.  21 ;  Judges  i.  29 ; 
2  Sam.  v.  25  ;  1  Chron.  xx.  4.  It  stands  on 
the  great  maritime  plain,  and  is  also  on  the 
coast  road  between  Egypt  and  Jerusalem. 
The  site  was  identified  (in  1874)  by  M. 
Clermont  Ganneau  with  Tell  Jezer.  The 
name  means  "out  off,"  "isolated"  (Gesen.) 
"  The  origin  of  the  title  is  at  once  clear,  for 
the  site  is  an  out-Her — to  use  a  geological 
term — of  the  main  line  of  hiUs,  and  the 
position  commands  one  of  the  important 
passes  to  Jerusalem  "  (Conder,  p.  6). 

The  mention  of  Gezer  leads  to  a  paren- 
thesis of  considerable  length  (vers.  16—19). 
The  question  of  the  levy  is  put  aside  for  the 
time,  whilst  the  historian  explains  how  it 
was  that  the  king  came  to  build  Gezer.  He 
then  proceeds  to  mention  the  other  towns 
built  during  the  same  reign. 

Ver.  16. — For  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  had 
gfone  up  and  taken  Gezer  and  burnt  it  with 
Are  [The  total  destruction  o^  the  place  and 
its  inhabitants  by  fire  and  sword  looks  more 
like  an  act  of  vengeance  for  some  grave 
offence  than  Uke  ordinary  warfare],  and 
Blaln  the  Cajuanltes  that  dwelt  In  the  city 
[Though  Gezer  was  allotted  to  Ephraim 
(Josh.  ?vi.  3)  and  designated  as  a  Levitical 
city  (ib.,  xii.  21),  the  Canaanite  inhabitants 
had  never  been  dispossessed  (Josh.  ivi.  10 ; 
LXX.  "Canaanites  and  Perizzites ;"  cf.  Judg. 
I.  29),  and  they  would  seem  to  have  enjojed 
a  sort  of  independence] ,  aad  given  it  for  a 
present  \h''Tp^,  dotatio,  dowry.  It  is  the 
onstom  of  the  East  for  the  husband  to  pui- 
ohase  his  wife  by  a  present  (Gen.  xnx.  18 ; 


2  Sam.  iii.  14,  &e.) ;  but  in  royal  marriages 
a  dowry  was  often  given.  "  Sargon  gave 
Cilicia  as  a  dowry  with  his  daughter.  .  .  . 
Autiochus  Soter  gave  his  claims  on  Mace- 
donia as  a  dowry  to  his  step-daughter  Fhila, 
when  she  married  Antigonus  Gonatas.  Coele- 
Syria  and  Palestine  were  promised  as  a  dowry 
to  Ptolemy  Epiphanes,  when  he  married 
Cleopatra,  sister  of  Antiochus  the  Great," 
&c.  (Eawlinson).  Gezer  being  a  wedding 
present,  its  conquest  must  have  taken  place 
years  before  the  date  to  which  the  history 
is  now  brought  down]  unto  his  daughter, 
Solomon's  wife. 

Ver.  17. — And  Solomon  built  Gezer  [In 
the  case  of  Gezer  it  was  an  actual  rebuHd- 
ing.  But  as  applied  to  Beth-horon,  &e., 
"  built  "  probably  means  enlarged,  strengtli- 
ened']  and  Beth-horon  the  nether  [mentioned 
in  connexion  with  Gezer,  Josh.  xvi.  3  (of.  x. 
10).  It  is  deserving  of  mention  that  the 
two  cities  of  Beth-horon  still  survive  in  the 
modem  villages  of  Beitur  el-tahta  and 
el-fok,"  names  which  are  "  clearly  corrup- 
tions of  Beth-horon  "the  Nether"  and  "the 
Upper  "  (Stanley,  S.  and  P.,  p.  208).  One 
lies  at  the  foot  of  the  ravine,  on  an  eminence, 
the  other  at  the  summit  of  the  pass.  like 
Megiddo  and  Gezer,  this  town,  too,  lay  on  a 
liigh  road,  viz. ,  that  between  Jerusalem  and 
the  sea  coast.  The  selection  of  Beth-horon 
for  fortification  by  Solomon  is  also  justified 
by  history— =three  decisive  battles  having 
been  fought  here  (see  Josh.  z.  10 ;  1  Mace, 
iii.  13—24,  and  Jos.,  Bell,  Jnd.  ii.  19. 
8.  _  The  object  of  the  king  in  fortifying 
this  place  was  to  protect  the  uplands  of 
Judah,  Benjamin,  and  Ephraim  against  in- 
vasion from  the  Philistine  plain.  It  is  per- 
haps not  uunoteworthy  that,  according  to  our 
author,  it  was  Beth-horon  the  nether  that 
Solomon  "buUt,"  as  this  would  naturally 
have  Buffered  more  than  its  loftier  neighbour 
from  war.  According  to  2  Chron.  viii.  5, 
however,  Solomon  built  Beth-horon  the 
upper  also. 

Ver.  18.— And  Baalath  [probably  the 
place  mentioned  in  Josh.  xix.  44,  and  there- 
fore a  town  of  Dan.  By  some  it  has  been 
identified,  but  on  wholly  insufficient  grounds 
— the  mention  of  Tadmor  immediately  after- 
wards being  the  chief- with  Baalbek.  This 
is  one  of  the  names  which  prove  how 
ancient  and  widespread  was  the  worship  of 
Baal  (Gesen.,  Thesaurus,  225  ;  Diet.  Bib.,i. 
147, 148)]  and  Tadmor  In  the  wilderness,  In 
the  land.  [Whether  this  is  (1)  the  famous 
Palmyra,  or  (2)  Tamar,  an  obscure  town  of 
south  Judah,  is  a  question  which  has  been 
much  disputed.  It  should  be  stated  in  the 
first  place  that  the  Cethib  has  "IDD,  but  the 
Keri,  after  2  Chron.  viii.  4,  reads  "10111,  as  do 
all  the  versions;  and  secondly  that  a  Tama  r  it 


OB.  rx.  10—28.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


193 


mentionedEzek.  zlvii.  19  and  xlyiii.  28  a  place 
which  may  well  be  identical  with  "  Hazazon 
Tamar,  which  is  Engedl "  (2  Ohron.  xx.  2 ; 
of.  Gen.  xiv.  7.  In  favour  of  (1)  are  the 
following  considerations :  (1)  the  statement 
of  the  chronicler  that  Solomon  did  build 
Palmyra  (for  of  the  identity  of  "  Tailmor  " 
with  Palmyra  there  can  be  no  reasonable 
doubt ;  see  Diet.  Bib.  iii.  1428).  (2)  The 
probability  that  Solomon,  with  his  wide 
views  of  commerce,  would  seize  upon  and 
fortify  the  one  oasis  in  the  great  Syrian 
desert  in  order  to  establish  an  entrepot 
there  (see  on  ver.  19)r  (3)  The  words  "  in 
the  wilderness,"  which,  of  course,  are 
eminently  true  of  Palmyra.  Against  it, 
however,  may  be  urged  (1)  that  Tamar  was 
much  more  likely  to  be  changed  into 
Tadmorthan  Tadmor  into  Tamar.  (2|  That 
this  place  is  distinctly  described  as  "  in  the 
land,"  which,  strictly,  Palmyra  was  not. 
But  here  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  chro- 
nicler omits  these  words,  and  that  the  Syriac, 
Arabic,  and  Vulgate  render,  "  in  the  land  of 
the  wilderness."  Eeil  says  our  text  is  mani- 
festly corrupt,  and  certainly  the  expression 
is  a  singular  one.  Some  would,  therefore, 
alter  pN3  into  01X3,  or  into  nDn3  (after 
2  Chron.  viii.  i).  Both  of  the  emendations, 
however,  while  undoubtedly  plausible,  are 
purely  conjectural.  Wordsworth,  who  thinks 
Palmyra  is  meant,  says  it  is  described  as 
"  in  the  land  "  to  indicate  that  God  had 
fnlfilled  his  promise  to  extend  the  land  of 
Solomon  far  eastward  into  the  wilderness 
(Psa.  Izzii.  9).  And  a  Jewish  historian,  espe- 
cially in  the  time  of  his  country's  decadence, 
might  well  recount  how  this  great  city  had 
once  been  comprised  within  the  boundaries 
of  Israel.  In  favour  of  (2)  are  these  facts:  (1) 
That  it  is  the  reading  of  the  text.  It  is 
said,  however,  that  the  ancient  name  of 
Tadmor  was  Tamar,  and  the  place  clearly 
owed  its  name  to  the  Palm  trees.  But  the 
name  is  always  Tadmor  in  the  Palmyrene 
inscriptions.  (2)  That  this  place  was  "in 
the  wilderness,"  i.e.,  of  Judah.  (3)  That  it 
was  "  in  the  land,"  and  {i)  that  it  was  in 
close  proximity  to  the  places  just  mentioned. 
The  evidence  is  thus  so  evenly  balanced  that 
it  is  impossible  to  decide  positively  between 
the  two. 

Ver.  19. — And  all  the  ctties  of  store  that 
Solomon  had  [cities  where  the  produce  of 
the  land  was  stored  for  the  use  of  the 
troops  or  household,  or  against  a  season 
of  scarcity  (Gen.  ili.  35 ;  Exod.  i.  11), 
or  possibly  (Ewald)  they  were  emporiums 
for  the  development  of  trade.  The  fact 
that  these  store  cities  are  mentioned 
in  the  same  breath  with  Tadmor,  is  an 
argument  for  the  identification  of  that 
place  with  Palmyra,  which  Solomon  could 

1    KINGS. 


only  have  built  as  a  means  of  gaining  or 
retaining  control  over  the  caravan  trade 
between  the  East  and  the  Mediterranean. 
Cf.  2  Chron.  xvii.  12 ;  xxxii.  28,  and  Gen. 
xli.  48.  They  would  seem  to  have  beeu 
chiefly  on  the  northern  frontier,  2  Cbron. 
viii.  4  ("inHamath") ;  ib.  ch.  xvi.  4  speaks 
of  "  the  store  cities  of  Napthali."  It  should 
be  remembered  that  Solomon  had  an  ad- 
versary in  Damascus],  and  cities  for  his 
Chariots,  and  cities  for  Ms  horsemen  [Cf. 
ch.  iv.  26.  These  were  not  so  much  fortresses 
(vers.  15 — 18)  as  places  adapted  to  accommo- 
date his  cavalry,  <fco.  For  horsemen  we  should 
perhaps  read  horses.  See  note  on  oh.  v.  6] , 
and  that  which  Solomon  desired  to  1>ulld 
[Heb.  and  the  desire  of  Solomon  which  he 
desired ;  cf.  ver.  1.  The  use  of  the  cognate 
verb  refutes  the  idea  that  Solomon's  "  desire" 
is  another  name  for  pleasure-buildings  or 
pleasaunces,  as  does  also  "  desire  "  in  ver.  11. 
It  is  certain,  however,  that  such  buildings 
were  erected,  and  it  is  probable  that  they 
are  referred  to  here]  In  Jerusalem  and  la 
Lebanon  [It  is  highly  probable  that  plea- 
sure-houses were  built  in  Lebanon  (Cant, 
vii.  4,  passim),  for  which  Solomon  may  well 
have  had  a  strong  affection,  and  pleasure- 
gardens  in  Jerusalem  (Eccles.  ii.  4 — 7).  See 
Stanley.pp.  197-199);  and  we  may  reasonably 
imagine  (with  Ewald)  that  in  these  latter 
he  sought  to  grow  specimens  of  the  plants, 
4c.,  about  which  he  "  spoke '  (ch.  iv.  33 ; 
of.  Eccles.  ii.  5).  "  It  is  a  cnrioas  fact  that 
in  the  ground  hard  by  the  '  fountains  of 
•Solomon'  near  Bethlehem,  which  exhibit 
manifest  traces  of  an  ancient  garden,  and 
where  the  intimations  of  Josephus  would  lead 
us  to  suppose  that  Solomon  had  a  rural  re- 
treat, are  still  to  be  found  a  number  of  plants 
self-sown  from  age  to  age,  which  do  not 
exist  in  any  other  part  of  the  Holy  Land  " 
(Kitto,  "  Bib.  lUus."  vol.iv.  p.  101).  Some  oi 
Solomon's  journeys  to  these  favourite  re- 
sorts, wo  can  hardly  doubt,  are  referred  to 
in  Cant.  iii.  6 — 10 ;  iv.  8  sqq. ;  vi.  11] 
and  in  all  the  land  of  his  dominion. 

Ver.  20.— And  aU  the  people  that  were 
left  of  the  Amorltes,  Hlttltes,  Ferizzltes, 
Hlvltes,  and  Jebusites  [Judges  i.  21 — 36; 
iii.  5 ;  1  Chron.  xxii.  2]  which  were  not 
Of  the  children  of  Israel 

Ver.  21. — ^Thelr  children  that  were  left 
after  them  In  the  land  [this  is  explicative 
of  ver,  20] ,  whom  the  children  of  Israel  also 
[also  is  not  in  the  Hebrew,  and  is  meaning- 
less] were  not  able  utterly  to  destroy, 
upon  those  did  Solomon  levy  a  tribute  ol 
bond  service  [see  on  ch.  v.  13,  and  cf.  Judges 
i.,  passim,  and  1  Chron.  xxii.  2]  unto  this 
day. 

Ver.  22. — But  of  the  children  of  Israel  did 
Solomon  make  no  bondmen  [see  howevai 


194 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  IX.  10—28. 


ch.  V.  18, 18.  This  service,  though  compul- 
B0i7,was  not  servile.  Bondage  was  forbidden, 
Levit.  XXV.  39.  The  levy  were  treated  as 
hired  servants  and  had  wages] ;  but  they 
were  men  of  war,  and  his  servants  [cf.  ch. 
i.  9.  Not  only  "  officials  of  the  war  depart- 
ment" (Bahr)  but  officers  of  every  kind], 
and  his  princes  [these  were  the  heads  both 
of  the  military  and  civil  services] ,  and  his 

captains  [Heb.  VESy^.  LXX.  rpurrarm. 
Exod.  ziT.  7 ;  xv.4;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  8  ;  2  Kings 
iz.  26 ;  X.  25,  &o.  These  third  men  were 
really  "  a  noble  rank  of  soldiers  who  fought 
from  chariots"  (Gesen.),  each  of  which  would 
seem  to  have  held  three  men,  one  of  whom 
drove,  while  two  fought :  thence  used  of  the 
body-guard  of  kings.  That  they  formed  a 
corps,  and  were  not  literally  "captains," 
is  clear  from  1  Sam.  xxiii.  8,  &c.]  and  rulers 
of  bis  chariots,  and  his  horsemen. 

Ver.  23.— These  were  the  chief  of  the 
officers  that  were  over  Solomon's  work, 
live  hundred  and  fifty,  which  bare  rule 
over  the  people  that  wTOug;ht  tn  the  work 
[see  on  ch.  v.  16] . 

Ver.  24 But  ['JIS,  lit.  only.  Keil  rightly 

connects  the  word"  with  TS  below.  "  So 
soon  as  .  .  .  then."  Cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  30. 
This  and  ver.  25  are  not  interposed  arbi- 
trarily, as  might  at  first  sight  appear,  but 
refer  to  oh.  iii.  1 — 4.  The  completion  of 
the  palaces  rendered  it  no  longer  necessary 
or  proper  that  Solomon's  daughter  should 
dwell  in  a  separate  house.  The  chronicler 
tells  us  that  she  had  dwelt  in  David's  palace' 
on  Mount  Zion,  and  that  Solomon  was  con- 
strained to  remove  her,  because  he  looked 
upon  all  the  precinct  as  now  consecrated 
(2  Chron.  viii.  11)].  Pbaraoh's  daughter 

•ame  np  [nnp2J.  Eeil  hence  argues  that 
the  palace  stood  on  higher  ground  than 
David's  house.  But  this  conclusion  is 
somewhat  precarious.  The  approach  to  the 
palace  involved  an  ascent,  but  Zion  was 
certainly  as  high  as  Ophel]  out  of  the  city 
of  David  unto  her  house  which  Solomon 
[Heb.  he]  had  built  for  her:  then  did  he 
build  Mlllo.  [TheniuB  infers  from  these 
words  that  MiUo  was  a  fort  or  castle  for  the 
protectiou  of  the  harem.  But  there  is  no 
warrant  for  any  such  conjecture.  In  the 
first  place,  this  wife  would  seem  to  have 
been  lodged  in  her  own  palace  apart  from 
the  other  wives.  2.  We  can  ofEer  a  better 
explanation  of  the  word  MUlo  (see  ver.  15). 
3.  The  word  "  then  "  may  mean  either  (1), 
that  when  her  palace  was  completed,  Solo- 
mon then  had  workmen  who  were  liberated 
and  were  employed  on  Millo  (Keil),  or  (2), 
that  when  she  vacated  David's  house,  the 
building  of  Millo  oould  be  proceeded  with. 


Ver.  25. — And  three  times  In  a  year  [t.e., 
no  doubt   at  the  three  feasts,  the  times 
of  greatest  solemnity,  and  when  tbere  was  the 
largest  concourse  of  people.    See  2  Chron. 
viii  12.    The  design  of  this  verse  may  be 
to  show  that  there  was  no  longer  any  offer- 
ing on  high  places.    It  would  thus  refer  to 
ch.  iii.  2,  as  ver.  24  to  ch.  iii.  1]  did  Solo- 
mon offer  burnt  offerli^s  and  peace  offer- 
ings upon  the  altar  which  he  built  unto 
the  Lord  [the  chronicler  adds,  "before  the 
porch  "] ,  and  he  burnt  Incense.  [It  has  been 
supposed  by  some  that  Solomon  sacrificed 
andbumtincensepropriaj/Kinu.  Accordingto 
Dean  Stanley  ("  Jewish  Ch."  ii.  pp.  220, 221), 
"  he  solemnly  entered,  not  only  the  temple 
courts  with  sacrifices,  but  penetrated  into 
the  Holy  Place  itself,  where  in  later  year* 
none  but  the  priests  were  allowed  to  enter, 
and  offered  incense  on  the  altar  of  incense." 
But  this  positive  statement  is  absolutely 
destitute  of  all  basis.  For,  in  the  first  place, 
there  is  nothing  in  the  text  to  support  it. 
If  Solomon  ordered,  or  defrayed  the  cost 
of,  the  sacrifices,  &b.,  as  no  doubt  he  did, 
the  historian  would  properly  and  naturally 
describe  him  as  offering  burnt  offerings. 
Qui  facit  per  alium  facit  per  se,  and  priests- 
are  expressly  mentioned  as  present  at  these 
sacrifices  (ch.  viii.  6 ;  2  Chron.  v.  7 — 14  ; 
vii.  2,  6).    We  have  just  as  much  reason, 
and  no  more,  for  believing  that  the  king 
built  MUlo  (ver.  24)  with  his  own  hands, 
and  with  his  own  hands  "  made  a  navy  of 
ships  "  (ver.  26),  as  that  he  sacrificed,  &a., 
in  propria  persona.    And,  secondly,  it  is 
simply  inconceivable,  if  he  had  so  acted, 
that  it    should    have    attracted    no  more 
notice,  and  that  our  historian  should  have 
passed  it  over  thus  Hghtly.    We  know  what 
is  recorded  by  our  author  as  having  hap- 
pened when,  less  than  two  centimes  after- 
wards, King  Uzziah  presumed  to  intrude  on 
the  functions  of  the  priests  (2  Chron.  xxvi. 
17 — 20) ;  cf.  1  Kings  xiii.  1),  and  we  know 
what  had  happened  some  five  centuries  be- 
fore (Num.  xvi.  85),  when  men  who  were 
not  of  the  seed  of  Aaron  came  near  to  offer 
incense  before  the  Lord.  It  is  impossible  that 
Solomon  could  have  disregarded  that  solemn 
warning  without  some  protest,  or  without 
a  syllable  of  blame  on  the  part  of  our  author. 
And  the  true  account  of  these  sacrifices  is 
that  they  were  offered  by  the  king  as  the 
builder  of  the  temple,  and  probably  through- 
out his  life,  by  the  hands  of  the  ministering 
priests  (2  Chron.  viii.  14).     Thrice  in  the 
year  he  showed  his  piety  by  a  great  function, 
at  which  he  offered   liberally]   upon  tho 
altax  [Heb.  upon  that,  sc.  altar  HiS.    See 
Gesen.  Lex.,  p.  94 ;  Ewald,  Syntax,  332a  (3)] 
that  was  before  the  Lord.    [The  altar  of 
incense  stood  before  the  entrance  to  th* 


OH.  IX.  10—28.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


195 


Oracle,  the  place  of  the  Divuie  presence. 
See  on  oh.  vi.  23].  So  he  finished  the 
housa  [Same  word,  but  in  the  Eal  form 
in  oh.  yii.  61.  The  Fiel  form,  used  here, 
may  convey  the  deeper  meaning,  "  he  per- 
fected," i.e.,  by  devoting  it  to  its  proper 
use.  It  was  to  be  "a  house  of  tacrifice" 
(2  Chion.  vii.  12). 

Ver.  26. — And  king  Solomon  made  a  navy 
of  ships  [Heb.  ^^K,  a  collective  noun,  cZassii. 
The  chronicler  paraphrases  by  nh'J^.  pl"!*!- 
This  fact  finds  a  record  here,  probably  be- 
cause it  was  to  the  voyages  of  this  fleet  that 
the  king  was  indebted  for  the  gold  which 
enabled  him  to  erect  and  adorn  the  buildings 
recently  described.  (As  to  form,  &o. ,  of  the 
ships,  see  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  p.  10l4).  But  no 
historian  could  pass  over  without  notice  an 
event  of  such  profound  importance  to  Israel 
as  the  construction  of  its  first  ships,  which, 
next  to  the  temple,  was  the  great  event  of 
Solomon's  reign]  In  Ezlon-geher  [lit.,  the 
backbojie  of  a  man  (or  giaui^.  Of.  Num. 
xxxiii.  85 ;  Deut.  ii.  8  ;  2  Kings  ziv.  22 ; 
2  Chron.  viii.  17.  The  name  is  probably 
due,  hke  Shechem  (see  note  on  ch.  xii.  25) 
to  a  real  or  fancied  resemblance  in  the 
physical  geography  of  the  country  to  that 
part  of  the  human  body.  Stanley  (S.  and  P. 
p.  84)  speaks  of  "  the  jagged  ranges  on  each 
side  of  the  guU."  Akaba,  the  modern  name, 
also  means  back.  2  Chron.  l.c.  says  Solo- 
mon went  to  Ezion-geber,  which  it  is  highly 
probable  he  would  do],  which  Is  beside 
[Heb.  n^=apudf  (Gesen.,  Lex.  «.«.)]  Eloth 

[lit.,  treei  akin  to  Elim,  where  were  palm 
trees  (Ezod.  xv.  27;  xvi.  1).  The  name  is 
interesting  as  suggesting  that  Solomon  may 
have  found  some  of  the  timber  for  the  con- 
struction of  his  fleet  here.  A  grove  of  pahn 
trees  "  still  exists  tt  the  head  of  the  golf  of 
Akaba"  (Stanley  B.  and  P.  p.  20).  Palms, 
it  is  true,  are  not  adapted  to  shipbuilding, 
but  other  timber  may  have  grown  there  in  a 
past  age.  Bat  see  note  on  ver.  27.  For 
Blath,  see  Porter,  p.  40 ;  Deut.  ii.  8 ;  2  Sam. 
viiL  14  (which  shows  how  it  passed  into  the 
hand  of  Israel) ;  2  Kings  viii.  20  ;  xiv.  22  ;  • 
xvi.  6.  It  gave  a  name  to  the  Elanitic  Gulf, 
now  the  Gulf  of  Akaba] ,  on  the  shore  [Heb. 
lip']  of  the  Red  sea  [Heb.  Sea  of  Rushes. 
LXX.  q  ipvBpA  BoKaaaa.  The  redness  is 
due  to  subaqueous  vegetation.  "  Fragments 
of  red  coral  are  for  ever  being  thrown  up 
from  the  stores  below,  and  it  is  these  coral- 
line forests  which  form  the  true  'weeds'  of 
this  fantastic  sea  "  (Stanley,  S.  and  P.  p. 
83).  There  is  also  apparently  a  bottom  of 
red  sandstone  {ib.  p.  6,  note).  It  is  divided 
by  the  Sinaitio  peninsula  into  two  arms  or 
gulfs,  the  western  being  the  OuU  of  Suez,  and 
the  eaiteni  the  Gulf  of  Akabah.   The  former 


'  is  130  miles,  the  latter  90  miles  long] ,  In  tht 
land  of  Edom.  [The  subjugation  of  Kdom 
is  mentioned  2  Sam.  viii.  14.] 

Ver.  27. — ^And  Hiram  sent  In  the  navy  his 
servants,  shlpmen  that  had  knowledge  of 
the  sea  with  the  servants  of  Solomon.  [The 
chronicler  states  (2  Chron.  viii.  18)  that  he 
sent  ships  as  well  as  servants,  and  it  has 
been  thought  that  ships  were  transported, 
in  parts  or  entire,  by  land  across  the  Isthmus 
of  Suez,  and  there  are  certainly  instances  on 
record  of  the  land  transport  of  fleets.  (Keil 
reminds  us  that  Alexander  the  Great,  accord- 
ing to  Arrian,  had  ships  transported — ^in 
pieces — ^from  Phoenicia  to  the  Euphrates, 
and  that,  according  to  Thucydides  (Bell. 
Pelop.  iv.  8)  the  Peloponnesians  conveyed 
60  ships  from  Corcyra  across  the  Leueadian 
Isthmus,  <So.)  But  this,  especially  when  the 
state  of  engineering  science,  &a.,  among  the 
Hebrews  is  taken  into  account,  is  hardly  to 
be  thought  of.  It  is  quite  possible,  however, 
that  timber  for  shipbuilding  was  floated  on 
the  Mediterranean  down  to  the  river  of 
Egypt,  or  some  such  place,  and  then  trans- 
ported either  to  Suez  or  to  Akaba.  Probably 
all  that  the  chronicler  means  is  that  Hiram 
provided  the  materials  and  had  the  ships 
built.  The  Israelites,  having  hitherto  had 
no  fleet,  and  little  or  no  experience  of  the 
sea,  were  unable  to  construct  ships  for  them- 
selves. And  the  Tyriana  may  have  seen 
in  the  construction  of  a  fleet  for  eastern 
voyages,  an  opening  for  the  extension  of 
their  own  maritime  trade.  Possibly  in  the 
first  voyages  Tyrians  and  Jews  were  co- 
partners.] 

Ver.  28 — And  they  came  to  Ophlr  [It  is 
perhaps  impossible  to  identify  this  place 
with  any  degree  of  precision.  The  opinions 
of  scholars  may,  however,  be  practically 
reduced  to  two.  The  first  would  place 
Ophir  in  India ;  the  second  in  southern 
Arabia.  In  favour  of  India  is  (1)  the  three 
years'  voyage  (but  see  on  ch.  x.  22) ;  (2)  most 
of  the  other  treasures  brought  back  by  the 
fleet,  exclusive  of  gold,  are  Indian  products. 
But  against  it  is  urged  the  important  fact 
that  no  gold  is  now  found  there,  south  of 
Cashmere,  whilst  south  Arabia  was  famed 
for  its  abundant  gold  (Fsa.  Ixxii.  16  ;  Ezek. 
zxvii.  22).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  alleged 
that  in  ancient  times  India  was  rich  in  gold 
(Ewald,  iii.  p.  264),  and  that  there  are  no 
traces  of  gold  mines  in  Arabia.  The  ques- 
tion is  discussed  at  considerable  length  and 
with  great  learning  by  Mr.  Twisleton  (Diet. 
Bib.  art.  "  Ophir").  He  shows  that  it  is 
reasonably  certain  (1)  that  the  Ophix  of 
Gen.  X.  29  is  the  name  of  some  city, 
region,  or  tribe  in  Arabia,  and  (2)  that  the 
Ophir  of  Genesis  is  the  Ophir  of  the  Book 
of   Kings.     And  Oesenius,  Bahr,  Keil,  •!. 


IM 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[oh.  IX.  10—23. 


agree  with  him  in  locating  Ophir  in  the 
latter  country.  Ewald,  however,  sees  in 
Ophir  "  the  most  distant  coasts  of  India," 
and  it  is  probable  that  the  Hebrews  used 
the  word  somewhat  loosely,  as  they  did  the 
corresponding  word  Tarshish,  and  as  we  do 
the  words  East  and  West  Indies.  They  were 
not  geographers,  and  Ophir  may  have  been 
merely  an  emporium  where  the  products  ol 
different  countries  were  collected,  or  a  nomen 


generale  for  "  all  the  countries  lying  on  the 
African,  Arabian,  or  Indian  seas,  so  far  as 
at  that  time  known"  (Heeren).  See  on  ch. 
X.  5],  and  fetched  firom  thence  gold,  four 
hundred  and  twenty  talents  [The  chrouicler 
says  450.  The  discrepancy  is  easily  acconn. 
ted  for,  20  being  expressed  by  3  ;  60  by  3. 
Wordsworth  suggests  that  "  perhaps  thirty 
were  assigned  to  Hiram  for  his  help  "]  and 
brought  it  to  king  Solomon. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  26. — The  Two  Altart  of  Judaism.  This  text  is  somewhat  remarkable  aa 
bringing  before  us  at  the  same  moment  the  two  altars  of  the  Jewish  Church — ^the 
^reat  brazen  altar  of  sacrifice  and  the  golden  altar  of  incense.  The  present  is  there- 
tore,  perhaps,  a  fitting  place  to  study  their  use  and  significance. 

For  it  is  with  good  reason  that  they  are  here  joined  together.  Though  the  ritual 
of  the  first  was  quite  distinct  fi:om  that  of  the  second,  yet  each  was  an  essential 
part  of  the  same  religious  system ;  each  was  a  centre  of  Hebrew  worship.  More- 
over, the  Becond  was  the  complement  of  the  first.  Incense  was  the  appropriate 
adjunct  of  sacrifice.  And  the  two  together  formed  practically  the  sum  of  the 
ordinary  ceremonial  of  the  children  of  the  old  covenant. 

The  altars  themselves,  however,  will  require  but  little  notice,  for  they  both  alike 
derived  their  interest  and  importance  from  the  purposes  they  served.  The  altar  of 
sacrifice  is  not  even  mentioned  by  our  historian  in  his  accoimt  of  the  temple 
arrangements;  while  the  chronicler  dismisses  it  in  a  single  verse.  And  neither 
the  ^ngs  nor  the  Chronicles  describe  the  size,  structure,  &c.,  of  the  altar  of  incense. 
It  is  true  the  altar"  sanctified  the  gift"  (Matt,  xxiii.  19;  Exod.  xxix.  37, 44),  perhaps 
sanctified  the  incense  also  (but  see  Exod.  xxx.  35 — 37),  but  all  the  same,  the 
sacrifice  and  the  incense,  not  the  brazen  or  the  golden  altars,  ore  the  important  and 
significant  things.  The  two  altars,  that  is  to  say,  really  bring  before  us  the  two 
questions  of  Sacrifice  and  Incense. 

I.  The  altar  of  sacrifice.  But  before  we  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  sacrifices 
smoking  on  the  altar,  let  us  glance  for  a  moment  at  the  altar  itself.     Observe— 

1,  Its  position.  Outside  the  temple,  the  "house  of  sacrifice"  (2  Chron.  vii.  12  ; 
Matt,  xxiii.  85),  but  in  the  court  of  the  priests,  and,  therefore,  exclusively  for  the 
service  of  the  priests. 

2.  Its  dvmenswna.  It  was  fifteen  feet  high,  and  its  top  was  a  square  of  thirty 
feet  (2  Chron.  iv.  1).  It  was  designedly  high — the  altar  of  the  tabernacle  was  but 
four  and  a  half  feet  high.  It  was  high,  despite  the  inconveniences  resulting  there- 
from. The  height  required  that  a  ledge  or  platform  should  be  constructed  round  it ; 
that  a  long  slope  or  flight  of  steps  should  be  ascended  in  order  to  reach  it;  and  that 
the  lavers  and  sea  should  be  high  in  proportion  (ch.  vii.  23,  26,  27,  88).  Its  great 
size  and  capacity— it  presented  a  superficies  of  900  square  feet — was  because  of  the 
great  number  of  victims  which  were  occasionally  offered  upon  it  at  one  time. 

8.  Its  horns.  These  were  no  freak  of  the  architect,  but  were  of  the  essence 
of  the  structure,  and  of  Divine  obligation  (Exod.  xxvii.  2).  The  blood  was  put  upon 
them  (ib.  xxix.  12  ;  Levit.  iv.  7, 18, 30, 34 ;  viii.  15 ;  ix.  9,  &o.) ;  the  sacrifice,  at  least 
in  early  times,  was  bound  to  them  (Psa.  oxviii.  27) ;  the  suppliant  for  life  clung 
to  them  (cb.  i.  50  ;  ii  28,  &o.)  The  altar  was  designed,  that  is  to  say,  for  sacrifice ; 
bu^  it  also  served  at  the  same  time  for  sanctuary. 
And  now  let  us  look  at  the  sacrifice,  at  "the  gift  upon  the  altar."  Observe — _ 
1.  It  is  an  offering.  Whatever  the  character  of  the  sacrifice,  burnt  offering,  sin 
offering,  peace  offering,  meat  offering,  it  was  an  offering,  a  gift.  Whether  whole 
buUocks  were  consumed,  or  only  the  fat,  kidneys,  Sm,,  it  bad  been  first  consecrated, 
devoted,  given,  to  God.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  primary  idea  of  sacrifice.  The  victim 
most  be  presented  before  it  could  be  immolated. 


OH.  IX.  10-28.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  197 

_  2.  It  was  ordinamh/  an  offering  made  by  fire  (1  Sam.  ii.  28).  The  holy  fire 
kindled  by  God  (Levit.  ix.  24),  and  which  for  long  centuries  was  never  suffered  to  go 
out  (Levit.  vi.  13),  the  element  which  at  that  time,  and  ever  since,  has  been  re- 
garded in  the  East  as  an  image  of  the  Godhead,  if  not  a  sign  of  His  presence,  this 
consumed  everything.  The  tongues  of  flame  not  only  carried  the  smoke  and  smell 
of  the  sacrifice — hecatomb,  holocaust,  whatever  it  was — up  into  the  blue  sky  and  to 
the  throne  of  God,  but  they,  so  to  speak,  devoured  the  victim ;  they  feasted  on  the 
sacrifice. 

3.  It  was  a/n  offering  of  life.  Not  only  was  this  a  matter  of  fact — that  the  victim 
was  first  slain,  then  offered  on  the  altar,  but  this  idea  was  expressed  in  the  ritual  of 
the  sacrifice.  The  blood  was  poured  out  at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  or  sprinkled  on 
its  horns,  or  borne  into  the  most  holy  place.  But  the  blood  is  the  life  of  the  flesh 
(Levit.  xvii.  11),  and  hence  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  was  the  core  and  centre  of 
all  sacrifice.  (See  Bahr,  Symbolik,  ii.  pp.  199  sqq.)  The  very  sepanraOon  of  the 
elements  again — the  blood  poured  in  one  place,  tlie  flesh  or  fat  burnt  at  another 
— ^pictured  death ;  for  when  the  blood  is  withdrawn  from  the  body  death  ensues. 
The  consuming  fire,  too,  spoke  of  death.  So  that  in  sacrifice  men  offered  to  God 
the  most  mysterious  and  precious  of  man's  possessions  and  of  God's  gifts,  the  Ufe, 
the  </«x4f  which  came  fi:om  God  and  went  back  to  God.  It  was  an  old  and  reason- 
able belief  that  the  gods  would  have  our  nearest  and  dearest — see  Tennyson's 
beautiful  poem,  "  The  Victim  " — hence  the  gift  to  the  altar  was  the  life. 

4.  It  was  am  offering  for  life.  The  full  significance  of  sacrifice,  we  may  readily 
believe,  the  Jew  did  not  know.  It  is  doubtM  whether  even  the  high  priest  com- 
prehended the  blessed  meaning  of  those  solemn  rites  in  which  he  bore  a  part.  But 
this  they  did  know,  that  the  life  offered  at  the  altar  was  an  atonement  for  their  life. 
The  lex  talUmia,  "an  eye  for  an  eye,"  &c.  (Exod.  xxi.  24),  had  taught  them  this.  So 
had  much  of  their  expressive  ceremonial,  e.g.,  the  laying  of  the  hands  on  the 
head  of  the  victim,  &c.  (Levit.  iii.  2 ;  iv.  4,  &c.)  So  above  all  had  the  express  words 
of  Scripture,  "  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood,  and  I  have  given  it  to  you  upon 
the  altar  for  an  atonement  for  your  souls  (Heb.  Kves,  same  word  as  above),  for  it  is 
the  blood  that  maketh  atonement  for  the  soul  "  (Heb.  through  the  Ufe,  so.  of  the 
blood)  Levit.  xvii.  11.  They  understood,  that  is,  that  sacrifice  was  not  only  euohar- 
istic,  but  that  it  was  also  deprecatory  and  in  some  way  expiatory.  They  hoped 
that  it  wouU  somehow  reconcile  them  and  restore  them  to  communion  with  God, 
the  Life,  the  Anima  amimantium. 

More  than  this,  however,  the  Jewish  worshipper  did  not  see  in  the  skorifioe.  But 
for  us  who  turn  our  gaze  to  Mount  Moriah  from  the  hOl  of  Calvary,  it  has  an 
additional  significance.    We  may  see  in  it — 

6.  A  pictv/re  of  the  offering  of  Jesus  Christ.  An  imperfect  picture,  no  doubt — a 
shadow,  a  type,  a  parable,  but  stiU  the  outline  is  clear  and  distinct.  We  see  here 
the  priest,  the  victim,  the  altar,  the  mactation,  the  blood-pouring,  the  elevation,  the 
deatii.  As  a  pictwre,  indeed,  all  sacrifice  "  showed  the  Lord's  death"  (1  Cor.  xi. 
26)  much  more  vividly  and  touchingly  than  the  Holy  Communion  does. 

6.  A  pleading  of  the  death  of  Christ.  This  is  the  crown  and  blossom  of  sacrifice. 
It  was  an  ivdiivtitns,  a  silent  but  eloquent  memorial  before  God.  Only  thus  can  we 
adequately  explain  the  elaborate  sacrificial  system  of  Moses.  IVom  any  other  point 
of  view  sacrifices  are,  as  Coleridge  confessed,  an  enigma.  But  see  in  them  tokens, 
memorials,  pleadings  of  the  one  vicarious  death,  and  all  is  clear.  Then  we  can 
comprehend  why  they  should  have  offered  thousands  of  victims  "year  by  year  con- 
tinually." Every  bullock,  every  sheep,  was,  though  the  worshippers  knew  it  not,  a 
mute  reminder  of  the  one  sacrifice  for  sin.  Each  was  a  foreshadowing  of  the 
death ;  the  death  of  TTim  who  is  "  the  hie  "  (John  xiv.  6) ;  each  spoke  to  the  heart 
of  God  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  Let  us  trace  the  paf  allel  a  little  more  in 
detail. 

1.  The  Alta/r  prefigured  the  Cross. 

(1)  In  its  position.  The  true  altar  of  incense  is  in  heaven.  The  altar  of  Ba«ri- 
fioe  was  altogether  of  this  world ;  it  was  in  the  truest  sense  "  an  altar  of  earth." 
But  while  outside  the  temple  of  heaven,  the  cross  was  yet  in  the  court  of  the  priests, 


198  THii  i'liiST  iJOOK.  OiJ'  KINGS.  [ch.  ix.  10—28. 

for  "  Immanuel's  land  "  was  a  sort  of  precinct  or  forecourt  of  the  eternal  sanctuary, 
audit  was  the  home  of  a  nation  of  priests  (Exod.  xix.  6).  Hence  we  may  learn  (1) 
that  sacrifice  is  only  ofiered  where  there  is  sin,  and  (2)  that  the  cross  goes  together 
with  the  kingdom  (Bev.  i.  6,  6) ;  it  is  the  altar  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church. 

(2)  In  its  elevation.  Probably  the  altar  was  made  high  to  give  it  due  honour 
and  prominence,  or  there  may  have  been  the  thought  of  elevating  the  sacrifice 
towards  heaven.  But,  whatever  the  reason,  it  struck  the  eye ;  everyone  saw  that  it 
was  the  centre  and  ornament  and  distinguishing  mark  of  the  court  of  the  priests. 
Now  the  cross  itself  was  probably  raised  but  two  or  three  feet  above  the  ground — 
pictures  generally  represent  it  incorrectly — but  it  was  planted  on  a  hiU.  Conder 
("  Tent- work,"  pp.  196, 198)  identifies  Calvary  with  a  rounded  knoU,  above  a  cliff  or 
precipice  some  thirty  feet  high,  near  the  Damascus  gate),  and  it  still — and  this  is 
the  important  thing — "  towers  above  the  wreck  of  time."  It  is  stiU  the  glory  and 
badge  and  attraction  of  Christ's  people  of  priests.  It  was  fitting,  too,  that  He 
should  be  raised  above  earth  who  was  from  above  (John  iii.  31) ;  that  He  should  be 
suspended  between  earth  and  heaven  who  should  reconcile  earth  to  heaven. 

(3)  The  cross  had  no  horns,  but  it  had  arms — arms  to  which  the  victim  was 
bound,  arms  which  were  stained  with  His  blood,  arms  which  o£fer  shelter  and 
sanctuary  to  the  world. 

"  Lord,  on  the  cross  Thine  arms  were  stietghed. 
To  draw  Thy  people  nigh,"  &o. 

3.  Tlie  Sacrifice  prefigured  the  Crucifixion.  It  is  hardly  needful  or  possible 
here  to  point  out  in  what  manifold  ways  the  various  sacrifices  of  the  Law  fore- 
shadowed the  oblation  of  Calvary.  It  must  suf5ce  to  say  here  that  this  too  was  a 
voluntary  offering  (Heb.  ix.  14),  a  whole  offering  (^»^D— of.  Heb.  x.  10,  &c.),  the 
grateful  savour  of  which  ascended  (the  idea  of  the  word  n?y)  to  heaven  (G-en.  viii. 
21 ;  Ephes.  v.  2) ;  that  the  life  was  given  (Matt.  xx.  28)  and  hlood  poured  (1  Peter 
i.  2) ;  that  the  blood  was  poured  for  the  remission  of  sins  (Matt.  xivi.  28 ;  Heb.  ix. 
22),  and  the  life  given  for  the  life  of  the  world  (John  vi.  51).  It  is  for  us  to  lay  our 
hands  on  the  head  of  the  sacrifice,  and  the  analogy  is  complete.  We  must  bring 
no  ofifering  of  our  own  merits,  but  must  take  refuge  imder  the  arms  of  the  Cross— 

"  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring. 
Simply  to  thy  Cross  I  oling." 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  because  sacrifices,  properly  so  called,  have 
ceased,  because  they  have  found  their  blessed  fulfihnent  in  "  the  one  offering " 
"  once  for  all "  (Heb.  x.  10, 14),  therefore  the  pictures  and  pleadings  of  that  offerme 
have  ceased  also.  On  the  contrary,  the  death  of  Calvary,  which  cannot  be  repeated, 
13  for  ever  pleaded  (Rev.  v.  6)  in  the  heavenly  temple.  In  this  sense  it  is  a  con- 
tinual  offermg  (Exod.  xxix.  42).  And  it  is  also  pleaded  by  the  Church  on  earth, 
ior  the  holy  sacrament,  hke  the  sacrifice,  teUs  of  death,  and  of  the  same  vicarious 
and  victorious  death.  The  sacrifice  pleaded  the  merits  of  Him  who  should  come; 
the  sacrament  the  merits  of  One  who  has  come.  The  first  was,  the  second  is,  an 
AvaiwnmQ  of  the  death  which  won  our  life.  (See  Homiletics  on  ch.  vi.  pp.  114  115.) 

II.  The  ALTAE  OF  INCENSE  It  is  often  forgotten  that  Judaism  had  two  altws. 
mt  who  shall  say  that  the  altar  of  mcense  was  less  important  or  less  gracious  than 
tnat  01  sacrifaoe. 

A  few  simple  questions  wiU  perhaps  best  bring  this  subject  of  incense  before  ns. 
Liet  us  therefore  ask — 

1.  Whatwas  the  incense  ?  Ifwas  (see  Exod.xxx.  34  sqq.)  (I)  a  confection  of  tweet 
Mpuess  a  compound  of  the  most  fragrant  and  grateful  products  of  the  earthf  which 

T^Z-u^T  Til^?  *  P^^^™S  °'^°"'-  (2)  A  perfume  ordained  of  God.  Its 
constituents  and  then:  proportions  were  alike  prescribed  {ib.  vers.  34,  35).  These 
were  to  be  "tempered  (Heb.  salted)  together."  Hence  the  scrupulous  care  with 
which  It  was  prepared  and  preserved  in  the  "house  of  Abtines."    And  hence  the 


OB.  IX.  10—28.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  199 

probability  that  the  story  of  thirteen  ingredients  (Jos.,  B.  J.  t.  S.  5)  of  the  addition 
of  oassia,  cinnamon,  &o.,  to  the  elements  mentioned  in  the  Law,  is  a  Babbinical 
foble.  Such  a  confection  would  have  been  "  strange  incense."  (3)  It  was  a  per- 
fume reserved  for  God  (Exod.  xii.  37, 38).  None  might  be  made  for  private  use  under 
pain  of  death  (ib.  ver.  88).  Hence  it  was  called  "most  holy"  (Heb.  holy  of  holies). 

2.  Where  was  it  offered  f  In  two  places.  Occasionally  in  the  most  holy  place ; 
nsually  on  the  golden  altar  which  stood  before  that  place.  Hence  this  altar  is 
spoken  of  as  "before  the  Lord,"  and  is  called  "  the  altar  that  belongeth  to  the  oracle* 
(ch.  vi  22).  It  was  clearly,  therefore,  and  peculiarly  an  offering  to  God,  whose 
throne  was  in  the  sanctuary,  and  whose  palace  was  the  temple.  It  was  bnmt 
before  the  Presence,  whose  seat  was  between  the  cherubim.  Indeed,  it  is  not  improb- 
able that  it  was  only  burnt  outside  the  oracle,  because  the  priests  must  not  enter 
the  most  holy  place.  (The  golden  altar,  as  we  have  just  seen,  really  "  belonged  to 
the  Oracle.")  When  the  high  priest  did  enter,  on  the  day  of  atonement,  the  incense 
was  burnt  within  the  veil.  And  the  Sadducees  were  accounted  heretical  because 
they  contended  that  the  incense  might  be  kindled  ontside  and  then  carried  inside 
the  holy  of  holies. 

3.  When  waa  it  hwmed  f  It  was  burned  (1)  momimg  and  evening.  When  the 
lamps  were  trimmed  at  the  break  of  day;  when  the  lamps  were  lighted  at  the 
approach  of  night.  Thus  every  little  life — for  our  days  are  "  lives  in  miniature" — 
was  routided  off  with  incense.  There  was  not  a  day  for  many  hundred  years  bat 
began  abd  ended  with  this  sweet  service.  (2)  With  the  morning  and  evening 
lacrijice.  It  was  bound  up  with  the  offerings  of  the  great  altar.  "  Mane,  inter 
sanguinem  et  membra  suffiebat,  yesperi,  inter  membra  et  libamina "  (Talmud, 
quoted  by  Lightfoot).  "  When  the  incense  and  prayers  were  finished,  the  parts  of 
the  victim  were  laid  on  the  altar."  So  that  the  incense  and  the  sacrifice  were  really 
parts  of  the  same  service.  The  two  altars  of  Judaism  presented  their  offerings  to 
heaven  at  the  same  time.  (3)  It  was  a  "perpetual  incense"  (Exod.  xxx.  8), 
just  as  the  sacrifice  is  called  a  continual  burnt  offering  {ih.  xxix.  42).  The  sweet 
perfume,  we  may  remember  here,  never  died  out  in  the  holy  place.  There  was  an 
everlasting  fragrance,  year  in,  year  out,  in  the  earthly  abode  of  the  heavenly  King. 
(4)  It  was  offered  together  with  prayer.  See  Luke  i.  10 ;  Kev.  v.  8 ;  viii.  1—4 ;  and 
Lightfoot,  "  Heb.  and  Talm.  Exero.  on  Luke  i.  10." 

4.  By  whom  was  it  offered}  (1)  By  the  priest*.  Originally,  it  is  believed,  by 
the  high  priest  exclusively,  but  subsequently  a  priest  was  chosen  by  lot  (Luke  i.  9) 
to  perform  this  ofSce  each  morning  and  each  evening.  And  we  are  told  that  as 
this  was  esteemed  the  most  honourable  of  all  the  functions  of  the  priests,  and  as  a 
blessing  was  thought  to  be  attached  to  its  perfom^moe,  the  lot  was  cast  among 
those  who  were  "  new  to  the  incense,"  i.e.,  among  those  who  had  not  offered  it 
already.  (2)  By  the  priests  alone.  No  function  was  more  jealously  guarded  than 
this.  On  two  memorable  occasions  (Num.  xvi.  35 — 40 ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  16  sqq.)  a 
terrible  dispensation  proclaimed  that  "  no  stranger,  who  was  not  of  the  seed  of  Aaron, 
should  come  near  to  offer  incense  before  the  Lord." 

6.  T^%  was  it  offered!  Maimonides  held  that  it  was  merely,  or  principally, 
designed  to  counteract  the  stench  which  would  arise  from  the  victims  slain  for  the 
morning  and  evening  sacrifice.  Others  have  beheld  in  it  merely  a  recognition  of  the 
majesty  and  sovereignty  of  God,  and  have  seen  its  counterpart  in  the  perfumes 
which  were  offered  before  the  monarchs  of  the  East  (cf.  Matt.  ii.  11).  But  a 
moment's  reflection  will  show  that  both  these  conceptions  are  miserably  inadequate 
and  unworthy.  It  is  inconceivable  that  so  prominent  and  essential  a  part  of  the 
Jewish  system  can  have  had  no  higher  meaning  or  have  no  analogue  in  Christianity. 
It  IS  universally  admitted  that  the  brazen  altar  and  its  sacrifices  were  full  of  symbol- 
ista.  How  can  we  think  that  while  these  prefigured  Christ's  death  the  golden  altar 
and  its  incense  foreshadowed  nothing.  No,  &ey  must  have  typified  something, 
and  something  connected  with  the  work  of  the  eternal  Son  of  God. 

For  observe,  just  as  there  is  an  altar  raised  on  Calvary,  just  as  there  is  a  sacrificial 
altar  of  which  we  Christians  eat  (Heb.  xiii.  10),  so  is  there  an  altar  in  heaven  (Bev. 
viii.  8).    Nor  will  this  surprise  us  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  Mosaic  worship  waa 


SOO  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  ix.  10—28 

fashioned  after  the  mode  of  the  heavenly,  and  that  the  tabernacle  and  its  fdmiture 
were  made  according  to  the  pattern  showed  in  the  Mount. 

What,  then,  did  incense  symbolize  ?  Was  it  prayer  ?  It  has  been  very  generally 
supposed  (after  Psa.  oxlL  2)  to  be  an  emblem  of  prayer.  But  this  is  a  view  which 
reflection  hardly  justifies.  For  (1)  prayer  was  offered  at  the  time  of  incense;  it 
was  an  invariable  adjunct  thereto,  and  we  should  hardly  have  the  type  and  anti- 
type, the  shadow  and  the  substance,  together.  The  type  is  only  needed  nntU  the 
antitype  takes  its  place.  (2)  Incense  is  said  to  be  offered  with  prayers  (Eev.  v.  8), 
where  the  "  which  "  (aV)  would  seem  to  refer  to  the  "  vials  "  (^edXaf)  rather  than  to 
the  dviua/idTuii  (oh.  vui.  1^-4).  In  the  passage  last  cited,  this  is  beyond  doubt. 
The  incense  was  to  be  added  to  (A.  V.  "  offered  " ),  and  was  therefore  distinct  from, 
the  prayers  of  all  saints. 

No,  the  incense  offered  day  by  day,  and  century  after  century,  prefigured  the 
gracious  intercession  of  Christ,  that  intercession  through  which  alone  our  prayers 
are  presented,  which  alone  ensures  their  acceptance,  and  without  which  sinful  man 
cannot  draw  near  to  God.  When  the  high  priest  entered  the  oracle,  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  congregation,  the  cloud  of  incense  must  cover  him  lest  he  should 
die.  We  have  but  to  notice  how  close  is  the  correspondence  between  type  and 
antitype  to  be  convinced  that  this  is  its  true  meaning.  (1)  His  prayers  are  like  the 
firagrajit  incense.  In  Him  the  Father  is  well  pleased.  And  they  are  ordained  of 
God.  He  is  the  "  Anointed,"  the  "  Advocate  with  the  Father,"  "  the  one  Mediator." 
(There  is  a  "  strange  incense,"  too — the  mediation  of  saints  and  angels.)  (2)  He 
stands  "  before  the  throne,"  "  at  the  right  hand  of  God,"  "  in  heaven  itself."  (3) 
He  "ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  The  incense  never  diss  out  of  the 
heavenly  courts.  When  we  pray,  morning  and  evening,  our  Intercessor  prays  also. 
When  we  offer  our  sacrifices.  He  offers  the  incense  at  the  same  time.  And  He  is 
also  (4)  our  High  Priest.  When  He  passed  through  the  heavens  with  His  own 
blood  to  make  atonement,  the  incense,  to  make  intercesgion,  was  not  forgotten. 
And  if  it  be  objected  that  in  heaven  the  incense  was  offered  by  the  elders  (Bev. 
V.  8),  or  angels  (i6.  viii.  3),  we  may  remember  that  the  ministry  at  the  golden  altar, 
which  strictly  appertained  to  the  high  priest  alone,  was  also  shared  by  other 
ministers  of  the  congregation,  and  the  angels  are  "  ministering  spirits." 

So  that  both  the  altars  of  Judaism  speak  to  us  of  Christ :  the  one  of  His  death, 
the  other  of  His  "  endless  life ; "  the  first  of  the  "  one  offering,"  the  second  of  the 
ceaseless  intercession.  And  between  them  they  shadowed  forth  the  fulness  and 
completeness  of  our  salvation.  "  We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father" — this  is 
the  gospel  of  the  incense.  "  We  have  a  great  High  Priest " — this  is  the  evangel  of 
incense  and  sacrifice  alike. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Ver.  26. — Solomon's  Worship.  Our  text  appears  at  first  sight  to  be  intro&aoed 
into  this  chapter  in  a  superfluous  and  arbitrary  manner.  It  is  not  without  good 
reason,  however,  that  this  record  of  Solomon's  religious  worship  stands  between 
statements  about  his  fortifications  and  his  fleet.  We  have  much  to  learn  from 
the  Old  Testament  method  of  blending  the  earthly  with  the  spiritual,  and  ol 
suffusing  national  enterprise  with  religion.  The  verse  before  us,  read  in  coir^ 
nezion  with  the  statement  made  in  oh.  iti.  2,  indicates  that,  after  finishing  tl^t 
temple,  Solomon  swept  away  the  abuses,  and  remedied  the  defects  which  had  pra 
vailed._  He  had  built  the  temple,  and  now  would  be  the  leader  of  his  people  in 
using  it.  He  did  not  consider  that  the  erection  of  an  altar  excused  him  frooi 
sacrificing  on  it.  He  was  not  one  of  those  who  will  encourage  others  to  devotioi , 
while  they  neglect  their  own  personal  responsibility.  Apply  this  to  any  who  con- 
tribute to  a  society,  but  withold  all  personal  service  ;  or  aid  in  the  celebration  oi 
worship,  while  their  own  hearts  are  never  engaged  in  it.  If  we  compare  the  text 
with  2  Chron.  viii.  12,  13,  we  see  that  it  was  not  only  on  the  national  festivals 
(Passover,  Pentecost,  and  Feast  of  Tabernacles),  but  on  all  occasions  appointed  by 
Mosaic  law,  that  Solomon,  through  the  priests,  presented  offerings  before  the  Lord 


OH.  IX.  10—28.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  SOI 

No  allusion  is  made  here  to  expiatory  sacrifices  (the  sin  offering  and  the  trespass 
offering)  but  these,  of  necessity,  preceded  those  mentioned  here.  All  the  more  fitly 
does  the  text  represent  what  ^e  should  offer  when  we  draw  near  to  God,  through 
themerits  of  the  expiation  already  made  for  us  by  Him  who  became,  on  our  behalf^ 
a  sin  offering.  This  verse  will  answer  the  o[uestion  of  conscience,.  "TFAai  shall  1 
render  wnio  the  Lord  f  " 

_  I.  The  dedication  of  self.  Burnt  offerings  were  representative  and  not  vica- 
rious. They  represented  the  dedication  of  himself  to  God  on  the  part  of  the  wor- 
shipper. St.  Paul  shows  us  this  (Bomans  xii.  1),  "I  beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren, 
by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,"  &o.  The 
appropriateness  of  the  type  can  be  easily  shown  by  alluding  to  such  points  as 
these : — 1.  Tlie  sequence  of  the  burnt  offering  on  the  expiatory  sacrifice.  No 
burnt  offering  was  made  until  a  previous  sin  offering  had  been  presented.  The 
worshipper  must  first  be  brought  into  covenant  with  God.  Were  the  burnt  offering 
presented  first,  the  barrier  of  sin  between  man  and  God  would  be  ignored,  and  the 
idea  of  an  atonement  would  be  denied.  Oiu'  offering  of  ourselves  is  only  acceptable 
through  the  previous  sacrifice  of  Christ.  2.  The  completeness  of  the  burnt  offering. 
The  sacrificer  laid  his  hands  on  the  victim,  and  then  it  was  placed  whole  on  the 
altar,  its  death  signifying  the  completeness  of  the  presentation  of  the  man,  body  and 
Boul,  to  the  Lord.  Show  that  God  has  the  right  to  demand  our  whole  selves ;  not 
a  share  in  affection  and  thought  simply.  8.  The  occasions  for  presenting  the 
burnt  offering,  (1)  DaAly  (Exod.  xziz.  88 — 42)  to  show  that  at  no  time  are  we 
"  our  own."  (2)  Doubly  on  the  sabbath  (Num.  xxvui.  9,  10).  The  seventh  day  a 
time  for  special  consideration  and  self- consecration.  (8)  On  great  festivals  Q^vooa.. 
xxviii.  11 ;  xxix.  89).  Times  of  exceptional  deliverance,  enrichment,  &c.,  are  seasons 
for  renewed  self-dedication.     Press  home  the  entreaty  of  Eom.  xii.  1. 

II.  The  eiviNa  of  thanes.  Peace  offerings  were  of  various  kinds,  but  had  the 
same  meaning.  They  were  a  presentation  to  God  of  his  best  gifts,  a  sign  of  grate- 
ful homage,  and  at  the  same  time  afforded  means  for  the  support  of  God's  service 
and  His  servants.  Flour,  oil,  and  wine  were  offered  with  the  daily  burnt  offering. 
The  shew-bread  was  renewed  each  sabbath  day.  Special  offerings  were  made  on 
the  sabbath  and  other  festivals.  The  first-fruits  were  presented,  and  com  from 
the  threshing-floor  at  the  annual  feasts,  &o.  (1)  All  these  were  of  a  Euchwristic 
nature,  and  teach  us  to  render  thanks  and  praise  to  God  (Heb.  xui.  15).  (2)  They 
betoTtened  communion  with  Ood,  for  in  part  they  were  eaten  by  the  people  in 
His  presence.  (3)  They  aided  in  the  sustenance  of  public  worship.  The  priests 
had  the  breast  and  shoulder.  See  the  lesson  Paul  draws  Phil.  iv.  18.  (4)  They 
ministered  to  the  necessities  of  the  poor.  Peace  offerings  constituted  great  national 
feasts.  Give  examples.  Show  Chnst's  care  for  the  poor.  Allude  to  such  verses  as 
Heb.  xiii  16.  We  express  thankfulness  to  the  Lord,  and  acknowledgment  of  His 
goodness,  by  distributing  to  others  as  they  have  need.  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done 
it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these,  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me." 

III.  The  offering  of  pbateb.  "  He  burnt  incense  upon  the  altar."  Inoense 
was  oflered  morning  and  evening  (Exod.  xxx.  7,  8),  and  on  the  great  day  of  atone- 
ment (Levit.  xvi.  12).  The  altar  of  incense  stood  before  the  holy  of  hoUeB  in 
the  holy  place,  where  only  the  priests  could  stand.  Sacredness  and  sweetnesa 
were  suggested  by  the  incense,  so  carefully  and  secretly  compounded,  so  exclusively 
used  in  the  service  of  God.  As  a  symbol  it  denoted  prayer ;  taken  in  its  broadest 
sense,  as  the  outflowing  of  the  soul  in  adoration,  prayer,  praise  toward  God.  Befer 
to  Psahn  cxli.  2,  where  prayer  and  incense  are  blended  as  reality  and  symbol ;  to 
the  smoke  in  the  temple  (Isaiah  vl  3  4) ;  to  the  people  praying  while  Zacharias 
was  burning  incense  (Luke  i.  10) ;  to  the  prayers  of  the  saints  before  the  throne 
(Bev.  V.  8 ;  viii.  3, 4).  1.  Pra/yer  should  be  reverent.  (The  incense  altar  was  close 
to  the  holy  of  holies,  under  the  immediate  eye  of  God.)  2.  Prayer  should  be 
constant,  (Incense  was  perpetual.  "  Pray  without  ceasing.")  B.  Prayer  should  be 
the  outcome  of  self-dedication.  (Inoense  was  kindled  by  a  live  coal  from  the  altar 
of  burnt  offering.)  4.  Prayer  is  accepted  through  the  merits  of  the  atonement. 
(The  horns  of  the  altar  of  incense  were  sprinkled  with  blood.) — A.  E. 


«n 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  X.  1—18. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X.  1—13. 


Thb  visit  or  the  qceen  op  Sheba. — ^The 
last  words  of  the  preceding  chapter  spoke  of 
Solomon's  fleet,  of  its  voyages,  and  the 
treasures  it  brought  home.  The  historian 
now  proceeds  to  tell  of  one  result  to  which 
these  voyages  led.  The  fame  of  the  king 
and  his  great  undertakings  was  so  widely 
difinsed,  and  excited  so  much  wonder  and 
curiosity,  that  a  queen  of  Arabia  came, 
among  others,  to  see  the  temple  and  the 
palaces  and  the  many  marvels  of  Solomon's 
city  and  court.  The  prediction  of  Solomon's 
prayer  (oh.  viii  42)  has  soon  had  a  fulfil- 
ment. 

Yer.  1.— And  when  the  queen  of  Sheba 
[There  is  no  good  ground  for  doubting  that 
by  K^Q7  we  are  to  understand  the  kingdom 
of  Southern  Arabia  (Temen).  It  is  true  that 
while  Gen.  xxv.  3  (cf.  1  Chron.  i.  32)  speaks 
of  Sheba,  the  eon  of  Joktan,  one  of  the 
colonists  of  southern  Arabia,  Gen.  z.  7  and 
1  Chron.  i.  9  mention  another  Sheba,  the 
Bon  of  Cuih,  and  a  doubt  has  arisen  whether 
this  was  an  Arabian  or  an  Ethiopian  prin- 
cess, and  it  is  alleged  that  she  was  the 
latter  by  Josephus,  who  calls  her  "  queen  of 
Egypt  and  Ethopia,"  and  by  some  Eabbinioal 
writers,  and  in  the  traditions  of  the  Abys- 
sinian church.  But  the  kingdoms  of  Sheba 
(K3^)  and  Saba  (H^O)  are  entirely  distinct 
(Fsa.  Ixxii.  10),  the  latter  being  the  name 
both  of  the  capital  and  country  of  Meroe, 
a  province  of  Ethopia  (Jos. ,  Ant.  ii.  10.  2) ; 
while  the  former  in  like  manner  designates 
both  the  chief  city  and  also  the  kingdom  of 
the  Sabeans  (Job  i.  15).  This  tribe  would 
■eem  to  have  grown  richer  and  stronger  than 
all  the  other  Arabian  peoples  by  means  of  its 
oommercial  enterprise,  and  it  was  especially 
famed  for  its  gold,  gems,  and  spices  (Ezek. 
zxvii.  22  ;  Jer.  vi.  20  ;  Isa.  Ix.  6;  Joel  iii.  8 ; 
Job  vi.  19  ;  Fsa.  Ixxii.  10).  It  is  noticeable 
that  in  both  kingdoms  government  by  female 
govereigns  was  not  uncommon  (cf.  Acts  viii. 
27) ;  but  it  is  very  remarkable  to  find  any 
country  under  the  rule  of  a  queen  at  this 
early  date.  (The  idea  that  either  of  these 
lands  was  always  governed  by  queens  has  no 
real  basis.)  The  name  of  this  princess, 
according  to  the  Koran,  was  Balkis,  according 
to  Abyssinian  belief,  Maqueda.  Whether 
she  was  a  widow  or  virgin  is  unknown] 
heard  [Heb.  liearing.  Doubtless  through 
the  Arab  traders.     The  record  of  this  visit, 


following  immediately  upon  the  mention  ol 
the  voyages  (ch.  ix.  26),  is  a  grain  of  evidence 
in  favour  of  locating  Ophir  in  Arabia]  of 
the  fame  (Heb.  hearing ;  of.  axori,  which  also 
means  the  thing  heard,  report.  Compare 
djroKoXwi^tg,  «:uvx))<"£>  *"•]  "'  Solomon  con- 
cerning the  name  [Heb.  D^?,  i.e.,"  in  rela- 
tion to,  in  connexion  with,  the  name,"  &a. 
Ko  doubt  it  was  the  house  he  had  built 

«  Ui^  (of.  chs.  iii.  2  ;  ▼.  17,  18 ;  viii.  17, 
18, 19, 20,  &c.)  had  made  him  famous.  But 
the  expression  is  somewhat  unusual,  and 
these  words  are  omitted  by  the  chronicler. 

Oesenius  and  Ewald,however,  regard  the?  ai 
instrumental,  "  the  fame  given  him  by  the 
name,"  &c.,  as  Judg.  vii.  18;  Ezek.  zii.  12, 
&c.,  and  Wordsworth  compares  the  use  of 
iv  in  Greek.  The  LXX.  and  other  versions 
read  "  the  name  of  Solomon  and  the  name 
of  the  Lord."  But  the  text  is  on  every 
ground  to  be  retained.  The  alliteration  in 
this  verse  (probably  accidental)  is  to  be 
noticed.  There  is  also  a  slight  paroTiomatia] 
of  the  Lord,  she  came  to  prove  (LXX. 
viipatiat,  to  test)]  blm  with  hard  questions 
[Heb.  in  riddles ;  LXX.  iv  alviyimai.  The 
Arabian  mind  has  ever  delighted  in  dark 
sayings,  enigmas,  &o.,  and  extensive  collec. 
tious  of  these  have  been  made  by  Borck- 
hardt  and  others  (see  Keil  in  he.)  Accord- 
ing to  Dius  (cited  in  Josephns,  Contra 
Ap.  i.  17.  18)  Solomon  also  had  dialectical 
encounters  with  Hiram  and  with  Abdemon, 
or,  according  to  Menander,  a  younger  son  of 
Abdemon,  a  man  of  Tyre.] 

Yer.  2. — And  she  came  to  Jemsalem  [a 
great  undertaking  in  those  days.  Our  Lord 
lays  stress  on  this  long  journey,  Ik  ruv 
Treparoiv  rijc  yijs,  Matt.  xii.  42  ;  Luke  xi.  31] 
with  a  very  great  train  [Heb.  with  a  very 

heavy  force  or  host  (?\'n).  Thenins  nnder- 
stands  the  words  of  an  armed  escort,  which 
may  well  have  been  necessary  considering 
the  countries  through  which  she  passed,  and 
the  treasures  she  carried.  It  would  also  be 
quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  age  that  the  queen 
should  be  escorted  by  a  band  of  her  soldiers. 
But  it  is  not  so  certain  that  this  idea  was  in 
the  historian's  mind] ,  with  [not  in  Heb.] 
camelB  [2  Chron.  ix.  1  has  "and  camels." 

But  the  word  is  here  explicative  of  the  7)11 
preceding  (Keil).  It  does  not,  however,  decide 
against  an  armed  force,  as  camels  would  be 
in  any  case  required.  The  camel  was  a 
familiar  object  to  the  Jews  (Exod.  ix.  8 ; 
Levit.  xi.  4 ;  Deut.  xiv.  7,  <&e.);  but  such  a 


OH.  X.  1— 18.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


203 


pToceBBion  as  this  would  create  great  as- 
tonishment in  Jerusalem,  and  vie  may 
imagine  how  the  people  would  Uue  the 
bazaars  as  she  passed,  and  the  acclama- 
tions with  which  they  would  greet  the  queen 
(of.  i.  40 ;  Matt.  xxi.  9)  and  her  swarit  at- 
tendants] that  bare  spices  [Heb.  balsams  ; 
hence  spices  generally ;  LXX.  fiSvafiaTa. 
Exod.  XXV.  6 ;  xxxt.  28 ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  22. 
The  perfumes  of  Arabia  are  proverbial  (see 
Herod,  iii.  107—113),  and  Yemen  is  the 
chief  spice  country  (Diet.  Bib.  i.  p.  91],  and 
very  much  gold  [Psa.  Ixxii.  15.  Gold  is  not 
now  found  in  Arabia,  nor  are  there  any 
traces  of  gold  mines ;  but  Strabo  and  Dio- 
dorns  both  state  that  it  was  found  there, 
and,  according  to  the  latter,  in  nuggets  of 
considerable  size  (Diet.  Bib.  i.  p.  707). 
It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  much  of 
the  "^old  of  Arabia"  came  to  its  emporiums 
from  other  lands.  This  particular  present 
was  doubtless  brought  by  the  queen  because 
she  had  heard  of  the  extensive  use  made  of 
it  by  Solomon,  and  of  the  enormous  quan- 
tities he  required.  "  Strabo  relates  that  the 
Sabeans  were  enormously  wealthy,  and  used 
gold  and  silver  in  a  most  lavish  manner  in 
their  furniture,  their  utensils,  and  even  on 
the  walls,. doors,  and  roofs  of  their  houses  " 
(Itawlinson)]  and  precious  stones  [the  onyx, 
emerald,  and  turquoise  are  still  found  in 
Arabia,  and  in  former  times  the  variety 
was  apparently  much  greater  (Plin.,  Nat. 
Hist,  xxxvii.)] ;  and  when  she  was  come  to 
Solomon,  she  communed  with  him  of  [Heb. 
spake  to  him]  all  that  was  In  her  heart. 
[The  words  are  not  to  be  restricted,  as  by 
KeU,  to  riddles.  There  may  well  have  been, 
as  the  earher  interpreters  supposed,  religious 
discourse — gravissimas  et  sacras  quaestiones. 

Ver.  3.— And  Solomon  told  her  [T^n  is 
used  of  solving  riddles  in  Judges  xiv.  13 
(Bahr),  and  interpreting  dreams  Gen.  xli. 
24;  Dan.  v.  12]  all  her  questions  [Heb. 
words]  ;  there  was  not  anything  hid  from 
the  king,  which  he  told  her  not. 

Yer.  4. — And  when  the  queen  of  Sheba 
had  seen  all  Solomon's  wisdom,  and  the 
house  he  had  built  [ver.  5  compels  us  to 
understand  this  of  the  palace,  not  of  the 
temple.  Josephus  says  she  was  especially 
astonished  at  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon] , 

Ver.  5. — And  the  meat  of  his  table  [ch. 
iv.  22,  23] ,  and  the  sitting  ["  The  rooms  of 
the_  courtiers  in  attendance"  (Keil).  But 
3^D  may  mean  an  assembly  (Psa.  i.  1),  and 
possibly  the  queen  saw  them  when  gathered 
together  for  a  meal]  of  his  servants,  and 
the  attendance  [Heb.  standing.  According 
to  Keil,"  the  rooms  of  the  interior  servants." 
But  ver.  8  appears  to  be  decisive  against  this 


vie^  Of  his  ministers  [i.e.,  those  who 
ministered  to  him.  The  word  "  servants  " 
is,  perhaps,  to  be  understood  of  state 
officers ;  the  word  "  ministers  "  of  personal 
attendants  (as  in  Acts  xiii.  5,  &c.)  That 
the  latter  were  an  inferior  class,  the ' '  stand- 
ing" shows],  and  their  apparel  [cf.  Matt, 
vi.  29.  The  rich  and  costly  dress  of  Eastern 
courtiers  and  attendants  is  sometimes  fur- 
nished by  the  king  (Gen.  xlv.  22 ;  1  Sam. 
xviii.  4 ;  2  Kings  v.  5 ;  Dan.  v.  7 ;  Esther 
V.  8 ;  1  Mace.  x.  20.  Of.  Chardin,  "  Voyage 
en  Perse,"  iii.  230] ,  and  his  cupbearers  [T3y 
this  word  Keil  would  understand  "  drinking 
arrangements."  But  see  2  Chron.  iz.  4, 
"cupbearers  (same  word)  and  their  ap- 
parel "],  and  his  ascent  ^TVV.  It  is  some- 
what doubtful  whether  we  are  to  interpret 
this  word,  ascent,  or  burnt  offering.  2  Kings 
xvi.  18,  1  Chron.  xxvi.  16,  Ezek.  xl.  26 
make  for  the  former,  and  the  chronicler  has 

^n*?J2  which  undoubtedly  means  "  ascent." 
But  all  the  translations  understand  the 
word  of  burnt  offerings — the  LXX.  has  mi 
T^v  oKoKouTiaaiv — and  the  word,  "  which 
occurs  at  least  300  times  in  the  Bible," 
always  (with  one  exception)  signifies  burnt 
offering.  It  is  objected  against  this  inter- 
pretation (1)  that  we  should  require  the 
plural,  i.«., "  burnt  offerings  ;  "  but  this  is  by 
no  means  certain,  as  the  historian  may 
refer  to  one  particular  holocaust  (see  ch.  ix. 
25)  which  the  queen  witnessed;  and  (2) 
that  the  sight  of  burnt  ofierings  could  not 
have  caused  her  any  astonishment  (Keil). 
But  their  prodigious  number  may  surely 
have  done  so  ;  and  we  are  certainly  to  under- 
stand that  Solomon  was  remarkable  for  the 
scale  of  his  sacrifices.  Considering,  how- 
ever, that  the  *ord  undoubtedly  means 
"  ascent "  in  Ezek.  xl.  26,  and  that  it  is  so 
paraphrased  by  the  chronicler,  it  is  perhaps 
safer  to  retain  this  rendering  here]  ;  there 
was  no  more  spirit  in  her  [same  expression 
Josh.  V.  1,  and  cf.  ii.  11.  For  various  legends 
as  to  this  queen,  see  Stanley,  "  Jewish  Ch." 
u.  pp.234— 236]. 

Ver.  6. — ^And  she  said  to  the  king.  It  vas 
a  true  report  [Heb.  Truth  was  the  word] 
that  I  heard  in  mine  own  land  of  thy  acts 
[or  words.  Same  word  as  above  and  in  the 
next  verse]  and  of  thy  wisdom. 

Ver.  7.— Howbelt,  I  believed  not  the 
words  ["  Fame,  as  it  is  always  a  blab,  so 
ofttimes  a  liar  "  (Bp.  Hall)]  until  I  came, 
and  mine  eyes  had  seen  It :  and  behold,  the 
half  was  not  told  me ;  thy  wisdom  and 
prosperity  exceeded  the  fame  [Heb.  thou 
hast  added  wisdom  and  good  to  the  report] 
which  I  beard. 

Ver.  8.— Happy  [Heb.    0   the   hnpi^iness, 


804 


THE  PIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  X.  1—18, 


as  in  Psa.  i.  1 ;  ii.  12 ;  xxxiii.  12,  &c.]  are 
thy  men  [LXX.  wines,  yvi'SiKic] ;  happy  are 
thy  servants,  which  stand  continually  he- 
fore  thee  [see  on  ch.  i.  2] ,  and  tliat  hear 
thy  wisdom. 

Ver.  9.— Blessed  he  the  Lord  thy  God 
[From  this  meution  of  the  name  of  Jehovah, 
taken  in  connexion  with  Matt.  xli.  42,  it  has 
been  concluded  that  the  queen  became  a 
convert  to  the  faith  of  Israel.  Bat  this 
inference  is  unwarranted.  Polytheism  per- 
mitted', and,  indeed,  encouraged,  a  full 
recognition  of  the  gods  many  of  the  dif- 
ferent races  and  regions.  See  on  ch,  y.  7, 
and  cf.  2  Ghron.  ii.  12  and  Ezra  i.  3. 
Observe,  too,  it  is  "Jehovah,  thy  God." 
And  it  is  very  significant  that  all  her  gifts 
and  treasures  were  for  the  king  ;  none  were 
offerings  to  the  temple]  which  delighted 
In  thee  [cf.  ch.  v.  7] ,  to  set  thee  on  the 
throne  of  Israel;  because  the  Lord  loved 
Israel  for  ever  [a  graceful  and  thoroughly 
Oriental  compliment.  This  visit  was  as 
flattering  to  the  pride  Of  the  chosen  people 
as  to  their  king] ,  therefore  made  he  thee 
Idng,  to  do  Judgment  and  justice. 

Ter.  10. — And  she  gave  the  king  an 
hundred  and  twenty  [Josephus  says  twenty'] 
talents  of  gold  [Psa.  Ixxii.  IS.  "  The  rivers 
still  run  into  the  sea ;  to  him  that  hath 
ehall  be  given  "  (Bp.  Hall).  As  to  the  talent, 
see  on  ch.  ix.  14] ,  and  of  spices  very  great 
store  [Heb.  much  exceedingly  (Ewald,  287  c.) 
"  The  immense  abundance  of  spices  in 
Arabia  ...  is  noted  by  many  writers.  Hero- 
dotus says  that  the  whole  tract  exhaled  an 
odour  marvellously  sweet  (iii.  113).  Dio- 
dorus  relates  that  the  odour  was  carried  out 
to  sea  to  a  considerable  distance  from  the 
shore  (iii.  46).  According  to  Strabo  the 
spice-trade  of  Arabia  was  in  the  hands  of 
two  nations,  the  Sabeans  and  Oerrhaeaus, 
whose  profits  from  it  were  sa  enormous  that 
in  his  time  they  were  the  two  wealthiest 
nations  on  the  face  of  the  earth  (xvl.  4.  19)," 
Bawliusou],  and  precious  stones;  there 
came  no  more  such  ahuudance  of  spices 
as  these  which  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave 
to  king  Solomon.  [Josephus  states  (Ant. 
viii.  6.  6)  that  the  cultivation  of  the  balsam 
in  Palestine  dates  from  this  visit ;  the 
plant  having  been  one  of  the  queen's 
gifts. 

The  two  following  verses  form  a  sort  of 
parenthesis.  In  speaking  of  the  gold  and 
gems  brought  by  the  Arabian  queen,  it 
occurs  to  the  historian  to  state  that  both  of 
these  oommoditiea  were  also  brought  in  by 
the  fleet.  Possibly,  too,  the  mention  of  the 
spices  reminded  him  of  the  fragrant  almug 
bees  brought  from  Ophir  (Bahr).     But  it 


would  rather  seem  that  they  are  included  al' 
one  of  the  chief  products  of  the  voyage. 

Ver.  11. — And  the  navy  of  Triram  also 
[t.«.,  built  and  equipped  by  him,  ch.  ix. 
26—28],  that  brought  gold  from  Ophir, 
brought  In  from  Ophir  great  plenty  of 
almug  trees  [In  2  Chi  on.  ii.  8 ;  ix.  10,  called 
"algum-trees."  The  origin  and  meaning 
of  the  word  are  alike  oncertain.  By  some 
(see  Gesen.,  Thes.  i.  p.  93) the  Alia  supposed 
to  be  the  Arabic  article,  as  found  in  Al-cora/n, 
Al-cohol,  Ad-miral,  &c.,  but  later  authorities 
(see,  e.3.,MaxMiiller,"Soience  of  Language," 
p.  214)  lend  no  support  to  this  view,  "  Oel- 
sius  enumerates  fifteen  different  trees,  each 
of  which  has  been  supposed  to  have  a  olaint 
to  represent  the  almug  tree'  of  Scriptme " 
(Diet.  Bib.  iii.  Appendix,  p.  vi)  It  is  now, 
however,  pretty  generally  agreed  that  the 
red  sandal-wood  ^pterocarpus  sandalionu, 
Linn. ;  or,  according  to  others,  tantalum 
album,  the  white  species)  is  intended — a  tree 
which  grows  in  jkdia.  and  on  the  coast  of 
Malabar.  It  is  said  that  in  India  sandal- 
wood is  called  valguha  (same  root) ;  and 
Stanley  sees  in  almug  the  "  Hebraized  form 
of  the  Deccan  word  for  sandal."  Dr. 
Hooker,  however,  (Diet.  Bib.  l.c.)  regards 
the  question  as  stUl  undecided],  and  pre- 
douB  stones.  [Stanley  remarks  on  the  fre- 
quent references  to  gold  and  silver  and 
precious  stones  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs 
(chs.  i.  9. ;  iii.  14,  15  ;  viii.  10, 11 ;  x.  20 ; 
zvi.  16,  &e.),  as  one  indication  that  it  be- 
longs to  the  age  of  Solomon.] 

Yer.  12. — And  the  king  made  of  the  almug 
trees  ptUars  [ht.,  props.    In  2  Chron.  ix. 

11  we  have  a  different  word,  nppip  (of. 
Judg.  XX.  31,  32  ;  1  Sam.  vi.  12,  &c.),' there 
translated  stairs.  The  word  in  the  text 
*1)^PP  is  &wa^  \iy.  Keil  understands 
"  steps  with  bannisters ;  "  Bahr  (after 
Jarohi)  "  tesselated  pavements  ; "  Gesenius, 
"  balusters ;  "  Thenius,  "  divans  ;  "  B8tt- 
oher,  "  benches  and  similar  moveables." 
But  was  not  the  pavement  already  laid,  and 
of  cedar ;  and  would  the  sanctuary  have 
divans,  &e.  ?]  for  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
for  the  king's  house^  harps  also  and  psal- 
teries [also  mentioned  together  (Psa.  Izzi 
22;  oviii.  2|  ol.  3).  They  were  stringed 
instruments,  but  tiieir  precise  shape  and 
character  is  quite  uncertain.  One  epedes 
of  sandal- wood,  or  of  wood  closely  allied  to 
it,  is  said  to  have  been  much  sought  after  for 
musical  instruments]  for  the  singers :  there 
came  no  such  almng  trees,  nor  were  seen 
unto  this  day. 

Yer.  13. — ^And  king  Solomon  gave  nnto 
the  queen  of  Sheba  all  her  desire,  whatso- 
ever she  asked,  beside  that  which  Solomon 
gave  her  of  hla  royal  bounty.     [Heb.  o«- 


.  X.  1—13.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


lOfi 


earding  to  the  hand  of  king  Solomon.  The 
ohxonidei  has,  "  beside  that  which  she  had 
bionght^  onto  the  king."  That  is  to  say, 
in  addition  to  the  fitting  presents  which  he 
made  in  return  for  her  giits,  he  freely  gave 
her  whatsoever  she  asked  for.  To  aik  for  a 
coveted  thing  is  no  breach  of  Oriental  pro- 
priety. The  Ethiopian  Christians  find  in 
these  words  (and  considering  the  character 
of  Solomon  and  the  license  of  that  age,  per- 
haps not  altogether  without  reason)  a  basia 
for  their  belief  that  she  bore  Solomon 
a  son,  Melimelek  by  name,  from  whom, 
indeed,  the  present  sovereigns  of  Abyssinia 
claim  to  derive  their  descent.]  So  she 
turned  and  went  to  her  own  country,  she 
and  her  servants. 

Bishop  Wordsworth  has  remarked  (p.  44) 
that  the  record  of  this  visit  disappoints  us. 
He  says,  "He  (Solomon)  answered  her  hard 
questions.  He  showed  her  his  palace  .  .  . 
but  we  do  not  hear  that  he  invited  her  to  go 
°ap  with  him  into  the  hoiua  ol  the  Lord," 


ie.  Again :  "  The  visit  of  the  qneen  ol 
Bheba  seem  to  have  been  without  any  spi- 
ritual result."  "  In  like  manner,"  he  adds, 
"we  hear  nothing  of  any  attempt  on  Solo- 
mon's pait  to  improve  his  friendship  and 
oommercial  relations  with  Hiram  into  on 
occasion  forcommnnicating  the  better  mer- 
ohandise  of  Divine  truth  to  the  Sidonians." 
But  sorely  this  criticism  overlooks  the 
fact  that  Judaism  was  not  a  missionary 
religion,  and  that  the  chosen  people  had  no 
sort  of  commission  to  convert  the  heathen. 
It  is,  no  doubt,  a  mystery ;  but  it  is  a  fact, 
that  for  2,000  years  the  light  of  God's  tmth 
was,  by  the  counsel  and  purpose  of  Qod, 
restricted  within  the  extremely  narrow  con- 
fines of  Israel,  and  that  the  "  fulness  of  the 
time,"  when  the  Gentiles  should  be  "fellow- 
heirs,"  was  distant  from  Bolomon'i  ity  by 
a  whole  miUeunionb 


HOMILETICa. 

Vew.  1—18. — The  Queen  of  Sheha.  Well  may  the  journey  of  this  Eastern  qrieai 
have  a  triple  mentiou  in  the  sacred  page  (1  Kings  z. ;  2  Chron.  ix. ;  St.  Matt.  xii. ; 
St.  Lnke  xi.),  for  it  is  almost,  if  not  altogether,  aui  generit.  We  are  so  faTniliar 
with  the  story  from  onr  infancy  that  we  often  fail  to  realize  its  true  character  and 
proportionB.  A  woman,  a  princess,  an  Arab  queen,  travels  some  three  thousand 
miles  in  search  of  wisdom.  We  have  read  of  long  voyages  undertaken  and  of 
great  hardships  endured  by  men  who  were  in  search  of  gold.  Fable  tells  of  the 
search  foitkgolden&eeee',  history  tells  of  many  voyages  to  a  fancied  El  Dorado,\mt 
here  only,  and  in  the  case  of  the  Magi,  do  we  read  of  a  traveller  who  brotight  gold 
and  sought  wUdom. 

And  onr  Lord  hag  honoured  this  history — ^this  almost  romantio  story — by 
drawing  one  of  its  lessons  with  His  own  hand  (Matt.  xii.  42).  But  though  Ha 
has  there  famished  the  outline.  He  has  left  it  for  us  to  fill  in  the  colouring.  And 
the  rest  of  the  story  He  has  left  untouched ;  the  other  lessons  we  have  to  gather  for 
.ourselves.  We  have,  therefore,  to  consider,  I.  The  joiimey  of  the  queen.  IL  Her 
Tioh  offerings  to  Solomon.    III.  Solomon's  royal  presents  to  her. 

L  As  to  the  JotTBNBT — the  one  point  noticed  by  our  blessed  Lord.  He  has 
rensmdai  TiB  (1)  of  its  character.  She  came  "  from  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Qi)  Of 
iti  purpose.  It  was  to  "  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon."  Let  us  collect  our  thoughts 
round  these  two  centres,  the  natvre  and  object  of  this  enterprise. 

L  The  Nature  of  this  Joubnbt.  Four  particulars  must  be  home  in  mind. 
(1)  TJte  length  of  the  weuy.  Presuming  that  Sheba  was  Yemen  (see  note  on 
ver.  1),  her  capital  would  be  at  no  great  distance  from  Mocha  or  Aden,  t.e.,  it  would 
be  some  fifteen  hundred  miles  distant  from  Jerusalem.  But  ancient  journeys  are 
not  to  be  measured  by  miles,  but  by  houra  Now  both  the  queen  and  her  company 
travelled  by  camels,  and  the  camel  can  only  go,  with  any  degree  of  comfort,  at  a 
walking  pace,  and,  like  other  beasts  of  burden,  must  have  occasional  rests.  Even  if 
they  had  some  "  swift  dromedaries"  for  the  queen,  the  pace  must  have  been  regulated 
by  the  sumpter  camels.  We  may  be  pretty  sure,  therefore,  that  the  party  would 
not  travel,  on  the  average,  more  than  twenty  miles  a  day,  which  would  give  some- 
thing like  seventy-five  days  for  the  journey  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  same  for  the 
ntiun.    (8)  lit  fatigue*  and  hardships.    Eastern  queens,  even  of  the  Sabeaus, 


20«  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  x.  1— la 

were  not  unacquainted  mth  luxury  (note  on  ver.  2),  and  the  journey  through  the 
"great  and  terrible  -wildemess"  woulil  Bubject  this  lady  to  many  discomforts. 
Camel-riding  is  very  tiring  ;  desert- travel  profoundly  wearisome.  Whatever 
comforts  her  "  very.great  train  "  might  be  able  to  procure  her,  nothing  could  alter 
the  blazing  sun  overhead,  the  burning  sands  beneath,  or  the  utter  desolation  and 
monotony  of  the  desert.  Those  who  have  made  the  journey  to  Sinai  wiU  have  some 
idea  what  the  daily  life  of  this  party  was  like.  (3)  Its  perils.  "  Perils  of  the 
wildemess"  (of.  Psa.  xci. ;  Deut.  viii.  15),  and  "perils  of  robbers"  alike.  Her 
course  lay  through  the  land  of  Ishmael,  whose  "  hand  was  against  every  man," 
and  she  carried  with  her  large  treasure — a  tempting  bait  to  the  rapacious  Bedotiin. 
True,  she  had  an  armed  escort,  but  that  would  not  exempt  her  from  dangers.  Nor 
were  these  "  perils  by  the  way"  all.  She  had  left  her  kingdom  without  its  head. 
An  insurrection  might  be  fomented  against  her  (Luke  xix.  14),  or  a  usurper  might 
snatch  her  crown.  And  all  this  was  (4)  undertaken  by  a  woman .  True,  she  was 
an  Arabian,  and  therefore  presumably  hardy  and  patient,  but  all  the  same  the  sex 
of  the  traveller  increases  our  admiration,  especially  when  we  consider  the  estima- 
tion in  which  women  have  generally  been  held  in  the  East.  And  she  was  a  queen, 
and  left  a  court,  left  her  fragrant  country,  "  Araby  the  blest,"  to  plod  painfally  and 
slowly  over  the  desert  reaches,  till  she  came  to  the  "  city  of  the  vision  of  peace." 

II.  The  PUEP03B  of  this  undektaking.  Many  sovereigns  have  left  their 
homes  at  the  head  of  "  a  very  great  train "  both  before  and  since  her  day,  but 
with  what  different  objects  in  view.  They  have  swept  across  continents — the- 
Barneses,  the  Shishaks,  ihe  Alexanders,  the  Tamerlanes  of  history,  but  not  for 
wisdom.  Theirs  was  no  peaceful  or  kindly  mission.  Some,  like  Peter  the  Great, 
have  visited  foreign  courts  for  the  sake  of  advancing  the  commerce,  &e.,  of  their 
country.  Some,  like  the  Persian  Shah  recently,  have  travelled  far  to  see  the 
wonders  of  the  world, and  to  taste  of  its  pleasures ;  but  she  came  to  "prove  Solomon 
with  bard  questions,"  to  "  commune  with  him  of  all  that  was  in  her  heart,"  i 

"reason  high 
Of  providence,  foreknowledge,  will,  and  fate, 
Fixed  fate,  freewill,  foreknowledge  absolute." 

It  iB  dear  that  to  her  "  wisdom  "  was  "  the  principal  thing,"  and  she  brought  gold 
and  rubies  (Job  xxviii.  18 ;  Prov.  iii.  15 ;  viii.  11)  to  obtain  it.  She  is  like  the 
"  merchantman  seeking  goodly  pearls."  She  has  found  one  pearl  of  great  price, 
and  she  will  give  all  that  she  has  to  possess  it.  True,  she  saw  the  wonders  of 
Solomon's  court,  but  she  came  to  hear  his  wisdom.  She  envied  his  courtiers,  not 
because  of  their  places,  palaces,  &c.,  but  because  they  stood  before  bim  (ver.  8)  and 
heard  his  words. 

And  our  Saviour  has  said  that  this  conduct  will  condemn  the  men  of  His  gener- 
ation. It  were  easy  to  show  how.  But  it  will  be  more  to  the  point  if  we  consider 
how  it  may  condemn  the  men  of  our  own  time. 

1.  Christ  is  "  more  {vXtiov)  than  Solomon."  Solomon  was  the  wisest  of  men; 
Christ  was  "  the  wisdom  of  God."  Solomon,  a  great  king ;  Christ,  "  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords  "  (Rev.  xvii.  4).  Compare  the  Song  of  Solomon  with  the 
Beatitudes ;  the  Proverbs  with  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;  Solomon's  end  and 
Christ's  death.  "We  should  not  dare  to  compare  them  had  not  He  done  it  before. 
2.  Christ  is  here.  No  need  to  cross  deserts  or  continents  to  find  Him.  "  Say 
not  in  thine  heart.  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ?  (that  is,  to  bring  Christ  down 
from  above),"  &c.  (Rom.  x.  6,  7).  And  say  not,  "  True,  He  was  present  in  those 
Galilean  synagogues,  in  those  streets  of  Jerusalem,  but  He  is  not  here."  His 
own  words  afiiim  the  contrary  (Matt,  xxviii.  20 ;  xviii.  2U,  &o.)  He  is  present 
everywhere. 

"  One  Spirit,  His 
Who  wore  the  platted  crown  with  bleeding  brows. 
Fills  nniversal  nature." 

But  more  espeoially  is  he  present  in  His  Church,  His  word.  His  sacraments.  8. 
Christ  hag  come  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  world  to  us.     It  is  not  we  who 


OH.  X.  1—18.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  207 

have  to  leavs  a  kingdom.     He  has  left  His  that  he  may  "appoint  unto  us  • 
kingdom." 

•*  Thy  Father's  home  of  light ; 
Thy  rainbow-circled  throne, 
Were  left  for  earthly  night, 
For  wanderings  sad  and  lone." 

And  yet  men  will  not  listen  to  Him,  will  not  learn  of  Him.  It  fs  said  that 
ninety-five  per  cent,  of  our  lahonring  classes  do  not  stateJly  attead  any  place  of 
Christian  worship.  And  of  those  who  do,  how  many  do  His  bidding  ?  In  the 
great  assize  all  these  will  meet  the  Queen  of  the  South.  She  will  witness  of  the 
journey  she  took,  of  the  sacrifices  she  made,  of  the  risks  she  incurred,  to  sit  at  the 
feet  of  Solomon.  She  will  tell  of  Solomon's  "  ascent,"  &o.,  and  she  will  put  to 
shame  and  everlasting  contempt  those  to  whom  the  words  and  wisdom,  the 
sacrifice  and  ascension  of  the  Lord  were  unholy  or  indifferent  things  (Heb.  x.  29). 

And  not  the  Queen  of  the  South  alone.  The  kings  of  the  East,  Melchior,  Jasper, 
Balthasar— so  tradition  calls  them — they  too  came  a  long  journey  to  see  the  chUd 
Christ.  And  how  many  pagans  in  Africa,  in  India,  in  the  islands  of  the  sea,  have 
gone  long  miles  just  to  hear  one  sermon  from  the  passing  missionary  ?  WiU  not 
all  these  condemn  the  men  of  this  generation  ? 

III.  Her  offerings  to  Solomon.  It  was  the  custom  of  those  days  to  approach 
king,  seer,  &o.,  with  a  present  (ver.  25  ;  Psa.  Ixxii.  10 ;  1  Sam.  ix.  7  ;  Judg.  vi.  18). 
And  she  id  not  come  empty.  We  read  of  "  camels  bearing  spices,"  of  120  talents 
of  gold,  &c.  (ver.  10).  Now  observe:  (1)  She  gave  of  what  she  had.  Her  country 
produced  or  imported  gold ;  it  produced  spices  and  precious  stones  (note  on  ver.  2). 
Other  visitors  to  Solomon  gave  garments,  horses,  &o.  (ver.  25).  These  she  had  not, 
but  she  gave  what  she  could  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).  (2)  She  gave  what  Solomon  needed. 
We  know  how  much  gold  he  required ;  not  for  the  temple  only — that  was  apparently 
completed — ^bnt  for  his  great  and  varied  undertakings.  She  brought  120  talents  of 
the  "  gold  of  Arabia  " — ^literally  the  ransom  of  a  province  (ch.  ix.  14).  She  brought 
spices — ^In  ver.  15,  we  read  of  "  the  traffick  of  the  spice  merchants  " — and  precious 
stones — in  2  Chron.  iii.  6  we  find  that  Solomon  garnished  the  house  with  these.  So 
that,  like  Hiram,  she  helped  to  prepare  a  shrine  for  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  (3)  She 
ga/oe  generously.  Her  munificence  was  unexampled — "  very  much  gold  "  (ver.  2). 
"  There  came  no  more  such  abundance  of  spices,"  &c.  (ver.  10). 

And  shall  not  her  gifts,  too,  condemn  ottr  parsimony  ?  For  Christ,  the  Divine 
Solomon,  has  need  of  our  spices  and  silver  and  gold.  He  too  is  building  a  temple 
(1  Peter  ii.  5).  He  too  plants  store  cities  and  treasures  in  His  realm.  He  would 
have  the  whole  round  world  girdled  with  Christian  temples.  He  would  make  it 
one  vast  "  Paradise"  (Eccles.  ii.  4,  6).  And  He  needs  our  agency  and  our  offerings. 
He  wants  the  perfume  of  sacrifice  on  our  part  (Phil.  iv.  18 ;  Eph.  v.  2 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  15). 
The  Queen  of  theSouth  did  not  offer  to  Solomon  of  that  which  cost  her  nothing. 
But  how  seldom  is  the  widow's  mite  offered  to  our  king.  "  All  these  of  theil 
abundance  have  cast  in,"  &c.  (Luke  xxi.  8).  Compared  with  her  gift  how  miserable  are 
our  subscriptions  and  offertories.  Note  :  There  is  a  striking  similarity  between  her 
gifts  and  those  of  the  Magi.     Both  too  were  offered  to  a  king. 

rV.  Solomon's  gifts  to  her.  She  was  not  the  loser  either  by  her  long  journey 
or  her  costly  presents.  A  prince  Hke  Solomon  could  not  permit  her  to  make  sacri- 
fices. Noblesse  oblige.  His  generosity  must  exceed  hers.  So  he  gave  her  "  all  her 
desire,''  "whatsoever  she  asked"  "according  to  the  hand  of  the  king"  (ver.  13,Heh.) 
We  see  here  a  picture  of  the  recompenses  of  our  God.  "  According  to  his  riches  in 
glory"  fPhU.  iv.  19).  "Exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think" 
(Eph.  iii.  20).  "  Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you  "  (Matt.  vii.  7).  His  gifts  too  are 
"  according  to  the  bond  of  a  Mng,"  and  what  a  king  t  He  cannot  remain  in  any 
num'i  debi    "  A  oup  of  cold  water  only"  He  will  abundantly  recompense. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  x.  1—13. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  Queen  nf  the  South.  This  incident  is  remarkable  as  the  only 
one  in  the  reign  of  Solomon  to  which  reference  is  made  in  the  New  Testament. 
Solomon  is  twice  spoken  of  by  our  Lord  in  His  recorded  discourses.  In  one  case 
his  royal  magnificence  is  declared  inferior  to  the  beauty  with  which  God  has  clothed 
the  "  lilies  of  the  field."  "  Even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one 
of  these  "  (Matt.  vi.  29).  Art  can  never  vie  with  nature.  What  loveliness  of  form 
or  hue  that  human  skiU  can  produce  is  comparable  with  that  of  the  petals  of  a 
flower  ?  '  What  is  all  the  glory  vrith  which  man  may  robe  himself  to  that  which  is 
the  product  of  the  creative  finger  of  God  ?  In  the  other  case,  it  is  the  wisdom  of 
Solomon  that  our  Lord  refers  to,  as  having  its  wide-spread  fame  illustrated  by  the 
visit  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  and  as  being  surpassed  by  the  higher  revelation  of  truth 
in  Himself  "  The  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  the  judgment,"  &o.  (Matt.  xii. 
42).  The  interest  and  importance  of  this  incident  is  greatly  heightened  by  its  thus 
finding  a  place  in  the  discourses  of  Christ.  In  itself  there  is  no  very  deep  meaning 
init.  It  suppliesfewmaterialsforhighmoralorspiritual teaching.  The intsrohange 
of  civilities  between  two  Oriental  monarchs  is  related  by  the  historian  with  innocent 
pride,  as  setting  forth  the  surpassing  grandeur  of  the  king  whose  reign  was  to  him  the 
golden  age  of  his  own  nation's  life.  There  is  something  of  a  romantic  charm  in  it, 
too,  that  naturally  gave  rise  to  fanciful  traditions  being  added  to  the  bibhcal  stoiy. 
But  beyond  this  it  is  an  event  of  no  great  moment.  This  use  of  it,  however,  by  our 
Lord  lifts  it  out  of  the  region  of  the  commonplace,  gives  it  other  than  a  mere  secular 
meaning,  makes  it  an  important  channel  of  Divine  instruction.  Every  name  is 
honoured  by  association  with  His.  Every  incident  becomes  clothed  with  sacred  in- 
terest when  made  to  illustrate  the  relation  of  human  souls  to  Him.  Let  us  look  at 
these  two  persons,  then,  in  the  light  of  the  New  Testament  reference  to  their  interview. 

I.  Solomon,  in  his  wisdom,  a  type  of  the  "  geeateb  "  Christ.  The  distinctive 
personal  characteristic  of  Solomon  was  his  "  wisdom."  The  fame  of  it  is  regarded 
by  some  as  marking  the  uprising  of  a  new  and  hitherto  unknown  power  in  Israel. 
Whence  came  this  new  phenomenon  ?  We  trace  it  to  a  Divine  source.  "  The 
Lord  gave  unto  David  this  wise  son  "  (ch.  v.  7).  "  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and 
understanding  exceeding  much"  (ch.  iv.  29).  No  doubt  the  extended  intercourse 
with  surrounding  nations  that  he  established  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  life  to 
Israel,  bringing  in  a  flood  of  new  ideas  and  interests.  This  supplied  materials  for 
his  wisdom  but  did  not  create  it.  It  was  not  learnt  firom  Egypt,  or  the  "  children 
of  the  East."  It  was  a  Divine  gift,  that  came  in  response  to  his  own  prayer  (oh. 
iii.  9).  1.  One  broad  feature  that  strikes  ns  in  Solomon's  wisdom  is  its  remarkable 
versatility,  the  variety  of  its  phases,  the  way  in  which  its  light  played  fi-eely  on  all 
sorts  of  subjects.  It  dealt  with  the  objects  and  processes  of  nature;  It  was  a  kind 
of  natural  science.  He  has  been  called  "  the  founder  of  Hebrew  science,"  the 
"  first  of  the  world's  great  naturalists."  "  He  spake  of  trees,  from  the  cedar  tree," 
&o.  (ch.  iv.  33).  One  would  like  to  know  what  the  range  and  quality  of  his  science 
really  was  ;  but  the  Bible,  existing  as  it  does  for  far  other  than  scientific  purposes, 
does  not  satisfy  our  curiosity  in  this  respect.  It  dealt  with  moral  facts  and  problems 
— a  true  practical  philosophy  of  life;  its  proper  ends  and  aims,  its  governing 
principles,  the  meaning  of  its  experiences,  its  besetting  dangers  and  possible 
rewards.  It  dealt  with  the  administration  of  national  affairs.  This  is  seen  in  his 
assertion  of  the  principle  of  eternal  righteousness  as  the  law  by  which  the  ruler  of 
men  must  himself  be  ruled.  His  wisdom  lay  in  the  gift  of  "  an  understanding 
heart  to  judge  the  people  and  discern  between  good  and  evil,"  and  the  people 
"feared  the  king,  for  they  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him  to  do  judgment" 
(oh.  iv.  29).  Weare  thus  reminded  of  the  unity  of  nature  and  of  human  fife.  Truth 
is  one,  whether  in  thought,  feeling,  or  conduct,  in  things  private  or  public,  secular 
or  spiritual.  Wisdom  is  the  power  that  discerns  and  utiUzes  the  innermost  truth 
of  all  things,_find8  out  and  practically  applies  whatever  is  essentially  Divine.  2. 
Solomon's  wisdom  assumed  various  forms  of  expression :  the  Froreibial  form,  as 


OH.  X.  1—18.]  THE  FIIiST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  209 

in  the  "  Book  of  Proverbs  ;  "  the  Poetic  form,  as  in  his  "  Songs  "  and  "  Psalms ; " 
the  Socratio  form,  by  question  and  answer,  riddles—"  dark  sayings  " — and  the  in- 
terpretation thereof.  It  is  in  this  latter  form  that  his  -wisdom  here  appears. 
Tradition  says  that  Hiram  engaged  with  him  in  this  "  cross  questioning,"  and  was 
worsted  in  the  encounter ;  so  here  the  queen  of  Sheba  came  "  to  prove  him  with 
hard  questions,"  and  "  communing  with  him  of  all  that  was  in  her  heart  she  found 
that  he  could  tell  her  all  her  questions,"  &o.  By  all  this  we  are  led  to  think  of 
"  One  greater  than  Solomon."  (1)  "  Greater,"  inasmuch  as  He  leads  men  to 
wisdom  of  a  higher  order.  Solomon  is  the  most  secular  of  the  inspired  writers  of 
the  Old  Testament.  Divine  things  are  approached  by  him,  as  it  were,  on  the 
lower,  earthly  side.  A  prudential  tone  is  given  to  the  coimsels  of  religion,  and 
vice  is  set  forth  not  so  m.uoh  as  wickedness  but  as  "folly."  Think  of  the  marked 
difference  between  the  utterances  of  Solomon's  wisdom  and  the  sublime  spiritual 
elevation  of  David's  psalms.  And  when  we  come  to  Christ's  teaching,  what  im- 
measurably loftier  heights  and  deeper  depths  of  Divine  truth  are  here  I  Eedemption, 
hoUness,  immortaUty,  are  His  themes — the  deeper  "  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven ; "  "in  him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  "  (Col.  ii.  3). 
(2)  "  Greater,"  inasmuch  as  the  Divine  fount  of  wisdom  must  needs  be  infinitely 
superior  to  any  mere  human  channel  through  which  it  flows.  Solomon  was  after 
all  but  a  learner,  not  a  master.  His  were  but  guesses  at  truth.  Christ's  were  the 
authoritative  utterances  of  the  incarnate  "  Word."  Solomon  spoke  according  to  the 
limited  measiu-e  of  the  spirit  of  truth  in  him.  Christ  epoke  out  of  His  own  infinite 
fulness.  "  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  nnto  Him"  (John  iii.  34).  "Whence, 
indeed,  did  Solomon's  wisdom  come  but  from  Him,  the  true  fontal  "  Light  that 
lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world"?  The  words  that  the  wise  in 
every  age  have  spoken  were  but  dim,  dawning  rays  of  the  hght  that  broke  in  a 
glorious  day  upon  the  world  when  He,  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  arose. 

II.  The  queen  of  Sheba,  in  heb  seasoh  after  wisdom,  as  an  example  fob 
OURSELVES.  AH  the  motives  that  actuated  her  in  this  long  pilgrimage  from  the  far- 
off  corner  of  Arabia  we  know  not.  Mere  curiosity,  commercial  interest,  personal 
vanity  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  it.  But  the  words  of  the  narrative 
suggest  that  it  was  mainly  an  honest  thirst  for  knowledge,  and  specially  for  clearer 
hght  on  highest  matters  of  human  interest.  Learn  (1)  The  nobility  of  a  simple, 
earnest,  restless  search  after  truth.  (2)  The  grateful  respect  which  a  teachable 
spirit  mU  feel  towards  one  who  can  unveil  the  truth  to  it.  (3)  The  joyous  satisfac- 
tion of  soul  that  springs  from  the  discovery  of  the  highest  truth.  How  much  does 
such  an  example  as  this  in  the  realms  of  heathen  darkness  rebuke  the  spiritual 
dnlness  and  indifference  of  those  who  with  the  Light  of  Life  shining  gloriously  upon 
them  in  the  person  of  Christ  refuse  to  welcome  it,  and  walk  in  it  I  "  Many  shall 
oome  from  the  east  and  the  west,"  &c.  (Matt.  vui.  11,  12).— W. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — The  Queen  of  Sheba.  The  suggestiveness  of  Solomon's  intercourse 
with  surrounding  nations.  His  magnanimity  was  as  remarkable  as  his  magnifi- 
cence. His  broad  policy  stood  out  in  striking  contrast  with  the  narrowness  of  some 
of  his  contemporaries  and  successors.  It  was  one  evidence  of  his  divinely  inspired 
wisdom.  In  some  respects  his  enlightenment  puts  to  shame  modern  cliplomaoy. 
Trace  his  relations  with  the  king  of  Tyre  and  the  queen  of  Sheba.  These  were  not 
exceptionally  treated  by  the  wise-hearted  ruler.  His  country  was  open  to  the  com- 
merce of  snrroimding  peoples,  and  his  court  free  to  aU  who  would  live  in  amity  with 
bim.  Indicate  the  typical  nature  of  his  kingdom — the  golden  age  of  God's  people. 
Apply  to  the  reign  of  Him  who  said,  "  A  greater  than  Solomon  is  herel"  Remarks 
on  the  position  and  the  commerce  of  the  land  from  which  this  great  queen  cam*. 

Her  conduct  is  full  of  suggestions  for  us^ 

I.  Heb  comino  shows  the  pains  those  should  take  who  are  searching  fob 
IBtiE  wisdom.  The  journey  was  long,  arduous,  costly,  tt  may  have  raised  oppo- 
sition amongst  the  people  she  ruled.  In  spite  of  aU  she  came.  Give  examples  of 
men  who  in  old  time  travelled  far  in  search  of  wisdom,  visiting  schools  of  philo- 
■ophy,  astrologers,  and  sages,  consulting  oracles  hke  that  at  Delphi.    Not  i 

1  kinds.  p 


210  THE  FIRST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS.  [cH.  x.  U—W 

demanded  of  men  in  our  days  who  investigate  natural  phenomena.  Instances 
abound  of  travellers  who  have  laid  down  life,  as  did  Franklin  and  XjiviBgstone,  in 
journeys  of  discovery ;  of  surgeons  and  physicians  who  have  run  personal  risk  to 
learn  by  crucial  experiment  a  means  of  cure ;  of  scientific  discoverers  who  have 
sacrificed  time  and  effort  to  make  sure  of  one  fact,  or  estabhsli  one  law,  ^c.  In 
contrast  with  all  this  how  small  the  effort  to  win  true  riches,  to  know  essential 
truth.  Many  are  content  with  hearsay  evidence.  The  queen  of  Slieba  was  not. 
At  any  cost  she  would  see  and  know  for  herself  Perhaps  it  was  with  some  remem- 
brance of  her  visit  that  Solomon  wrote  Prov.  ii.  8 — 5  :  "  If  thou  cri^est  after  know- 
lerlge,  and  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understanding ;  if  thou  seekest  her  as  silver,  and 
seal  chest  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures ;  then  thou  shalt  understand  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,  and  find  the  knowledge  of  God."  Compare  this  with  the  parable  of  the 
merchant  seeking  goodly  peai-ls  (Matt.  xiii.  45,  46)j     See  also  CoL  ii.  3. 

II.  Heb  confession  expresses  the  feeling  of  those  who  have  come  to  One 
GREATER  THAN  SoLOMON.  "The  half  was  not  told  me"  (vers.  6,  7).  St.  Paul 
speaks  of  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ ;  "  of  "  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ,"  &c.  In  proportion  as  men  really  know  Him,  and  live  near  Him,  does 
He  appear  more  winsome  and  worthy.  Cite  the  utterances  of  such  men  as  Bernard, 
Wesley,  &c.  Their  words  fall  from  our  lips  in  song,  yet  they  seem  extravagant  to 
us  on  our  low  level  of  religious  life,  and  at  our  sad  distance  firom  Christ.  Such 
bursts  of  praise  we  may  use  as  tests  of  our  devotion.  Christ  has  not  chauged,  but 
too  often  His  people  see  Him  from  afar.  Any  one  who  is  living  near  the  Lord  can 
say,  "  The  half  was  not  told  me  "  of  Thy  love  and  glory. 

III.  Her  offering  suggests  the  presentation  we  should  make  to  our  King. 
Bead  verse  10.  Draw  out  the  parallel  between  this  and  the  coming  of  the  Magi 
(Matt,  ii.),  when  they  fell  down  and  worshipped  the  child  Jesus,  and  opened  their 
treasures  and  presented  to  Him  gifts — gold  and  frankincense  and  myrrhs 

"  Say,  shall  we  yield  Him,  in  costly  devotion, 
Odours  of  Edom  and  offerings  Divine ; 
Gems  of  the  mountain,  and  pearls  of  the  ocean. 
Myrrh  from  the  forest,  or  gold  from  the  mineT 

•  Vainly  we  offer  each  ample  oblation  ; 

Vainly  with  gifts  would  his  favour  secure ; 
Eicher,  by  far,  is  the  heart's  adoration  ; 
Dealer  to  God  are  the  prayers  of  the  poor." 

See  Isa.  i.  12 ;  Fsa.  xl.  6,  &c. 

IV.  Her  entertainment  reminds  us  of  the  welcome  GrrEN  by  otm  Lord. 
1.  Like  Solomon  (ver.  3)  Christ  cmawers  owr  questions.  He  knew  His  disciples 
"  were  desirous  to  ask  Him,"  so  they  needed  not  even  to  fi-ame  their  questions.  Un- 
spoken prayers  are  heard.  2.  Like  Solomon  {vei.  B)  Christ  reveals  His  glory.  The 
transfiguration,  the  last  talk  with  the  apostles,  the  apocalypse,  &c.  8.  Like  Solomon 
(ver.  lb)  Christ  loads  us  with  benefits.  Pardon,  peace,  strength,  joy,  &c. — of 
greater  worth  than  gold  and  precious  stones.    These  material,  those  imperishable. 

Let  the  earnestness  of  this  queen  rebuke  our  sloth  and  unbelief.  "  The  queen 
of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  the  judgment  with  this  generation,  and  shall  con- 
demn it:  for  she  came  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  to  hear  the  wisdom 
of  Solomon,  and  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here  "  (Matt.  xii.  42). A.  B. 


EXPOSITION 
CHAPTEE  X.  14—29. 

BotiOMON'S    WEALTH,    POMP,    AND    POWER. — 

The  visit  of  the  Queen  of  SUeba,  in  itself  a 
striking  proof  of  the  fame  and  greatness  of 
Solomon,  is  followed  by  a  description  of  his 
TCTennes,  his  throne,  and  various  other  par- 


ticulars of  his  wealth  and  magnificence, 
some  of  which  are  related  here  because  they 
were  the  products  of  the  voyages  of  that  same 
fleet  which  had  been  the  means  of  acquaint- 
ing the  queen  with  Solomon  and  his  glory. 
Ver.  14.— Now  the  weight  of  gold  thai 


CH.  X.  14— 2'J.J 


THE  FIRST  LOOK  OF  KINGS. 


ail 


came  to  Solomon  In  one  year  [probably  one 
particular  and  excei'tional  year,  probably 
also  the  year  of  the  queen's  visit,  not  year 
by  year  {Wordsworth,  al.),  as  tiie  Vulgate 
(per  singulos  annos).  One  fleet  only  came 
home  from  its  voyage  after  three  years,  and 
the  gold  would  hardly  weigh  precisely  666 
talents  year  by  year]  was  six  hundred 
threescore  and  six  talents  of  gold.  [The 
correspondence  with  the  number  of  the 
beast  (Eev.  xiii.  18 ;  cf.  Ezra  ii.  13)  is  in  all 
probability  not  altogether  accidental.  It  is 
possible,  i.e.,  that  the  number  of  the  beast 
is  a  reminiscence  of  this  number  of  talents. 
For  we  may  surely  see  in  this  statement  of 
Solomon's  prodigious  wealth  an  indieation 
of  his  worldliness,  the  turning-point,  per- 
haps, in  his  estrangement  from  God.  "  The 
love  of  money  "  may  have  been  the  root  of 
all  his  evil.  It  is  certainly  remarkable  that 
from  this  time  forward  his  career  is  one  of 
steady  declension.  It  is  also  remai  kable  that 
while  he  is  here  represented  to  us  as  a 
"royal  merchant,"  the  mark  of  the  beast  is 
on  the  buyers  andsellers  (Eev.  xiii.  17).  But 
see  "  Expositor,"  May,  1881.  It  is,  of  course, 
possible  that  the  number  has  been  corrupted, 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  have  been  re- 
corded, partly  because  of  the  singularity  of 
the  sum  total.  The  666  talents  include  the 
receipts  from  all  sources — taxes,  tribute,  and 
voyages' — with  the  exception  made  presently 
(ver.  15).  EawUnson  quotes  Keil  (in  his 
earlier  edition)  as  estimating  this  amount 
at  £3,646,350.  But  in  his  later  work,  Eeil 
puts  it  in  round  numbers  at  two  and  a  half 
millions  (17,000,000  thalers),  while  Mr.  Poole 
calculates  it  at  about  £8,000,000.  These 
\ridely  varying  figures  are  instructive,  as 
showing  that  both  estimates  are  little  more 
than  guesswork.  We  do  not  know  the  value 
of  the  Hebrew  talent,  nor,  indeed,  can  it 
ever  be  rightly  appraised  until  we  know  its 
purchasing  power.  The  denarius,  e.g.,  is 
generally  valued  at  8Jd.  (or  7id.)  because  it 
contained  some  58  grains  of  pure  silver,  but 
its  real  value  was  nearer  three  shilliugs, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  a  fair  wage  for  a  day's 
work  on  the  land  (Matt.  xx.  2).  In  any  case, 
it  is  clear  that  this  sum  should  hardly  be 
compared  with  the  annual  revenue  of  other 
Oriental  empires,  ashy  Eawlinson  (see  above). 
Ver  15. — Beside  that  he  had  of  the  mer- 
chantmen [The  root  l-IR  signifies  to  wander 
or  travel  about.  In  Num.  xiii.  16,  17,  it  is 
used  of  spies.  It  may  here  be  applied  to 
persons  who  travelled  for  purposes  of  trade ; 
but  the  versions  differ  very  materially  in 
their  rendering  of  the  word;  the  LXX. 
understanding  it  of  tribute  {tS>v  ^ooidj'  tSiv 
inroreTayjiivuiv) ;  the  Chaldee,  Syriac,  and 
Arabic  of  artizans ;  the  Vulgate  of  ambas- 
sadors.   And  the  word  is  nowhere  else  used 


of  traders.  For  the  construction,  see  Ewald 
287e],  and  of  the  trafflck  [it  is  note- 
worthy that  no  such  word  is  used  before 
DHFIij  above]   of  the  aplce  [not  in  Feb.] 

merchantB  [^JT  is  akin  to  ^i^.  Like  the 
preceding  word,  the  primary  meaning  is  to 
go  about  QY\  foot) ;  hence,  to  trade.  It  is 
probable  that  Solomon's  great  commercial 
enterprises  were  conducted  for  his  own 
benefit,  i.e.,  that  the  merchants  were  little 
more  than  agents,  who  bought  and  sold  for 
the  king.  Such  is  the  custom  of  Eastern 
kings  (Kittn)],  and  of  aU  the  Idngs  of 
Arabia  [3^I^ri  is  very  variously  interpreted. 
According  to  Gesenius  it  means  foreigners, 
and  he  would  understand  "foreign  kings 
who  made  an  alliance  with  the  Israelites," 
and  so  the  Cbaldee.  Eeil :  "  the  kings  of  the 
mixed  population  "  (mentioned  Exod.  xii.  38. 
Cf.  Jer.  1.  37 ;  Neh.  xiii.  3).  Perhaps  the 
words  are  best  explained  by  Jer.  xzT.  24: 
"  The  kings  of  Arabia  (3"1g)  and  ...  of  the 
mingled  people  (y^)})  that  dwell  in  the 
desert,"  t.e.,  the  desert  of  Arabia  deterta, 
bordering  on  Palestine.  The  chronicler 
here  gives  us  3^J!,  i.e.,  not  the  Arabia  of 
the  geographers,  but  the  tract  of  country 
south  and  east  of  Palestine,  as  far  as  the 
Bed  Sea  (Gesenius).  Ko  doubt  these  kings, 
who  were  great  sheepmasters,  paid  their 
tribute  in  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  (2  Chron. 
xvii.  11;  2  Kings  iii.  4] ,  and  of  the  governors 
Of  the  country.  [The  word  nina  (of.  ch. 
XX.  24)  is  a  foreign  word,  perhaps  Sanskrit, 
appirently  borrowed  by  the  Jews  from  the 
Persians.  It  is  used  of  Tatuai  (Ezra  v.  6), 
of  Zerubbabel  (Haggaii.  1),  and  of  Nehemiah 
(Neh.  V.  14).  Probably  our  author,  in  whose 
day  it  was  a  familiar  and  well-understood 
word,  substituted  it  for  some  older  Hebrew 
designation.  But  the  office  and  bharacter 
of  these  "  governors "  is  more  difficult  to 
define  than  the  name.  Eawlinson  thinks 
that,  in  some  parts  of  the  empire,  the  kings 
— the  "  empire  of  Solomon,"  he  observes, 
"  was  in  the  main  a  congeries  of  small 
kingdoms  "  — "  had  been  superseded  by 
governors."  But  it  seems  as  natural  to 
understand  the  term  of  the  twelve  prefects 
mentioned  in  chap,  iv.,  who  were  "  the 
governors  of  the  land,"  or  of  similar  officers 
in  the  different  outposts  of  the  kingdom.  We 
know  that  the  contributions  which  passed 
through  their  hands  were  furnished  in  land ; 
hence,  perhaps,  it  is  that  this  income  is 
distinguished  from  the  gold  of  ver..  14. 

Ver.  16. — And  king  Salomon  made  two 
hundred  targets  [n|y,  from  a  root  which 
signifies  protect,  a  large  oblong  shield, 
which  covered  the  entire  person  (Psa.  v.  18), 


aia 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH.  X.  14— 2ft 


6vpc6s.  scutum.  See  1  Sam.  xvii.  7,  41. 
The  LXX.  here  reads  Sopara,  i.e.,  spears]  of 
beaten  gold  [The  authorities  are  divided  as 
to  the  meaning  of  D-in^',  here  translated 
beaten.  This  rendering  is  supported  by 
Bahr  and  Eeil  (after  Kimohi),  hut  Gesenius 
understands  mixed  gold.  Eawlinson  infera 
from  the  u-e-ght  that  the  shields  were  only 
plated  (shields  were  commonly  made  of 
wood,  covered  with  leather).  But  whether 
they  were  solid  or  not  does  not  decide  the 
question  whether  the  gold  was  pure  or 
alloyed.  "  Shields  of  gold  "  are  mentioned 
2  Sam.  viii.  7 ;  1  Mace.  vi.  39]  :  six  hundred 
shekels  [Heb.  omits  shekels,  as  elsewhere, 
Gen.  xxiv.  22;  xxxvii.  28;  Judg.  viii.  26,  &o. 
There  were  apparently  two  kinds  of  shekel, 
the  Mosaic  and  the  royal  (for  the  latter  see 
2  Sam.  xiv.  26).  The  former  -was  twice  as 
mui'h  as  the  latter,  but  there  is  no  agree 
ment  amongst  commentators  as  to  the 
weight  or  value  of  either.  Nor  can  we  be 
certain  which  is  indicated  here.  Thenius 
decides  for  the  former,  and  estimates  the 
weight  of  the  gold  on  each  target  to  be  17J 
lbs.,  and  the  value  to  be  6000  thalers 
(£900),  or,  according  to  Keil,  5000  thalers 
(£750).  Keil,  however,  iiichnes  to  the 
belief  that  the  royal  sbekel  is  meant,  in 
which  case  the  weight  would  be  9  lbs. ,  and 
the  value  about  £400.  Bahr,  however, 
estimates  the  gold  at  no  more  than  £78 
(623  thalers)]  of  gold  went  to  one  target. 

Ver.  17. — And  he  made  three  hundred 
■hlelds  [portable  shields  (peltas,  Vulgate) 
adapted  for  use  in  hand-to-hand  encounters 
(2  Chron.  xii.  9,  10;  cf.  2  Sam.  i.  21).  That 
these  were  much  smaller  shields  is  clear 
from  the  text.  These  shields  were  borne 
by  the  royal  body-guard  on  great  occasions 
(ch.  xiv.  27).  They  were  taien  away  by 
Shishak  {ib.  ver.  26)]  of  beaten  gold ;  three 
pound  [n^p,  /iva,  mina.  As  2  Chron.  ix.  16 
has  here  300  shekels,  it  follows  that  the 
maneh  =  100  shekels.  From  Ezek.  xiv.  12, 
however,  it  would  seem  that  there  were 
manehs  of  different  value]  of  gold  went  to 
one  sDJeld  [i.e.,  half  as  much  as  to  the 
target]  ;  and  the  Mng  put  them  In  [Heb. 
gave  tftem  to]  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  [oh.  vii.  2.  They  would  certainly 
be  suspended  on  the  walls,  but  whether  on 
the  inside  or  the  outside  is  not  quite  certain, 
and  the  text  affords  us  no  means  of  deciding. 
We  know  that  elsewhere  shields  were 
suspended  outside  the  walls  of  armouries, 
Ac.  "  At  Tyre  the  beauty  of  the  place  was 
thought  to  consist  in  the  splendour  and 
variety  of  the  shields  of  all  nations  hung  on 
its  waUs  (Ezek.  xxvii.  10,  11).  In  Borne 
the  temple  of  Bellona  was  studded  with 
them.     In  Athens,  the  round  marks  where 


they  hung  can  still  be  traced  on  the  walls  of 
the  Parthenon.  There  were  also  arms  hung 
round  the  walls  of  the  second  temple 
(Jos.,  Ant.  XV.  11.  8),"  Stanley.  It  is 
supposed  that  along  with  those  made  by 
Solomon  were  hung  the  shields  taken  by 
David  from  the  Syrians,  as  according  ti>- 
2  Sam.  viii.  7,  LXX.,  these  latter  also  were- 
carried  off  by  Shishak.  It  has  been  inferred 
from  Cant.  iv.  4  that  these  also  were  500  in- 
number,  and  that  the  entire  thousand  were 
suspended  on  a  part  of  the  house  of  the 
forest  of  Lebanon  known  as  the  Tower  ot 
David  ;  cf .  Isa.  xxii.  8  ;  Psa.  xlvii.  9] . 

The  historian  now  proceeds  to  describe^ 
the  great  featm'e  of  another  of  Solomon's 
palaces.  As  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  was  distinguished  by  the  golden 
shields  which  emblazoned  and  glorified  its 
walls,  so  was  "  the  porch  of  judgment  "  (oh- 
vii.  7)  by  the  chryselephantine  throne. 

Ver.  18. — ^Moreover  the  king  made  a,  great 
throne  [Heb.  seat.  The  use  of  a  chair 
where  the  custom  of  the  country  is  to  squat 
on  the  ground,  or  to  recline  on  a  divan,  is 
always  a  mark  of  dignity.  Bee  2  Kings  iv. 
10;  Prov.  ix.  14]  of  Ivory  [Heb.  tooth. 
Below  in  ver.  22  we  have  elephant's  tooth. 
It  is  generally  thought  that  this  "  throne  of 
the  house  of  David "  (Psa.  cxxii.  6)  was  of 
wood,  veneered  with  ivory,  as  was  tha 
practice  in  Assyria  (Eawlinson,  •'  Ancient 
Monarchies,"  i.  p.  463),andin  the  chrysele- 
phantine statues  of  the  Greeks  (Pans.  ii.  4. 
1;  vi,  25.  4,  &e.)  Balir  says  there  is  no 
more  necessity  for  believing  this  throne  to 
have  been  of  solid  ivory  than  the  "ivory 
house  "  mentioned  in  ch.  xxii.  39.  Of.  Psa. 
xiv.  8 ;  Amos  iii.  15 ;  vi.  4.  But  there  i» 
surely  this  difEereuoe  between  them,  that 
the  palace  could  not  possibly  be  constructed 
entirely  of  ivory,  whereas  the  throne  might 
be,  and  some  of  the  thrones  of  India  have 
been  (Eawlinson)] ,  and  overlaid  it  with  the 
best  [TSID,  from  the  root  ITS,  separavit  = 
aurum  depuratum.  The  chronicler  explains^ 
the  word  by  ninQ  (2  Chron.  ix.  17)]  gold.^ 
[It  is  very  unlikely  that  the  gold  entirely 
covered  and  concealed  the  ivory,  especially 
if  the  latter  was  merely  a  veneer.  Keil  and 
Biihr  consider  that  the  gold  was  laid  on  the 
wood  and  the  ivory  inserted  between  the- 
plates,  but  the  text  does  not  speak  of  over- 
laying with  ivory,  but  of  overlaying  ivory 
with  gold.  -And  the  presumption  is  that  ther 
ivory  was  soUd.  In  the  Greek  statues  both 
ivory  and  gold  were  applied  in  laminae,  the 
former  representing  the  flesh,  the  latter  the 
drapery.] 

Ver.  19.— The  throne  had  Blx  steps  ["  The> 
characteristic  feature  in  the  mval   throne- 


,  X.  14—29.] 


THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


213 


wag  its  elevation  "  (Diet.  Bib.  iii.  p.  1493) ; 
■ct,  Isa.  vi.  1] ,  and  the  top  [Heb.  head]  of 
the  throne  was  round  behind  [same  word 
eh.  vii.  23,  24.  Thenius  and  Bahr  under- 
stand it  of  an  arched  or  rounded  canopy 
attached  to  the  back ;  Eeil  supposes  that 
the  baoli  was  arched  or  rounded  in  form] : 
and  there  were  stays  [Heb.  hands,  i.e., 
arms]  on  either  side  on  the  place  of  the 
seat  [see  drawing  of  Assyrian  throne  in 
Jjayard's  "  Nineveh,"  ii.  301 ;  Diet.  Bib.  iii. 
p.  1494] ,  and  two  lions  [probably  of  wood 
overlaid  with  gold.  Cf.  Jer,  x.  3,  4]  stood 
beside  the  stays. 

Ver.  20. — And  twelve  lions  stood  there 
on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other,  upon  the 
£ix  steps  [It  is  somewhat  doubtful  whether 
there  were  twelve  or  fourteen  lions  in  all. 
Most  commentators  assume  that  there  were 
•fourteen,  and  the  text  will  certainly  bear 
chat  construction.  But  it  is  altogether  more 
likely  that  there  were  twelve  ;  that  is  to  say, 
that  the  two  lions  on  the  topmost  step  are 
the  two  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse  as 
"  standing  beside  the  stays,"  otherwise 
there  would  have  been  four  lions  on  that 
step.  And  we  all  know  that  twelve  had  a 
significance  such  as  could  not  attach  to  any 
other  number  (Bahr,  Symbolik,  i.  201—205  j 
ii.  183,  423).  It  would  signify  that  all  the 
4}rlbes  had  an  interest  in  the  royal  house  (of. 
ch.  xii.  16  ;  2  Sam.  xx.  1)  ;  and  a  right  ol 
approach  to  the  throne  (cf.  oh.  xviii.  31). 
The  Hon,  a  familiar  emblem  of  sovereignty 
among  many  nations,  had  an  especial  ap- 
propriatenees  in  this  case,  as  being  the 
symbol  of  the  tribe  of  .Tudah  (Gen.  xlix.  9  ; 
cf.  Kum.  zxiii.  24 ;  xxiv.  9).  We  are  to  see 
in  them  partly  "  symbols  of  the  ruler's 
authority  "  (Keil),  and  partly,  perhaps,  they 
represented  the  twelve  tribes  as  guardians  of 
the  throne,  "The  king  mounted  between. 
fignrea  of  lions  to  his  seat  on  the  throne, 
and  sat  between  figures  of  lions  upon  it " 
^Wordsworth).  Thrones  somewhat  similar 
to  this  in  character,  but  much  less  magnifi- 
.ceut,  are  represented  on  the  Assyrian  monu- 
ments. The  historian  might  justly  add]  : 
there  was  not  the  like  made  [Heb.  not 
made  so]  in  any  Idngdom. 

Ver.  21.— And  all  Mng  Solomon's  drink- 
ing vessels  were  of  gold  [as  were  those  of 
Assyria  and  Babylon.  This  lavish  display 
of  wealth  was  oharacteristio  of  Oriental 
courts.  Bawlinson  quotes  Chardin's  de- 
oription  of  the  splendour  of  the  court  of 
Persia,  "  Tout  est  d'or  massif,"  &a.,  and 
adds,  "  Both  Symes  and  Yule  note  a  simi- 
lar use  of  gold  utensils  by  the  king  of  Ava 
^Symes,  p.  372;  Yule,  p.  84)  "],  and  all  the 
vessels  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
were  of  pure  gold  [^IHp  ;  se«  on  oh.  vi.  20. 


LXX.  vpvuliff  avyKiKKuaniva.  This  immense 
quantity  of  gold  is  quite  paralleled  in  the 
accounts  of  profane  writers.  "  Sardana- 
palus,  when  Nineveh  was  besieged,  had  150 
golden  bedsteads,  150  golden  tables,  a 
million  talents  of  gold,  ten  times  as  much 
silver,  &c.  (Ctesias,  ap.  Athenaens,  xii.  p.  29). 
No  less  than  7170  talents  of  gold  were  used 
for  the  vessels  and  statues  of  the  temple  of 
Bel  in  Babylon.  .  ,  Alexander's  pillage  of 
Ectabana  was  estimated  at  120,000  talents 
of  gold,"  (fee.  (Bahr,  in  loc.)] ;  none  were  ol 
silver  [Heb.  none  silver.  The  Marg.,  "  there 
was  no  silver  in  them,"  i,e.,  they  were  un- 
alloyed, is  a  misapprehension  of  the  true 
meaning] ;  It  was  nothing  accounted  of  In 
the  days  of  Solomon. 

Ver.  22. — For  [Reason  why  silver  was  so 
lightly  esteemed.  It  was  because  of  the 
prodigious  quantity  both  of  gold  and  silver 
brought  in  by  the  fleet]  the  king  had  at 
sea  a  navy  of  Tarshlsh  {It  has  been  much 
disputed  (1)  whether  this  was  a  second 
fieet,  or  the  same  as  that  mentioned  ch. 
ix.  26 — 28,  as  trading  to  Ophir,  and  (2) 
whether  this  fleet,  if  it  were  not  the  same, 
went  to  Ophir  or  to  Tartessus  in  Spain.  EeU 
and  Bahr  contend  that  there  was  bat  one 
fieet,  first,  because  there  is  no  mention  of  a 
second  fleet  at  oh.  ix.  28,  and,  secondly,  be- 
cause the  cargoes  were  practically  the  same. 
I  incline  (with  EawUnson,  al.)  to  think  there 
were  two  separate  navies,  for  the  following 
reasons  :  (1)  The  expression  "  navy  of 
Tarshish  "  (in  2  Chron.  ix.  21  expanded 
into  "  ships  going  to  Tarshish,"  which  Keil 
and  Bahr  are  compelled  to  set  aside  as  a 
mistake  on  the  part  of  the  writer),  taken  in 
connexion  with  the  following  words,  "  with 
(DV.  together  with,  as  well  as)  the  navy  of 

Hiram  "  (i.e.,  as  we  conclude  from  ver.  11, 
the  navy  manned,  or,  it  may  be,  owned,  by 
Hiram)  points  to  a  separate  fleet ;  (2)  the 
cargoes,  so  far  from  being  the  same,  strike 
me  as  being  altogether  diverse.  The  Ophir 
fleet  brought  in  "gold,  abuug  trees,  and 
precious  stones."  The  navy  of  Tarshish 
"  gold  and  silver,  ivory,  apes,  and  pea- 
cocks." Seei  below.  (3)  Even  if  we  under- 
stand here  by  the  "  navy  of  Hiram  "  a  Phoeni- 
cian fleet,  still  a  second  fleet  is  indicated. 
But  this  leads  us  to  consider  the  destina- 
tion of  these  ships.  The  term, ' '  fleet  of  Tar- 
shish," does  not  in  itself  prove  anything,  for 
the  expression,  "  ships  of  Tarshish,"  is 
almost  a  synonym  for  "  merchant  vessels." 
In  ch.  xxii.  48  we  read, "  Jehoshaphat  made 
ships  of  Tarshish  to  go  to  Ophir,"  and  they 
"were  broken  ac  Ezion-geber"  (of.  Psa. 
xlviii.  7 1  Jonah  i.  3).  It  is  probable  that  in 
Jewish  Iipa  the  words  were  a  nomen  gene- 
rale  for  all  vessels  going  long  voyages  (la^ 


314 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  X.  14—291 


ii.  16;  Psa.  xlviii.  7;  compare  our  "East 
Indianian,"  "  Greenlander ").  But  the 
words  "  in  the  sea,"  D'3,  are  most  naturally 

understood  of  that  ocean  which  the  Jews 
called  par  excellence  "  the  sea,"  or  "  the 
great  sea "   (Num.   xxxiv.    6,  1),  i.e.,  the 

Mediterranean,  though  the  term  D'H  is  un- 
doubtedly used  of  the  Eed  Sea,  the  Sea  of 
Galilee,  and  the  Dead  Sea.  And  the  more 
so  as  we  know  that  the  Tyrians  had  an  exten- 
sive commerce  with  Tai  tessus,  which  was  a 
great  emporium  of  trade  from  the  earliest 
times.  Bahr  objects  that  "  no  gold  is 
found  in  Spain,  but  few  peacocks,  and  little 
ivory ;  "  but  Eawlinson,  on  the  other  hand, 
affirms  that  "  Spain  had  the  richest  silver 
mines  known  in  the  ancient  world,  and  had 
a  gooddeal  of  gold  also"  (Plin.,  Nat.  Hist, 
iii.  4),  while  "  apes  and  ivory  were  produced 
by  the  opposite  coast  of  Africa  "  (Herod,  iv. 
191>  As  to  peacocks  see  below).  And  it 
is  a  powerful  argument  in  favour  of  Tar- 
tessus  that  it  is  the  plentifnlness  of  silver 
in  Solomon's  days  has  suggested  this  refer- 
ence to  the  fleet.  For  though  silver  "  was 
fijund  in  the  land  of  the  Nabateeans,  accord- 
ing to  Strabo,  xvi.  784"  (Keil),yet  it  was  to 
Tartessus  that  the  ancient  world  was  chiefly 
indebted  for  its  supplies  of  that  metal.  On 
the  whole,  therefore,  it  seeins  probable  that 
(1  second  fleet,  trading  with  the  Mediter- 
ranean seaports,  is  here  described.  And 
Psa.  Ixxii.  10  is  distinctly  in  favour  of  this 
conclusion.  When  Bwald  says  ("  Hist. 
Israel,"  iii.  263)  that  the  Phoenicians  would 
hardly  tolerate  a  rival  in  the  Mediterranean, 
he  surel.v  forgets  that  they  had  been  admitted 
by  the  Jews  to  share  the  trade  of  Ophir] 
with  the  navy  of  Hiram  ;  once  In  three 
years  [This  period  agrees  better  with  a 
voyage  to  Spain  than  to  Southern  Arabia. 
And  if  we  understand  it  of  Spanish 
voyages,  it  removes  one  difficulty  in  the 
way  of  placing  Ophir  in  Arabia.  It  has 
also  been  urged  that  "  the  Hebrews 
reckoned  parts  of  years  and  days  as  whole 
ones  "  (Kitto) ;  but  this  hardly  would  apply 
to  the  expression  "  OTice  in  three  years  "] 
came  the  navy  of  Tarshlsh,  bringing  gold 
and  silver.  Ivory  [Heb.  tooth  of  elephants, 
LXX.  dSovTCQ  bXeipdvTivoi.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  the  name  for  elephant  used  here  is  de- 
rived from  the  Sanskrit  (Ciesen.),  and  an 
argument  has  been  drawn  hence  in  favour  of 
placing  Opbir  inin  Jia,  and  of  ideutifying  the 
Tarshish  fleet  with  the  navy  of  Ophir.  But 
such  conclusions  are  extremely  precarious. 
The  name  may  have  first  come  to  the  Jews 
from  India,  in  which  case  it  would  be  re- 
tained, from  whatever  quarter  the  com- 
modity was  subsequently  derived.  See 
Bawlinson,  p.  546] ,  and  apes  [Bip  is  in  like 


manner  identified  by  Gesenius,  al.,  with  th» 
Sanskrit  kapi.  Sir  J.  Emerson  Tenuant 
("  Ceylon,"  ii.  p.  102)  says  "  the  terms  by 
which  these  articles  (ivory,  apes,  and  pea- 
cocks) are  designated  in  the  Hebrew  Scrip- 
tures are  identical  with  the  Tamil  names  by 
which  some  of  them  are  called  in  Ceylon  to 
the  present  day"],  and  peacocks.  [So  the 
the  ancients  interpret  the  original  word,, 
thougli  some  of  the  modems  would  under- 
stand "  parrots."  But  the  root  On  appears 
in  several  Aryan  tongues  (of.  rauf ,  from- 
raFug,  ami  pavo)  as  indicating  the  peacock 
(Gesen.,  ir;x  Miiller,  oZ.)  which  originally 
came  froui  India.  Whether  it  was  also- 
found  in  Africa  is  uncertain.  Aristophanes 
(Birds,  485)  says,  KaXiirai  nepffucbg  opvig- 
Wordswortli  very  justly  sees  in  the  mention 
of  these  curious  beasts  and  birds  a  symptom, 
of  declension  in  simpHcity  and  piety,  a  token 
that  "  wealth  had  brought  with  it  luxury 
and  effeminacy,  and  a  frivolous,  vainglorious^ 
love  for  novel  and  outlandish  objects." 

Ver.  23. — So  King  Solomon  exceeded  all 
the  kings  of  the  earth  for  riches  and 
wisdom  [Cf.  ch.  iii.  13.  "  There  is  something 
ominous  of  evil  here.  Eiches  are  put  before 
wisdom.  This  was  not  the  case  in  the 
beginning  of  Solomon's  reign  (ch.  iii.  11)  "■ 
— Wordsworth. 

Ver.  24. — And  all  the  earth  sought  t» 
[Heb.  sought  the  face  of]  Solomon,  to  hear 
tals  wisdom  which  God  bad  put  In  his  heart 
[i.e.,  mind.     Cf .  ch.  iv.  34] . 

Ver.  25. — And  they  brought  [Heb.  and 
these  (visitors  were)  brinping]  every  man 
his  present  [It  is  doubtful  whether  we 
are  to  understand  by  this  word  tribute,  or 
gifts.  The  succeeding  words,  "  a  rate  year 
by  year,"  would  seem  to  imply  the  former;, 
the  fact  that  the  visitors  came  not  as  sub- 
jects, but  to  "hear  the  wisdom,"  &e.,  the 
latter.  Bahr  understands  that  the  presents 
' '  were  repeated  year  by  year,  so  highly  had 
Solomon  risen  in  estimation."  But  even 
this  supposition  does  not  explain  the  "rate"]' 
vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of  gold,  and 
garments  [cf.  Gen.  xlv.  22  ;  2  Kings  v.  26; 
Ezra  ii.  69] ,  and  armour  [rather,  "  arms, 
weapons  "  (Gesen.)  Ewald  understands 
perfume;  LXX.  araKTr/v,  i.e.,  oil  of  myrrh] , 
ajid  spices  [cf.  ver.  10] ,  horses  and  mules 
[see  on  oh.  i.  83],  a  rate  year  by  year 
[Heb.  the  matter  of  a  year  in  las  year] . 

The  remaining  verses  of  this  chapter, 
which,  in  the  account  of  the  chronicler, 
find  a  place  at  the  end  of  the  first  chapter  oi* 
his  second  hook,  repeat  some  of  the  informa- 
tion already  given  in  chs.  iv.  26  and  ix.  19, 
and  furnish  a  few  additional  particulars  &» 
to  the  wealth  and  commerce  of  the  king. 


cu.  X.  14—29.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


81fi 


Yer.  26. — And  Solomon  gathered  together 
hlB  diaxlota  and  horsemen,  and  he  had  a 
thousand  and  four  hundred  chariots  [these 
words  have  an  important  bearing  on  ch. 
iv.  26,  where  see  note] ,  and  twelve  thousand 
horsemen.  [The  question  may  suggest  itself 
here,  why  did  Solomon,  who  was  a  "  man  of 
peace,"  maintain  such  a  formidable  array  of 
chariots  and  horsemen  ?  For  not  only  was 
it  in  contravention  of  Deut.  xvii.  16  (of. 
1  Sam.  viii.  11),  but  it  was  entirely  un- 
necessary, especially  for  a  nation  inhabiting 
a  hiUy  country  like  that  of  Israel.  We  find, 
consequently,  that  David,  when  he  took  a 
thousand  chariots  from  Hadarezer  (1  Chron. 
xviii.  4),  only  reserved  for  his  own  use  one 
hundred  of  them,  though  he  was  at  the  time 
engaged  in  war.  It  may  perhaps  be  said 
that  this  force  was  necessary  to  keep  the 
tributary  kings  in  due  subjection.  But  it 
seems  quite  as  likely  that  it  was  maintained 
largely  for  the  sake  of  pomp  and  display. 
Solomon  seems  to  have  determined  in  every 
way,  and  at  any  cost,  to  rival  and  surpass 
all  contemporary  kings.  The  maintenance 
of  this  large  force  of  cavalry  is  another 
token  of  declension] ,  whom  he  bestowed  In 
the  cities  for  chariots  (ch.  ix.  19),  and  with 
the  king  at  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  27. — And  the  king  made  sUver  to  be 
In  Jerusalem  as  stones  [an  obviously  liyper- 
bolical  expression] ,  and  cedar  trees  made 
he  to  be  as  the  sycamore  trees  [the  nppt^ 
is  the  avKonimpia  of  the  New  Testament 
(Luke  xix.  4),  i.e.,  as  the  name  imports, 
the  fig-mulberry — the  '*  sycamine  tree  "  of 
Luke  xvii.  6  would  seem  to  denote  the  mul- 
berry proper.  Though  now  but  compara- 
tively rare  in  Palestine,  it  is  clear  that 
formerly  it  was  very  common  (see,  e.g.,  Isa. 
ix.  10,  whence  it  appears  that  it  was  used 
for  building  purposes,  and  where  it  is  also 
contrasted  with  the  cedars)'.  It  was  esteemed 
both  for  its  fruit  and  its  wood,  so  much  so 
that  David  appointed  a  steward  to  have 
the  supervision  both  of  "  the  olive-trees 
and  the  sycamore  trees  in  the  Shefelah  " 
(1  Chron.  xxvii.  28).  The  sycamores  of  Egypt, 
which  were  used  for  the  coffins  of  mummies 
(Diet.  Bib.  iii.  p.  1394),  are  referred  to  in 
Psa.  Ixxviii.  47,  in  a  way  which  bespeaks 
their  great  value.  There  is  a  good  description 
of  the  tree  in  Thomson,  "Land  and  Book,"  i. 
23 — 25]  that  are  In  the  vale  [Same  word  as 
in  1  Chron.  I.e.  The  Shefelah  is  a  "broad 
swelling  tract  of  many  hundred  miles  in 
area,  which  sweeps  gently  down  from  the 
mountains  of  Judah  '  to  mingle  with  the 
bounding  main  '  of  the  Mediterranean " 
(Grove,Dict.  Bib.  iii.  p.  1611).  This  "  Low 
Country"  extended  from  Joppa  to  Gaza. 
The  translation  "  vale "  is  altogether  mis- 
leading.    Conder  ("  Tent-work,"  p.  5)  de- 


scribes it  as  "consisting  of  low  hills,  about 
five  hundred  feet  above  the  sea,  of  whits 
soft  limestone,"  and  adds  that  "  the  broad 
valleys  among  these  hills  .  .  .  produce  fine 
crops  of  corn,  and  on  the  hills  the  long 
olive  groves  flourish  better  than  in  other 
districts  " — an  incidental  and  valuable  con- 
firmation of  the  text.  "  The  name  Sifla, 
or  Shephelah,  still  exists  in  four  or  five 
places  round  Beit  Jibrln  "  (Eleutheropolis), 
lb.  p.  276]  for  abundance. 

Yer.  28.  —  And  Solomon  had  horses 
brought  out  of  Egypt,  and  linen  yam :  the 
king's  merchants  received  the  Unen  yam  at 
a  price.  [This  is  a  difficult  passage,  and 
the  difficulty  lies  in  the  word  ilJiPP,  here  ren- 
dered "  hnen  yam."  Elsewhere  the  word 
signifies,  a  congregation,  or  gathering,  as  of 
water  (Gen.  i.  10;  Exod.  vii.  19;  Levit.  xi. 
36).  Consequently,  Gesenius  (with  Yata- 
bluB,  al.)  would  here  interpret,  "company." 
"And  the  company  of  kings'  merchants  took 
the  com/pany  (of  horses)  at  a  price."  The 
great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  inter- 
pretation is  perhaps  the  paronomasia, 
which,  though  not  altogether  without  pre- 
cedent, would  be  formal  and  unusual  in 
grave  history.  Somewhat  similarly  Bahr  : 
"  and  as  to  horses  .  .  .  and  their  collection, 
the  merchants  of  the  king  made  a  collec- 
tion for  a  certain  price,"  but  this  again  is 
strained  And  artificial.  Perhaps  it  is  safer 
to  see  in  the  word  the  name  of  a  place. 
The  LXX.  (similarly  the  Yulgate)  renders, 
"  from  Egypt  and  from  Thekoa,"  xai  ic 
BeKove,  which  Eeil,  however,  contends  is 
manifestly  a  variation  of  an  older  reading, 
Kai  Ik  Kou£,  "  and  from  Kova."  As  to  Koa 
or  Kova,  it  is  objected  that  no  such  place  is 
mentioned  elsewhere,  and  it  is  alleged  that 
if  it  were  a  market  for  horses,  or  even  if  it 
were  a  frontier  station,  where  the  duties  on 
horses  were  collected,  we  should  surely  have 
heard  of  it  again.  But  this  is  by  no  means 
certain.  Koa  may  well  have  been  an  in- 
significant post  on  the  frontier  which  it 
was  only  necessary  to  mention  in  this  con- 
nexion. Qmovk  certainly  looks  like  an  emen- 
dation, but  it  is  to  be  remembered  that 
although  Tekoa  (Amos  i.  1 ;  2  Chron.  xi.  6 ; 
XX.  20)  was  apparently  an  insignificant 
village,  still  it  gave  its  name  to  a  district ; 
it  was  no  great  distance  from  the  Egyptian 
frontier —  it  was  some  six  Eoman  miles 
south  of  Bethlehem,  according  to  Jerome 
(in  Amos,  Proem.),  and  it  may  have  been 
the  rendezvous  of  the  Egyptian  and  Hebrew 
horse-dealers.  The  text  would  thus  yield 
the  following  meaning :  "  And  as  for  the 
export  of  Solomon's  horses  from  Egypt  and 
from  Koa  (or  Tekoa),  the  king's  merchants 
I  took  them  from  Koa  (or  Tekoa)  at  a  price." 
I       Yer.    29.  —  And    a    chariot    [including 


21S 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  X.  14—29 


perhaps  the  two  or  three  horses  (see  note 
on  oh.  V.  6)  usually  attached  to  a  chariot, 
and  the  harness.  3^1  is  used  (2  Sam.  viii.  4 ; 
X.  18 ;  Ezek.  xxsix.  20)  for  chariot  and 
horses]  came  up  and  went  out  of  Egypt 
for  six  hundred  shekels  of  silver  [about 
£80  (Wordsworth,  £35),  but,  as  these 
figures  show,  the  precise  value  cannot  be 
ascertained  with  certainty.  But  it  is  quite 
clear  that  these  amounts  cannot  have  been 
the  custom  duty,  or  the  profits  after  reckon- 
ing all  expenses  (Ewald)  paid  on  chariots 
and  horses,  but  must  represent  the  actual 
price] ,  and  aa  horse  for  an  hundred  and 
fifty :  and  so  for  all  the  kings  of  the 
Hlttites.  [We  can  hardly  see  in  these 
Hittites  representatives  of  the  seven  nations 
of  Canaan  (Wordsworth,  al.),  though  the 
term  "Hittite"  is  sometimes  undoubtedly 
used  as  a  nomen  generate  for  Canaanites 
(Josh.  i.  4 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  3),  for  the  Canaanitish 
tribes  had  been  reduced  to  bond-service,  the 
Hittites  amongst  them  (ch.  ix.  20).  The 
word  is  probably  used  somewhat  loosely  of 
the  semi-independent  tribes  bordering  on 
Palestine,  the  Khatti  of  (he  Assyrian  in- 


scriptions (Diet.  Bib.  i.  819),  with  whom 
Solomon  had  a  sort  of  alliance.  It  is  a 
curious  coincidence  that  we  find  horses 
and  chariots  associated  in  popular  estima 
tion  with  the  Hittites,  at  a  later  period  of 
the  history  (2  Kings  vii.  6).  Nor  are  we 
justified  in  supposing  that  these  horses 
and  chariots  were  furnished  as  cavalry  to 
"  Solomon's  vassals,  whose  armies  were  at 
hia  disposal,  if  he  required  their  aid " 
(Bawliuson),  for  the  kings  of  Syria  are 
mentioned  presently,  and  some  of  these  at 
least  were  enemies  to  Solomon.  Probably 
all  we  are  to  understand  is  that  neighbour- 
ing nations  received  their  supply  of  horses 
from  Egypt — the  home  of  horses  and  chariots 
(Exod.  xiv.  6  ;  xv.  1 ;  Deut.  xvii.  16  ;  Issa. 
xxxi.  1 ;  Jer.  xlvi.  2 — 4) — largely  through 
the  instrumentality  of  Solomon's  mer- 
chants] .  and  for  the  kings  of  Syria  ["  who 
became  the  'bitterest  enemiee  of  Israel" 
(Wordsworth):  one  fruit  of  a  worldly  policy] , 
did  they  bring  them  out  by  their  means. 
[Heb.  by  their  hand  they  brought  them  out, 
i.e.,  they  exported  (hem  through  Solomon's 
traders. 


H0MILETIC8. 

^ere.  14 — 29. — The  Decline  and  Fall  of  Solomon.  The  fall  of  Solomon,  in  itself 
one  of  the  most  portentous  facts  in  Scripture  history  (see  Homiletics,  pp.  78 — 80), 
is  rendered  doubly  suggestive  and  admotiitory  by  a  consideration  of  the  way 
in  -which  it  was  brought  about.  It  was  not  that  he  succumbed  to  some  fierce 
onslaught  of  temptation ;  it  was  no  terrible  rush  of  passion — no  sudden  guilty  love 
of  "  fair  idolatresses,"  as  some  have  held — wrought  his  ruin  ;  on  the  contrary,  his 
decline  in  piety  was  bo  gradual  and  slow  as  to  be  almost  imperceptible.  It  is 
almost  impossible — and  this  consideration  alone  is  most  instructive —  to  trace  with 
certainty  the  steps  which  led  to  his  downfall.  The  Arab  tradition  teaches  that  a 
little  worm — no  more — was,  silently  and  unseen,  gnawing  at  the  staff  on  which  this 
Colossus  leaned,  and  that  it  was  only  when  it  broke  and  he  fell  that  men  dis- 
covered he  was  dead — an  instructive  parable  of  his  moral  and  spiritual  decay.  We 
may  well  cry  here — 

"  0  fall'n  at  length  that  tower  of  strength 
Which  stood  foursquare  to  all  the  winds  that  blew.* 

But  it  is  much  more  pertinent  to  ask  what  brought  that  proud  fortress  to  the 
ground.  It  would  have  sustained  unshaken  the  blows  of  engines  of  war ;  it  would 
have  defied  the  hurtling  storm  and  tempest,  but  it  could  not  resist  the  gradual 
subsidence  of  its  foundations,  and  so,  while  preserving  a  fair  appearance  almost  to 
the  last,  it  settled  and  settled,  and  at  the  last  became  a  heap  of  ruins. 

Let  us  trace,  then,  as  best  we  can,  that  downward  course  which  ended  in  the 
builder  of  the  temple  building  altars  to  Baal ;  let  us  lay  bare,  if  we  can,  this  worm 
that  was  noiselessly  but  ceaselessly  eating  out  his  inner  life.  Perhaps  we  cannot 
discover  all  its  hidden  workings,  but  we  can  surely  see  some. 

Up  to  the  date  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple  all  would  seem  to  have  gone 
well.  Unless  the  dedication  prayer  is,  as  some  have  (.ffiimed,  the  composition  of 
a  later  age,  the  prince  who  poured  out  his  soul  before  God  in  those  earnest  and 
graoious  words  cannot  have  erred  very  far  from  the  right  way.     And  the  message 


OH.  X.  14— 29.]  THE  FlKSl  BOOK  OP  KINGS  817 

he  received  Jtuing  the  builcTing  of  the  temple  confirms  this  view.  It  is  a  messaga 
not  of  warning  but  of  enoourajjement.  It  is  at  the  completion  of  the  palaces  that 
we  discover  the  first  certain  token  of  defection.  For  it  was  then  that  the  Lord 
appeared  unto  him  the  second  time,  and  the  communication  then  made  was 
undeniably  minatory.  Its  tone  of  threatening  is  inexphcable,  except  on  the  sup- 
position that  Solomon's  "  heart  was  not  right  with  the  Lord,"  &o.  At  this  period, 
then,  about  the  twenty -fourth  year  of  his  reign,  the  destroying  worm  wis  already 
at  work. 

Nor  is  it  difficult  to  conjecture  what  was  the  first  beginning  of  declension  on 
Solomon's  part.  We  find  it  in  the  erection  of  the  palaces,  or  rather  in  the  carnal 
mind  and  the  self-love  and  the  desire  for  ostentation  whicli  led  to  their  erection. 
It  is  just  possible  that  the  building  of  these  palaces  was  not,  in  itself,  to  be  con- 
demned. It  is  suspicious,  no  doubt,  and  argues  selfishness  and  heartlessness, 
when,  as  in  Eussia,  Turkey,  &c.,  the  huge  and  costly  residences  of  the  Crown  con- 
trast everywhere  with  the  wretched  hovels  of  the  peasantry.  And  one  would 
naturally  expect  the  theocratic  king  to  attain  a  higher  level  and  to  devote  him- 
self more  to  the  advancement  of  his  people's  good  than  ordinary  rulers.  But  it 
must  be  remembered  that  under  Solomon  the  Jewish  people  enjoyed  an  unprece- 
dented prosperity  (eh.  iv,  20,  21).  The  entire  nation  shared  in  the  wealth  and 
abundance  of  the  court.  We  cannot  be  certain,  consequently,  that  the  palaces, 
per  se,  involved  a  departure  from  the  law,  the  more  so  as  some  of  them  were 
necessary  for  purposes  of  state  and  justice  (see  on  oh.  vii.  7).  But  the  matter 
appears  in  a  very  different  light  when  we  come  to  consider  the  way  in  which 
they  were  reared.  Forced  labour,  on  the  part  of  the  subject  races  at  least,  can  no 
doubt  be  justified  froiB  Scripture  (Josh.  ix.  21  sqq.),  at  any  rate,  for  the  house  of 
God  (ver.  23),  but  not  for  the  pleasure  or  aggrandisement  of  the  monarch 
(1  Sam.  viii.  11,  16).  "It  is  not  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  that  the  people  shall  weary 
themselves  for  very  vanity  "  (Hab.  ii.  13).  And  when  we  remember  tijat  Jeroboam 
was  probably  encouraged  to  rebel  by  seeing  and  hearing  the  murmurings  of  the 
house  of  Joseph  (oh.  xi.  28)  of  whose  labours  he  was  the  overseer,  and  that  this 
and  similar  burdens  laid  upon  the  people  (ch.  xii.  4)  resulted  in  the  revolt  of  the 
ten  tribes,  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  Solomon  completed  his  great  uudertakiugs 
(ch.  ix.  16 — 19)  without  inflicting  positive  hardship  and  grave  injustice  on  large 
numbers  of  his  subjects.  It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  the  woe  pronounced  against 
a  later  monarch  (Jer.  xxii.  13,  14)  had  not  been  unmerited  by  him.  He  had 
"  used  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages,"  &o.  Possibly  he  had  raised  his 
forest  of  cedar  pillars,  &e.,  by  the  sweat  and  groans  of  his  serfs.  It  was  a  common 
thing  for  Eastern  autocrats  to  do,  but  when  "  Jedidiah  "  did  it,  the  cries  of  the 
oppressed  labourer  went  up  "  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth." 

But  whether  the  erection  of  the  palaces  was  in  itself  wrong  or  not,  and  whether 
the  raising  of  the  "  levy  "  (oh.  ix.  15)  was  oppressive  or  not,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  the  "  proud  look  and  high  stomach  "  (Psa.  oi.  6 ;  oxxxi.  1, 2) — the  very 
(spirit  which  David  had  disclaimed — which  prompted  some  of  these  understandings 
was  altogether  sinful.  Solomon  is  now  no  longer  the  "little  child"  he  once  was 
(oh.  iii.  7).  Now  that  he  has  "  strengthened  himself, "  like  his  son  after  him, 
he  begins  to  forget  his  God  and  to  forsake  His  law  (2  Chron.  xii.  1).  It  has  been 
promised  him  tiiat  he  shall  exceed  all  other  kings  in  wisdom  and  riches  and 
honour  (oh.  iiL  12, 18)  ;  but  this  is  not  enough  for  him,  he  must  surpass  them  also 
in  the  outward  tokens  of  wealth  and  power.  His  palaces,  to  begin  with,  must  bo 
greater  than  theirs.  He  no  longer  covets  the  best  gifts  (see  Homiletics,  p.  65).  The 
fine  gold  is  become  dim. 

Still,  so  fiEir,  there  has  been  no  deliberate,  or  perhaps  even  consoions,  infiraction  oi 
the  law — only  the  worldly  and  selfish  mind.  He  may  weU  have  argaed  that  his 
state  required  this  show  of  magnificence ;  that  the  Canaanites  were  ordained  of 
God  to  hew  wood  and  draw  water  at  his  pleasure.  But  this  only  shows  how  slight 
are  the  beginnings  of  evil ;  how  fine  sometimes  is  the  line  which  divides  tight  from 
wrong,  and  how  easily  onr  judgment  is  warped  by  our  inclinations.  It  is  the  old 
story,  Homo  vuU  decipi  et  decipiatv/r. 


218  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [CH.  x.  U— 29 

It  is  impossible  to  say  in  what  precise  order  the  records  of  Solomon's  reign  are 
to  be  arranged,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  next  downward  step  is  to  be  traced  in  the 
aUiance  in  which  he  engaged  with  the  Tyrians.  We  cannot  blame  him,  of  course, 
for  the  "league  "  of  ch.  v.  12.  But  for  that,  he  could  hardly  have  built  the  temple, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  palaces.  Whether  he  was  justified,  however,  in  having  at  sea 
"  a  navy  of  Tarshish  with  the  navy  of  Hi/ram, "  (ch.  x  22)  may  well  be  doubted. 
For  it  was  part  of  God's  plan  that  the  Jewish  people  should  "  dwell  alone  and  not 
be  reckoned  among  the  nations "  (Num.  xxiii.  9).  Their  geographical  position 
was  one  of  almost  complete  isolation.  They  were  not  destined  to  be  a  great  com- 
mercial country.    Their  land  was  to  be  the  theatre  of  our  redemption.    Theirs  were 

"  those  holy  fields 
Over  whose  acres  waited  those  blessed  feet, 
Which  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  were  nailed 
For  our  salvation,  to  the  bitter  cross ;" 

and  it  was  no  preparation  for  the  Incarnation  that  it  should  become  the  home  ol 
"  gripple  merchants."  Contact  and  copartnership  with  idolaters  could  hardly  be 
for  the  advantage  of  the  faith.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  see  that  Solomon's  commerce 
grew  at  the  expense  of  his  religion.  Riches,  proverbially  a  dangerous  possession, 
were  with  him — wise  though  he  was — a  step  towards  utter  ruin.  All  the  time  that 
his  fleets  were  ploughing  the  main,  thaJt  caravans  of  merchants  were  filling  his 
store  cities,  that  he  was  driving  bargains  with  the  Syrians  and  Hittites  (ver.  29), 
leanness  was  spreading  in  his  soul — he  was  becoming  more  and  more  a  secular 
prince.  It  has  been  justly  remarked  that  the  mention  of  "  apes  and  peacocks  "  (ver. 
22),  is  a  significant  indication  of  the  moral  and  mental  deterioration  which  he  was 
.undergoing.  To  think  that  the  wisest  of  men  should  find  his  pleasure  in  the  antics 
of  the  one  or  the  plumage  of  the  other ;  or  that  he,  the  viceroy  of  Jehovah,  should 
import  jibbering  baboons  and  strutting  fowls,  if  not  for  himself,  for  the  outlandish 
women  of  his  court.  No,  these  "  wide  views  of  commerce,"  this  partnership  with 
the  Tyrians,  this  influx  of  prosperity,  has  not  been  for  Solomon's  or  Israel's  good. 
Indeed,  if  we  study  the  character  of  the  average  nineteenth  century  Jew,  we  may 
form  a  fair  idea  of  what  commercial  enterprise  and  lust  of  gold  did  for  Solomon, 
the  first  of  Hebrew  chapmen. 

And  yet  this  commerce,  it  is  easy  to  see,  may  have  been  in  its  commencement 
unexceptionable.  Possibly  it  was  in  part  undertaken  to  provide  gold  for  the 
embelUshment  of  the  temple.  But  it  soon  engendered,  if  indeed  it  was  not  en- 
gendered by,  that  "  love  of  money  which  is  the  root  of  all  evU."  As  Solomon 
grew  richer  he  loved  riches  more.  Ver.  23  is  full  of  significance.  "  So  Solomon 
exceeded  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  for  riches  and  wisdom."  Time  was  when 
wisdom  held  the  first  place  (ch.  ui.  11).  And  so  it  came  to  pass  that  he  who  at 
first  was  "  rich  toward  God,"  and  who,  like  David  his  father,  had  only  accumulated 
gold  for  the  glory  of  the  sanctuary,  proceeded  to  "multiply  silver  and  gold  to  him- 
self" (Deut.  xvii.  17).  Even  his  drinking  vessels  were  of  pure  gold  (ch.  x.  21).  So 
that  his  comma-ce  and  its  prodigious  gains  led  at  last  to  a  distinct  violation  of  the 
law.  He  has  not  ceased  to  serve  God.  He  still  sacrifices  and  burns  incense  three 
times  a  year  (ch.  ix.  25).  But  he  is  trying  to  serve  God  and  mammon,  and  mammon 
has  gained  the  mastery.  It  is  probably  mentioned  as  a  circimistance  full  of  signi- 
ficance, that  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  him  in  one  year  was  six  hundred  and 
sixty-six  talents  (ver.  14).  For  as  seven  is  the  number  of  the  covenant,  so  six 
marks  a  falling  short  of  that  covenant,  and  the  first  distinct  violation  of  the  covenant 
consisted  in  the  multiplication  of  silver  and  gold. 

And  when  a  breach  in  the  law  was  once  made  we  are  not  surprised  to  hear 
presently  that  it  was  widened.  FaciUs  descensus  Averni.  From  the  multiplication 
of  the  precious  metals  it  was  an  easy  step  to  the  multiphoation  of  horses.  And 
here  we  see  at  once  how  Solomon's  conscience  has  become  seared,  or  he  has  learnt 
to  disregard  its  warnings.  He  knew  perfectly  well  that  his  "twelve  thousand 
horsemen  "  were  a  violation  of  the  law.     And  he  could  hardly  excuse  himself  on  th« 


CH.  X.  14—29.]  THE  FIRST  DOOK  OF  KINGS.  219 

ground  that  they  were  required  for  purposes  of  defence.  The  hilly  country  ol 
Palestine  does  not  admit  of  their  being  deployed  therein.  It  was  partly  because 
they  could  only  be  employed,  in  aggressive  warfare  that  they  were  forbidden. 
Whatever  unction,  therefore,  he  might  lay  to  his  soul  as  to  his  accumulation  of 
gold,  he  could  hardly  think,  if  he  thought  at  all,  that  his  horses  and  chariots 
involved  no  sin.  But  they  were  necessary,  he  persuaded  himself,  to  the  state  of  so 
great  and  puissant  a  monarch,  and  he  would  have  them.  And  so  hardened  was 
he,  so  careless  of  the  commandment,  that  he  actually  established  a  market  for 
horses  on  Ins  southern  frontier  and  supplied  them  to  neighbouring  kings,  who 
presently  employed  them  against  the  people  of  the  Lord. 

And  yet,  grave  as  was  this  disregard  of  law,  it  was  but  a  worm  that  was  at  work 
in  his  soul — only  self-love  and  self- confidence  (cf.  Isa.  xxx.  1) ;  only  the  lust  of 
the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life.  He  is  still  the  Lord's  anointed:  his  lips  distil  know- 
ledge ;  he  still  offers  hecatombs,  but  his  "  heart  is  not  right,''  &c. 

And  so  the  years  passed  by.  To  all  outward  appearance  his  glory  and  magni- 
ficence increased.  It  is  very  suggestive  to  consider  how  hollow  was  that  prosperity 
which  was  the  marvel  of  the  world,  and  how  that  wisdom  which  was  so  renowned 
was  foolishness  with  God.  The  court  became  more  splendid,  more  voluptuous, 
more  dazzling,  but  the  man  became  year  by  year  poorer  and  meaner  and  baser. 
It  only  needed  one  step  more — and  apparently  he  was  not  long  in  taking  that — to 
complete  his  defection.  The  other  monarchs  of  his  time  had  their  seraglios.  It 
was  necessary  that  he  too  should  have  an  establishment  of  this  kind,  and  he  must 
have  it  even  greater  than  theirs.  He  Imew  that  the  lawforebade  the  multiplication 
of  wives,  but  what  of  that  ?  He  had  violated  the  law  already :  he  might  just  as 
well  do  it  again.  An  obsolete  precept,  he  may  have  argued,  suited  to  primitive 
times,  no'ist  not  stand  in  the  way  of  his  pomp  or  his  pleasures.  And  so  the  Lord's 
anointed  gathered  round  him  ia  the  holy  city  a  thousand  strange,  immodest  women. 
His  fleets  and  merchants  brought  him  mistresses  from  every  laud.  And  they  brought 
wilh  them  their  foreign  rites,  and  the  effeminate  king  was  taken  captive  by  their 
charms,  and  they  had  their  way,  and  nothing  would  suffice  them  but  he  must  tolerate 
their  religion,  and  what  he  did  for  one  he  must  do  for  all,  and — and  so  the  end  of 
sin  and  shame  is  reached,  and  the  decline  becomes  a  fall,  and  "  the  darling  of 
Jehovah,"  the  wisest  of  men,  the  representative  of  Heaven,  the  builder  of  the 
temple,  the  type  of  our  Lord,  buUds  altars  to  tho  "  abominations  "  of  Moab  and 
Ammon  "in  the  hill  that  is  before  Jerusalem"  (oh.  xi.  7). 

This  mournful  history  is  full  of  admonition  EUid  instruction.  It  must  suf&ce  to 
indicate  the  following  lessons : — 

1.  A  man  may  preach  to  others  and  yet  he  a  castaway  (1  Cor,  ix.  27).  Solomon's 
Prayer  (ch.  viii.).  Psalm  (Psa.  cxxvii.),  and  Proverbs  should  be  studied  in  the  light 
of  his  fall.  "Thou  therefore  which  teachest  another,  teachest  thou  not  thyself?  " 
(Rom.  ii.  21).  Compare  vers.  22,  23  with  Prov.  v.— vii. ;  and  remember  the  con- 
stant refeieiices  to  the  " law "  in  the  dedication  prayer. 

2.  "  Nemo  repente  turpissimua  fuit."  "  He  lliutdespiseth  little  things  shall  fall 
by  httle  and  Uttle." 

"  It  is  the  little  rift  within  the  lute 
That  by  and  by  shall  make  its  music  mute." 

3.  "  Out  of  the  hea/rt  of  men  proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications," 
&o.  (Mark  vii.  21).  It  was  not  to  an  assault  from  without,  it  was  to .  treachery 
within  that  Solomon  yielded — Solomon  who  had  said,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all 
diligence,"  &c. 

4.  "  The  love  of  money  ia  the  root  of  all  evil "  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  May  we  not 
Bay, "  Behold  two  kings  stood  not  before  him :  how  then  shall  we  stand  ?  "  (2  Kings 
X.  4).  "  Children,  how  hard  it  is  for  them  that  trust  in  riches,"  &c.  (Mark  x.  24). 
"Take  heed,  and  beware  of  oovetousness  "  (Luke  xiL  15),  "  which  is  idolatry" 
(Col.  iii.  5). 

5.  Tlie  course  of  sin  is  dovmhill.  Vires  acquirit  eundo.  The  sinner  is  on  an 
inclined  plane ;  and  the  gradient  at  first  is  almost  imperceptible.  Let  us  learn,  too, 
"  the  deceitfulness  of  sin." 


S20 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS, 


[CH.  XI.  1—13. 


C.  Woman,  made  to  be  man'*  helpmeet,  too  often  becomes  Ms  sna/re.  It  is  seldom 
that  a  man  is  ruined  but  a  woman  has  had  a  share  in  it. 

7.  Solomon  was  old  at  the  time  of  Us  fall,  &o.  (ch.  xi.  4).  Hot  youth  has  its 
dangers  and  temptations  ;  but  mature  age  has  them  also.  David  was  not  less  than 
fifty  when  he  fell.    See  p.  225. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  XI.  1—13. 


Solomon's  defection.  —  The  observant 
reader  will  have  already  remarked  in  this 
history  some  intimations  of  Solomon's  ap- 
proaching fall.  Among  these  are,  first,  the 
repeated  warnings  which  are  addressed  to 
him,  especially  in  ch.  ix.  6 — 9,  and,  second, 
hia  repeated  transgressions  of  the  law  by 
which  he  ruled.  We  have  already  heard 
of  the  multiplication  of  silver  and  gold 
(ch.  X.  14 — 25),  in  defiance  of  Deut.  xvii. 
17,  and  of  the  multiplication  of  horses 
(ch.  i.  27—29),  in  disregard  of  ver.  16  of  the 
same  chapter.  We  now  read  how  the  ruin 
of  this  great  prince  was  completed  by  the 
multiplication  of  wives.  The  historian 
obviously  had  the  words  of  Deut.  xvii.  in  his 
mind  as  he  wrote.  It  is  remarkable  that 
the  chronioler  is  altogether  silent  as  to 
Solomon's  fall,  as  he  is  also  as  to  David's 
sin. 

Ver.  1. — But  [Heb.  And.  This  chapter  is  a 
direct  continuation  of  the  preceding.  LXX. 
lent  6  j3a(!i\ei{  K.r.X.  The  polygamy  was  but 
a  part  of  his  worldliness,  like  the  chariots, 
go'rd,  &c.]  Mag  Solomon  loved  [The  LXX. 
^v  (pikoymrie  is  misleading.  It  is  perfectly 
clear  that  it  cannot  have  been  mere  sensu- 
ality led  to  this  enormous  harem.  This  is 
evident  from  (1)  his  time  of  life.  It  was 
"when  he  was  old" — i.e.,  when  passions 
are  not  at  their  strongest — that  his  wives 
turned  away  his  heart.  (2)  The  number — 
il  the  numbers  are  to  be  trusted — of  his 
wives.  A  thousand  concubines  cannot  be 
kept  for  mere  purposes  of  passion.  (3)  The 
large  number  of  princesses,  which  shows 
that  the  object  of  this  array  of  mistresses 
was  to  enhance  his  state  and  renown.  As 
he  exceeded  other  kings  in  glory,  wisdom, 
and  power,  so  must  he  excel  them  not  only 
in  armies,  chariots,  and  horses,  but  also  in 
the  number  of  his  wives.  It  is  clear,  there- 
fore, that  the  "lust  of  the  eye"  and  "the 
pride  of  life"  had  their  part  in  this  huge 
establishment.  "  The  same  consideration 
of  state  which  leads  a  Western  prince  or 
noble  to  multiply  horses,  leads  an  Eastern 
prince  to  multiply  wives,  with   often   as 


little  personal  consideration  in  the  one  case 
as  in  the  other  "  (Kitto)]  many  [He  is  blamed 
for  their  number.  This  was  against  Deut. 
xvii.  17]  strange  [not  merely  foreign, 
though  tnat  is  the  primary  meaning  of 
the  word,  hut  strange  as  opposed  to  a  law- 
ful wife.  Cf .  Prov.  v.  20 ;  vi.  24 ;  vii.  5, 
&c.  No  doubt  the  harlots  in  Israel  were 
principally  aliens]  women,  together  with 
['aTia^nXI  te. ,  praeterfiUam  Ph.  (Maurer). 
Pharaoh's  daughter  is  regarded  as  his 
lawful  wife]  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  [see 
note  on  ch.  iii.  1] ,  women  of  the  MoaWtes, 
Ammonites  [Heb.  Moabitesses,  &a.  Per- 
haps these  two  nations  are  mentioned  first 
because  such  alhances  as  these,'  though 
not  forbidden  in  terms  by  the  law,  would 
nevertheless,  from  its  spirit  and  bearing 
towards  these  races,  be  looked  upon  with 
especial  disfavour.  If  the  Ammonite  or 
Moabite  was  not  to  be  received  into  the  con- 
gregation until  the  tenth  generation  (Deut. 
xxiii.  3) ;  if  the  Israehte  was  not  to  seek 
their  peace  or  prosperity  all  the  days  of 
his  life  (ver.  6),  then  the  idea  of  inter- 
marriage with  them  must  have  been  alto- 
gether repugnant  to  the  Hebrew  polity,  as 
indeed  we  may  gather  from  the  book  of  Euth], 
Edomltes  [Favourably  distinguished  (Deut. 
xxiii.  7)  from  the  two  preceding  races.  The 
Edomite  was  a  "  brother."  bEis  children  of 
the  third  generation  might  enter  into  the 
congregation] ,  Zldonlans  [Rawlinson  thinks 
this  word  lends  "  some  countenance  to  the 
tradition  recorded  by  Menander  (op.  Olem. 
Alex.  'Strom.'  i,  p.  386),  that  Solomon 
married  a  daughter  of  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre." 
But  such  tradition  was  sure  to  arise;  the 
uxorious  character  of  Solomon  and  his  close 
relations  with  Hiram  are  quite  sufficient  to 
account  for  its  growth.  And  a  daughter  of 
Hiram  would  hardly  have  been  passed  over 
without  special  mention] ,  and  Hlttltes  [see 
on  oh.  X.  29] . 

Ver.  2. — Of  the  nations  concerning  which 
the  Lord  said  unto  the  cnildren  of  Israel 
[Of  the  nations  just  enumerated,  the  law 
expressly  forbade  marriage  with  the  Hittites 
alone  (Exod.  xxxiv.  11 — 16 ;  Deut.  vii.  1 — 4), 
though  the  Zidonians  are  probably  to  be 
Included,  as  being  Canaanites  (Gen,  z.  16). 
But  the  principle  which  applied  in  the  case 
of  the  seven  nations  of  Canaan  applied 
equally  to  all  other  idolaters.    *'  They  will 


OB.  &1.  1 — 13.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


221 


turn  away  thy  son  from  following  me,"  &o. 
(Deut.  vii.  4).  The  spirit  of  the  law,  conse- 
quently, was  as  much  ■violated  by  an  Edomite 
or  Ammonite  as  by  a  Hittite  alliance] , 
Te  shall  not  go  In  to  them,  neither  shall 
they  come  In  unto  you  [much  the  same  ex- 
pression Josh,  xxiii.  12.  The  historian  does 
not  cite  any  special  Scripture,  however,  but 
gives  the  substance  of  several  warnings],  for 
Burely  they  will  turn  away  your  heart 
after  thetr  gods  [of.  Bzod.  xxziv.  16] :  Solo- 
mon clave  [same  word  Oen.  ii.  4]  unto 
these  [emphatic  in  Heb,  "even  to  these," 
instead  of  cleaving  to  God  (Deut.  iv.  4 ;  x. 
20;  XXX.  20,  each  of  which  has  the  same 
word  as  here),  and  despite  the  prohibitions 
of  the  law,  &o.]  In  love. 

Ver.  3. — ^And  be  bad  Beven  Irandred 
wives,  princesses  [These  may  have  been 
members  of  royal  or  princely  houses  of 
neighbouring  nations.  Evidently  they  en- 
joyed a  distinguished  rank] ,  and  three  hun- 
dred concubines  [Though  not  committed  to 
a  defence  of  the  accuracy  of  the  figures 
700  and  300  (which  are  clearly  round  num- 
bers), it  must  be  said  that  the  reasons  alleged 
for  reducing  them  (as  from  700  to  70)  are 
not  of  much  weight.  It  is  hardly  correct,  e.g., 
to  say  (as  Bawlinson)  that  the  numbers  are 
given  in  Cant.  vi.  8  as  "threescore  queens 
and  fourscore  concubines,"  for  it  is  obvious 
that  too  much  importance  must  not  be  at- 
tached to  an  obiter  statement  ("  there  are 
threescore,"  &o.)  in  a  poetical  book,  too, 
and  one  descriptive  of  Solomon's  youth. 
The  view  of  Ewald  and  Eeil,  again,  that  these 
numbers  represent  the  sum  total  of  the  in- 
mates of  the  harem  at  different  periods  of 
Solomon's  long  reign,  rather  than  the  num- 
ber present  at  any  one  time — they  would  see 
in  the  numbers  of  Cant.  l.e.  a  statement  of 
the  average  strength  ot  the  seragho — though 
not  to  be  described  as  evasive,  Is  certainly 
not  the  natural  interpretation  of  the  words. 
And  these  numbers,  when  we  compare  them 
with  the  establishments  of  other  Eastern 
potentates,  are  not  found  to  be  at  all  incre- 
dible. The  conunentators  all  remind  us  that 
Dareius  Oodomannus,  e.g.,  took  with  him  on 
his  expedition  against  Alexander  360  jieJitceii. 
Or  if  ancient  history,  as  Bawlinson  affirms, 
furnishes  no  strict  parallel  to  these  figures, 
the  harems  of  modem  Persia  and  Turkey  at 
any  rate  have  quite  equalled  that  of  Solomon. 
(See  Bahr  in  loc.)  It  is  true  that  Behoboam 
had  only  18  wives  and  60  concubines  (2  Chron. 
zi.  21) ,  but  then  Behoboam  was  not  Solomon. 
If  his  harem  was  but  a  tithe  of  his  father's, 
so  also  were  his  wealth  and  his  power] :  and 
bis  wives  tnmed  away  bis  beart.  ["  Satan 
hath  foimd  this  bait  to  ttUce  so  well  that  he 
never  changed  sinoe  be  crept  into  Paradise  " 
(Bp.  HaU).] 


Ver.  4. — For  it  came  to  pass,  when  Solo 
mon  was  old  [As  he  was  but  sixty  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  "  old"  is  here  a  relative 
term,  and  must  mean  "  toward  the  close  of 
his  life,"  i.e.,  when  he  was  about  50  or  55] , 
that  his  wives  turned  away  Ms  heart  after 
other  gods  [The  text  does  not  limit  Solo- 
mon's polygamy  to  the  time  of  old  age,  but 
his  idolatrous  leanings.  I  say  leanings, 
for  it  is  doubtful  to  what  extent  Solomon 
himself  took  part  in  actual  idolatry.  Both 
Bahr  and  Keil  —  the  latter  in  opposition 
to  the  views  he  held  in  1846  —  not  to 
speak  of  others,  deny  that  lie  shared  the 
idolatries  of  his  wives,  and  the  former 
labours  hard,  and  on  the  whole,  it  seems 
to  me,  successfully,  to  prove  that  he  was 
only  guilty  of  sanctioning  idolatrous  wor- 
ship in  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem.  His 
arguments,  briefly  stated,  are  these :  (1) 
It  is  nowhere  said  that  he  "served  "  ("ISl?) 
other  gods — the  expression  constantly  used 
of  the  idolatrous  kings ;  cf.  xvi.  31 ;  xxii.  53 ; 
2  Kings  %yi.  3,  &e.  (2)  Neither  the  son  o( 
Sirach  nor  the  Talmud  nor  the  Babbins 
know  anything  of  his  personal  idolatry.  (3) 
Had  he  formally  worshipped  idols,  his  sin 
would  have  been  greater  than  that  of  Jero- 
boam— as  to  which,  however,  see  on  eh. 
xii.  29  sqq.  (The  "  sin  of  Jeroboam  "  lay 
in  "  making  Israel  to  sin,"  i.e.,  in  forcing 
his  people  into  schismatic  and  unauthorized 
worship,  rather  than  in  any  practices  of  his 
own.)  (4)  The  expressions  "his  heart  was 
not  perfect,"  below,  and  "  he  went  not  fully  " 
Jver.  6)  are  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of 
idolatry.  Similarly  Ewald  says,  "  There  is 
no  evidence  from  ancient  authorities  that 
Solomon,  even  in  advanced  life,  ever  leffc 
the  religion  of  Jahveh,  and  with  his  own 
hand  sacrificed  to  heathen  gods.  All  traces 
of  contemporary  history  extant  testify  to  the 
contrary  "  (vol.  iii.  p.  297).  See,  however,  on 
ver.  5] :  and  bis  heart  was  not  perfect  wltb 
the  Lord  bis  God  [It  is  instructive  to  com- 
pare with  this  the  words  of  ch.  viii.  61, 
"  Let  your  heart  be  perfect,"  Ac.  Words- 
worth remarks  that  "  the  defection  even  of 
Solomon  from  God  through  the  influence 
of  his  strange  wives  is  one  of  the  best  justi» 
fications  "  of  the  commands  of  Exod.  xxxiv. 
12—16;  Deut.  vii.  2—4,  &o.],  as  was  tta* 
heart  of  David  bis  father. 

Ver.  5. — ^For  Solomon  went  after  [Baw- 
linson observes  that  this  expression,  which 
is  "  common  in  the  Pentateuch,  always 
signifies  actual  idolatry."  He  cites  Deut. 
xi.  28 ;  xiU.  2 ;  xxviii.  14 ;  but  it  should  be 
considered  that  in  the  two  passages  last 
cited  the  words  are  added, ' '  and  served  them." 
And  the  true  explanation  would  seem  to  be 
that,  though  "  it  is  not  stated  that  Solomon 
himself  offered  sacrifice  to  these  idols,"  yet 


'l-ll 


TUE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XI.  1—13. 


"  even  the  building  of  altars  for  idols  was 
a  participation  in  idolatry,  which  was  irre- 
concilable with  true  fidelity  to  the  Lord" 
(KeU).  Bahr  contends  that  the  words  "  went 
after  Ashtoreth,"  &o',  no  more  involve 
personal  service  than  the  word  "  built "  in 
ver.  7  involves  personal  labour ;  but  both 
expressions  show  that  he  regarded  these 
idolatries  not  only  without  disfavour,  but 
with  positive  approval  and  practical  en- 
couragement. "Itisnotlikelyheoouldbe  so 
insensate  as  to  adore  such  deities,  but  so  far 
was  the  uxorious  king  blinded  with  affection, 
that  he  gave  not  passage  only  to  the  idolatry 
of  his  heathenish  wives,  but  furtherance  " 
(Bp.  Hall).  And  the  distinction,  so  far  as 
the  tin  is  concerned,  between  this  and  actual 
idolatry  is  a  fine  one.  It  is  not  implied, 
however,  that  Solomon  ever  discarded  the 
worship  of  Jehovah.  To  the  end  of  his  reign 
he  would  seem  to  have  offered  his  solemn 
sacrifices  on  the  great  altar  thrice  a  year. 
But  his  heart  was  elsewhere  (ver.  9).] 
Ashtoretli  the  goddess  of  the  Zldonlans 
[D'jhK'y,  'AffTopri/,  probably  connected  with 
dffrqjD,  Stella,  and  star,  by  some  identified 
with  the  planet  Venus,  by  others  with 
the  moon,  is  here  mentioned  for  the  first 
time  in  the  singular  {Ashtaroth,  plural,  is 
found  in  Gen.  xiy.  S  ;  Jadg.  ii.  13  ;  x.  6  ;  1 
Sam.  vii.  4 ;  lii.  10,  &c.)  With  Baal,  she 
divided  the  worship  of  the  Phoenicians,  the 
antiquity  of  which  is  evident  from  Gen.  xiv. 
5 ;  Num.  xxii,  41.  It  was  really  an  impure 
cultus  of  the  reproductive  powers  (see  be. 
low  on  xiv.  23).  Interesting  proof  of  the 
existence  of  a  temple  of  this  goddess  at 
Sidon  is  supplied  by  an  inscription  dis- 
covered there  in  1855  (see  Diet.  Bib.  i.  123)], 
and  after  MHcom  [In  Jer.  xhx.  13 ;  Amos 
i.  15,"Malcam,  "i.e.,  their  king.  According  to 
Gesenius,  the  same  as  Molech  (i.e.,  the  king) 
in  ver.  7,  though  Ewald,  Movers,  Eeil  regard 
tb«m  as  different  deities.  But  it  seems 
more  probable  that  it  was  the  same  deity, 
worshipped  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10, 13)  under  dif- 
ferent^ attributes.  This  is  "  the  first  direct 
historical  allusion"  to  his  worship  in  the 
Old  Testament.  A  warning  against  it  is 
found  Levit.  xx.  2—5.  He  was  the  fire-god, 
as  Baal  was  the  sun-god,  and  the  sacrifices 
offered  to  him  were  those  of  children,  who 
would  seem  to  have  not  only  "  passed 
through  the  fire,"  but  to  have  been  burnt 
therein.  Psa.  ovi.  37, 88 ;  Jer.  vii.  31  j  xix.  5  ; 
Ezek.  xxiii.  89,  &e.  See  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  403] 
the  abomination  [i.e.,  the  hateful,  detest- 
able idol]  of  the  Ammonites.  [It  has  been 
suggested  (Speaker's  Commentary  on  Levit. 
XX.  2)  that  the  children  offered  to  Molech 
were  children  of  incest  or  adultery,  and  we 
are  reminded  that  Ammon  was  the  child  of 
incest.    It  must  be  remembered,  however, 


that  we  have  no  record  of  Jewish  children 
passing  through  the  fire  to  Molech  before 
the  time  of  Ahaz  (Bahr,  Keil).] 

Ver.  6. — And   Solomon  did  evil  In  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  [cf.  Judg.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  7, 

&o.] ,  and  went  not  folly  [K^?!?  N^,  sc.  n^^!; 
A  pregnant  expression  found  also  Num.. 
xiv.  24 ;  xxxii.  11,  12 ;  Deut.  i.  36]  after 
the  Iiord,  as  did  David  his  father. 

Ver.  7.— Then  did  Solomon  buUd  an  hlg-h 
place  [see  on  oh.  iii.  2]  for  Chemosh,  the 
abomination  of  Uoab  [The  meaning  of 
"Chemosh"  is  uncertain.  Gesenius  suggests 
"Vanquisher" — Chemosh  was  the  god  of 
war.  The  mention  of  Ashtar-Chemosh  on  the 
Moabi  te  stone ' '  connects  the  Moabite  religion 
with  the  Phoenician,"  where  Ashtar  is  the 
masculine  form  of  Astarte,  and  suggests 
that  "  Chemosh  was  connected  with  the  an- 
drogynous deities  of  Phoenicia  "  (Speaker's 
Comm.  on  Num.  xxi.  29).  It  is  probable, 
in  fact,  that  Ohemosh,  Baal,  Ashtoreth, 
Molech,  <6o.,  were  originally  so  many  names 
of  the  one  supreme  God,  worshipped  under 
different  attributes,  and  with  various  rites 
in  different  countries] ,  In  the  hill  that  Is 
before  Jerusalem  [see  2  Kings  xxiii.  13. 
The  hiU  is  of  course  the  mount  of  Olives. 
The  altar  would  seem  to  have  stood  on  the 
south  peak,  which  is  now  known,  as  it  has 
been  for  centuries  past,  as  the  Mons  Scandali, 
or  the  Mons  Offensionis  (the  Vulg.  rendermg 
of  2  Kings  l.c.)  See  Eobinson,  i.  565,566] , 
and  for  molech,  the  abomination  of  the 
chUdreu  of  Ammon.  [Ewald  sees  in  these 
altars  a  wise  religious  tolerance  ("Hist. 
Israel,"  iii.  pp.  297,298).] 

Ver.  8.— And  likewise  did  he  for  all 
[having  done  it  for  one,  he  must  needs  do 
it  for  all.  "  No  hill  about  Jerusalem  was 
free  from  a  chapel  of  devils"  (Hall)]  his 
strange  wives,  which  burnt  [Heb.  burning, 
Ewald,  335  a]  incense  and  sacrificed  unto 
their  gods.  [Observe,  as  bearing  on  the 
question  of  Solomon's  apostasy,  that  Solo- 
mon huilt  the  altars ;  lus  wives  sacrificed, 
&o.  According  to  KeU,  incense  is  here  men- 
tioned before  sacrifice,  because  vegetable 
took  precedence  of  animal  offerings  in  the 
nature-worship  of  Western  Asia  (Bahr, 
Symbolik,  ii.  pp.  237  sqq.)  But  it  is  very 
doubtful  whether  this  idea  was  in  the  mind 
of  the  writer.] 

Ver.  9. — And  the  lord  was  angry  with 
Solomon,  because  his  heart  was  turned 
from  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  had 
appeared  unto  him  twice,  [cf.  iii.  6  and 
ix.  2.  The  anger  arose  partly  from  the  ex- 
ceptional favours  which  had  been  shown  to 
him ;  cf.  Amos  iii.  2  ;  Luke  x.  12—15.] 

Ver.  10. — And  had  commanded  him  con- 
cerning  this  thing    [ch.   ix.   6]    that   IM 


CH.  XI.  1—13.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


2ii8 


should  not  go  after  other  gods:  hut  he 
kept  not  that  which  the  Lord  cosunanded. 

Ver.  11. — Wherefore  the  Lord  said  unto 
Solomon  [probably  by  a  prophet,  Ahijah  or 
Iddo.  There  would  hardly  be  a  third  ap- 
pearance] ,  Forasmuch  as  this  Is  done  of 
thee  [Heb.  this  was  with  thee] ,  and  thou 
hast  not  kept  my  covenant  and  my  sta- 
tutes, which  I  have  commanded  thee,  I  wUI 
surely  rend  [i.e.,  despite  thy  great  power 
and  magnificence,  tby  fortifications  and 
mnnitions  of  war]  the  kingdom  from  thee, 
and  will  give  It  to  thy  servant  [Not 
merely  subject,  but  officer,  employs.  This 
made  the  decree  the  more  bitter.  A  "  ser- 
vant" should  be  heir  to  his  glory.  For  a 
hireling  Solomon's  vast  treasures  had  been 
prepared.  This  verse  should  be  read  in  the 
light  of  Eccles.  ii.  18.^ 

Ver.  12. — Notwithstanding  In  thy  days 
I  win  not  do  It  [The  threatering  had  two 
gracious  and  merciful  limitations,  (1)  The 
blow  should  not  fall  until  after  his  death 
{of.  vei.Sli  ch.  zzi.  29;  8  Kings  zxii. 


20),  and  (2)  the  disruption  should  be  but 
partial.  There  should  be  a  "  remnant " 
Eom.  ix.  27 ;  xi.  5,  &c.]  for  David  thy  father's 
sake  [i.e.,  because  both  of  David's  piety 
and  God's  promise  to  him  (2  Sam.  vii.  13)]  : 
hut  I  wUl  rend  it  out  of  the  hand  of  thy 
Boa 

Ver.  13.— Howbelt  I  will  not  rend  away 
all  the  kingdom;  bnt  will  give  one  tribe 
[viz.,  Jadah  (ch.  xii.  20,  "  the  tribe  of  Judah 
only  ").  "  Even  the  reservation  of  one  tribe 
is  called  a  gift "  (Wordsworth)  to  thy  son  for 
David  my  servant's  sake,  and  for  Jerusa- 
lem's sake  which  I  have  chosen.  [But  for 
this  provisinn,  Jerusalem  would  have  ceased 
to  be  the  religious  capital.  When  the  sceptre 
departed  from  Judah,  we  may  be  sure  that 
the  "  envy  of  Ephraim "  would  have  de- 
manded tiat  the  city  of  their  solemnities 
should  be  placed  elsewhere  -at  Shiloh, 
which  for  400  years  had  been  God's  "  bright 
sanctuary,"  or  at  Bethel,  which  from  far 
earlier  times  had  been  a  holy  place.  See 
on  oh.  zii.  29,  82.] 


HGMILETICS. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  Sin  of  Solomon.  Three  questions  will  suffice  to  Bring  this 
subject  before  us.  First,  what  was  this  sin  ?  secondly,  by  whom  was  it  committed? 
thirdly,  when,  and  under  what  circumstances  ? 

But  first,  it  is  well  we  should  understand  what  this  sin  was  not.  (1)  It  was  not 
actual  idolatry.  True,  Solomon  built  the  altars,  hut  he  built  them  for  his  wives 
(vers.  7,  8).  The  wisest  of  men  never  stooped  so  low  as  to  "  project  his  person  "  to 
dumb  idols  (note  on  ver.  4).  To  him,  an  idol  was  "  nothing  in  the  world  "  (1  Cor. 
viii.  4).  That,  of  all  things,  was  "  vanity  of  vanities ; "  (2)  Nor  was  it  the  outcome 
of  simple  sensuality.  The  vrives  who  "  turned  away  his  heart,"  and  to  whom  he 
"  clave  in  love  " — it  was  not  passion  hut  pride  had  collected  them  in  such  numbers 
imder  his  palace  roof.  "  His  crowded  seraglio  was  but  one  instance  more  of  the  sort 
of  ambition  which  made  him  seek  to  surpass  all  men  in  his  gardening,  his  agricul- 
ture, bis  treasures  of  gold,"  &o.  (Keble).  See  on  ver.  1.  But  when  he  had  them,  he 
must  hnmour  them,  even  in  their  idolatries.  He  was  very  far,  we  may  be  sure, 
from  thinking  that  all  religions  were  alike,  which  has  been  "  the  disease  of  some 
great  wits )  "  but  he  flattered  himself  that  he  was  tolerant  and  Uberal,  and  as  he 
claimed  liberty  of  conscience,  bo  he  must  concede  it  to  others. 

We  see,  then,  that  the  essence  of  this  sin  was  that  having  permitted  himself, 
or  purposes  of  state  and  pride  and  ostentation,  the  love  of  many  strange  women,  he 
permitted  them,  and  possibly  some  of  his  subjects  also,  to  worship  their  false  gods. 
And  by  so  doing — 

1.  Ee  game  a  direct  sanction  to  superstition.  He  may  have  argued,  like  some 
in  later  times  and  some  who  bear  the  Christian  name,  that  these  things,  though 
nothing  in  themselves,  were  all  very  well  for  women,  that  the  ignorant  must 
have  material  objects  of  worship,  &o.  But  it  was  not  thus  that  the  God  of  his 
fathers  viewed  the  deed.  This  philosophic  tolerance  of  other  creeds,  lie  called 
the  teaching  of  falsehood.  This  liberality,  in  His  sight,  was  "  damnable  un- 
charitableness  " — ^the  expression  is  Jeremy  Taylor's — for  it  was  leading  poor  souls 
•way  from  the  li^t  and  changing  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie  (Eom.  i.  25).  It  was 
"  making  the  blind  to  wander  out  of  the  way  "  (Deut.  xxviL  18)  in  the  worst  possiblt 
■ense  of  the  words. 


824  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xi.  1—18. 

2.  He  eneov/raged  immorality  cmd  cruelty.  For  it  must  never  be  forgotten 
what  the  "  abominations  "  of  these  Semitic  divinities  were  like.  The  idolatry  oi 
the  East  always  involved  impurity  ;  hence  its  powerful  hold  on  a  nation  likei  the 
Jews,  for  whom  the  worship  of  "  silver  and  gold,  the  works  of  men's  hands,"  could 
have  had  bnt  little  charm.  Its  "  vile  affections  "  (Rom.  i.  26)  were  its  chief  attrac- 
tions. And  Solomon,  who  knew  what  the  worship  of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth  meant, 
who  knew  how  unclean  were  their  rites,  and  what  painful  and  shameful  sacrifices 
Molech  and  Chemosh  demanded  of  their  votaries,  nevertheless  gave  the  word,  and 
presently  the  hilla  about  Jerusalem  were  crowned  with  chapels  of  devils. 

8.  Se  dishonoured  the  one  true  God.  For  if  "  Polytheism  is  not  exclusive," 
Monotheism,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  is  and  must  be.  Its  basis,'its  fundamental 
conception,  is  that  there  are  not  "  gods  many  and  lords  many. "  Its  keynote  is  the 
Shema  Israel  (Deut.  vi  4),  "the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  It  proclaims  a 
"jealous  God"  who  will  not  give  His  glory  to  another,  nor  His  praise  to  graven 
images  (Isa.  xlii.  8).  But  Solomon  robbed  Him  of  His  rights ;  of  the  exclusive 
sovereignty  and  the  undivided  authority  which  belonged  to  Him  alone.  By 
building  idol  altars  he  claimed  homage  for  idol  deities  ;  before  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord's  people,  he  thrust  rivals  and  pretenders  on  to  the  Lord's  throne,  and  degraded 
"  the  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man."  (Eom. 
L23). 

4.  He  defied  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  For  these  altars  of  lust  and  cruelty  were 
not  built  in  a  comer.  They  did  not  shrink  from  the  light  as  in  a  past  age  ;  they 
were  not  frequented  hy pagani.  They  rose  "on  the  hill  that  is  before  Jerusalem;" 
they  fronted  the  altax  of  Jehovah  ;  their  priests  were  visible  to  the  priests  in  the 
temple  court ;  their  smoke  ascended  to  the  sky  along  with  the  smoke  of  the  daUy 
sacrifice.  If  insult  had  been  designed,  it  could  hardly  have  been  more  open  or 
obtrusive. 

II.  And  by  whose  permission,  at  whose  bidding  were  these  shrines  of  infamy 
erected  ?    They  were  built  by — 

1.  The  wisest  of  men.  In  science  (ch.  iv.  33),  in  philosophy  {ih.  vers.  29 — 82), 
in  self-knowledge  (see  Homiletics,  pp.  78,  79),     Cf.  ch.  iii.  12,  28. 

2,  The  most  favoured  amd  enlightened  of  men.  The  Lord  "  appeared  unto  him 
twice  "  (ver.  9).  His  was  "abundance  of  revelations  "  (c£  2  Cor.  xii.  7).  To  him  it 
was  said,  "  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee  "  (ch.  iii  6).  This  was  Jedidiah.  "  There  was 
no  king  like  Solomon,  who  was  beloved  of  his  God,  yet  even  him  did  outlandish 
women  cause  to  sin"  (Neh.  xiiL  26). 

8  The  builder  of  the  temple.  To  him  had  been  granted  the  high  honour  which 
was  denied  to  pious  David.  He  had  "  found  a  place  for  the  Lord,  a  habitation 
for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  "  (Psa.  cxxxii.  5).  The  golden  altar,  the  brazen  altar; 
he  had  planned  and  reared  them  both.  And  now  he  builds  altars  to  "  horrors  " 
(see  note  on  oh.  xv.  13).  "  He  that  burneth  incense,  he  blessed  an  idol "  (Isa. 
Ixvi.  3,  Heb.) 

4.  The  teacher  of  the  Church.  He  was  "  that  deep  sea  of  wisdom  which  God 
ordained  to  send  forth  rivers  and  fountains  of  all  Divine  and  human  knowledge  to 
all  nations,  to  all  ages ;  "  he  was  "  one  of  those  select  secretaries  whose  hand  it 
pleased  the  Almighty  to  employ  in  three  pieces  of  the  Divine  monuments  of  sacred 
Scriptures"  (Bp.  Hall).  He  is  fallen,  but  his  writings  stand.  He  stUl  preaches  to 
others,  though  himself  a  castaway.  There  have  been  authors  whose  pestilent 
writings  go  on  corrupting  and  destroying  souls  for  ages  after  they  have  ceased  to 
speak.  But  Solomon's  is  in  some  i-espects  a  sadder  case  than  theirs.  His  writings  * 
have  taught  and  blessed  the  world  for  nigh  three  thousand  years  after  he  himself 
fell  into  "  utter  wretohlessness  of  most  unclean  living." 

6.  A  man  who  wa/med  others.  It  is  only  when  we  study  his  fall  in  the  light 
of  his  prayer  and  proverbs,  with  their  many  admonitions,  that  we  realize  how  great 
a  wreck  he  became  andhow  appaUing  is  the  lesson  of  his  faU.  "  Since  the  first  man, 
Adam,  the  world  hath  not  yielded  either  so  great  an  example  of  wisdom  or  so  fearfill 
an  example  of  apostasy,  as  Solomon"  (Hall), 

III.  But  WHEN  was  it,  let  us  now  ask,  that  Solomon  fell  into  this  deadly  sin  f  At 


m.  XI.  1—13.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  125 

what  period  of  his  reign,  and  under  what  oiromustanoes,  did  he  sink  to  such  depths 
of  degradation  ?    Observe — 

1.  It  was  not  after  sudden  or  special  tenvpiation  (see  Homiletics,  p.  216). 
We  may  truly  say  of  him,  "  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  yon  but  such  as  is 
common  to  man."  No  Delilah,  no  Bathsheba  wrought  his  ruin.  It  is  instructive 
to  compare  ch.  iv.  20 — 24  with  the  account  of  our  Lord's  temptation  (Matt.  iv. 
8 — 11).  Solomon  was  not  tempted  by  hunger  ;  his  "provision  for  one  day  was," 
ko.  The  enemy  could  not  offer  him  "  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the 
glory  of  them  :"  he  had  them  already  (ch.  iv.  21,  24;  oh.  x.  passim);  he  could 
only  use  the  common  weapon  of  presumption,  of  spiritual  pride,  and  it  was  by  this 
ihat  Solomon  was  slain. 

2.  It  was  not  after  great  trials  or  oAversity,  His  career,  how  unlike  David's  1 
"  Best  on  every  side."  "Neither  adversary  nor  evil  occurrence  "  (ch.  v.  4).  "  Eating, 
drinking,  and  making  merry"  (ch.  iv.  20).  Compare  1  Sam.  chs.  xviii. — xxx.  And 
yet  David  stood  and  Solomon  fell.  What  we  caH  adversity  (compare  Jacob's  "  all 
these  things  are  against  me,"  Gen.  xlii.  36)  is  often  spiritual  prosperity.  "  Tribu- 
lation "  is  a  significant  word.  The  tribulum  was  the  threshing-sledge  which  separ- 
ated'the  chaff  from  the  grain.  It  is  said  by  some  that  war  is  necessary  for  nations 
to  preserve  them  from  corruption  and  decay ;  it  is  certain  that  peace  is  not 
always  good  for  princes.  The  man  of  peace  and  rest,  who  was  "  not  plagued 
like  other  men,"  has  furnished  the  world  with  the  most  terrible  example  of  aposlasy. 
Well  may  the  apostle  bid  us  to  "  rejoice  in  tribulation  also,"  to  "  count  it  aU  joy 
when,"  &c.  (James  i.  2). 

8.  It  was  "  when  he  was  old."  St.  Paul  speaks  of  "youthful  lusts,"  but  old  age 
has  its  special  dangers  and  temptations.  It  was  in  the  time  of  mature  experience, 
when  the  hot  blood  of  youth  should  have  cooled,  when  he  should  have  known  the 
world  and  his  wisdom  should  have  been  ripest,  that  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart. 
Perhaps  he  presumed  upon  his  exalted  gifts  and  revelations.  With  age  came  self- 
confidence.  It  is  thus  that  many  strong  cities  have  been  taken.  "  Praeruptum 
eoque  neglectum  ''  discloses  the  secret  of  their  falL 

4.  It  was  when  his  riches  had  increased.  The  greater  his  store,  the  leaner  his 
■oul.  "  It  is  easier  for  a  camel,"  &c.  (Matt.  xix.  24).  "  The  deoeitfuincBS  of  riches  " 
choked  the  word  (Matt.  xlii.  22).  The  Latin  proverb  which  says  that  "  every  rich 
man  is  either  a  knave  or  the  son  of  a  knave  "  has  some  truth  in  it.  Happy  are 
those  who  have  "  neither  poverty  nor  riches  "  (Prov.  xxx.  8) ;  happiest  those  wlio 
can  say,  "  My  riches  consist,  not  in  the  abundance  of  my  possessions,  but  in  the 
fewness  of  my  wants." 

6.  It  was  when  his  prosperity  was  at  its  highest.  It  was  when  he  "  waxed  fat" 
that  "  Jeshiirun  kicked."  It  is  when  men  "  have  eaten  and  are  full "  that  tliey  most 
need  to  "  beware  that  they  forget  not  the  Lord  their  God"  (Deut.  viii.  10,  11). 
Observe,  it  was  not  untU  he  had  reached  the  very  pinnacle  of  greatness  and  felicity 
that  Solomon  fell.  "  His  prosperity,  which  even  wise  men  find  a  constant  wear  arid 
trial  to  the  spirit,  did  him  more  harm  than  even  his  wisdom  did  him  good"  (Au- 
gustine). How  appropriate  that  prayer,  "  In  all  time  of  our  wealth,  .  .  .  good 
Lord,  deliver  us."  "  The  food  convenient  which  Agur  prayed  for  is  safer  than  the 
food  abundant  which  even  Solomon  was  surfeited  with  "  (M.  Henry). 

6.  It  was  after  his  wives  were  multiplied.  Polygamy  has  ever  been  a  snare 
to  rulers.  It  is  said  that  Scripture  nowhere  condemns  it.  If  tlie  letter  does  not, 
the  spirit  does.  Scripture  tells  of  the  misery  it  has  occasioned.  Witness  the  families 
of  Abraham,  Jacob,  Elkanah,  and  David.  It  was  the  immediate  cause  of  Solomon's 
ruin.  There  are  few  partnerships  which  are  so  hghtly  entered  into  as  the  one  which 
lasts  for  all  life.  And  yet  how  completely  is  a  man's  honour,  prosperity,  and  peace 
in  his  wife's  keeping.  "  Hovt  many  have  we  known  whose  heads  have  been  broken 
by  their  own  rib  "  (Bp.  Hall).  It  is  a  quaint  but  true  saying,  "  If  a  man  would 
thrive,  ne  must  ask  his  wife."  How  strange  that  he  who  knew  the  priceless  value 
of  one  true  woman's  love  (Prov.  xxxi.  10 — 31)  should  surrender  himself  to  Immodest 
and  forbidden  attachments.  Can  there  be  a  reference  to  his  thousand  wives  and 
ooncublnes  in  those  pessimist  words  of  Eccles.  vii.  26 — 28  ?    "If  one  woman  untlid 

1   EINQS.  Q 


226  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS,  [oh.  xi.  1-13. 

all  mankind,  what  marvel  is  it  if  many  women  nndid  one  ?  "  (Hall.)  "  Thou  didst 
bow  thy  loins  unto  women,  and  by  thy  body  wast  thou  brought  into  subjection " 
(Eoolus.  xlvii.  19). 

7.  It  was  after  repeated  wmmingt.  He  had  had  (1)  the  standing  warning  of 
Scripture  (Deut.  xvii.  16  sqq.),  (2)  the  special  warnings  of  his  father  David  (1  Kings 
ii.  8,  4,  and  especially  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9),  (3)  the  supernatural  warnings  of  God. 
(1  Kings  iii.  14;  vi.  12,  18 ;  iz.  6,  7).  And  to  these  may  surely  be  added  (4)  the 
repeated  and  emphatic  warnings  which  he  had  himself  addressed  to  others.  But 
all  these  went  for  nothing.  And  so  it  is  too  probable  his  own  words  (Prov.  xxix.  1) 
found  a  fulfilment  in  his  own  person.  The  saddest  consideration  of  all  is  that  this 
great  preacher  has  unconsciously  predicted  his  own  fall,  and  passed  sentence  on 
himself.    **  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  wiU  I  judge  thee,"  &o.  (Luke  zix.  22). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  Fall  of  a  King,  Solomon  was  a  king  of  men.  Not  only 
Wiis  he  supreme  civil  ruler  of  his  nation,  he  was  also  chief  in  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge, and  distinguished  in  the  favour  of  God  (Neb.  xiii.  26).  This  moral  royalty 
is  open  to  all.  The  prize  is  nobler  than  that  of  the  most  glittering  "corruptible 
crown."  From  this  kingship  Solomon  fell,  though  he  retained  the  throne  of 
the  nation.  The  rascal  often  lurks  in  the  heart  tiiat  is  under  an  anointed  face. 
Let  us  consider — 

I.  The  occasion  of  this  delinquekct.  1.  Solomon  had  many  wives.  (1)  This 
was  an  invasion  of  God's  order.  That  order  was  exhibited  in  Eden,  when  Eve  stood 
singly  by  the  side  of  Adam.  Lamech  was  the  first  polygamist  (Gen.  iv.  19).  He 
was,  ominously,  the  fifth  in  descent  firom  the  firatricide  Cain.  (2)  Moses  tolerated 
polygamy,  as  he  also  suffered  divorcements,  not  with  approval  of  these  customs,  but 
rather  in  judgment  upon  the  people  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts  (see  Matt,  xix, 
8 — -9).  (3)  This  principle  will  explain  many  Mosaic  ordinations  the  observance  of 
which  was  a  burdensome  yoke,  and  from  which,  by  the  mercy  of  Christ,  we  are 
happily  released  (Acts  xv.  10,  11),  Note :  God's  order  cannot  be  invaded  with 
impunity.  It  is  oiir  duty  carefully  to  ascertain  it,  and  faithfully  to  keep  it.  2.  His 
wives  were  strange  women.  (1)  Not  only  were  they  foreigners,  they  were  also 
idolaters.  There  is  no  proof  that  even  Pharaoh's  daughter  was  a  proselyte, 
Solomon  could  have  no  spiritual  sympathy  with  these  without  compromising' his 
loyalty  to  Jehovah.  (2)  They  were  idolaters  of  those  very  nations  agaiast  alliances 
With  which  the  law  of  God  was  express  (see  ver.  2  ;  Exod,  xxxiv.  12 — 16 ;  Deut. 
viL  8,  4).  The  sin  was  therefore  most  flagrant.  (3)  The  spirit  of  this  inhibition 
still  binds  (see  1  Cor.  vii.  39 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14),  The  reason  for  it  is  in  the  nature  of 
things  and  must  abide.  Note  :  Many  a  man  has  had  his  heart  pierced  and  his 
head  broken  by  his  own  rib.  3.  Damid  had  too  many  wives.  (1)  The  example  of 
David  may  have  injuriously  influenced  Solomon.  A  large  harem  may  have  been 
a  sign  of  grandeur ;  but  these  kings  ought  to  have  been  superior  to  such  fashions 
(see  Deut,  xvii.  17),  (2)  The  evils  in  the  examples  of  good  men  are  especially 
mischievous,  for  they  are  Uable  to  be  condoned  into  harmlessness ;  the  more 
readily  so  when  to  foUow  them  is  agreeable  to  natural  inclinatiou,  (3)  They  are 
liable  to  be  carried  farther.  If  David  had  many  wives,  Solomon  had  very  many. 
David's  wives  were  chiefly  daughters  of  Israel,  but  Solomon's  were  daughters  of 
foreign  idolaters.  Amongst  his  700  wives  and  300  concubines,  not  one  was  good  (see 
Eccles,  vii.  28) ._  Note :  Good  men  should  be  especially  watchful  over  their  influence 
— ^parents,  ministers,  Sunday-school  teachers,  professors  of  religion, 

II.  The  progress  of  the  evil.  1.  First  the  heart  is  set  against  the  head. 
(1)  The  earliest  record  here  is  that  Solomon's  heart  was  turned  away.  His  head 
at  first  seems  to  have  been  clear,  as  Adam's  also  was,  who,  though  in  the  trans- 
gression, yet  was  «'  not  deceived  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  14).  But  his  heart,  like  that  of  Adam, 
was  fatally  susceptible  to  female  influence.  (2)  It  is  a  foolish  thing  in  a  wise  man 
to  trust  ms  head  when  he  gives  bis  heart  to  evil,    "  Man  at  his  best  is  vanity,' 


«H.  XI.  1— 13.j  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  827 

2.  Then  the  heart  rules  tke-head.  (1)  This  is  the  next  stage  and  inevitable.  Thia 
may  be  disputed  long,  but  will  assert  itself  in  time.  Observe  well  that  when 
Solomon  was  "  old  "  he  so  far  yielded  to  the  influence  of  his  wives  as  to  encourage 
and  join  in  their  idolatry.  (2)  Probably  his  vices  made  him  prematurely  old. 
dalmet  supposes  him  to  have  been  eighteen  years  old  when  he  came  to  the  throne, 
and  he  reigned  forty  years  (ver.  42).  Tims  he  could  be  only  fifty-eight  at  his 
death.  8.  Finally  the  wise  man  becomes  a  fool.  (1)  Behold  this  wisest  of  men 
ti-ying  to  solve  the  impossible  problem  of  serving  Jehovah  and  Ashtaroth  I  He 
went  not  fully  after  the  Lord  his  God  as  did  David  his  father.  (2)  David  indeed 
fell  into  grievous  sin,  but  his  offence  was  more  directly  against  man ;  indirectly 
against  God.  Even  then  the  offence  as  against  God  was  the  venom  of  his  crimes 
(Psa.  li.  4).  But  the  sin  of  Solomon  was  against  God  directly.  Note :  Offences 
against  society  are  denounced  without  mercy  by  men,  while  the  mental  rebellion 
of  the  unbeliever  against  God  is  even  gloi'ified  as  "  honest  doubt  I "  bat  the  Bible  is 
explicit  that  "  He  that  beUeveth  not  shall  be  damned."  (3)  Behold  this  wise  man 
farther  building  a  temple  to  Molech,  the  murderer,  the  devil,  on  the  Mount  of 
OUves,  over  against  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  glorious  work  of  his  royal  youth  ! 
Oonld  folly  go  farther  ?  (4)  The  mischief  of  Solomon's  idolatry  remained  to  the 
times  of  Josiah  (see  2  Kings  xxui.  13).  Who  can  say  that  it  terminated  even  then  ? 
Eternity  wiU  declare. — M. 

Vers.  9 — 18. — The  Anger  of  God.  This  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  sin.  Had 
Ood  expressed  no  displeasure  against  Solomon,  what  mischief  might  not  his  example 
have  vprought?  The  terrible  judgments  of  the  great  da^  will  have  a  most  salutary 
effect  upon  the  order  and  stability  of  the  whole  moral  universe.  If  men  sufficiently 
considered  these  things  they  would  hesitate  before  they  plunged  into  vices.  Let 
us  be  admonished  from  this  history  as  to — 

I.  How  THE  ANGER  OF  GoD  IS  PROVOKED.  It  is  provoked — 1.  By  the  turning  away 
of  the  heart  from  Him.  (1)  And  justly  so,  for  to  do  this  is  to  outrage  the  highest 
propriety.  God  is  everything  that  should  engage  the  affections  of  an  inteUigent 
creature — "  the  perfection  of  beauty ; "  "  the  altogether  lovely."  (2)  For  to  do 
this  is  the  straight  road  to  the  deepest  demoralization.  IVIan  is  made  in  the  image 
of  God  expressly  that  his  nature  may  have  its  perfection  in  union  and  conununion 
with  Him.  To  turn  away  from  God  must  lead  to  depravation  evermore.  This,  in 
other  words,  is  everlasting  damnation.  (3)  Then  let  us  keep  our  hearts  (Prov. 
iv.  23).  No  diligence  should  be  spared.  Our  life  is  in  it.  2.  By  doing  this 
wa/ntonh).  (1)  It  was  an  aggravation  of  Solomon's  sin  that  Ood  had  appeared 
to  him.  Beview  the  circumstances  of  the  vision  he  witnessed  before  he  set  about 
the  building  of  the  temple  (see  oh.  iii.  5 — 15).  He  could  not  have  been  wholly 
ignorant  of  the  glorious  character  of  God.  (2)  It  was  a  further  aggravation  that 
Ood  had  appeared  to  him  twice  (ver.  9).  Eeview  the  circumstances  of  the  vision 
after  the  work  of  the  temple  was  finished  (see  ch.  ix.  1 — 9).  Note :  Privileges 
imply  corresponding  responsibilities.  Note  further:  God  keeps  account  of  His 
fevours  conferred  upon  us,  though  we  may  forget  them.  He  will  remind  us  of 
them  all  in  the  great  day  of  judgment.  (3)  It  was  an  additional  aggravation 
that  he  had  been  forewarned  of  the  very  evils  into  which  he  fell.  And  the  promises 
of  God  to  him  had  been  so  remarkably  verified  that  he  had  the  best  reason  to 
accept  the  truth  of  His  admonitions.  How  slow  of  heart  are  the  men  to  believe 
the  inflexibility  of  Divine  justice  !  (4)  A  king  who  exacts  obedience  from  subjects, 
or  a  master  who  claims  the  obedience  of  servants,  should  be  the  last  to  forget  his 
duty  to  God.     Consider — 

XL  How  TEE  ANOEB  OF  GoD  IS  EXPRESSED.  It  is  expressod — 1.  In  the  severity  of 
justice.  (1)  The  kingdom  of  Solomon  was  now  doomed  to  be  rent.  He  had 
divided  his  affections  (between  Jehovah  and  Molech),  so  are  the  affections  of  his 
subjects  now  to  be  divided.  (2)  A  considerable  portion  of  his  kingdom  is  to  be 
turned  over  to  one  of  his  servants.  What  a  fitness  there  is  in  this  judgment  also  t 
Solomon,  the  servant  of  God,  rebelled  against  God;  Jeroboam,  the  servant  of 
Solomon,  rebels  against  Solomon.     (3)- What  a  melancholy  reversal  i    Time  wag 


228  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [cu.  xi.  1-13. 

when  God  loved  Solomon  (see  2  Sam.  xii.  24 ;  1  Kings  t.  9 ;  Neh.  xiii.  26).  Severe 
is  the  fall  from  the  height  of  a  throne.  From  a  vastly  greater  elevation  is  the  fall 
of  one  cast  from  the  bosom  of  God.  (4)  Behold  how  sin  works  ruin  I  It  ruins 
individuals,  families,  nations.  The  anger  of  God  ia  expressed — 2.  With  the 
mitigations  of  mercy.  (1)  For  the  sake  of  David  his  father  these  judgments  wera 
not  to  come  upon  Solomon  in  his  day.  We  little  know  the  benefits  or  the  evUs 
entailed  upon  us  by  our  forefathers.  We  should  see  that  we  entail  not  evils  but 
benefits  upon  our  descendants.  (2)  "  For  David's  sake  I "  David,  the  beloved, 
was  a  type  of  Christ,  for  whose  sake  the  entail  of  infinite  mischief  is  cut  off  from 
his  sons,  and  they  are  made  heirs  of  inestimable  blessings.  (3)  Even  Behoboam' 
was  to  reap  the  benefit  of  the  faithfulness  of  David.  One  tribe,  the  most  im- 
portant, was  to  be  retained  to  him.  The  promises  respecting  the  true  sou  of 
David  must  be  fulfilled.  (4)  "  For  Jerusalem's  sake,"  also,  m«rcy  must  rejoice  upon 
judgment  (ver.  13).  The  temple  was  there.  The  shechinah  was  there.  Kingdoms 
are  spared  the  severity  of  judgments  in  respect  to  the  interests  of  religion  in  many- 
ways  little  dreamed  of  by  statesmen  and  rulers. — M. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Solomon's  Sin.  I.  The  sm.  1.  Its  natitre.  He  not  only  aided  his 
wives  to  continue  their  idolatrous  worship,  he  himself  participated  in  it.  He  went 
after  strange  gods,  seeking  their  favour  and  observing  their  ordinances.  The. 
worship  of  Jehovah  was  not  discarded,  but  delight  in  the  true  God  was  gone, 
and  the  flame  of  that  loving  zeal  for  God's  commandments  died  away:  his  heart 
was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God.  The  worship  now  offered  in  the  temple 
was  the  lingering  tradition  of  a  brighter  past,  a  thing  of  custom  and  outward 
necessity,  and  the  heart  was  given  to  baser  worships,  sensuous  and  sensual  The 
soul  had  ceased  to  drink  at  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  was  drinking  at  the- 
fountain  of  death.  Is  our  heart  perfect  with  the  Lord,  our  delight  in  His  love,  our 
hunger  after  His  righteousness  as  deep  as  in  the  past  ?  Do  we  offer  a  cold  and 
formal  worship  to  Him,  while  our  heart  warms  into  living  interest  and  strong 
desire  only  at  the  world's  shrines  ?  2.  Its  guilt.  (1)  God  had  given  Solomon 
unparalleled  wisdom,  wealth,  and  power,  and  all  were  now  turned  against  hi» 
Benefactor.  All  that  fame  and  influence  were  used  to  glorify  idolatry  and  lessen 
zeal  for  God's  service.  How  often  are  God's  gifts  thus  turned  against  Him  I  (2) 
The  sin  of  Solomon  became  the  sin  of  Israel  (ver.  83).  The  responsibiUty  of 
parents  in  regard  to  their  children's  attitude  toward  God — the  responsibility  of  the 
leaders  of  thought  and  of  society,  of  all  of  us,  as  to  how  we  influence  men  in  their 
attitude  toward  the  things  unseen  and  etemaL  8.  Its  sadness.  It  was  his  last. 
work,  the  sin  not  of  youth  but  of  old  age.  The  light  which  God  had  kindled  did 
not  flame  out  into  eternal  glory,  but  went  out  in  eternal  night.  The  seeds  of  sin 
and  disaster  were  sown  among  his  people,  his  life  a  wreck,  his  memory  not  a  star 
to  guide  the  wanderer  in  the  darkness,  but  a  warning  beacon  on  the  waste  of 
death  1    The  story  of  many  a  life  besides :  wiU  it  be  the  story  of  thine  ? 

II.  What  led  to  it.  1.  Unregulated  affections.  The  vidsdom  of  marrying  only 
in  the  Lord.  The  danger  of  worldly  alliances  and  worldly  friendships.  2.  The- 
despising  of  Qod's  commandments  (see  ver.  2,  and  Deut.  xvii.  16,  17).  The 
counsels  of  God  were  lightly  esteemed.  Many  commands  of  God  are  to-day  held 
to  be  antiquated  and  are  quietly  ignored.  The  directions  of  Scripture  in  regard  lo- 
what  are  deemed  minor  things  are  set  aside.  The  spirit  of  unbelief  is  there.  For 
individuals  and  for  churches  it  must  prove  a  seed  of  sin  and  spiritual  disaster.  3. 
The  hmmam,  love  displaced  the  Divine,  The  spirit  of  disloyalty  needed  only  *. 
strong  enough  inducement  to  go  further,  and  it  found  it  here.  To  please  his  wives, 
altars  to  their  gods  were  bmlt  on  Mount  Olivet,  and  then  his  own  soul  was  taken 
in  the  snare  of  their  abominations.  The  testimony  which  we  are  called  to  lift  up. 
in  the  face  of  all  life  away  from  God  is  safety  for  our  own  soul.  It  is  hard  to  do  it, 
but  there  is  life  in  it  for  ourselves  and,  it  may  be,  for  others  also.— U. 

Vers.  9 — IS.—Ood's  Anger,  L  Sins  aee  set  in  thb  uohi  op  past  mercies.. 
L  Solomon's  idolatry  it  contrasted  with  the  advantage*  conferred  upon  him. 


OH.  zi.  1—18.]  TH£  FIBST  BOOR  OF  EINQS.  I3U 

The  Lord  had  appeared  to  him  twice.  The  reality  of  God's  existence  and  His 
personality  had  heen  engraven  upon  Solomon's  soul.  2.  With  the  corrvmanchnent 
'given.  The  Lord  "  had  commanded  him  concerning  this  thing."  The  rebellion 
and  ingratitude  are  both  marked.  Our  sins  are  judged  not  only  in  themselves  and 
iheir  effects,  but  also  in  the  light  of  what  God  has  done  and  said  to  us.  There  is  a 
baseness  and  an  enmity  in  sin  that  will  yet  crush  the  sinful  heart.  Do  we  weigh 
eins  in  this  way  ?  Does  our  repentance  read  them  thus  ?  God's  judgment  will : 
"  Forasmuch  as  this  is  done  of  thee,"  &o. 

IL  The  Divine  JUDGMENT.  1.  Hopes  frustrated.  Solomon  may  have  excused 
his  sin  to  himself  because  it  conciliated  neighbouring  princes  and  nations  and  so 
etrengthened  his  kingdom.  But  while  he  fancied  himself  building  up,  he  was  in 
reality  casting  down.  Forgetfulness  of  God  is  forgetfulness  ofone's  own  good.  2. 
Pride  abased.  The  dominion  is  given  to  a  servant.  There  is  not  only  loss  but 
shame.  There  are  first  that  will  be  last,  and  last  first.  8.  Punishment  reflects  sin. 
Solomon's  rebellion  and  ingratitude  are  punished  by  rebellion  and  ingratitude. 
The  kingdom  is  rent  from  him  by  a  subject,  and  by  one  whom  he  had  trusted  and 
advanced  (ver.  28).  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  As  the 
vricked  have  shut  out  God,  God  will  shut  out  them. 

III.  The  Divine  meect.  In  God's  chastisements  there  is  ever  a  gateway  of 
kindness  through  which  we  may  pass  up  into  His  forgiveness  and  love.  1.  The 
judgment  is  delayed.  It  was  a  heavy  judgment  that  the  kingdom  should  be  rent 
from  his  son,  but  it  would  have  been  an  added  bitterness  had  his  own  day  set  in 
disaster  and  shame.  2.  The  whole  will  not  he  taJcen  even  from,  his  son.  His  seed 
will  still  reign  in  Jerusalem.  8.  There  is  humbling  even  in  the  mercy.  It  is  done 
for  David's  sake  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake.  Pride  is  crushed  beneath  God's  mercy 
•8  well  as  beneath  His  juilgment.  We  are  pardoned  for  Christ's  sake  and  His 
name's  sake.  In  the  midst  of  rebuke  for  iniquity  there  is  mercy  and  life  for  lowly 
feith.— U. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  Downfall  of  Solomon.  The  fall  of  Solomon  has  appeared  to 
some  commentators  incredible.  As  to  the  fact  itself,  however,  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
Nor  is  his  fall  so  exceptional  as  many  suppose.  Otiiers  beside  this  king  have  had 
pious  parentage,  a  religious  education,  a  promising  youth,  extraordinary  intellectual 
«ndowments,  frequent  warnings  of  their  danger,  and  yet  have  failed  and  come 
•short  of  the  glory  of  God.  Give  examples.  It  is  noteworthy  that  God  saw  Solo- 
mon's danger  and  warned  him  of  it  on  the  evening  of  that  day  upon  which  his 
religious  devotion  appeared  most  intense.  The  dedication  of  the  temple  was  at 
«nce  ihe  zenith  of  the  nation's  glory,  and  of  their  king's  highest  attainments. 
Describe  the  Feast  of  Dedication  ;  the  song  of  the  people — "  Lilt  up  your  heads,  0 
ye  gates,  &c. ;  the  prayer  of  Solomon  that  tliis  might  be  so ;  and  the  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  Presence.  Contrast  this  scene  with  the  silence  of  the  following  night, 
in  which  the  message  of  the  Lord  came,  bidiling  him  beware  lest  the  emotion  and 
resolve  of  the  day  should  be  evanescent  (ix.  2).  Our  times  of  religious  excitement 
are  not  our  safest  hours.  Enthusiasm  has  its  perils  as  well  as  its  powers.  Refer 
to  Peter's  eager  protestation,  and  the  Lord's  word  of  caution,  "  Simon,  Simon, 
behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have,"  &c.  (Luke  xxii.  31).  The  sins  which  consti- 
tuted Solomon's  decadence — against  which,  through  him,  we  are  warned — appear 
to  have  been  these : 

I.  Senscalitt.  His  base  self-indulgence  grew  upon  him,  as  it  does  on  any  man. 
The  life  he  lived  was  degrading  to  his  manhood.  Love  became  debased  to  lust, 
because  it  was  divorced  from  purity.  Physically,  as  well  as  morally,  he  became  a 
wreck,  and  though  not  60  years  of  age  when  he  died,  he  was  already  weary,  broken, 
*nd  old  (ver.  4).  Some  light  may  be  thrown  upon  his  downward  progress  by  the 
books  which  bear  his  name,  and  which,  if  not  written  by  him,  were  declarations  of 
the  experience  he  knew.  If  the  Song  of  Solomon  represents  his  bright-  youth, 
when  love,  though  passionate,  was  undefiled,  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes  is  the  out- 
•ory  of  his  age,  when  all  seemed  "  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,"  and  when  he  tried 
-once  more  painfully  to  lay  the  old  foundation  of  the  shattered  fabric  of  his  lift 


ISO  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xi.  1— 1». 

(Eceles.  xii.  13).  Compare  him  with  Samson  ;  show  how  the  indtilgence  of  paesion 
destroys  ki ugliness.  Even  such  sin  was  not  beyond  pardon.  It  would  have  been 
wel  for  Solomon  had  he  returned  to  God,  as  his  father  had  done  (see  Psa.  li.) 

II.  Evil  companionship  (ver.  2).  The  Israelites  were  often  warned  against 
marriage  with  the  heathen.  At  times  ordinary  international  intercourse  was  for- 
bidden. Instances  are  given  in  which  disobedience  to  this  law  of  severance 
brought  terrible  effects.  Some  companionship  is  essential  to  man.  The  hermit 
mnst  be  a  very  imperfect  Christian.  John  the  Baptist  was  in  the  wilderness,  but 
Christ,  whom  we  follow,  was  ever  found  in  the  haimts  and  homes  of  men.  Yet 
under  the  new  dispensation  the  wise  choice  of  companiimship  is  insisted  on,  and 
provided  for.  The  twelve  apostles  were  associated  together,  as  well  as  separated 
from  others ;  and  in  their  work  they  went  forth  by  two  and  two.  The  Apostolic 
Church  presents  a  beautiful  picture  of  fellowship  (Acts  ii.)  It  is  amongst  tlie  wise- 
hearted  and  devout  that  we  are  to  find  our  fiienfls.  "  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked 
together  with  unbelievers."  The  importance  of  this  to  the  young,  whose  characters 
»re  not  yet  formed.  Hence  responsibility  rests  on  parents,  who  can  encourage  or 
hinder  acquaintances,  and  on  young  people  themselves."  He  must  have  something 
of  Christ's  wisdom  and  strength,  and  must  be  animated  by  His  motives,  who,  like 
Him,  would  be  safe  and  useful  amongst "  the  publicans  and  sinners." 

III.  ExTEAVAGANCB.  The  Wealth  of  Solomon  was  enormous.  The  treasure 
■aved  for  him  by  David  seemed  inexhaustible,  and  the  tribute  from  other  peoples 
(x.  25),  the  monopolies  granted  by  the  king  (x,  28,  29),  the  importation  of  gold  from 
Opiiir  (ix.  28),  &c.,  brought  immense  revenues.  The  king  was  proportionately  ex- 
travagant. See  the  account  given  of  his  palaces,  hi^  gardens,  and  his  retinue.  No 
country  could  long  bear  such  a  strain.  Increased  taxation  was  necessary,  and  this 
was  one  of  the  causes  of  the  break-up  of  the  kingdom  uniler  Eehoboam.  Show 
in  morlern  life  the  temptations  to  extravagance  and  ostentation ;  the  injury 
caused  by  these  sins  to  a  nation ;  the  moral  perils  to  which  the  extravagant  are 
exposed  ;  the  diminution  of  help  to  God's  cause  and  to  God's  poor. 

IV.  Oppression.  He  appears  to  have  copied  the  Pharaohs  not  only  in  magnifi- 
cence, but  in  disregard  for  human  suffering.  The  Canaanites  were  reduced  to  the 
position  of  helots ;  multitudes  were  torn  from  their  homes  to  fell  timber  in  the 
forests,  or  hew  stone  in  the  quarries.  Even  the  Israelites  had  to  do  forced  labour. 
Kings  have  respoiisibihty  to  their  people,  as  well  as  the  people  to  their  kings. 
God's  laws  were  violated  by  Solomon  (Exod.  xxii.  21 ;  xxiii.  9).  Show  from  history 
the  Nemesis  of  oppression.  Indicate  manifestations  of  the  spirit  of  tyranny  in 
business,  in  homes,  schools,  &c. 

v.  Idolatry.  Solomon  erected  temples  to  Ashtoreth,  Milcom,  and  Ohemosh. 
Describe  the  idolatries  specified.  AH  idolatry  sternly  forbidden.  The  cultus  of 
these  deities  hideously  cruel,  dark,  impure.  Heathenism  degrades  man  and  dis- 
honours God.  Show  the  steps  which  led  Solomon  to  the  commission  of  such 
egregious  sin.  (1)  He  was  broad  in  his  views,  far  advanced  from  the  traditional 
knowledge  of  the  age,  and  often  conversed  with  wise  men  of  other  creeds.  Slowly 
he  lost  his  sense  of  the  pre-euiinence  of  the  truth  revealed  to  him.  He  saw  what 
was  true  in  other  systems,  but  meantime  lost  his  horror  at  what  was  false  in  them. 
Tliis  one  of  the  special  perils  of  our  age ;  point  it  out  (2)  He  wished  all  that  was 
connected  with  him  to  reflect  his  own  magnificetuse.  It  was  not  enough  that  his 
wives  and  concubines  should  be  at  hberty  to  worship  their  idols ;  they  must  do  it 
splendidly,  if  at  all,  for  his  glory  was  concerned  in  their  acts.  (3)  He  would  please 
amd  attract  surrounding  nations.  Tiiis  pai-tly  for  commercial  ends,  chiefly  for 
personal  glory.  Base  motives  lead  to  fake  policy,  and  false  pohcy  prepares  for 
national  ruin. 

Conclusion. — 1.  The  possibility  oj'rwvn  to  those  whose  religious  advantages  are 
greatest. 

2.  The  retribution  heavier  in  proportion  a*  the  offence  is  aggravated  by  neg- 
hcted  warning. — A.  B. 

Vers.  9 — 13. — Solomon's  Fall.    The  dark  omen  that  marred  the  brightness  of 


OH.  XL  1—13.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  281 

Solomon's  second  vision  (ch.  ix.  6)  has  come  to  be  fulfilled.  He  was  forewarned  of 
danger  and  yet  has  fallen  into  it.  The  splendour  of  royal  circumstance  remained 
the  same,  but  how  completely  has  his  true  glory  departed  1  "  How  is  the  gold 
become  dim  and  the  fine  gold  changed  I "  The  smile  of  God  that  rested  as  glad 
sunshine  on  his  head,  has  turned  to  "anger."  The  cause  of  the  change  is  in  the 
Becresy  of  his  own  soul.  The  Scripture  narrative  is  silent  about  the  course  of  his 
inner  life,  the  phases  of  thought  and  feeling  through  which  he  may  have  passed ; 
80  that  this  sudden  note  of  discord  in  the  midst  of  the  harmony  strikes  us  with 
something  of  sad  surprise.  Enough,  however,  is  said  to  show  that  it  was  a  moral 
change  in  the  man  himself.  The  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  not  changed  in  His 
purpose  or  method  ;  it  is  Solomon  whose  "  heart  is  turned  from  him."  How  far 
this  was  a  fatal  change,  a  real  apostasy,  we  know  not.  We  need  not  attempt 
to  solve  the  purely  speculative  question  as  to  whether  he  ever  recovered  from  his 
fall ;  his  later  writings  suggest  at  least  the  hope  that  it  was  so.  Enough  for  na 
now  to  note  the  facts,  to  trace  the  causes,  and  learn  the  lessons.  Certain  broad 
principles  of  moral  life  are  here  strikingly  illustrated. 

L  The  TREAcaEsv  of  humak  natube.  Beneath  the  fairest  exterior  there  may 
be  latent  germs  of  evil  that  only  need  outward  incentives  to  develop  themselves  into 
disastrous  issues.  Even  the  inspirations  of  the  highest  wisdom  and  the  raptures  of 
reHgious  emotion  may  have  underlying  them  tendencies  to  the  grossest  forms  of 
foUy  and  the  lowest  deeps  of  sin  and  shame.  Solomon  was  sincere  enough  in  his 
earlier  piety,  but  too  little  alive  to  the  slumbering  forces  of  evil  that  he  bore  within 
him.  His  moral  history  confirmed  the  truth  of  his  own  proverb  :  "  He  that  trustetb 
in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool "  (Frov.  xxviii.  26).  An  Arab  tradition  says  that  in  the 
staff  on  which  he  leaned  there  was  a  worm  which  was  secretly  gnawing  it  asunder. 
That  worm  was  the  hidden  cormption  of  his  moral  nature.  It  is  a  solemn  lesson: 
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  We  can  look  upon  no 
form  of  wrong-doing  in  others  without  being  reminded  that  there  is  something  akin 
to  it  in  ourselves.  Concealed  in  our  own  bosoms  there  is  that  which  might  possibly 
develop  into  similar  issues.  Our  only  security  Ues  in  the  triumph  of  that  gracious 
Divine  power  that  can  thoroughly  purge  the  fountain  of  the  heart,  and  destroy  there 
the  very  germs  of  eviL 

II.  The  base  uses  to  which  the  hiqhest  advantages  of  lifb  hat  be  peb- 
TEBTED  BY  THE  WAYWARD  HEART.  Solomou's  greatness  became  the  occasion  and 
aggravation  of  his  fall.  His  royal  magnificence  fostered  "the  lust  of  the  eye  and  the 
lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  pride  of  hfe."  His  consciousness  of  power  degenerated  into 
tyranny  (1  Kings  xii.  4 ;  1  Sam.  viii.  11).  The  wealth  of  his  emotional  nature 
took  the  form  of  ilUcit  love  and  boundless  self-indulgence.  His  studious  interest  in 
Nature  induced  the  dream  of  occult  mysterious  powers  in  material  things,  and  the 
practice  of  magic  arts.  His  intercourse  with  men  of  other  nations  led  to  his 
catching  the  infection  of  their  idolatries,  QntU  at  last  the  rival  temples  of  Moloch, 
Chemosh,  and  Ashtaroth,  with  all  their  cruel  and  abominable  rites,  firowned  darkly 
npon  Olivet,  over  against  the  glorious  house  of  the  Lord  on  Mount  Moriah.  So 
fatally  may  the  noblest  personal  endowments  and  the  richest  advantages  of  life 
foster  the  evil  tendencies  of  the  heart  when  once  it  has  surrendered  itself  to  their 
oontroL  If  it  be  true  that  "  there  is  a  soul  of  goodness  in  things  evU,"  it  is  equally 
tme  that  nothing  is  so  good  but  that  the  spirit  of  evil  may  transform  it  into  an 
instrument  of  moral  injury.  The  fascinations  of  outward  life  are  full  of  danger  when 
that  spirit  lurks  within.  The  wealth  of  a  man's  intellectual  resources,  the  multitude 
of  his  possessions,  the  range  of  his  influence,  do  but  put  into  his  hands  the  more 
abundant  means  of  wrong-doing  when  his  heart  is  not  loyal  to  the  good  and  true. 

■*  The  fairest  things  below  the  sky 
Give  but  a  flattering  light ; 
We  must  suspect  some  danger  nigh. 
Where  we  possess  delight." 

This  idea  is  not  to  be  carried  too  far.  Life  would  be  intolerable  on  the  principle 
of  universal  suspicion  and  distrust.    The  great  Father  of  all  would  have  His  ohildrea 


288  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  Ich.  si.  1—18 

use  and  enjoy  freely  the  good  of  every  kind  that  falls  to  their  lot.  But  let  thom 
beware  lest  tlie  spirit  of  evil,  in  some  form  of  outward  charm,  through  some  secret 
avenue  of  soul  or  sense,  should  gain  an  entrance  to  the  citadel  of  their  heart,  and 
"  turn  it  away  "  from  Him. 

III.  The  certainty  of  Divine  retributions.  Solomon  cannot  sin  with  impunity. 
His  personal  defection  involves  the  throne  in  dishonour  and  the  whole  nation  in 
discord  and  sorrow.  He  had  been  forewarned  that  it  should  be  so,  and  the  threat- 
enings  of  God  are  as  sure  as  His  promises.  What  is  God's  "anger"  but  just  the 
reverse  side  of  that  faithfulness  that  secures  tlie  purposes  of  His  grace  ?  What  are 
His  judgments  but  the  severer  methods  of  His  holy  love  ?  An  inexorable  Nemesis 
tracks  the  path  of  the  transgressor ;  not  a  mere  blind  fate — not  a  mere  impersonal 
law  of  moral  sequence — but  a  Divine  will  and  power,  pledged  to  vindicate  the  cause 
of  eternal  righteousness.  It  may  foUow  him  slowly,  as  with  "  leaden  foot,"  but 
sooner  or  later  it  overtakes  hun.  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  &c.  (GaL  vi.  7,  8). 
And  though  one  only  may  sow  the  evil  seed,  how  many,  often,  are  the  reapers  I 
"  The  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  on  the  children,"  &o.  No  man  can  "  perish 
alone  in  his  iniquity."  According  to  the  range  of  his  social  relations  so  is  the 
mischief  his  wrong-doing  works.  When  the  king  falls,  how  many  fall  with  him  I 
The  laws  of  God 

"  must  work  their  will. 
Whatever  human  heart  nnfly  bleed  ; 
And  more  than  they  who  do  the  ill 
Must  suffer  for  the  evil  deed." 

IV.  The  mercy  that  tempers  Divine  judgments.  The  execntion  of  the 
sentence  is  both  delayed  and  modified.  Not  in  Solomon's  own  reign  shall  the 
thing  be  done ;  "  nor  shall  the  kingdom  be  whoUy  torn  from  his  house  "  (vers.  12, 13). 
This  is  partly  from  tender  regard  for  the  sacred  memory  of  David  his  father,  and 
partly,  we  may  believe,  in  mercy  to  himself,  that  space  may  be  given  him  for  re- 
pentance (see  Psa.  Ixxxix.  80 — 37).  We  have  here  a  type  and  example  of  the  general 
method  of  God's  ways.  "  In  wrath  he  remembers  mercy."  Something  of  gracious 
forbearance  is  seen  in  the  severest  of  His  judgments.  His  chastisements  are  fatherly. 
And  beneath  the  darkest  providences  and  the  sternest  retributions  there  is  the 
steady  flow  of  a  loving-kindness  that  endures  throughout  all  generations,  the  strength 
of  a  covenant  that  shall  never  be  broken. — W. 

Vers.  9 — 13. — After  the  consecration  of  the  temple  Solomon  reached  the  culmi- 
nating point  of  his  reign,  both  in  a  spiritual  and  temporal  point  of  view.  His  fame 
and  his  dominion  continued  to  increase.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  came  from  the  far 
East  to  pay  him  homage.  From  this  summit  of  glory  he  had  a  sudden  and  shame- 
ful fall,  and  became  all  but  an  apostate.  This  son  of  David,  whose  high  honour  it 
was  to  have  built  and  consecrated  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  this  heir  of  the  promises 
on  which  hung  the  salvation  of  mankind,  sank  into  idolatry.  The  causes  of  his  fall 
were — 1st,  Pride  :  he  forgot  to  give  glory  to  God.  2nd,  Lust  :  strange  women  enticed 
him  after  strange  gods  (ch.  xi.  8).  The  fall  of  Solomon  repeats  in  a  manner  the  features 
of  the  first  transgression.  It  began  in  the  desire  to  be  as  God,  and  was  consummated 
in  the  gratification  of  the  flesh.  Its  emphatic  warning  to  all  God's  people  is,  "  Let 
him  tliat  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall "  (1  Cor.  x.  12).  Chastisement 
from  God  is  the  consequence  of  this  fall.  God  had  already  warned  Solomon  that 
His  most  glorious  promises  were  contingent  on  obedience  to  His  commands.  "  If 
thou  walk  in  my  ways,"  &o.  (ch.  iii.  13,  14).  God  chastens  Solomon  because  He 
loves  him,  and  does  not  altogether  take  His  mercy  from  him,  since  He  still  leaves 
the  kingdom  of  Judah  to  his  descendants.  The  book  of  Ecolesiastes,  with  its  blend- 
ing of  bitterness  and  repentance,  is  perhaps  the  ripening  fruit  of  this  meroifal 
severity. — E.  de  P, 


OB.  XI.  14—43.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  XI.  14—43. 


Solomon's  adtebsaiiies. —  As  the  his- 
torian has  collected  together  in  ohs.  vi., 
vii.,  viii.  all  the  information  he  can  con- 
vey respecting  the  temple,  and  in  cha.  ix., 
X.  all  the  scattered  notices  respecting  Splo- 
mon's  power  and  greatness,  so  here  he 
arranges  in  one  section  the  history  of 
Solomon's  adversaries.  It  must  not  be  sup- 
posed that  the  following  records  stand  in 
due  chlonological  order.  The  eimiitiea  here 
mentioned  did  not  date  from  the  deli- 
very of  the  message  of  which  we  have  just 
heard ;  on  the  contrary,  the  hatred  and  oppo- 
sition of  Eadad  and  Bezon  began  at  an  early 
period,  though  not  the  earMest  (ch.  v.  4),  of 
Solomon's  reign.  It  was  only  in  his  later 
life,  however,  that  they  materially  affected 
his  position  and  rule ;  hence  it  is  that  they 
Are  brought  before  us  at  this  stage  of  the 
history,  and  also  because  they  are  manifestly 
regarded  M  chastisements  for  Solomon's 
«in. 

Ver.  14. — And  the  Lord  stirred  up  an 
Adversary  unto  Solomon,  Hadad  [In  ver.  17 
written  Adad,  HIK.  Apparently  this,  like 
Pharaoh,  was  a  title  rather  than  a  name. 
And,  like  Pharaoh,  it  is  said  to  mean  the  sun. 
It  was  borne  by  a  king  of  Edom  in  very 
■early  times.  Gen.  xxv.  15 ;  xxxvi.  35,  39  (in 
-the  latter  verse,  as  in  ch.  xxv.  15,  Hadar  is 
.probably  a  clerical  error  for  Hadad,  as  the 
name  stands  in  1  Chron.  i.  80,  50,  T  and 
"1  being  so  very  much- alike.  Geseiiius, 
iowever,  contends  that  Hadar  is  the  true 
leading),  and  was  also  a  favourite  name 
with  the  kings  of- Syria,  especially  in  the 
{orms  Benhadad,  Hadadezer]  the  Edomite : 
lie  was  of  the  king's  seed  In  Edom. 

Ver.  15. — For  it  came  to  pass,  when  David 
-was  In  Edom  [2  Sam.  viii.  14.  But  the  text 
is  peculiar.  Instead  of  "  in  Edom"  we  have 
"  with  Edom,"  DISTIX,  unless  we  take  HK 
to  be  the  mark  of  the  accusative,  which,  how- 
ever, there  is  no  verb  to  govern.  Keil  inter- 
prets, "When  David  had  to  do  with  Edom." 
Biihr  refers  to  1  Chron.  xx.  5,  and  Gen.  xix. 
4,  but  they  are  not  strictly  parallel,  and  it  is 
possible  that  the  text  is  slightly  corrupt,  as 
the  LXX.,  Syr.,  and  Arab,  must  have  had 
ni3n3  instead  of  nVna  before  them  "  when 
David  smote  Edom."  The  LXX.  ,e.g.,  reads 
iv  Tip  l^oXoQpevaai.  k.  r.  X.  It  was  only  vica- 
riously, however,  that  David  smote  Edom,  or 


was  in  Edom.    According  to  1  Chron.  zriii. 

12,  Ahishai  slew  18,000  Edomites,  while 
Psa.  Ix.  (title)  represents  Joab  as  having 
slain  12,000  at  the  same  time  and  place. 
The  two  brothers  were  both  in  h  igh  command, 
or  Abishai  may  have  been  detailed  by  Joab  to 
this  service] ,  and  Joab  the  captain  of  the 
host  was  gone  up  to  bury  the  slain  [The 
commentators  generally  are  agreed  that 
these  are  the  Israelites  slain  by  the  Edoniitea 
during  an  invasion  of  Israel,  and  not  either 
the  Edomites  or  Israelites  slain  in  the  valley 
of  Salt] ,  after  he  had  smitten  [rather,  that 
he  smote.  This  is  the  apodosis]  every  male  In 
Edom.  [This  is,  of  course,  hyperbolical  (cf. 
"  all  Israel "  below).  It  is  clear  that  the 
whole  Edomite  nation  did  not  perish.  The 
words  point  to  a  terrible  slaughter  (of.  1 
Chron.  xviii.  13)  among  the  men  of  war. 
Possibly  the  cruelties  of  the  Edomites  (com- 
pare Fsa.  cxxxvii.  7 ;  Obad.  10 — 14)  had  pro- 
voked this  act  of  retribution,  as  to  which  see 
Deut.  XX.  13.] 

Ver.  16. — For  six  months  did  Joab  remain 
there  with  all  Israel  [i.e.,  the  entire  army, 
as  in  ch.  xvi.  16,  17] ,  until  he  had  cut  off 
every  male  in  Edom. 

Ver.  17.— That  Hadad  fled  [This  word 
excludes  the  idea  that  he  was  carried  off  in 
iufano?  by  servants,  something  like  Joash, 
2  Kings  xi.  2] ,  he  and  certain  Edomites  of 
his  father's  servants  with  him,  to  go  into 
Egypt  [cf.  Matt.  ii.  13]  ;  Hadad  being:  yet 
a  little  child.  [The  words  used  of  Solomon 
ch.  iii.  7.] 

Ver.  18.— And  they  arose  out  of  nidlan 
[a  name  of  wide  and  somewhat  varied  sig- 
nificance. Midian  embraces  the  eastern  por- 
tion of  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  (Exod.  ii.  15, 
21 ;  iii.  1),  and  stretches  along  the  eastern 
border  of  Palestine.  Tb  e  term  has  been  com- 
pared with  our  "  Arabia."  And  the  indefinite- 
ness  arises  in  both  instances  from  the  same 
cause,  viz.,  that  the  country  was  almost  en- 
tirely desert.  Midian  would  thusextend  along 
the  back  or  east  of  Edom.  There  is  no  need, 
consequently  (with  Thenius),  to  read  JIUp 
i.e.,  their  dwelling.  It  is  noticeable,  how- 
ever, that  the  LXX.  reads  i«  rnc  jroXewf 
Ma£ui/i,  and  some  of  the  geographers  do 
mention  a  city  of  that  name  on  the  eastern 
shore  of  the  Elanitie  gulf] ,  and  came  to 
Faran  [Elsewhere  Mount  Paran,  Hab.  iii.  3 ; 
Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ;  a  desert  and  mountainous 
tract  lying  between  Arabia  Petreea,  Pales- 
tine, and  Idumsea  (see  Num.  x.  12 ;  xiii. 
3,  27  ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  1 ;  Deut.  i.  1),  and 
comprehending  the  desert  of  Et  Tih.  It  is 
difficult  to  identify  it  with  greater  precision. 


SM 


t;he  fiest  book  of  kings. 


[CB.  XI.  14— 4a 


bat  it  has  been  ootmeoted  with  the  beantifnl 
Wddy  Feiran,  near  Mount  Serbal,  in  the 
Sinaitio  range,  which  would  agree  fairly  well 
with  our  narrative] :  and  they  took  men  with 
them  out  of  Faian  [as  guides  through  the 
desert,  and  possibly  as  a  protection  also], 
and  came  to  Egypt  [The  direct  route  from 
Edom  to  Egypt  would  be  across  the  desert 
of  Et  Tih — practically  the  route  of  the  cara- 
van of  pilgrims  from  Mecca.  But  this  does 
not  settle  the  position  of  Paran,  as  the  text 
seems  to  hint  that  the  fugitives  did  not 
proceed  direct  from  Edom.  They  may  have 
taken  refuge  in  the  first  instance  amongst 
the  tribes  of  Midian;  or  they  may  have 
diverged  from  the  straight  course  through 
fear],  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  [This 
cannot  have  been  the  Pharaoh  who  was 
Solomon's  father-in-law,  for  in  the  first 
place,  the  flight  was  in  the  time  of  David, 
and  secondly,  a  prince  who  had  aided  and 
abetted  these  fugitives  would  hardly  be  likely 
to  form  an  alliance  with  their  great  enemy. 
It  may  have  been  Psusennes  n.] ;  which  gave 
lilm  an  house,  and  appointed  him  victuals 
[{.<.,  certain  cities  or  officers  were  charged 
with  his  maintenance,  though,  as  his  rela- 
tions with  the  royal  family  were  so  extremely 
intimate  (vers.  19 — 22),  he  may  have  been  fed 
from  the  royal  table],  and  gave  him  land. 

Ver.  19. — toi&  Hadad  found  great  favour 
In  the  sight  of  Pharaoh,  bo  that  he  gave 
him  to  wife  the  sister  of  his  own  wife,  the 
■later  of  Tahpenes  [LXX.  Bextfiiva.  "No 
name  that  has  any  near  resemblance  to 
either  Tahpenes  or  Thekemina  has  yet  been 
found  among  those  of  the  period  "  (Poole, 
Diet.  Bib.  iii.  1431).  Bawlinson  adds  that 
the  monuments  of  that  age  are  extremely 
■oanty]  the  queen.  [Heb.  ny^i  the  word 
generally  used  of  the  queen  mother  (as  in 
ch.  XV.  13).  Here-,  and  in  2  Kings  z.  13, 
however,  it  is  used  of  the  queen  consort.] 

Yer.  20. — And  the  sister  of  Tahpenes  hare 
Uni  Oenuhath  his  son  [otherwise  unknown], 
whomTalipenes  weaned  In  Pharaoh's  house 
[A  significant  token  of  his  adoption  into  the 
royal  family.  The  weaning,  which  generally 
took  place  in  the  second,  sometimes  third, 
(2  Mace.  vii.  27)  year, was  clearly  a  much  more 
marked  occasion  in  the  ancit^nt  East  than 
it  is  among  ourselves  (Gen.  xxi.  8 ;  1  Sam. 
i.  24)]:  and  Genubath  was  In  Pharaoh's 
bonsehold  among  the  sons  uf  Pbaraoh.  [i.e. 
he  was  brought  up  in  the  Egyptian  harem.] 

Ver.  21. — And  when  Hadad  heard  In  Egypt 
that  David  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  that 
Joah  the  captain  of  the  host  was  dead  [It 
comes  out  very  significantly  here  what  a 
name  of  terror  Joab's  had  been  in  Edom, 
and  how  deep  was  the  impression  which  his 
bloody  vengeance  of  a  quarter  of  a  century 
befon  had  made]  Hadad  said  to  Pharaoh, 


Let  me  depart  [Heb.  send  me  away] ,  that 

1  may  go  to  mine  own  country.  [Bawlin- 
son cites  Herod,  ui.  132—137;  i.  25,  35, 
106,  107,  to  show  that  refugees  at  Oriental 
courts  must  obtain  permission  to  leave 
them.] 

Ver.  22. — Then  Pharaoh  said  unto  him. 
But  what  hast  thou  lacked  with  me,  that, 
behold,  thou  seekest  to  go  to  thine  ows 
country?  [The  natural  inquiry  of  Eastern 
courtesy.]  And  he  answered,  Nothing: 
howbelt  let  me  go  In  any  wise.  [Heb.  thou 
shalt  surely  send  me  away.  Bawlinson  says, 
"  There  is  a  remarkable  abruptness  in  this 
termination."  But  we  must  remember  how 
unfinished,  to  our  eyes,  Scripture  narratives 
constantly  seem.  There  is  no  need,  conse- 
quently, to  suspect  any  accidental  omission 
from  the  Hebrew  text.  The  LXX.,  it  is 
true,  adds,  "  and  Ader  departed,"  &c.,  but 
this  may  be  inferred  from  vers.  14,  25.  And 
Hadad's  persistent  desire  to  depart,  for 
which  he  assigns  no  reason,  is  suggestive 
of  the  thoughts  which  were  stirring  in  his 
soul.  "The  keen  remembrance  of  his 
native  land,  his  lost  kingdom,  and  the 
slaughter  of  all  his  house,  gathered  strength 
within  him ;  and  all  the  ease  and  princely 
honour  which  he  enjoyed  iu  Egypt  availed 
not  against  the  claims  of  ambition,  ven- 
geance, and  patriotism  "  (Eitto).] 

Ver.  23.— And  God  stirred  him  np  another 
adversary  [almost  identical  with  ver.  14] , 
Rezon  the  son  of  TiHaiiah  [Often  identified 
with  the  Hezion  of  ch.  xv.  18,  but  on  insuf- 
ficient grounds.  Whether  he  was  a  usurper, 
who  had  dethroned  Hadad  (see  Jos.,  Ant., 
vi.  5.  2),  or  an  ofBcer  of  Hadadezer's  who 
escaped  either  before  or  after  the  battle  of 

2  Sam.  viii.  3 — 5,  is  uncertain.  The  follow- 
ing words  agree  equally  well  with  either  sup- 
position] ,  which  fled  from  hla  lord  Hadad- 
ezer  king  of  Zobah. 

Ver.  24. — And  he  gathered  men  unto  Iilm, 
and  became  captain  over  a  hand  [either  of 
rebels  before  or  of  fugitives  after  the  defeat] , 
when  David  slew  them  of  Zobah  [Of  Zobah, 
not  in  Heb.  "  Them  "  must  mean  the  Syrian 
army] :  and  they  went  to  Damascus,  and 
dwelt  therein  [As  David  put  garrisons  in 
Syria  of  Damascus  (2  Sam.  viii.  6),thisniu8t 
have  been  some  time  after  the  defeat  of  the 
Syrians.  But  Eeil  argues  that  it  cannot 
have  been  in  the  middle  or  later  part  of  Solo- 
mon's reign,  inasmuch  as  Solomon  must 
have  been  lord  of  Damascus,  or  he  could  not 
have  built  Palmyra.  But  it  is  not  so  incon- 
trovertibly  settled  that  Solomon  did  build 
Palmyra  (see  on  ch.  ix.  18)  as  to  make  this 
argument  of  much  weight.  And  even  if  it 
were,  we  might  still  fix  the  reign  of  Bezon  at 
an  earlier  period  of  Solomon's  sway.  See 
below] ,  and  reigned,  [i.e.,  the  band  or  troof 


OH.  XI.  14 — 13.] 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


28S 


of  Bezon,  either  in  the  confusion  of  the  de- 
feat, or  in  some  subsequent  time  of  anarchy, 
took  possession  of  Damascus,  and  he,  it 
would  seem,  usurped  the  crown.  The  word 
" reigned,"  however  (plural),  is  somewhat 
remarkable.  It  may  perhaps  be  accounted 
for  by  the  plurals  wluch  precede  it.    The 

insertionofone"yoa"0D»71D»1  for  W^OM) 
gives  the  sense  "  they  made  him  king,"  which 
would  certainly  be  preferable,  if  the  emen- 
dation were  not  purely  conjectural. 

Yer.  25. — Aad  he  was  an  adversary  to 
Israel  all  the  days  of  Solomon  [We  are  not 
compelled,  however,  to  beUeve  that  his 
reign  lasted  "  all  the  days  of  Solomon." 
This  last  expression  ia  to  be  taken  with  con- 
siderable latitude.  It  is  an  Orientalism. 
At  the  time  of  ch.  v.  4,  neither  Hadad  nor 
Bezon  was  giviog  Solomon  any  trouble], 
beside  the  mischief  which  Hadad  did  [Heb. 
omits  did.  The  construction  of  the  Hebretr 
(see  Ewald,  277<i  (2),  2926,  note)  is  difficult. 
Literally,  "  and  with  the  evil  which  Hadad," 
&o.  (comp.  ver.  1  of  this  chapter,  "and  with 
the  daughter,"  &o.,  with  Exod.  i.  14,  Heb.) 
The  LXX.  reconstructs  the  text,  making 
the  following  words,  ■'  and  he  abhorred," 
&o.,  apply  to  Hadad;  and  altering  Syria 
(DIK)  into  Edom  (DIK)  to  suit.  But  it 
is  far  better  to  understand  D^V  (with 
our  Authorized  Version) ;  t.<.,  beside  the 
mischief  which  Hadad  did  (or,  "  beside  the 
mischief  of  Hadad,"  Ewald).  "  And  he 
(Bezon)  abhorred,"  &a.  Hadad's  enmity 
has  already  been  described  (vers.  17 — 22), 
and  the  historian  has  passed  on  to  the  case 
of  Bezon.  It  is  extremely  nnUkely  that  he 
should  now  suddenly  recur  exclusively  to 
Hadad.  It  is  very  natural  for  him,  on  the 
other  hand,  in  his  account  of  Bezon,  to  re- 
mind Us  that  all  this  was  in  addition  to  the 
mischief  wrought  by  Hadad]  :  and  be  ab- 
horred [Heb.  loathed]  Israel  and  reigned 
over  Syria. 

Yer.  26 — ^And  Jeroboam  [Yiewed  in  the 
light  of  their  history,  the  names  Jeroboam 
and  Behoboam  are  both  instructive.  The 
first  means,  "  Whose  people  ai'e  many ; "  the 
second,  "Enlarger  of  the  people."  The 
latter  might  almost  have  been  bestowed  in 
irony,  the  former  by  way  of  parody]  the  son 
of  Nebat  [The  case  of  Jeroboam  is  now 
related  at  much  greater  length,  not  so  much 
because  of  the  importance  of  the  rebelhon 
at  the  time,  as  because  of  its  bearing  on  the 
later  history  of  Israel.  It  led  to  the  disrup- 
tion  of  the  kingdom  and  the  schism  in  the 
Chnrch.  It  was  the  first  great  symptom  of 
the  decadence  of  the  power  of  Solomon ;  of 
his  decline  in  piety  we  have  had  many  indi- 
cations. We  see  in  it  an  indication  that 
the  Hebrew  eommonwealth  has  passed  its 


zenith],  an  Ephrathlte  [t.«.,  Ephraimite; 
of.  Judg.  xii.  6 ;  1  Sam.  i.  1.  Kpliraim 
was  the  ancient  rival  of  Judah,  and  by 
reason  of  its  numbers,  position,  &e.,  might 
well  aspire  to  the  headship  of  the  tribes 
(Gen.  xlix.  26 ;  xlviii.  19 ;  Dent,  xxxiii.  17 ; 
Josh.  xvii.  17)]  of  Zereda  [Mentioned  here 
only,  unless  it  is  identical  with  Zeredathah 
(2  Chron.  iv.  17)  or  Zarthan  (Josh.  iii.  16; 
1  Kings  iv.  12)  in  the  Jordan  valley. 
That  this  place  was  apparently  situate 
in  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  is  no  argument 
against  the  identification  (Bahr),  for  an 
Ephrathite  might  surely  be  born  out  of 
Ephraim.  It  is,  however,  observable  that 
Zereda  has  the  definite  ariicle  (similarly 
r)  ^apiipa  in  the  LXX.,  but  this  place  is  lo- 
cated in  Mount  Ephraim),  which  Zarthan,. 
&c.,  have  not.  Henceit  is  probably  the  same 
as  the  Zererath  of  Judg.  vii.  22.  In  fact,, 
some  MSS.  read  iTJ^V  there  instead  of  TQyt 
and  T  and  T  are  not  only  etymologically 
interchangeable,  but  are  also  extremely 
liable  to  be  confused  (see  above  on  ver.  14)] ,. 
Solomon's  servant  [i.e.,  officer ;  cf.  ver.  28] ,. 
whose  mother's  name  was  Zeruab  [t.e., 
leprous.  His  mother's  name  is  recorded, 
probably  because  his  father,  having  died 
early,  was  comparatively  unknown.  But  it  is 
not  impossible  that  the  similarity  either 
with  Zeruiah  (cf.  ch.  i.  7)  or  Zererah  had 
something  to  do  with  its  preservation.  The 
people  would  not  readily  forget  that 
Solomon's  other  great  adversary  was  the 
son  of  Zeruiah.  And  we  have  many  proofs 
how  much  the  Jews  affected  the  jingle  of 
similar  words] ,  even  he  lifted  up  his  [Heb. 
a]  band  [i.e.,  rebelled.  Synonymous  ex- 
pression 2  Sam.  xviii.  28 ;  xx.  21.  Observe,, 
we  have  no  history  or  account  of  this  rebel- 
lion except  in  the  LXX.,  but  merely  of  the 
circumstances  which  led  to  it]  against  tbO' 
Idng. 

Yer.  27. — And  this  was  the  cause  [or,. 
this  is  the  account;  this  is  how  it  came  about. 
Same  words  Josh.  v.  4,  and  oh.  ix.  15.  We 
have  here  a  long  parenthesis,  explaining  the 
origin,  &o.,  of  Jeroboam's  disaffection]  that 
be  lifted  up  bis  hand  [Heb.  a  hand]  ag'ainst 
the  king.  Solomon  buUt  MUIo  [see  on  ch, 
ix.  15] ,  and  repaired  the  breaches  [These 
words  convey  the  impression  that  Solomon 
renewed  the  decayed  or  destroyed  parts  of 
the  wall.  But  (1)  13p  does  not  mean  re- 
pair, except  indirectly.  It  means  he  closed,. 
shut.  And  (2)  yi^  sing,  refers  to  one  breach 
or  opening.  Moreover  (3)  it  was  not  sO' 
long  since  the  wall  was  built  (2  Sam.  v.  9). 
It  could  hardly,  therefore,  have  decayed,, 
and  there  had  been  no  siege  to  cauee  a 
breach.  We  must  understand  the  word,  con- 
sequently,  not  of  a  part  broken  down,  bat' 


236 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH.  U  11 — IS, 


of  a  portion  unbuilt.  A^'e  Lare  elsewhere 
suggested  that  this  was  the  breach  in  the  line 
of  circumvallation,  caused  by  the  Tyropaeon 
valley,  and  that  the  Millo  was  the  bank,  or 
rampart  which  eloted  it.  And  to  this  view 
the  words  of  the  text  lend  some  confirma- 
tion] of  tbe  city  of  David  bis  father.  [As 
Millo  wag  built  about  the  25th  year  of 
Solomon's  reign  (ch.  ix.  15),  we  are  en- 
abled to  fix  approximately  the  date  of 
Jeroboam's  rebellion.  It  waff  apparently 
about  ten  or  twelve  years  before  Solomon's 
death. 

Ver.  28. — And  the  man  Jeroboam  was  a 
jnlghtyman  of  valour  [same  expression  Judg. 
vi.  12 ;  xi.  1 ;  1  Sam.  ix.  1 ;  2  Kings  xv.  20. 
In  Kuth  ii.  1  it  hardly  seems  to  imply  valour 
so  much  as  wealth  (as  A.  V.) :  and  Solomon 
seeing  the  young  man  that  he  was  Indus- 
trious [Heb.  doing  worW],  he  made  *'<"' 
ruler  over  all  the  charge  [Heb.  appointed 
him  to  all  the  burden]  of  the  house  of 
Joseph.  [The  tribe  of  Ephraim,  with  its 
constant  envy  of  Judah,  must  have  been 
mortified  to  find  themselves  employed — 
though  it  was  but  in  the  modified  service 
of  Israelites — on  the  fortifications  of  Jeru- 
salem. Their  murmurings  revealed  to  Jero. 
beam  the  unpopularity  of  Solomon,  and 
perhaps  suggested  thoughts  of  overt  rebel- 
lion to  his  mind.] 

Ver.  39.— And  It  came  to  pass  at  that 
time  [a  general  expression  =  "  when  he  was 
thus  employed "]  when  [Heb.  that]  Jero- 
boam went  out  of  Jerusalem  that  [Heb. 
and] ,  the  prophet  Ahljah  the  Shllonlte  [t.e., 
of  Shiloh,  as  is  expressed  ch.  xiv.  2—4, 
where  see  notes.  He  too,  therefore,  was  an 
Ephraimite  (Josh.  xvi.  5).  This  portion  of 
the  history  is  probably  derived  from  his  writ- 
ings (2  Chron.  ix.  29).  We  may  be  pretty 
eure  that  Nathan  was  now  dead]  found  him 
In  the  way ;  and  he  [i.e.,  Ahijah.  Ewald 
understands  Jeroboam  to  be  meant,  and 
would  see  in  the  new  garment  his  "  splendid 
robe  of  office"]  hrd  clad  himself  with  a 
new  garment  [HD^B'  same  word  as  H^'DB' 
such  transpositions  of  letter?  being  common. 
The  simlah  was  the  outer  garment  (Gen. 
ix.  23  ;  1  Sam.  xxi.  10,  &o.),  which  serveil  at 
night  as  a  covering  (Ueut.  x\ii.  17).  It 
was  probably  identical  in  shape,  &o.,  with 
the  camel's-hair  humous,  or  abba,  worn  by 
the  Arabs  at  the  present  day  (cf .  Conder,  pp. 
318,  342),  and  being  almost  a  square  would 
lend  itself  well  to  division  into  twelve 
parts]  ;  and  they  two  were  alone  in  the 
field  [i.e.,  open  country.] 

Ver.  30.— And  Ahljah  caught  [This 
English  word  almost  implies  that  it  was 
.Jeroboam's  garment  (cf.  Gen.  xxxix.  12)  ; 
lut  the  original  simply  means  "  laid  hold 


of."]  the  new  garment  that  was  on  Um, 
and  rent  [same  word  as  in  vers.  11,  12,  13] 
It  In  twelve  pieces.  [The  first  instance  oi 
an  "  acted  parable  "  (BawUnscn).] 

Ver.  31. — ^And  he  said  to  JerQhoam,  Tain 
thee  ten  pieces :  foi  thus  salth  the  Lord, 
the  God  of  Israel,  Behold,  I  will  rend  the 
kingdom  out  of  the  hand  of  Solomon,  and 
will  give  ten  tribes  [Eeil  insists  that 
"  ten "  is  here  mentioned  merely  as  the 
number  of  completeness ;  that,  in  fact,  it 
is  to  be  understood  symboUcaUy  and  not 
arithmetically.  ,  He  further  states  that  in 
point  of  fact  the  kingdom  of  Jeroboam  only 
consisted  of  nine  tribes,  that  of  Simeon 
being  practically  surrounded  ij  the  territory 
of  Judah,  and  so  becoming  incorporated  iu 
the  southern  kingdom.  But  surely,  if  that 
had  been  the  idea  in  the  prophet's  mind,  it 
would  have  been  better  expressed  had  he 
torn  off  one  piece  from  the  garment  and 
given  the  rest,  undivided,  to  Jeroboam 
(Biihr).  And  the  reference  to  the  number  of 
the  tribes  is  unmistakable.  As  to  Simeon, 
we  have  no  means  of  knowing  what  part 
that  tribe,  if  it  still  existed,  took  at  the  divi- 
sion of  the  kiugdom.  See  on  ch.  xix.  3.  Its 
members  had  long  been  scattered  (Gen.  xlix. 
7),  and  it  gradually  dwindled  away,  and  has 
,  already  disappeared  from  the  history.  But 
even  if  it  had  a  corporate  existence  and  did 
follow  the  lead  of  Judah,  still  that  is  not  con- 
clusive on  the  question,  for  we  know  not  only 
that  the  historian  uses  round  numbers,  but 
also  that  we  are  not  to  look  for  exact  state- 
ments, as  the  next  verse  proves]  to  thee. 

Ver.  32.— But  he  shall  have  one  tribe 
[LXX.  Sua  aioJTrTpa.  Some  would  understand 
"one  tribe,  in  additidn  to  Judah,"  but 
compare  ch.  xii.  20,  "  tribe  of  Judah  only," 
and  see  note  on  ver.  13.  Possibly  neither 
Judah  nor  Benjamin  is  here  to  be  thought 
of  separately.  In  ch.  xii.  21,  and  2  Chron. 
xi.  3,  23,  they  are  both  reckoned  to  Eeho- 
boam.  They  might  be  regarded  as  in  some 
sense  one,  inasmuch  as  they  enclosed  the 
Holy  City  (Seb.  Schmidt),  the  Une  of  divi- 
sion passing  right  through  the  temple 
platform.  But  it  is  perhaps  safer,  in  view 
of  ch.  xii.  20,  to  understand  the  term  of 
Judah,  compared  with  which  large  and 
influential  tribe  "  Uttle  Benjamin "  was 
hardly  deserving  of  separate  mention)  for 
my  servant  David's  sake,  and  (or  Jerusa- 
lem's sake  [see  on  vers.  12,  13],  the  city 
which  I  have  cbosen  out  of  aU  the  tribes  of 
Israel. 

Ver.  33.— Because  that  tHey  [The  LXX. 
has  the  singular  throughout,  and  so  have 
all  the  translations,  except  the  Chaldee. 
But  the  plural  is  to  be  retamed.  the  import 
being  that  Solomon  was  not  alone  in  hia 
idolatrous  leanings;    or  it  may  turn  our 


OH.  XL  14—43.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


SBT 


thoughts  to  the  actual  idolaters — his  wives 
— whose  guilt  he  shared.  The  singular 
looks  as  if  an  alteration  had  been  made  to 
bring  the  words  into  harmony  with  the 
context,  and  especially  with  the  concluding 
words  of  this  verse,  "  David  his  father."] 
have  forsaken  me,  and  bave  worshipped 
Ashtoreth  the  goddess  of  the  Zidonians 
[I'jnV  a  Chaldee  form.  But  many  MSS. 
read  D*]1V],  Chemosh  the  god  of  the 
Moabltes,  and  lUlcom  [the  LXX.  has 
"their  king  the  abomination,"  &c.,  xai  r^i 
/3a(nXtT  aiiTuv.  See  note  on  ver.  5] ,  the  god 
of  the  children  of  Ammon,  and  have  not 
walked  In  my  ways,,  to  do  that  which  is 
right  In  mine  eyesi  and  to  keep  my  statutes 
and  my  judgments,  as  did  David  Us 
father. 

Ver.  34.— Howhelt  I  will  not  take  tbe 
whole  kingdom  [Bawlinson  says  the  context 
requires  "aught  of  the  kingdom,"  and 
affirms  that  the  Hebrew  wiU  bear  this 
rendering;.    But  he  surely  forgets  that  the 

Hebrew  has  the  def.  art.  ns'j^pgO"  ^?"n§! 
can  only  represent  "  all  the  kingdom,  n)v 
PaaCKeiav  oXqv  (LXX.)    See  Gesen.,  Thesau. 

>.v.  73  d.  It  would  certainly  seem  as  if 
this  verse  should  speak  of  Solomon's  re- 
taining the  sceptre  during  his  lifetime, 
and  not  of  his  retaining  a  part  of  the 
empire.  But  we  may  not  go  against  the 
grammar]  out  of  his  hand :  but  I  will  mak* 
him  prince  aJl  the  days  of  his  life  for 
David  my  servant's  sake,  whom  I  chose, 
because  he  kept  my  commandments  and 
my  statutes.  ["  If  Solomon  break  his 
covenant  with  God,  God  will  not  break  his 
covenant  with  the  father  ol  Solomon" 
(Hall).] 

Ver.  35. — But  I  will  take  the  kingdom 
out  of  his  son's  hand,  and  will  give  it  tmto 
thee,  even  ten  tribes. 

Ver.  36. — And  unto  his  son  will  I  give 
one  tribe  [of.  ver.  32,  note] ,  that  David  my 
servant  may  have  a  light  alway  before  ma 
[The  same  expression  is  found  in  ch.  xv. 
4;  2  Kings  viii.  19 ;  2  Ghron.  xxi.  7  ;  and 
compare  Fsa.  cxxxii.  17.  Keil  would  ex- 
plain it  by  2  Sam.  xxi.  17  ;  but  2  Sam.  xiv. 
7,  "  my  coal  which  is  left,"  appears  to  be  a 
closer  parallel.  The  idea  is  not  that  of  a 
home  (Bawlinson),  but  family,  issue.  We 
speak  of  the  extinction  of  a  family  (Bahr)]  ' 
in  Jerusalem,  the  dty  which  I  have  chosen 
me  to  put  my  name  there. 

Ver.  37.— And  I  will  take  thee,  and  thou 
Shalt  reign  according  to  all  that  thy  soul 
deslreth  [We  are  not  justified  in  concluding 
from  these  words  that  Jeroboam  then  had 
ambitious  designs  upon  the  throne  (Keil). 
They  rather  mean,  "  as  king,  all  thy  desires 
shall  be  gratified "  (of.  Deut.  xii.  20 ;  xiv. 


26 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  16 ;  2  Sam.  iii.  21).  Baht 
paraphrases  "  thou  shalt  have  the  dominion 
thou  now  Btrivest  for,"  but  we  have  abso- 
lutely no  proof  that  Jeroboam  at  that  time 
had  ever  meditated  rebellion.  It  is  quite 
possible  that  the  idea  was  inspired  by  this 
interview],  and  shalt  be  king  over  Israel. 

Ver.  38.— And  it  shaU  be.  If  thon  wilt 
hearken  unto  all  that  I  command  thee  [cf. 
ch.  iii.  14 ;  vi.  12  ;  ix.  4] ,  and  wUt  walk  In^ 
my  ways,  and  do  that  is  right  In  my  sight, 
to  keep  my  statutes  and  my  command- 
ments, as  David  my  servant  did;  that  I 
will  be  with  thee  [cf .  ch.  i.  37,  note] ,  and 
build  thee  a  sure  house  [cf.  2  Sam.  vii. 
11,  16 ;  {.e.,  a  family,  perhaps  dynaity.  Ob- 
serve, however,  there  was  no  promise  to- 
Jeroboam,  as  there  was  to  David,  of  an  en- 
during kingdom.  It  was  not  God's  design 
to  take  away  the  kingdom  from  David  in 
pra^petuity  (ver.  39)] ,  as  I  buUt  for  David, 
and  will  give  Israel  unto  thee. 

Ver.  39.— And  I  will  for  this  [<.«.,  the 
defection  just  described]  afflict  the  seed  of: 
David,  but  not  for  ever  [Heb.  all  the  days. 
Cf.  Fsa.  Ixxxix.  28,  33,  36.  This  limitation, 
"  not  for  ever,"  would  seem  to  apply  to 
the  kingdom,  for  it  was  through  the  loss  of 
their  kingdom  that  the  seed  of  David  was 
afSicted.  And  if  so,  it  promises,  if  not  a: 
restoration  of  the  kingdom  to  the  house  of 
David,  at  any  rate  a  renewal  or  continuance 
of  God's  favour.  We  may  perhaps  regard  the 
promise  as  fulfilled  in  the  subsequent  his- 
toiy  of  the  kings  of  Jndah.  Not  only  did 
the  kingdom  last  for  nearly  500  years,  but 
the  royal  house  of  David  maintained  its- 
position  to  the  time  of  Zerubbabel.  Nor  is 
it  to  be  overlooked  that  He  "of  whose  king- 
dom there  shall  be  no  end"  (Luke  i.  83)< 
was  the  son  of  David]. 

Ver.  40. — Solomon  sought  therefore  tO' 
kill  Jeroboam.  [It  is  often  assumed  that 
Solomon's  attempt  on  Jeroboam's  life  was 
the  result  of  the  prophecy  of  Ahijah.  And 
our  translation  with  its  "  therefore  "  favours 
this  view.  The  Heb.,  however,  has  simply 
"and  Solomon  sought,"  Sm.  And  these 
words  connect  themselves  with  ver.  26,. 
"even  he  lifted  up  his  hand,"  &o.  With 
ver.  27  a  parenthesis  begins,  explaining 
how  it  came  about  that  Jeroboam  rebelled. 
It  is  implied  distinctly  that  it  was  because 
of  Ahijah's  prophecy.  That  prophecy,  how- 
ever, was  in  no  sense  a  justification  of 
treason  or  attack  on  Jeroboam's  part.  The 
fact  that  God  had  revealed  His  purposes  was 
no  reason  why  Jeroboam  should  forestall 
them.  David  knew  and  others  knew  that 
he  was  destined  to  be  king,  but  he  piously 
left  it  for  God,  in  His  own  time  and  way,  to 
place  him  on  the  throne.  And  Jeroboam's 
rebellion  is  the  more  inexcusable,  because 


488 


THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XI.  14 — 43. 


Ahijah  had  expressly  stated  that  Solomon 
was  to  retain  the  kingdom  during  hia  life- 
time. However,  "  he  lifted  up  his  hand ; " 
there  was  some  overt  act  of  rebellion,  and 
Solomon,  because  of  this,  and  not  because 
of  the  prophecy  (of  which,  indeed,  he  may 
never  have  heard),  sought  to  slay  him.  Nor 
was  the  king  without  justification  in  so  doing. 
Treason  must  be  promptly  suppressed,  and 
treason  against  a  benefactor  (see  ver.  28) 
is  doubly  hatpful.]  And  Jeroboam  arose, 
xtnd  fled  into  Egypt  [cf.  verse  17,  and  Matt. 
ii.  13.  It  was  the  natural  place  of  refuge] , 
anto  Shishak,  Wng  of  Egypt  [Shishak  is 
beyond  doubt  the  Sheshonk  I.  of  the  monu- 
ments, and  is  the  first  of  the  Pharaohs  vrho 
can  be  identified  with  certainty  (see  Diet. 
Bib.  iii.  p.  1288).  The  date  of  his  accession 
appears  to  be  somewhere  between  988  and 
980  B.O.  As  to  his  invasion  of  Palestine, 
flee  on  ch.  xiv.  25.  His  reception  of  Jero- 
boam almost  proves  that  there  has  been  a 
change  of  dynasty,  and  that  the  new  Pharaoh 
-wns  no  friend  to  Solomon],  and  was  In  Egypt 
'until  the  death  of  Solomoa  [Compare  again 
Matt.  ii.  15.] 

Ver.  41. — And  the  rest  of  the  acta  of 
Solomon,  and  all  that  he  did,  and  bis  wis- 
dom, are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of 
the  acts  of  Solomon  7  [The  sources  of  this 
history  are  mentioned  more  specifically  in 
a  Chron.  iz.  29.] 


Ver.  42.— And  the  time  (Hob  (/";/«]  that 
Solomon  reigned  In  Jerusalem  over  all 
Israel  was  forty  years.  [Josephus,  here  as 
elsewhere,  doubles  the  figure,  making  his 
reign  to  have  lasted  eighty  years.  It  is  some- 
what remarkable,  but  affords  no  just  ground 
for  suspicion,  that  each  of  the  first  three 
kings  of  Israel  should  have  reigned  just  forty 
years.  "  Such  numerical  coincidences  occur 
in  exact  history.  Saosduchinus,  Ghinila- 
danus,  and  Nabopolassar,  three  consecutive 
kings  of  Babylon,  reigned  each  twenty-one 
years  "  (Eawlinson).] 

Yer.  43. — And  Solomon  slept  with  his 
fathers  [see  note  on  ch.  ii.  10.  For  the 
later  and  often  mythical  aecouuls  of  Solo- 
mon, see  Ewald,  iii.  pp.  318, 319.  The  ques- 
tion of  his  repentance  is  discussed  by  Keble, 
"  OccasionalPapers,"pp.416 — i34] , and  was 
burled  ta  the  city  of  David  bis  father;  and 
Behoboam  his  son  [So  far  as  appears  his 
only  son.  "  Solomon  hath  but  one  son,  and 
he  no  miracle  of  wisdom."  "  Many  a  poor 
man  hath  a  honseful  of  children  by  ene 
wife,  whilst  this  great  king  hath  but  one 
son  by  any  houseluls  of  wives"  (Bp.  Hall). 
It  is  worth  remembering  in  this  connection 
that  Psa.  cxxvii.,  which  speaks  of  chil- 
dren as  God's  reward  (ver.  3),  is  with  gooil 
reason  ascribed  to  Solomon]  relgued  in  his 
Btead. 


EOMILETIOS. 

Vera.  81—85. — The  Punishment  of  Solomon's  Sin.  We  have  lately  traced  the 
:gradual  declension  in  piety  of  this  most  puissant  prince  ;  we  have  seen  him  steadily 
sowing  to  the  wind.  The  next  thing  Scripture  records  concerning  him  is  the 
retribatiou  which  befel  him.    It  is  now  for  us  to  see  him  reaping  to  the  whirlwind. 

But  in  considering  the  recompenses  of  his  sin,  it  is  essential  to  remember — 1. 
That  we  can  only  speak,  because  we  only  know,  of  the  temporal  pimishment  which 
attended  him.  It  may  be  that  was  all.  Possibly  the  flesh  was  destroyed  that  the 
fipirit  might  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  vi.  5).  It  may  be  that,  foully 
as  he  fell,  he  did  not  fall  finally,  but  of  this  no  man  can  be  certain.  There  is  evety 
reason  to  think  that  the  question  has  been  "left  in  designed  obscurity"  (Keble, 
"  Occasional  Papers,"  pp.  392 — 434,  where  the  subject  is  discussed  at  considerable 
length),  that  no  one  might  presume.  It  may  be,  therefore,  that  he  still  awaits  the 
just  recompense  of  wrath  in  the  day  of  wrath  (Rom.  ii.  5).  2.  That  if  this  temporal 
punishment  does  not  strike  us  as  severe — considering  the  enormity  of  his  sin  and  the 
greatness  of  the  gifts  and  privileges  he  had  abused — it  is  partly  because  the  temporal 
punishment  was  mitigated  for  his  father's  sake.  The  avenging  hand  could  not  smite 
Solomon  without  at  the  same  time  hurting  David.  We  are  expressly  told  that 
Solomon  was  maintained  on  the  throne  all  his  life,  and  that  one  tribe  was  given — the 
word  implies  that  the  gift  was  unmerited — to  his  son,  for  David's  sake  (vers.  84 — 36). 
I^  therefore,  we  are  tempted  to  think  that  the  punishment  was  not  exemplary,  let 
us  see  in  it  an  instance  of  God's  "  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  "  (sc,  of  gene- 
rations, Exod.  XX.  6)— a  proot  of  the  Infinite  Love  which  "  remembered  David  and 
all  his  afflictions  "  (Psa.  cxxxii.  1).  But  such  as  it  was,  it  was  sufficient  to  teach 
us  these  two  lesaops  at  least.  1.  "Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out "  (Num.  xxxiL 
US).    2.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap  "  (GaL  vi.  7). 


OH.  XL  14—43.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  239 

For  this  retribution  was  of  two  kinds.    There  was — I.  That  which  SoLOMOfi 

aUFFERED  IN  HIS  OWN   PERSON  J  and,  II.    ThAT   WHICH   HE    SUFFERED  IN   HIS    FAMILY 

AND  KINGDOM.  Under  the  first  of  these  categories  the  following  penalties  are  to  be 
ranked : 

1.  His  Kfe  was  shortened.  Probably  by  the  operation  of  natural  laws.  It  is  not 
euggested  that  he  was  directly  smitten  of  God ;  it  is  quite  possible  that  his  rank 
voluptuousness  destroyed  his  energies  and  induced  premature  decay.  But  all  the 
same  his  days  were  cut  short.  Not  only  was  long  life  the  principal  sanction  of  the 
dispensation  under  which  he  lived,  but  it  had  been  expressly  promisfid  him  as  the 
reward  of  piety  (ch.  iii.  14).  But  his  sun  went  down  while  it  was  yet  noon.  He 
was  not  sixty  when  the  mandate  went  forth,  "  Bemove  the  diadem,  and  take  off  the 
orown  "  (Ezek.  xxi.  26).  And  if  it  be  true,  what  Dr.  Johnson  said  to  David  Garrick 
when  the  latter  showed  him  his  elegant  house  at  Bichmond,  that  great  and  rare 
earthly  possessions  "  make  deathbeds  miserable,"  it  must  have  cost  Solomon  a  sharp 
pang  to  leave  so  soon  his  cedar  palace  and  his  chryselephantine  throne. 

2.  His  life  wcu  embittered.  If,  as  is  most  probable,  we  have  in  the  book  of 
Ecclesiastes  a  chapter  of  his  autobiography,  it  is  clear  that  his  glory  brought  him 
little  satisfaction  (ch.  iii.  passim  ;  v.  13 ;  vi.  12 ;  viL  26);  there  was  a  worm  at  the  root 
of  all  his  pleasures.  Of  what  avail  were  his  houses,  hia  gardens,  his  pools  of  water, 
ko.,  so  long  as  be  had  not  the  heart  to  enjoy  them? 

"  It  is  the  mind  that  maketh  good  or  ill, 

That  maketh  wretoh'd  or  happy,  rich  or  poor, 
For  some,  that  hath  abundance  at  bis  will, 
Hath  not  enough,  but  seeks  a  greater  store." 

He  knew  nothing  of  "  the  royalty  of  inward  happiness."  Kow  difiTerent  St. 
Paul,  "  Having  nothing,  yet  possessing  all  things,"  &o.  (2  Cor.  vi.  10).  What 
a  commentary  on  the  "  confessions  "  of  Solomon,  as  they  have  been  called,  with 
their  everlasting  refrain,  their  vanitas  vanitatii/m,  is  that  confession  of  a  man  who 
eufiered  one  long  martyrdom  of  pain — the  Baptist  minister,  Bobert  HaU — "  I  enjoy 
everything." 

8.  He  was  tortured  by  remorse.  This  is  not  expressly  stated,  but  surely  it  may 
with  good  reason  be  inferred.  For  the  wisest  of  men  could  not  be  so  insensate, 
when  he  heard  the  message  of  doom  (ch.  xii.  2),  as  not  to  reflect  how  different 
his  end  was  to  be  from  his  beginning ;  how  fair  the  flower,  and  how  bitter  the  fruit. 
Surely  the  cry  he  has  put  into  others'  lips  would  often  rise  from  his  own,  "  How 
have  I  hated  instruction,"  &c.  (Prov.  v.  12). 

4.  He  was  haunted  by  forebodings.  "This  great  Babylon"  which  he  had 
bnilded,  how  soon  should  it  be  destroyed.  The  empire  which  he  had  consolidated 
should  barely  last  his  life.  "  One  tribe  " — ^how  those  words  would  ring  in  his  ears  t 
Then  he  had  good  reason,  too,  to  fear  that  his  son  was  one  of  the  class  he  had 
himself  described  (Prov.  x.  1 ;  xv.  20 ;  xvii.  25  ;  xix.  13.  Cf.  Eccles.  ii.  19) ,  and  no 
match  for  Jeroboam,  of  whose  designs  upon  the  throne  he  cannot  have  been  ignorant 
{1  Kings  xL  26,  27).  He  had  the  mortification  of  knowing  that  his  "  servant "  would 
enter  into  his  labours.  And  to  the  prospect  of  dissensions  within,  was  added  the 
certainty  of  disaffection  without.  Hadad  and  Bezon  were  already  on  his  border, 
and  were  only  biding  their  time.  The  pohtical  horizon  was  indeed  black  and 
lowering. 

6.  He  was  ha/rassed  by  adversaries.  For  it  is  clear  from  verses  14,  23,  26, 
that  Solomon's  enemies  were  not  content  to  wait  for  his  death,  l^amascus  was  a 
thorn  in  his  side.  Egjrpt  was  a  hotbed  of  intrigues.  The  profound  peace  which  he 
once  enjoyed  he  had  lost.  The  clouds  of  war  were  not  only  gathering,  but  some  of 
them  had  burst.  His  throne  of  ivory  and  gold  can  have  been  but  an  insecure  and 
nncomfortable  seat  for  some  time  before  he  vacated  it. 

II.  But  men  like  Solomon  think  of  posterity  and  of  posthumous  fame  as  much  as 
of  themselves.  If  every  father  has  "given  hostages  to  fortune,"  how  much  more 
Ynlnerable  is  a  king  in  the  person  of  his  successor.  Let  us  now  trace  the  calamities 
which  befel  Solomon's  house  and  kingdonL 


240  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xi.  14— 4a 

1.  In  the  infatuation  of  Ms  son.  Was  there  ever  a  political  crisis  so  wofiiUy- 
mismanaged  as  that  which  marked  Eehohnam's  accession  ?  A  few  pacific  words, 
a  graceful  concession,  and  all  would  have  gone  well.  But  his  brutal  non  possumus 
precipitated  his  downfall.  It  was  enough  to  make  Solomon  turn  in  his  grave.  But 
it  is  for  US  to  remember  that  "  his  mother's  name  was  Naamah,  an  Am/monitess  "' 
(ch.  xiv.  21,  31).    And  this  is  the  result  of  multiplying  wives. 

2.  Jn  the  dismemberment  of  his  kingdom.  The  vast  empire  which  Solomon  had 
founded  with  so  much  care  and  pains,  how  short  a  time  sufficed  to  tear  it  asunder. 
What  a  contrast  between  the  "  one  tribe  "  with  its  barren  territory,  and  the  descrip- 
tion of  ch.  iv.  20,  21.  How  had  he  spent  his  strength  for  naught,  or  rather  for  his 
slave  J.eroboam,  who  inherited  all  the  fairest  and  wealthiest  portions  of  the  realm. 
And  this  was  the  end  of  his  land-hunger — that  he  was  left  with  the  desert  of  Judah.. 

8.  In  the  invasion  of  ShishaTt.  For  he  had  not  long  slept  with  his  fathers  when- 
the  vast  treasures  which  he  had  lavished  on  the  palace  ol  the  Lord  and  his  own 
palaces  were  carried  away  to  Egypt.  All  the  precious  metals  which  David  had 
accumulated,  all  the  acquisitions  of  Solomon's  fleets,  all  the  royal  offerings  of  the 
queen  of  Sheba  and  of  tributary  kings — gone  to  the  sons  of  the  stranger,  to  the  swart 
children  of  Ham.  He  had  amassed  prodigious  wealth,  but  it  was  for  aUens  and 
enemies.  Not  only  the  shields  and  drinking  vessels,  but  the  candlesticks,  bowls,, 
and  the  very  laminae  which  had  glorified  the  sanctuary,  aU  f^ll  to  tlw  invader. 
What  a  case  of  Sic  vos  non  vobis  I  What  would  Solomon  have  said  could  he  have 
foreseen  Eehoboam's  "Brummagem"  shields,  and  the  punctilious  ceremony  with 
which  they  were  paraded  and  preserved?  And  this  was  the  end  of  multiplying 
silver  and  gold  to  himself.    He  had  put  it  all  into  a  bag  with  holes  (Haggai  i.  6). 

4.  In  the  dem,oraKzation  of  Ms  people.  For  the  idolatries  of  Judah,  the  images, 
the  groves,  the  Sodomites  (ch.  xiv.  23),  were  but  the  continuation  and  development 
of  the  idolatries  which  Solomon  had  inaugurated.  His  son  did  but  reap  the  crop- 
which  himself  had  sown.  Nay,  so  exact  is  the  lex  taUonis  that  we  presently  find 
a  queen  of  Judah  erecting  a  "  horror  "  for  the  most  shameful  of  rites  (see  note  on 
oh.  zv.  13).  And  this  was  the  result  of  buUiiing  altars  for  his  queens  and  princesses 
"  on  the  hill  that  is  before  Jerusalem,"  that  within  a  few  years  the  Lord's  people,, 
whose  was  the  law  and  the  temple,  &o.,  built  them  high  places,  &o., "  on  every  high 
hiU  and  under  every  green  tree  "  (ch.  xiv.  23). 

6.  In  the  captivity  of  the  nation.  For  the  dispersion  and  enslavement  of  the 
Jewish  people,  though  only  consummated  some  four  centuries  later,  and  though  it 
was  the  retribution  of  a  long  series  of  sins,  was  nevertheless,  in  a  sense,  the  result 
of  Solomon's  sin.  That  is  to  say,  his  sin  was  (as  ch.  ix.  vers.  6,  7  show)  the  first 
beginning  of  that  ever-deepening  apostasy  from  the  Lord,  of  which  the  captivity 
was,  fi-om  the  first,  denounced  as  the  punishment.  Other  princes  no  doubt  followed 
in  his  steps  and  fiUed  up  the  measure  of  iniquity,  but  the  Grand  Mona/rque  of  their 
race  had  first  showed  them  the  way.  And  so  the  people  who  had  held  sway  even 
to  the  Euphrates  were  carried  beyond  the  Euphrates,  and  those  who  had  seen  subject 
kings  in  their  land  became  subjects  in  a  foreign  land  (cf.  Jer.  v.  19).  How  full  of 
instruction  and  warning  is  it  that  the  captivity  which  Solomon  foretold  (ch.  viii. 
46)  he  should  have  done  so  much  to  precipitate.  He  predicted,  t.«.,  both  his  own 
and  his  nation's  downfall. 

6.  But  the  multiplication  of  horses,  that  too,  like  the  other  sins,  seems  to  have 
brought  its  own  peculiar  Nemesis.  For  whence,  let  us  ask,  came  the  army  that 
pillaged  Jerusalem,  and  carried  off  the  treasures  of  tiie  temple  ?  It  came  in  the 
footprints  of  the  horses.  First,  the  invasion  of  Solomon,  and  then  the  invasion  of 
Shisbak,  "with  twelve  hundred  chariots  and  threescore  thousand  horsemen"  {^ 
Chron.  xii.  3).  And  what  came  of  tlie  horses  supplied  to  the  Tynans  and  Hittites? 
See  ch.  xx.  1  ("  horses  and  chariots ; "  of.  ver.  25)  ;  ch.  xxii.  31 ;  2  Kings  vi.  15 ; 
vii.  6,  &o.  It  is  extremely  probable  that  the  cavalry  he  supplied  to  foreign  kings 
became  an  instrument  in  their  hands  to  scourge  his  own  people.  Nor  is  it  wholly- 
unworthy  of  notice  that  the  murderer  Zimri  was  "  captain  of  half  the  chariots  " 
(ch.  xvi.  9).    Assuredly,  that  unhallowed  trade  did  not  go  unpunished. 

Such,  then,  is  the  principal  moral  of  this  history :  "  'Their  sorrows  shall  be  mul 


OH.  XI.  14—43.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  841 

tiplied  that  hasten  after  another  god  "  (Fsa.  xvi.  4).  And  among  the  additional 
lessons  which  this  suhjeot  teaches  are  these :  (1)  That  where  much  is  given,  much 
will  be  required ;  (2)  That  judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God ;  (3)  "  He  that 
knew  his  lord's  wiU.  and  did  it  not  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes ; "  (4)  "  Every 
transgression  and  disobedience  shall  receive  its  just  recompense  of  reward;''  (fi)  "If 
Ood  spared  not  the  natural  branches,"  &o. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAKIOUS  AUTH0E8. 

"Vers.  14 — Z5.— Premonitions  of  Wrath.  Though  the  full  weight  of  the  jnd.gment 
of  God  upon  the  sin  of  Solomon  was  not  to  come  upon  him  in  his  lifetime,  yet  did 
he  not,  in  this  world,  go  altogether  without  punishment.  The  foreknowledge  of 
the  evils  to  come  upon  his  family  and  people  was  in  itself  a  heavy  afSiction.  But  in 
addition  to  this,  the  evening  of  his  days  was  doomed  to  be  disturbed.    To  this  e&i — 

I.  God  stirred  dp  adversaries  aqainst  him.  1.  In  themselves  these  were 
inconsiderahle.  (1)  Hadad  the  Edomite  t  What  can  he  do  ?  He  is  indeed  of  the 
seed  royal  of  Edom,  but  then  Edom  is  tributary  to  Solomon,  and  Hadad  is  an  ezUe 
in  Egypt  (2)  Bezon  the  Syrian  I  What  can  he  do  ?  He  was  only  a  captain 
under  Hadadezer,  king  of  Zobah,  whom  David  defeated,  and  who  fled  with  his 
men,  over  whom  he  seems  to  have  acted  as  a  chief  of  banditti.  2.  But  they  have 
been  qwietly  acquiring  influence.  (1)  Hadad,  who  was  a  lad  when  he  fled  from 
David,  has  now  attained  to  man's  estate ;  is  in  high  favour  with  Pharaoh,  and 
has  become  brother- in-law  to  the  monarch  of  the  Kile.  (2)  Bezon  also,  taking 
advantage  of  the  apathy  of  Solomon,  who  is  too  much  engaged  in  the  seragho  to 
pay  close  attention  to  the  affairs  of  his  distant  provinces,  is  already  in  Damascus 
and  on  the  throne  of  Syria.  8.  With  God  behind  them  they  are  now  formidable. 
(1)  The  fly  is  a  feeble  creature,  but  let  God  send  it  forth  as  a  plague,  and  Egypt  is 
in  agony.  So  Hadad,  again  amongst  his  Edomites,  is  by  a  competent  Providence 
«nabled  to  work  "  mischief  "  even  to  Solomon  !  (2)  Bezon  also  is  in  a  position  to 
gratify  his  abhorrence  of  Israel  "  all  the  days  of  Solomon,"  or  to  the  end  of  those 
days.  (3)  Let  us  see  the  hand  of  God  in  all  the  events  of  life.  Let  the  discern- 
ment of  symptoms  of  His  displeasure  lead  us  to  repentance  and  reformation.  Let 
ns  never  despise  the  day  of  small  things,  for  the  great  hand  of  God  may  be  in  it. 
It  is  difficult  to  distinguish  the  trifling  from  the  momentous. 

II.  He  stirred  np  those  adversaries  by  means.  1.  They  werereminded  of  the 
tufferings  of  their  people.  (1)  When  David  conquered  Edom  there  was  a  fearful 
«amage.  For  six  months  Joab  was  engaged  in  cutting  off  all  the  males,  until,  no 
natives  surviving,  Israel  had  to  bury  the  slain  (vers.  16, 16).  This  slaughter  was 
sufficiently  dreadful,  though  it  may  only  have  extended  to  those  old  enough  to  bear 
arms.  Hadad  was  not  an  infant  then,  but  ()t3p  "Wi)  a  Utile  boy — of  sufficient  age 
to  see  what  was  going  on  and  make  his  escape  with  the  servants.  Bezon  was  of 
an  age  and  in  a  position  to  estimate  the  miseries  which  the  Syrians  suffered  when 
"  David  slew  "  them,  which  suf&ciently  accounts  for  the  manner  in  which  he  "  ab- 
horred IsraeL"  Wars  are  the  cradles  of  resentments.  (2)  These  terrible  massacres 
have  their  justification  in  the  sins  of  the  people  who  suffered  them.  In  executing 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  Edom,  David  fulBlled  the  famous  prophecy  of  Balaam 
(see  Num.  zxiv.  17— :19).  But  in  this  David  was  the  type  of  Christ,  the  true  Star 
of  Jacob  and  Prince  of  Israel,  whose  anger  will  sweep  His  enemies  to  extermina- 
tion. 2.  They  were  persuaded  that  the  opportwnity  was  ripe  for  revenge.  (1)  They 
heard  that  the  warriors  were  dead  (ver.  21).  They  were  no  longer  paralyzed  by 
the  sound  of  the  once  terrible  names  of  David  and  Joab.  (2)  As  for  Solomon,  he 
never  was  a  warrior.  And  now  he  is  stupefied  by  idolatry,  and  enervated  in  the 
harem.  (8)  Consequeutly  they  put  on  a  bold  front,  and  from  different  points 
harassed  and  distracted  Solomon,  apparently  with  impimity.  For  the  kmg  of 
Israel  knew  that  God  was  angry,  and  "  conscience  makes  cowards  of  us  all." 

Who  can  afford  to  have  God  for  his  enemy  ?  Solomon  could  not  afford  it.  Can 
we  ?  Who  would  not  make  peace  with  such  an  antagonist  ?  He  proposes  His 
own  terms.     Why  do  we  not  repent  and  beUeve  the  gospel  ? — M. 

1    KINGS.  r> 


243  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xi,  14—43. 

Vers.  26 — 28. — Jeroboam,.  The  words  before  ns  are  interesting  as  the  earliest 
notice  of  a  character  who  made  a  considerable  figure  in  Hebrew  history.  They 
bring  before  us — 

I.  The  obscubiiy  of  his  origin.  1.  He  was  a/a  EphratMte  of  Zereda.  (1)  The 
tribe  of  Ephraim  was  not  obscure ;  on  the  contrary)  it  was  next  in  importance  to 
Judah.  But  that  importance  was  collective — arose  from  the  multitude  of  its 
people.  An  iadividual  Ephrathite  would  rather  be  lost  in  the  multitude.  (2)  As 
to  Zereda,  so  little  was  this  place  among  the  thousands  of  Ephraim  that  it  is 
mentioned  only  here,  and  would  have  been  forgotten  bat  for  Jeroboam.  Note: 
Places  derive  notoriefy  from  men.  Men  are  greater  than  places.  2.  He  was  the 
son  of  Nebat  and  Zeruah.  (1)  Of  these  persons  we  should  not  have  heard  but 
for  the  part  their  son  played  in  history.  How  much  of  our  reputation  is  ad- 
ventitious! Unenviable  is  the  notoriety  gained  through  relationship  with  the 
deviL  How  truly  glorious  is  that  man  who  rejoices  in  the  imputed  lighteousnees 
of  Christ  1  (2)  Yet  Nebat  and  Zeruah  founded  the  reputation  of  Jeroboam.  They 
had  the  moulding  of  the  child  which  became  the  father  of  the  man.  This  is  the 
true  reason  for  the  association  of  their  names  with  his.  (3)  In  this  view  there  is 
something  judicial  in  this  association  of  the  names  of  parents  arid  child.  Their  in- 
fluence, though  obscure,  was  sure,  and  now  finds  expression.  What  an  expression 
will  there  be  of  obscure  influences  when  the  momentous  resultants  come  out  in  the 
disclosures  of  the  great  judgment  I  3.  He  was  the  son  of  a  widow.  (1)  Why  is 
this  noted,  but  to  suggest  that  through  the  death  of  Nebat  the  responsibilities  of 
the  home  at  Zereda  early  devolved  upon  Jeroboam?  Thus,  those  executive  powers 
which  brought  him  imder  the  notice  of  Solomon  had  early  scope.  How  Uttle  we 
know  of  the  purposes  of  Providence  in  the  bereavements  and  afflictions  of  famUies ! 
(2)  Private  afflictions  are  suffered  for  public  uses.  In  suffering,  let  us  not  murmur, 
but  Usten  to  the  voice  of  God,  and  pray  that  the  dispensation  may  be  sanctified. 

II.  Hia  ADVANCEMENT  TO  POWER.  1.  He  became  a  mighty  mam  of  valour.  (1) 
This  fact  is  recorded,  but  not  the  stages  by  which  he  became  so  known.  Many 
a  struggle  occurred  which  had  no  other  record  than  in  this  resultant.  The  value 
of  circumstances  is  expressed  in  resultants.  Let  us  attempt  to  weave  all  the 
circumstances  of  our  hves  into  a  character  of  goodness  that  will  endure  for  ever. 
(2)  Jeroboam  had  an  energetic  spirit  and  probably  a  lobnst  physique.  These  he 
inherited.  Neither  for  genius  nor  good  constitutions  are  we  indebted  to  ourselves. 
We  owe  much  to  our  ancestors.  (3)  But  he  cultivated  his  natural  parts.  Many 
are  richly  endowed  by  nature,  but  waste  their  endowments  as  an  idle  spendthrift 
wastes  an  inheritance.  Our  very  faculties  may  become  obhterated  by  disuse 
(Matt.  XXV.  28).  2.  Sis  abilities  were  discerned  by  Solomon,  (1)  This  is  noted 
to  have  occurred  ia  connection  with  the  building  of  MiUo,  and  the  closing  of,  or  to 
close,  the  breaches  in  the  city  of  David  (ver.  27).  Possibly  Jeroboam  distinguished 
himself  against  Jebusites,  or  some  other  malcontents,  or  in  closing  those  breaches 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  (2)  Possibly  the  industry  that  attracted  the  notice  of 
Solomon  may  have  been  simply  in  superintendence  of  improvements  in  the  buildings 
at  MiUo  and  the  fortifications.  Providence  finds  opportunities  for  those  who  are 
ready  to  enter  the  opening  door  (Prov.  xxii.  29).  8.  He  was  promoted  to  the 
charge  over  the  house  of  Joseph.  (1)  From  an  individual  once  lost  in  the  multitude 
of  this  great  house,  he  is  now  conspicuous  before  the  multitude.  His  being  an 
Ephrathite  is  now  of  importance  to  him.  Let  us  never  quarrel  with  circumstances, 
for  we  never  know  what  may  prove  of  service.  (2)  Being  found  diligent  in  a 
minor  charge  he  is  promoted  to  a  major  responsibility.  So  does  God  deal  with 
His  people  (Matt.  xiii.  12  ;  xxv.  29).  What  is  worth  doing  is  worth  doing  welL  4. 
'Now  he  lifts  his  hand  agamst  his  patron.  (1)  Prosperity  brings  out  the  character. 
He  is  moved  by  ambition.  Much  would  have  more.  He  aspires  to  a  throne.  His 
success  had  encouraged  this  desire  before  he  met  AMjah  (see  ver.  87).  (2)  He 
rebels  against  the  author  of  his  prosperity.  Ambition  smothers  gratitude.  How 
human  1  Is  not  this  the  case  with  all  rebels  against  God  ?  (8)  How  plainly  we 
can  see  baseness  when  manifested  by  man  toward  his  fellow ;  but  how  slow  we 
are  to  see  this  when  ingratitude  is  toward  God  I 


OH.  XI.  14—48.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  243 

The  obscurity  of  our  origin  is  no  hex  to  our  adyanoement  in  the  religious  service 
of  God.    "  Not  many  noble  are  called."— M. 

Vers.  29 — 89. — The  Message  of  Ahijdh.  As  Jeroboam  went  out  of  Jerusalem 
with  his  comiuission  from  Solomon  to  rule  as  his  lieutenant  over  the  house  of 
Joseph,  meditating  how  he  might  use  his  fortune  to  construct  a  throne,  he  was  met 
by  Ahijah  the  ShUonite,  who  accosted  him  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  Ids  ambition. 
In  the  message  of  Ahijah  we  have — 

I.  A  PROPHECY.  1.  This  was  expressed  in  st^rt.  (1)  The  Shilonite  provided  him- 
self with  a  new  garment.  This  was  intended  to  symbolize  the  kingdom.  The 
same  sign  had  been  similarly  used  before  (see  1  Sam.  xv.  27 ;  xxiv.  5).  Note :  His 
people  are  the  honourable  clothing  of  a  prmce  (see  Proy.  xiv.  28).  (^  The  garment 
was  new.  The  kingdom  of  Israel  was  as  yet  young.  Solomon  was  but  the  third 
monarch  in  succession.  The  garment  was  whole.  So  was  the  kingdom,  as  yet| 
nnbroken.  Note :  The  robe  of  Christ  was  seamless  and  woven  throughout,  which 
suggests  the  perfect  unity  which  will  appear  in  the  subjects  of  His  heavenly  kingdom. 
Note  further:  That  in  His  transfiguration,  which  symbolized  His  kingdom  (see 
Matt.  xvi.  28 ;  xvii.  1),  His  raiment  shined  "as  no  fuller  on  earth  could  white  it," 
suggesting  the  purity  and  glory  in  which  the  subjects  of  that  kingdom  are  to  shine 
(Matt.  xiii.  48).  (B)  But  Ihe  robe  in  the  hands  of  the  prophet,  the  messenger  and 
representative  of  Grod,  is  now  rent  into  twelve  pieces,  according  to  the  number  of 
tribes  composing  the  kingdom,  ten  of  which  were  given  into  the  hand  of  Jeroboam. 
Note:  God  disposes.  In  its  mihtant  state  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  subject  to 
revolutions,  but  not  so  in  its  triumphant  and  heavenly  state.  2.  The  prophecy  also 
is  expressed  in  words  (vers.  81 — 89).  (1)  Thus  the  testimony  is  twofold.  It 
appeals  to  the  eye,  also  to  the  ear.  (2)  History  verified  the  predictions  to  th« 
letter.  What  a  testimony  to  the  truth  of  God  is  the  harmony  and  correspondence 
of  prophecy  and  history  I 

II.  Its  reasons.  These  are  expressed  and  implied.  1.  The  sin  of  Solomon  ii 
specified  (vers.  81,  83).  (1)  Solomon  forsook  the  Lord.  God  never  forsakes  us 
imless  we  first  forsake  Him.  Let  us  be  admonished.  (2)  He  worshipped  idols. 
Ashtoreth,  the  impure  Venus  of  the  Zidonians ;  Chemosh,  the  abomination  of  the 
Moabites ;  and  MUcom,  or  Molech,  the  devil  of  the  Ammonites,are  put  into  compe- 
tition with  the  God  of  Israel !  Whoever  is  so  fooUsh  as  to  forsake  God  wUl  surely 
become  the  dupe  of  devils.  (8)  We  notice  the  plural  pronoun,  "  they  have  forsaken 
Me,"  &o.  Not  Solomon  and  his  wives,  for  these  heathen  women  had  never  known 
God ;  but  Solomon  and  the  Israelites  drawn  away  by  his  influence  and  example. 
Men  seldom  sin  alone.  Accomplices  are  involved  with  their  leaders  in  a  common 
retribution.  (4)  He  forgat  the  good  example  of  his  father  David.  This  is  mentioned 
to  his  discredit.  We  are  accountable  to  God  for  our  advantages.  For  godly 
parents,  godly  ministers,  opportunities.  2.  The  piety  of  David  is  remembered. 
(1)  It  is  remembered  in  the  mind  of  God.  Let  sincere  Christians  who  are  apt  to  be 
discouraged  at  their  failures  take  comfort  from  the  fact  that  God  is  more  wiUing  to 
remember  our  good  endeavours  than  oxa  failures.  David  in  glory  would  know  the 
blessedness  of  this.  (2)  It  is  remembered  to  the  advantage  of  his  offspring  on  the 
earth.  The  temporal  judgments  upon  Solomon's  sins  were  mitigated  in  conse- 
quence of  David's  piety.  Would  not  David,  in  glory,  have  satisfaction  in  this? 
8.  The  Scriptures  must  be  fulfilled.  (1)  David  was  to  have  a  hght  always  before 
God  in  Jerusalem  (Psa.  oxxxii.  16,  17).  The  family  of  David  must  be  preserved 
until  Messiah  comes  to  be  the  Light  of  the  Gentiles.  (2)  As  David  was  a  type  of 
Christ,  so  was  Jerusalem,  vrith  its  temple  and  shekiuah,  a  type  of  His  Church.  Of 
this  Church,  Christ  is  the  everlasting  Light  (see  Isa.  xxiv.  23 ;  Ix.  19,  20 ;  Bev.  zzi. 
23).  4.  No  mention  is  made  of  any  goodness  in  Jerohoa/m.  (1)  This  omission  is 
significant.  It  suggests  that  the  Fphrathite  was  used  only  as  the  instrument  of 
Providence  for  the  punishment  of  sinners  ;  and  for  this  service  had  the  reward  of 
his  ambition.  Therefore  the  success  of  awe  desires  in  this  world  is  no  certain  proof 
either  of  our  goodness  or  of  God's  favour.  (2)  But  in  respect  to  his  service  God 
gave  Jeroboam  a  glorious  opportunity  by  goodness  to  make  himself  great  like 


244  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xi.  14—43. 

David  (see  ver.  38).     What  opportunities  does  God  graciously  Yoaohaafe  to  nil 
Let  us  utilize  them  to  the  best  possible  account. — M. 

¥ers.  40 — 48. — Solomon's  End.  There  is  peculiar  interest  attaching  to  the  earlier 
and  later  days  of  men  who  have  made  a  figure  in  history.  Here  we  have  the  brief 
record  of  the  end  of  a  character  famed  for  wisdom  above  aU  mere  men,  upon  which 
we  have  sadly  to  meditate  that — 

I.  He  sank  under  a  dense  OLono.  1.  His  morning  wot  very  bright.  (1)  From 
his  youth  he  was  beloved  of  God.  In  token  of  this  he  received  from  God  the  name 
Jedidiah  (2  Sam.  xii.  24,  25).  Could  any  distinction  be  more  glorious  ?  Let  the 
young  among  us  aspire  to  this  distinction.  (2)  When  he  came  to  the  throne  tliis 
name  was  changed  to  Solomon,  the  Peaceable.  The  wars  of  his  father  David  were 
everywhere  so  triumphant,  that  no  adversary  now  appeared  (oh.  v.  4).  The  love  of 
God  brings  peace.  (3)  He  was  zealous  and  faithful  in  building  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  which  he  devoted  to  God  in  a  noble  dedicatory  prayer,  and  had  an  answer  in 
the  descent  of  the  holy  fire  upon  the  sacrifices,  and  in  the  Shekinah  taking  pos- 
session of  the  house.  Those  who  are  beloved  of  God  and  rejoice  in  His  peace  are  fit 
agents  for  the  building  of  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  Lord.  (4)  He  was  blessed  by 
God  with  extraordinary  wisdom,  not  only  in  the  arts  of  government,  but  also  in 
various  walks  of  learning  (1  Kings  iii.  8 — 10 ;  iv.  83).  The  profoundest  philosophers 
have  been  godly  men.  The  boast  of  sceptics  to  the  contrary  is  not  sustained  by 
fact.  (6)  He  was  inspired  by  God  to  contribute  books  to  the  sacred  Scriptures. 
The  Chaldaisms  which  occur  in  the  Eoclesiastes  are  not  sufficient  to  wrest  the 
authorship  of  that  book  from  Solomon,  to  whom  the  Jews  have  ever  ascribed  it ; 
for  these  it  may  have  acquired  in  passing  through  the  hands  of  Ezra.  2.  But  hii 
evening  was  very  black.  (1)  His  reign  extended  over  forty  years,  and  a  considerable 
portion  of  that  period  he  was  under  bad  influences.  Pharaoh's  daughter  is  thought 
to  have  been  a  proselyte  to  Judaism,  but  of  this  there  is  no  proof.  (2)  This  foreign 
marriage  was  followed  by  about  seven  hundred  more.  These  were  distinguished  as 
princesses  (ver.  3).  Not  that  they  were  daughters  of  kings,  but  wives  of  Solomon, 
of  the  second  order,  Pharaoh's  daughter  being  queen.  Beside  these  were  the  three 
hundred  concubines.  Such  a  harem,  in  its  nimiber  alone,  was  a  plain  violation  of 
the  law  (Deut.  xvii.  17).  But  he  was  stiU  further  guilty  in  making  alliances  with 
heathen  women  (Exod.  xxxiv.  16;  Deut.  vii.  8,  4).  (3)  The  very  evils  predicted 
happened  to  Solomon ',  through  these  he  was  drawn  into  the  grossest  idolatry  (vers. 
S — 8).  (4)  The  last  act  recorded  of  him  was  that  of  seeking  to  kill  Jeroboam,  who 
to  avoid  his  resentment  took  refuge  with  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt.  Shishak  was 
brother-in-law  to  Hadad,  the  Edomite  adversary  of  Solomon,  but  not  the  father  of 
Solomon's  wife,  as  some  have  supposed.  If,  as  the  narrative  suggests,  this  design 
upon  the  life  of  Jeroboam  was  in  consequence  of  his  knowledge  of  the  prophecy  of 
Ahijah,  it  was  an  evidence  of  extreme  wickedness,  for  it  was  fighting  against  God. 
It  was  the  veiy  sin  of  Saul  against  his  father  David.  And  in  this  purpose  he  seems 
to  have  persisted  to  his  death  ;  for  Jeroboam  remained  in  Egypt  until  that  event. 
How  fearful  are  the  evils  of  apostasy  1     How  admonitory  I 

II.  But  is  theee  no  sunshine  in  the  cloud  ?  Some  think  they  see  it — 1.  In 
the  promise  of  God  to  Damd.  (1)  The  promise  referred  to  is  recorded  2  Sam.  vii. 
12 — 17.  But  was  not  Solomon,  who  was  chastened  wiQi  the  rod  of  men  by  Hadad, 
Bezon,  and  Jeroboam,  the  subject  of  the  mercy  of  God,  in  that  his  family  was  con- 
tinued in  the  throne  of  Judah  ?  In  this  he  was  distinguished  from  Saul,  whoso 
succession  was  cut  off.  (2)  Unless  this  answer  can  be  shown  to  be  insufficient,  the 
Calvinistic  argument  based  upon  this  text  for  the  infaUible  final  perseverance  of  the 
saints  is  simply  a  begging  of  the  question.  2.  In  the  Divine  approval  of  the  reign 
of  Solomon.  (1)  The  passage  relied  upon  in  this  statement  is  2  Chron.  xi.  17. 
But  when  the  commencement  of  the  rule  of  Behoboam  in  Judah,  for  three  years,  is 
commended  as  according  to  the  example  of  David  and  Solomon,  the  allusion,  as  far 
as  Solomon  is  concerned  at  least,  was  to  the  manner  in  which  he  commenced  his 
reign.  (2)  This  is  sufficient  for  the  consistency  of  the  text.  To  make  it  prove  more 
would  make  it  prove  too  much  by  committing  God  to  the  approval  of  what  He  has 


OH.  XI.  14—43.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  846 

elBewliere  explicitly  oondemned.  (3)  Rehoboam,  who  as  king  of  Jndah,  liie  hi« 
father  Solomon,  began  his  reign  well,  fell  into  the  snare  of  Solomon  in  multiplying 
wives  (see  2  Chron.  zi.  21).  3.  In  his  cmthorsMp  of  the  Ecclesiastes.  (1)  The 
argument  is  that  upon  the  message  of  God,  by  Ahijah,  as  is  supposed  (vers.  9—13), 
Solomon  repented,  and  afterwards  wrote  this  book,  in  which  he  confesses  the  vanity 
of  his  past  fife.  (2)  But  the  theory  of  his  repentance  upon  that  occasion  ill  consorts 
with  the  history  of  his  seeking  the  life  of  Jeroboam,  because  he  was  destined  to  give 
effect  to  the  burden  of  that  message.  True  repentance  will  bear  meet  fruit  (Matt. 
iii.  8).  (3)  The  Ecclesiastes  was  more  probably  written  before  than  after  the 
apostasy  of  Solomon.  The  allusions  to  his  experiences  as  "  king  over  Israel  in 
Jerusalem  "  may  have  been  prophetic  anticipations,  which  may  explain  the  past 
tense,  "  was  king,"  which  is  agreeable  to  the  prophetic  style.  When  aU  has  been 
said  that  can  be  alleged  to  encourage  hope  in  Solomon's  end,.the  doubt  is  grave 
enough  to  instruct  us  that  we  must  not  presume  upon  God's  mercy,  and  sin.  Let 
us  rather  hope  in  His  mercy,  repent,  and  sin  no  more.  Praise  God  for  the  Great 
Atonement  I — M, 

Vers.  14 — 26. — The  Divine  Chastisements.  I.  Chastisement  is  meect.  Though 
the  judgment  was  kept  back,  Solomon  was  meanwhile  made  to  feel  the  rod  of  cor- 
rection. We  may  be  forgiven  and  yet  chastised — yea,  chastised  because  we  are 
forgiven.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth,"  &c.  This,  too, 
was  mercy,  for — 1.  It  was  fitted  to  lead  him  to  seele  Ood  in  truth.  It  is  easier  to 
feel  and  confess  our  folly  and  sin  in  adversity  than  when  all  is  well  with  us,  2. 
It  revealed  to  him  the  hind  of  ha/rvest  he  had  prepwred  for  his  child.  He  was 
now  reaping  the  finiits  of  his  father's  fierce  vengeance  (see  ver.  15).  The  story 
recorded  on  the  page  of  Scripture  was  then  on  Israel's  lips  and  in  Solomon's 
thoughts.  When  God  visits  for  sin,  the  iniquity  of  the  past  is  rememb  ered.  Sins 
are  seeds  that  produce  harvests  of  trouble  for  those  who  come  after  us;  and 
Solomon's  reaping  the  fruit  of  his  father's  deeds  must  have  set  before  him  the 
legacy  of  judgment  he  was  bequeathing  to  his  own  son.  And  yet  Solomon  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  benefited.    Are  we  reading  the  lessons  of  our  cha  stisements  f 

II.  OuB  ENEMIES  ABB  God's  insteumbnts.  1.  When  they  assail  us  it  is  of  Him. 
The  Lord  stirred  them  up.  They  had  been  adversaries  before,  but  they  had 
hitherto  been  powerless  to  harm  Israel  (see  ver.  4).  But  now  in  Solomon's  fall  the 
day  of  their  opportunity  came.  Our  foes  are  held  as  in  a  leash  by  God.  Without 
His  permission  they  can  attempt  nothing :  when  they  are  loosed  it  is  of  H  im.  They 
serve  Him  and  in  the  truest  sense  serve  us.  In  the  midst  of  evil  de»jds  and  evil 
speech  let  us  look  past  all  to  Him.  2.  God's  restrainmg  hand  is  still  upon  them. 
Though  Hadad  and  Eezon  attempted  more,  they  were  not  permitted  to  succeed.  So 
far  as  they  may  serve  us  they  are  allowed  to  go,  but  no  farther. — U. 

Vers.  26 — i^.— The  call  to  Jeroloam.  I.  The  UNWEAEiEt  efpoets  of  God  to 
win  men  fob  eighteottsness.  This  is  the  beginning  of  the  stoiy  of  J  eroboam  the 
son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin.  1.  He  is  met  by  mercy.  The  widow's  son 
is  made  king  of  Israel.  2.  By  counsel  and  promise  (ver.  38).  The  seed  is  cast 
upon  the  stony  ground  and  among  the  thorns,  as  well  as  upon  the  good  soil. 
Learn — 1.  That,  like  the  great  husbandman,  we  should  sow  the  seed  of  the  kingdom 
ererywhere ;  though  men  may  not  hear,  God  is  served  and  glorified  in  that  offered 
mercy.  2.  It  is  no  proof  that  all  is  well  with  us,  that  we  have  been  th  e  recipients 
of  God's  goodness,  or  that  His  Word  has  touched  and  searched  our  heart :  is  there 
•ny  firuit  7 

IL  The  spibii  bequibed  in  oedee  to  bbap  lasting  benefit  fbom  o  thees'  dis- 
ASTEBS.  1.  Sympathy  with  them  in  their  suffering.  The  judgment  which  is  to 
fall  upon  Solomon  and  Israel  is  laid  upon  Jeroboam's  heart.  He  went  out  clothed 
with  a  new  garment,  he  returned  with  a  handful  of  fragments,  the  symbol  of  the 
new  kingdom  and  the  effect  of  God's  judgment.  We  cannot  rightly  enter  into 
blessing  springing  from  another's  loss  if  we  pass  in  with  a  light  heart.  2.  Recognition 
ef  them  as  still  objects  of  Divine  mercy  (vers.  34, 36).    The  house  of  David  wm  not 


249  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [cb.  xi.  14—43. 

to  l)e  utterly  cast  out.  The  love  that  !;:iii1es  on  us  is  still  round  them.  8.  Becognition 
that  the  gift  we  receive  is  from  the  hand  of  the  same  Master.  Blessmg  and  judg- 
ment liaug  for  him  upon  the  same  issues  (vers.  83,  38).  Only  in  lowliness  and 
brotherliness  can  we  rightly  receive  the  gifts  God  sends  us. 

III.  The  impossibility  op  thwarting  the  Divine  purpose  (ver.  40).  1  Solo- 
mon's attempt  to  remove  the  danger  by  slaying  Jerohoa/m  is  defeated.  His  life  is 
guarded  till  his  work  is  done.  2.  It  only  serves  the  Divine  pv/rpose,  Jeroboam's 
enmity  is  secured.  He  is  sent  down  to  Egypt  and  strenglhened  by  alliance  with 
a  power  unfriendly  to  Israel.  Fighting  against  God,  we  only  bind  our  cords  the 
more  firmly,  we  kick  against  the  pricks.  To  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand 
of  God  will  bring  us  into  the  Ught  of  mercy :  to  contend  with  Him  is  destruction. — U. 

Ver.  28. — The  Successful  Ma/n.  Among  the  "  adversaries  "  of  Solomon,  Jeroboam 
was  the  most  active.  He  raised  sedition,  or,  in  the  words  of  Scripture,  "lifted  up 
his  hand,"  against  the  king.  He  was  of  humble  birth,  but  belonged  to  the  most 
powerful  tribe — Ephraim.  His  rise  is  described  here.  The  fortifications  of  Miilo 
'onderneath  the  citadel  of  Zion  were  being  erected.  Amongst  those  employed  Jero- 
boam was  noticed  by  the  king  as  strong,  skilful,  and  industrions.  Ever  on  the  out- 
look for  talent,  and  with  wisdom  to  discern  it,  Solomon  made  him  superintendent 
of  the  tribute  required  in  money  and  service  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim ;  a  place  of 
trust  and  profit.  Jeroboain  is  a  good  example  of  wokldlv  success,  the  subject  for 
our  consideration. 

1,  The  elements  of  worldlt  success.  1.  Natural  abiUty.  This  belonged  to 
the  son  of  Nebat  in  large  measure,  as  his  subsequent  history  shows.  Shrewdness, 
courage,  self-reliance  were  his.  These,  and  similar  gifts,  are  unevenly  distributed 
Amongst  men.  Children  at  school  are  by  no  means  equal  in  powers  of  attainment. 
In  business,  one  man  wiU  make  a  fortune  where  another  would  not  suspect  a  ohanoe. 
Amongst  the  advantages  of  such  inequality  are  these :  that  the  higher  and  lower 
grades  of  work  required  by  the  world  are  alike  done  ;  and  that  room  is  given  for 
the  exercise  of  generosity,  self-conquest,  &o.,  in  our  social  relations. 

2.  Personal  diligence.  With  all  Jeroboam's  faults  he  was  not  idle.  He  did 
thoroughly  and  well  what  came  to  hand.  This  is  the  secret  of  success,  both  in 
student  and  business  hfe.  It  rectifies  the  balance  sometimes  between  men  of  un- 
equal abihty.  The  tortoise  wins  the  race  against  the  hare.  The  student  conquers 
the  genius.  Where  it  is  added  to  ability,  success  in  life  is  certain.  "  Seest  thou  a 
man  dihgent  in  his  business?  he  shaU  stand  before  kings:  be  shall  not  stand  before 
mean  men"  (Prov.  xxii.  29).  "The  hand  of  the  diligent  shaU  bear  rule"  (Prov. 
zii.  24).  Examples :  Abraham's  servant ;  Joseph  in  Egypt,  &c.  Show  how  this  is 
true  in  the  higher  sphere  of  the  Christian  life.  "  To  hun  that  hath  to  him  shall  be 
given,"  &c.     He  that  is  faithful  with  few  things  wiU  become  ruler  over  many, 

8.  Kindly  interest.  "  Solomon  saw  the  young  man."  This  added  an  element  of 
uncertainty  to  his  prospects.  It  seemed  a  chance,  but  was  under  the  rule  of  God,  as 
the  history  shows.  Diligence  and  fidelity  should  be  ours,  whether  or  no  we  have 
the  notice  of  the  earthly  master,  for  the  unseen  King  is  ever  watching  us.  We  are 
to  work  with  singleness  of  heart,  as  unto  the  Lord  ;  to  serve  others  "  not  with  eye 
service  as  men  pleasers,"  &c.  Show  the  responsibility  which  rests  on  employers  to 
develop,  and  encourage,  and  put  to  the  best  use  the  gifts  of  their  miployei.  Pro- 
motion should  follow  merit. 

II.  The  possibilities  op  wokldly  success.  1.  It  it  possible  to  defend  othen. 
Jeroboam  was  known  in  future  times  of  danger  as  the  man  who  "  enclosed  the  city 
of  David."  Higher  possibilities  than  that  belong  to  successful  men.  How  they  can 
guard  those  employed  by  them  from  disease,  fi:om  moral  contamination,  from 
ignorance,  &c.     The  responsibilities  of  landowners,  manufacturers,  &c. 

2.  It  is  possible  to  lighten  the  burdens  of  others.  As  ruler  over  the  tribute, 
Jeroboam  could  alleviate  or  aggravate  the  burdens  of  the  tribe.  Point  out  what 
could  be  done  by  far-seeing,  right-hearted  statesmen  to  lessen  the  troubles  of  the 
poor,  the  miseries  of  subject  races,  the  burdens  of  taxation,  &o. 

3.  /(  is  possible  to  becom.e  ready  for  loftier  rule.    He  who  was  the  overseer  of 


OH.  XL  14—48.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  847 

one  tribe  liecame  the  king  of  Israel.  The  discharge  of  the  duties  of  the  former 
office  made  those  of  the  latter  less  arduous.  Apply  this  to  the  preparation  of  men 
for  the  nobler  rule  of  heaven,  by  the  exercise  of  powers  for  God  in  the  earthly  sphere. 

III.  The  perils  of  worldly  success.  1.  Ingratitude.  Jeroboam  fostered  ill- 
feeling  against  Solomon  in  Ephraim  till  he  was  expelled  the  kingdom.  Men  often 
kick  away  the  ladder  by  which  they  rose  to  fortune.  Give  examples.  The  wsh  to 
forget  the  past  in  which  they  wanted  help,  and  to  attribute  to  their  own  skill  what 
oame  from  the  kindness  of  others,  tempts  to  this.  Even  poor  parents  have  been 
loft  uncared  for  by  prosperous  children. 

2.  Impatience.  Jeroboam  was  to  have  the  kingdom,  as  Ahijah  told  him,  but  he 
could  not  wait  for  Solomon's  death.  His  first  exaltation  and  the  words  of  the 
prophet  aroused  greed  and  ambition  which  would  not  be  stayed.  A  man  who  has 
known  nothing  but  success  is  more  impatient  than  are  others  at  a  disappointment 
or  difficulty.  It  is  harder  for  him  than  for  one  trained  in  the  school  of  adversity  to 
say,  "  Not  my  wiU,  but  Thine  be  done."  His  is  seldom  the  "  meek  and  quiet  spirit " 
which  is,  in  the  sight  of  God,  of  great  price. 

8.  Behellion  agamst  God.  He  heard  from  Ahijah's  lips  these  words  of  God 
about  Solomon — "  I  will  make  him  prince  aU  the  days  of  his  life ; "  yet  during  his 
life  Jeroboana  tried  to  dethrone  him.  Compare  this  conduct  with  that  of  David 
towards  Saul.  The  contrast  is  the  more  remarkable  because  of  the  provocation 
David  received,  and  because  the  son  of  Jesse,  unlike  the  son  of  Nebat,  had  been 
actually  anointed  king.  He  had  no  right  to  seize  what  God  had  promised  to  give. 
Jacob  learnt  this  lesson  in  the  house  of  Laban.  In  this  disregard,  or  defiance,  oi 
God  was  the  germ  of  Jeroboam's  ruin.  His  rule  was  (like  Solomon's)  conditional 
on  obedience  to  the  Divine  wiU  (compare  ver.  38  with  ix.  4 — 6).  Stability  depends 
on  God  ;  the  seen  on  the  unseen.  No  cleverness,  no  diligence,  no  human  help  can 
bring  lasting  prosperity  to  a  soul,  or  to  a  nation,  which  forsakes  righteousness  and 
forgets  God. — A.  R. 

Vers.  29—86;  ohs.  xiv.  21—81;  xvi.  1,  2,  25,  26. — The  judgments  of  Qod  on 
Judah  and  Israel  from,  the  death  of  Solomon  to  the  time  of  Ahah.  The  separation 
of  the  people  of  God  into  two  kingdoms  was  a  punishment  for  the  idolatry  ol 
Solomon  ;  but  from  this  punishment  God  brought  forth  good,  for  it  was  well  that 
the  pride  of  the  Jews  should  not  be  fostered  by  unmixed  prosperity.  It  would  have 
formed  a  far  stronger  barrier  to  the  gospel  in  after  times  if  it  had  not  been  thus 
early  broken. 

After  the  separation  of  the  two  kingdoms,  idolatry  more  or  less  gross  prevailed 
in  both,  with  brief  intervals  of  return  to  the  worship  of  the  true  God.  This  fearful 
moral  declension  is  traceable  to  a  great  extent  to  the  fiiU  of  Solomon.  Sin  is  thus 
always  the  parent  of  after  evil.  He  who  rebels  against  God  leaves  behind  him  the 
influence  of  his  example,  and  gives  fresh  force  to  the  current  of  evil.  God  made 
both  kingdoms  feel,  during  this  period,  repeated  strokes  of  His  chastising  hand. 
Their  history  is  a  history  of  tears  and  blood.  Every  fresh  sin,  the  bitter  outgrowth 
of  former  transgressions,  becomes  a  source  of  new  calamities.  The  hard  Asiatic 
tyranny  of  Behoboam  leads  to  the  rending  of  the  kingdom.  The  erection  of  a 
half-pagan  sanctuary  entails  upon  Jeroboam  and  his  race  the  catastrophes  which 
issue  in  their  ruin. 

The  history  of  the  Jews  during  this  period,  therefore,  presents  the  aspect  of  one 
long  judgment  of  God,  in  which  sin  brings  forth  death  and  thus  becomes  its  own 
punishment  (James  i.  15).  This  is  true  also  in  the  history  of  individuals ;  and  we 
nave  in  tliis  fact  one  of  the  strongest  evidences  that  we  are  under  the  government 
of  a  holy  God.  Let  us  never  forget  that  His  holiness  is  at  the  same  time  love,  and 
that  through  all  the  dark  and  sorrowfal  vicissitudes  of  our  life  He  is  carrjang  out 
His  plan  of  mercy.  In  spite  of  all  its  falls,  its  wanderings,  and  its  woes,  Israel  did 
fulfil  its  preparatory  mission.  If  in  the  end  the  theocracy  tottered  to  its  fall,  this 
failure  also  entered  into  the  conditions  of  the  Divine  plan.  Israel  was  never  treated 
by  God,  however,  as  a  mere  passive  instrument.  God  gave  it  repeated  warnings, 
as,  for  example,  by  the  mouth  of  tlie  unKnown  prophet  who  was  sent  to  Jeroboam 
to  declare  to  him  the  judgments  of  God  (ch.  xiii.) — E.  de  P. 


248 


THE  riEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xn.  1 — 24 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  Xn.  1—24. 


The  revolt  of  the  ten  tbibes. — ^With 
tie  reign  of  Eehoboam,  on  which  our  hiB- 
torian  now  enters,  we  begin  the  second 
great  period  in  the  history  of  the  Hebrew 
monarchy,  so  far  as  it  is  related  in  these 
Books  of  Kings.  The  first,  which  com- 
prises the  Augustan  age  of  Israel,  the  short- 
lived maturity  of  the  race  in  the  reign  of 
Solomon,  has  extended  over  forty  years, 
from  B.o.  1015  to  b.o.  976.  The  second, 
which  is  the  period  of  the  existence  of  the 
two  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah  side  by 
aide — that  is  to  say,  from  the  disruption  to 
the  carrying  away  of  Israel  into  captivity — 
extends  over  two  centuries  and  a  half,  viz., 
from  B.C.  975  to  B.o.  722,  and  is,  with  few 
exceptions,  a  period  of  steady  and  shameful 
decline. 

And  in  giving  his  account  of  the  division 
of  the  kingdom,  onr  historian,  vtore  suo, 
confines  himself  to  the  recital  of  actual  facts, 
and  hardly  speaks  of  their  hidden  causes. 
Tet  the  sixteenth  verse  of  this  chapter 
reveals  to  as  very  clearly  one  of  the  secret 
springs  of  the  dissatisfaction  which  existed 
at  the  date  of  Behoboam's  accession,  one  of 
the  influences  which  ultimately  led  to  the 
disruption  of  Israel.  Jealousy  on  the  part  of 
Ephraim  of  the  powerful  tribe  of  Judah  had 
undoubtedly  something  to  do  with  the  revo- 
lution of  which  we  now  read.  The  discon- 
tent occasioned  by  Solomon's  levies  and  the 
headstrong  folly  of  Eehoboam  were  the  im- 
mediate causes,  but  influences  much  deeper 
and  of  longer  standing  were  also  at  work. 
The  tribe  of  Ephiaim  had  clearly  never 
thoroughly  acquiesced  in  the  superiority 
which  its  rival,  the  tribe  of  Judah,  by 
furnishing  to  the  nation  its  sovereigns, 
its  seat  of  government,  and  its  sanctuary, 
had  attained.  During  the  two  former  reigns 
the  envy  of  Ephraim  had  been  held  in  check, 
bnt  it  was  there,  and  it  only  needed  an  occa- 
sion, such  as  Eehoboam  afforded  it,  to  blaze 
forth.  That  proud  tribe  could  not  forget 
the  glowing  words  in  which  both  Jacob 
(Gen.  xlix.  22—26,  "the  strength  of  my 
hrad  ")  and   Moses  (Dent,  xxxiii.  13 — 17) 


had  foretold  their  future  eminenM.  They 
remembered,  too,  that  their  position — ^in  the 
very  centre  of  the  land — ^was  also  the  richest 
in  all  natural  advantages.  Compared  with 
their  picturesque  and  fertile  possessions,  the 
territory  of  Judah  was  as  a  stony  wUdemess. 
And  for  a  long  time  they  had  enjoyed  a 
certain  superiority  in  the  nation.  In  the 
time  of  Joshua  we  find  them  fully  consoious 
of  their  strength  and  numbers  (Josh,  zvii. 
14),  and  the  leader  himself  admits  their 
power  (ver.  17).  When  the  tabernacle  was 
first  set  up,  it  was  at  Shiloh,  in  the  territory 
of  Ephraim  (Josh,  xviil  1),  and  there  the  ark 
remained  for  more  than  three  hundred  years. 
And  the  pre-eminence  of  Ephraim  amongst 
the  northern  tribes  is  enriously  evidenced 
by  the  way  in  which  it  twice  resented 
(Judg.  viii.  1 ;  xii.  1)  campaigns  ondertaken 
without  its  sanction  and  co-operation.  It 
and  its  sister  tribe  of  Manasseh  had  fur- 
nished, down  to  the  time  of  David,  the 
leaders  and  commanders  of  the  people — 
Joshua,  Deborah,  Gideon,  Abimelech,  and 
Samuel—  and  when  the  kingdom  was  estab- 
lished it  was  from  the  allied  tribe  of  Senja- 
min  that  the  first  monarch  was  selected. 
"  It  was  natural  that,  with  such  an  inherit- 
ance of  glory,  Ephraim  always  chafed  under 
any  rival  supremacy  "(Stanley,"  Jew.  Ch."ii. 
p.  272).  It  was  natural,  too,  that  for  seven 
years  it  should  refuse  allegiance  to  a  prince 
of  the  rival  house  of  Judah.  Even  when,  at 
the  end  of  that  time,  the  elders  of  Israel 
recognized  David  as  "king  over  IsraeP' 
(2  Sam.  V.  8),  the  fires  of  jealousy,  as 
the  revolt  of  Sheba  and  the  curses  of 
Shimei  alike  show,  were  not  wholly  extin- 
guished. And  the  transference  of  the 
sanctuary,  as  well  as  the  sceptre,  to  Judah 
— for  Jerusalem,  whilst  mainly  in  the 
territory  of  Benjamin,  was  also  on  the 
border  of  Judah — wonld  occasion  fresh 
heart-burnings.  It  has  been  supposed  by 
some  that  Fsa.  Ixxviii.  was  penned  as  a 
warning  to  Ephraim  against  rebellion,  and 
to  reconcile  them  to  their  loss  of  place  and 
power;  that,  if  so,  it  was  not  effectual,  and 
that  the  jealousy  endured  at  a  much  later 
date  Isaiah  xi.  13  shows.     There  had  prob< 


CH.  xn.  1 — 24.1 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


249 


ably  been  an  attempt  on  the  part  of 
Jeroboam  the  Ephraimite  to  stir  up  hia 
and  the  neighbouring  tribes  against  the 
ascendanoy  of  Judah  in  the  person  of 
Solomon.  That  first  attempt  proved 
abortive.  But  now  that  their  magnificent 
king  was  dead,  now  that  the  reins  of 
government  were  held  by  his  weak  and 
foolish  son,  the  men  of  Ephraim  resolved, 
unless  they  could  wrest  from  him  very 
great  concessions,  to  brook  the  rule  of 
Judah  no  longer  and  to  have  a  king  of 
their  own  house.  (The  reader  will  find  a 
very  suggestive  chapter  on  this  subject  in 
Prof.  Blunt's  "Undesigned  Coincidenoes," 
pp.  162—174.) 

Yer.  1. — And  Rehoboam  [see  on  ch.  xi.  26, 
and  compare  the  name  EvpvStjfios.  The  name 
possibly  indicates  Solomon's  ambitious 
hopes  respecting  him.  The  irony  of  history 
alone  emphasizes  it.  Eccles.  ii.  18,  19 
would  seem  to  show  that  Solomon  himself 
had  misgivings  as  to  his  son's  abilities, 
"  As  the  greatest  persons  cannot  give  them- 
selves children,  so  the  wisest  cannot  give 
.  their  children  wisdom  "  (Hall).  His  mother 
was  Naamah,  an  Ammonitess  (ch.  xiv.  31) . 
It  would  appear  from  ch.  xiv.  21,  and  2 
Chron.  xii.  13,  that  he  was  41  years  of 
age  at  his  accession.  But  this  is,  to  say 
the  least,  doubtful.  For  (1)  he  is  described 
in  2  Chron.  xiii.  7  as  being  "  young  ("lyO) 
end  tender-hearted."  (2)  The  LXX.  addi- 
»  tion  to  1  Kings  zii.  24  says  he  was  sixteen ; 
mbq  i>v  iKKaideica  iruiv  iv  tS  PaaCKmuv  airov, 
(3)  It  is  hardly  probable  that  Solomon,  who 
was  himself  "young  and  tender"  at  his 
father's  death,  should  then  have  had  a  son 
a  year  old.  (4)  Eehoboam's  counsellors,  who 
had  "grown  up  with  him,"  and  were  there- 
fore of  the  same  age  as  himself,  are  called 

"  lads  "  (Dn^?,  LXX.  irmJdpio).  To  these 
reasons  Eawlinson  adds  a  fifth,  viz.,  "  that 
it  is  hardly  likely  that  David  would  have 
permitted  his  son  to  marry  an  Ammonitess, 
which  of  course  he  must  have  done,  if 
Rehoboam  was  bom  in  his  lifetime.  But 
it  should  be  remembered  that  David  had 
Idmself  married  a  foreign  princess,  Maaohah, 
daughter  of  Talmai,  king  of  Geshur  (1 
Chron.  iii.  2).  There  is  greater  force  in 
the  remark  that  Solomon's  marriages  with 
Ammonite  and  Moabite  women  belong 
apparently  to  a  later  period  of  his  life  (ch. 
xi.  1).  Altogether  the  evidence  seems  to 
point  to  a  corruption  of  the  text  of  oh. 
xiv.  21,  Ac,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that 
•'forty-one''  is  there  an  error  of  transcrip- 
tion for  "twenty-one,"  a  mistake  easily 


made,  if,  as  is  extremely  probable,  the 
ancient  Hebrews,  like  the  later,  used  the 
letters  of  the  alphabet  as  numerals.  Twenty- 
one  would  then  be  t<3  ;  forty-one  ND]  vent 
to  [This  journey  was  probably  made  soon 
after  a  prior  coronation  at  Jerusalem. 
According  to  the  LXX.  addition,  it  was  at 
least  a  year  after  his  accession]  Shechem 
[An  old  gathering  place  of  the  northern 
tribes  (Josh.  xxiv.  1).  Its  position,  in  the 
very  centre  of  Palestine,  fitted  it  for  this 
purpose.  ("Shechem  may  be  considered 
the  natural  capital  of  Palestine,"  Conder, 
p.  16.)  But  it  was  perhaps  primarily 
selected  because  it  was  the  capital  of 
Ephraim,  not  because  it  was  a  "national 
sauotuary  of  Israel "  (Wordsworth),  a  title 
to  which  it  has  but  little  claim.  It  bad 
once  before  furnished  Ephraim  with  a 
king  (Judg.  ix.  2).  We  learn  from  Joshua 
XX.  7  that  it  was  "  in  Mount  Ephraim ; " 
from  Judges  ix.  7  that  it  was  under  Mount 
Gerizim.  To  its  position  the  place  was,  no 
doubt,  indebted  for  its  name.  It  is  often 
said  to  be  doubtful  whether  the  place  was 
named  after  Shechem,  the  son  of  Hamor 
(Gen.  xxxiii.  18),  or  whether  this  prince 
took  his  name  from  the  place.  The  latter 
is,  no  doubt,  the  correct  view.  For  Shechem 
means  strictly,  not,  as  it  is  often  translated, 
the  "  shoulder,"  but  dorsi  pars  superior,  at 
perhaps  the  space  between  the  shoulder- 
blades   (as   is   proved   by   Job   xxxi.   22, 

"  Let  my  shoulder  fall,"  HDJB'B).  Henoe 
the  word  is  found  only  in  the  singular 
(see  Gesen.,  Thes.  iii.  p.  1407).  Now  any 
one  who  has  seen  the  vale  of  Shechem 
(Nabliis)  will  hardly  doubt  that  its  name 
is  due  to  its  resemblance  to  this  part  of  the 
body  (compare  "  Ezion-geber,"  oh.  ix.  26). 
The  town  lies  in  a  valley  between  the  two 
ridges  of  Ebal  and  Gerizim ;  of.  Jos.,  Ant.  iv. 
8.  44.  "  The  feet  of  these  mountains  where 
they  rise  from  the  town  [to  the  height  of  1000 
feet]  are  not  more  than  500  yards  apart." 
It  is  consequently  one  of  the  most  striking 
and  beautiful  spots  in  Palestine,  andthemore 
BO  as  its  perennial  supply  of  water  clothes 
it  with  perpetual  verdure.  For  its  history 
see  Gen.  xii.  6  ;  xxxiii.  18  ;  xxxiv. ;  xlviii. 
22 ;  Deut.  xxvii.  4 — 12  ;  Josh.  xx.  7 ;  xxi.  20 ; 
xxiv.  1,  25,  32  ;  Judg.  ix.  ;  &6.  In  the  New 
Testament  it  has  been  supposed  to  appear 
under  the  form  Sychar  (John  iv.  5),  and 
this  variation  has  been  universally  accounted 
for  as  a  paronomasia,  '\\^^  meaning  "  a  lie." 
But  the  recent  survey  has  given  us  good 
reasons  for  identifying  the  place  last  named 
with  'Askar,  a  Uttle  nllage  on  the  slope  of 
Ebal,  half  a  mile  from  Jacob's  well  and  a 
little  over  a  mile  from  Nablfls  (Conder,  pp.  40, 
41)]:  for  [This  word  suggests  that  Behoboam 


2S0 


THE  FIBST  BOOR  OF  EINOS. 


[oh.  xn.  l~ai. 


bad  not  *'  selected  the  capital  of  Ephraimto 
be  the  Bcene"  of  his  coronation  (Bawl.) 
bnt  that  he  went  thither  because  the  northern 
tribes  claimed  this  conceesion.  They  de- 
manded apparently  that  he  should  meet 
them  to  receive  their  homage  in  the  terri- 
tory of  Ephraim.  It  was  a  recognition  of 
the  importance  of  the  tribe,  and  there  they 
could  the  better  urge  their  demands]  aU 
brael  [That  is,  not  the  twelve  tribes  (Ewald), 
but  the  ten,  or  their  representatives.  The 
name  of  Israel  was  already  identified  with 
the  ten,  or  rather  eleven,  tribes  (see  2  Sam. 
ii.  9, 10,  17,  28).  It  is  highly  probable  that 
the  comparative  isolation  of  Judah  from 
the  rest  of  the  tribes  (see  Diet.  Bib.  vol.  i. 
p.  1167)  had  led  to  this  result.  Indeed,  this 
fact— that  the  term  "Israel"  was  used  of 
the  whole  nation,  exclusive  of  the  tribe  of 
Jndah — shows  in  a  veiy  significant  way  the 
alienation  of  Judah  from  the  rest]  were 
eome  to  Shechem  to  make  him  Idng.  [It 
would  certainly  seem  from  these  words  as  if 
the  ten  tribes  had  then  no  settled  idea  of  re- 
volting. Eimchi  sees  in  the  very  selection  of 
Shechem  a  proof  that  they  were  only  "seek- 
ing an  opportunity  for  transferring  the 
government  to  Jeroboam,"  Similarly  Eeil. 
But  the  glories  of  Solomon's  reign  and  the 
traditions  of  the  house  of  David  would 
surely  make  them  hesitate,  even  if  they 
had  beard  of  the  prophecy  of  Ahijah  the 
Shilonite  (ch.  xi.  29),  before  they  wantonly 
broke  away  from  Behoboam.  And  the  text 
mya  expressly  that  they  had  assembled  to 
"make  him  Mng,"  i.e.,  to  accept  him  as 
■neh,  to  anoint  bim  (1  Chron.  xii.  38  com- 
pared with  2  Sam.  ii  4;  v.  3  shows  that 

■ijvpri  is  synonymous  with 'il^p?  IJB'O,  Keil), 
afta  the  example  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  ii.  15), 
David  (2  Sam.  ii.  4 ;  v.  3),  and  Solomon 
(oh.  L  39 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  22).  Ko  doubt, 
88  the  context  shows,  they  intended  to 
stipulate  for  an  alleviation  of  burdens,  &e., 
and  their  selection  of  Shechem  as  the  place 
where  th^  would  render  their  allegiance 
was  a  "  significant  hint "  (Ewald.  "  The 
very  place  puts  Israel  in  mind  ol  a  re- 
bellion," Bp.  Hall)  to  Behoboam.  Their 
pntting  forward  Jeroboam  as  their  spokes- 
man— ^presuming  for  the  present  that  the 
received  text  of  ver.  3  is  to  be  retained,  as 
to  which,  however,  see  below — was  a 
further  hint,  or  rather  a  plain  indication, 
that  they  did  not  mean  to  be  trifled  with. 
It  is  not  a  proof,  however,  as  Keil  main- 
tains, that  they  had  already  determined  to 
make  the  latter  king,  for  they  distinctly 
■aid  to  Behoboam  (ver.  4),  "Grant  our 
petition  and  toe  mil  serve  thee."  ^(Ewald, 
who  says  "  they  had  the  fullest  intentions 
of  confirming  his  power  as  king  if  their 


wishes  were  granted,"  points  ont  how  thil 
bet  makes  against  the  received  text, 
according  to  which  they  had  already  sum- 
moned Jeroboam  from  Egypt.)  It  is  clear 
from  this  and  the  passages  cit^  above  that 
the  Jewish  people  at  this  period  of  their 
history  were  accustomed,  not  indeed  to 
choose  their  king,  bnt  to  confirm  him  in  his 
office  by  public  acclamation.] 

Ver.  2. — ^And  It  came  to  pass,  when  Jero- 
boam the  son  of  Kebat  [see  on  ch.  xi.  26], 
who  was  yet  in  Egypt  [The  nsnal,  and  in- 
deed the  necessary,  interpretation,  if  we 
retain  our  present  Hebrew  text,  is  that  these 
words  refer,  not  as  the  context  would  lead 
us  to  suppose,  to  the  time  indicated  is  vers. 
1,  8,  &c.,  bnt  to  the  time  of  Solomon's 
death.  But  see  below] ,  heard  of  It  [The 
words  "  of  it,"  though  not  in  the  original, 
are  a  fair  and  legitimate  interpretation  of 
its  meaning.  Whether  they  are  retained 
or  not,  the  natural  and  grammatical  inter- 
pretation is  that  it  was  the  visit  to  Shechem, 
just  before  mentioned,  of  which  Jeroboam 
heard.  But  according  to  our  received  text, 
Jeroboam  was  one  of  the  deputation  which 
met  king  Behoboam  at  Shechem.  It  has 
been  found  necessary,  consequently,  to 
understand  the  words  of  the  death  ol 
Solomon,  which  has  been  relatol  in  ch. 
xi.  43.  So  the  Vulgate,  Audita  morte  ^us. 
Similarly  the  LXX.  Cod.  Vat.  inserts  the 
substance  of  this  verse  as  part  of  oh.  xi.  43. 
(The  Cod.  Alex,  follows  the  Hebrew.)  Bnt 
this  interpretation  is  surely  strained  and 
unnatural]  (for  he  was  fled  ttom  the  pre- 
sence of  king  Solomon,  and  Jeroboam  dwelt 
In  Egypt  d  [The  parallel  passage  in  8 
Chron.  x.  has  here,  "And  Jeroboam  re- 
turned from  Egypt"  ('SOD'T  JB*!!  instead 
of  'XD3  '-(•  3^»J).  And  as  some  copies  of  the 
LXX.  have  nai iwiarptrlai'ltpoPoiii  l^Alyiir- 
rov  and  the  Vulgate  has  "  Reversui  est  de 
Aegypto,"  Dathe,  Bahr,  dl.  would  adopt  this 
reading  here.  It  is  true  it  involves  bnt  a 
slight  change,  and  it  may  simplify  the  con- 
struction. But  no  change  is  really  required. 
Bahr's  objection,  that  in  the  text,  as  it 
stands,  we  have  an  unmeaning  repetition, 
"  He  was  still  in  Egypt  .  .  .  and  Jeroboam 
dwelt  in  Egypt,"  loses  all  its  force  if  we 
understand  Jeroboam  to  have  continued 
his  residence  in  Egypt  (as  the  LXX.  says 
he  did)  after  hearing  of  Solomon's  death, 
until  summoned  by  the  tribes  to  be  their 
leader.  In  any  case  the  repetition  accords 
with  Hebrew  usage.] 

Ver.  3.— That  [Heb.  and]  they  sent  and 
called  him.  And  Jeroboam  and  all  the 
congregation  of  Israel  came  [It  has  been 
held  that  this  verse  is  largely  an  interpola- 
tion.    The  LXX.  Cod.   Vat.  has  simply, 


«B.  XII.  1 — 24.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


2S1 


"And  the  people  spake  nnto  Mng  Beho- 
boam,  sayiug."  Of  more  importance,  how- 
ever, is  the  fact  that  it  is  at  direct  variance 
with  ver.  20,  which  places  the  appearance  of 
Jeroboam  on  the  scene  after  the  revolt  of 
the  tribea.  Indeed,  these  two  verses  can 
only  be  brought  into  agreement  by  the 
questionable  device  of  understanding  the 
"  aU  Israel "  of  ver.  20  very  differently  from 
the  same  expression  in  ver.  1.  If,  however, 
we  follow  in  this  instance  the  L£K.,  which 
omits  the  name  of  Jeroboam  both  here  and 
in  ver.  12  (and  which  thereby  implies  that 
he  was  not  one  of  the  deputation  to  Beho- 
boam,  but,  as  ver.  2  states,  was  at  that  time 
still  ia  Egypt),  the  difficulty  vanishes.' 
Yer.  20  then  becomes  the  natural  and 
logical  continuation  of  vers.  2,  3.  "And 
Jeroboam  dwelt  in  Egypt.  And  they  sent 
and  called  him  [to  the  country.]  .  ,  ,  And 
when  all  Israel  heard  that  Jeroboam  was 
come  again  [at  their  summons]  they  sent 
and  callediiim  unto  the  congregation,"  <feo. 
And  in  favour  of  the  omission  of  Jeroboam's 
name  is  the  fact  that  the  Hebrew  text,  both 
in  ver.  3  and  in  ver.  12,  betrays  some  Uttle 
confusion.  In  ver.  3,  the  Cethib  has  4K3^1 
and  -ib^l  in  ver.  12,  whereas  the  Keri  has 
Kh*l  in  both  oases.  The  words  look,  that 
is  to  say,  as  if  a  singular  nominative  had 
been  subsequently  introduced],  and  spalie 
unto  Rehohoam,  saying. 

Ver.  4.^-Tliy  father  made  our  yoke  [see 
for  the  literal  sense  of  the  word.  Num. 
xiz.  2  ;  Deut.  zxi.  8,  &a. ;  for  its  tropi- 
cal use,  Levit.  xxvi.  13 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  43, 
&c.]  grievous  [Heb.  heavy.  Was  this  com- 
plaint a  just  one?  It  is  one  which  occa- 
sions us  some  surprise,  as  the  reign  of 
Solomon  had  not  only  been  glorious,  but 
the  people  had  apparently  enjoyed  the 
greatest  plenty  and  prosperity  (ch,  iv.  20, 
25;  of.  viii.  66).  Bishop  Hall,  Bahr,  and 
other  writers,  consequently,  who  see  in  the 
fact  that  the  ten  tribes  had  chosen  Jeroboam 
for  their  mouthpiece  a  settled  determination 
on  their  part  to  revolt,  affirm  that  their 
grievances  were  purely  factitious.  But  we 
must  not  forget  that,  despite  the  unbroken 
peace  (see  Hall,  "Contempl."  ii.  136)  and 
general  prosperity  and  affluence,  the  people 
had  had  one  burden  at  least  to  bear  which  is 
always  galling  and  vexatious,  the  burden  of 
a  conscription.  It  is  by  no  means  certain, 
though  it  ia  oonstantly  assumed,  and  is  not 
in  itself  improbable,  that  the  taxes  and  im- 
posts had  been  heavy,  the  passages  alleged 
in  support  of  that  view  (ch.  z.  15,  25 ;  xii. 
4,  LXX.)  being  quite  inconclusive.  But 
while  we  have  no  right  to  speak  of  the 
"  enormous  exactions  of  the  late  king " 
{Stanley),  we  may  be  perfectly  sure  that 


such  an  establishment  aa  his  (ch.  iv.  22, 
26)  and  such  undeirtakinga  (oh.vi.  14,  22  ;  iii. 
1 ;  vii. ;  ix.  26,  17,  18)  would  be  extremely 
,  costly,  and  that  their  cost  was  not  alto- 
gether defrayed  by  the  presents  of  subject 
princes  (oh.  iv.  21 ;  of.  x.  10, 14),  the  profits 
of  the  king's  merchants  (ch.  x.  28),  or  the 
imports  of  the  fleet  [ib.,  v.  21).  But  the 
people  had  certainly  had  to  pay  a  more 
odious  tribute,  that  of  forced  labour,  of 
servile  work  (ch.  iv.  6,  Heb. ;  v.  14 ;  of.  ch. 
ix.  21.  DD  IS  almost  always  used  of  a  tri- 
bute rendered  by  labour,  Gesen.)  It  is 
quite  true  that  Solomon  was  not  the  first 
to  institute  this ;  that  David  had  exacted  it 
before  him  (2  Sam.  xx.  24) ;  that  the  bur- 
den was  one  with  which  all  subjects  of  the 
old-world  mouarchies,  especially  in  the 
East,  were  familiar;  and  that  in  this  case  it 
had  been  imposed  with  peculiar  considerate- 
ness  (oh.  v.  14).  But  it  is  none  the  less  cer- 
tain, when  we  consider  :the  magnitude  of 
Solomon's  undertakings,  and  the  number 
ot  men  necessarily  employed  in  executing 
them,  that  it  must  have  involved  some 
hardships  and  created  much  dissatisfaction  ; 
such  results  are  inevitable  in  all  conscrip- 
tions. "  Forced  labour  has  been  amongst 
the  causes  leading  to  insurrection  in  many 
ages  and  countries.  It  alienated  the  people 
of  Eome  from  the  last  Tarquin ;  it  helped 
to  bring  about  the  French  Revolution ;  and 
it  was  for  many  years  one  of  the  principal 
grievances  of  the  Eussian  serfs  "  (Kawlin- 
son).  But  we  may  find  instances  of  its 
working  perhaps  as  more  Eastern,  more 
closely  illustrative  of  the  text  aniongst  the 
Fellahln  of  Egypt.  "  According  to  Pliny, 
360,000  men  had  to  work  20  years  long  at 
one  pyramid"  (Bahr).  In  the  construction  of 
the  great  Mahmoudieh  canal,  by  Mehemet 
Ali,  over  300,000  labourers  were  employed. 
They  worked  under  the  lash,  and  such  were 
the  fatigues  and  hardships  of  their  life  that 
many  thousands  died  in  the  space  of  a  few 
months  (of.,  too,  Exod.  i.  11  sqq. ;  ii.  23]: 
now  therefore  make  thou  the  grievous 
[Heb.  hard,  heavy]  service  of  thy  father, 
and  his  heavy  yoke  which  he  put  upon  us, 
lighter  \]it.,"  lighten  somewhat  from,"  <fec.], 
and  we  will  serve  thee.  [Their  stipula- 
tions seem  reasonable  enough.  Bahr,  who 
says,  "  We  cannot  admit  the  complaint  of 
too  hard  tribute-work  to  be  well  founded," 
andEeil,  who  maintains  that  "there  can- 
not have  been  any  well-grounded  occasion 
for  complaint,"  surely  forget  that  both  the 
aged  counsellors  (ver.  7)  foii  also  the 
writer  of  this  book  (vers.  13 — 15)  manifest 
some  degree  of  eympathy  with  the  com- 
plainants.] 

Ver.  5. — And  he  said  unto  them,  Depart 
yet  for  thref  days  [so  as  to  afford  time  for 


253 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XII.  1 — 24. 


counsel  and  deliberation.  It  lias  been 
assumed  that  both  the  old  and  young  ad- 
visers of  Eehoboam  had  been  taken  by 
him,  as  part  of  his  retinue,  to  Shechem 
(Biihr).  But  it  is  quite  as  likely  that  some 
of  them  were  summoned  from  Jerusalem 
to  adyise  him,  and  that  the  three  days'  de- 
lay was  in  order  to  give  time  for  their 
attendance.  It  ia  a  long  day's  journey 
(12  hours)  from  Kabllis  to  Jerusalem. 
Three  days,  consequently,  would  just  afford 
sufficient  time  for  the  purpose]  then  come 
again  to  me.  And  the  people  departed. 
[The  peaceable  departure,  like  the  respect- 
ful demand,  contradicts  the  idea  of  a  settled 
purpose  to  rebel.] 

Yer.  6. — And  Idng  Behoboam  consulted 
with  the  old  men  [According  to  Bahr,"  the 
D''Ji?.T  are  not  old  people,  but  the  elders." 
•No  doubt  the  word  is  constantly  used,  as 
in  the  expressions,  "  elders  of  Israel," 
"  elders  of  the  city,"  <fco.  (cf .  irpeafivHpoi, 
senotores  (from  lenex),  aldermen  =  elder 
men),  without  any  reference  to  age;  but 
this  is  not  the  case  here,  as  the  strong 
contrast  with  "young  men"  (vers.  8,  13, 
14)  proves]  that  stood  before  [see  on  oh. 
i.  2]  Solomon  Ms  father  [among  them, 
perhaps,  were  some  of  the  "princes"  of 
oh.  iv.  2  sqq.]  wMle  he  yet  lived,  and 
said,  How  do  ye  advise  that  I  may  answer 
this  people  7 

Ve'r.  7. — And  they  spaKe  unto  him,  say- 
ing, If  thou  wilt  be  a  servant  unto  this 
people  this  day,  and  wilt  serve  them  [Keil 
questions  the  propriety  and  expediency  of 
this  advice.  He  says,  "  The  king  coald  not 
become  the  1^^  of  the  people  without  pre- 
judicing the  authority  entrusted  to  him  by 
God."  But  they  do  not  propose  that  he 
should  become  their  servant,  except  for  one 
day,  and  then  only  in  the  sense  of  making 
reasonable  concessions.  What  they  mean 
is  this :  "  If  thou  wilt  brook  for  once  to 
accede  to  their  terms  instead  of  dictating 
thine  own,"  &e.  The  form  of  their  answer 
was  probably  suggested  by  the  temper  of 
the  king.  They  saw  what  was  passing  in 
his  mind,  viz.,  that  he  would  fain  play  the 
autocrat,  and  that  he  resented  it  exceed- 
ingly that  his  subjects,  just  as  he  had  be- 
gun to  taste  the  sweets  of  royalty,  should 
presume  to  parley  with  him  ;  and  they  say 
in  effect,  "  Tou  think  that  they  are  revers- 
ing your  relations,  that  they  are  making 
you,  their  sovereign,  their  servant.  Be  it 
BO.  It  is  but  for  one  day.  Then  they  will 
be  your  slaves  for  ever  "] ,  and  answer  them 
[i.e.,  favourably;  grant  their  request;  cf. 
Psa.  xxii.  22 ;  Ixv.  6],  and  speak  good 
words  to  them,  then  will  they  be  thy  ser- 
vants for  ever.     ['  Thy  servants,"  in  oppo- 


sition to  "a  servant  "  above ;  "  for  erer  *• 
in  opposition  to  "  this  day."] 

Yer.  8. — But  he  forsook  the  counsel  of 
the  old  men  which  they  had  given  [Heb. 
counselled]  him  ["We  can  eadly  imagine 
that  their  proposal  was  not  very  agreeable  to 
the  rash  and  iinperious  young  king,  in  whose 
veins  Ammonite  blood  flowed  "  (Bahr)] ,  anil 
consulted  with  the  young  men  [see  on  ver. 
1.  "  The  very  change  argues  weakness.  .  . 
Green  wood  is  ever  shrinking  "  (Hall)]  that 
were  grown  up  with  him  [possibly  his  com- 
panions in  the  harem],  and  which  stood 
before  him  [i.e.,  as  his  courtiers  and  coun- 
sellors (cf.  ver.  6).  The  old  men  were  the 
counsellors  of  Solomon ;  the  young  men 
alone  are  spoken  of  as  the  ministers  of 
Eehoboam. 

Ver,  9. — And  he  said  unto  them,  What 
counsel  give  ye  [emphatic  in  the  original] 
that  we  [It  is  noticeable  how  Behoboam 
identifies  these  young  men  with  himself. 
He  employs  a  different  expression  when 
addressing  the  old  men  (ver.  6),  The  A.  V. 
perhaps  gives  its  force  by  the  translation, 
"  that  I  may  answer,"  &c.  ;  lit.,  "  to 
answer"]  may  answer  this  people  who 
have  spoken  to  me,  saying,  Make  the  yoke 
which  thy  father  did  put  upon  us  lighter  T 

Yer.  10. — And  the  young  men  that  were 
grown  up  with  him  spake  unto  him, 
saying,  Thus  shalt  thou  speak  unto  this 
people  [There  is  a  certain  amount  of  con- 
temptuousness  in  the  expression  (cf.  St. 
John  vii.  49)]  that  spake  nnto  thee  [The 
repetition,  "  speak,  spake,"  is  probably  not 
nndesigued.  It  suggests  the  idea  of  retalia- 
tion, or  that  it  was  a  piece  of  presumption 
on  their  part  to  have  spoken  at  all],  saying, 
Thy  father  made  our  yoke  heavy,  but 
make  thou  it  lighter  onto  us  [lit., /rom 
upon  us]  ;  thus  shalt  thou  say  unto 
them  [This  iteration  is  expressive  of  deter- 
mination and  resentment.  We  may  read 
between  the  lines,  "  I  would  make  short 
work  with  them,  and  teach  them  a  lesson 
they  will  not  forget"],  My  little  finger 
["  Finger"  is  not  in  the  original,  but  the 
meaning  is  indisputable]  shall  be  [or  u, 
n^y,  strictly,  wai  thicker.  The  LXX.  has 
simply  iraxuripa]  thicker  than  my  father's 
loins.  [A  figurative  and  perhaps  proverbial 
expression.  The  sense  is  clear.  "  My 
hand  shall  be  heavier  than  my  father's, 
my  force  greater  than  his,  my  weakness 
even  stronger  than  his  strength."  The 
counsel  of  the  young  men  is  full  of  flattery, 
which  would  be  acceptable  to  a  young  king. 

Yer.  11. — And  now  whereas  my  father  did 
lade  you  with  [or,  lay  upon  you]  a  heavy 
yoke,  I  will  add  to  your  yoke :  my  father 
chastised  you  with  whips  [It  is  probable 
that  the  expression  is  not  entirely  figura- 


OH.  xn.  1—24.] 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


261 


tive.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  le-vies  of 
Amorites,  Hittites  (ch.  Ix.  20),  &o.,  had  been 
kept  at  their  toils  by  the  lash] ,  but  I  will 
chastise  you  with  scorpions.  ["  The  very 
words  have  stings "  (Hall).  It  is  generally 
held  that  there  is  here  "  no  allusion  what- 
ever to  the  animal,  but  to  some  instrument 
of  scourging — unless,  indeed,  the  expression 
is  a  mere  figure "  (Diet.  Bib.  iii.  p.  1161). 
Perhaps  it  is  safer  to  understand  it  as  a 
figure  of  speech,  although  the  scorpion, 
unlike  the  serpent,  is  little  like,  or  adapted 
to  use  as,  a  lash.  Probably  it  was  in  the  pain 
the  whip  caused  that  the  resemblance  lay 
(Bev.  ix.  5).  All  the  commentators  mention 
that  the  later  Bomans  used  a  whip  called 
a  "  Scorpio,"  and  cite  Isidore  (Orig.  5,  27) 
in  proof.  Gesenius,  Keil,  al.  understand 
"  whips  with  barbed  points,  like  the  point 
of  a  scorpion's  sting  ;  "  the  Babbins,  Virgae 
spinis  instructae  ;  others,  the  thorny  stem  ot 
the  egg-plant,  by  some  called  the  "  scorpion 
plant."  Compare  our  use  of  the  word  "  cat." 
"  The  yoke  and  whips  go  together,  and  are 
the  signs  of  labouring  service  (Ecclus.  zzz. 
26,  or  xxxiii.  27)  "  Bahr.] 

Ver.  12. — So  Jeroboam  and  [LXX.  omits] 
all  the  people  came  to  Rehoboam  the  third 
day  ["  Three  days'  expectation  had  warmed 
these  smoking  Israelites"  (Hall)],  as  the  king 
had  appointed,  saying,  Come  to  me  again 
the  third  day. 

Ver.  13. —  And  the  btniT  answered  the 
people  [the  omission  of  Jeroboam's  name, 
though  perhaps  it  cannot  be  pressed  in 
argument,  is  noticeable]  roughly,  and  for- 
sook the  old  men's  counsel  that  they  gave 
him. 

Ver.  U. — And  spa&e  to  them  after  the 
counsel  of  the  young  men,  saying,  My 
fattier  made  your  yoke  heavy,  and  I  will 
add  to  your  yoke:  my  father  also  chas- 
tised you  with  whips,  but  I  will  chastise 
you  with  scorpions. 

Ver.  15. —  Wherefore  the  king  hearkened 
not  mito  the  people,  for  the  cause  [or  course 
of  events  ;  Ut.,  tarri]  was  fi:om  the  Lord 
["  Quem  Deua  vult  perdere,  prius  dementat." 
God  did  not  inspire  Behoboam's  proud  and 
despotic  reply,  hut  used  it  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  His  purpose,  the  partition  of 
the  kingdom  (of.  Exod.  ziv.  4 ;  Matt.  zxvi. 
24).  God  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise 
Hun], that  [Heb.  in  order  that]  he  might 
perform  his  saying,  which  the  Lord  spake 
Iqr  [Heb.  in  the  hand  of;  cf.  ch.  xiv.  18 ;  ii.  25, 
note]  Ahljah  the  Shllonite  [see  on  oh.  xi. 
.■.1]  unto  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Kebat. 

Ver.  16. — So  when  all  Israel  saw  that 
the  king  hearkened  not  unto  them,  the 
people  answered  pSeb,  brought  hack  word 
to  !  probably  after  some  consultation 
Amongst    themselves]    the    king,  saying. 


What  portion  have  we  In  David?  [Sami 
expression  as  2  Sam.  xx.  1.  The  words,  in- 
terpreted  by  this  passage  and  2  Sam.  xix.  43, 
mean,  "  Since  we  have  no  kindness  or  fair- 
ness from  David's  seed,  what  is  his  house 
to  us?  Why  render  homage  to  his  son? 
We  receive  nought  from  him,  why  yield 
aught  to  him  ?  "]  neither  have  we  inherit- 
ance in  the  son  of  Jesse  [i.e.,  "  his  tribe  is 
not  ours ;  his  interests  are  not  ours."  Bahr 
sees  in  the  expression  "  son  of  Jesse  "  "  an 
allusion  to  David's  humbler  descent,"  but 
surely  without  reason.  It  is  simply  a  peri- 
phrasis for  the  sake  of  the  parallelism.  The 
rhythm  almost  elevates  the  words  to  the  rank 
of  poetry]:  to  your  tents,  0  Israel  (lit.,  thy 
tents,  or  dwellings ;  i.e. ,  "  Disperse  to  your 
homes  (see  oh.  viii.  66  j  and  of.  2  Sam.  xviii. 
17 ;  xix.  8 ;  xx.  1),  and  prepare  for  war." 

?n'X,which  means  primarily  a  "  tent,"  has  for 
its  secondary  meaning,  "habitation,""home." 
This  cry — the  Marseillaise  of  Israel — ^prob- 
ably had  its  origin  at  a  time  when  the  people 
dwelt  in  tents,  viz. ,  in  the  march  through 
the  desert  (see  Josh.  xxii.  4;  Num.  i.  62  ; 
ix.  18 ;  xvi.  26)].  Now  see  to  thine  own 
house,  David  [i.e.,  let  the  seed  of  David 
henceforth  reign  over  the  tribe  of  Judah,  if 
it  can.  It  shall  govern  the  other  tribes  no 
longer.  "It  is  not  a  threat  of  war,  but  a 
warning  against  interference  "  (Bawlinson). 
nST  has  the  meaning  of  "  look  after,"  "  care 
for."  "  David,  the  tribe  father,  is  mentioned 
in  place  of  his  family  "  (KeU)] .  So  Israel 
departed  unto  their  [lit.,  his]  tents  [see 
note  on  ch.  viii.  66] . 

Ver.  17.— Bnt  as  for  the  Children  of 
Israel  which  dwelt  In  the  dtles  of  Judah 
[t.f .,  "  the  Israelites  proper  or  members  of 
other  tribes,  who  happened  to  be  settled 
within  the  limits  of  the  land  of  Judah" 
(cf.  ver.  23).  A  number  of  Simeonites  were 
(Bawlinson)  certainly  among  them  (Josh.  xix. 
1 — 9).  The  term  "  children  of  Israel "  is 
henceforward  to  he  understood  in  its  re- 
stricted sense  (see  on  ver.  1).  It  cannot 
include  the  men  of  Judah],  Behoboam 
reigned  over  them. 

Ver.  18.  —  Then  king  Kehoboam  sent 
Adoram,  who  was  over  the  tribute  [Prob- 
ably the  same  officer  as  the  Adoniram  of 
oh.  iv.  6.  For  "Adoram,"  the  LXX.  and 
other  versions  read  '  'Adoniram "  here.  It 
is  curious  that  a  person  of  the  same  name, 
Adoram  (LXX.  Adoniram),  was  over  David's 
levy  (2  Sam.  xx.  24).  That  there  was  a 
relationsliip,  and  that  the  office  had  de- 
scended from  father  to  son,  can  hardly  be 
doubted,  but  whether  two  persons  or  three 
are  indicated  it  is  impossible  to  say.  It  in 
of  course  just  possible,  though  hardly  Ukely 
that  one  and  the  same  person  (Ewald)  can 


254 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XII.  1 — 24. 


have  been  Buperintendent  of  servile  work 
under  David,  Solomon,  and  Behoboam.  _  It 
is  generally  assumed  that  the  young  king 
sent  this  officer  "  to  treat  with  the  rebels 
and  to  appease  them,  as  Josephus  expressly 
sftys"  (Bahr).  It  seems  quite  as  likely  that 
he  was  sent  to  coerce  them,  or  to  collect 
the  taxes,  as  a  summary  way  of  showing 
that  the  king  meant  to  enforce  his  rights 
and  was  not  moved  by  their  words.  For 
it  is  hardly  probable  that  such  a  proud 
and  headstrong  prince  as  Behoboam  would 
stoop,  especially  after  the  confident  threats 
which  he  had  just  uttered,  to  parley  with 
rebels.  Such  a  man,  guided  by  such  coun- 
sellors, and  inflated  with  a  sense  of  his  own 
power  and  importance,  would  naturally 
think  of  force  rather  than  of  conciliation 
or  concessions.  He  would  be  for  trnng  his 
whips  of  scorpions.  And  if  conciliation 
had  been  his  object,  it  is  hardly  likely  that 
he  would  have  employed  Adoram,  the  super- 
intendent of  the  levy,  a  man  who  would 
naturally  be  obnoxious  to  the  people,  to 
effect  it.  Moreover  the  sequel — Adoram's 
tragical  end — also  favours  the  suppoeition 
that  he  was  sent,  not  "to  arrange  some 
alleviation  of  their  burdens "  (Eawlinson), 
bnt  to  carry  out  the  high-handed  policy  of 
the  king] ;  and  all  Israel  stoned  blm  wltb 
atouea  ["With  one  exception,  this  was  a 
Uoodless  revolution"  (Stanley).  It  has 
been  remarked  that  the  practice  of  stoning 
is  first  heard  of  in  the  stony  desert  (Arabia 
Petraea).  But  in  reality  it  is  older  than  the 
date  of  the  Exodus,  as  Exod.  viii.  26  shows. 
And  it  is  an  obvious  and  ready  and  summary 
way  of  despatching  obnoxious  persons  (cf. 
Exod.  xvii.  4 ;  1  Sam.  xxx.  6 ;  1  Kings  xxi. 
10).  It  is  to  this  day  a  favourite  method  of 
the  East  for  testifying  hatred  and  intoler- 
ance] ,  that  he  died.  Therefore  king  Rebo- 
boam  made  speed  [So  the  LXX,  tfOaaev. 
The  Hebrew  literally,  means,  as  margin, 
"strengthened  himself."  But  the  A.  V.  gives 
the  practical  force  of  the  word.  He  be- 
stirred himself ;  he  lost  no  time ;  the  death 
of  Adoram  showed  him  the  danger  of  a 
moment's  delay.  "  He  saw  those  stones 
were  thrown  at  him  in  his  Adoram"  (Hall).] 
to  get  him  up  to  bis  cbailot,  to  flee  to 
Jerusalem. 

Ver.  19. — So  Israel  rebelled  Qit.,  fell  away 
(marg.)  The  common  secondary  meaning 
of  the  word  is  to  transgress.  Its  use  here 
may  perhaps  suggest  that  their  rebellion 
was  not  without  siu]  against  the  house  of 
David  unto  this  day  (see  on  ch.  viii.  8)]. 

Ver.  20. — And  It  came  to  pass,  when  all 
Israel  heard  that  Jeroboam  was  come  again 
[These  words  are  hardly  consistent  with 
the  idea  that  Jeroboam  had  been  from  the 
first  the  npokesman  of  "  all  Israel "  in  their 


interviews  with   Behoboam.     If,   however, 
the  received  text  of  vers.  3,  12  is  retained 
(see  on  ver.  3),  then  we  must  understand 
the  "  all  Israel "  in  ver.  1  of  the  representa- 
tives of  the  different  tribes,  and  here,  of  the 
entire  nation  who  had  heard  from  its  repre- 
sentatives, on  their  return  to  their  homes 
(ver.  16),  of  the  presence  of  Jeroboam  in  the 
country],  that  tbey  sent  and  called  blm 
unto  tbe  congregation   [Where  and  when 
this  gathering  was  held  we  are  not  informed. 
Probably  it  was  at  Shechem,  and  soon  after 
Behoboam's  flight.    After  the  open  and  irre- 
parable breach  which  they  had  made  (ver. 
18),  the  leaders  of  the  tribes  would  naturally 
assemble  at  once  to  concert  measures  for 
their  defence  and  future  government] ,  and 
made  ''<"'  king   [by  anointing.     Note  on 
ver.  1]  over  all  Israel    [This  public  and 
formal  consecration  of  Jeroboam  completed 
the  secession  of  the  northern  tribes.    Was 
this  secession  sinful?  Bahr,  Keil,  and  others, 
who  start  from  the  assumption  that  secession 
was  determined  upon  even  before  Behoboam 
came  to  Shechem,  and  that  the  complaints 
of  the  people  respecting  the  grievous  service 
to  which  they  had  been  subjected  by  Solo- 
mon were  groundless,  naturally  conclude 
that  it  was  altogether  treasonable  and  un- 
justifiable.   But  is   this  conclusion  borne 
out  by  the  facts?    We  may  Madily  admit 
that  the  schism  was  not  accomplished  with- 
out sin :  we  cannot  but  allow  that  Israel 
acted  with  undue  precipitation,  and  that 
Behoboam,  who  was   "  young  and  tender- 
hearted," was    entitled,   for   David's   and 
Solomon's  sake,  as  well  as   his  own,  to 
greater  forbearance  and  consideration,  and 
it  is  almost  certain  that  both  the  "envy  of 
Ephraim"  and  the  ambition  of  Jeroboam 
largely  influenced  the  result.    At  the  same 
time,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  division 
of  the  kingdom  was  ordained  of  God,  and 
that  the  people  had  just  cause  of  complaint, 
it  not,  indeed,  sufficient  warrant  for  resist- 
ance, in  the  arbitrary  and  insolent  rejection 
of  their  petition  by  the  young  king.    No 
law  of  God  requires  men  to  yield  themselves 
up  without  a  struggle  to  such  cruel  and 
abject  slavery  as  Behoboam  threatened  these 
men  with.    They  judged — and  who  shall  say 
unreasonably? — from  his  words  that  they 
had  only  tyranny  and  cruelty  to  expect  at 
his  hands,  and  what  wonder  if  they  stood 
on  their  defence?    They  are  only  to  be 
blamed  because  they  did  more.    But  law- 
ful resistance  not  uncommonly  ripens  into 
unlawful  rebellion]:  there  was  none  that 
followed  tbe  bouse  of  David,  but  tbe  tribe 
of  Judab  only.     [This  general  statement  is 
qualified  immediately  t^terwords  (ver.  il). 
The  tribe  of  Benjamin,  "the  smallest  ol 
tbe  tribes  of  Israel "  (1  Bam.  ix.  91),  "  UtOt 


#H.  XII.  1—24.1 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


255 


Benjainin"  (Psa.  Ixviii.  27),  is  here  omitted 
as  of  comparatively  small  account.  Exact 
precision  has  never  characterized  Oriental 
writers.  There  is  no  suspicion  of  untruth : 
it  is  the  genius  of  the  people  to 

"disdain  the  lore, 
Of  nieely  calculated  less  and  more.*' 

It  may  be  added  here  that  Edom  remained 
under  the  sway  of  Judah  until  the  reign 
of'Jehoram  (2  Kings  viii.  20),  just  as  Moab 
and  other  portions  of  Solomon's  empire  for 
a  considerable  period  formed  part  of  the 
new  kingdom  of  Israel  (2  Kings  i.  1 :  iii. 
4,  5).] 

Ver.  21. — ^And  when  Rehoboam  was  come 
to  Jerusalem,  he  assembled  all  the  house 
of  Judah  with  [Heb.  and]  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin  [It  is  at  first  sight  somewhat  sur- 
prising that  Benjamin,  so  long  the  rival  of 
Judah,  and  which  had  so  long  resisted  the 
rule  of  David,  should  on  this  occasion 
have  detached  itself  from  the  leadership  of 
Ephraim,  its  near  and  powerful  neighbour, 
and  a  tribe,  too,  with  which  it  had  a  sort 
of  hereditary  connexion.  That  a  sort  of 
jealousy  existed  at  one  time  between  the 
tribes  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  consequent, 
no  doubt,  on  the  transference  of  the  sceptre 
from  the  house  of  Saul  to  that  of  David,  is 
very  evident.  A  thousand  men  of  Benjamin 
constituted  the  foUovring  of  the  rebel  Shimei, 
(2  Sam.  xix.  17).  The  rising  of  Sheba  the 
Benjamite,  again  {ib.,  xx.  1),  proves  that 
the  enmity  and  discontent  were  not  even 
then  subdued.  But  when  the  ten  tribes  fell 
away,  Benjamin  seems  never  to  have  faltered 
in  its  allegiance.  The  change  is  easily 
accounted  for.  It  was  the  glory  of  Ben- 
jamin that  Jerusalem,  the  joy  of  the  whole 
earth,  the  civil  and  reUgious  capital  of  the 
nation,  was  largely  within  its  border.  "  The 
city  of  the  Jebusite"  was  in  the  lot  of 
Benjamin  (Josh,  xviii.  28).  But  it  was 
also  on  the  boundary  line  of  Judah. 
This  fact  had,  no  doubt,  brought  the 
two  tribes  into  close  contact,  and  had 
given  them  interests  in  common,  in  fact 
had  "  riveted  them  together  as  by  a  cramp  " 
(Blunt,  pp.  167,  174,  who  traces  "  a  gradual 
tendency  of  the  ten  tribes  to  become  con- 
federate under  Ephraim,"  and  a  growing 
alliance  and  community  of  interests  between 
Judah  and  Benjamin) ;  and  now  Benjamin 
could  not  fail  to  see  that  separation  from 
Judah  would  mean  the  loss  of  Jerusalem 
(which  would  be  largely  peopled  by  the  men 
of  Judah,  David's  tribe,  and  would  be  prac- 
tically in  their  hands),  while  adhesion  to 
Ephraim  would  not  prevent  the  establish- 
ment of  another  sanotuaiy  further  north. 
The  traditions  of  fifty  years,  consequently, 
•nd  the  common  interest  in  the  capital. 


prevailed  over  hereditary  ties  and  ancient 
feuds,  and  decided  Benjamin  to  cast  in 
its  lot  with  Judah ;  the  more  so,  as  the 
heads  of  this  tribe  may  have  felt,  after 
once  furnishing  Israel  with  its  king,  as 
jealous  of  Ephraim  as  they  had  once  been 
of  Judah.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  how- 
ever, that  some  portions  of  Benjamin,  in- 
cluding Bethel,  Gilgal,  and  Jericho,  were 
incorporated  in  the  northern'  kiugdom 
(Ewald)] ,  am  hundred  and  fourscore  thou- 
sand diosen  men  [the  LXX.  has  tKarbv 
Kai  iiKo(n  =  120,000,  but  the  larger  number 
need  create  no  astonishment.  At  the  time 
of  David's  census,  the  men  of  Judah  num- 
bered— ^if  the  figures  can  be  depended  on 
— 500,000,  while  Abijah  could  muster  some 
18  years  afterwards  an  army  of  400,000 
(2  Chron.  xiii.  3)],  which  were  warriors 
[lit.,  making  war],  to  fight  against  the 
house  of  Israel,  to  bring  the  kingdom 
again  to  Rehoboam,  the  son  of  Solomon. 
[It  is  characteristic  of  Behoboam  that  he 
proposes  forthwith  to  subdue  the  rebellious 
tribes  by  force.  Probably  he  had  no  idea 
to  what  extent  the  tribes  would  prove  dis- 
loyal.] 

Ver.  22. — But  the  word  of  God  came  unto 
Shemaiah  [This  part  of  the  history  is  prob- 
ably derived  from  the  "book"  which  this 
prophet  wrote  (2  Chron.  xii.  15).  When 
Keil  describes  him  as  "  a  prophet  who  is  not 
mentioned  again,"  he  has  surely  overlooked 
2  Chron.  xii.  7,  8,  where  we  find  him  pro- 
phesying with  reference  to  the  army  of 
Shishak] ,  the  man  of  God  [a  common  ex- 
pression in  the  books  of  Kings,  It  rarely 
occurs  in  the  other  Scriptures.  This  desig- 
nation is  not  altogether  synonymous  with 
"  prophet."  It  is  used,  for  example,  of 
angels  (Judg.  xiii.  6,  8),  of  Moses  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  1),  and  of  David  (2  Chron.  viii.  14), 
and  would  embrace  any  minister  or  servant 
of  God,  while  K^33  is  restricted  to  the 
teaching  order.  There  were  false  prophets, 
but  no  false  men  of  God.  It  is  also  worth 
considering  whether  the  name  of  prophet 
may  not  have  been  practically  restricted  to, 
or  bestowed  by  preference  on,  those  who 
had  received  a  prophetic  training,  the  "  sons 
of  the  prophets  "  who  had  been  taught  in 
the  schools.  Cf.  1  Sam.  x.  6—12;  ziz.  20 ; 
Amos  vii.  14],  saying, 

Yer.  23. — Speak  unto  Rehoboam,  tbe  son 
of  Solomon,  king  of  Judah,  and  unto  all 
the  house  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and  to 
the  remnant  of  the  people  ["  the  children 
of  Israel"  mentioned  in  ver.  17,  where  see 
note] ,  saying, 

Yer.  24.— Thus  salth  the  Lord,  Te  shall 
not  go  up,  nor  fight  against  your  brethren 
[a  timely  reminder  of  the  unity  of  the  race, 
notwithstanding  the  division  of  the  king- 


266 


THE  FIE8T  BOOK  OF  KIN  OB. 


[cH.  ill.  1—24. 


dom]  the  children  of  Israel :  return  every 
man  to  his  house :  for  this  thing  [i.e.,  the 
division,  rupture]  Is  [lit.,  was}  trom  me.  [A 
prophet  of  Judah  now  confirms  what  a 
prophet  of  Israel  had  already  announced] . 
They  hearkened  therefore  vmto  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  and  returned  [not  "  because  they 
probably  saw  that  a  war  with  the  numeri- 
cally greater,  and  just  now  bitterly  excited, 
ten  tribes  would  bring  them  into  a  worse 
condition  still"  (Bahr),  but  because  of  the 
"  word  of  the  Lord."  It  was  the  remon- 
strance of  the  prophet  alone  restrained 
them.  They  knew  their  numerical  inferiority 
before,  but  they  nevertheless  mustered  for 
battle]  to  depart  [a  common  Hebraism.  The 
phrase  in  2  Chron.  xi.  4,  fl^^D  •U-1t5'» 
"  they  returned  from  going,"  was  probably 
designed  as  an  explanation] ,  according  to 
the  word  of  the  lord. 

At  this  point  the  Yat.  LXX.  inserts  along 
addition,  which  differs  from,  and  indeed 
contradicts,  the  Hebrew  text  in  some  im- 
portant  particulars.  Behoboam  is  repre- 
sented as  16  years  of  age  (Heb.  40),  as 
leigning  12  years  (Heb,  17) ;  bis  mother 
U  Naanan  (Heb.  Naamah),  and  is  the 
daughter  of  Ana,  son  of  Nahash,  king  of 
Ammon.  Jeroboam  is  described  as  son  of 
Sarira,  a  harlot.  He  is  appointed  by  Solo- 
mon superintendent  of  the  levy  of  Ephraim, 
and  builds  for  him  a  city  Sarira,  and  also 
completes  the  circumvallation  of  Jerusalem. 
He  has  300  chariots  and  aims  at  royalty. 
Solomon  seeking  to  slay  him,  he  flees  to 
Shishak,  king  of  Egypt,  who  treats  him 
with  distinction,  giving  him  the  sister  of 
hi*  own  wife  in  marriage.    Here  his  son 


Abijah  is  bom,  when  Behoboam  has  been 
something  like  a  year  upon  the  throne. 
After  his  birth,  Jeroboam  asks  a  second 
time  to  be  released :  he  returns  to  his  own 
country,  takes  np  his  abode  at  Sarira,  for- 
tifies it,  and  gathers  the  tribe  of  Ephraim 
round  him.  Here  Abijah  falls  sick,  and 
the  visit  to  the  prophet,  narrated  in  ohap. 
xiv.,  takes  place.  The  child  dies ;  there  is 
general  mourning,  after  which  Jeroboam 
goes  to  Shechem,  and  collects  the  tribes. 
Here  the  prophet  Shemaiah  (not  Abijah) 
tears  a  new  garment  in  twelve  pieces,  gives 
him  ten,  and  promises  him  the  dominion 
over  ten  tribes.  After  which  follow  the 
events  of  vers.  6 — 24  of  this  chapter. 

The  great  eircnmstantiality  of  this  nar- 
rative has  led  some  scholars — ^Dean  Stanley 
among  them — to  prefer  it  before  the  Hebrew 
version.  But  its  details  will  not  bear  careful 
examination,  and  there  is  little  doubt  that 
it  is  a  compilation  of  later  date.  Itsnntrust- 
worthiness  has  been  well  shown  among  others 
byBawlinson,  Speaker's  Commentary  in  2oe. 
But  he  omits  to  notice  what  is  perhaps  its 
strongest  condemnation,  viz.,  that  this  LXX. 
addition  is  in  conflict  with  the  LXX.  (and 
Heb.)  text  of  chap.  xi.  The  account  of 
Jeroboam's  maniage  with  the  sister  of  the 
queen,  e.g.,  is  manifestly  a  variation  of  the 
history  of  Hadad  (ch.  xi.  ver.  19 ;  see  also 
ver.  22).  Kor  does  it  harmonize  with  the 
preceding  history  ol  this  chapter,  M  given 
by  the  LXX 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  18 — 16. — Jiidicial  Infatuation.  It  is  impossible  to  read  this  history  of 
the  great  rebellion,  even  at  the  present  day,  without  a  certain  feeling  of  sadness. 
We  see  here  a  young  prince,  heir  to  one  of  the  greatest  empires  of  antiquity,  the 
inheritor  of  an  illustrious  and  unequalled  name,  with  all  the  advantages  which  the 
glory  and  greatness  of  his  father  could  give  him,  reaping  the  benefits  of  a  long 
peace,  his  coffers  full  of  money,  his  cities  filled  with  all  manner  of  store,  his  fleets 
ploughing  the  sea,  his  army  guarding  his  frontier  ;  we  see  him  wantonly 
flinging  these  singular  advantages  away  from  him,  and  absolutely  courting  his  own 
destruction  and  the  dismemberment  of  his  kingdom.  We  see  a  position  which  has 
had  but  few,  if  any,  parallels  recklessly  sacrificed  for  the  lack  of  a  few  conciliatory 
words.  It  needed  but  the  slenderest  modicum  of  common  sense  and  all  would 
have  gone  well.  He  had  but  to  stoop  for  one  day  in  order  to  conquer  for  ever 
(ver.  7).  But  no  ;  we  hear  him  instead  hurling  opprobrious  words  at  the  spokesmen 
of  the  ten  tribes,  and  forthwith  the  land  is  ablaze  with  insurrection.  He  madly 
talks  of  the  might  of  his  little  finger,  of  whips  and  scorpions,  and  from  that  hour 


OH.  xn.  1—24.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KIxXGS.  267 

his  kingdom  is  divided  ;  the  holy  people  are  ranged  under  hostile  banners,  and  the 
way  is  opened  for  the  schiBm  in  the  Church.  We  talk  sometimes  of  men  who 
dance  on  the  edge  of  a  volcano,  and  we  have  read  of  Nero  fiddling  while  Borne  was 
bumrug,  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  history  affords  a  more  pitiable  instance 
of  folly  and  infatuation  than  this.  And  it  was  such  infatuation  that  we  can  hardly 
resist  the  conclusion  that  it  was,  somehow,  retributive  and  judicial.  "  Who  would 
not  have  looked  any  whither  for  the  cause  of  this  evU,  rather  than  to  heaven  ?  Tet 
the  holy  God  challenges  it  to  Himself  "  (Bp.  Hail).  "  The  cause  was  from  the  Lord." 
It  Is  well  that  we  should  imderstand,  however,  that  this  gross  infatuation  was 
only  one  out  of  many  factors  which  produced  the  disruption.  The  division  of  the 
kingdom — the  first  act  in  the  long  drama  of  retribution  for  the  sin  of  Solomon — was 
to  a  large  extent  the  natural  result  of  the  rule  and  poUcy  of  Solomon.  No  doubt 
of  all  the  causes  of  revolt  the  prophecy  of  Ahijah  was  the  most  influential.  It  was 
that  "beginning"  which,  as  Aristotle  sagely  remarks,  is  often  the  larger  half. 
Possibly  but  for  that,  Israel's  "  winter  of  discontent "  would  have  been  "  made 
glorious  by  the  summer  sun  "  of  the  accession  of  a  young  prince.  Probably  but 
for  that,  Jeroboam  would  never  have  "  Hfted  up  his  hand  against  the  king."  But 
we  must  not  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  the  people  had  had  a  "  heavy  yoke  "  to 
bear.  Behoboam  himself  confessed  to  this  (ver.  14).  It  is  idle  to  say  that  their 
demands  betray  a  foregone  conclusion  to  revolt.  The  contrary  is  distinctly  imphed 
in  verses  4,  7.  Nor  is  it  the  fact  that  the  rebellion  was  wholly  due  to  the  jealousy 
of  Ephraim,  for  that  proud  tribe  had  readily  acquiesced  in  the  supremacy  of  Judali 
during  the  reign  of  David.  Indeed,  the  rebellion  is  almost  inexplicable,  except  on  the 
supposition  that  the  people  had  suffered  real  hardships,  and  carried  heavy  burdens 
during  Solomon's  reign.  Men  do  not  soon  forget  the  glories  of  such  an  empire  as 
his,  and  do  not  wantonly  tear  it  asunder,  and  reduce  it  to  impotence,  unless  they 
have  had  substantial  grievances.  But  in  this  case,  so  many  were  their  grounds  of 
disaffection  that,  remembering  that  Jeroboam,'  who  no  doubt  appeared  to  them  in 
the  light  of  a  champion  and  tribune  of  the  people,  was  in  reserve,  should  they  need 
bis  services,  it  only  needed  the  infatuation  of  Behoboam  to  kindle  the  smouldering 
embers  of  discontent  into  a  fiame. 

And  when  we  see  in  this  inconceivable  infatuation  the  immediate  cause  of  the 
disruption,  we  must  still  remember  how  it  was  that  Behoboam  came  to  be  capable 
of  such  egregious  folly.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  he  was  expressly  blinded  for  the 
occasion  ?  Is  it  implied  that,  like  Saul,  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  troubled  him, 
orthatjlikeAhabihewasthe  victim  of  heaven-sent  delusions?  Is  it  not  rather  enough 
to  beUeve  that  he  was  simply  left  to  himself,  to  be  the  sport  of  his  own  foUy  and 
pride  ?  His  infatuation  would  still  be  judicial,  if  we  saw  in  it,  not  the  strange  per- 
versity of  a  moment,  but  the  spontaneous  outcome  of  his  birth  and  education. 
Indeed,  in  that  case,  it  would  be  still  more  conspicuously  the  just  and  appropriate 
retribution  for  his  father's  sin.  It  was  because  of  Solomon's  foreign  wives,  and  the 
idolatries  which,  with  his  sanction,  they  practised,  that  Solomon's  empire  was  to 
be  torn  firom  his  son  (chap.  zi.  33).  And  now  we  find  that  the  dismemberment  of 
this  empire  was  brought  about  by  the  son  of  one  of  these  strange  women — the  child 
of  an  unregenerate  Ammonitess.  It  has  been  said  that  "  every  great  man  is  the  son 
of  his  mother."  •  The  same  remark  might  be  made  of  every  great  fool.  It  was 
probably  because  Naamah  was  what  she  was  that  Behoboam  was  what  he  was. 
"  The  two  worst  men  in  my  parish,"  said  a  clergyman,  "  are  what  their  mothers  have 
made  them."  We  could  not  expect  much  character,  not  to  speak  of  wisdom,  in 
Solomon's  mistresses,  who  were  chosen  for  their  charms,  and  whose  cloistered  hfe, 
amid  the  intrigues,  and  follies,  and  pettinesses  of  the  harem,  did  not  fit  them  to  be  the 
mothers  of  kings.  What  knowledge  of  the  world  or  of  men,  what  honour,  what 
common  sense  could  we  hope  to  find  in  one  brought  up  under  such  influences  ? 
The  bearing  of  Behoboam  is  precisely  the  bearing  we  should  expect  as  the  result 
.of  the  training  of  an  Eastern  harem.  It  appears,  consequently,  that  we  may 
"justly  regard  his  infatuation  as  judicial,  not  so  much  in  the  sense  of  being  inspired 
*  "Regie  g^nerale,  a  laquelle  du  moms  je  n'ai  gu^iti  vu  d' exceptions,  ht  hemmes  tuperieurt 
font  tons  ksjils  de  U'tr  mire." — Mieheltt. 

1  KI.NOa.  ** 


253  THE  FIRSX  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xn.  1—24. 


for  the  moment,  bnt  as  being  the  natural  consequence  of  his  parents'  folly  and 
sin.  But  let  us  now  consider  what  shape  this  same  infatuation  took :  let  us  separate 
it  into  its  constituent  parts,  that  we  may  the  better  understand  Behoboam's  charao- 
ter,  and  see  the  workings  of  his  mind.    Observe — 

I.  His  entire  unconsciousness  of  DANaEE.  There  were  not  wanting,  to  those 
who  could  read  the  signs  of  the  times,  many  indications  of  peril.  It  was  a 
"  significant  hint "  that  Bhechem  had  been  selected  for  his  coronation ;  that  the 
tribes  insisted  on  a  conference ;  that  instead  of  acclamations  he  was  met  with 
stipulations.  It  was  a  prestige  of  danger  that  their  first  words  to  Solomon's  son, 
to  David's  grandson,  were  of  a  "  heavy  yoke  "  and  a  grievous  burden.  It  was  still 
more  ominous  that  Jeroboam  had  already  raised  the  standard  of  revolt,  and  that  this 
arch-rebel — according  to  the  received  text,  but  see  on  vers.  3,  20 — was  present  among 
the  malcontents.  Even  if  he  had  not  at  that  time  been  recalled  from  Egypt,  still 
Eehoboam  knew  full  well  that  he  was  there,  and  ready  to  rebel  again  if  opportunity 
offered.  All  these  were  mutterings  of  the  coming  storm,  and  no  one  who  was  not 
a  fool  could  have  failed  to  perceive  their  import. 

II.  His  vacillation  and  irresolution.  Bishop  Hall  observes  that  his  stipu- 
lating for  three  days  in  which  to  consider  their  demand  was  the  only  word  he  spoke 
which  avgued  wisdom.  Matthew  Henry,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  that  it  was 
"  impolitic  to  take  time  to  consider,"  and  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  this  was 
not  really  a  false  and  dangerous  move.  Had  lie  bluntly  refused  all  ooncessinns  ami 
laid  hands  on  the  ringleaders,  it  is  very  probable  that  such  a  display  of  enerjiy 
would  have  quelled  the  spirit  of  insurrection.  Or  had  he  graciously  and  instantly 
promised  a  redress  of  their  grievances,  he  would  have  preserved  his  crown.  But 
this  delay  was  dangerous.  It  set  them  a-tliinking  what  they  would  do  in  case  of 
a  refusal.  A  Fabian  policy  has  saved  some  states,  no  doubt ;  but  how  many  has  it 
destroyed  ?  And  if,  as  has  been  suggested  (on  ver.  6),  the  object  of  the  three 
days'  delay  was  that  he  might  summon  his  young  companions  to  his  side,  its 
unwisdom  is  still  more  apparent. 

III.  His  pride  and  obstinacy.  It  was  pride,  not  mental  incapacity,  led  him  to 
reject  the  counsel  of  the  old  men  and  seek  for  further  advice.  It  was  because  it 
went  against  the  graiu  to  be  a  "  servant,"  even  tor  one  day.  That  they  should  have 
presumed  to  ask  concessions,  or  to  parley  with  him  at  all,  was  an  offence  in  his  eyes. 
It  is  easy  to  read  his  vexation  between  the  Unes.  With  his  high-flown  notions  of 
Divine  right,  with  the  characteristic  contempt  of  an  autocrat  for  the  masses,  it  was 
mortifying  to  find  his  subjects  bandying  words  with  him.  We  may  be  pretty  sure 
that,  had  the  old  men  advised  "  whips  of  scorpions,"  &c.,  we  should  have  heard  of 
no  further  consultation.  The  pride  of  Solomon  and  the  pretensions  of  Naamah 
reappear  in  their  son. 

IV.  His  folly.  This,  which  is  conspicuous  all  the  way  through,  is  especially 
manifest  iu  (1)  his  turning  to  the  young  men  for  advice,  and  (2)  in  his  taking  it  in 
preference  to  that  of  the  old  men.  We  might  also  instance  the  threats  to  which 
he  stooped,  and  the  mission  of  Adoram,  but  these  come  more  appropriately  under— 

V.  His  insolence  and  defiance.  Had  he  wished  to  provoke  a  rebeUion,  he 
could  not  have  taken  more  effectual  means  to  secure  the  end.  "  I  will  add  to  your 
yoke."  "  I  will  chastise  yon  with  scorpions."  What  cry  could  he  possibly  expect 
in  return,  except  a  war-cry,  such  as  he  presently  heard  ?  If  he  had  meant  to 
punish,  he  should  surely  have  held  his  tongue  and  used  his  hands.  To  boast  of 
what  he  would  do  is  like  the  Chinese  warrior,  who  thinks  to  disperse  his  enemies  by 
a  ferocious  shout.  And  to  send  Adoram,  not  to  make  overtures  of  peace — Beho- 
boam's folly  would  hardly  go  so  far  as  to  select  him  for  such  a  mission — but,  as  it 
would  seem,  to  collect  tribute  or  to  make  a  show  of  his  authority,  why,  if  he  had 
designed  to  make  the  breach  u-reparable,  and  to  stamp  out  the  last  faint  hope  of 
reconciUation,  he  could  not  have  done  more.  It  was  the  act  of  a  spoilt  chUd,  it 
was  the  coming  out  in  the  flesh  of  what  was  bred  in  the  bone. 

Aniongst  the  lessons  this  history  teaches  are  these :  (1)  The  sins  of  the  fathers 
are  visited  upon  the  children,  and  that  by  ihe  operation  of  so-called  natural  laws. 
<2)  That  God  uses  the  folly,  as  well  as  the  wrath,  of  man  to  praise  Him.    (3)  That 


OH.  ML  1—24.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  258 

if  a  fool  be  brayed  in  a  mortar  with  a  pestle,  yet  Trill  not  his  foolishness  depart 
from  him,  (4)  That  the  mother  lias  the  marring  or  the  making  of  her  child  in  bei 
hands.    (6)  That, 

"  A  pebble  in  the  streamlet's  source, 

Hath  turned  the  course  of  many  a  river  { 

A  dewdrop  on  the  baby  plant, 

Eath  warped  the  giant  oak  for  ever." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0E3. 

Vers.  1—5. — The  Dead  wnd  the  Living,  "  The  king  is  dead ;  long  Kve  tlie  kmgt " 
This  paradox  expresses  an  important  truth.  Bathsheba  recognized  it  when  David 
on  his  deathbed  promised  her  that  Solomon,  her  son,  should  succeed  him  on  the 
throne,  and  she  said,  "  Let  my  lord  king  David  live  for  ever  "  (ch.  i.  31). 

I.  Solomon  IS  DEAD.  1.  His  active  form  ia  no  longer  seen.  (1)  He  "slept  with 
his  fathers  "  (ch.  xi.  43).  He  has  stiffened  into  a  corpse.  Perfectly  passive  now  ! 
What  a  moral  1  The  doom  of  alL  Work  while  it  is  day.  (2)  He  was  "  buried  in 
the  city  of  David  his  father."  He  had  a  royal  funeral.  But  all  this  state  was 
simply  to  bury  Mm — to  put  him  out  of  sight.  Much  wisdom  is  bttried  alive  in 
state  display.  (3)  Jeroboam  may  now  return  from  Egypt.  The  protection  of 
Shishak  is  no  longer  needed.  Human  wrath  has  its  limitations.  Not  so  Divine 
wrath  (see  Matt.  x.  28).  2.  Where  ia  the  disembodied  spirit  f  (1)  Not  extinct. 
Not  in  stupor.  The  term  "  sleep "  relates  to  the  body.  It  anticipates  for  it  an 
awaking — a  resurrection.  (2)  Stirring  in  the  world  of  spirits  as  it  stirred  when 
embodied  in  tliis  world  of  matter.  ^3)  What  a  world  is  that  I  How  populous  ! 
How  darkly  veiled  I  yet  how  interesting  to  us  ^lio  are  on  our  way  thither  1 

II.  Bdt  he  survives  in  Bbhoboam.  This  fact  is  the  ground  of — 1.  Behoboam't 
cla/im  to  the  throne.  (1)  He  is  Solomon's  representative.  This  is  more  than  a  law 
phrase.  Had  he  not  been  the  son  of  Solomon  he  would  not  have  been  invited  to 
Sheohem.  We  inherit  responsibihties.  (2)  Solomon  lives  in  Eehoboam  with  a 
potency  to  move  "  aU  Israel."  See  the  nation  from  Dan  to  Beersheba,  under  this 
influence,  streaming  down  to  Shechem.     2.  The  nation's  suit  to  the  claimant. 

(1)  In  thib  uhey  recognise  the  claim  of  Solomon's  representative  to  the  crown. 

(2)  Also  that  he  may  likewise  oppress  them  as  Solomon  had  done  (see  ch.  iv.  7,  22 ; 
ix.  15).     From  Solomon's  oppressions  they  seek  of  Solomon,  in  Eehoboam,  relief. 

(3)  How  history  verifies  prophecy  (see  1  Sam.  viii.  10 — 18). 

III.  So   SURVIVING,  HIS  INFLUENCE  13  MODIFIED.      1.   A  nCW  tndvoidual  WppeOTB, 

(1)  Eehoboam  is  not  the  &csimile  of  Solomon.  He  is  indeed  the  son  of  a  vrise 
man ;  but  the  son,  not  of  his  wisdom,  but  of  his  folly.  His  mother  was  an 
Ammonitess.  This  fact  is  emphasised,  according  to  the  Hebrew  style,  by  being 
stated  and  restated  (ch.  xiv.  21,  31).  (2)  His  character  is  the  resultant  of  the 
influences  of  Solomon,  of  Naamah,  and  of  those  which  also  flowed  into  the  current 
of  his  life  during  the  apostasy  of  his  father.  He  became  the  impersonation  of  these 
various  moral  forces.  (3)  "The  influence  of  Solomon  in  Eehoboam,  therefore,  is 
considerably  modified.  Parents  are  to  a  large  extent  responsible  not  only  for  their 
own  direct  influence  upon  the  character  of  their  children,  but  also  for  the  con- 
temporary influences  to  which  they  allow  them  to  be  exposed.  2.  New  relation- 
ships have  therefore  to  be  formed.  (1)  The  people  suffered  the  imposts  of  Solomon 
while  he  lived.  They  grew  upon  them  by  degrees,  and  brought  with  them  a 
system  of  vested  interests.  The  whole  system  became  so  crystallized  around  the 
person  of  the  king  that  it  was  difficult  to  obtain  rehef.  (2)  Now  Solomon  is  dead 
all  this  is  loosened,  and  the  opportunity  is  given  for  the  nation  to  remonstrate. 
They  are  prompt  to  improve  it.  (3)  Jeroboam  is  not  only  present  now,  which 
he  would  not  have  been  had  Solomon  lived,  but  is  made  the  spokesman  of  the 
people.  (4)  Eehoboam  confesses  the  force  of  these  altered  circumstances  in  listpn- 
ing  to  the  suit,  and  taking  time  to  deliberate  upon  the  nature  of  his  reply.  The 
value  of  influences  is  a  most  profitable  subject  for  Chiistiaa  consideration ;  present- 
posthumous  (see  2  Peter  i.  16). — M. 


260  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xii.  1—24, 

Ver.  6 — 11. — ItraeVs  Magna  Charta.  The  qnestion  submitted  to  Eehoboam  at 
Shechem  concerned  the  conBtitution  of  the  monarchy.  Hitherto  there  had  been 
no  constitution  defining  the  rights  of  the  people  and  limiting  the  power  of  the 
crown.  Eehoboam  took  three  days  to  deliberate  upon  the  people's  BiU  of  Eights, 
and  in  that  interval  took  counsel.  The  old  men  who  stood  before  Solomon  advised 
concession,  while  the  young  ones,  who  had  grown  op  with  him,  recommended 
resistance.    Wisdom  was  with  the  ancients. 

I.  Limited  monarchy  la  best  foe  the  people.  1.  Becwuse  it  reeogrdtes  their 
rights.  (1)  The  people  do  not  exist  for  the  king.  They  may  be  governed  as  a 
republic  without  a  king.  (2)  But  the  king  exists  for  the  people.  Where  no  people 
are  there  can  be  no  king.  (3)  For  a  king,  therefore,  to  use  the  people  simply  for 
his  own  aggrandisement  and  ignore  their  rights  is  preposterous  (Jer.  ii.  14).  2.  It 
respects  their  happiness.  (1)  Since  the  people  collectively  are  of  more  importance 
than  an  individual  monarch,  the  haughty  bearing  of  a  monarch  is  out  of  place. 
So  the  sages  counselled  Eehoboam  to  "  serve  "  the  people  and  "  speak  good  words 
to  them."  (2)  The  interests  of  a  good  king  will  be  bound  up  with  the  happiness 
of  his  subjects,  and  he  cannot  reasonably  object  to  a  constitution  that  will  recognise 
this  community  of  interests. 

II.  It  is  best  also  foe  the  peince.  1.  It  encourages  his  virtues.  (1)  It  does 
this  by  limiting  his  extravagance.  Solomon  would  have  been  far  happier  had  his 
pecple  been  saved  the  charge  of  building  palaces  for,  and  sustaining  in  state,  seven 
hundred  princesses  and  three  hundred  concubines.  (2)  For  what  would  be  neces- 
sary to  sustain  his  rank  a  constitutional  king  might  trust  the  good  sense  of  liis 
people.  At  Sliechem  they  did  not  seek  exemption  from  taxation,  but  relief  from 
its  excesses.  They  knew  that  it  would  not  be  to  the  credit  of  a  great  people  to 
pauperise  their  prince.  2.  It  gives  stability  to  his  throne.  (1)  "  They  will  be  thy 
servants  for  ever."  Such  was  the  manner  in  which  this  was  expressed  by  the  sages. 
It  wiU  be  their  interest  to  be  so.  Gratitude  also  will  bind  them.  The  loyalty  of 
love  is  stronger  and  more  enduring  than  that,  of  fear.  This  is  the  loyalty  which 
the  gospel  claims,  and  the  constancy  of  the  subjects  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is 
witnessed  in  a  million  martyrdoms.  (2)  Who  rules  over  a  loving  people  may  be 
tranquil.  He  need  not  fear  the  poniard  of  the  assassin.  (This  is  tiie  paradise  of 
tyrants  1)  He  will  have  the  joy  of  ruling  over  a  happy  nation.  The  typical  con- 
stitutional monarch  is  the  father  of  his  people. 

III.  Advocates  of  tyeanny  scorn  to  reason.  1.  The  yowng  counsellors  give 
no  reasons.  (1)  This  method  they  leave  to  the  ancients.  For  reasons  they 
substitute  smart  speech.  "  Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  them,  My  little  finger  shall 
be  thicker  than  my  father's  loins."  Pertness  too  often  has  displaced  reason. 
(2)  Why  should  reasons  be  given  by  one  who  claims  a  Divine  right  to  act  as 
he  pleases?  2.  But  may  there  not  be  a  benevolent  a/atocracy ?  (1)  Certainly. 
And  if  this  can  be  guaranteed,  together  with  competent  wisdom,  then  there  is  no 
better  government.  For  is  not  this  the  very  idea  of  the  government  of  God? 
(2)  But  who  can  guarantee  this  in  hiunan  kingdoms?  The  people  certainly  are 
as  likely  to  know  what  is  for  their  welfare  as  the  majority  of  their  kings.  (3)  What 
if  the  autocrat  should  prove  a  fool  ?  What  if  he  should  prove  a  devil  ?  Would 
not  a  kingdom  in  this  case  be  a  hell  upon  earth  ?  (4)  Eehoboam  seems  to  have 
combined  the  satanio  and  the  foolish.  Lost  the  greater  part  of  his  kingdom; 
reigned  over  the  remnant  wickedly.  Christians  should  pray  for  their  rulers. 
They  should  bless  God  for  their  liberties. — M. 

Vers.  12 — 16. — Infatuation.  "  Whom  the  gods  mean  to  destroy  they  first 
infatuate."  Such  was  the  observation  of  a  heathen  philosopher ;  and  it  is  true, 
only  that  the  inlatuators  are  devils,  and  God  permits.  The  text  furnishes  a  case  in 
point.  What  but  infatuation  could  have  prompted  Eehoboam  to  have  acted  so 
insanely  ?     It  is  seen — 

1.  In  his  refusal  to  hearken  to  the  people.  1.  They  assembled  to  honour 
him.  (1)  He  was  invited  to  Shechem  to  meet  them  that  they  might  crown  him. 
(2^  Chey  promised  to  serve  him  as  they  had  served  his  father.  They  had  a  reserva- 


OH.  m.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  *ol 

tion,  but — ^2.  Thei/r  reservation  was  not  unreasonable.  (1)  They  ha?,  suff-jrpcf  .rhat 
they  called  a  "  grievous  yoke  "  of  taxation  and  servitude,  of  which  they  desired  a 
relaxation.  Had  they  not  a  right  to  demand  this  ?  Did  the  people  exint  to  be  the 
slaves  of  their  kings  ?  (2)  They  did  not  ask  to  be  released  from  all  taxation  and 
servioe.  They  acknowledged  the  duty  of  sustaining  the  legitimate  burdens  of  the 
state.    Why,  then,  did  he  not  hearken  ? 

II.  In  the  answeb  he  gave  them.    1.  Bespecting  Ms  father's  administration. 

(1)  He  owned  that  his  father  had  ruled  with  rigour  ;  that  he  had  made  their  yoke 
heavy.  He  put  it  even  stronger  than  the  complainants ;  that  he  had  "  chastised 
then:!  with  whips."  (2)  Might  he  not  rather  have  softened  it  to  them  ?  He  could 
have  reminded  them  that  Solomon  had  created  their  commerce ;  that  their  commerce 
had  so  enriched  them  that  they  might  bear  the  taxes ;  that  his  wisdom  had  made 
the  nation  great  and  respected  ;  that  he  had  built  their  temple  ;  that  they  had 
something  for  their  taxes  in  great  public  works.  (8)  But  he  lacked,  not  only  the 
wisdom  of  his  father,  but  also  the  feelings  of  a  good  son.  2.  Bespecting  his  own. 
iX)  He  declares  that  he  will  rule  them  more  oppressively  than  his  father  did ;  that 
he  will  increase  their  burdens  and  sting  them  with  "scorpions" — knotted  whips 
armed  with  iron  points.  (2)  These  rough  and  hard  words  were  paraded  and  ren- 
dered more  offensive  by  the  rough  and  hard  manner  (ver.  13).  (3)  How  gratuitous 
was  this  insolence  I    "What  but  infatuation  could  have  prompted  it?    It  is  seen — 

III.  In  tee  ciboumstances  attendino  the  answeb.  1.  It  was  deliberately 
^iven.  (1)  It  could  not  claim  the  excuse  of  being  uttered  thoughtlessly  in  haste, 
for  he  had  taken  three  days  to  consider  it.  (2)  In  taking  these  three  days  the 
tyrant  betrayed  the  fool.  It  gave  the  people  time  to  confer  and  agree  upon  a 
policy.  2.  It  was  advisedly  gi/oen.  (1)  He  did  not  speak  without  counsel.  He  had 
taken  the  advice  of  the  wits  with  whom  he  had  been  brought  up.  (2)  He  had  also 
consulted  the  sages  who  had  been  schooled  in  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  he  might 
have  acted  upon  it  but  did  not.  (8)  He  left  God  out  of  his  counsels,  though  his 
Shechinah  was  stUl  in  the  temple.  3.  He  trusted  in  his  fortune.  (1)  He  was  the 
son  of  Solomon.  Probably  the  only  son.  We  read  of  no  other ;  had  there  been  one 
he  would  probably  have  been  mentioned  as  a  rival  who  would  keep  the  nation 
nnited.  (Note:  population  is  not  increased  by  polygamy.  Hosea  iv.  10.) 
Behoboam,  therefore,  presimied  upon  the  strength  of  his  claim  to  the  throne. 

(2)  Even  the  presence  of  Jeroboam  at  the  head  of  the  remonstrants  did  not  shake 
his  confidence  in  his  fortune.  He  could  scarcely  have  been  ignorant  of  the  message 
of  Ood  to  his  father,  and  the  corresponding  prophecy  of  Ahijah.  But  what  are  the 
words  of  Jehovah  to  this  son  of  Naamah  the  Ammonitess,  whose  national  god  was 
Molech  ?  (3)  But  the  Providence  he  ignored  is  seen  in  the  infatuation  that  ignored 
it.  The  cause,  the  (riDD)  revolution, -was  from  the  Lord  (ver.  16.)  ''They  that 
lose  the  kingdom  of  heaven  throw  it  away  as  Behoboam  did  his,  by  their  own  wil- 
fiilness  and  foUy  "  (Matthew  Henry).  Miserable  is  the  infatuation  that  imperiLi 
the  salvation  of  the  souL — M. 

Vers.  16 — ^20. — The  Sevolution.  The  nneonciliatory,  insulting,  insane  conduct 
of  Behoboam  in  rejecting  the  Bill  of  Bights  of  the  people  of  Israel  provoked  a 
revolution  in  the  state.     This  is  recorded  in  the  text,  in  which  we  learn  that — 

I.  It  commenced  with  the  ebjeotion  of  the  king.  1.  This  act  was  done 
in  haste.  (1)  By  his  hesitation  at  such  a  time,  under  such  circumstances,  to 
listen  to  their  grievances,  the  people  saw  that  Behoboam  was  a  tyrant.  They 
accordingly  avaUed  themselves  of  the  three  days  he  took  to  consider  his  reply,  to 
concert  their  measures,  and  were  therefore  ready  for  action.  (2)  They  soon  "  saw 
that  the  king  hearkened  not."  He  left  them  in  no  doubt,  for  he  took  high  ground 
at  once.  And  they  were  as  prompt  in  their  resolution.  2.  It  was  done  in  amger. 
(1)  This  is  seen  in  the  manner  in  which  the  leaders  of  the  people  mingle  theif 
advice  to  their  constituents  with  their  answer  to  the  king  (ver.  16).  (2)  Also  in  the 
promptness  with  which  the  people  acted  upon  the  advice.  •'  So  Israel  departed 
unto  their  tents."  8.  But  their  anger  carried  them  too  far.  (1)  Why  include 
David  in  theii  resentment  ?  Had  they  no  inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jesse  ?   ^Yullld 


262  THE  FIEST  LOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xil  1—24. 

they  liave  said  so  whon  David  delivered  them  from  the  hand  of  Goliath?  How 
fitful  is  the  passion  of  the  multitude  I  Hov?  soon  are  good  men  forgotten  I  (2)  In 
rejecting  David  did  they  not  forsake  the  Lord  who  gave  them  David  and  his  seed 
for  ever  by  a  covenant  of  salt  ?  (2  Chron.  xiii.  B—9.)  (3)  la  rejecting  David,  in 
whom  was  the  promise  of  Messiah,  did  they  not  go  far  towards  rejecting  Christ  ? 
See  Stephen's  argument.  Acts  vii.  (4)  Were  they  not  impolitio  in  this  ?  In  so 
rejecting  David  they  alienated  from  their  cause  the  great  tribe  of  Judah.  Wrong 
is  never  truly  politic.  (5)  In  their  hot  haste  they  do  not  consult  God,  either  by 
urim  or  by  prophet  (Hosea  viii.  4). 

II.  It  was  completed  in  the  ceownino  op  Jeeoboam.  1.  Between  these  acts 
there  was  an  interval.  (1)  While  in  their  tents  the  IsraeHtes  were  still  open  to 
consider.  They  were  as  yet  committed  to  no  poUoy  for  the  future.  Time  and  re- 
flection might  have  shown  them  that  their  anger  had  been  carried  too  far.  (2) 
Wise  counsel  now  might  have  brought  befor«  them  the  evils  of  a  division  in  the 
nation.  Thus  they  would  be  weakened  in  the  presence  of  the  heathen.  And 
in  case  of  differences  with  Judah  difficulties  might  arise  in  respect  to  their  rehgious 
duties.  For  their  temple  was  in  the  dominion  of  Judah.  They  may,  there- 
fore, be  liable  to  temptations  to  irreligion,  if  not  to  idolatry.  (3)  While  in  their 
tents  they  were  likewise  stiU  open  to  negotiations.  Eeasonable  concessions  now 
from  Eehoboam  might  bring  them  back  to  their  allegiance.  2.  But  Behoboam's 
folly  hastened  the  sequel.  (1)  He  sent  among  them  "  Adoram,  who  was  over  the 
tribute."  Adoram,  from  his  office,  was  odious  to  them,  for  the  taxes  he  had 
collected  were  the  very  ground  of  their  complaint.  Thus  the  infatuation  of  the 
king  was  as  conspicuous  in  his  choice  of  an  ambassador  as  in  that  of  his  coun- 
sellors. (2)  The  haste  with  which  this  was  done  aggravated  the  evil.  It  was  done 
while  he  was  yet  in  Sheohem,  before  his  return  to  Jerusalem.  If  Adoram  was 
commissioned  then  to  collect  taxes,  Behohoam  lost  no  time  in  producing  his 
•corpion.  (3)  Irritated  as  they  were,  this  act  roused  their  resentment  to  fury,  and 
"  all  Israel  stoned "  Adoram  to  death.  3.  They  now  completed  the  revolution. 
(1)  Eehoboam,  in  terror  of  his  life,  mounted  his  chariot,  and  fled  to  Jerusalem.  So 
ignominiously  ended  his  threatening  words  1  (Prpv.  xL  2  ;  xvi.  18  ;  xviL  19  ;  xviii. 
12.)  (2)  Israel,  now  free  from  the  embarrassment  of  the  monarch's  presence  pro- 
ceeded at  once  to  crown  Jeroboam.  (8)  But  in  all  this  there  is  no  consultation  with 
the  Lord ;  yet  to  the  letter  are  the  predictions  of  Ahijah  verified.  There  is  a  Pro- 
vidence in  human  affairs.  Prophecy  makes  this  evident.  Wicked  men  are,  in 
their  very  waywardness,  unconsciously  made  the  instrumentB  of  that  Providence  in 
bringing  punishment  upon  themselves. — M. 

Vers.  21 — 24. — The  Message  of  Shemaidh.  In  the  order  of  Providence  the 
words  of  the  prophet  Ahijah  became  so  far  translated  into  history,  that  ten  of  the 
tribes  of  Israel  had  revolted  from  the  son  of  Solomon  and  had  made  the  son  of 
Nebat  their  king.  Eehoboam,  unwilling  to  lose  so  unportant  a  portion  of  his 
kingdom,  was  now  mustering  a  formidable  army  to  reduce  them  to  submission.  At 
this  juncture  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Shemaiah.     Let  us  consider — 

I.  The  message.  1.  It  was  the  word  of  Jehovah.  (1)  So  it  is  worthy  of  all 
respect.  It  is  the  word  of  Infinite  Wisdom  and  Knowledge.  It  is  the  word  of  the 
Supreme  Arbiter.  (2)  God  does  not  speak  immediately  to  men  upon  ordinary 
occasions.  Indirectly  He  speaks  to  us  evermore  and  in  a  million  voices.  (3) 
Happy  is  that  people  among  whom  the  voice  ot  God  is  heard.  This  was  eminently 
the  happiness  of  Israel.  It  was  a  sad  day  in  Israel  when  there  was  "  no  open 
vision"  (1  Sam.  iii.l).  2.  It  came  hy  the  hand  of  Shemaiah.  (1)  God  spake  "in 
divers  manners."  By  audible  voice,  as  from  Sinai ;  by  urim,  as  in  the  temple ;  by 
dreani ;  and  by  prophet,  as  in  the  present  case.  (2)  Ahijah  was  a  man  of  God. 
Such  in  general  were  the  prophets.  But  sometimes  it  pleased  God  to  use  persons 
of  equivocal  character  ;— Balaam,  Pharaoh,  Nebuohadnezzaf,  Caiaphas  (John  xi. 
49—52).  8.  It  cami-  to  the  wlmle  community.  (1)  To  Eehoboam.  He  was  first 
mentioned  as  the  head.  Also  because  he  was  the  principal  cause  of  the  mischief 
which  he  now  sought  to  repair.     (2)  To  Judah  and  Benjamin.     These  tribes  were 


OH.  XII.  1—24.1  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  263 

BO  united  as  to  be  viewed  as  "  one  tribe,"  and  are  unitedly  called  "  Jurlali."  Th« 
temple  was  actually  within  Benjamin's  boundary.  (3)  To  the  remnant  of  the 
people.  These  consisted  of  priests  and  Levites,  and  godly  people  out  of  all  tha 
tribes  who  were  unwilling  to  separate  themselves  from  the  house  of  David  (2  Chron. 
xi.  13 — 16).  4.  It  oommcmdrsd  peace.  (1)  They  were  not  to  fight  with  their 
brethren.  The  case  must  be  extreme  that  can  justify  a  civil  war.  What  miseries 
must  have  ensued  if  180,000  warriors  of  Judah  had  encountered  a  corresponding 
army  of  Israel  1  (2)  They  were  to  submit  to  a  revolution  which  was  from  tha 
Lord.  Not  that  God  was  the  author  of  it,  but  permitted  to  be  brought  about  by  the 
king  and  his  people  for  the  punishment  of  their  wickedness.  "  What  is  brought 
about  in  the  course  of  God's  providence  is  considered  and  spoken  of  as  done  by 
Him  as  a  general  would  say  that  he  drew  the  enemy  into  a  snare,  which  he  had 
only  laid  in  his  way  "  (Julius  Bate). 

II.  Its  reception,  1.  They  hearlcened  to  the  word.  (1)  They  recognized  it 
as  the  word  of  God.  Shemaiah  was  known  to  be  a  "man  of  God."  His  message 
also  agreed  to  that  of  Ahijah,  the  fulfilment  of  a  part  of  which  pledged  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  remainder.  (2)  To  resist  now  would  be  to  fight  against  God.  This 
would  be  a  hopeless  business.  But  is  not  this  the  attitude  of  every  sinner?  2. 
They  returned  to  their  houses.  •  (1)  The  remnant  of  Israel  were  naturally  glad  to  be 
spared  the  horroi-s  of  a  war  with  their  brethren.  (2)  So  were  the  people  of  Judah 
and  Benjamin.  People  are  generally  averse  to  war  unless  stirred  up  to  it  by  their 
rulers.  What  a  responsibility  rests  with  war-makers  I  (3)  Rehoboam  is  powerless 
without  the  people.  He  is  now  thoroughly  cowed.  The  discipline  was  good  for 
him.  This  was  seen  in  the  next  three  years  of  his  reign.  It  were  well  if  all  men 
recognised  God's  word  when  it  comes  to  them.  We  have  God's  word  written  in 
the  Scriptures  of  truth.  Do  we  take  it  home  to  guide  and  aontrol  our  conduct  ? 
— M. 

Vers.  12 — 16. — The  rending  of  the  Tcingdom.  The  name  of  Rehoboam  is  re- 
markable as  seen  in  the  light  of  the  facts  of  his  history.  The  "  enlarger  of  the  king- 
dom "  becomes  the  chief  instrument  in  its  disruption.  The  one  strong  nation,  the 
throne  of  which  he  inherited  I'rom  his  father,  is  changed  by  his  folly  into  two  com- 
paratively weak  and  distracted  kingdoms,  which  maintain  towards  each  other  an 
attitude  of  perpetual  jealousy  and  strife.  The  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  was  a  calamity 
from  the  ill  effects  of  which  the  land  never  recovered.  Both  politically  and  re- 
ligiously the  unity  of  the  chosen  people  was  hopelessly  broken,  and  the  career  of 
each  separate  division  became  henceforth  one  of  ever  deepening  corruption.  The 
northern  kingdom  was  governed  for  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  by  a  succession 
of  men  who  followed  only  too  closely  in  the  steps  of  "  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat, 
who  made  Israel  to  sin."  Their  reigns  were  httle  else  than  a  story  of  crime  and 
bloodshed  and  confusion.  And  though  the  history  of  Judah  was  not  quite  so  dark, 
it  tells  very  much  the  same  tale.  Few  of  its  kings  were  wholly  free  from  the 
prevalent  wickedness.  The  efforts  of  the  noblest  of  them,  aided  by  all  the  moral 
influence  of  a  long  line  of  inspired  prophets,  were  powerless  to  arrest  the  down- 
fall of  the  state  ;  tiU  at  last,  after  three  hundred  and  eighty  years,  it  sunk  into  the 
shame  and  misery  of  the  Captivity.  How  can  it  be  said  of  all  this,  that  "  The 
cause  was  from  the  Lord"?  Look  (1)  at  the  human  element,  (2)  at  the  Divine 
element,  in  this  transaction.     It  is  full  of  meaning  for  every  age. 

I.  Thk  human  element.  The  rending  of  the  kingdom  was  not  a  sudden  event 
that  came  without  warning.  As  in  all  such  cases,  a  variety  of  circumstances  pre- 
pared the  way  for  it.  There  were  slumbering  sources  of  mischief,  certain  conditions 
of  thought  and  feeling,  specially  old  jealousies  between  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and 
Judah,  that  made  it  inevitable.  But  having  regard  to  the  nearer  occasions,  note— 
(1)  How  the  seed  of  evil  sown  in  one  generation  bears  deadly  fruit  in  the  next. 
Trace  the  calamity  back  to  the  time  when  Solomon's  heart  first  began  to  turn  from 
the  Lord.  The  root  of  it  lay  in  his  idolatry,  and  in  the  oppressions  into  which  hia 
luxury  led  him.  That  idolatry  undermined  the  deepest  foundation  of  the  nation's 
unity  in  its  loyalty  to  Jehovah,  the  Great  Invisible  King ;  that  tyranny  violated  the 


264  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xii.  1—24 

public  sense  of  righteousness,  which  Ib  the  strength  of  every  nation,  and  kindled  a 
smouldering  fire  of  discontent,  which  was  sure,  when  occasion  served,  to  burst  into 
a  flame.  So  true  is  it  that  the  evil,  as  well  as  the  good,  men  do  "  lives  after  them." 
Through  the  subtle  relations  that  exist  between  man  and  man,  generation  and 
generation,  the  possible  influence  of  any  form  of  wrong-doing  can  never  be 
measured.  It  spreads  in  widening  circles.  As  in  the  line  of  individaal  history 
eveiy  man  reaps  what  he  sows — 

••  Our  deeils  still  travel  with  us  from  afar, 
And  what  we  have  been  makes  us  what  we  are"— 

go  in  the  line  of  succeeding  generations.  Germs  of  evil  sown  by  the  fathers  spring 
up  among  their  children.  There  is  a  conservation  of  moral  forces  as  of  material. 
Let  a  corrupting  power  be  once  set  in  motion,  and,  though  hidden  for  awhile,  it  is 
sure  to  appear  again  in  some  riper  and  more  extended  form.  The  nation  retains 
its  visible  unity  under  Solomon,  but  when  the  charm  of  his  personal  reign  is  over, 
the  disintegrating  work  that  has  been  going  on  beneath  the  surface  is  made 
manifest.  (2)  The  danger  there  is  in  following  the  prompting  of  foolish 
inexperience  and  headstrong  self-wiU.  Eehoboam  was  wise  in  taking  counsel 
of  his  advisers  in  this  emergency.  His  foUy  lay  in  listening  to  those  who  flattered 
his  vanity,  rather  than  those  whose  prudence  was  a  safer  guide  ;  and  in  supposing 
that,  whether  the  discontent  that  urged  the  plea  of  oppression  was  reasonable  or  not, 
heavier  oppression  would  cure  it.  It  is  a  familiar  picture  of  human  life  that  we 
have  here.  "  Days  should  speak,  and  multitude  of  years  teach  wisdom " 
(Job  xxxii.  7) ;  but  how  often  is  the  counsel  of  youthful  incompetence  followed 
because  it  is  more  agreeable.  There  is  a  time  to  resist  as  well  as  to  yield ;  but 
experience  shows  that  the  pride  that  refuses  all  reasonable  concession,  and  perhaps" 
adds  insult  to  wrong,  defeats  its  own  end.  To  stoop  is  often  to  conquer.  To 
humble  one's  self  is  the  way  to  be  exalted.  Imperious  self-wiU  rushes  blindly  to  its 
own  ruin.  Kindly  human  sympathy  and  generous  self-abandonment  vrin  honour 
and  power.     "  He  that  would  be  great  among  you,"  &c.  (Matt.  xx.  26,  27). 

II.  The  Divine  element.  This  is  seen  in  two  respects.  (1)  So  far  ae  these 
events  were  the  result  of  the  wrong-doing  of  men,  God  ordains  the  laws  by  virtue 
of  which  that  result  comes  to  pass.  AU  sin  is  a  defiance  of  the  Divine  Authority. 
But  the  sovereignty  of  God  is  proclaimed  in  the  very  disasters  that  follow  it  and 
avenge  it.  What  is  the  punishment  of  sin  but  an  assertion,  in  a  form  that  cannot 
be  avoided,  of  the  authority  against  which  it  is  a  rebellion  ?  We  can  no  more 
avert  the  penalty  that  treads  on  the  heels  of  trangression  than  we  can  escape  from 
our  own  shadow,  or  change  the  course  of  nature,  and  that  because  we  cannot  get 
beyond  the  reach  of  God.  The  law  that  governs  it  is  backed  by  aU.  the  forces  of 
Omnipotence.  It  is  but  a  phase  of  the  Will  that  is  "  holy  and  just  and  good." 
Learn  to  look  through  all  the  wayward  and  uncertain  forms  of  human  action  to 
the  majesty  of  that  Eternal  Bighteousness  that  "  cannot  be  mocked,"  but  will 
vindicate  itself  in  unfailing  sequences  of  reward  and  punishment.  (2)  Evil  as 
these  events  and  doings  may  be,  God  works  out  through  them  Hia  own  all-wise 
purposes.  The  principle  involved  in  this  may  be  profoundly  mysterious  to  us,  but 
the  fact  is  too  manifest  to  be  denied.  Jeroboam  may  have  been  utterly  wrong  in 
the  spirit  that  moved  him,  taking  advantage  of  tribal  jealousy  for  the  purposes  of 
his  own  ambition  ;  and  yet  he  did  but  fulfil  the  Divine  decree  expressed  through 
Ahijah  the  Shilonite  (oh.  xi.  29  seq.),  and  even  through  the  prediction  of  the 
patriarch  Jacob,  which  gave  to  Joseph  the  ascendancy  and  declared  that  the  seed 
of  Ephraim  should  "  become  a  multitude  of  nations."  Behoboam's  high-handed 
policy  was  without  excuse,  and  yet  he  and  his  fooUsh  counsellors  were  but  ministers 
of  the  Divine  purpose,  maintaining  God's  choice  of  the  house  of  David,  and  help- 
ing to  fulfil  the  prophecy  that  the  "  sceptre  should  not  depart  from  Judah  until 
SMloh  come."  All  history  is  fuU  of  illustrations  of  the  way  in  which  God  makes 
the  evil  of  the  world,  in  itself  essentially  at  variance  with  His  will,  to  serve  TTitti. 
AU  streams  of  human  foils  and  wrong,  wandermg  and  tortuous  as  they  may  be. 


«H.  xiL  1—24.]  THE  FiiibT  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  268 

become  tributoiy  to  the  great  river  of  His  purpose,  "  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man 
to  praise  Him."  The  highest  example  is  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  man's  iniquity 
working  out  the  world's  redemption.  "  Him,  being  delivered  by  the  determinate 
counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  ye  have  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands,"  &c.  (Acta 
ii.  28).  The  final  verification  of  this  truth  belongs  to  the  time  when,  out  of  all  the 
sin  and  strife  and  sorrow  of  the  ages,  God  shall  bring  forth  the  glorious  triumph 
of  His  gracious  sovereignty,  the  "  gathering  together  into  one  of  all  things  in 
Christ."— W. 

Vers.  18,  14. — Behohoami'a  Folly.  Such  madness  is  scarcely  credible  in  the 
eon  of  Solomon.  These  two  kings  present  a  remarkable  contrast.  Solomon  at 
twenty  years  of  age  is  the  wisest  man  of  his  times,  Behoboam  his  son,  at  forty,  is 
unfit  to  rule  himself  or  his  people.  Wisdom  is  not  by  descent,  but  is  the  gift  of 
God.  Describe  the  scene  in  the  chapter :  the  visit  of  Behoboam  to  Shecbem, 
probably  with  a  view  to  conciliate  the  ten  tribes ;  the  complaint  of  the  people  ;  the 
two  councils  of  the  king ;  the  maddening  effect  of  his  reply.  The  study  of  small 
and  foolish  men  is  advantageous,  as  well  as  the  study  of  the  great  and  wise,  that  by 
their  follies  we  may  be  warned.  Behoboam's  faults  lie  on  the  surface,  as  would  be 
natural  in  so  shallow  a  character  as  his.  A  careful  study  of  the  chapter  reveals  to 
us  the  following. 

I.  Behoboam's  feebleness  of  oharaotee.  We  should  expect  of  one  who  suc- 
ceeded to  the  throne  in  the  prime  of  his  life  some  clear  notions  of  the  policy  he 
would  pursue.  Brought  up  in  a  court  to  which  the  rulers  of  other  peoples  came 
(ch.  X.  24),  over  which  the  wisest  king  of  that  age  ruled,  he  was  rich  in  natural 
advantages.  He  could  also  have  discovered  for  himself  the  condition  of  the  people, 
their  causes  of  complaint,  &c.  Had  he  given  himself  to  such  thought  he  would 
have  been  prepared  for  prompt  and  resolute  action  on  his  accession.  Instead  of 
this  he  seems  helpless ;  turns  now  to  these  and  now  to  those  for  counsel,  and  has 
not  even  enough  wisdom  to  weigh  the  value  of  advice  when  it  is  given.  "  Unstable 
as  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel,"  is  a  law  of  far-reaching  application.  Amongst  the 
virtues  we  should  inculcate  in  our  children  is  that  of  sober  self-reliance.  It  may  b» 
fostered  in  the  home  with  safety  and  advantage.  Trust  a  child  with  something 
which  he  is  free  to  use  or  abuse,  in  order  to  test  him,  and  develop  in  him  this 
grace.  Probably  Behoboam  had  been  brought  up  in  the  harem,  and  so  had  tha 
heart  of  a  child,  with  the  years  of  a  man.  All  gifts  must  be  exercised  to  increase 
their  value.  "  A  double-minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways,"  and  an  example 
of  this  lies  before  us. 

IL  Behoboam's  contempt  of  expebienoe.  He  consulted  the  old  advisers  of 
Solomon,  it  is  true,  but  clearly  for  the  look  of  the  thing  only.  Directly  after 
speaking  with  "  the  responsible  ministers  of  the  crown,"  he  turned  to  the  courtiers, 
who  were  far  less  able  to  advise  in  such  a  crisis.  Job  says,  "  With  the  ancients 
is  wisdom ;  and  in  length  of  days  understanding."  This  is  not  always  true.  A 
man  may  be  old  without  being  wise,  he  may  go  through  many  experiences  without 
being  experienced.  StiU,  other  things  being  equal,  a  long  study  of  affairs  gives 
knowledge  and  discretion.  It  would  clearly  be  so,  with  men  chosen  by  the  wise 
Solomon.  Besides,  those  who  have  already  won  their  honours  are  more  dis- 
interested than  those  who  are  ambitiously  seeking  to  win  them ;  and  those  whose 
reputations  are  high  are  more  careful  to  guard  themselves  against  foUy  than  those 
who  have  no  reputation  to  lose.  [Found  on  such  principles  the  duties  of  submis- 
sion to  authority,  of  reverence  to  age,  &c.,  which  are  the  essentials  of  a  happy 
home  and  of  a  peaceful  society.] 

III.  Behoboam's  besoet  to  the  foolish.  "The  answer  of  the  young  men 
showed  their  folly.  That  such  a  spirit  should  exist  is  a  proof  that  in  the  later  years 
of  Solomon  the  people  about  him  had  sadly  doteriorated.  (1)  These  were  the  boon 
companions  of  Behoboam,  and  knowing  his  haughty  temper  they  flattered  him  to 
the  top  of  his  bent.  (2)  They  were  courtiers  brought  up  amid  the  luxuries  of  the 
splendid  reign  just  ended,  and  knew  Uttle  or  nothing  of  the  condition  of  the  people. 
For  these  and  other  reasons  they  were  of  all  others  the  most  unfit  to  give  counsel 


266  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  mi.  1— 2t. 

in  this  crisis.  [Give  exampleB  from  history  of  kings  ruined  by  their  favourites.] 
We  sliould  always  suspect  those  who  gratify  our  vanity,  or  seek  to  further  our  lower 
pleasures.  Show  the  evils  whicli  arise,  especially  to  weak  characters,  from  foohsh 
associates.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise,  but  a  companion  of 
fools  shall  be  destroyed."  "Forsake  the  foolish,  and  live."  "Blessed  is  he  that 
walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor 
sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scomful." 

IV.  Behoboam's  boastfulness  op  his  poweb.  "  My  little  finger  shall  be 
thicker  than  my  father's  loins."  A  proverbial  expression  to  denote  that  his  power 
was  greater  than  his  father's.  Such  bragging  is  no  sign  of  courage.  At  the  first 
outbreak  of  rebellion,  this  boaster  "  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to  his  chariot,  to  flee 
to  Jerusalem."  A  strong  character  expresses  itself  not  in  great  words,  but  in  great 
deeds.  The  boastful  Peter  fails,  the  silent  John  stands  firm.  The  Pharisee  is 
rejected;  the  pubhcan  justified.  "  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted-  and 
he  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased." 

V.  Eehoboam's  abuse  of  his  authority.  "  My  father  made  your  yoke  heavy, 
and  I  will  add  to  your  yoke,"  &c.  This  was  not  the  speech  of  one' who  felt  himself 
to  be  a  shepherd  of  God's  flock,  but  of  one  who  assumed  despotic  authority.  This 
was  never  permitted  to  a  king  of  Israel,  nor  is  it  intended  by  God  that  any  man 
should  thus  rule.  It  would  be  an  evil  to  the  ruler  himself  as  well  as  to  his  people. 
Least  of  all  is  it  to  be  tolerated  in  the  Christian  Church.  The  highest  in  ecclesias- 
tical office  are  forbidden  to  be  "  lords  over  God's  heritage,"  but  are  to  be  "  examples 
to  the  flock."  Christ  said,  "  The  kings  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  lordship  over  them 
.  .  .  but  ye  shall  not  be  so  "  (Luke  xxii.  24 — 29), 

VL  Behoboam's  neglect  op  pkayer.  How  differently  he  began  his  reign  from 
his  father !  Solomon  went  first  to  God  ;  Eehoboam  went  hither  and  thither  for 
counsel,  but  never  turned  to  God  at  all.  How  often  we  act  thus  in  our  temporal 
perplexities,  in  our  theological  difficulties,  &c.  How  sadly  we  forget  the  words, 
"  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  of  God,"  &c.  (J as.  L  5 — 8).  Throw  the  lurid 
light  of  this  story  on  Proverbs  L,  and  make  personal  application  of  the  warning 
given  there. — A.  R. 

Ver.  16. — The  Bevoli.  This  was  the  song  of  the  insurrection.  It  is  the  Mar«eil- 
Icdse  of  Israelitish  history.  We  heard  it  first  after  the  revolt  of  Absalom  (2  Sam 
XX.  1).  It  appears  to  have  originated  with  "  Shoba,  the  son  of  Biohri,  a  Benjamite." 
The  revolt  described  in  our  text  was  more  serious,  beginning  as  it  did  the  ruin  of 
Solomon's  splendid  kingdom.  All  such  national  events  (the  wars  of  the  Roses,  the 
civil  war  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  revolution  of  1688,  the  French  Revolution  of 
the  last  century,  &c.)  are  worthy  of  study.  Moral  causes  he  at  the  root  of  them  all, 
and  the  hand  of  God  is  over  them  all.  The  moral  and  Divine  are  more  clearly 
revealed  in  Old  Testament  history  ;  hence  in  part  its  value.  In  tracing  this  great 
revolution  to  its  causes,  we  do  not  forget,  though  we  do  not  dwell  upon,  two  factors 
to  which  our  attention  is  called  by  Scripture— (1)  the  design  of  God,  and  (2)  the 
ambition  of  Jeroboam.  We  must  remember,  however,  in  regard  to  the  former  that 
God  expressly  declared  til  at  He  would  base  future  events  on  the  king's  obedience 
or  disobedience  to  His  law.  And  as  to  the  ambitious  designs  of  Jeroboam,  they 
would  all  have  been  futile  if  (as  God  bad  foreseen)  there  had  not  been  nopular  dis- 
content, combined  with  princely  folly.  What,  then,  were  the  ultimate  causes  of 
the  event  described  ? 

I.  Tribal  jealousy.  This  had  always  existed.  Ephraim  and  Judah  had 
specially  displayed  it.  The  jealousy  of  Ephraim  had  as^erled  itself  both  against 
Gideon  and  Jephthah  (Judg.  viii.  1 ;  xii.  1).  The  pride  of  this  tribe  was  fostered 
by  such  facts  as  these  :  Joshua  sprung  from  it,  Samuel  was  born  within  its  borders, 
Saul  was  of  Benjamin,  hereditary  with  Joseph ;  its  geograplucal  position  gave  it 
power,  &c.  Hence,  till  David's  time,  the  leadership  of  the  nation  was  practically 
in  the  hands  of  Ephraim.  He  reigned  seven  years  over  Judah  before  he  could 
obtain  supremacy  over  the  other  tribes.  He  dealt  wisely  with  those  who  belonged 
to  Ephraim,  selecting  some  of  them  for  special  favour,  &o.     Solomon,  however, 


OH.  xii.  1  -  n.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  267 

aggravated  the  discontent  by  his  oppression  towards  the  close  of  his  reign,  so  that 
Eehoboam  had  no  easy  task  before  him.  AU  was  ripe  for  revolt.  1.  National 
strength  is  impossible  without  national  wnity.  Clans  mast  lose  their  jealousies  if 
they  would  become  a  strong  people.  The  severance  of  the  rich  from  the  poor,  the 
hostility  between  capital  and  labour,  the  disaffection  of  any  section  of  the  people 
must  be  a  source  of  weakness,  a  sign  of  decadence.  2.  The  Church's  poiver  is 
tapped  by  sectarian  hostility.  There  may  be  diversity  in  modes  of  work  and 
worship,  but  amongst  all  Christians  should  be  unity  of  spirit.  "  There  are  diversities 
of  oiierations,  but  the  same  spirit."  Each  tribe  maymaroh  through  the  wilderness 
with  its  own  banner,  but  aU  must  find  their  one  centre  in  the  IDivine  presence,  and 
seek  their  one  Canaan  as  a  land  of  rest.  Isaiah  foretells  the  day  when  "  Bphraim 
shah  not  envy  Judah,  and  Judah  shall  not  vex  Ephraim  "  (oh.  xi.  13). 

II.  Heavy  taxation.  It  affected  the  people's  wealth,  and  stOl  more  painfully 
their  personal  labour.  A  more  fooUsh  step  than  that  which  Eehoboam  took  could 
scarcely  be  imagined.  He  sent  to  appease  the  people  "  Adoram,  who  was  over  tlie 
tribute;"  the  very  man  who  represented  the  oppression  they  relented  I  Qiiem 
Deus  vult  perdere,  prius  dementat.  Show  how  extravagance,  disregard  of  the 
rights  of  others,  unjust  demands,  carelessness  of  the  interests  of  dependants,  lead 
to  disaster — in  homes,  in  business,  in  national  and  eBclesiastical  affairs.  Illustrate 
tliis  from  history;  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman  Emjiire  ;  t'o  dissolution  ol 
the  formerly  vast  dependencies  of  Spain,  &o.  So  if  a  Church  dem;mds  too  much, 
as  Bonie  does,  she  loses  all.  The  intelligent  men  of  Bomau  Cathohc  countries  are 
Bceptics. 

III.  Religious  indifference.  That  this  existed  is  evident  from  the  ease  with 
which  Solomon  set  up  the  worship  of  Ashtoreth,  Milcom,  and  Chemosh  ;  and  from 
the  fact  that  Jeroboam,  directly  after  the  revolt,  erected  the  calves  at  Bethel  and 
Dan.  J.  D.  Miohaelis  and  others  have  fought  to  justify  the  people  in  their  re- 
belhon,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  so  far  as  they  were  concerned  the  revolt  was 
criminal.  Neither  in  this  nor  in  any  other  act  of  man  does  higher  causahty  affect 
the  morality  of  an  act.  They  were  anxious  about  the  decrease  of  taxation,  but  not 
about  the  removal  of  idolatry.  To  them  it  mattered  little  whether  Jehovah  were 
worshipped  or  not.  But  it  was  to  represent  Him,  to  fulfil  His  purpose,  to  preserve 
His  truth,  that  the  kingdom  existed.  Indifference  to  God  is  destructive  of  the 
Btaliility  of  human  hopes,  of  the  kingliness  of  human  character,  of  the  peace  and 
seeurity  of  human  kingdoms.  Christ  has  come  into  the  world  to  arouse  it  from 
indifference,  that  aU  men  may  go  out  to  greet  Him  as  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of 
lords."  If  you  lose  the  kingdom  of  heaven  it  is  because,  like  Rehoboam,  you  throw 
it  away.  The  lost  opportunity  never  came  to  him  again.  He  was  forbidJen  to  try 
to  recover  by  force  what  he  sacrificed  by  folly  (ver.  24).  Over  him  and  over  many 
a  man  the  lament  may  be  heard,  "  Oh  that  thou  hadst  known,' even  thou,  at  least  in 
this  thy  day,  the  tilings  which  belong  unto  thy  peace,  but  now  they  are  hid  from 
thine  eyes." — A.  K. 

Vers.  1 — 20. — The  accomplishment  of  the  i>i'^<-li''i^il  judgment,  I.  Dangers 
OFTEN  COME  disguised.  1.  It  luas  a  time  of  joyous  expectation.  Nothin.t;  be- 
tokened the  nearness  of  rebelUon  and  disaster.  All  Isriiel  had  come  to  Sliecliem 
to  make  him  king.  There  was  no  dispute  about  the  succession,  and  no  unwil- 
lingness to  own  the  sway  of  the  house  of  David.  All  was  hopeful.  Danger 
may  lurk  in  joy  like  a  venomous  insect  in  a  flower.  2.  The  people's  request  was 
reasonable.  Eehoboam  could  shield  himself  under  no  plea  of  Divine  right.  David 
was  appointed  to  shepherd  Israel,  and  the  people  had  a  right  to  protest  against 
their  burdens.  3.  Their  demand  seems  to  have  been  urged  with  moderation. 
There  was  as  yet  no  determination  to  rebel.  The  issue  lay  with  the  king.  It  was 
to  bear  the  stamp  of  his  mind  as  well  as  theirs.  There  are  naoments  that  face  ub 
with  a  sudden  demand  to  manifest  the  spirit  that  is  in  us  and  to  make  or  mar  our 
future.  Should  the  demand  come  to  thee  to-day,  what  mark  would  be  left,  what 
work  would  be  done? 

II.  A  danger  wisely  met.     1.  The  importance  of  the  juncture  was  felt  anS 


tea  THE  FinST  book  of  kings.  [oh.  XII.  1—24. 

owned.  He  took  time  for  consideration.  A  good  decision  is  nothing  the  worse  of 
a  calm  review  :  a  bad  one  needs  it.  2.  He  sought  counsel.  We  are  helped  by  the 
iight  of  others'  judgment,  but  above  all  we  need  the  direction  of  God. 

III.  The  beginning  of  disastbb.  1.  A  grcwe  defect.  Among  all  that  is  said  of 
these  three  days  there  is  no  mention  of  his  inquiring  of  the  Lord,  or  lifting  up  one 
cry  for  guidance.  There  is  pride  and  passion  in  us  which  only  God  can  subdue : 
these  retained  are  worse  than  all  our  foes  ;  they  can  only  harm  us  through  the 
enemies  we  harbour  within  our  breast.  2.  The  counsels  of  wisdom  cure  rejected 
(vers.  7,  8).  8.  The  counsels  of  folly  accepted  (vers.  8 — 11).  He  was  seeking  for 
the  reflection  of  his  own  proud,  vengeful  thought,  and  he  now  found  it  in  the 
advice  of  those  who  were  liJke-minded.  "What  we  need  is  not  the  strengthening  of 
our  own  judgment,  but  its  correction  by  the  utterance  of  love  and  nghteonsness 
and  truth. 

IV.  FoLiii's  HARVEST.  1.  The  shame  of  rejection  and  desertion  (ver.  16). 
2.  Eis  last  attempt  to  assert  his  authority  defeated  (ver.  18).  8.  His  igno- 
minious flight.  He  who  might  have  won  a  kingdom  has  to  flee  for  his  life. 
4.  The  separation  of  the  ten  tribes  completed  (vers.  19,  20).  Xi  Eehoboam  had 
fled  from  the  evil  which  was  in  himself,  he  would  not  have  required  to  flee  from 
his  people.  We  give  birth  to  the  terrors  which  pursue  us.  There  is  but  one  flight 
possible  from  loss  and  death — the  flight  from  sin. — U. 

Vers.  21 — 83.    I.  An  error  that  could  not  be  repaired  (vers.  21 — 24).    Beho- 

boam  had  zeal  and  strength  behind  him  in  his  attempt  to  bring  back  the  tribes 
by  force.  One  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  men  responded  to  his  call ;  but  all 
were  dispersed  at  the  lifting  up  of  God's  hand.     The   attempt   was   forbidden, 

1.  Because  of  the  ties  of  kindred.  These  were  forgotten  by  Eehoboam  when  he 
threatened  the  people  with  a  heavier  yoke.  Tyranny  is  possible  only  in  the  denial 
of  the  brotherhood  of  man.  It  was  forgotten  now  as  he  gathered  his  hosts  together. 
Wars  are  impossible  in  the  recognition  of  the  brotherhood  of  man.  This  is  God's 
word  to  the  nations,  to  England  as  to  the  rest :  "  Ye  shall  not  .  .  ,  fight  against 
your  brethren."  2.  Because  the  loss  was  of  Ood.  "  This  thing  is  from  Me." 
These  two  thoughts  assuage  anger  and  beget  repentance ;  they  who  are  against  us 
are  our  brethren,  and  the  blow  is  from  our  Father's  hand.  Our  mistakes  are  per- 
mitted, and  we  eat  their  bitter  fruit  in  God's  righteous  judgment.  Keep  the  way 
of  love  and  lowly  dependence  on  God.  Every  other  ia  full  of  mistake  and  irre- 
parable loss. 

II.-  The  blindness  of  worldly  policy  (vers.  25 — 38).  Judged  from  a  merely 
human  standpoint,  Jeroboam  showed  commendable  foresight,  and  took  effectual 
precautions  against  a  great  and  possible  danger.  Yet  he  did  not  look  far  enough 
or  high  enough.  The  range  of  his  vision  did  not  embrace  the  mightiest  of  all 
forces.  It  shut  out  God,  and  every  step  he  took  ensured  the  destruction  of  the 
power  he  sought  to  guard.  1.  His  fear  was  wnhelief.  There  did  seem  to  be  a 
danger  iri  the  recourse  of  the  tribes  to  Jerusalem,  but  he  had  God's  promise  that 
He  would  buUd  him  a  sure  house  if  he  would  do  that  which  was  right  in  God's 
sight  (xi.  38).     Do  not  our  fears  go  right  in  the  face  of  the  promises  of  God  ? 

2.  It  was  base  forgetfuVness  of  Ood's  mercy.  The  Lord  had  fulfilled  part  of  what 
He  had  said.  The  very  circumstances  in  which  the  fear  arose  (the  possession 
of  the  kingdom)  were  thus  its  answer.  Our  fears  not  only  deny  God's  promises, 
but  also  the  testimony  of  the  past.  Unbelief  and  ingratitude  are  the  first  steps 
in  the  path  of  sin  (Eom.  i.  21).  8.  His  defiance  of  Ood.  When  unbelief  has  shut 
Him  out  of  the  heart.  His  commandments  are  lightly  esteemed.  To  suit  the 
exigencies  of  state,  God's  ordinances  were  overturned,  other  holy  places  were  set 
up,  the  commandment  against  image-worship  broken,  the  priesthood  and  the  feast- 
time  changed.  Jeroboam's  sin  lives  still  in  our  statecraft,  in  the  conduct  of  our 
business,  &c.  God's  purpose  regarding  us  and  the  world  is  nothing  I  His  com- 
mandments are  the  only  things  that  with  safety  can  be  disregarded !  4.  His  mil- 
directed  ingenuity.  He  cleverly  takes  advantage  (1)  of  thfl  jealousy  of  the  tribes. 
Why  should  Jerusalem  be  the  only  holy  place,  or  Levi  the  one  servant  of  God> 


CB.  XII.  25—33.] 


THE  MEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


269 


(2)  He  only  repeats  the  sin,  and  quotes  the  words,  of  Aaron,  and  the  fathers  (Exod. 
xxxii.  4).  (3j  He  uses  places  already  consecrated,  Bethel  by  Jacob's  vision  and 
altar,  and  Dan,  th&  shrine  of  Mioah's  image  (Judg.  xviii.  3.0).  (4)  He  hides  zeal 
for  his  own  safety  under  the  plea  of  care  for  the  people's  convenience  (ver.  28). 
Misused  ability  cannot  shield  from  God's  judgment.  In  every  step  he  took  he  was 
the  more  surely  sealing  his  own  doom,  and  ensuring  the  final  extinction  of  hi* 
people.    "  Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not  mocked." — U. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  Xn.  25—33. 


The  establishment  op  the  kingdom  of 
Israel,  and  the  schism  in  the  CnnKOH. — 
The  historian,  after  deecribing  the  great 
rebellion  of  the  Jewish  people,  proceeds,  in 
the  rest  of  this  chapter,  to  relate  the  mea- 
Bures  which  the  new  king  took  to  secure  his 
position.  These  were  both  external  and 
internal.  The  external  means  were  the 
erection  of  fortresses  ;  the  internal,  the 
provision  of  new  sanctuaries,  priests,  and 
ordinances. 

Ver.  25. — Then  Jeroboam  built  [i.e.,  re- 
built or  fortified,  ni|l  naturally  has  both 
meanings]  Shechem  [see  on  ver.  1  and  on  oh. 
xiv.  1]  In  Mount  Ephralm  [The  Har- 
Ephraim,  or  mountain  district  of  Ephraim 
(in  Josh.  xi.  16  called  the  "Mountain  of 
Israel ; "  of.  Josh  xvii.  16—18 ;  Judg.  iv.  5 ; 
X.  1 ;  1  Sam.  i.  1),  is  "the  central  mass  of 
the  hUls  of  Palestine,  nearly  equidistant 
from  the  northern  and  southern  boundary 
of  the  whole  country  "  (Stanley,  S.  and  P., 
p.  229),  and  the  richest  and  most  beautiful 
part  of  the  land.  "The  tower  of  Siohem 
had  been  burnt  down  by  Abimeleoh  and 
the  tower  of  Penuel  had  been  destroyed  by 
Gideon,  Judg.  viii.  17  "  (Keil).  The  city  of 
Bhechem  had  been  destroyed  at  the  same 
time  as  the  tower,  but  bad  no  doubt  been 
rebuilt,  at  least  in  part,  otherwise  it  could 
hardly  have  been  selected  for  Sehoboam's 
coronation.  It  was  naturally  Jeroboam's 
first  care  to  strengthen  his  position  by  forti- 
fying his  capital,  and  the  more  so  as  this 
city  would  be  particularly  obnoxious  to 
Eehoboam  as  the  scene  of  the  revolution ; 
but  why  he  should  at  the  same  time  have 
nbuilt  Penuel — Ewald  thinks  the  seat  of 
government  was  placed  here — is  not  at  first 
sight  BO  obvious,  as  it  lay  beyond  the  Jor- 
dan (Gen.  xxxii.  22,  30;  xxxiii.  17)  and 
was  therefore  presumably  outside  the  circle 
of  hostilities,  should  such  arise.  Probably 
it  was  because  this  was  the  gate  to  his 
Trans-Jordanio  territory.  A  tower  com-  j 
■landing  tb«  fords  of  the  Jordan  would  I 


secure  Reuben,  Gad,  fte.,  against  Invasion 
from  Judah.  It  is  also  not  unlikely  tliat 
Jeroboam,  who  was  the  great  castle  builder  of 
that  age,  had  some  fears  of  "  hostile  attacks 
from  the  north  and  north-east"  (KeU),  or 
thought  of  "the  caravan  road  which  led 
over  Gilead  to  Damascus"  (Wordsworth), 
and  of  which  he  would  wish,  for  the  sake 
of  his  revenue,  to  retain  the  control],  and 
dwelt  therein  [He  made  it  his  first  resi- 
dence and  capital];  and  went  out  from 
thence  [i.e.,  when  he  had  secured  one  forti- 
fied city.  He  could  hardly  be  certain  as 
yet  which  side  some  of  the  tribes  would 
take.  It  is  also  possible  that  some  of  the 
workmen  who  had  built  Sheohem  were 
afterwards  employed  on  the  fortification  of 
Penuel],  and  hiiut  FenueL  [Bahr  says, 
"  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  built  these 
fortifications  by  tribute  labour,  like  Solo- 
mon. "  BuUs  this  quite  so  certain  r  The 
people  after  the  revolt  would  naturally 
conclude  that  Behoboam,  of  whose  proud 
temper  they  had  had  such  proof,  would 
want  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on  the  city 
which  had  rejected  him,  and  the  Instinct  of 
self-defence  would  lead  them  at  once  to 
rebuild  their  walls.  And  the  new-born 
kingdom  would  also  earnestly  desire  to  pos- 
sess, a  suitable  capital.  Thus  their  self- 
interest  and  enthusiasm  alike  would  obviate 
the  necessity  for  a  conscription.] 

Yer.  26. — And  Jeroboam  said  in  his  heart, 
Now  shall  the  kingdom  return  to  the  house 
of  David  [It  needed  much  less  prescience 
than  Jeroboam  seems  to  have  possessed  to 
perceive  that  fortresses  and  armies  would 
be  of  no  avail  for  the  defence  of  his  realm, 
so  long  as  Jerusalem  remained  the  one 
sanctuary  of  the  land.  He  clearly  foresaw 
that  if  the  people  went  up  thither,  as  in 
time  past,  three  times  a  year,  to  keep  the 
feasts,  the  religious  sentiment  would  in 
time  reassert  itself  and  sweep  him  and  hii 
new  dynasty  away.  With  one  religion,  one 
sanctuary,  one  priesthood,  there  could  not 
long  be  two  kingdoms.  People  who  had  so 
much  in  common  would,  sooner  or  later, 
complete  the  unity  of  their  national  life 
under  a  common  sovereign.  And  we  find, 
indeed,  that  so  powerful  were  the  attrae- 


270 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  RINGS. 


[oh.  xn.  2S— SaL 


tions  of  the  temple,  and  the  religions  sys- 
tem of  which  it  was  the  centre,  that  "  the 
priests  and  Levites  that  were  in  all  Israel," 
together  with  the  more  devout  laity,  fell 
away  to  Behoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  13,  16), 
while  the  speech  of  Abijah  on  Mount  Zema^ 
raim  (2  Cliron.  xiii.  11),  proves  that  others 
as  well  as  Jeroboam  were  well  aware  that 
the  old  religion  and  the  new  kingdom  could 
hardly  oo-exist.] 

Ver.  27. — If  this  people  go  np  to  do  aacrl- 
flce[Heb.  sacrifices]  In  the  house  of  the  Lord 
at  Jerusalem  [as  the  law  of  Moses  ordained 
(Deut.  xU.  11,  14;  xvi.  6,  11)],  then  shaU 
the  heart  of  this  people  turn  again  unto 
their  lord  [The  Syriao  omits  this  word.  The 
LXX.  has  TTpoc*  Kv^mv  kcli  Kvpiov  avTuiv] , 
even  unto  Eehoboam  king  of  Judah  [When 
Wordsworth  remarks  that  Jeroboam  "  here 
acknowledges  Kehoboam  as  the  'lord'  of 
the  people,  "he  surely  forgets  that  these  are 
not  the  actual  words  of  Jeroboam,  but  the 
thoughts  which  the  historian  supposes  him 
to  have  had  (ver.  26)] ,  and  they  shall  kill 
me  [as  they  would  do,  if  they  wished  to 
return  to  Eehoboam's  rule.  Their  first 
offering  would  be  the  head  of  the  usurper, 
2  Sam.  XX.  20,  21 ;  cf.  2  Sam.  iv.  7],  and  go 
again  [lit.,  turn-  again,  same  word  asabovoj 
to  Rehoboam  king  of  Judah. 

Ver.  28.  — Whereupon  the  Wng  took 
counsel  ["With  his  counsellors,  or  the 
htjads  of  the  nation  who  had  helped  him  to 
the  throne "  (Keil).  Bahr  understands, 
"  he  reflected  about  it  alone  "  {et  excogitato 
eonsilio,  Vulgate),  alleging  that  so  important 
a  circumstance  as  the  concurrence  of  the 
heads  of  the  people  in  changing  the  system 
of  worship  would  not  have  been  passed  over 
in  silence.  But  while  the  text  does  not 
perhaps  imply  any  formal  deliberation  with 
the  elders,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
Jeroboam,  who  owed  his  position  to  popular 
election,  and  who  was  far  too  sagacious  not 
to  follow  the  example  of  Behoboam  (vers. 
6,  9),  would  summon  others  to  advise  him 
as  to  this  critical  and  momentous  step. 
Wordsworth  refers  to  Isa.  xxx.  1,  and  says 
that  "  Jeroboam  is  the  image  and  pattern  of 
Machiavellian  politicians."  "  Next  to  Ahi- 
thophel,  I  do  not  find  that  Israel  yielded  a 
craftier  head  than  Jeroboam's  "  (Hall)] ,  and 
made  two  calves  [It  is  generally  held  that 
these  were  in  imitation  of,  or  were  suggested 
by,  the  "golden  calf"  of  Aaron  (Exod. 
xzxii.  2),  and  the  close  resemblance  of  Jero- 
boam's words  (below),  in  inaugurating  this 
newcuZttts,  to  Aaron's  have  been  thought  to 
prove  it.  But  surely  it  has  been  overlooked 
that  Jeroboam  could  hardly  be  so  shoit- 
sighted  and  unwise  as  deliberately  to  rrjiii- 
troduce  a  worship  which  had  provoked  the 
"  fierce  wrath  "  (ver.  12)  of  God,  and  had 


nearly  resulted  in  the  extermination  of  tht 
Jewish  race.  For  of  course  neither  Jero- 
boam nor  his  people  could  have  forgotten 
the  stern  condemnation  which  Aaron's  calf- 
worship  had  received.  The  molten  image 
ground  to  powder,  the  ashes  mixed  in  the 
driuk  of  the  people,  the  slaughter  of  three 
thousand  worshippers,  &c.,  would  assuredly 
have  hved  in  the  memories  of  the  nation. 
A  more  impolitic  step,  consequently — one 
more  certain  to  precipitate  his  ruin,  by 
driving  the  whole  nation  into  the  arms  of 
Judah  —  Jeroboam  could  not  have  taken, 
than  to  attempt  any  revival  or  imitation  of 
the  forbidden  cultus  of  the  deser  And  it 
is  as  httle  likely  that  the  worship  of  the 
calves  was  derived  from  the  worship  of  Apis, 
as  practised  at  Memphis,  or  of  "Mnevis, 
the  sacred  calf  of  Heliopolia "  (Stanley), 
though  with  both  of  these  Jeroboam  had 
recently  been  in  contact.  It  would  have 
been  but  a  sorry  recommendation  in  the 
eyes  of  Israel  that  the  first  act  of  the  new 
king  should  be  to  introduce  the  hateful 
idolatry  of  Egypt  into  the  land ;  and  every 
consideration  tends  to  show  that  the  calf- 
worship  was  not,  and  was  not  intended  to 
be,  idolatry,  such  as  the  worship  of  Egypt 
undoubtedly  was.  It  is  always  carefuUy 
distinguished  from  idol-worship  by  the  his- 
torians and  prophets.  And  the  idea  which 
Jeroboam  wished  to  give  his  subjects  waa 
clearly  this — that,  so  far  from  introducing 
new  gods  or  new  sanctuaries,  he  was  merely 
accommodating  the  old  worship  to  the  new 
state  of  things.  He  evidently  felt  that  what 
he  and  his  honse  had  most  to  fear  was,  not 
the  armies  of  Behoboam  but  the  ritual  and 
religious  associations  of  Jerusalem.  His 
object,  if  he  were  wise,  must  therefore  be 
to  provide  a  substitute,  a  couutei-feit  wor- 
ship. "  I  will  give  you,"  he  virtually  says, 
"  at  Bethel  and  Dan,  old  sanctuaries  of  our 
race  long  before  Jerusalem  usurped  their 
place,  those  visible  emblems  of  the  heavenly 
powers  such  as  are  now  found  only  in  the 
temple.  Tou  too  shall  possess  those  mys- 
terious forms  which  symbolize  the  Invisible, 
but  you  shall  have  them  nearer  home  and 
easier  of  access."  There  can  be  httle  doubt, 
consequently,  that  the  "  calves"  were  imita- 
tions of  the  colossal  cherubim  of  Solomon's 
temple,  in  which  the  ox  or  calf  was  prob- 
ably the  forma  praecipua  (oh.  vi.  23).]  of 
gold  [Hardly  of  solid  gold.  Possibly  of 
wood  covered  with  gold  plates,  i.e.,  similar 
to  the  cherubim  (oh.  vi.  23 — 28) ;  probably 
of  molten  brass  (see  ch.  xiv.  9,  and  cf.  Fsa. 
ovi.  19),  overlaid  with  gold ;  such  images,  in 
fact,  as  are  described  in  Isa.  xl.  19],  and 
sj.id  unto  them,  It  Is  too  much  for  you 
[This  translation,  pace  EeU,  cannot  be 
maintained.    Nor  can  it  be  said  that  "  the 


OH.  XII.  25— 88.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


271 


exact  meaning  of  the  original  ia  doubtful  " 
(Bawliuson),  for  n  study  of  the  passages 

when  this  phrase,  03^*3^  ooours  (see,  e.g., 

Dent.  i.  6 ;  ii.  3 ;  iii.  26  ;  and  cf.  Gen  zIt, 
28  ;  Exod.  ix.  23 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16 ; 
'  1  Kings  xix,  4)  will  conyinoe  the  reader 
,  that  it  must  be  rendered  here,  "It  is 
/  enough  " — i.e., ' '  you  have  gone  long  enough 
to  a  city  which  only  owes  its  present  posi- 
tion to  the  ambition  of  the  tribe  of  Judah, 
and  which  is  a  standing  testimony  to  your 
own  inferiority;  henceforth,  desist."  We 
have  an  exact  parallel  in  Bzek.  xliv.  6  ; 
where  the  Authorized  Version  renders,  "  Let 
it  suffice  you."  The  LXX.  supports  this 
view  by  rendering  iKavovadu)  iiiiiv  through- 
out. Vulgate,  nolite  ultra  ascendere,  &c.]  to 
go  up  to  Jerusalem :  behold  thy  gods 
[rather  "  god,"  for  Jeroboam  had  no  idea 
of  introducing  polytheism.  It  is  true  he 
made  two  calves  because  of  his  two  sanctu- 
aries, but  each  was  designed  to  represent 
the  same  object— the  one  God  of  Israel. 
The  word  is  translated  ■■  gods  "  in  Exod. 
xzxii.  1,  4,  8,  23,  31 ;  but  as  the  reference 
is  in  every  case  to  the  one  calf,  it  should  be 
translated  "  god  "  there  also,  InNehemiah's 
citation  of  the  words  (ch.  ix.  18),  the  word 
is  unmistakably  singular.  "  This  is  thy 
god,"  <feo.  The  words  are  not  "  exactly  the 
same  as  the  people  used  when  setting  up 
the  golden  oalf "  (Bahr).  Jeroboam  says, 
"  Behold,"  Ac] ,  0  Israel,  which  brought 
thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  [It  is  at 
first  Bight  somewhat  difficult  to  resist  the 
view,  whioh  is  generally  entertained,  tlint 
Jeroboam,  of  set  purpose,  cited  the  ipsissim  i 
verba  of  the  Israelites  in  the  desert  (EzoJ. 
zzxii.  4).  But  a  little  reflection  wiU  show 
that  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  believe  that 
a  monarch,  circumstanced  as  Jeroboam 
was,  could  at  the  very  outset  of  his  career 
have  acted  in  the  teeth  of  history,  and  have 
committed  the  gross  blander,  not  to  say 
wanton  outrage,  of  deliberately  connecting 
his  new  cult  with  the  calf-worship  of  the 
desert.  He  can  hardly  have  dared,  that  is, 
to  say,  "  This  is  no  new  religion,  for  this 
very  form  of  worship  our  fathers  used 
formerly  in  the  desert,  under  the  guidance 
of  Aaron  himself "  (Seb.  Schmidt,  followed 
by  EeU,  a{,)  unless  both  he  and  his  people 
alike — ^which  is  inconceivable — ^were  igno- 
rant of  their  nation's  history  recorded  in 
Exod.  xxxii.  19 — 3S.  It  has  been  argued 
by  some  that  this  action  of  Jeroboam  and 
the  ready  compliance  of  the  ten  tribes, 
prove  that  the  Pentateuch  cannot  then  have 
been  written.  But,  as  Hengstenberg  (cited 
by  Wordsworth)  rejoins,  the  same  argument 
would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Bible 
•ould  not  have  been  written  in  the  dark 


ages,  or,  we  might  add,  even  at  the  present 
day.  He  can  hardly  have  claimed,  that  ia 
to  say,  to  be  reintroducing  the  oaU-worship, 
which  God  had  so  emphatically  reprobated, 
unless  he  designed  an  open  defiance  of  the 
Most  High,  and  wished  to  shock  aU  the  reli- 
gious instincts  and  convictions  of  his  people. 
It  is  much  more  natural,  consec^uently,  to 
suppose,  considering  the  very  frequent  recur- 
rence, though  sometimes  in  slightly  different 
shapes,  of  the  formula  "  the  Lord  thy  God, 
which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt "  (Exod.  XX.  2 ;  xxix.  45,  46  ;  Levit. 
xix.  86 ;  xxiii.  43  ;  xxv.  38 ;  xxvi.  13,  45 ; 
Num.  XV.  41 ;  xvi.  13 ;  xx.  16 ;  Deut.  v. 
6,  15  ;  vi.  12  ;  viii.  14 ;  ix.  26 ;  Josh.  xxiv. 
6,  17  ;  Judg.  vi.  8  ;  1  Sam.  viii.  8 ;  x.  18 ; 
1  Kings  viii.  21,  &c.)  that  the  correspon- 
dence is  accidental,  the  more  so  as  Jero- 
boam does  not  quote  the  exact  words,  and 
that  he  has  used  a  phrase  which  was  con- 
stantly in  their  ears,  insisting  thereby  that 
his  calves  were  emblems  of  the  God  of  their 
race,  the  God  whose  great  glory  it  was  that 
He  had  taken  their  nation  out  of  the  midst 
of  another  nation,  &o.  (Deut.  iv.  34),  and 
delivered  them  from  a  thraldom  with  whioh, 
perhaps,  the  tyranny  of  Kehoboam  is  in- 
directly compared.  Or  if  there  was  any 
reference  to  the  golden  oalf,  it  must  have 
been  depreciatory,  as  if  to  say,"  That  was 
rank  idolatry,  and  as  such  it  was  punished. 
That  calf  was  an  image  of  Apis.  My  calves 
are  cherubic  symbols,  symbols  such  as  He 
has  Himself  appointed,  of  the  Great  De- 
liverer of  our  race.  Behold  thy  God,  whioh 
really  brought  thee  up,"  &a.] 

Ver.  29. — And  he  set  the  one  in  Bethel,  and 
the  other  put  he  in  Dan.  [Two  considera- 
tions seem  to  have  influenced  Jeroboam  in 
his  choice  of  these  sites.  First,  both  these 
places  were  in  some  sort  sanctuaries  already. 
Bethel  was  already  a  makSm,  or  holy  place, 
in  the  days  of  Abraham;  was  consecrated 
by  the  visions  and  altar  of  Jacob  (Gen. 
xxviii.  11 — 19  ;  xxxi.  13 ;  xxxv.  1,  7,  15), 
and  by  the  ark  having  been  there  (Judg. 
XX.  26—28,  Heb. ;  of.  Jos.,  Ant.,  v.  2.  10). 
And  though  Dan  (Josh.  xix.  47 ;  Judg. 
xviii,  29 ;  xx.  1)  can  hardly  have  had  as 
sacred  a  character  as  the  "house  of  God 
and  the  gate  of  heaven"  (Gen.  xxviii.  17) 
had,  still  it  had  its  shrine  and  its  schis- 
matic priesthood.  A  grandson  of  Mosea 
(Judg.  xviii.  13,  true  reading)  had  mini*, 
tered  there,  and  his  sons  were  the  priesta 
of  Dan  stiU.  Secondly,  these  localitiea 
would  suit  the  convenience  of  his  subjects, 
being  respectively  at  the  southern  and 
northern  extremities  of  the  kingdom.  And 
this,  no  doubt,  was  one  reason  why  Dan 
was  chosen  in  preference  to  other  places, 
such  as  Shiloh,  which,  though  more  saoied, 


271 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xn.  26— 8& 


were  less  conveniently  situated.  A  sanctuary 
at  Dan  would  save  the  northern  tribes 
many  tedious  journeys.  It  should  be  re- 
marked that  Bethel  properly  belonged  to 
Benjamin  (Josh,  xviii.  13,  22),  though  it 
was  also  on  the  border  of  Ephraim ;  and  it 
has  been  suggested  that  it  was  Jeroboam's 
■eleotion  of  this  place  as  a  seat  of  the  calf- 
worship  decided  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  to 
follow  the  lead  of  Judah.  But  the  narrative 
seems  to  imply  that  their  choice  had  been 
made  at  an  earlier  period  (ver.  21),  and  the 
city  would  seem  to  have  been  long  in  the 
possession  of  the  house  of  Joseph  ( Judg.  i. 
22).  It  is  now  known  as  Beitin,  and  is  one 
of  the  most  naked  and  dreary  spots  in 
Palestine.  "  The  place  seems,  as  it  were, 
turned  to  stone ;  and  we  can  well  imagine 
that  the  patriarch  found  nothing  softer  than 
a  stone  for  his  piUow."  Conder,  p.  252, 
who  suggests  that  from  the  time  of  Abraham 
Bethel  was  a  DipD,  a  sacred  place  merely 
(Gen.  zxviii.  11),  and  distinct  from  the 
adjoining  elty  of  Lnz  (ver.  19).] 

Ver.  80. — And  this  thing  became  a  sin 
[It  vxu  in  itself  sinful,  for  it  both  set  at 
nought  the  express  prohibition  of  the  De- 
calogue (Ezod.  zz.  4),  and  also  disregarded 
the  one  sanctaaiy  of  God's  choice  (Deut. 
xiL  6).  And  it  led  to  other  sins,  e.g.,  the 
intrusion  of  •  schismatic  and  irregular 
priesthood,  and  the  performance  of  tm- 
anthorized  rites,  and  to  "  an  ever-deepening 
corruption  of  the  national  faith  "  (Ewald). 
Gf .  Hosea  viii.  5 ;  ziii.  2.  But  the  meaning  is, 
it  became  an  occasion  of  sin  to  the  people 
("  Quodfuitpostea causa  gravissimi peccati" 
— ^Vatab.)  Jeroboam  "  made  Israel  to  sin  " 
(oh.  xiv.  16 ;  xv.  26,  &c.)  It  is  difficult  to 
conceive,  in  the  face,  of  these  and  similar 
words,  how  any  one  can  seriously  maintain 
that  "  the  church  of  Israel  was  the  national 
church  "  (Stanley,  ii.  264)] :  for  the  people 
went  to  worship  before  the  one  even  unto 
Dan.  [The  people  frequented  both  sanctu- 
aries ;  why,  then,  is  that  at  Dan  especially 
mentioned?  Some  (Bawlinson,  e.g.)  have 
suggested  that  the  text  is  here  corrupt,  and 
that  we  should  read,  "  before  the  one  to 
Bethel,  and  before  the  other  to  Dan."  Ac- 
cording to  others,  "the one"  (inXH)  refers 
to  the  double  lO^ri  ("the  one,"  "the 
other") ;  of.  ver.  29.  They  would  interpret, 
that  is,  "  the  people  went  to  both,  even  to  the 
distant  Dan  "  (Bahr,  Thenius).  Eeil  would 
force  the  text  and  understand,  ' '  the  people, 
even  unto  Dan,"  {.<.,  the  people  throughout 
the  whole  kingdom.  Similarly,  Wordsworth. 
Ewald  understands  "before  the  one"  to 
tneau  mUS  i.e.,  "  as  one,"  ac.  man.    On  the 

-  V  :  '  * 

whole  it  is  better  to  take  the  words  as  they 
stand,  literally.   It  is  quite  conceivable  that, 


at  first,  the  people  resorted  almost  exclusivelj 
to  the  Danite  sanctuary.  Having  been  for 
long  years  a  seat  of  worship,  and  having 
probably  its  "house  of  high  places,"  or 
temple  (see  below),  already  built,  it  would 
naturally  be  in  a  position  to  receive  wor- 
shippers some  time  before  Bethel  was  pre- 
pared for  that  purpose.  Jeroboam's  offer- 
ing in  person  at  Bethel  (ver.  32)  which 
marks  the  inauguration  of  his  new  ritual 
there,  may  have  been  partly  designed  to 
attract  worshippers  to  a  shrine,  which,  as 
being  nearer  Jerusalem,  or  for  some  other 
reason,  was  neglected.  But  the  verse  is 
patient  of  another  interpretation.  It  may 
intend  to  convey  that  the  rebellious  tribes, 
in  their  defiant  disregard  of  the  old  order  of 
things,  the  order  now  represented  by  a 
hostile  kingdom,  went  en  masse  to  the 
opposite  point  of  the  compass,  even  to  the 
unhallowed  and  hitherto  despised  sanctuary 
of  the  Danites.  The  LXX.  (Yat.)  addition 
.here  is  noticeable, "  And  they  forsook  the 
house  of  the  Lord."] 

Ver.  81.— And  be  made  an  hoiue  of  Uglt 
places  [See  on  ch.  iii.  2,  and  cf .  2  Kings  xvii. 
29.  It  is  often  assumed  (Keil,  BawUnson, 
al.  after  Josephus)  that  Jeroboam  built  two 
temples  for  his  cherubim,  and  the  statement 
of  the  text,  that  he  built  one,  is  explained 
on  the  ground  that  the  historian  contrasts 
the  "  house  of  high  places  "  with  the  "  house 
of  the  Lord."  Ewald,  too,  after  2  Kings 
xvii.  29, 33,  understands  the  words  as  plural. 
But  is  it  not  more  probable  that  a  chapel  or 
sanctuaiy  already  existed  at  Dan,  where  an 
irregular  priesthood  had  ministered  for 
more  than  four  hundred  years  ?  This  verse 
would  then  refer  exclusively  to  Jeroboam's 
procedure  at  Bethel  (see  next  verse).  There 
he  built  a  temple  and  ordained  a  number  of 
priests,  but  Dan  had  both  already.  We 
know  that  the  Danite  priests  carried  on  the 
calf-worship  to  the  time  of  the  captivity 
(Judg.  xviii.  80).  This  "house  of  high 
places  ■'  has  grown  in  Ewald's  pages  into  "  a 
splendid  temple  in  Ganaanite  style  "],  and 
made  priests  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 
[Heb.  niSi?p  "from  the  ends,"  i.e.,  from 
all  classes,  ex  universo  populo  (Gesen.),  and 
not,  as  the  writer  explains  presently,  from 
the  tribe  of  Levi  alone.  Gen.  xix.  4,  Judg. 
xviii.  2,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  2,  prove  this  to  be  the 
correct  interpretation  of  the  word.  EawUn- 
son,  who  remarks  that  "Jeroboam  could 
have  no  motive  for  specially  selecting  per- 
sons of  low  condition,"  does  not  thereby 
dispose  of  the  A.  V.  rendering,  for  the 
historian  might  mean  that  some  of  Jero- 
boam's priests  were  of  the  lowest  stamp, 
because  he  could  find  no  others,  or  because 
he  was  so  little  scrupulous  as  to  take  them. 
"Leaden  priests  are  well  fitted  to  golden 


oa.  xiL  2S— 83.] 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


873 


deities"  (Hall)],  which  were  not  of  the 
sons  of  Levi.  [Jeroboam  would  donbtless 
have  been  only  too  glad  to  have  retained  tbe 
services  oi  the  Levitioal  priests,  but  they 
went  over  in  a  body  to  Behoboam  (2  Chron. 
xi.  13).  The  statement  of  ver.  14,  that 
"  Jeroboam  and  his  sons  "  had  "  cast  them 
out,"  suggests  that  they  had  refused  to  take 
part  in  his  new  cult  and  that  thereupon  he 
banished  them,  and,  no  doubt,  confiscated 
their  possessions.  The  idea  of  Stanley,  that 
"  following  the  precedent  of  the  deposition 
of  Abiathar  by  Solomon,  he  removed  from 
their  places  the  whole  of  the  sacerdotal 
order,"  is  a  wild  conjecture  for  which  Scrip- 
ture affords  not  the  slightest  warrant.] 

Ver.  82. — And  Jeroboam  ordained  a  feast 
in  the  eighth  month,  on  the  fifteenth  day 
of  the  month,  like  unto  the  feast  that  Is  in 
Judah  [i.e.,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  which 
was  held  on  the  15th  of  the  seventh  month 
(of.  ch.  viii.  2).  This  was  the  great  feast  of 
the  year,  and,  as  the  feast  of  harvest  or 
ingathering,  the  most  joyous.  See  on  ch. 
viii.  1.  Had  Jeroboam  provided  no  counter 
attraction  to  this  great  festive  gathering  in 
Judah  he  might  have  found  it  a  formidable 
temptation  to  his  subjects.  The  reason 
usually  given  for  the  alteration  of  the  time 
— in  defiance  of  the  law,  which  expressly 
fixed  it  in  the  seventh  month  (Levit.  zziii. 
84, 89, 41) — ^is  that  the  eighth  would  be  more 
generally  convenient  in  the  north,  where 
the  harvest  or  vintage  was  a  month  later 
(Then.,  Keil),  as  affording  more  time  for  the 
ingathering.  In  favour  of  this  view  is  the 
consideration  that  the  Jews  not  unfreqnently 
had  to  intercalate  a  month — a  second  Adar — 
into  their  year,  because  of  the  season  being 
a  late  one.  Some  of  the  older  commentators, 
e.g.,  Vatab.,  think  this  time  was  chosen  as  the 
anniversary  of  his  accession,  but  this  is  pure 
conjecture,  and  snch  an  association  would 
be  contrary  to  the  genius  of  the  Hebrew 
people.  Eeil  maintains  that  Jeroboam's 
design  was  to  "  make  the  separation,  in  a 
religious  point  of  view,  as  complete  as 
possible."  But  we  can  hardly  be  expected 
to  b^eve  that  he  altered  the  month, 
for  the  sake  of  creating  a  distinction, 
but  "  retained  the  day  of  the  month,  the 
fifteenth,  for  the  sake  of  the  weak  who  took 
offence  at  his  innovations"  (Keil).  The 
day  was  retained,  as  Bahr  points  out,  be- 
cause, the  months  being  lunar,  the  fifteenth 
was  the  day  of  the  full  moon],  and  he 
offered  [Heb.  as  marg.,  "  and  he  went  wp" 
i.e.,  ascended  the  altar ;  LXX.  avi^n.  (Eeil 
flontends  that  ^V^l  means  "and  be  sacri- 
ficed," but  this  translation  is  without  pre- 
cedent. Ver.  83,  "  and  he  went  up  to  Sum 
incense"  is  decisive  as  to  the  meaning.) 
The  altar  was  always  raised     It  was  prob- 

1    KINGS. 


ably  approached  by  a  slope,  as  Exod.  xx. 
26  forbade  steps,  though  it  is  by  no  means 
certain  that  they  were  not  used  even  in 
Solomon's  temple,  and  Jeroboam  probably 
would  have  no  scruples  on  such  a  minute 
point  of  ritual.  It  has  been  thought  (Kitto, 
iv.  1^7)  that  he  was  moved  to  officiate  in 
person  by  the  precedent  of  the  Egyptian 
kings,  who  exercised  priestly  functions ;  but 
it  is  much  more  probable  that  he  was 
guided  by  the  example  of  Solomon  at  the 
dedication  of  the  temple]  npon  [i.e.,  he 
stood  upon  the  ledge  or  platform  (called  in 
the  A.  V.  "compass,"  Exod.  xxvii.  6)  in 
the  middle  of  the  altar]  the  altar.  So  did 
he  in  Bethel  [i.e.,  the  feast  was  held  at  one 
centre  only,  and  at  Bethel  alone  the  king 
offered  in  person.  But  I  venture  to  suggest 
that  instead  of  )9,  "so  did  he,"  &c.,  we 
should  read  *3.  The  LXX.  seem  to  have 
had  this  word  before  them — liti  rA  BvaiaoTri- 
piov  8  fjroirjtrev  Iv  fSatBrjX.  And  not  only 
does  this  slight  change  bring  the  Hebrew 
into  harmony  with  the  LXX.,  but  it  also 
simplifies  the  construction.  "He  went  up 
upon  the  altar  which  he  made  to  sacrifice 
unto  the  calves  which  he  made."  The  very 
tautology  is  instructive,  as  suggesting  that 
altar,  calves,  and  priests  were  all  of  Jero- 
boam's making,  not  of  God'l  ordaining. 
The  use  of  *3  as  a   relative  (>=1^K)  is 

strictly  grammatical],  sacrificing  [marg.,  to 
sacrifice]  unto  the  calves  that  he  had 
made :  and  he  placed  In  Bethel  [Dan  being 
already  provided  with  its  priesthood]  the 
priests  of  the  high  places  [i.e.,  of  "the 
house  of  high  places  "  (ver.  31).  Or  it  may 
be  acontemptuous  designation  of  Jeroboam's 
irregular  priests]  which  he  had  made. 

Ver.  33. — So  he  offered  [Heb.  went  wp,  as 
before.  This  verse  is  reaUy  the  introduction 
to  the  history  of  the  next  chapter]  upon  the 
altar  which  he  had  made  In  Bethel  the 
fifteenth  day  of  the  eighth  month,  even  In 
the  month  which  he  had  devised  [ Josephua 
(Ant.  viii.  8.  5)  seems  unaware  that  this  new 
feast  was  kept  at  a  different  date  from  the 
true  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  But  these  words 
are  decisive]  of  his  own  heart  [The  Cethib 

has  13pp  by  which  Maurer  and  Eeil  under 

stand    13?p  ("seormm."    But  qu.)    But 

the  Keri  i3?p  is  every  way  to  be  preferred, 
So  LXX.,  OTTO  KapSiaq  airov.  Similarly, 
Neh.  vi.  8] ;  and  ordained  [rather,  kept, 
celebrated]  a  feast  unto  [Heb.  for]  the 
children  of  Israel :  and  he  offered  [went 
up]  upon  the  altar,  and  burnt  Incense 
[Heb.  to  bum,  &e.  The  context  seems  to 
imply  that  it  was  not  incense,  or  not 
incense  only,  but  the  sacrifice,  or  sacrificial 

T 


274 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  xn.  25—88. 


parts  of  the  victim,  that  the  king  bomed. 
See  on  ch.  xiii.  3  (ja''3).  And  this  meaning 
is  jastified  by  Lev.  i.  9, 17 ;  1  Sam_.  ii.  16 ; 
Amos  iv.  6,  where  the  same  word  is  used. 
It  cannot  be  denied,  however,  that  the 
word  is  generally  nsed  of  incense,  and  it  is 
very  probable  that  both  this  and  sacrifices 
were  offered  by  Jeroboam  on  the  same  altar 
(of.  oh.  xi.  8).  We  may  perhaps  see  in 
Jeroboam's  ministering  in  person,  not  only 
the  design  to  invest  the  new  ordinance  with 
ezoeptionikl  interest  and  splendoor,  but  also 


the  idea  of  enconraging  his  new  priests  to 
enter  on  their  unauthorized  functions  with- 
out  fear.  The  history,  or  even  the  traditions, 
of  Nadab  and  Abihu  (Lev.  z.)  and  of  Eorah 
and  his  company  (Niun.  xvi.  40),  and  the 
threatenings  of  the  law  (Num.  xviii.  7,  22, 
cf.  2  Chron.  xxvi.  20),  may  well  have  made 
them  hesitate.  To  allay  their  fears  the 
king  undertakes  to  offer  the  first  of  the  sacri- 
fices. And  that  their  fears  of  a  Divine  in- 
terposition were  not  gxoundlui  Uw  M^uel 
shows.] 


H0MILETIC3. 

Ver.  80. — The  Sin  of  Jeroloam.  What  was  this  sin,  of  which,  from  this  time 
forward,  the  historian  has  so  much  to  say  ?  It  is  mentioned  more  than  twenty 
times  in  Scripture.  It  oasts  its  dark  shadow  across  fifteen  reigns  of  the  kings  M 
Israel.  Its  baleful  influences  were  felt  for  more  than  two  and  a  half  centuries.  It 
was  the  prime  cause  (2  Kings  xvii.  21-23)  of  that  captivity  from  which  the  ten 
tribes  have  never  returned.  Surely  we  ought  to  know  what  it  was.  And  as  one 
help  to  a  right  conclusion,  let  us  first  clearly  understand  what  it  was  not. 

I.  It  was  not  the  sin  of  rebellion.  There  may  have  been  sin  in  the  way  in 
which  the  rupture  with  Judah  was  brought  about  (see  2  Chron.  xiii.  6,  7),  though 
that  is  by  no  means  certain  (notes  on  vers.  19,  20).  But  even  if  Israel  was  set  upon 
rebellion,  and  even  if  Jeroboam  had  rudely  and  wickedly  precipitated  the  revolt, 
that  cannot  be  "  the  sin  "  of  which  he  is  here  and  elsewhere  accused.  For,  in  the 
first  place,  later  kings  could  not  be  held  responsible  for  Jeroboam's  conduct  at  the 
time  of  the  disruption,  i.t,,  they  could  not  commit  that  sin  of  Jeroboam  ;  and, 
secondly,  the  disruption  itself  was  ordained  of  God  (ch.  xi.  31  sqq. ;  xii.  16 ; 
2  Chron.  xi.  4).  Verse  15,  too,  is  decisive.  "  The  cause  was  from  the  Lord."  Those 
who  sate  on  Jeroboam's  throne,  consequently,  no  less  than  the  successors  of  Solomon, 
reigned  dejure  Divino,  The  former  equally  with  the  latter  were  the  anointed  of 
Heaven  (2  Kings  ix.  8,  6).  It  was  the  Lord  *'  raised  up  "  (ch.  xiv.  14)  Baasha 
(ch.  XV.  28,  29),  Zimri  (ch.  xvL  12),  Jehu  (2  Kings  ix.  6),  and  the  rest. 

II.  It  was  not  the  sin  of  ooiNa  afteb  otheb  oods.  If  this  were  the  sin 
referred  to  here  it  would  probably  have  been  called  "  the  sin  of  Solomon,"  for 
Solomon  is  twice  charged  with  that  sin  (ch.  xi.  4, 10),  whereas  Jeroboam  never  went 
after  Baal,  or  Ashtoreth,  or  Milcom.  It  is  true  the  calves  are  once  called  "  other 
gods"  (ch.  xiv.  9),  but  they  are  only  so  called  in  derision,  and  in  ch.  xvi  31  the 
sin  of  Jeroboam  is  expressly  distinguished  from  the  worship  of  other  gods.  It  was 
probaljly  Jeroboam's  boast  (see  note  on  ver.  28),  not  that  he  was  instituting  a  new 
religion,  or  setting  up  a  rival  Deity,  but  that  he  was  worshipping  the  one  true  God 
in  a  more  rational  and  primitive  way.  See  Jos.,  Ant.  viii.  8.  4.  And  that  the  calf- 
worship  was  not  idolatry,  properly  so  called,  is  clear  from  this  consideration,  that 
"  the  sin  of  Jeroboam  "  is  confined  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  Kot  one  of  the  kings 
of  Judah  is  ever  taxed  with  it.  And  yet  it  was  in  Judah,  and  not  in  Israel,  that 
idolatry  prevailed.  Of  the  kings  of  Israel,  only  Ahab  and  his  two  sons  were  guilty 
of  idolat^  ;  whereas  of  the  kings  of  Judah  only  five  set  their  faces  against  it.  Yet 
the  non-idolatrous  kings  of  Israel  are  constantly  charged  with  Jeroboam's  sin,  and 
the  idolatrous  kings  of  Judah  never.     Polytheism,  therefore,  it  cannot  have  been. 

III.  It  was  not  the  sih  of  imaqe  worship.  The  calves  were  not  made  to  be 
worshipped,  any  more  than  the  cherubim  of  Solomon's  temple.  Nor  do  we  read 
that  they  received  Divine  worship.  "  The  people  went  to  worship  before  the  one," 
4c.  The  Scripture,  it  is  true,  calls  them  "  molten  images,"  but  Jeroboam  doubtless 
said  they  were  symbols  of  the  heavenly  powers,  designed  (like  the  images  of  the 
Roman  Communion)  to  be  helps  to  devotion,  and  they  are  nowhere  called  "idols," 


:h.  mi.  26—33.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  876 

at  "  horrore,"  or  "  statues."  We  entirely  misconoeive  Jeroboam's  purpose,  and 
discredit  his  sagacity,  if  we  think  that  he  had  the  worship  of  Apis  or  Mnevis  or  ttay 
similar  idol  in  his  mind.  The  last  thing  that  would  occur  to  lum  would  be  to  set 
up  a  purely  pagan  system  amongst  such  a  people  as  the  Jews.  His  was  not  the 
sin  of  idol  worship.    What,  then,  was  it  ? 

I.  It  was  the  sin  of  hebest.  For  "  heresy  "  in  the  original  meaning  of  the 
word  simply  implied  an  arbitrary  selection  of  doctrines  or  practices — a'ipeaie  =  a 
chooninti — ^instead  of  dutifully  accepting  those  which  God  has  enjoined.  This  is 
prvoisely  what  Jeroboam  did.  Instead  of  taking  and  handing  down  to  his  suc- 
cessors, whole  and  undefiled,  the  "  faith  once  delivered,"  he  presumed  to  modify  it ;  to 
adapt  it,  as  he  thought,  to  the  new  order  of  things,  &c.     His  heresy  was  threefold. 

1.  He  chose  his  own  places  of  worship.  God  had  ordained  that  there  should 
be  one  sanctuary  for  the  whole  nation.  Both  the  law  of  Moses  and  the  history  of 
Israel  aUke  taught  that  the  religious  centre  of  the  nation  should  be  one.^  From  an 
early  age  it  was  predicted  that  God  would  choose  Himself  a  place  to  put  His  name 
there  (Deut.  xii.  13,  14  ;  xiv.  23).  And  this  Divine  choice  had  been  recently  and 
unmistakably  made.  He  "  chose  not  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  but  chose  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  the  Mount  Zion  which  He  loved."  And  He  built  His  "  sanctuary,"  &c.  (Psa. 
Izzvui  67 — 69 ;  of.  Psa.  cxxxii.  18,  14).  At  the  dedication  of  this  sanctuary 
this  choice  had  been  publicly  proclaimed  (oh.  viii,  10,  11  ;  2  Chron.  vii.  2,  12,  16). 
The  whole  nation  then  understood  that  God  had  "  chosen  Jerusalem  to  put  His 
name  there."  And  Jeroboam  was  aware  of  this,  and  was  also  aware  that  the 
division  of  the  kingdom  was  to  make  no  difference  as  to  the  oneness  or  the  position 
of  the  sanctuary.  To  prevent  misconception  he  was  twice  reminded  in  the  message 
of  Ahijah,  his  charter  to  the  crown,  that  Jerusalem  was  "  the  city  which  God  had 
chosen  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel "  (ch.  xi.  32,  3S).  It  was  to  be  in  the  future, 
as  it  had  been  in  the  past,  the  one  place  of  incense  and  sacrifice.  And  that  Jero- 
boam knew  it,  his  own  thoughts  (oh.  xii.  26,  27)  reveal  to  us.  "  If  this  people  go 
up  to  do  sacrifice  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem."  He  is  quite  clear,  then 
— indeed,  he  could  not  be  otherwise — as  to  the  place  of  God's  choice.  But  that  place, 
he  argues,  wiU  not  do  for  him.  Political  considerations  demand  that  he  shall  find 
a  religious  centre  elsewhere.  So  he  "takes  counsel,"  and  decrees  ex  mero  arbitrio 
that  Israel  shall  have  three  holy  places  instead  of  one,  and  that  Bethel  and  Dan 
shall  henceforward  divide  the  honours  hitherto  enjoyed  by  Jerusalem. 

2.  He  chose  his  own  modes  of  worship.  Though  the  way  in  which  God 
should  be  approached  had  been  prescribed,  though  every  detail  of  the  Divine  ser- 
vice had  been  ordered  beforehand,  and  though  he  had  been  warned  against  adding 
aught  to  it  or  diminishing  aught  from  it  (Deut.  iv.  2 ;  xii.  32),  yet  he  decided  other- 
wise. Perhaps  he  persuaded  himself  that  he  had  good  reasons  for  it ;  but  all  the 
same  he  chose  otherwise  than  God  had  chosen.  Though  Bxod.  xx.  4,  &c.,  forbade 
the  making  of  graven  images,  yet  he  "made  molten  images  "  (oh. xiv. 9).  Though 
the  law  decreed  that  the  sons  of  Aaron  alone  should  offer  sacrifice  and  burn  in- 
sense,  yet  he  determined  to  play  the  priest  himself,  and  also  "  made  him  priests 
of  the  lowest  of  the  people."    Sie  volo,  sicjubeo,  &c. 

8.  He  chose  his  own  times  of  worship.  Nothing  could  have  been  more 
positively  fixed  than  the  date  of  the  Feast  of  the  Tabernacles.  It  was  to  be  "  the 
fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  "  (Levit.  xxiii.  84,  39).  But  this  was  not  the 
day  of  Jeroboam's  "  choice."  He  "  devised  "  a  month  "  of  his  own  heart ;  "  be 
consulted,  perhaps  he  thought,  his  people's  oonvenienoe  ;  but  was  there  ever 
heretic  yet  that  was  not  full  of  arguments,  when  all  God  asks  is  obedieuoe  1 

"  In  religion 
What  dangerous  error,  but  some  sober  brow 
Win  bless  it  and  approve  it  with  a  text, 
Hiding  the  grossness  with  fair  ornament," 

n.  It  was  tee  sin  of  schism.  It  is  not  without  reason  that  in  the  Litany 
"heresy  and  schism"  are  coupled  together,  for  the  latter  springs  out  of  the 
former  (Justin  Martyr  quotes  as  one  of  the  sayings  of  our  Lord  leavrai  axiv/tca-a  ral 


276  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xn.  26—33. 

aipims  (cf.  1  Cor  xi.  18).  Jeroboam's  arbitrary  choice  led  to  a  dwision  in  the 
Jewish  Church.  Let  us  briefly  consider  in  wliat  way  the  breach  in  the  national 
unity,  hitherto  so  close  and  conspicuous,  was  effected. 

1.  The  one  centre  of  unity  gave  place  to  three  centres  of  divition.  Hitherto, 
three  times  a  year  (cf.  ix.  25)  all  the  males  of  Israel,  from  Dan  to  Beersheba,  had 
gathered  roimd  one  altar.  Thither,  "the  tribes  went  up,  the  tribes  of  the  Lord." 
Now,  instead  of  going,  even  from  Dam,  the  people  went  to  worship  before  the 
calves  "  even  unto  Dan."  The  ten  tribes  turned  their  backs  on  Jerusalem,  and 
sought,  some  of  them,  a  sanctuary  at  the  opposite  point  of  the  compass.  Nor  did 
those  who  worshipped  at  Bethel  afford  a  less  striking  proof  of  disintegration,  for 
that  sanctuary  was  within  sight  of  the  temple  mount.  The  two  pillars  of  smoke 
ascending  day  by  day  from  rival  altars,  but  twelve  miles  apart,  proclaimed  to  all 
that  there  was  a  "  schism  in  the  body." 

9.  The  one  priesthood  of  Aaron  shared  its  ministry  toith  the  priests  of  Jerohoa/m. 
No  longer  were  offerings  brought  exclusively  to  the  sons  of  Levi,  but  "  whosoever 
would"  might  burn  the  incense  and  sprinkle  the  blood.  The  schism  was  accentu- 
ated by  the  appointment  of  a  new  order  of  men,  with  vested  interests  in  the 
perpetuation  of  division. 

8.  The  one  ritual  of  Divine  obligation  was  tra/oestied  hy  rites  and  eeremomea 
of  humum  appointment.  If  the  breach  was  widened  by  the  intrusive  priesthood,  it 
was  deepened  by  the  unauthorized  and  forbidden  cultus  of  the  calves.  The 
stranger,  who  came  out  of  a  far  country  for  God's  name's  sake  (ch.  viii.  41,  42),  to 
pray  toward  the  house,  found  himself  in  the  presence  of  rival  systems,  each  claim- 
ing to  be  primitive  and  true,  but  differing  so  widely  that  he  would  go  home  to  his 
own  land,  doubting  whether  both  were  not  false.  He  would  say,  as  others  have  said 
sinoe,  that  before  men  compassed  sea  and  land  to  make  proselytes,  they  bad  better 
agree  among  themselves. 

4.  The  one  Feast  of  Tabernacles  appointed  of  God  was  parodied  hy  a  Feast 
devised  ofma/n.  That  feast,  the  most  joyous  of  the  year,  bad  once  been  the  greatest 
manifesiition  of  religious  unity  which  Israel  afforded.  It  was  the  very  "  dissidence 
of  dissent"  when  t^e  feast  of  the  seventh  month  was  straightway  and  osten- 
tatiously followed  by  a  feast  of  the  eighth  month,  celebrated  but  a  few  miles  distant. 
It  was  the  culminating  proof  ot.Sixo — araoia. 

III.  The  sin  of  Kobah  (Num.  xvl)  This  has  been  already  twice  referred  to,  as 
a  part  of  the  heresy  and  as  a  factor  in  the  schism.  But  it  may  well  stand  by  itself 
as  a  substantive  part  of  the  sin.  It  was  just  as  great  a  violation  of  the  Divine 
law  to  use  the  ministry  of  tmauthorized  persons  as  to  worship  at  shrines  of  man's 
choosing  or  with  ordinances  of  man's  devising. 

This,  then,  was  "  the  sin  of  Jeroboam."  It  was  not  rebellion,  not  idolatry,  but 
the  worship  of  the  true  God  in  unauthorized  places,  with  unauthorized  rites,  and 
by  unauthorized  ministers.  Nor  did  it  make  it  less  a  sin  that  it  seemed  to  prosper. 
The  church  of  Jeroboam  straightway  became  the  ohorch  of  the  majority.  At  the 
time  of  the  captivity  it  could  boast  of  some  antiquity  (Judg.  xviiL  80 ;  2  Kings 
xvii.  16).  But  all  the  same  God  put  His  brand  upon  it.  Three  miracles 
(1  Kings  xiii.)  were  wrought  as  a  testimony  against  it.  The  voices  of  tiie 
prophets  were  raised  to  condemn  it  (Hosea,  ;as«tm;  Micah  vi  16,  &c.)  But  from 
year  to  year  and  reign  to  reign  it  flourished,  and  bore  its  baleful  fttut,  and  then, 
after  the  schism  had  lasted  two  hundred  and  fifty  years,  while  the  kingdom  ot 
Judah,  despite  its  idolatries,  still  retained  for  136  years  longer  its  place  in  the 
oovenaut  land,  the  ten  tribes  were  carried  away  to  the  cities  of  the  Medes,  were 
"  scattered  beyond  the  river,"  and  disappeared  from  the  page  of  history. 

And  has  this  sin  no  lessons  ?  has  its  punishment  no  warnings  for  ourselves  f  If, 
as  some  seem  to  think,  we  may  pick  and  choose  our  doctrines  at  pleasure ;  if  the 
Scripture  is  of  private  interpretation ;  if  we  are  at  liberty  each  one  to  sot  up  his  own 
dogmas  against  the  quod  semper,  quod  ubique,  qttod  ab  omnibus  of  the  Catholic 
Church ;  or  if  there  is  no  such  thing  as  schism :  if  it  is  never  mentioned  or  never 
reprobated  in  the  New  Testament;  if  the  Babel  of  sects — there  are  over  one  hundred 
of  them  in  this  England  of  ours — is  according  to  the  plan  and  purpose  of  onr  Lord ; 


TH.  Ml  25—33.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  877 

or  if,  again,  the  "  form  of  Bound  words,'*  the  depositiim  fidei,  the  creeds  of  the 
undivided  Church,  have  no  authority :  if  they  can  be  added  to  by  the  autocrat  ol 
Borne,  or  diminished  from  by  any  state,  or  sect,  or  teacher ;  or,  finally,  if  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  a  "  mission  "  of  Christ's  ministers ;  if  any  man  may  take  this 
honourHo  himself;  if  those  who  have  never  been  sent  themselves  may  never- 
theless send  others — then  this  history  is  void  of  all  meaning.  But  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  Christianity  is  the  chUd  of  Judaism,  and  the  Christian  Church  the 
inheritor  of  the  principles  of  the  Jewish ;  if  that  church  is  One  and  Catholic 
and  Apostolio ;  if  the  faith  was  once  for  all  (^TraS)  delivered  to  the  saints ;  if  our 
Lord  Christ  sent  His  apostles  even  as  the  Father  had  sent  Him  (John  xx.  21), 
if  they  in  turn  "  ordained  elders  in  every  city  "  (Titus  L  6 ;  of .  2  Tim.  ii.  2),  and  by 
laying  on  of  hands  (Acts  xiii.  3) ;  if  the  tactual  succession  is  not  a  mere  piece  of 
priestly  assumption — then  assuredly  the  history  of  Jeroboam's  sin  is  fall  of  meaning, 
and  "very  necessary  for  these  times."  And  the  prominence  accorded  to  it  in 
Scripture,  the  twenty  references  to  its  working — we  can  understand  it  aU  when  we 
remember  that  "whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime  were  written  for  our 
learning,"  and  that  the  Spirit  that  moved  the  prophets  foresaw  the  manifold  bereaies 
and  Bobisma  of  Cbristeudom. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  26 — 27. — Jeroboam's  Despondency.  "  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wean  a 
crown."  Jeroboam's  ambition  was  to  be  a  king,  and  God  gave  him  his  desire.  This 
was  to  punish  Solomon  and  his  house  for  their  apostasy,  and  the  men  of  Israel  who 
had  been  led  away  in  it.  The  sequel  proved  that  the  ambition  of  Jeroboam  also 
brought  its  punishment,  for  be  soon  found  his  throne  the  reverse  of  a  comfortable 
seat. 

I.  His  faith  in  his  feofle  was  shaken.  1.  They  seem  to  hwoe  heeome  restive 
under  his  rule.  (1)  This  was  likely  to  be  the  case.  Their  complaint  against  the 
house  of  David  was  the  pressure  of  their  burdens.  But  these  could  not  be  lightened 
when  two  kings  had  to  be  maintained  instead  of  one ;  when  a  court  had  to  be 
supported  by  a  greatly  diminished  constituency.  (2)  They  had  to  create  a  capital 
worthy  of  the  Mngdom.  So  Jeroboam  set  about  building  Shechem,  which  was  a 
ruin ;  for,,two  centuries  before,  it  bad  been  demolished  by  Abimelech  (Judg.  iz.  46). 
The  cost  of  this,  including  that  of  the  palace  there,  appears  to  have  been  so  dis- 
agreeable, that  Jeroboam,  for  bis  tranquUlity,  shifted  his  court  to  Fennel,  on  the 
east  of  the  Jordan.  (8)  Penuel  now  stood  in  need  of  improvements.  It  bad 
Buffered  at  the  hands  of  Gideon  nearly  three  centuries  before,  when  the  tower  was 
destroyed  (Judg.  viii.  17).  A  second  palace  here  was  not  likely  to  ease  their  bur- 
dens. (4)  Then  their  ability  to  pay  taxes  was  reduced ;  for  their  commerce,  created 
in  the  days  of  Solomon,  seems  to  have  declined.  This  would  not  improve  their 
temper.  2.  He  therefore  ieccmie  gloomily  apprehensive.  (1)  He  feared  that, 
having  now  discovered  that  their  burdens  were  no  lighter,  they  might  reflect  that 
they  bad  done  wrong  in  throwing  off  allegiance  to  their  legitimate  sovereign,  and 
that  the  "  kingdom  would  return  to  the  bouse  of  David."  (2)  Further,  that  this 
disposition  must  be  encouraged  by  their  visits  to  Jerusalem  for  religious  purposes 
(Dent.  xvi.  16, 17).  They  would  then  see  that  neither  Shechem  nor  Penuel,  as 
capitals,  could  compare  with  Jerusalem.  (3)  And  he  feared  that  a  counter  revolu> 
tion  must  imperil  his  life,  for  Behoboam  would  demand  this  as  a  condition  of  their 
reconciliation.    But  the  true  cause  of  his  despondency  was  that — 

n.  He  had  fobootten  to  tbust  in  God.  1.  Had  he  no  assv/rance  in  the  words  of 
Ahijah  ?  (1)  Did  not  Ahijah  give  him  ten  pieces  of  the  rent  garment  ?  Did  he  not 
accompany  the  sign  with  assuring  words  ?  (Chron.  xi.  87.)  Has  not  this  part  of  the 
prophecy  been  fiJfllled  ?  (2)  Is  it  not,  therefore,  in  the  power  of  Jeroboam  to 
perpetuate  his  throne  by  faithfully  serving  God  ?  (Ohron.  xi.  38.)  The  fulfilment  of 
the  former  part  of  the  prophecy  surely  pledges  the  latter.  (3)  Ah,  but  this  promise 
is  conditional  t    Bo  are  all  God's  promises.    If  we  comply  not  with  the  conditions 


87t  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xn.  25— Sa. 

we  Bhall  infallibly  forfeit  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  But  he  was  moved  by  ant' 
bition  rather  than  piety.  (1)  Had  he  complied  with  the  holy  conditions,  instead 
of  apprehending  mischief  to  his  throne  from  tlie  visits  of  his  subjects  to  Jerusalem, 
it  would  be  the  other  way.  For  the  more  they  learnt  to  love  and  serve  God,  the  more 
loyal  must  they  be  to  a  godly  king.  (2)  But  he  felt  in  his  soul  that  he  had  not  so 
compUed :  nor  had  he  any  disposition  to  repent ;  therefore,  instead  of  seeking  help 
in  God,  as  he  should  have  done,  he  trusted  to  his  own  wicked  policy.  There  is  no 
real  happiness  without  God.  The  very  pinnacle  of  human  ambition  is  a  throne  : 
yet  without  God  is  there  no  happiness  here.  "What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain 
the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  " — M. 

Yer.  28. — Jeroboam'*  Cahei.  Unbelief  is  the  root  of  all  mischief.  Had  the 
king  of  Israel  believed  God,  he  would  have  obeyed  Him ;  then  he  would  have  been 
under  no  temptation  to  set  up  a  spurious  religion  to  the  confusion  of  his  &mily  and 
people.    But  what  did  he  mean  by  these  calves  ? 

I.  They  were  intended  to  be  images  of  the  God  of  Isbaei,.  1.  So  he  deteribet 
themin  the  text.  (1)  "  These  are  thy  Elohim,  O  Israel."  Our  Enghsh  Bibles  give 
the  word  "  God  "  without  the  capital  G,  as  though  the  purpose  of  Jeroboam  were  to 
lead  the  people  away  from  the  true  God.  This,  indeed,  was  the  effect,  but  that  it 
was  the  design  may  well  be  doubted.  (2)  He  fiirther  identifies  the  Elohim  repre- 
sented in  them  as  having  broiight  them  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  This  expres- 
sion is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  Elohim  he  would  remind  them  of  in  these 
figures  was  the  same  who  wrought  all  the  miracles  of  the  Exodus.  (8)  We  must 
not  be  misled  by  the  words,  "  Behold  thy  Elohim,"  or  "  These  are  thy  filohim," 
M  though  he  wished  to  impose  these  calves  upon  them  as  the  very  Elohim  who 
wrought  all  the  wonders  of  their  miraculous  history.  For  this  is  a  Hebraism  &r 
ivmilitudea  (see  Gea.  xli.  27 ;  Dan.  ii.  38 ;  1  Cor.  x.  4).  Note :  Bomanists  impose 
their  monstrous  transubstantiation  upon  those  who  have  not  discerned  this.  2.  HU 
error  was  a  reproduction  of  Aaron's.  (1)  This  will  be  clear  from  a  comparison  of 
the  text  with  Exod.  xxxii.  4.  (2)  Aaron  could  not,  under  the  very  shadow  of  the 
Shekinah,  and  within  hearing  of  the  voice  of  thunder  from  Sinai,  have  intended  to 
substitute  his  calf  for  the  very  Elohim.  (3)  But  that  he  only  intended  it  as  an 
emblem  of  the  true  God  is  placed  very  clearly  before  us  in  the  words  following 
(Exod.  xxxii.  6,  6),  in  which  the  feast  celebrated  before  his  calf  is  called  a  "feast  of 
Jehovah.''  8.  Tet  this  was  idolatry.  (1)  Idolatry  may  consist  of  worshipping  the 
creature  instead  of  the  Creator.  This  the  Bomanist  does  when  he  worships  the 
wafer.  (2)  Or  it  may  be  substituting  some  imagination  of  his  heart  for  the  God 
who  has  miraculously  revealed  Himself,  and  whose  revelations  concerning  Himself 
are  written  in  Holy  Scripture.  Such  were  the  idealizations  of  the  ancient  (and  also 
modem)  heathen.  (3)  Or  it  may  consist  in  attempting  to  worship  the  tme  God 
through  unauthorised  images  (see  Exod.  xx.  4).  This  was  the  case  with  Aaron, 
also  with  Jeroboam.  It  is  likewise  the  case  with  the  Romanist,  who  nses  crucifixes, 
and  images  and  pictures  of  the  Persons  of  tiie  Trinity. 

n.  But  wht  did  he  make  calves?  1.  He  had  the  cherubim  in  his  mini. 
(1)  These  had  the  visage  of  a  calf.  They  had,  indeed,  also  the  visages  of  a  lion, 
of  a  man,  and  of  an  eagle.  But  the  whole  figure  terminated  in  the  foot  of  a  calf 
(Ezek.  i.  7).  (2)  Jeroboam's  calf  probably  had  also  associated  with  it  the  other 
visages  of  the  cherubim;  so  probably  had  Aaron's,  for  they  respectively  call 
their  image  by  the  plural  name  Elohim  (D'n^S).  The  single  image  at  Bethel  ia 
also  called  calves  (D'J7l?)  in  the  plural,  which  suggests  a  plurality  of  visages,  though 
not  necessarily  visages  of  calves,  for  the  whole  emblem  appears  to  have  been 
designated  by  this  name.  2  But  the  cherubim  were  emblems  of  the  Holy  Trinity. 
(1)  The  calf  or  young  bull,  which  by  the  ancients  was  taken  for  an  emblem  of  fire, 
stood  here  for  the  fint  Person  of  the  Godhead.     (See  Bate's  "  Critica  Hebrfea," 

under  7iV  and  3113  ;  also  his  learned  "  Inquiry  into  the  Occasional  and  Standing 
Bimihtudes  of  the  Lord  God  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.")  (2)  The  lion  was 
the  symbol  of  hght,  and  stood  for  the  second  Person.   With  the  face  of  the  lion  that 


OH.  UL  25—83.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  m 

of  the  man  was  constantly  associated,  foreshadowing  the  assumption  of  the  manhood 
into  the  Godhead  by  that  blessed  Person.  (3)  And  the  eagle,  the  emblem  of  air, 
Btood  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  (4)  These,  therefore,  are  called  the  cherubim,  ot 
timilitudei  of  the  Great  Ones,  from  D*ai  Great  Ones,  and  D  KJce,  8.  Micah't 
teraphim  were  like  Jeroboam's  calves.  (1)  They  were  a  compoond  or  plural 
image  like  the  oherabim,  and  used  Uke  them  (see  Judg.  xvii.  6,  xviii.  6).  (2) 
Michael  was  a  worshipper  of  the  true  God,  and  so  was  Laban,  who  also  used 
teraphim  (see  Gen.  xzxi.  19,  80,  37,  49).  (3)  Compare  also  1  Sam.  zix.  13; 
Ezek.  xxi.  21 ;  Hosea  iii.  4.  (4)  The  cerberus  of  the  pagans,  with  its  plurality  of 
heads,  was  a  corruption,  and  the  name  of  that  monster  keeps  up  the  sound,  of  the 
original  Hebrew  c%eru&im.  How  Bubtle  is  the  spirit  of  idolatry  I  We  cannot  keep 
too  close  to  God's  Word, — M. 

Vers.  28 — 88. — JeroboamCt  Sin.  The  Mng  of  Israel,  moyed  by  personal  ambition 
instead  of  zeal  for  God,  fearing  lest  his  people,  in  going  to  Jerusalem  to  worship, 
should  see  reason  to  regret  having  rent  the  kingdom,  took  counsel  to  prevent  this. 
The  result  was  the  development  of  the  policy  described  in  the  text.  It  was 
cunning — 

I.  In  the  kind  of  worship  imposed.  1.  A$  to  its  objects,  (1)  It  purported 
to  be  the  worship  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Essentially  the  same  with  the  worship  at 
Jerusalem.  Thus  it  concUiated  favour.  Had  it  been  the  worship  of  any  god  of 
the  nations,  opposition  would  have  been  provoked.  (2)  Yet  was  it  idolatry.  So  in 
like  manner  is  much  of  the  worship  of  modem  times  which  passes  under  the  name 
of  Christianity.  Satan  does  not  lose  his  identity  by  transforming  himself  into  an 
angel  of  light.  2.  A$  to  its  modes.  (2)  Its  images  were  imitations  of  the  cherubim. 
Such  also  were  the  teraphim.  And  as  God  was  said  to  dwell  in,  not  "  between  " 
(2^  is  to  inhabit),  the  cherubim,  so  Jeroboam  directed  his  dupes  to  seek  the  God 
of  Israel  in  his  calves.  (2)  With  these  were  associated  altars,  /or  sacrifice  and 
incense,  like  those  in  the  temple ;  and  the  victims  would  be  clean  animals  proper 
for  sacrifice  ;  the  incense  also  would  be  similar  to  that  burnt  in  Jerusalem.  (3)  He 
had  a  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  which  is  described  in  the  text  as  "  like  unto  the  feast 
that  is  in  Judah."  Only  that  he  altered  the  date  as  well  as  the  place  from  the 
fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  to  the  corresponding  day  of  the  month  following. 
It  is  significantly  noted,  "  which  he  had  devised  of  his  own  heart "  (see  Num.  xv. 
89).  He  was  a  forerunner  of  another  character  who  has  not  hesitated  to  "  change 
times  and  laws "  (Dan.  viL  26).  8.  As  to  its  ministers.  (1)  His  priests  were 
Levites,  where  he  could  get  them.  In  this  he  seems  to  have  succeeded  at  Dan. 
For  the  descendants  of  Jonathan,  who  was  of  the  family  of  Aaron,  appear  to  have 
fallen  in  with  his  designs  (see  Judg.  xvui  80).  (2)  But  it  was  different  at 
Bethel.  Here  the  Levites,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  had  too  much  principle  to  serve  his 
calves.  So  "  he  made  priests  of  the  lowest  of  the  people."  (3)  Amongst  these  he 
officiated  himself.  Morally  he  was  indeed  amongst  the  lowest  of  the  people, 
notwithstanding  his  position  as  king.  This,  unhappily,  was  not  suf&cieutly  discerned. 
The  wicked  do  not  understand  (Dan.  xii.  10). 

II.  In  the  places  chosen  fob  that  worship.  1.  Dam,  was  ehosen  with 
lagacity.  (1)  This  was  a  city  in  the  north,  whose  Canaanitish  name  was  Laish, 
but  which,  when  conquered  by  the  Danites,  received  the  name  of  their  father 
(Judg.  xviii.  29 — 81).  This  would  be  convenient  to  the  people  living  so  distant 
from  Jerusalem.  (2)  Besides,  from  its  founding,  this  city  was  sacred  to  the  worship 
of  God  through  the  medium  of  teraphim.  This  was  about  the  time  of  Joshua's 
death  when  Phinehas  ministered  at  the  tabernacle  at  ShUoh  (compare  Judg.  xx. 
27,  28).  From  these  very  teraphim,  when  they  were  in  the  house  of  Micah,  God 
gave  respfenses  to  Jonathan  the  priest.  (8)  For  the  teraphim  of  Micah,  which 
were  carved  blocks  covered  with  silver,  Jeroboam  substituted  one  of  his  calves, 
which  was  covered  with  gold  ;  otherwise  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any 
material  change  in  the  worship  there.  So  the  prejudices  of  the  people  would  not 
be  shocked.  2.  Bethel  also  was  chosen  with  sagacity.  (1)  This  was  in  the 
southern  part  of  the  kingdom,  to  accommodate  those  who  might  otherwise  go  to 


280  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xn.  25—33. 


Jerusalem  through  convenience  of  distance.     How  adroitly  do  the  wicked  plac« 
their  snares  I     (2)  This  place,  too,  had  a  memorable  history.     It  was  the  scene  oi . 
the  vision  of  the  ladder  and  renewal  of  the  covenant  with  Jacob,  In  token  of  which 
the  patriarch  vowed  to  the  Lord,  anointed  a  pillar,  and  built  an  altar  ,(Gen.  xxviii. 
19,  20  ;  xxxi.  13  ;  xxxv.  1,  7).     It  was  one  of  the  stations  of  Samuel,  and  a  place  to. 
which,  in  his  days,  the  people  were  accustomed  to  go  up  to  worship  (1  Sam.  vii.  16; 
X.   3).     (3)    Here,   accordingly,  Jeroboam  fixed  his  head-quarters,   and  built  a- 
pretentious  temple,  or  "  house  of  high  places  "  (ver.  31). 

Thus  practically  did  Jeroboam  say,  with  another  purpose  in  his  heart,  "  It  is  too 
much  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem."  Beware  of  religion  made  easy ;  it  may 
land  you  in  perdition.  Beware  of  imitations  of  Divine  things.  Keep  rigidly  to 
the  Word  of  God.— M. 

Vers.  26— 2S.— The  Sim,  of  Jeroloam.  This  passage  describes  the  act  which 
is  so  often  referred  to  with  horror,  in  the  books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles,  as 
"  the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat."  To  an  irreligious  man  like  himself, 
nothing  would  appear  more  natural  or  politic  than  this  conduct.  He  had  been 
driven  into  Egypt  by  Solomon,  had  there  married  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  become 
femiliar  with  the  worship  of  Apis  and  Mnevis.  Now  he  had  returned,  and  found 
himself  the  ruler  of  the  ten  tribes,  the  first  king  of  the  separate  "kingdom  of 
Israel."  Eecognizing  as  he  did  the  religious  tendencies  and  memories  of  his 
people,  he  saw  that  the  national  assemblies  for  worship  in  the  temple  at  Jeru- 
salem would,  sooner  or  later,  imite  the  tribes  again  under  one  king.  Hence  his 
action.  Looking  at  his  conduct  (1)  from  the  earthward,  and  (2)  from  the  heaven- 
ward side,  we  see  that  his  policy  was  at  once  shrewd  and  sinful. 

I.  The  sheewdness  of  Jeroboam's  policy.  (1)  It  was  am,  appeal  to  tribal 
independence.  In  effect  he  said,  "  "Why  should  you  men  of  Ephraim  be  dependent 
for  your  worship  on  Judah  ?  Why  should  your  tribute  go  to  support  their  temple  ? 
Let  us  have  a  place  of  our  own."  This  argument  has  been  repeated  by  demagogiies 
in  every  land  and  age.  Class  has  been  set  against  class,  nation  against  nation. 
Church  against  Church,  by  this  spirit.  Show  some  of  the  advantages  of  recog- 
nizing our  interdependence.  (2)  It  was  an  appeal  to  self-indMlgence.  "  It  is  too 
much  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem."  Point  out  instances  in  which  religious 
teachers  have  condescended  to  such  base  suggestions  as  this ;  e.g.,  the  theology  that 
declares  self-conquest  nothing,  that  makes  faith  the  executioner,  instead  of  the 
sustaiuer  of  morality;  the  teaching  that  wiU  offer  "indulgences"  to  those  of 
sinful  habit ;  the  worship  that  pleases  a  sensuous  taste,  but  demands  no  intelKgent 
thought,  &c.  8.  It  was  an  appeal  to  former  memories.  He  made  Shechem  his 
capital,  a  place  associated  with  Abraham  and  Jacob,  and  afterwards  assigned 
to  the  Levites,  and  made  a  -free  city.  He  erected  one  of  the  calves  at  Bethel, 
a  holy  place  on  the  borders  of  Benjamin  and  Ephraim  (see  Gen.  xxxii).  No 
doubt  his  design  was  to  conciliate  those  "who  were  proud  of  past  history.  4.  It 
was  a  bold  attem.pt  to  deceive  the  devout.  He  pretended  that  it  was  the  old  worship 
re-established ;  that  Jehovah  was  really  represented  by  the  calves ;  "  These  be  thy 
gods  (the  old  gods)  that  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  Not  the  first  or 
last  time  in  which  the  prince  of  darkness  has  appeared  as  an  angel  of  light.  Shrewd 
as  was  the  policy,  it  was  not  perfectly  successful  even  during  his  reign.  The  best 
people  emigrated  to  Judah  (like  the  Huguenots  to  England),  to  enrich  another 
kingdom  by  work  and  wealth ;  and  the  prophets  and  many  of  the  priests  were 
roused  to  hostility.  Even  had  it  succeeded,  however,  such  policy  deserved  to  b« 
branded  with  infamy.  Principle  must  never  be  sacrificed  to  expediency.  Success 
never  condones  wrong-doing  with  God. 

II.  The  sinfulness  of  Jeroboam's  policy.  1.  It  revealed  his  utter  distrust  of 
Qod.  See  the  promise  that  had  been  given  him  (ch.  xi.  38) :  "  I  will  build  thee 
a  sure  house."  He  could  not  believe  it.  He  would  trust  his  own  skill  rather  than 
God's  favour.  So  had  it  been  with  Saul  and  ^olomon.  The  path  of  simple 
obedience  is  strait  and  narrow,  and  "  few  tliere  be  that  find  it."  "  Do  My  will  and 
trust  Me,"  is  the  lesson  of  hie,  but  we  are  slow  to  learn  it    Many  professing 


OH.  JUi.  25— 3».]  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  KINGb.  281 

Christians  consider  religion  inappropriate  to  business  competition  and  to  political 
movements.  In  this  they  resemble  the  son  of  Nebat.  2.  Jt  violated  the  funda- 
mental law  of  the  Decalogue.  If  the  first  command  was  not  actually  broken,  the 
Becond  was,  necessarily.  Had  these  calves  merely  been  the  outward  symbols  of 
Jehovah,  they  were  amongst  the  forbidden  "  images."  Jeroboam  knew  this.  He 
remembered  the  calf  Aaron  made,  for  hia  words  were  an  echo  of  those  of  the  first 
high  priest.  He  knew  that  only  the  intercession  of  Moses  then  saved  the  people 
from  destruction,  yet  again  he  defiantly  disobeyed.  Show  the  peril  of  allowing 
images,  crucifixes,  banners,  the  elements  in  the  sacrament,  &o.,  to  take  a  false 
position  in  Christian  worship.  Even  if  the  initiated  worship  God  through  these, 
they  break  (in  spirit)  the  second  command;  while  the  more  ignorant  are  with 
equal  certainW  led  to  the  violation  of  the  first.  8.  It  involved  and  necessitated 
other  sins.  (1)  The  people  worshipped  in  the  place  God  had  not  chosen,  as 
He  had  chosen  the  temple.  (2)  They  had  no  ark  of  the  covenant  on  which  rested, 
and  because  of  which  was  promised,  the  real  presence  of  God.  (3)  Tlie  priests 
were  chosen  by  the  king  in  opposition  to  the  ordinance  of  God  (vers.  31,  &o.,  ex 
universo  popido.  (4)  The  national  feast  of  tabernacles  was  changed  from  the 
seventh  month  (Levit.  xxiii.  34)  to  the  eighth,  not  only  because  the  harvest 
was  later  in  the  north  than  in  the  south  of  Judah,  but  to  widen  insidionsly 
the  breach  between  the  kingdoms.  So  in  all  ages  and  in  all  spheres  one  sin  leads- 
to  another.  It  would  be  better  to  die  as  Abigail  (ch.  xiv.  13)  than  to  reign  as 
Jeroboam. — ^A.  E. 

Vers.  26 — 80. — Hie  Qolden  Calves.  Jeroboam  here  earns  for  himself  that  name 
of  evil  repute — "  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin."  As  the  leader  in  the 
revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  he  was  simply  fulfilling  a  Divine  purpose.  "  The  thing  was 
from  the  Lord," — the  ordained  penalty  of  Solomon's  transgression  (ch.  xi.  31,  33). 
But  this  setting  up  of  the  golden  calves,  this  only  too  successful  attempt  to  sever 
the  sacred  bond  that  boimd  the  people  of  the  whole  land  in  one  common  allegiance 
to  the  temple  and  the  great  invisible  King  who  sat  enthroned  there,  bore  a  widely 
different  character.  This  was  not  "  from  the  Lord."  It  was  wholly  evil.  "  The 
thing  became  a  sin,"  and  the  sin  of  Jeroboam  became  the  prolific  source  of  sin  in 
Israel  through  all  succeeding  generations  (see  ch.  ziv.  7 — 16).  This  transaction 
illustrates — 

I.  The  fatai.  pbbversity  of  a  lawless  ambition.  This  was  Jeroboam's  min. 
God,  by  the  prophet. Ahij ah,  had  promised  to  estabUsh'  him  in  the  kingdom  on 
certain  conditions  (ch.  xi.  88).  There  was  no  wrong  in  the  mere  fact  of  his 
leaking  to  verify  this  prediction.  His  sin  lay  in  the  nature  of  the  means  he  adopted. 
He  thought  it  needful  in  order  to  his  having  a  "  sure  house  "  that  the  people  should 
he  kept  from  going  up  to  sacrifice  at  Jerusalem.  In  other  words,  he  would  strengthen 
his  house  at  the  expense  of  doing  deep  dishonour  to  the  "  Bouse  of  the  Lord."  His 
own  petty  kingship  was  more  to  him  than  the  Infinite  Majesty  of  Jehovah.  Thus 
we  see  how  a  carnal  ambition  (1)  is  subject  to  needless  fears ;  (2)  trifles  with  or 
defies  a  power  that  it  finds  to  be  infinitely  stronger  than  itself ;  (3)  thinks  to  secure 
its  ends  by  means  that  actually  defeat  them  ;  (4)  is  deceived  by  its  seeming  successes. 
History  is  full  of  examples  of  the  way  in  which  men  have  sought  power  for  them- 
selves, either  by  the  abuse  or  the  degradation  of  things  sacred,  or  have  thought  to 
serve  ends  right  in  themselves  by  unrighteous  means.  This  was  one  form  of  Satanic 
temptation  to  which  our  blessed  Lord  was  subject.  "  All  these  things  will  I  give 
thee,"  &o.  (Matt.  iv.  8,  9),  and  his  professed  followers  have  too  often  fallen  before 
it 

n.  The  abtifice  of  a  wicked  purpose.  This  is  seen  in  the  way  in  which  Jero- 
boam practised  craftily  upon  the  rehgious  sentiment  of  the  people  in  the  service  at 
his  own  ambitious  designs.  (1)  He  pandered  to  their  idolatrous  propensities.  The 
"  golden  calves  "  may  have  been  intended  as  a  memorial  rather  than  a  representa- 
tion of  the  Deity.  But  they  were  too  suggestive  of  the  base,  sensuous  worship  of 
Egypt,  and  violated  the  second  commandment  if  not  the  first.  (2)  He  made  pre- 
tence of  consulting  their  ease  and  convenience.    "  It  is  toe  much  for  you,"  &o.    (8) 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  xm.  1 — 10. 


He  took  advantage  of  the  sacred  associations  of  Bethel  and  Ban,  as  if  the  place 
would  hallow  the  proceeding.  (4)  He  instituted  a  priestly  order  as  a  substitute 
for  the  Levites.  (6)  He  ordained  festivals  that  should  rival  those  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem.  In  all  this,  while  affecting  to  do  honour  to  the  traditions  of  religion, 
he  struck  a  &tal  blow  at  the  rehgious  unity  and  integrity  of  the  nation,  turning  the 
highest  sanctities  of  its  life  into  an  occasion  of  sin.  How  forcibly  are  we  reminded 
that  iniquity  assumes  its  most  hateful  form  when  it  prostitutes  to  its  own  ends 
things  sacred  and  Divine.  Satan  is  never  so  Satanic  as  when  he  wears  the' garb  of 
"  an  angel  of  light."  The  most  detestable  of  all  vices  is  hypocrisy.  More  deadly 
injury  has  been  done  to  the  cause  of  religion  by  its  false  friends  than  its  bitterest 
enemies  could  ever  inflict. 

III.  The  disastrous  effects  of  wickedness  in  high  places.  Jeroboam's 
wicked  policy  perpetuated  and  multiphed  in  Israel  the  evils  of  which  the  rending 
of  the  kingdom  at  first  had  been  the  penalty.  With  few  exceptions  all  the  kings 
that  followed  him  "  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  and  the  record  of  their  reigns 
is  httle  else  than  a  stoty  of  crime  and  bloodshed  and  misery.  Moreover,  the  leprosy 
of  idolatry  spread  from  the  throne  down  through  all  classes  of  the  people  until  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  was  completely  overthrown  and  the  ten  tribes  were  carried  captive 
into  Assyria.  Such  are  the  woes  that  fall  on  a  land  when  its  princes  are  corrupt 
and  reprobate.  So  true  is  it  that  "  they  that  sow  to  the  wind  shall  reap  the  whirl- 
wind."—W. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xra.  1—10. 


Thb  testimony  ov  Odd  against  the 
OAU  woBSHip. — We  have  in  thia  chapter, 
which  some  commentators  consider  to  be 
derived  from  a  different  source  from  the 
narratives  which  precede  and  follow  it — 
the  expression  of  ver.  82,  "the  cities  of 
Samaiia,"  according  to  them,  proving  it  to 
be  of  •  later  date,  while  the  style  and 
colouring  of  the  Btoiy  suggest  that  it  em- 
bodies a  tradition  cuirent  in  the  time  of 
the  compiler — an  account  of  certain  circum- 
itanoei  of  profound  significance  which 
marked  the  inauguration  of  Jeroboam's  first 
great  feast — for  the  close  connexion  with 
eh.  zii.  shows  that  it  is  "  the  fifteenth  day 
of  the  eighth  month  "  that  is  here  described. 
The  chapter  divides  itself  into  two  sections, 
the  first  (vers.  1 — 10)  containing  the  pubUo 
testimony  of  the  prophet  of  Judah  against 
the  schismatic  worship,  the  second  (vers. 
11 — 82)  his  subse(iuent  perversion  and  his 
tragical  death. 

Ver.  1. — ^And,  bebold,  there  came  a  man 
of  God  [see  on  oh.  xiL  22.  The  "  man  of 
God"  is  throughout  carefully  distinguished 
from  the  "prophet."  Josephus  calls  the 
former  Jadon,  probably  the  Grecized  form 
of  Iddo,  \^if,  which  appears  as  ill;*  la'do, 
in  the  Keri  of  2  Chron.  ix.  29.  Idio,  how- 
ever, notwithstanding  his  "  visions  against 


Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebst "  (2  Obion,  is. 

29),  it  cannot  have  been,  for  he  survived  to 
the  reign  of  Abijah,  and  indeed  wrote  a 
"  story  "  (Heb.  Midrash,  i.e.,  Commentary) 
of  that  reign,  whereas  this  man  of  God  died 
forthwith.  For  a  similar  reason,  we  cannot 
beUeve  it  to  have  bean  Shemaiah,  the  his- 
torian of  the  reign  of  Behoboam  (2  Chron. 
xii.  6, 16)]  out  of  Judab  [whithar,  as  a  rule, 
both  priests  and  prophets  would  seem  to 
have  retreated  (2  Chron.  xi.  14, 16).  It  is 
clear,  however,  tliat  the  migration  of  the 
latter  was  not  io  general  as  that  of  the 
former.  In  ver.  11  we  find  a  prophet  at 
Bethel ;  in  ch.  ziv.  Ahijah  is  stiU  at  Shiloh, 
and  at  a  later  day  we  find  schools  of  tk* 
prophets  at  Bethel,  Jericho,  &o.  (2  Kings  ii. 
3,  5).  Stanley  sa;s  with  truth  that  "  the 
prophetical  activity  of  the  time  ...  is  to 
be  found  in  the  kingdom,  not  of  Judah,  but 
of  Israel,"  but  omita  t«  add  that  it  was  be- 
cause the  northern  kingdom  mora  aipaeially 
needed  their  ministry.  It  was  just  for  this 
reason  that  Ahijah  and  others  remained  at 
their  posts.]  by  [Heb.  in,  same  word  as  in 
vers.  2,  9,  17,  20,  82,  &o.  Similarly,  1  Sam. 
iii.  21,  The  3  is  not  merely  instrumental, 
but,  like  the  h  of  the  K.  T,,  denotes 
the  sphere  or  element,  "  By  the  word" 
would  imply  that  he  had  received  a  Divine 
communication  ;  ■'  in  the  word,"  that  his 
message  possessed  him,  inspired  him,  was 
"in  his  heart  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up 
in  his  bones"  (Jer.  xx,  9)]  the  word  ot 
the  Lord  unto  Bethel  [It  is  wortii  remem- 
bering that  the  new  sanctuary  at  Bethel 
would  probably  be  visible  from  the  teinpla 


OH.  XIII.  1 — 10.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


883 


(Porter,  p.  219 ;  Van  de  Velde,  ii.  283),  so  that 
this  fanctiou  was  an  act  of  open  defiance] : 
and  Jeroboam  stood  by  [Heb.  upon.  See 
on  oh.  xii.  32,  33.  It  is  the  same  oocasion] 
the  altar  to  bum  incense  [or  to  bum  the 
fat,  &o.,  of  the  sacrifice.  See  on  ch.  xii.  33. 
This  altar  was  clearly,  pro  hac  vice,  an  altar 
of  burnt  ofiering ;  not  an  altar  of  incense, 
as  is  proved  by  the  next  verse.] 

Yer.  2.— And  he  cried  against  the  altar 
In  the  vord  of  the  Lord,  and  said,  0  altar, 
altar,  thus  salth  the  Lord  [This  apostrophe 
of  the  altar  is  very  striking  and  significant. 
It  is  as  if  the  prophet  disdained  to  notice 
the  royal  but  self -constituted  priest ;  as  if 
it  were  useless  to  appeal  to  him ;  as  if  his 
person  was  of  little  consequence  compared 
with  the  religious  system  he  was  inaugu- 
rating, the  system  of  which  the  altar  was 
the  centre  and  embodiment] ;  Behold  a  child 
Bhall  be  bom  unto  the  house  of  David, 
Josiah  by  name  [This  particular  mention 
of  the  Beformer  by  name  was  formerly  re- 
garded, as  by  many  it  is  still,  as  a  remark- 
able instance  of  prophetic  foresight.  But 
the  tendency  of  late,  even  amongst  orthodox 
theologians,  has  been  to  doubt  the  authen- 
ticity of  these  two  words,  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  unlike  Scripture  prophecy  in 
general  to  descend  to  such  details,  which 
rather  belong  to  soothsaying  than  predic- 
tion. Prophecy  concerns  itself  not  with 
names,  times,  and  similar  particulars,  but 
with  the  "  progressive  development  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  in  its  general  features  " 
(Sell).  It  is  not  for  a  moment  denied  that 
the  prophet  could  just  as  easily,  speaking  "in 
the  word  of  the  Lord,"  have  mentioned  the 
name  of  Josiah,  as  the  circumstance  that  a  son 
of  the  house  of  David  would  utterly  destroy 
the  worship  of  calves.  But  it  is  alleged 
that  the  latter  prediction  is  quite  in  accord- 
ance with  Scripture  usage,  and  the  former 
altogether  contrarient  thereto.  The  case  of 
Cyrus  (Isa.  zliy.  28 ;  xlv.  1),  it  is  true,  is  an 
exception  to  the  rule,  unless  ^'^b  (which 
means  the  sun)  is,  like  Pharaoh  and  Hadad, 
a  name  of  office,  a  title  of  the  Persian  kings. 
The  instances  of  Isaac  (Gen.  xvii.  19)  and 
Solomon  (1  Ghran.  xxii.  9)  are  not  parallels, 
as  in  both  these  cases  the  name  was  highly 
significant,  and  each  was  mentioned,  not  by 
way  of  prophecy,  biit  as  a  direction  to  bestow 
that  name  on  a  child  shortly  about  to  be 
bom.  And  it  is  certainly  noticeable — though 
the  argument  e  silentio  is  necessarily  a  pre- 
carious one — "  that  where  this  narrative  is 
again  referred  to  (2  Kings  xxiii.  15 — 18)  there 
is  no  aUueion  to  the  fact  that  the  man  of  God 
had  prophesied  of  Josiah  by  name  "  (Baw- 
linson).  On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  seems 
probable  that  the  two  words  m'^'  ^n^v'X^ 


were  no  part  of  the  original  prophecy,  but  a 
marginal  note  which  in  course  of  time  found 
its  way  accidentally  into  the  text.  The  idea 
of  Keil,  that ' '  Josiah  "  is  mentioned  here  not 
as  a  proper  name,  but  as  an  appellation,  "he 
whom  Jehovah  sustains,"  is  hardly  worthy 
of  serious  consideration.  It  may  be  allowed, 
however,  that  the  meaning  of  the  name 
affords  some  slender  reason  for  its  mention] ; 
and  upon  thee  shall  he  offer  [lit.,  gaerijiee'] 
the  priests  of  the  high  places  [see  on  ch. 
xii.  32]  that  bum  Incense  upon  thee,  and 
men's  bones  [Heb.  hones  o/man,  i.e.,  human 
bones.  Nothing  could  more  completely  fore- 
shadow the  future  desecration  of  the  altar. 
The  presence  in  the  congregation  of  a  living 
man  who  had  merely  touched  a  dead  body 
and  had  not  been  purified,  defiled  the  taber- 
nacle (Num.  xix.  13),  how  much  more  the 
dead  body  itself,  burnt  on  the  very  altar. 
The  Samaritan  who  once  strewed  the  temple 
with  human  ashes  (Jos.,  Ant.  xviii.  2.  2) 
knew  that  he  took  the  most  effectual  way 
to  pollute  it]  shall  be  burnt  [Heb.  shall  they 
burn]  upon  thee.  [For  the  fulfilment,  see 
2  Eiogs  xxiii.  20,  "  At  the  ground  of  this 
judgment,  as  of  the  whole  theocratic  law, 
Ues  thejtu  taUouis"  (EeU,  1816).] 

It  is  worthy  of  note  how  completely  this 
brief  protest  proclaimed  to  Jeroboam  the 
utter  and  shameful  overthrow,  both  of  his 
political  and  religious  systems.  A  child 
of  the  rival  house  of  David  should  stand 
where  he  then  stood,  his  successors  extinct 
or  powerless  to  prevent  him,  and  should 
cover  this  new  cultus  with  disgrace  and  con- 
tempt. The  man  of  God,  he  must  have 
felt,  has  proclaimed  in  few  words  the  fall  of 
his  dynasty,  the  triumph  of  his  rival,  and 
the  failure  of  all  his  schemes. 

Ver.  3. — And  be  gave  a  sign  [The  Heb. 
ns'lD  rather  signifies  a  portent  {repaf;,  mira- 
culum,  prodigium)  than  a  sign,  the  proper 
word  for  which  is  JliS.  The  word  occurs 
repeatedly  in  the  Pentateuch,  where  it  is  ren  - 
dered  wonder,  or  miracle,  by  our  translators 
(Wordsworth).  Signs  had,  of  course,  been 
given  before  (Exod.  iv.  30 ;  vii.  9 ;  1  Sam. 
xii.  17 ;  &e.)  but  hardly  in  such  immediate 
attestation  of  a  special  message.  From  this 
time  forward  such  signs  are  not  infrequent 
(Isa.  vii.  14 ;  xxxviii.  8 ;  2  Kings  xix.  29). 
They  mark  the  decline  of  faith  (Matt.  xii. 
39),  As  to  the  need  at  this  crisis  for  some 
miraculous  token,  see  Homiletics.  The 
fitness  of  this  particular  sign  is  obvious] 
the  same  day,  sajring.  This  is  the  sign 
which  [Rather  that ;  "lg'«  =  guod.  The  A.  V. 
rendering  hardly  makes  seme.      Nor  doe* 


284 


THE  FIE8T  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CB.  XUL  1—10. 


it  agree,  as  Bawlinson  seems  to  think,  with 
the  LXX.,  which  reads  tovto  to  prjiia  8 
i\a\i]a€  Kvpioi,  &c.]  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
[i.e.,  by  me.  "This  is  the  proof  that  my 
message  is  from  Him,  and  is  no  idle  threat." 
Wordsworth  sees  in  this  sign  "  a  proof 
vouchsafed  by  God  Himself  to  the  man  of 
Judah,  as  well  as  to  Jeroboam,  that  he  was 
really  sent  by  God,"  &o.  Butsurely  a  man 
who  came  "in  the  word  of  the  Lord," 
and  cried,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  wanted 
no  proof  that  "he  was  doing  God's  bid- 
ding "  (see  1  Cor.  xiv.  22)]  ;  Behold,  the 
altar  shall  be  rent  and  the  ashes  [strictly, 
fat  ashes.  [B*^ ;  properly,  "fatness"  (see 
Judg.  iz.  9  ;  Fsa.  Ixiii.  5.  Triortjf ,  LXX.), 
is  the  fat  of  the  sacrifice,  which  was  burnt 
npon  the  altar,  mixed  with  the  ashes 
that  consumed  it]  that  axe  upon  It  shall 
be  poured  out.  [The  sign,  a  partial  de- 
struction of  the  altar,  and  the  scattering 
of  the  sacrifice,  was  admirably  calculated 
to  presage  its  ultimate  and  final  and  igno- 
minious overthrow.  The  idea  favoured 
by  Stanley  ("Jewish  Ch. "  ii.  280)  that 
this  prediction  was  fulfilled  "  if  not  before, 
at  least"  in  the  time  of  Amos,  when  the 
altar  was  destroyed  by  an  earthquake  shook 
(Amos  ix.  1 ;  of.  iii.  14),  does  not  seem  to 
take  account  of  ver.  5.] 

Ver.  4. — And  It  came  to  pass  when  Mng 
Jeroboam  [The  A.  V.  follows  the  LXX.  The 
Heb.  omits  "  Jeroboam  "]  heard  the  saying 
of  the  man  of  God,  which  had  cried  against 
the  altar  In  Bethel,  that  he  put  forth  his 
hand  [instinctively.  His  first  thought  was, 
not  to  wait  and  see  whether  the  promised 
sign  was  given,  but  to  seize  and  punish  the 
man  who  had  dared  thus  to  denounce  and 
thwart  him.  And  we  may  imagine  how  ex- 
tremely mortifying  this  interruption  must 
have  been  to  him.  It  threatened  the  com- 
•  plete  frustration  of  his  policy  at  the  very 
moment  when  it  seemed  certain  of  success] 
from  the  altar  [the  ledge  or  platform,  i.e., 
where  he  stood.  He  did  not  leave  it,  but 
shouted  his  commands  to  his  servants], 
saying.  Lay  hold  on  hint  ["  Arrest  him," 
"  let  him  not  escape."  One  word  in  the 
Heb.]  And  his  band,  which  be  put  forth 
against  him,  dried  up  [Possibly  the  result 
of  paralysis  or  tetanus  (Ackermann  in 
Bahr).  It  was  like  the  "  withered  hand  "  of 
the  New  Testament  (Matt.  xii.  10,  &o.) 
deprived  of  feeling  and  vital  force,  as  the 
next  words  show] ,  so  that  he  could  not  pull 
It  In  again  to  Mm-  [It  was  not  only  power- 
less to  punish,  it  was  punished.  "Now 
stands  the  king  of  Israel,  like  some  antique 
statue,  in  a  posture  of  impotent  endeavour  " 
(Hall).  This  was  a  warning  to  the  king,  not 
so  much  against  his  unauthorized  and 
Rohismaticai  rites,  as  against  his  attempt  to 


avenge  himself  on  the  messenger  of   God 
(Psa.  cv.  14,  15).] 

Ver.  5. — The  altar  also  was  rent  [by  the 
same  invisible  power,  and  probably  at  the 
same  moment] ,  and  the  ashes  poured  out 
tcova.  the  altar,  according  to  the  sign  which 
the  man  of  Ood  bad  given  by  tbe  word  of 
the  Lord. 

Yer.  6. — And  the  king  [hnmbled  and 
alarmed  by  the  judgment  he  had  experienced 
in  his  own  person]  answered  and  said  unto 
the  man  of  God,  Intreat  now  [The  Heb.  is 
very  expressive — "Smooth  or  stroke  theface." 
It  is  an  expression  which  occurs  several 
times.  See  especially  Bxod.  xxxii.  11 ;  3 
Kings  xiii.  4;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  12  j  Prov. 
xix.  6]  of  the  Lord  thy  God  [i.e.,  whose 
messenger  thou  art.  "  Jeroboam,  oon* 
science-stricken,  does  not  dare  to  call  Jeho- 
vah his  own  God"  (Wordsworth).  This 
was  probably  the  case,  yet  surely  -it  is  an 
inference  not  warranted  by  the  text.  The 
expression,  "  The  Lord  thy  God,"  is  of  con- 
stant occurrence,  especially  when  a  "  man 
of  God"  is  addressed;  cf.  ch.  xvii.  12; 
xviii.  10] ,  and  pray  for  me  [This  sudden 
change  in  his  bearing  shows  how  much 
Jeroboam  was  frightened.  The  siglit,  too, 
of  the  king  humbly  suppUcating  the  pro- 
phet who  a  moment  before  had  protested 
against  the  calf-worship  was  calculated  to 
make  an  impression  on  the  minds  of  the 
people] ,  that  my  hand  may  be  restored  me 
again.  And  the  man  of  God  besought 
[ht.,  stroked  the  face  o/]  the  Lord,  and 
the  king's  hand  was  restored  bim,  and 
became  as  It  was  before. 

Yer.  7. — And  the  king  said  unto  the  man 
of  God,  Come  home  with  me,  and  refresh 
thyself  [with  food,  ablutions,  &0.  (Gen. 
xviii.  4,  6  ;  xix.  2  ;  Mark  vii.  3,  &o.)  we  are 
hardly  justified  in  seeing  in  these  words 
(with  Bahr  and  Keil)  an  attempt  to  "gain 
the  prophet  over  to  his  side  by  friendliness," 
and  to  render  his  threat  harmless  in  the 
eyes  of  the  people.  The  king  doubtless 
may  have  hoped  that  it  would  "  blunt  the 
edge  of  the  prophet's  denunciation  of  his 
schismatioal  altar"  (Wordsworth);  but  this 
was  not  the  object,  or  not  the  sole  object, 
with  which  the  invitation  was  given.  Jero- 
boam could  not  possibly  have  done  less, 
after  the  signal  service  the  man  of  God  had 
rendered  him,  than  invite  him  to  his  palace. 
Eastern  courtesy  alone  (Gen.  xviii.  4 ;  xix. 
2  ;  xliii.  24,  &e.)  would  require  him  to  offer 
hospitality  to  his  benefactor.  And  hecoiUd 
scarcely  hope  that  any  hospitalities  womd 
either  neutralize  the  impression  which  the 
recent  miracles  had  made,  or  win  over  to  mi 
side  one  who  had  a  direct  commission  from 
the  Most  High  to  oppose  him.  With  more 
reason,  WordsworUi  cites  1  Sam,  XT.  80. 


sH.  xm.  1 — 10.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINOa. 


88S 


"  Honour  me  now,  I  pray  thee,  before  the 
elders  of  my  people."  A  feeling  of  gratitude 
may  have  prompted  the  invitation,  while  the 
king  at  the  same  time  was  very  sensible  of 
the  advantages  which  would  accrue  to  him- 
self if  it  were  accepted] ,  and  I  vlll  give 
thee  a  reward.  [The  services,  especially  of 
seers  and  prophets,  were  invariably  requited 
in  the  East  with  presents,  as  are  those  of 
Judges,  Eadis,  Eaimakams,  and  other 
officers  at  the  present  day  (see  ch.  ziv.  3 ; 
Gen.  zziv.  63 ;  xxziii.  11 ;  zliii.  11  ;  Nnm. 
xxii.  17 ;  Jndg.  iii.  17 ;  vi.  18 ;  xiii.  15 ;  1 
Sam.  Ix.  7,  8 ;  zii.  8 ;  2  Kings  T.  6, 16 ;  viii 
8,9).] 

Ver.  8. — ^And  the  man  of  God  said  nnto 
the  Ung,  If  thou  wilt  give  me  half  thine 
house  [cf.  Num.  zxii.  18,  of  which,  how- 
ever, there  is  hardly  a  reminiscence.  Ob- 
viously, htJf  the  contents  or  wealth  of  thy 
house] ,  I  will  not  go  In  with  thee,  neither 
will  I  eat  bread  nor  drink  water  In  this 
plac& 

Ver.  9. — ^Por  so  was  It  charged  [Heb.  Tie, 
sc.  the  Iiord,  charged  me]  me  by  [Heb.  in] 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  sajring.  Eat  no  bread, 
nor  drink  water  [Participation  in  food — the 
"  eating  salt " — ^is  in  the  East  a  token  of 
friendship  and  afSnity ;  a  sign  of  close  com- 
munion and  feUowship.  The  prophet's 
refusal  to  participate  was  consequently  a 
practical  and  forcible  disclaimer  of  all 
fellowship,  a  virtual  excommunication,  a 
public  xepndiatioa  of  the  oalf- worshippers. 


Cli  1  Cor.  V.  11,"  With  such  an  one,  no,  not 
to  eat."  As  Corn.  &  Lapide,  "  Ut  ipso  facto 
ostenderet,  Bethelitas  idololatrae  adeo  esse 
detsstdMlei,  et  a  Deo  quasi  excommunicatos, 
ut  nullum  fidelium  cum  iis  cibi  velpotiu 
communionem  habere  velit "] ,  nor  turn  again 
by  the  same  way  that  thou  earnest.  [I'he 
object  of  this  command  was  not  "simply  to 
test  the  obedience  of  the  prophet "  (Raw- 
linson),  nor  yet  that  no  one  might  "force 
him  to  a  delay  which  was  irreconcilable 
with  his  commission  "  (Eeil),  for  that  was 
practically  executed,  but  to  avoid  as  far  aa 
possible — what,  indeed,  happened  in  spite 
of  these  precautions — his  being  traced  and 
followed.  Because  of  this  provision,  the 
old  prophet  (ver,  10)  was  reduced  to  ask, 
"  What  way  went  he  ?  "  But  the  charge,  we 
can  hardly  doubt,  was  also  designed  to  serve 
another  purpose,  viz.,  to  warn  the  prophet 
against  doing  what  he  did  presently — against 
returning  to  Bethel.  When  he  was  followed, 
and  when  he  was  told  of  a  revelation  com- 
manding his  return,  he  should  have  remem- 
hered,among  other  things,  that  it  had  clearly 
been  part  of  God's  purpose,  as  evidenced  by 
the  explicit  instructions  given  him,  that  he 
should  not  be  followed.  This  alone  should 
have  led  him  to  suspect  this  old  prophet  of 
deceit.] 

Ver.  10. — So  lie  went  another  way,  and 
returned  not  by  the  way  that  IM  came  to 
BetheL 


H0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  2, 8,  8. — Frotett  and  Excommunication.  The  rin  of  Jeroboam,  (bo  soliism 
-which  he  inangorated  in  person  at  the  first  feast  of  tabernacles  held  in  Bethel,  was 
not  consummated  without  protest.  When  the  king,  possibly  in  the  "  golden 
.garments"  of  the  priesthood,  mounted  the  altar  platform  and  stood  before  the 
vast  multitude  assembled  to  witness  this  first  great  function  of  the  new  regime, 
a  messenger  of  God,  sent  from  Judah,  the  seat  of  the  true  religion,  lifted  up 
his  voice  and  witnessed  against  these  irregular  and  impious  proceedings,  against 
the  unsanctified  altar,  the  unhallowed  sacnfice,  and  the  intmsive  priesthood.  It 
must  have  been  pretty  clear  beforehand  that  any  protest  addressed  to  Jeroboam, 
who  had  devised  and  elaborated  this  corruption  of  Mosaic  worship,  would  be  nn- 
.availrng,  but  nevertheless  it  must  be  made.  It  was  probably  in  part  because 
Jeroboam  was  beyond  the  reach  of  remonstrance  that  the  warning  was  addressed 
to  the  altar  itsel£  In  other  words,  it  was  made  for  the  sake  of  the  people  rather 
than  of  their  king.  They  should  be  mercifully,  and  therefore  distinctly,  taught  that 
this  oalf-worship  had  not  and  could  not  have  the  sanction  of  the  Most  High. 
Whether  they  would  hear,  or  whether  they  would  forbear,  they  should  see  that 
God  had  not  left  Himself  without  witness ;  they  should  know  that  at  this  ciisis 
there  bad  been  a  prophet  amongst  them.  The  breach  should  not  be  made  without 
due  warning  of  its  sinfulness  and  its  consequences.  "  For  a  testimony  unto  them" 
vthe  man  of  God  addresses  the  dumb  altar,  the  sign  and  centre  of  the  new  system, 
and  proolaimB  not  only  its  overthrow  but  the  destruction  of  Jeroboam's  house  and 
4he  defeat  of  all  his  schemes. 

And  as,  nvi^pr  ?rir<)i  circumstances,  mere  threats,  of  whataoever  oharactor  and  by 


288  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xm.  1— Itt 

whomsoever  spoken,  wonld  have  had  bnt  little  weight  without  "  Bigns  foUowing,"  the 
mesBage  straightway  receives  the  confirmation  of  a  miracle.  That  tlie  man  of  God 
"  came  from  Judali  "  was  in  itself  reason  enough  why  the  men  of  Israel  should  not 
listen  to  him,  unless  he  compelled  their  attention  by  prodigies.  "  A  partizan," 
they  would  say,  "  perhaps  a  hireling  of  Kehoboam,  it  was  natural  such  a  one  would 
prophecy  evil  of  the  Northern  Church  and  kingdom,"  and  so  his  words  would  have 
been  unheeded,  even  if  his  life  had  been  spared.  Besides,  one  who  professed  to 
come  as  he  did,  "in  the  word  of  the  Lord,"  they  had  a  right  to  ask  for  his 
credentials,  and  those  credentials  could  only  be  nairaculous.  Had  not  Moses  and 
Aaron  "  wrought  signs  and  wonders  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  before  Pharaoh  and  all 
his  servants?"  Had  not  Samuel,  too,  supported  his  message  by  a  portent  ?  (1  Sam. 
xii.  18.)  If  the  denunciation  of  the  schism,  consequently,  was  not  to  be  inoperative, 
he  must  "  give  a  sign  "  the  same  day. 

And  to  these  "  two  witnesses  " — "  the  "  sure  word  of  prophecy  "  and  the  "sign 
following" — the  rashness  and  impiety  of  Jeroboam  procured  the  addition  of  a  third,  or 
rather  of  two  more— silent,  but  eloquent  attestations,  each  of  them,  that  the  prophet 
had  not  spoken  in  his  own  name.  For,  enraged  at  this  bold,  this  most  unwelcome 
and  sinister  interruption  of  his  ritual,  and  fearing  the  effect  of  this  brave  protest  on 
Ilia  audience  and  the  thousands  of  Israel  to  whom  the  news  would  ultimately  come, 
and  forgetting  at  the  moment  the  sacred  character  of  the  speaker  and  the  unseen 
panoply  which  protected  him,  he  stretches  forth  his  hand  intuitively,  as  if  to  detain 
the  prophet,  and  thunders  his  commands  to  the  attendant  soldiery  to  arrest  him.  But 
that  hand,  really  raised  against  the  Most  High,  suddenly  becomes  rigid  and  power- 
less, and  he  must  needs  stoop  to  beg  the  prophet's  prayers  that  it  may  be  restored 
to  him  again.  And  so  it  came  to  pass  that  the  heretic  king  furnished  in  his  own 
person,  much  against  his  wUl,  two  powerful  proofs  that  the  "man  of  God"  did 
indeed  speak  the  word  of  God  and  'was  supported  by  the  power  of  God.  It  is  thus 
that  God  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him. 

Such,  then,  was  the  peotest,  in  word  and  deed,  which  marked  the  first  great 
service  of  the  schismatic  Church.  But  that  was  not  all.  The  protest  was  to  be 
followed  by  an  interdict.  The  man  of  God  was  commissioned  at  the  same  time  to 
put  the  city  ■and  inhabitants  of  Bethel  under  a  ban.  He  was  to  treat  them  as  lepers, 
as  so  tainted  with  heresy,  so  polluted  and  unclean  in  the  sight  of  God,  that  he 
could  neither  eat  of  their  bread  nor  drink  of  their  cup.  For  this  was  clearly  the 
object  of  the  injunction,  "  Eat  no  bread  nor  drink  water  there ; "  it  was  to  show 
that  all  who  participated  in  this  unhallowed  worship  were  thenceforward  io  be 
treated  by  Divine  command  as  heathens  and  publicans.  And  to  the  children  of 
the  East  this  public  disclaimer  of  fellowship,  this  practical  excommuaioation, 
would  have  a  significance  such  as  with  our  altered  conditions  of  society  we  can 
hardly  conceive,  though  the  "  Boycotting"  of  our  own  time  may  help  us  to  under- 
stand its  operation.  Every  citizen  of  Bethel,  every  worshipper  of  the  calves,  would 
feel  himself  branded  as  unclean.  The  "  scarlet  letter  "  which  the  Puritans  of  New 
Eugland  printed  on  the  bosom  of  the  adulteress  hardly  involved  a  greater  stigma. 
It  was  for  this  reason,  therefore,  that  when  the  king  bade  the  man  of  God  to  his 
palace  and  promised  him  a  royal  recompense  for  the  service  he  had  rendered  him, 
the  latter  flung  back  his  invitation  in  his  face,  and  swore  that  half  the  king's  house 
would  not  tempt  him  to  eat  of  his  dainties.  Jeroboam,  and  his  people  through  him, 
should  learn  that  if  they  would  persist  in  their  wanton  defiance  of  Divine  law; 
if  they  would  have  two  churches  and  three  sanctuaries  where  God  had  decreed 
there  should  in  either  case  be  but  one ;  if  they  would  sacrifice  before  the  works  of 
their  own  hands,  and  by  ministers  of  man's  ordaining,  and  at  times  of  man's 
devising,  then  the  pious  Hebrews  who  preserved  inviolate  the  ancient  faith  should 
wipe  their  hands  of  them,  and  treat  them  as  renegades  and  aliens  from  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel. 

The  lessons  of  this  history  are  manifold.  Two,  however,  oooupy  a  position  of 
pre-eminence  above  the  rest. 

1.  TJiat  corruptions  of  religion  a/re  not  to  be  eonsummated  without  protest  on 
the  part  of  the  Chu/roh     That  Christianity,  as  well  as  Judaism,  should  have  its 


OH.  xm.  1— 10.J  THE  JFlllST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  5287 

heresies  and  schisms  was  distinctly  foretold  by  St.  Paul  himself  (1  Cor.  xi.  19  ;  Acts 
XX.  29,  30).  But  if  they  are  inevitable,  because  of  the  frailty  of  our  nature  and  the 
hardnesss  of  our.  hearts,  they  are  none  the  less  sinful,  and  it  is  none  the  less  our 
duty  to  strive  and  to  witness  against  them.  K  God  did  not  suffer  that  first  great 
schism  to  pass  unreproved,  can  we  do  better,  or  do  less,  than  follow  His  example  ? 
It  may  be  said  that  we  cannot  always  distinguish  between  heresy  and  orthodoxy 
— that  we  "  call  our  doxy  orthodoxy,  and  other  people's  doxy  heterodoxy,"  and 
this  is  quite  true.  But  individual  opinion  is  one  thing  and  the  teaching  of  the 
Church  another.  Has  the  Church,  then,  no  teaching  office  ?  Is  she  or  is  she  not 
"the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth"  ?  Has  she  or  has  she  not  the  promise  of 
our  Lord's  guidance  and  illumination?  (Matt,  xviii.  17,  18;  xxvui.  20.)  Or 
can  the  Church  universal  err  ?  (Matt.  xvi.  18.)  Is  her  "  Quod  semper,  quod  uhique," 
&c.,  no  test  of  truth  ?  It  is  not  for  the  private  Christian  to  claim  any  infallibility, 
but  it  is  for  the  Church  to  say  what  is  in  and  what  is  against  her  depositum  fidei. 
And  furthermore  it  is  her  duty,  in  her  synods  and  by  her  officers,  to  protest  against 
all  corruptions  of  the  faith.  "A  man  that  is  a  heretic  .  .  •  reject,"  Titus  iii.  10  ; 
cf.  ch.  i.  9—11 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  3—5  ("  From  such  withdraw  thyself") ;  Eom.  xvi.  17  ; 
Matt,  xviii.  17 ;  3  John  9,  10 ;  Gal.  i.  8 ;  ii.  11.  The  Christian  verity  is  not  less 
dear  to  God  than  was  the  teaching  of  Moses.  The  preacher  is  as  much  bound 
to  preserve  the  faith  whole  and  undefiled  as  was  the  prophet.  And  it  is  idle  to  say, 
as  it  sometimes  is  said,  that  mere  protests  are  worse  than  useless.  They  may  not 
avert  a  schism— this  protest  did  not — but  they  may  have  their  use  nevertheless,  as 
this  had.  Or  if  they  are  entirely  futile  as  regards  others,  they  are  not  forgotten  of 
God.  Besides,  who  shall  say  that  success  or  non-success  is  to  alter  the  standard 
of  Christian  duty  ?  It  is  surely  something  to  be  able  to  say,  whatever  the  issue, 
Liberavi  anima/m  meam.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  God  knew  beforehand  that 
this  His  protest,  though  enforced  by  signs  and  wonders,  would  be  comparatively 
unavailing. 

2.  That  certain  crimes  against  morality  a/nd  religion  are  still  to  be  visited  by 
EXCOMMUNICATION.  Not  the  excommunication  of  bell  and  book  and  candle — that 
finds  no  place  in  Holy  Scripture — but  social  excommunication  such  as  that  described 
to  us  in  this  history.  Indeed,  there  is  also  an  ecclesiastical  excommunication  which 
must  sometimes  be  wielded.  There  are  persons  with  whom  we  have  no  right  to 
eat  and  to  drink  at  the  Table  of  our  Blessed  Lord — persons  who  must  be  repelled 
at  any  cost  from  Holy  Conmiunion,  lest  we  should  indirectly  make  ourselves  "  par- 
takers of  other  men's  sins"  (1  Tim.  v.  22).  When  John  Wesley  once  proposed  to 
give  a  note  of  admission  to  the  Lord's  Table  to  a  man  of  dubious  character,  Henry 
Moore,  one  of  his  preachers,  bluntly  said  that  if  that  man  were  admitted  ho  should 
refuse  to  attend.  "  Sir,"  said  Wesley,  "  I  should  attend  even  if  the  devil  came  to 
Holy  Communion."  "  So  should  I,"  was  the  answer ;  "  but  not  if  John  Wesley 
gave  him  a  note  of  admission."  For  it  is  obvious  that  the  Eucharist,  the  closest 
rite  of  fellowship — the  rite  \frhich  makes  and  proclaims  us  members  one  of  another 
(Eom.  xii.  4, 5) — if  knowingly  administered  to  the  "notorious  evil-Uver,"  is  a  virtual 
condoning  of  his  sin ;  it  is  equivalent  to  bidding  him  God  speed  (2  John  10,  11),  and 
so  it  makes  the  Church  "  partaker  of  his  evil  deeds."  "  Therefore  put  away  from 
among  yourselves  that  wicked  person"  (1  Cor.  v.  18).  But  our  history  points 
rather  to  social  than  ecclesiastical  interdict.  And  it  must  be  distinctly  imderstood 
that  the  refusal  to  eat  and  drink  with  notorious  and  incorrigible  evU-livers  is  a  part 
of  Christian  duty  (see  1  Cor.  v.  9—11 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  14, 16 ;  Matt,  xviii.  17).  We 
are  not  permitted  to  know  them  and  to  treat  them  like  other  men.  The  story  of 
St.  John's  hurriedly  leaving  the  bath  because  of  the  presence  there  of  the  heretic 
Cerinthus,  is  one  for  which  the  so-called  tolerance  of  the  age  can  only  afford  a 
contemptuous  smile ;  but  this  age  is  often  wiser  in  its  own  conceit  than  Christ  and 
His  apostles.  Only  let  us  remember,  if  we  must  treat  any  as  heathens  and  pub- 
licans, how  Christ  treated  the  penitent  publicans  (cf.  Luke  xv.  1,  2) ;  and  then  let 
us  not  shrink  from  discharging  this  painful  duty  both  to  our  country,  our  Church, 
and  our  God.     Among  the  secondary  lessons  of  Our  story  are  these : 

1.  That  right  shall  trivrnph  in  the  long  rum.    The  schism  throve  for  260  years, 


288  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xiu.  1—10. 

but  tlie  altar  was  ultimately  dishonoured  and  overthrown.  The  Eeformer  who 
should  desecrate  it  with  bones  of  men  was  already  appointed  in  the  onunsels  of 
•God.  Even  so,  sooner  or  later,  "  every  plant  wliich  my  heavenly  Father  hath  not 
planted  shall  be  rooted  up  "  (Matt.  xv.  13).  "  If  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will  come 
to  nought"  (Acts  V.  88). 

*'  Onr  little  systems  have  their  day, 
They  have  their  day  and  cease  to  be." 

Magna  est  veritat,  &e.    The  Babel  of  sects  cannot  last  for  ever. 

2.  The  ministers  of  God  are  secure  so  long  as  they  do  their  9/uty,  Iferoboam, 
•with  the  ten  tribes  at  his  back,  was  powerless  against  the  unprotected  missionary. 
"  He  reproved  kings  for  their  sakes,  saying  .  .  .  Do  my  prophets  no  harm  "  (Psa. 
■cv.  14,  15).  The  stars  shall  fall  from  their  courses  before  a  hair  of  their  heads 
shall  be  injured.  Cf.  Dan.  iii.  27 ;  vi.  22 ;  2  Kings  i.  10,  &c.  But  it  may  be 
objected,  "  The  saints  and  messengers  of  God  have  often  been  brutally  outraged 
And  murdered  "  (Heb.  xi.  35 — 37).  True,  but  who  shall  say  that  they  were  not 
then  most  secure  ?  "  Through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
<}od"  (Acts  xiv.  22).  It  was  when  Stephen  was  martyred  that  he  saw  "Jesus 
standing" — i.e.,  to  help — "  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  It  has  been  suggested  that 
it  was  when  St.  Paul  was  stoned  and  taken  up  for  dead  (Acts  xiv.  19)  tbat  he  was 
.caught  up  into  Paradise  (2  Cor.  xii  4).     Sic  iter  ad  astra. 

8.  The  ivicJced  cannot  dispense  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  "  Entreat  the 
face  of  the  Lord  thy  God  and  pray  for  me  "  (of.  Exod.  ix.  28 ;  Num.  xii.  2, 13 ; 
Acts  viii.  24).  How  often  has  this  history  repeated  itself ;  and  wliat  a  foreshadow- 
ing of  the  world  to  come  1  Here  was  one  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan  worshipping 
at  the  prophet's  feet,  &c.  (Eev.  iii,  9).  Observe,  too,  it  is  the  part  of  a  man  of  God 
to  answer  threats  with  prayers.  "They  are  mine  adversaries,  but  I,  prayer" 
.(Psa.  cix.  4,  Heb. ;  cf.  Psa.  xxxv.  18  sqq.)  It  is  the  very  best  w»y  of  overcoming 
evil  with  good. 

4.  Men  are  often  more  concerned  about  their  sufferings  than  about  their  tins. 
Jeroboam's  entreaty  is,  not  that  his  sin  may  be  forgiven,  but  that  his  hand  may  be 
restored.  How  many  pray,  "  Heal  my  body;"  how  few,  "Healmy  soul,  for  I  have 
sinned  against  thee  "  (Psa.  xii.  4).  The  plague  of  head  or  hand  extorts  more  cries 
for  mercy  than  the  plague  of  the  heart  (ch.  viii.  38). 

6.  "  Law  a/nd  order  cannot  he  violated  with  impunity  by  any  ruler  under  any 
religious  pretext "  (Maurice).  The  rent  altar  teaches  the  lesson  of  Psa.  ii.  2 — 6 : 
"  Those  betray  themselves  that  think  by  any  sin  to  support  themselves."  .  .  .  "He 
{promised  himself  that  the  calves  would  secure  the  crown  to  his  family,  but  it  proved 
they  lost  it "  (M.  Henry). 

6.  Let  the  ministers  of  Ood  beioare  of  bribery.  "  Come  home  with  me  and  I 
win  give,"  &e.  The  device  of  Jeroboam  for  silencing  and-conciliating  the  prophet  has 
often  been  tried  since,  and  with  fatal  success.  How  many  men's  mouths  have  been 
stopped  by  a  sop — by  place  or  pension,  nay,  by  an  insignificant  present.  Men  know 
well — the  enemy  of  man  knows  weU—  that  Qie  preacher  finds  it  hard  to  reprove  a 
benefactor.  The  writer  once  heard  an  influential  person  boasting  that  he  had 
silenced  his  clergyman's  remonstrances  and  appeals  by  a  present  of  game  I  The 
world  has  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  the  clergy  are  not  incorruptible ;  that  they,  like 
others,  have  their  price.  Let  us  be  on  our  guard  against  social  corruption.  How 
sinister  the  influence  of  some  homes  on  the  younger  clergy.  The  cordial  "  Come 
home  with  me  "  was  to  them  a  snare  of  Satan.  With  the  State  clergy  how  strong 
the  temptation  to  sacrifice  independence  for  a  benefice  ;  with  Nonconformists,  to 
speak  smooth  words  lest  the  congregation  should  "  stOD  the  suppliMb"  Xhs  i 
<s  Qod  thus  Bj^eaks  to  all  ministers  of  Godi 


OH.  xin.  1—10.]  THK  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  889 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  Fire  of  Jehovah.  Jeroboam  went  to  inaugnrate  Idi  feast  of 
tabernacles  at  liis  principal  temple  ia  Bethel,  and  to  give  effect  to  the  ceremonies 
officiated  in  person  as  high  priest.  Then,  as  he  stood  by  the  altar,  censer  in  hand, 
he  was  confronted  by  the  word  of  the  Lord.  A  man  of  God  from  Judah  denouaced 
the  altar  in  the  words  before  us,  which  contain  a  very  remarkable  prophecy ;  and 
he  authenticated  his  message  by  a  miraculous  sign.  (Compare  Mark  zvi.  20.)  The 
subject  teaches — 

I.  That  God  sees  the  end  from  the  beginnino.  1.  Thii  it  evinced,  in  Hie 
worTca  of  creation.  (1)  There  is  foresight  in  the  constitution  and  adjustments  of 
the  framework,  and  in  the  motions,  of  the  orbs.  (2)  Also  in  the  anticipatory 
instincts  of  animals — storing  of  food,  provisions  for  young.  Moths  deposit  their 
eggs  upon  leaves,  not  used  by  themselves  as  food,  but  proper  to  sustain  the  larvee. 
(3)  And  in  the  amticipatory  facultiea  of  man.  Intelligent  foresight  in  business, 
in  politics,  in  science,  in  religion.  2.  It  ia  evinced  m  prophecy.  (1)  Great  out- 
lines of  the  world's  history  pre-written  there  (see  Gen.  ix.  25 — 27;  Dan.  vii.).  (2) 
Particular  example  here.  (Compare  this  with  2  Kings  xxiii.  IS — 20.)  The  facts 
here  were  attested — By  the  Jews,  on  whose  behalf  they  were  ordered — By  the 
Ephrathites,  who  would  have  impugned  their  authority  if  they  could.  8.  This 
example  is  too  circu/mstantial  to  have  been  accidental.  (1)  The  child  was  to 
be  of  the  house  of  David.  Who  but  God  could  foresee  that  the  house  of 
David  should  occupy  the  throne  of  Judah  at  a  distance  of  356  years  ?  (2)  Who 
but  God  could  foresee  that  Bethel  would  then  have  passed  from  the  kings  of 
Israel  under  the  dominion  of  Judah?  (See  2  Chron.  xiii.  19.)  (3)  Who  but 
God  could  foresee  that  at  a  distance  of  340  years  a  child  should  be  born  to  the 
house  of  David,  bearing  the  name  of  Josiah,  who  should  in  due  time  do  these 
things  ?  (4)  Who  else  could  anticipate,  even  when  Josiah  received  his  name, 
that  the  grandson  of  the  wicked  Manasseh,  and  son  of  the  no  less  wicked  Amon, 
should  come  to  the  throne,  and  with  pious  zeal  bring  these  things  to  pass  ?  Note : 
Such  prescience  as  God  displayed  in  this  prophecy,  and  such  providence  as  He 
evinced  in  its  accomplishment,  encourage  faitii.  They  assure  us  that  our  very 
names  are  in  His  book  (PhU.  iv.  8).    They  encourage  prayer. 

II.  That  Hb  will  confront  the  sinner  in  judgment.  1.  The  message  to 
Jeroboam  was  to  this  very  effect.  (1)  He  bore  His  testimony  against  the  altar. 
It  had  been  consecrated,  after  a  fashion,  by  the  king,  but  God  would  desecrate  it. 
The  bodies  of  its  priests  were  to  be  sacrificed  upon  it,  and  the  bones  of  men  were 
to  be  burnt  upon  it  (ch.  xiii.  2).  God  will  accept  no  wiU-worship — ^no  worship 
ordered  after  the  policy  of  statesmen.  (2)  In  the  demolition  of  the  altar,  not 
only  is  the  religion  connected  with  it  doomed  to  be  overthrown,  but  the  judgment 
involves  its  votaries — the  king,  his  priests,  his  people.  (3)  The  testimony  -wai 
strong.  The  man  of  God  cried  aloud.  He  did  not  quail  in  the  presence  of  the 
king  amidst  his  friends.  God's  messengers  should  never  cringe  nor  quail  God's 
word  can  never  fail.  2.  These  things  were  an  allegory.  (1)  Many  of  the 
wonderful  narratives  of  Holy  Scripture  may  be  thus  imderBtood.  We  have  the 
famous  example.  Gal.  iv.  21—31.  (2)  Here  Jeroboam,  hke  all  other  leaders  in 
apostasy,  was  a  forerunner  of  the  Antichrist.  As  the  religion  of  the  "  man  of 
sin "  is  a  caricature  of  the  religion  of  Christ,  so  was  that  of  Jeroboam  a  parody 
upon  the  Mosaic.  (3)  Josiah  was  a  type  of  Christ,  the  true  Son  of  David.  (Compare 
Isa.  vii.  14.)  Warning  and  mercy  come  before  destruction.  The  army  of  Judah 
was  stayed  from  crushing  Jeroboam  (ch.  xii.  24),  and  in  the  mission  of  the  man 
of  God  there  was  mercy  in  the  warning.  Let  the  sinner  be  admonished  dui  to 
refiise  the  gospel. — J.  A.  M. 

Ygjg  4 0. TJ^e  Mam,  of  Sin.    When  the  man  of  God  predicted  the  confusion  of 

(he  political  religion  of  Jeroboam,  and  gave  the  sign  that  the  altar  at  Bethel  sIjouUI 

1   KINGS.  " 


290  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xm.  1—10. 

be  rent  and  its  ashes  poured  out,  the  pride  of  the  king  who  stood  there  as  a  priest 
was  mortified,  and  his  resentment  was  manifested  as  described  in  the  text. 

I.  Jeroboam  was  a  typical  sinneb.  1.  He  transgressed  God's  law — (1)  In 
making  images.  The  law  forbad  this  (Exod,  xx.  4,  6).  But  he  made  two  golden 
calves.  Note  :  Images  of  God  must  be  caricatures,  and  God  wiU  not  be  mocked, 
solemnly  or  otherwise,  with  impunity.  How  many  frightful  caricatures  of  Deity 
has  the  "  man  of  sin"  perpetrated  I  (2  Thess.  ii.  8 — 12.)  (2)  In  multiplying  altars. 
Legal  worship  was  limited  to  one  altar  "  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  should 
choose"  (Deut.  xvi.  16).  This  was  to  keep  before  men  the  one  only  Mediator 
(John  xiv.  6 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5).  Therefore  other  altars  than  that  at  Jerusalem  were 
"  altars  unto  sin  "  (Hos.  viii.  11).  (8)  In  creating  jjriesi*.  According  to  the  law, 
none  but  sons  of  Aaron  had  a  Divine  vocation  to  the  priesthood  (Exod.  xxx.  7,  8 ; 
2  Chron.  xxvi  18;  Heb.  v.  4).  According  to  the  gospel,  Christ  is  sole  Priest 
Jeroboam,  an  Ephrathite,  invaded  the  law-principle,  making  himself  high  priest, 
and  making  subordinate  priests  of  the  lowest  of  the  people.  2.  ne  did  soimpu- 
dently.  (1)  His  sin  was  not  of  ignorance,  for  he  had  access  to  the  Scriptures ; 
but  it  did  not  serve  his  purpose  to  refer  to  them.  (2)  Prophecy  was  particularly 
distasteful  to  him,  for  his  doom  is  written  there.  Jeroboam  had  this  from  the  hps 
of  Ahijah,  and  now  has  it  from  the  man  of  God  from  Judah.  Beware  of  the  spirit 
that  would  discourage  a  study  upon  which  God  has  pronounced  a  blessing  (Rev.  i.  3). 
(3)  The  spirit  of  his  reUgion  was  political.  He  would  not  have  troubled  himself 
with  it  had  he  not  poUtical  ends  to  serve  (ch.  xii.  26 — 29).  And  to  carry  out  these 
he  dissembled  :  "  It  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  to  Jerusalem  I " 

II.  His  DOOM  also  was  typical.  1.  He  was  confronted  by  the  word  of  Ood. 
(1)  With  this  the  man  of  God  from  Judah  withstood  him  at  his  altar.  So  by  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  and  especially  with  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  has  the  man  of  sin 
been  confronted  by  Waldenses,  Pa,ulikians,  Hussites,  Lutherans,  and  such-like  men 
"  from  Judah."  (2)  But  against  this  testimony  he  invoked  the  civil  power  under 
his  usurped  control  (ver.  4).  The  spirit  of  persecution  was  there.  The  modern 
Jeroboam  carried  it  further  (Dan.  xii.  21  ;  Eev.  xiii.  7 ;  xvii.  6).  2.  Tie  was 
humbled  by  the  power  of  Ood.  (1)  His  hand  was  withered  ;  his  power  to 
persecute  was  paralyzed.  How  powerless  is  the  hand  of  man  when  arrested  by 
the  hand  of  God  I  Behind  the  political  restraints  which  now  hold  the  persecuting 
hand  of  our  enemies  we  must  discern  the  invisible  hand  of  God.  (3)  The  altar, 
then,  was  cloven,  and  the  ashes  of  the  spurious  sacrifices  poured  out  as  with  con- 
tempt. This  also  was  effected  by  the  same  invisible  hand.  Who  can  resist  the 
might  of  God  ?  (4)  Constrained  by  these  judgments,  he  confessed  the  finger  of 
God,  and  entreated  the  man  of  God  to  pray  for  the  restoration  of  his  hand  (see 
Exod.  X.  16, 17  ;  Num.  xxi.  7  ;  Matt.  v.  23,  24).  8.  Yet  he  persisted  in  his  sin. 
(1)  His  humiliation  was  selfish.  It  was  the  creature  of  his  terror  and  suffering, 
so  it  was  transient.  (2)  True  repentance  is  of  a  loftier  principle,  and  is  enduring. 
It  is  a  Ufe,  as  faith  also  is  a  Ufe.  (3)  Instead  of  using  his  restored  hand  to  demohsh 
his  high  places,  he  used  it  to  repair  the  altar  at  Bethel,  and  persisted  in  his  sin 
(vers.  83,  34  ;  2  Chron.  xiii.  20).  But  Josiah  executed  the  judgments  of  prophecy 
in  due  time.  So  wUl  the  modem  Jeroboam  and  his  monstrous  organization  of  sin 
perish  in  the  fires  of  the  judgment  (Dan.  vii.  10,  11  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  8).  Note :  Let 
those  come  out  of  Babylon  who  would  escape  her  plagues. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  7— 10.— T^e  Man  of  Ood.  We  may  view  "  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat, 
who  made  Israel  to  sin,"  as  the  "  man  of  sui "  of  his  time,  and  a  forerunner  of  the 
Antichrist  of  more  modern  times  (2  Thess.  ii.  8).  In  contrast  to  him  we  have  to 
consider  the  "  man  of  God,"  in  which  character  this  prophet  who  confronted  Jero- 
boam at  Bethel,  is  described.  The  instructions  under  which  he  acted  teach  us  how 
a  saint  should  behave  amongst  workers  of  iniquity. 

L  He  must  hold  no  fellowship  with  them.  1.  He  must  not  eat  and  d/rink 
with  them.  (1)  For  this  was  anciently  a  profession  of  fellowship.  Hence  the 
Hebrews  in  Egypt  would  not  eat  with  the  Egyptians  (Gen.  xhii.  82).  The  Jews 
would  not  eat  with  the  Samaritans  (John  iv.  9) ;  and  they  were  shocked  to  see 


«H.  xm.  1—10.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  291 

Jeens  eating  with  publicans  and  sinners  (Matt.  ix.  11).  For  the  same  reason  OhriB- 
tians  were  forbidden  to  eat  with  ungodly  persons  (1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  see  also  Bom.  xri. 
17;  2  Thess.  iii.  6, 14;  2  Tim.  iii.  5 ;  Jaa.  iv.  4;  2  John  10).  (2)  The  law  of 
distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  meats  set  forth  not  only  the  duty  of  avoiding 
fellowship  with  moral  undeanness,  but  also  with  those  who  are  morally  unclean  ; 
for  the  unclean  animals  represented  "  sinners  of  the  Gentiles  "  while  the  clean 
etood  for  the  "  holy  people  "  of  Israel  (Acts  x.  14,  84,  85).  (8)  The  eating  of  the 
forbidden  fruit  in  Eden  at  the  instigation  of  the  serpent,  who  also  seems  to  have 
«aten  of  it  first,  expressed  fellowship  with  Satan  1  As  the  trees  of  Eden  were  sacra- 
mental, it  may  have  expressed  a  covenant  with  the  Evil  One  I  Those  who  ate 
together  were  imderstood  to  stand  to  each  other  in  a  eovenamt  relationship  (Gen. 
xxxi.  43 — 46).  (4)  In  this  light  the  Christian  Eucharist  sets  forth  the  covenant 
fellowship,  that  we  have,  first,  with  Christ,  and  secondly,  with  those  who  are  in 
euch  fellowship  with  Him  (see,  in  this  light,  John  vi.  58 — 56).  2.  He  must  refute 
their  presents.  (1)  Some  think  Jeroboam's  offer  to  "reward"  the  man  of  God 
was  to  give  him  a  bribe.  This  is  not  evident.  Yet  good  men  are  liable  to  be 
tempted  with  bribes,  but  should  stoutly  refuse  them  (1  Sam.  xii.  3  ;  Job  xv.  84). 
(2)  The  king's  intention  was  to  do  honour  to  the  man  of  God,  according  to  a 
constant  custom  in  the  East  (see  1  Sam.  ix.  7;  2  Kings  v.  15).  The  word  nno 
here  translated  "  reward,"  would  have  been  better  rendered  "  gift,"  as  in  many 
other  places  it  is.  But  such  a  gift  or  present,  if  accepted,  would  express  friendship, 
and  therefore,  coming  fi:om  the  hand  of  an  arch  idolater  and  schismatic,  it  must  be 
declined.  (8)  Good  men  must  be  oareful,how  they  accept  favours  from  the  wicked, 
lest  in  doing  so  they  may  compromise  to  them  their  independence,  or  come  unduly 
nnder  their  influence  (see  Gen.  xiv.  28 ;  xxiii.  18 — 16 ;  2  Kings  v.  16). 

II.  His  intebcoubse  with  them  should  be  bbief.  1.  While  eervimg  God  he 
it  safe.  (1)  His  very  testimony  for  God  commits  him  to  a  course  of  conduct  con- 
sistent with  it.  This  element  of  moral  strength  is  lost  to  those  who  hide  their  light 
under  a  bushel.  (2)  He  has  a  right  to  claim  God's  help  (Matt.  x.  19,  20;  xxviii.  20). 
2.  But  it  is  perilous  longer  to  remoMi.  (1)  The  very  disposition  to  remain  amidst 
circumstances  with  which  we  should  have  no  sympathy  argues  weakness  which 
should  alarm.  (2)  He  lays  himself  open  to  temptation.  He  may  find  the  "  king  " 
disposed  to  honour  him.  Some  are  foolishly  susceptible  to  flattery  fi-om  the  great 
ones  of  this  world.  The  man  of  God  should  be  proof  against  this  (ver.  8).  (3)  He 
may  be  taken  at  a  disadvantage.  Being  away  from  the  influence  of  godly  mends. 
Having  now  no  claim  to  special  help  from  God.  8.  But  why  must  he  retv/m  by 
4imother  way  f  (1)  Not  only  did  the  man  of  God  give  a  sign,  but  he  was  also  him- 
self a  sign  (see  Ezek.  xii.  11 ;  xxiv.  24  ;  Zech.  iii.  8,  margin).  As  Jeroboam  was 
the  sign  of  the  man  of  sin,  tins  prophet  was,  at  least  in  his  instructions,  a  typical 
♦'  man  of  God."  (2)  In  coming  from  Judab,  where  God  was  purely  worshipped  in 
His  temple,  to  Ephraim,  where  "  altars  were  made  unto  sin,"  he  would  personate 
that  moral  lapse  into  which  Ephraim  had  fallen.  (3)  In  his  speedy  return  from 
Ephraim  to  Judah,  after  deprecating  the  sin  of  the  place,  he  would  represent  to  the 
Ephrathites  what  God  expected  from  them,  viz.,  repentance  and  reformation.  (4) 
But  the  way  back  to  God  is  not  precisely  the  reversal  of  the  way  from  Him.  Adam 
fell  by  sin  of  his  own  and  was  turned  out  of  Eden,  but  must  return  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  another  (Gen.  iii.  24).  Our  way  back  to  God  is  the  "  new  and  living  way 
ipened  in  the  blood  of  Jesus." — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Nameless  Prophet,  Jeroboam's  inauguration  of  the  high  plao* 
at  Bethel  was  an  imitation  of  Solomon's  dedication  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem. 
Like  Solomon,  he  chose  the  feast  of  tabernacles  as  the  season  for  this  ceremony, 
although  he  daringly  altered  the  date  of  the  feast  from  the  seventh  month  to  the 
eighth.  Describe  the  scene  :  the  crowds  of  people,  the  new-made  priests,  the  gor- 
geous shrine,  the  conflicting  feelings  of  the  worshippers.  None  dared  to  oppose  the 
king,  and  at  the  expected  moment  he  stepped  forward  to  burn  incense  before  the 
oalf.  Just  then  one,  who  had  been  tiU  then  unnoticed,-  pressed  to  the  front  of  the 
oowd.    He  came  from  the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  Judah.    In  words  of  terribls 


2M  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KIKGS.  [en,  xiii.  1-10. 


invective  he  delivered  the  message  of  the  Lord.  "Who  was  he  ?  Josephus  (Ant., 
yiii.  8.  §  5)  identifies  ]iim  with  Iddo  the  seer.  There  is  no  proof  of  this.  He  was  one 
of  the  many  servants  of  Jehovah  who  have  done  their  work  without  emblazoning 
on  it  their  name.  Like  John  the  Baptist,  he  was  content  to  be  "  a  voiue  crying" 
out  a  testimony  for  God.  In  considering  the  service  rendered  in  his  day  by  this 
MAMBLEss  PEOPHET  let  US  look  at  the  following  : 

I.  His  mesbaob.  1,  Its  Divine  origin.  "  He  cried  ...  in  the  word  of  the 
Lord."  A  remarkable  expression.  It  represents  the  word  as  the  sphere  in  which 
he  lived,  the  atmosphere  he  breathed.  A  sense  of  the  Divine  presence,  a  confi- 
dence in  the  Divine  call,  a  certainty  of  the  Divine  message,  characterized  him. 
This  was  a  sign  of  the  true  prophet.  Compare  with  this  the  call  of  Samuel,  the 
announcements  of  Elijah,  the  commission  of  Isaiah,  &o.  To  some  the  declarations 
of  God's  will  came  fitfully.  Prophecy  was  never  a  constant  possession  of  a  servant 
of  God.  There  was  a  tidal  flow  of  inspiration,  the  law  of  which  we  know  not.  So 
was  it  with  the  miraculous  powers  of  the  Apostles.  2.  Its  definite  nature  (ver.  2). 
The  very  name  of  the  coming  avenger  is  mentioned  more  than  three  hundred  years 
before  Josiah's  birth.  It  was  foretold  that  the  priests  would  be  sacrified  on  the 
altar  at  which  they  had  insulted  God.  The  lex  talionis  is  the  ground  of  this,  as 
of  other  theocratic  laws.  It  reminds  us  that  the  sinner  is  destroyed  by  his  own 
sin ;  that  punishments  are  not  arbitrary,  but  are  the  legitimate  issues  of  crime 
against  God.  It  was  farther  announced  that  the  bones  of  the  dead  would  be  taken 
from  the  graves  and  burnt  on  the  altar,  so  that  the  place  of  idolatry  might  be 
defiled  and  dishonoured.  See  Num.  xix.  16.  For  fulfilment  of  prophecy  read 
2  Kings  xxiii.  15 — 20.  3.  Its  merciful  design.  In  ch.  xii.  24  we  read  that  God 
forbaile  the  advance  of  the  army  of  Judah  on  Jeroboam.  Instead  of  carnage  he 
sends  this  message.  He  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  would  rather  he 
should  turn  from  his  wickedness  and  lire.  Suggest  the  warnings  God  now  sends 
to  rouse  us  to  thought  and  penitence. 

II.  His  courage.  It  was  a  bold  thing  to  venture  amongst  the  people  at  a  time 
when  they  were  full  of  hatred  to  Judah,  and  of  unwillingness  to  be  reminded  of 
Jehovah  ;  and  to  face  the  king,  who  was  a  man  of  despotic  and  resolute  temper,  in 
the  very  pride  of  his  royal  strength.  But  in  the  presence  of  them  all  the  prophet's 
cry  arose,  "  0  altar,  altar,  thus  saith  Jehovah,"  &c.,  as  if  the  stones  would  listen  more 
readily  than  the  people.  Give  examples  of  similar  courage  being  displayed  by  men 
who  have  had  the  consciousness  they  were  speaking  for  God ;  e.g.,  Moses  before 
Pharaoh,  Elijah  before  Ahab,  John  the  Baptist  before  Herod,  Peter  and  John 
before  the  Sanhedrim,  Paul  before  FeUx.  From  church  history,  too,  such  examples 
as  that  of  Ambrose.  John  Knox,  &c.,  may  be  cited.  Show  how  requisite  comrage 
is  now  to  genuine  fideUty  to  conviction,  amongst  sceptical  or  sinful  associations. 

III.  His  credentials,  a  sign  was  given  there  and  then.  The  altar  was  cleft 
in  twain,  and  the  ashes  were  poured  out.  For  the  significance  of  the  latter  see 
Levit.  xvi.  3,  4.  Point  out  the  credibility  of  supernatural  signs  as  attesting 
supernatural  revelatious.  Refer  to  the  miracles  of  Christ,  of  which  He  said, 
"  Believe  me  for  the  very  works'  sake."  See  also  Mark  xvi.  20  ;  Acts  ii.  43.  In- 
dicate the  nature  of  the  credentials  which  the  world  may  fairly  demand  of  Chris- 
tian men  in  the  present  day ;  and  show  bow  far  we  faU  in  giving  these,  and  the 
causes  of  our  failure. 

IV.  His  safety.  Amidst  all  the  perils  encircling  him  he  was  "  kept  by  the  power 
of  God."  The  hand  that  would  have  slain  him  was  withered ;  the  man  who  cursed 
his  message  besought  his  prayers.  "  Man  is  immortal  till  his  work  is  done." 
When  God's  servants  die,  it  is  because  they  have  fulfilled  the  purpose  of  their  Kves. 
They  have  many  enemies,  but  God  can  disable  all  their  foes.  The  path  of  duty  is 
the  path  of  safety.  Illustrate  this  from  the  records  of  the  Christian  Church; 
Luther  at  Worms,  &o.  1.  Learn  to  listen  for  God's  message.  He  would  make  you 
His  "  voice."  2.  Learn  to  dare  anything  in  Ood'a  name.  The  rarity  of  Christian 
ohivalry.  8.  Leaim  to  trust  in  Ood'a  protection.  "  He  that  dweUeth  in  the  secret 
place  of  the  Most  High  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty."  4.  Learn 
to  pray  even  for  your  persecutors.     Compare  ver.  6  with  Matt.  v.  44. — A.  R. 


OB.  xm.  1—10.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  898 

Ver.  6. — The  King  confronted  hy  the  Prophet.  Jeroboam  is  not  allowed  to 
pursue  his  iniquitous  career  without  solemn  Divine  rebuke  and  warning.  Though 
Beboboam  has  been  forbidden  to  .attempt  forcibly  to  suppress  the  revolt  of  the 
tribes  (ch.  xii.  24),  a  "  man  of  God  out  of  Judah  "  is  sent  sternly  to  denounce  the 
rival  altar,  and  to  give  the  sacrilegious  king  something  like  a  symbolic  forewarning 
of  the  disasters  that  should  surely  befall  him.  The  scene,  described  here  with  so 
macb  simplicity  and  dramatic  force,  is  full  of  moral  instruction. 

I  In  the  person  of  the  king  we  see  the  helplessness  of  a  wicked  mam  in  the 
HANDS  OF  AN  OFFENDED  GoD.  The  physical  associations  and  the  mental  Conditions 
here  presented  are  alike  suggestive  of  this.  It  is  a  striking  picture  of  restrained 
infatuation  and  impotent  rage.  1.  The  king's  withered  wrm  tells  how  God  can  in 
a  moment  turn  the  strength  that  is  used  against  Him  to  weakness.  "  When  thou 
with  rebukes  dost  correct  man  for  iniquity,"  &c.  (Psa.  zxxiz.  11).  2.  The  rent  altar 
suggests  the  certain  frustration,  sooner  or  later,  of  the  purposes  and  plans  of  those 
that  are  at  enmity  with  God.  "  The  Lord  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen 
to  nought,"  &o.  (Psa.  xxxiii.  10).  "If  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  man,"  &c. 
(Acts  V.  33),  3.  The  king's  inability  to  'pray  for  himself  reminds  us  how  God  some- 
times fovsakes  those  who  forsake  Him,  so  that  it  seems  utterly  vain  for  them  to  call 
upon  Him.  Many  a  man  has  felt  like  Saul,  "  I  am  sore  distressed,  and  God  is 
departed  from  me,"  &e.  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  15).  4.  His  appeal  to  the  prophet  to  inter- 
cede for  him  is  typical  of  the  way  in  which  ungodly  nien  are  often  contrained  by 
force  of  circumstance  to  seek  suocoiu:  from  those  whom  they  have  despised.  "  The 
wheel  of  fortune  turns  and  lowers  the  proud,"  and  they  are  placed,  perhaps,  at  the 
mercy  of  the  very  men  whom  they  once  scorned  and  injured.  Such  are  the  penal 
ties  that  God  often  inflicts  on  those  who  trifle,  with  His  authority  and  defy  His 
power.     Such  is  the  curse  that  falls  upon  "  presumptuous  sin." 

II.  The  behaviour  of  the  prophet  presents  A  pine  example  of  moral  dionity 
AND  CONSCIODS  STRENGTH.  See  here — (1)  The  courage  of  a  man  who  knows  that 
God  is  on  his  side.  The  prophets  of  old,  conscious  of  a  more  majestic  Presence 
and  a  higlier  Sovereignty,  never  trembled  before  the  face  of  wicked  kings.  The 
fear  of  Gcd  casts  out  all  other  fear.  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body," 
&c.  (Luke  xii.  4,  5).  "  If  God  be  for  us,"  &c.  (Rom.  viii.  31).  (2)  The  mag- 
nanimity of  one  who  feels  that  he  is  called  to  witness  for  God  among  men.  The 
prophet  will  not  take  advantage  of  the  king's  lic';iuessness;  rather  responds  at  once 
to  his  appeal.  He  who  is  ii*pired  by  God's  Spirit  will  not  return  scorn  for  scorn, 
or  retaliate  an  attempted  injury,  but  rather  use  for  beneficent  ends  the  power  that 
he  possesses.  "  Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven 
and  consume  them  ?  "  "  Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of,"  &o.  (Luke 
ix,  54,  56).  (3)  The  efficacy  of  the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man.  The  withered 
arm  is  restored,  and  though  this  had  no  happy  moral  effect,  as  might  have  been 
expected,  on  Jeroboam,  the  whole  transaction,  in  which  mercy  was  thus  blended 
with  judgment,  vindicated  the  honour  of  Jehovah,  and  established  afresh  His 
eovereigu  claim  to  the  allegiance  alike  of  king  and  people. — W. 

Vers.  1 — 10.— I.  The  pretensions  of  error  deepen  its  shame.  The  idolatrons 
ultar  was  being  solemnly  consecrated.  The  people's  eyes  were  dazzled  with  the  splen- 
<lour  of  the  priestly  and  regal  display.  Jeroboam  himself  stood  by  the  altar  to 
offer  incense.  And  then  the  cry  arose  which  arrested  every  ear  and  thrilled  through 
every  soul.  1.  The  atternpt  to  give  importance  to  the  new  idolatry  only  broadened 
tlie  mark  for  God's  rebuke:  it  simply  lent  emphasis  to  His  condemnation.  They 
had  oome  to  consecrate,  and  had  really  come  to  attend  upon  God  while  He  dese- 
crated the  work  of  their  hands.  Heathenism  in  its  splendour  thus  rebuked  by  the 
preaching  of  the  cross,  Rome  by  the  light  of  the  Reformation.  2.  The  agent  by 
tvhom  Ood's  glorn  was  vindicated.  The  insignificance  of  the  poor,  weary,  travel- 
etained  man  deepened  their  disgrace.  "  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty." 

II.  The  doom  of  idolatrous  worship.  1.  The  altar  viUl  he  desecrated.  The 
place  will  be  made  an  abomination  and  horror.     Sin's  judgment  will  in  the  end  be 


294 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KING! 


[oh.  xm.  11 — 84. 


sm's  destruction.  2.  The  sin  will  be  wiped  out  in  the  blood  and  shame  of  thost 
who  have  wrought  it.  ^The  priests  will  be  offered  upon  the  altar,  the  bones  of  its 
worshippers  burned  upon  it.  The  world's  sin  will  be  ended  in  God's  fiery  judg- 
ment  upon  the  sinful.  8.  The  certainty  of  Ood's  pwrpose.  Centuries  intervened 
between  the  prediction  and  the  fulfilment,  but  all  was  arranged.  The  time  wa» 
fixed,  the  avenger  named.  There  is  no  uncertainty  in  God's  mind  regarding  the- 
end  of  iniquity.  The  decree  has  been  recorded,  the  time  fixed,  the  man  named  by 
whom  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  4.  The  sign  meanwhile  given. 
The  altar  was  rent  and  its  ashes  poured  out.  The  wrath  revealed  from  heaveu  nov 
is  proof  that  all  God's  purpose  shall  be  fulfilled. 

III.  Man's  inability  to  contend  with  God.  1.  TJie  withered  a/rm.  The  ana 
outstretched  in  eager,  wrathful  command  to  arrest  the  man  of  God,  withered  in  the 
very  attitude.  It  was  the  emblem  of  liis  house  and  of  his  people ;  they  were 
withered  in  the  attitude  of  rebellion  against  God.  2.  The  prophet's  safety.  Hfr 
needed  none  to  shield  him.  God  protects  all  those  who  serve  Him.  8.  Jeroboam't 
humiliation.  He  turns  fi:om  idol  and  altar  and  priests,  and  requests  the  prophef » 
intercession  with  Jehovah.  4.  His  a/rm,  is  restored  at  the  prophet's  request,  and 
he  thus  bears  in  his  person  another  token  that  the  word  he  has  heard  is  from  God. 
It  is  the  story  of  God's  contest  with  darkness  and  wrong  to-day. 

IV.  Sbpaeation  ESSENTIA!,  FOR  TESTiMONT.  Jeroboam's  hospitality  and  reward 
were  alike  refused.  The  prophet  was  even  forbidden  to  return  by  the  same  way : 
he  was  not  to  enter  even  into  acquaintance  with  men  who  were  sinning  so  deeply 
against  God.  Unless  there  be  separation  our  testimony  is  a  sham.  Our  life  un- 
says our  speech.  If  we  will  speak  God's  word  to  the  sinful,  our  attitude  must 
reveal  their  distance  from  God  and  the  peril  in  which  they  stand.  If  our  own  heart 
be  fiUed  with  hol^  fear  it  may  past  from  us  to  tbem. — J.  U. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  xm.  11—84. 

TbS    disobedience    and     death    of    THE 

KAN  OF  God. — The  seduction  of  the  man 
of  God,  who  has  borne  such  fearless  witness 
against  Jeroboam's  ecclesiastical  policy,  and 
Ms  tragical  end,  are  now  narrated,  partly 
because  of  the  deep  impression  the  story 
made  at  the  time,  bnt  principally  because 
these  events  were  in  themselves  an  eloquent 
testimony  against  the  worship  of  the  calves 
and  the  whole  ecclesiastical  policy  of  Jero- 
boam, and  a  solemn  warning  for  all  time 
against  any,  the  slightest,  departure  from 
the  commandments  of  Ood.  The  very  un- 
faithfulness of  this  accredited  messenger 
of  the  Most  High,  and  the  instant  punish- 
ment it  provoked,  became  part  of  the  Divine 
protest  against  the  new  rSgime,  against  the 
nnfaithfuLness  of  Israel ;  whilst  the  remark- 
able manner  in  which  these  occurrences 
were  recalled  to  the  nation's  memory  in  the 
reign  of  Jogiah  (2  Kings  xxiii.  17, 18)  made 
h  impossible  for  the  historian  of  the  theo- 
OMKiy  to  pass  them  over  without  notice. 


Ver  11. — Now  there  dwelt  aa  oM  prophet 

[Heb.  a  certain  (lit.  one)  old  propliet.  For 
this  use  of  inx  (=ti(,)  cf.  1  Kings  xx.  13; 
xiz.  4]  at  Bethel  [It  is  at  first  somewhat 
surprising  to  find  one  of  the  prophetic  order 
residing  here,  at  the  very  seat  and  strong- 
hold of  the  apostasy,  especially  after  what 
we  read  in  2  Chron.  xi.  13 — 16,  that  the 
priests  and  Levites,  and  it  would  seem  all 
devout  worshippers  of  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel,  had  left  the  country,  and  had  gone 
over  to  Eehoboam.  For  we  cannot  sup- 
pose that  a  sense  of  duty  had  kept  this 
prophet  at  his  post  (see  note  on  ver.  1).  The 
fact  that  he  remained,  not  only  in  the  king- 
dom, but  at  its  ecclesiastical  capital ;  that  he 
stood  by  without  protest  when  the  schism  was 
being  effected,  and  that,  though  not  present 
himself  at  the  sacrifice,  he  permitted  his  sons 
to  be  there,  is  a  sufficient  index  to  his  cha- 
racter. It  is  quite  possible  that  strong  poli- 
tical sympathies  had  warped  his  judgment, 
and  that  he  had  persuaded  himself  that  the 
policy  of  Jeroboam  was  necessitated  by  the 
division  of  the  kingdom,  which  he  knew  t* 
be  from  the  Lord,  and  which  one  of  his  own 
order  had  foretold.  Or  it  may  be  that,  despite 
his  better  judgment,  he  had  gone  with  hie 
tribe  and  the  majority  of  the  nation,  and  now 


OH.  xin.  11 — 84.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  EINGa 


996 


felt  it  difficult  to  withdraw  from  a  false  posi- 
tion. Or,  finally,  he  may  have  taken  the  side 
of  Jeroboam  because  of  the  greater  honours 
and  rewards  that  prince  had  to  bestow 
(see  on  ver.  18).  There  is  a  striking  simi- 
larity  between  bis  position  and  action  and 
that  of  Balaam] ;  and  bla  sons  [The  Heb. 
has  son ;  The  LXX.,  Syr.,  and  Vulg.,  sons. 
It  is  quite  true  that  a  "  very  slight  change 
in  the  Hebrew  text  would  bring  it  into  ac 
oordance  with  the  Septuagint  here  "  (Eaw- 
linson,  similarly  Ewald),  but  it  would  be 
against  sound  principles  of  textual  criticism 
to  make  it.  It  is  much  more  likely  that  the 
LXX..  and  other  versions  have  been  altered 
akeady,  and  that  the  plural  has  been  intro- 
duced here  because  it  is  uniformly  found  in 
the  later  narrative.  "His  ton"  (133),  as 
the  lectio  ardua,  is  therefore  .to  be  retained. 
The  use  of  the  singular  indicates  that  one 
of  them  was  at  first  the  principal  speaker. 
Perhaps  one  hastened  home  with  the  news 
before  the  rest.  The  sons  of  the  prophet 
are  not  to  be  confounded  with  "the  sons 
{i.e.,  disciples)  of  the  prophets  "  (2  Kings  ii., 
lii.,  iv., passim);  not  merely  because  "the 
latter  would  scarcely  have  witnessed  the  gol- 
den calf-worship  "  (Bah r),  but  also  because 
they  would  have  been  differently  designated] 
came  and  told  him  all  the  works  [Heb. 
tcorle]  that  the  man  of  God  had  done  that 
day  in  Bethel :  the  words  which  he  had 
spoken  unto  the  king,  them  they  [observe 
the  plural]  told  also  to  their  father.  [It  is 
quite  clear  that  the  virtual  excommunication 
which  the  man  of  Ood  had  pronounced  had 
made  as  great  an  impression  as  the  signs 
which  he  had  showed.  The  interdict  was  a 
matter  which  came  home  to  the  Bethelites, 
as  an  affront  to  the  whole  community.] 

Ver.  12. — And  their  fkther  said  onto 
them.  What  way  vent  he  7  [The  question 
shows  that  the  old  prophet  throughly  under- 
stood the  import  of  those  "words,"  and 
that  his  first  thought  was  that  the  interdict 
must  be  removed  at  any  cost.]  For  Ma 
sons  had  seen  [Heb.  arid  his  sons  saw,  or 
showed.  liXK..  SeiKviovaiv.  Similarly  most  of 
the  versions.  A  very  slight  ohan  ge  in  the  vowel 
points  1NT1  for  1iXy^  would  give  this  sense] 
what  way  the  man  of  God  went  which 
came  fSrom  Judah. 

Ver.  13. — And  he  said  unto  his  sons. 
Saddle  me  the  ass.  [This  prompt  and 
seemingly  abrupt  command — though  we 
cannot  be  sure  that  all  the  conversation  is 
here  reported — shows  his  instant  resolve  to 
follow.  These  are  the  words  of  one  who  had 
made  up  Ms  mind,  coute  que  coute,  to  bring 
the  man  of  God  back.]  So  they  saddled  him 
tbe  ass :  and  be  rode  thereon. 

Ver.  14.— And  he  went  after  tbe  man  of 


God  and  found  blm  sitting  nnder  an  oak 
[Heb.  the  oak ;  i.e.,  the  well-known  oak. 
Possibly  there  was  but  one,  or  one  of  great 
size,  in  the  neighbourhood — such  trees  are 
comparatively  rare  in  Palestine.  Possibly 
also  this  tree  became  well  known  from  these 
events.    It  is  singular  that  in  another  place 

(Gen.  XXXV.  8)  we  read  of  "the  oak"  (|i^N) 
of  Bethel,  whilst  in,  Judg.  iv.  6  we  read  of 
the  "  palm  tree  "  (IDFl)  of  Deborah,  between 
Bamah  and  Bethel."  And  it  is  not  at  all 
improbable,  seeing  that  in  1  Sam.  x.  8  we 

read  of  the  terebinth  (f\P^)  of  Tabor— in 
the  A.  V.  rendered  "plain  of  Tabor" — 
which  Ewald  ("  Hist.  Israel,"  iii.  21 ;  iy.Sl) 
considers  to  be  only  a  dialectic  variation  of 
Deborah,  and  remembering  the  great  age  to 
which  these  trees  attain,  that  the  same  tree 
is  referred  to  throughout.    The  word  here 

used,  it  is  true,  is  D^S^  (which  is  generally 
supposed  to  indicate  the  terebinth,  but  is 
also  ' '  used  of  any  large  tree  "  (Gesenius), 
and  which,  therefore,  may  be  used  of  the 

\w^  of  Bethel.  Both  names  are  derived 
from  the  same  root  (>1i<  fortis,  Cf.  Amos 
ii.  9),  and  both  indicate  varieties — what 
varieties  it  is  not  quite  clear — of  tbe  oak. 
Some  expositors  have  seen  in  this  brief  rest 
the  beginning  of  his  sin,  and  certainly  it 
would  seem  against  the  spirit  of  his  instmo- 
tions  to  remain  so  near  a  place  (see  note  on 
ver.  16)  from  which  he  was  to  vanish  speedily, 
and,  if  possible,  unperceived.  In  any  case 
the  action  betrays  his  fatigue  and  exhaus- 
tion] ,  and  be  said  unto  him.  Art  thou  tbe 
man  of  Sod  that  earnest  ftom  Judab  ?  And 
he  said,  I  am. 

Ver.  15.— Then  he  said  unto  blm,  Come 
home  with  me  [Heb.  Come  with  me  to  the 
house]  and  eat  bread.  The  sting  was  in 
the  tail  of  this  invitation.  If  he  would  par- 
take of  food,  he  would  thereby  remove  the 
ban  and  so  neutralize  one  port  of  his  mis- 
sion.] 

Ver.  16. — ^And  be  said,  I  may  not  [Heb. 
am  not  able  Ui]  return  with  thee,  nor  go  in 
with  thee :  neither  wUl  I  eat  bread  nor 
drink  water  with  thee  In  this  place.  [The 
translation  "  in  tliat  place  "  adopted  by 
Wordsworth  (after  the  Vulgate,  in  loco  isto) 
does  not  agree  with  the  Hebrew.  And  it  is 
not  required  by  the  context.  The  tree  was 
probably  at  no  great  distance  from  the 
town.] 

Ver.  17. — ^For  it  was  said  to  me  [Heb.  a 
word  to  me\  by  [Heb.  in]  tbe  word  of  the 
Lord,  Thou  shalt  eat  no  bread,  nor  drink 
water  there,  nor  turn  again  to  go  by  the 
way  that  thou  earnest, 

Ver.  18. — ^He  said  unto  blm,  I  wn   a 


THE  FIIiST  BOOK  OF  EINOS. 


[oh.  xin.  11 — 84. 


propbet  also  as  thon  art ;  and  aa  angel 
(Bahr  observes  that  "  he  does  not  venture 
to  Bay  that  Jehovah  spate  to  him,  but  says 
an  angel  did."  Is  it  not  more  probable  that 
the  angel  was  mentioned,  partly  for  the 
purpose  of  giving  an  air  of  circumstantiality 
and  reality  to  his  story,  and  partly  to  convey 
the  idea  of  his  having  a  superior  authority 
for  his  message  t  A  communication  through 
a  celestial  messenger  would  seem  to  have 
been  regarded  as  a  higher  form  of  revelation 
than  a  subjective  communication  to  the  mind 
of  the  prophet.  Of.  Acts  vii.  53  ;  Heb.  ii.  2 ; 
Luke  i.  13,  29  ;  Acts  xxvii.  23,  &a.  Observe, 
the  prophet  speaks  presently  of  "  the  word 
of  Jehovah"]  spake  unto  me  by  [Heb.  i?i; 
same  expression  as  in  ver.  17]  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  saying,  Bring  him  hack  with  thee 
Into  thine  house  that  he  may  eat  [Heb.  and 
he  shall  eat]  bread  and  drink  water.  But 
be  lied  to  him.  [These  last  words  are  in- 
serted parenthetically;  hence  there  is  no 
"  bat "  in  the  Heb.  The  true  character  and 
designs  and  motives  of  this  "  old  prophet " 
have  long  been  a  cruxinterpretum  (see  Hall, 
Contempl.,  ii.  151 — 3.)  Some,  including 
Joseph  us  and  most  Jewish  commentators, 
have  supposed  him  to  be  al'ngether  a  false 
and  lying  prophet,  such  as  ai\i  found  plenti- 
fully later  on  in  the  history  (ch.  xxii.  6 ; 
Jer.  xxviii.  1) ;  but  against  this  is  the  fact 
that  hia  was  undoubtedly  the  channel  of  a 
Divine  communication  (ver.  21).  The  real 
difficulty,  no  doubt,  lies  in  the  fact  that 
one  by  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  spake  to 
man  should  have  acted  so  base  a  part  as  he 
did.  But  it  must  be  remembered  (1)  that  he 
did  not  know  what  a  terrible  judgment 
his  lie  would  bring  upon  "  the  man  of 
God ; "  (2)  that  truth  had  not  the  place  in  the 
Jewish  scheme  which  it  has  in  Christian 
morals;  (3)  that  the  gift  of  prophecy  is 
compatible  with  much  moral  imperfection 
on  the  part  of  the  prophet — the  cases  of 
Balaam  and  Caiaphas  will  occur  to  all — 
and  (4)  that  this  man  was  constrained  to 
prophesy  almost  in  spite  of  himself  ;  he  was 
compelled,  i.e.,  to  proclaim  his  own  falseness, 
and  to  announce  the  punishment  of  the  man 
he  had  himself  deceived.  It  is  also  to  be 
considered  that  this  lying  prophet,  like  those 
of  ch.  xxii.  22,  accomphshed  the  purpose  of 
God,  which  was  to  make  the  man  of  God  a 
Hgn  to  the  men  of  that  generation.  Cf. 
Isa.  zz.  3 ;  Ezek.  xii.  6  ;  xxiv.  24.  In  this 
latter  consideration,  indeed,  lies  the  key  to 
the  history.  The  object  the  old  prophet  had 
in  view  it  is  not  so  difficult  to  divine.  He 
hears  that  the  prophet  of  Judah  has  refused 
the  hospitality  of  King  Jeroboam,  and  has 
put  the  city  of  Bethel  and  the  new  cultus 
under  a  virtual  ban  by  refusing  to  eat  bread 
in  the  place,  or  to  hold  any  communication 


with  the  Inhabit^nti,  himself,  among  the 
rest,  although  he  has  taken  no  part,  even  by 
his  presence,  in  the  ceremonial  of  the  day. 
He  naturally  feels  himself  condemned  and 
aggrieved  by  this  conduct.  A  prophet 
would  feel  the  interdict  much  more  keenly 
than  the  people,  and  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  this  man,  who  had  been  trying 
to- serve  two  masters,  was  deeply  mortified 
by  the  excommunication  pronounced  against 
him.  He  resolves,  therefore,  to  rehabilitate 
himself  in  his  own  estimation  and  that  of 
his  neighbours,  by  bringing  back  the  man  of 
God  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  so  in  effect  to 
remove  the  interdict,  at  any  cost.  'If  he 
succeeds,  he  will  make  the  whole  city,  and 
especially  the  sovereign,  whose  policy  has 
been  so  emphatically  condemned,  his  debtor; 
while  by  accomplishing  what  the  king  had 
failed  to  effect,  he  wUl  at  once  heal  his 
wounded  ptide  and  secure  a  position  of  in- 
fluence in  the  new  kingdom.  If  it  was  the 
hope  of  temporal  advancement  had  detained 
him  at  Bethel,  he  now  sees,  as  he  thinks, 
an  easy  way  to  its  attainment ;  if  it  was  an 
ardent  sympathy  with  the  new  state  of 
things,  he  sees  before  him  an  opportunity 
of  expressing  it  in  a  most  practical  and 
serviceable  way.] 

Ver.  19. — So  he  went  back  with  him, 
and  did  eat  bread  in  bis  bouse,  and  drank 
water  [cf.  ver.  10] . 

Ver.  20. — And  It  came  to  pass,  u  they 
sat  at  the  table  [cf.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  30.  He  is 
taken  in  the  act,  "  even  in  the  blossoms  of 
his  sin  "] ,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
unto  the  prophet  that  brought  blm  baCk. 

Ver.  21. — And  be  cried  [same  word  as  in 
ver.  2.  He  who  denounced  the  "sin  of 
Jeroboam"  is  now  denounced  in  turn] 
unto  the  man  of  God  that  came  from 
Judah,  saying.  Thus  saltb  the  Lord,  Foras- 
much as  thou  hast  disobeyed  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord,  and  hast  not  kept  the  command- 
ment which  the  Lord  thy  Qod  commanded 
thee. 

Ver.  22. —But  camest  back,  and  hast 
eaten  bread  and  drunk  water  in  the  place, 
of  the  which  the  Lord  did  say  to  thee.  Eat 
no  bread,  and  diink  no  water ;  thy  carcase 
[rather  corpse  ;  "  carcase  "  is  now  a  term  of 
disparagement,  of  which,  however,  there  is 
no  idea  in  the  Hebrew]  shall  not  come  unto 
the  sepulchre  of  thy  fathers.  [The  desure, 
common  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  to  all 
mankind,  to  rest  after  death  amongst  kindred 
dust,  was  especially  strong  in  the  Jew.  It 
is  evidenced  by  the  common  euphemism 
"he  was  gathered  unto  his  fathers,"  and  by 
the  provisions  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxiii.  4), 
Jacob  (Gen.  xlvii.  29  ;  xlix.  29—31),  and 
Joseph  (Gen.  1.  25).  See  also  the  words  ol 
Barzillai  (2  Sam.  ziz.  87;  and  compare 


OH.  xm.  11 — 84. 1 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


897 


2  Sam.  ii.  82).  This  dpnunciation  did  not 
necessarily  imply  a  violent  death  (as  Keil, 
al.)  or  even  a  speedy  death,  but  it  prepared 
the  man  of  Clod  for  some  untimely  end.] 

Ver.  23.— And  It  came  to  pass,  after  he 
had  eaten  bread,  and  after  he  had  drunlc, 
that  he  saddled  [i.e.,  the  prophet  of  Bethel; 
the  "  man  of  God  "  would  seem  to  have  come 
on  foot.  See  below]  for  him  the  ass,  to  wit, 
for  the  prophet  whom  he  had  brought  back. 
This  translation  is  inadmissible.  For  not 
only  is  the  term  "  prophet "  throughout 
this  narrative  restricted  to  the  prophet  of 
Bethel  (the  prophet  of  Judah  being  always 
spoken  of  as  "  the  man  of  God,")  but  the 
expression  here  used  'il  'K  N'^IH  is  also 
twice  used  (vers.  20,26)  of  the  same  prophet. 
He  is  characterized  there,  that  is  to  say,  as 
"  the  prophet  which  brought  him  back ;"  it 
is  hardly  likely,  therefore,  that  the  same 
words  are  here  to  be  interpreted,  "  the 
prophet  whom  he  brought  back."  The 
mistake  has  arisen  from  the  proximity  of  \7 
("for  him")  to  N>33^  ("to"  or  "for  the 

prophet ").  But  the  \?  is  here  indicative  of 
possession  (the  dative  of  the  possessor),  as 
in  1  Sam.  xiv.  16,  "  the  watchmen  to,"  i.e., 
of,  "Saul,"  and  ib.  xvi.  18,  "a  son  to 
Jesse  "  (cf.  Gen.  xiv.  18  Heb. ;  1  Kings  v. 
29  Heb. ;  Kuth  ii.3  Heb.)  We  must  therefore 
render  "He  (the  old  prophet,  but  this  is 
not  absolutely  certain  j  the  "  man  of  God  " 
may  be  understood)  saddled  for  him  (the 
man  of  God)  the  ass  of  the  prophet  which 
brought  him  back.  "  The  man  of  God  had 
been  delayed  by  bis  return  to  Bethel,  and 
the  prophet,  out  of  pity,  lends  or  gives 
him  his  ass.  Not  merely,  it  is  probable, 
for  the  sake  of  speeding  iiim  on  Ms  way, 
but  that  he  might  have  tome  living  thing 
with  him  on  a  journey  which  he  had  so 
much  cause  to  dread. 

Ver.  24. — And  when  he  was  gone  [Heb. 
avd  he  went],  a  lion  (Lions  were  evi- 
dently numerous  in  Palestine  in  former 
days,  though  they  are  now  extinct.  This 
is  proved  by  the  names  of  places,  such 
as  Laish,  Lebanth,  &e.,  and  by  the  con- 
stant reference  to  them  in  Scripture.  They 
had  their  lairs  in  the  forests,  one  of  which 
existed  near  Bethel  (2  Kings  ii.  24),  and 
especially  in  the  thickets  of  the  Jordan 
valley  (Jer.  xlix.  19;  Zech.  xi.  3)]^  met 
[Heb.  found.  The  primary  meaning  of 
NSp  is,  no  doubt,  "  found  accidentally," 
"came  upon"  (Efpev,  invenit),  but  it  is 
often  used  of  finding  after  a  search  (1  Sam. 
ix.  4,  &o.),  and  it  should  be  remembered 
that  this  is  the  word  used  in  vers.  14, 28]  him 
by  [in,  as  below]  the  way,  and  slew  him : 
and  hla  carcase  was  cast  in  the  way  boad. 


highway,  ver.  25] ,  and  the  asB  stood  [Heb. 
standing]  by  It,  the  lion  also  stood  [stand- 
ing]  by  the  carcase.    [These  particulars  are 
mentioned  to  show  that  Iiis  death  was  no 
accident,  or  chance,  but  a  visitation  of  God. 
There  are  probably  but  few  persons  who 
have  not  felt  that  this  summary  punish- 
ment was  marked  by  extreme  severity  ;  the 
more  so,  as   the  prophet  was  cruelly  de- 
ceived, and  that  by  a  brother  prophet,  who 
claimed  to  have  received  a  subsequent  reve- 
lation, and  whom,  consequently,  it  appeared 
to  be  a  duty  to  obey.    And  when  it  is  ob 
served  that  the  really  guilty  person,  the 
prophet  of  Bethel,  so  far  as  appears,  escaped 
all  punishment,  and  by  his  lie  secured  for 
himself  respect  for  his  remains,  we  seem  to 
have  a  case  of  positive  hardship  and  in- 
justice.   As  I  have  discussed  the  question 
at  some  length  elsewhere  (Homil.   Quart., 
vol.   iv.  pp.  214 — 221),  it  must  suffice  to 
say  here  that  the  difficulty  is  at  once  re- 
moved if  we  remember  that  although  the 
Jewish  dispensation  was  one  of   temporal 
recompenses,  yet  all  the  same  there  it  m 
judgment  hereafter.    No  doubt  the  man  ol 
God  was  punished  for  his  disobedience,  for 
inexcusable  disobedience  it  was.    It  is  quite 
true  that  he  was  solemnly  assured  that  an 
angel    had    appeared  to   revoke  his  com- 
missioii,  but  for  this  he  had  only  the  word 
of  a  stranger,  of  one,  too,  with  whom  he 
had  been  commanded  "not  even  to  eat." 
He  had  "  the  word  of  the  Lord ;  "  that  is  to 
say,  the  voice  of  God,  borne  in  upon  his 
soul,  forbidding  his  return,  and  the  word  of 
an  irreligious  stranger,  who  gave  no  "  sign 
the  same  day "  in  proof  of  his  mission, 
authorizing  it.     There  can  be  no   doubt 
which  he  ought  to  have  followed,  the  more 
so  as  the  command  he  had  himself  received 
was  so  remarkably  explicit  and   decisive 
(ver.  9) ;  so  decisive  that  we  cin  hardly 
suppose  he  would  have  deviated  from  it, 
had  not  the  pains  of   hunger  and  thirst 
pleaded  powerfully  in   favour  of   the  pre- 
tended revelation  of  the  Bethelite  prophet. 
Indeed,  it  is  hardly  too  mnoh  to  say  that  he 
eagerly  welcomed  this  cause  for  returning. 
It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  acquit  him  of 
disobedience.    Nor  is  it  difficult  to  see  that 
the  consequences  of  this  disobedience  were 
serious.  It  was  not  as  if  he  had  disregarded 
a  mere  positive  obligation,  the  only  object 
of  which  was  to  test  his  obedience  (Eawliu- 
son) ;  he  bad  acted  in  a  way  calculated  to 
destroy  the  moral  effect  of  his  mission.    He 
had    been    employed   not  only  to  testify 
publicly  against  the  calf -worship,  but  also 
to  lay  the  city  and  the  new  sanctuary  of 
Jeroboam  nnder  an  interdict,  and  by  hia 
return  that  interdict  lost  much  of  its  force. 
His  eating  and  drinking,  small  matters  in 


99S 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS, 


[oh.  zm.  11 — 84 


themselves,  were  full  of  significance.  In- 
deed, he  did  in  one  way  precisely  what 
Jeroboam  and  his  people  were  doing  in 
another — he  forsook  the  plain  commands  of 
God  for  the  ordinances  of  men  ;  he  listened 
to  the  tempter  and  ate  the  forbiaden  fruit ; 
and  so  it  came  to  pass  that,  instead  of  wit- 
nessing against  disobedience,  he  himself  set 
them  the  example  of  disobedience.  It  is 
the  story  of  the  Fall  over  again;  and 
therefore  death,  the  punishment  of  the 
Fall,  hefell  him.  But  before  we  say  that 
his  punishment  was  too  severe,  let  us  re- 
member what,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  that 
primal  punishment  has  become.  It  has 
been  turned  into  a  blessing.  It  has  given 
ns  the  incarnation,  redemption,  eternal 
Ufe.  We  forget  that  death  is  not  neces- 
sarily an  evil — is  in  reality  a  blessing.  One 
of  the  heathen  has  said  that  if  we  only 
knew  what  the  future  life  was  like,  we 
should  not  be  content  to  live.  To  this 
"  man  of  God  "  it  must  surely  have  been 
gain  to  die.  If  the  flesh  was  destroyed,  it 
was  that  the  spirit  might  be  saved  (1  Cor. 
T.  5).  Only  because  we  forget  that  death 
is  the  gate  of  life  do  we  comp]»in  of  the 
severity  of  his  doom.  And  as  to  the  lying 
prophet  who  wrought  all  this  mischief  es- 
caping retribution — which,  by  the  way,  he 
did  not  do,  for  assuredly  he  must  have  had 
a  life-long  remorse — it  is  overlooked  that 
the  day  of  retribution  has  not  yet  arrived. 
There  is  for  him  a  judgment  to  come.  It 
may  be  said  that  the  Jew  did  not  know  of 
this — that  the  future  life  had  not  then  been 
revealed.  That  is  quite  true,  and  for  that 
very  reason  this  visitation  would  make  all 
the  deeper  impression  on  their  minds.  To 
this  must  be  added  that  the  man  of  God 
did  not  die  merely  or  principally  because  of 
his  sin,  but  "  that  the  works  of  God  might 
be  made  manifest  in  him."  His  death  was 
necessary  in  order  that  his  mission  might 
not  be  altogether  invalidated.  His  miserable 
end  —as  it  must  have  seemed  to  them — 
would  surely  speak  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Bethel  and  to  all  Israel  and  Judah,  for  long 
years  to  come,  as  to  the  sure  vengeance 
awiiiting  the  disobedient,  whether  king, 
prophet,  pnest,  or  people.  Though  dead 
"  he  cried  against  the  altar  of  Bethel." 
And  the  sacred  naiTative  (vers.  26 — 32) 
■affords  us  some  ground  for  hoping  that  the 
"  old  prophet  "  became  penitent  for  his  sin. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  he  joins  his  testimony 
to  that  of  the  man  of  God.  Thus,  this 
tragedy  extorted  even  from  him.  a  warning 
against  disobedience  (ver.  26),  and  a  con- 
firmation of  the  prophecy  against  the  altar 
of  Bethel  (ver.  32).] 

Ver.  25 — And,  behold,  men  passed  \>j, 
and  saw  the  carcase  cast  In  the  way,  and 


the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase :  and  the; 
came  and  told  it  In  the  city  where  the  old 
prophet  dwelt.  [This  was  precisely  what 
God  had  designed.  By  this  means,  the 
very  disobedience  and  death  of  the  man  of 
God  became  a  part  of  the  protest  against 
the  new  rites.  "  For  if  the  partaking  of 
food  against  the  commandment  of  God, 
though  the  result  not  of  indulgence,  but  of 
deceit,  brought  so  great  a  punishment  upon 
a  righteous  man,  what  sort  of  chastise- 
ments would  befall  those  who  had  left  God 
their  Maker  and  were  worshipping  sense- 
less images  "  (Theodoret.)] 

Ver.  26.— And  when  the  prophet  that 
brought  him  back  from  the  way  heard 
thereof,  he  said,  It  is  the  man  of  God,  who 
was  disobedient  [Heb.  rebelled ;  same  word 
as  in  ver.  21]  nnto  the  word  [Heb. 
"vwuth,"  as  in  ver.  21]  of  the  Lord: 
therefore  the  Lord  hath  delivered  him 
unto  the  lion,  which  hath  torn  [Heb.  ai 
marg.,  broken.  The  word  "  is  very  expres- 
sive, for  the  lion  kills  with  one  blow  " 
(Thenius)]  and  slain  him,  according  to  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  which  he  spake  nnto 
him. 

Ter.  27. — And  he  spake  to  his  sons,  sa;- 
tng,  Saddle  me  the  ass.  And  they  saddled 
him. 

Yer.  28. — And  be  went  and  fonnd  his 
carcase  cast  in  the  way,  and  the  ass  and 
the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase :  the  lion 
had  not  eaten  the  carcase  nor  torn  [Heb. 
broken,  as  in  ver.  26]  the  ass. 

Ver.  29. — And  the  prophet  took  np  the 
carcase  of  the  man  of  God,  and  laid  it  upon 
the  asa  [i.e.,  the  one  standing  by],  and 
brought  it  back :  and  the  old  prophet  came 
to  the  city,  to  mourn  and  to  bury  him. 
[The  mourning  is  specially  mentioned, 
because  in  the  East  professional  wallers 
were  and  are  employed  at  funerals.  The 
Jew,  no  less  than  the  Greek  and  Eoman, 
esteemed  it  a  great  misfortune  and  disgrace 
to  be  deprived  of  decent  burial :  Isa.  xiv.  19  ; 
Jer.  xxii.  19;  and  especially  2  Kings  iz. 
10.] 

Yer.  30. — And  he  laid  his  carcase  in  hie 
own  grave  [Matt,  xxvii.  60.  This  was  a 
mark  of  profound  respect  (Ruth  i.  17  ;  Gen. 
xxiii.  6)] ;  and  they  mourned  over  him,  say- 
ing, Alas,  my  brother.  [A  customary 
formula  in  lamentation  (Jer.  xxii.  18).  It 
hardjy  implies  that  "  he  was  mourned  and 
buried  as  a  relative  of  the  family  "  (Bahr). 
Seeing  that  the  old  prophet  was  responsible 
for  his  death,  he  could  hardly  have  done 
less.  "  It  is  a  cruel  courtesy  to  kill  a  man 
and  then  help  him  to  his  grave"  (Hall).] 

Yer.  31.— And  it  came  to  pass,  after  he 
bad  buried  him,  that  he  spake  to  his  sona^ 
saying,  When  I  am  dead,  then  bury  me  In 


BH.  xin.  11 — 84.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


899 


the  gepnlcbre  [Palestine,  being  of  lime- 
stone formation,  has  a  large  number  of 
oaves.  These,  enlarged  a;nd  adapted,  were 
everywhere  used  for  interments.  ("  The 
whole  cliffs  on  its  southern  side  [Hinnom] 
are  honeycombed  with  tombs,"  Porter).  In 
three  sides  of  the  cave  vaults  {loculi),  each 
large  enough  to  hold  a  body,  were  recessed 
in  the  rook,  the  entrance  being  closed  by  a 
Blab  of  stone  (see  Conder,  pp.  85,  96, 118, 
&e.)  In  the  so-called  "  tombs  of  the  kings  " 
and  "  prophets  "  we  have  such  sepulchres  on 
a  large  scale.  A  Paper  on  the  Tombs  of 
Palestine  will  be  found  in  the  Quarterly 
Statement  of  the  Palestine  Exploration 
Fund,  p.  66  eqq.  It  appears  from  2  Kings 
xxiii.  17  that  a  pillar  was  erected  to  mark 
this  prophet's  resting-place]  wherein  the 
man  of  God  Is  burled ;  lay  my  bones  beside 
bis  bones.  [That  is  to  say,  "  Bury  me 
in  the  cell  next  to  his  "  (Bawlinson).  But 
it  is  not  absolutely  certain  that  this  arrange- 
ment (of  loculi)  obtained  at  this  early  period. 
The  bodies  may  have  been  in  much  closer 
contact.  See  2  Kings  ziiL  21.  The  LXX. 
adds  here,  "  That  my  bones  may  be  saved 
with  his  bones ;  "  an  obvious  gloss,  founded 
on  2  Kings  xxiii.  18.  This  request  throws 
some  light  on  the  yearning  desire  of  the 
modem  Jew  to  rest  as  near  as  possible  to  the 
bodies  of  the  saints.  See  Porter,  i.  p.  145.] 
Ver.  32. — For  the  saying  which  he  cried 
by  the  word  of  the  Iiord  against^the  altar  In 
Bethel,  and  against  all  the  houses  of  the 
high  places  [At  that  time  there  would  seem 
to  have  b^en  but  two  "  high  places."  Keil 
sees  "a  prophetic  element  in  these  words." 
Be  thinks  the  old  prophet  foresaw  that  such 
sanctuaries  would  be  multiplied.  Bawlinson 
gathers,  "  from  the  mention  of  the  great 
high  place  in  1  Kings  iii.  4,  that  there  were 
many  lesser  high  places  in  the  laud,"  which, 
no  doubt,  was  the  case  at  the  date  of 
Solomon's  accession.  It  is  probable,  how- 
ever, that  many  of  these,  if  not  all,  would 
be  deserted  when  the  temple  was  built.  And 
it  ia  most  reasonable  to  suppose  that  in 
these,  as  in  the  following  words,  the  his- 
torian has  represented  the  prediction  or 
affirmation  of  the  old  prophet  in  the  lan- 
guage of  liis  own  time]  which  are  In  the 
dtles  of  Samaria.  [Obviously,  these  exact 
words  cannot  have  been  used  by  the  prophet 
of  Bethel,  for  Samaria  dates  its  existence 
and  name  from  the  reign  of  Omri  (1  Kings 
xvi.  24).  The  compiler  of  the  Kings  pro- 
bably found  the  term  in  the  documents 
which  he  used,  or  possibly,  as  already  sug- 
gested, translated  the  prophet's  meaning  into 
the  language  of  a  later  day]  shall  surely 
oome  to  pass. 


Ver.  33. — After  this  thing  [calculated 
though  it  was  to  make  a  deep  impression 
and  to  furnish  a  solemn  warning]  Jeroboam 
turned  not  Crom  his  evil  way.  "  Some  hand 
was  found  that  durst  repair  the  altar  God 
had  rent  "  (Matthew  Henry).  According  to 
Josephus,  the  old  prophet  now  explained 
away  the  miracles  of  the  prophet  of  Judah, 
alleging  that  the  altar  had  fallen  because  it 
was  new  and  the  king's  hand  had  beoomo 
powerless  from  fatigue  (Ant.,viii.  9,  §  1)] ,  but 
made  again  [Heb.  "returned  and  made." 
The  tautology  is  significant.  He  returned 
not  from  his  sin,  but  returned  to  it]  of  the 
lowest  [see  on  ch.  zii.  11]  of  the  people 
priests  of  the  high  places :  whosoever  would 
[Heb.  pleased] ,  he  consecrated  [Heb.  filled 
his  hand.  In  the  consecration  of  Aaron  and 
his  sons,  and  possibly  of  their  successors 
also,  the  portions  of  the  victim  which  were 
usually  burned  upon  the  altar,  together  with 
the  right  shoulder  or  leg,  which  was  the 
priest's  portion,  and  three  cakes  of  un- 
leavened bread,  were  put  into  the  hands  of 
the  candidates  for  the  priesthood,  and 
waved  before  the  Lord  before  they  were 
offered  on  the  altar  (Ezod.  xxix.  22 — 26  ; 
Levit.  viii.  25—28).  To  "fill  the  hand" 
consequently  became  a  synonym  for  con- 
secration] him  [It  would  almost  appear, 
from  the  extreme  readiness  with  which 
Jeroboam  ordained  his  priests,  that  few 
candidates  offered  themselves  for  the  office. 
In  one  respect,  however,  he  exacted  more 
from  the  candidate  than  did  the  law.  For 
whereas  the  latter  required  "  one  bullock 
and  two  rams "  (Exod.  xxix.  1,  &c.),  he 
demanded  one  bullock  and  seven  rams  as 
the  offering  on  consecration  (2  Gbron. 
xiii.  9] ,  and  he  became  one  of  the  priests 
[Heb.  and  he  became  priests,  &o.  So  the 
Ghaldee.  LXX,  cai  £yE»cra  iepeie]  Of  the  high 
places. 

Ver.  34.— And  this  thing  [Heb.  "  in  this 
thing :"  l^'ja.  Of.  1  Chron.  vii.  23 ;  ix.  33] 
became  sin  unto  the  house  of  Jeroboam, 
even  to  cut  It  off,  and  to  destroy  It  from  ofE 
the  ftice  of  the  earth  [ch.  xv.  29.  The 
forfeiture  of  the  crown  would  bring  in  its 
train,  almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  the 
destruction  of  his  family  (ch.  xiv.  10 — 14). 
And  we  are  taught  here  that  both  events 
are  to  be  regarded,  under  the  dispensation  of 
temporal  rewards  and  punishments,  as  the 
recompenses  of  his  impiety ;  of  that  daring 
schismatic  policy  which,  in  all  its  branches, 
betrayed  a  complete  disregard  of  the  terms 
of  the  covenant,  and  which  was  persevered 
in  contemptuous  defianoa  ol  ths  repeated 
warnings  of  Qod.] 


800  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xni.  11—84. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  21  sqq. — The  Man  of  Ood  and  the  People  of  God.    The  morning  of  that 

fifteenth  day  of  the  eighth  month,  that  black  day  in  the  He'orew  Kalendar,  that 
Ijirthday  of  division,  was  hardly  more  memorable  or  eventful  than  the  evening. 
In  the  morning  the  Bethelites  saw  the  signs  of  the  man  of  God  ;  in  the  evening 
tliey  saw  in  him  a  sign,  a  parable,  and  a  terrible  warning.  The  lesson  of  the 
rent  altar  and  the  rigiil  hand  was  followed  by  the  lesson  of  the  lion  and  the  ass 
and  the  rigid  corpse.  Truly,  of  that  day  it  might  be  truly  said,  "  The  evening  and 
Ihe  morning  were  one  day." 

For  we  may  be  sure,  when  the  old  prophet  came  back  from  his  quest  of  the  body, 
and  brought  with  him  that  melancholy  burden,  swicging  across  the  ass,  the  men 
■of  Bethel,  who  had  already  heard  from  wayfarers  of  the  tragedy,  would  crowd  the 
streets  or  lanes — ^for  Bethel  was  probably  little  more  than  a  village — to  meet  him, 
and  would  gaze,  hushed  and  awestruck,  into  the  dumb  and  helpless  face  of  the 
man  whose  words  and  deeds  bad  that  day  been  so  full  of  power.  There  was  not  a 
child  that  night  but  would  leave  his  play  to  stare  in  silent  wonder,  or  with  whis- 
pered question,  on  the  corpse.  Of  that  sad  funereal  procession,  the  words  which, 
near  a  thousand  years  later,  desciibed  the  entry  of  a  Hving  Prophet  into  an 
adjoining  city,  might  justly  be  useil,  "All  the  city  was  moved,  saying.  Who  is 
Ibis  ?  "  (Matt.  xxi.  10.)  Nor  would  the  language  which  described  the  effect  of  that 
same  Prophet's  death  a  few  days  later  be  less  applicable  here,  "  All  the  people  that 
came  together  to  that  sight,  beholding  the  things  which  were  done,  smote  theil 
breasts  and  returned"  (Luke  xxiii.  48). 

Let  ns  now  suppose,  however,  for  the  sake  of  bringing  out  the  lessons  of  this 
narrative,  that  there  were  some  in  the  crowd — as  on  the  first  feast-day  there  may 
well  have  been — strangers  in  Bethel  (cf.  John  xii.  20  ;  Acts  ii.  6 — 11),  who  did  not 
understand  the  things  which  were  come  to  pass  there  that  day.  Let  us  join  them, 
as  they  go,  earned  by  the  stream,  to  meet  the  body  ;  let  us  listen  to  their  questions, 
and  to  the  answers  they  receive.  We  shall  not  gather  all  the  truth  from  the  discourse 
we  overhear,  but  we  shall  learn  at  all  events  one  lesson  which  this  tragedy  had  for 
the  men  of  that  time. 

Now  the  first  question  which  would  rise  to  these  strangers'  Ups,  aa  they 
<!ame  upon  the  body,  borne  by  the  patient  ass,  which  was  the  one  terrified 
witness  of  the  catastrophe,  would  be,  "Who  is  this?"  They  think,  perhaps, 
it  is  some  peasant  who  has  been  slain  as  he  tilled  his  fields,  or  some  itinerant 
chapman  who  has  been  murdered  on  his  journey.  But  the  bystanders  speedily 
undeceive  them.  They  tell  them  that  this  is  "  a  man  of  God  who  came  from 
Judah."  His  name,  it  may  be,  is  unknown  to  them,  "out  not  his  deeds.  They 
relate,  with  breathless  excitement,  not  unmixed  with  fear,  how  a  few  short  hours 
ago  he  was  amongst  them ;  how  on  the  morning  of  that  very  day  he  had  con- 
fronted their  king  as  he  was  in  the  act  of  sacrificing,  had  denounced  his  inno- 
vations, had  foretold  tlie  overthrow  of  his  pohoy  and  dynasty,  and  had  then 
wrought  wonderful  works  in  attestation  of  his  mission.  The  strangers  listen  with 
steadily  increasing  wonderment.  Had  this  man  been  "a  murderer  whom  ven- 
geance suffered  not  to  live,"  or  a  sinner  above  all  men  that  dwelt  in  Bethel, 
they  could  have  understood  it  Such  a  one,  however  he  might  have  met  his 
•end,  would  only  have  received  the  just  reward  of  his  deeds,  but  "  a  man  of  God,"  a 
man  who  wrought  miracles,  a  favourite  of  Heaven  I— they  cannot  comprehend  it,  and 
they,  as  excited  as  their  informants,  hurriedly  ask  how  he  has  come  by  his  death. 

"  A  lion  slew  him,"  is  the  answer.  It  is  true  no  human  eye  saw  the  deed, 
but  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  manner  of  his  death.  Then  they  tell  how  way- 
faring men  that  afternoon  had  seen  a  strange  sight,  a  corpse  cast  in  the  way— 
whote  corpse  they  knew  not— and  an  ass  and  a  lion  standing  as  joint  sentinels 
«yer  it,  &o.  And  then  the  strangers  would  understand  that  this  man  of  God  had 
died  by  the  visitation  of  God.  They  would  remember  that  the  "  teeth  of  evil 
fceasts"  were  one  of  the  plagues  denounced  in  the  law,  and  they  would  wonder,  and 


OH.  xm.  11—84]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  SOi 

they  would  ask,  what  this  messenger  of  the  Most  High,  this  miracle-worker, 
oomd  have  done  between  morning  and  evening  to  bring  this  terrible  judgment 
down  upon  his  head. 

And  this  was  a  question  which  only  the  old  prophet  could  rightly  answer,  and 
he  bad  answered  it  already.  He  had  told  his  sons  and  neighbours  that  afternoon, 
when  first  he  heard  of  this  tragedy,  thsbt  it  was  the  punishment  of  disobedience 
(ver.  26).  Not  improbably  he  proclaimed  it  again  to  the  crowd  which  awaited  his 
return.  "He  had  been  charged,"  he  would  say,  as  they  stood  gazing  on  the 
helpless  corpse,  "  to  lay  our  city  under  a  ban ;  he  had  been  commanded  to  eat  no 
bread,  to  drink  nc  water  here.  And  he  came  back,  and  he  ate  bread  and  he  drank 
water  in  my  house ;  therefore  it  is  that  '  the  Uon  hath  torn  him  and  slain  him, 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord' "  (ver.  26). 

And  so  the  men  of  Bethel,  and  the  strangers  among  them—  and  thousands  of 
strangers  would  be  present  in  Bethel  at  that  time — would  understand  that  this  man, 
albeit  a  prophet,  and  a  doer  of  wondrous  works,  had  paid  the  penalty  of  his  partial 
disobedience  with  his  life.  They  would  perceive  that  God  had  not  spared  His  own 
elect  messenger.  They  would  see  that  the  man  who  had  been  commissioned  to 
protest  against  Jeroboam's  will-worship,  who  had  courageously  faced  the  king  in 
his  might,  and  had  stood  like  an  Athanase  against  the  world,  had  received  judg* 
ment  without  mercy  when  he  overstepped  the  commandment  of  his  God.  And 
they  would  assuredly  be  reminded,  some  of  them  at  least,  how  sinful  and  how 
dangerons  must  be  that  departure  from  the  law  which  they  had  that  day  seen 
instituted  amongst  themselves.  And  as  one  by  one  they  dropped  off,  and,  deeply 
awed  and  impressed,  returned  to  their  tents  or  booths,  the  one  thought  which  above 
all  others  filled  their  minds  would  be  this — how  sure  and  swift  and  terrible  was  the 
recompense  of  disobedience. 

But  if  these  strangers,  in  their  perplexity,  proceeded  to  make  f^^'ther  inquiries, 
as  they  may  well  have  done ;  if  they  asked  what  could  have  led  such  a  man 
as  this  to  set  at  nought  the  plain  commandment  of  God :  If  they  discovered 
from  the  old  prophet,  or  his  sons,  or  others,  the  circumstances  of  his  sin  ;  if  they 
learned  that  this  man  of  God  had  resisted  the  entreaties  of  the  king,  had  obeyed 
his  own  instructions  to  the  letter,  and  had  only  come  back  and  eaten  bread  on  the 
solemn  assurance  of  this  old  prophet  himself  that  an  angel  from  heaven  had  dis- 
tinctly reversed,  his  couimission ;  if  they  understood  that  it  was  because  he  had 
taken  this  man  at  his  word  and  trusted  to  his  good  faith,  as  they  themselves 
would  have  done  in  like  circumstances,  that  he  had  been  induced  to  return ;  and 
that  because  of  tliis,  and  nothing  else,  this  ambassador  of  the  Most  Merciful  had 
died  by  the  stroke  of  a  wild  beast,  we  may  imagine  what  their  astonishment 
and  horror  would  be  like.  "  Who  shall  dehver  us,"  they  would  cry,  "  out  of 
the  hand  of  this  mighty  God  ?  "  And  it  is  probable  that  at  first  they  would  find  it 
difficult  to  see  wherein  his  sin  lay,  and  to  disentangle  the  right  and  the  wrong  in 
his  conduct.  They  would  say,  and  rightly,  that  he  was  much  more  sinned  against 
than  sinning.  It  would  seem  to  them  that  the  really  guilty  party  escaped 
unpunished,  whUst  his  innocent  victim  paid  to  the  uttermost  farthing.  And  it 
is  possible  that  some  found,  at  least  for  a  time,  in  this  episode,  as  some  in  later 
days  have  done,  a  riddle  which  they  could  not  read.  But  its  meaning  could  not 
be  lost  upon  them  all ;  if  it  had  been,  the  Divine  purpose  in  this  visitation  would 
have  been  defeated.  It  may  be  the  old  prophet  himself  expounded  its  lessons ; 
it  may  be  that  "  such  as  set  their  heart  to  seek  the  Lord" — and  we  may  be  sure 
that  Jeroboam's  innovations  had  occasioned  the  gravest  misgivings  and  fears  in 
many  minds — ^found  them  out  for  tliemselves.  But  in  any  case  some  would  not 
be  long  in  discovering  that  these  things  were  am,  allegory.  "  As  hieroglyphics," 
says  Lord  Bacon,  "preceded  letters,  so  parables  were  more  ancient  than  argu- 
ments." May  we  not  add  that  acted  parables  were  still  more  ancient  than  spoken 
ones.  A  Tarquin,  striking  off  the  heads  of  the  tallest  poppies,  belongs  to  the 
beginnings  of  history.  This  was  the  age  when  men  not  only  gave  signs,  but  wera 
»uch  themselves  (Isa.  xx.  8 ;  Ezek.  xxiv.  24 ;  Matt.  xii.  89,  40).  The  death  of  the 
"man  of  God"  accordingly  was  a  parable,  an  object-lesson  of  the  most  impressive 


802  THE  PIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xin.  11—34 

kind  as  to  the  doom  of  the  unfaithful  people  of  God.  In  his  end,  men  might  see 
a  fore-shadowincr  of  their  nation's,  if  it  should  persevere  in  the  worship  of  the  calves. 
For  they  would  assuredly  remember,  as  they  pondered  this  history,  that  as  this  . 
prophet  of  Judah  was  a  man  of  God,  precisely  so  was  Israel  the  people  of  God  (ch. 
viii.  43,  62,  66 ;  xiv.  7 ;  Levit.  xxvi  12 ;  Deut.  xxvi.  18).  As  he  was  to  other  men, 
so  was  Israel  to  other  nations.  Was  he  elect  of  God  and  precious  ?  So  were  they. 
Had  he  a  mission  ?  So  had  they.  Had  God  spoken  to  him  ?  He  had  also  spoken 
to  them,  and  moreover,  had  given  them  a  charge  not  unlike  his.  For  it  is  to  be 
also  considered  that  God  had  plainly  spoken  to  Israel  on  this  very  subject  of  Divine 
worship.  At  the  very  threshold  of  the  Decalogue,  at  the  head  of"  the  words  of  the 
covenant,"  stood  the  charge,  "  Thou  shalthave  none  other  gods  but  me.  Thoushalt 
not  make  to  thyself  any  graven  image,"  &c.  And  it  is  to  be  noted  here  that  these 
words  stand  side  by  side  with  the  formula, "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  brought 
thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt " — the  very  words  which  Jeroboam  had  cited  in 
instituting  his  new  mode  of  worship  ;  the  very  cry  which  had  been  raised  before 
when  Israel  made  its  first  golden  calf  (Exod.  xxxii.  8).  It  is  almost  certain,  there- 
fore, that  these  initial  words  of  the  covenant  had  been  lately  and  forcibly  recalled 
to  their  minds.  But  in  any  case  they  could  not  be  ignorant  that  their  forefathers 
had  been  expressly  charged  to  make  no  simUitude,  no  graven  or  molten  image 
(Levit.  xxvi.  1 ;  Deut.  iv.  16,  25 ;  v.  8 ;  xxvii.  15,  &o.)  And  this  commandment, 
too,  like  the  message  of  that  morning,  had  been  confirmed  with  signs  following. 
The  blackness,  darkness,  tempest,  trumpet,  fire,  all  these  had  attested  that  revela- 
tion of  God's  wUl.  It  might  possibly  occur  to  some  o'f  their  minds,  therefore,  that 
when  the  first  protest  against  a  corrupt  following  of  the  true  God  was  raised.  He 
"  gave  a  sign  the  same  day." 

Such,  then,  was  the  commandment  given  to  Israel.  It  was  as  explicit,  as  authort 
tative  as  that  which  this  dead  prophet  had  recently  received.  But  of  late  a  new  teacher 
had  appeared  amongst  them,  in  the  person  of  their  king,  who  presumed  to  counter- 
maud  this  law  of  the  Almighty.  We  are  not  told,  indeed,  that  Jeroboam  claimed 
to  be  prophet  as  well  as  priest,  but  we  find  him  acting  as  one,  and  received  as  one. 
It  is  hardly  likely  that  he  laid  claim  to  any  revelation  from  on  high.  He  was  not 
the  man  to  pretend  to  visions  of  angels.  It  was  his  contention  that  he  was  re- 
verting to  the  old  form  of  religion,  but  that  was  all.  At  the  same  time,  he  was  the 
great  false  prophet  of  the  Old  Testament.  Just  as  Moses  was  the  giver  of  the  law, 
just  as  Elias  was  its  restorer,  so  was  Jeroboam  its  depraver.  Precisely  what  the 
lying  prophet  taught  the  man  of  God,  that  had  he  taught  the  people  of  God,  viz., 
that  God's  command  w^as  somehow  abrogated.  Prophet  of  Bethel  and  priest-king 
of  Bethel  were  alike  in  this,  that  each  met  the  Divine,  "  Thou  shall  not,"  with  the 
human,  "  Thou  shall."  There  was  this  difference  between  them,  that  the  first 
inculcated  disobedience  to  but  one  command,  whilst  the  second  contravened  a 
whole  system;  but  this  very  divergence  would  make  the  parallel  all  the  more 
impressive.  "  If,"  they  would  argue,  "  if  a  prophet,  a  doer  of  signs  and  wonders, 
died  without  mercy  because  he  listened  to  the  voice  of  a  brother  prophet — who 
swore  that  he  had  received  a  revelation  concerning  him — and  so  was  betrayed  into 
breaking  one  commandment,  of  how  much  sorer  punishment  shall  those  be  thought 
worthy  who  at  the  mere  word  of  their  Mng,  albeit  he  claimed  no  spiritual  authority, 
and  acted  from  political  motives  only,  reject  the  gracious  covenant  of  heaven,  con- 
firmed by  many  signs,  and  go  after  false  gods,"  &o.  There  were  some,  no  doubt, 
would  see  in  the  corpse  borne  to  its  bnrial  that  day  a  foreshadowing  of  the  more 
terrible  judgment  then  hanging  over  their  own  heads. 

And  BO  we  find  this  prophet  of  Judah  has  not  lived  or  suffered  in  vain.  His 
death,  like  that  of  Samson,  virought  even  more  effectnally  than  his  Ufe.  He  was 
set  forth  as  it  were  appointed  to  death  (1  Cor.  iv.  9).  He  silently  and  unoonsoiously 
mirrored  forth  the  sin  and  the  punishment  of  a  disobedient  people. 

It  now  only  remains  for  us  to  indicate  briefly  how  the  analogy  between  man  ol 
God  and  people  of  God  received  its  completion  in  the  punishment  which  befell  the 
latter.  The  punishment  of  the  prophet  was  death  ;  of  the  people,  whose  sin  was 
much  greater,  death  and  superadded  infamy.    We  see  this — 


CH.  xm.  11—34.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  808 

1.  In  the  case  of  Jerohomn's  house.  For  the  family  of  the  deceiver  was  the 
first  to  suffer.  As  in  the  case  of  the  man  of  God,  "swift  retribution  "  followed 
upon  sin.  And  what  retribution  I  The  death  and  destruotiou  of  the  race.  He 
himself  was  smitten  of  God.  His  seed  was  suddenly  cut  off.  The  sword  of  Baasha 
was  as  swift  aa  the  lion's  paw.  Only  one  of  his  children  "  came  to  the  grave." 
The  rest  were  devoured  of  beasts  and  birds.     (Of.  ch.  xiv.  11  with  ch.  xiii.  28.) 

2.  In  the  case  of  his  intrusive  priests.  If  they  escc^ped  a  violent  death,  their 
renlains  experienced  disgrace  worse  than  death  (ver.  2).  Here  prophet  and  priests 
stand  in  contrast.    The  respect  accorded  to  his  ashes  was  denied  to  theirs. 

3.  In  the  case  of  the  entire  people.  For  the  captivity,  foretold  in  oh.  xiv.  15, 
was  the  death  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  death-knell  of  the  people.  The  ten  tribes 
soon  lost  their  corporate  existence.  And  what  agonies  preceded  that  dissolution  I 
(See  Jer.  lii. ;  Lam.  passim  ;  Pss.  Ixxiv.,  cxxxvii.)  The  people  to  death,  the  land  to 
lions  I     (2  Kings  xvii.  25.)     Could  the  analogy  be  much  closer  ? 

But  indeed  tlie  analogy  does  not  end  there.  De  te  fahula  nourratwr.  The  Chris- 
tian Church  has  inherited  the  place,  the  privileges,  the  responsibilities  of  the  Jewish 
people.  If  that  Church,  or  if  the  individual  Christian  be  imfaithfol  or  disobedient, 
let  them  see  their  own  fate  glassed  and  pourtrayed  in  that  of  the  disobedient 
prophet.  "  If  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches,"  &o.  "  I  will  remove  thy 
candlestick  ont  of  his  place."    "  Shame  and  everlasting  contempt." 

The  Two  'Prophets.  We  have  already  considered  the  principal  lesson  which  this 
■trange  history  had  for  that  time.  Let  us  now  indicate  some  of  the  lessons  which 
it  has  for  all  time.  The  text,  to  borrow  Bishop  Ridley's  phrase,  "  shall  lead  us  by 
the  hand  ; "  we  will  record  them  as  we  find  them  set  down  in  the  story.  And  first 
let  us  contemplate  the  Old  Prophet.    Observe — 

1.  It  was  the  false  prophet  that  was  old.  Age  should  bring  wisdom  (Job.  xxxii. 
7;  ch.  xii.  7),  and  piety.  But  see  HomUetics,  p.  225.  The -old  king  (oh.  xi.  4) 
and  the  old  prophet  ahke  remind  us  that  there  is  "  no  sinner  like  an  old  sinner." 

2.  It  was  only  the  false  teacher  that  was  styled  a  prophet.  Probably  because 
he  alone  had  been  taught  in  the  schools.  He  was,  so  to  speak,  in  the  prophetical 
succession.  The  man  of  God  was  an  irregular,  though  not  self-constituted  mes- 
senger. But  observe,  when  God  employs  an  irregular.  He  authenticates  his  mission 
with  a  sign.  And  consider,  too,  the  unwortblness  of  ministers  argues  nothing 
against  the  office  or  the  succession.     See  Art.  XXVI. 

8.  The  old  prophet  was  in  Bethel.  "  Where  Satan's  seat  is  "  (Rev.  ii  8).  But 
God  had  not  fixed  the  bounds  of  his  habitation.  What  wonder  if,  like  him  who 
"pitched  his  tent  toward  Sodom  "  (Gen.  xiii.  12),  he  fell  into  temptation  and  sin  ? 
The  old  prophet,  in  his  way,  has  "  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  beheld  the  plain  of  the 
Jordan,  that  it  was  well  watered  everywhere."  He  has  remained  here  to  worship 
the  rising  sun.     Conscience  bade  him 'go.     Convenience  made  him  stay. 

4.  The  old  prophet  tries  to  serve  two  masters.  Though  Jeroboam  sets  up 
molten  images,  a  sanctuary,  a  priesthood,  he  raises  no  protest.  But  when  Jero- 
boam burns  incense  and  sacrifices,  he  does  not  sanction  the  proceeding  by  his 
presence.  But  he  compromises  the  matter  by  sending  his  sons.  "  Video  meliora 
proboque,  Deteriora  sequor."  "  He  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea  driven 
with  the  wind  and  tossed  "  (James  i.  6) .  The  temporiser  soon  finds  diificulties  in  his 
path.  Those  who  try  to  gain  both  worlds  generally  contrive  to  lose  both.  After  the 
conduct  of  ver.  18,  he  could  not  respect  himself;  and  after  the  prophecy  of  ver.  82, 
he  could  expect  no  advancement  from  the  king. 

6.  The  old  prophet  stoops  to  lies.  And  yet  he  was  a  true  prophet.  A  preacher 
of  righteousness,  yet  he  practised  deceit.  Baalam  has  been  called  "  a  strange 
mixture  of  a  man."  This  prophet's  character  and  conduct  were  equally  strange. 
But,  alas  I  it  is  a  common  thing  to  find  men's  example  differing  widely  from  then; 
precept ;  to  find  insight  without  holiness,  light  without  love.  Prophetic  gifts  do 
not  imply  piety.    It  is  no  new  thing  for  God's  ministers  to  fall  into  sin. 

6.  TJie  old  prophet  slays  a  mam,  of  God.  It  was  his  tongue,  not  the  lion's  paw, 
reaUy  dew  a  man  more  righteous  and  better  than  he.    A  prophet  is  the  instra- 


804  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xui.  11—34. 

ment  of  a  murder  (cf.  John  viii.  44).  "What  shall  be  given  unto  thee,  or  what  shall 
be  done  unto  thee,  thou  false  tongue  ?  "  (Fs.  cxx.  3.)  Let  us  take  care  lest  we  destroy 
with  our  meat  one  for  whom  Christ  died  (Eom.  ziv.  16).    Let  us  remember — 

"  What  guilt,  what  grief  ma;  be  inouired 
By  one  incautiouB,  hasty  word." 

Now  let  ns  turn  to  the  Man  op  God.    Observe — 

1.  The  man  of  God  believes  every  word.  He  was  not  altogether  without  excuse. 
False  prophets  were  not  as  plentiful  as  they  afterwards  became.  He  was  unpre- 
pared for  such  unblushing  deceit.  We  should  probably  have  done  the  same.  Yet 
we  have  had  manifold  warnings  (Matt.  vii.  16 ;  zxiv.  11. ;  Acts  xz.  29  ;  1  John 
iv.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1,  &c.)  We  have  been  taught  that  if  "  an  angel  from  heaven 
preach  any  other  gospel  unto  us,"  it  is  at  our  peril  we  listen  (Gal.  L  8).  We  have 
been  reminded  that  "  Satan  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light"  (2  Cor. 
xi.  14). 

2.  The  mam,  of  God  is  deceived  hy  Ues.  It  is  a  favourite  device  of  the  enemy. 
He  is  the  "  father  of  lies  "  (John  viii.  44).  It  was  thus  he  deceived  our  first  parents. 
That  weapon  has  answered  so  well  that  he  phes  it  again  and  again  (cf.  2  Cor.  iv.  4 ; 
2  Thess.  ii.  11). 

3.  The  man  of  God  goes  hack  to  Bethel.  This  faithful  and  courageous  servant, 
who  had  defied  the  king,  who  had  refused  his  dainties  and  rewards,  &c.,  does  not 
endure  to  the  end.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standetb,"  &o.  "  Whosoever  shall 
keep  the  whole  law  and  offend  in  one  point  he  is  guilty  of  all,"  because  he  is  guilty 
of  disobedience.  "  Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought."  The  commands  of  God 
must  be  kept  in  their  entirety. 

4.  The  man  of  God  is  denounced  by  the  prophet.  Those  who  lead  ns  into  sin 
are  the  first  to  tax  us  with  it  afterwards.  The  deceiver  turns  upon  his  victim.  Wo 
get  scant  comfort  from  companions  in  sin.  "What  is  that  to  us?  See  thou  to 
that"  (Matt,  xxvii.  4). 

6.  The  mam  of  God  hears  his  doom  in  silence.  "He  was  speechless."  "  I  be- 
came dtmib  and  opened  not  my  mouth,  for  it  was  thy  doing."  "  Being  convicted 
by  their  own  conscience  "  (John  viii.  9). 

6.  The  ma/n  of  God  dies  without  mercy.  Though  a  prophet,  the  teeth  of  an  evil 
beast  avenge  his  disobedience.  Judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  17). 
The  teacher  shall  receive  the  greater  condemnation  (James  iii.  1).  "  Many  stripes  " 
are  for  those  who  knew  and  did  not.    "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 

7.  Yet  his  corpse  is  net  mangled  or  dishonoured.  It  was  partly  for  our  admoni- 
tion that  he  died.  He  was  ordained  to  be  a  sign  to  that  generation.  Therefore, 
though  deceived,  he  was  not  forsaken.  The  lion  and  the  ass  keep  watch  over  his 
remains.  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints."  "A  bone 
of  him  shall  not  be  broken."  "Let  no  man  move  his  bones  "  (2  Kings  xziii.  18). 
His  honourable  fimeral  (cf.  Isa.  Hii.  9 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  60)  and  the  respect  subse- 
quently paid  him  show  that  he  was  no  castaway. 

And  now  that  we  have  considered  the  prophet  of  Bethel  and  the  prophet  of 
Judah  separated  by  deceit  and  death,  let  us  see  them  for  a  moment  reunited. 

1.  In  their  testimony.  For  to  the  witness  of  the  man  of  God  against  the  altar 
of  Bethel  was  added  the  unwilling,  and  therefore  powerful,  vidtness  of  the  old  pro- 
phet (ver.  32).  Jeroboam  has  gained  nothing  by  the  death  of  the  man  who  had 
denounced  him  and  his  rites.  Though  dead,  he  speaks,  and  speaks  as  he  could 
never  have  done  in  life.  And  now  "one  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet  of  their 
own,"  has  been  constrained  to  echo  and  enforce  his  testimony.  The  king  has  now 
the  testimony  of  two  unimpeachable  witnesses  against  his  impious  proceedings. 

2.  In  their  gra/ve.  "  Lay  my  bones  beside  his  bones."  Like  Balaam,  this  old 
prophet  would  "  die  the  death  of  the  righteous."  "  Gather  not  my  soul  with  sin-, 
ners "  (Psa.  xxvi.  9)  is  his  cry.  •'  Sit  anima  mea  cum  illo."  He  vriU  take  his 
chance  with  the  man  of  God  rather  than  with  the  king.  "  I  had  rather  be,"  says 
one,  "  with  Origen  wherever  he  is  than  with  Justinian  and  Theodora  wherever  they 
are."    "  In  death  they  were  not  divided." 


OH.  XIII.  11—84.]  TKE  FIRST  BOOK  Oi'  KINGS.  805 

_  But  how  different  their  lot  in  life.  The  deceived  dies ;  the  deoeiver  lives.  The 
lion  which  slew  the  comparatively  innocent  man  of  God  would  not  touch  the  lying 
prophet,  Though  old,  he  is  spared  to  grow  older,  while  the  other's  eon  went  down 
at  noon.  What  an  iUnstration  this  of  the  strange  confusion  of  this  present  life 
(c£  Pes.  Iziz.,  Ixxiii.,  &o.)  ;  what  a  proof  of  a  life  to  come,  where  each  shall  receive 
his  just  recompense  of  reward !  To  the  Jew,  suckled  in  a  creed  of  temporal  rewards 
&e.,  this  history  would  present  some  anxious  problems,  all  of  which  are  dear  sinco 
our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  "  brought  life  and  immortality  to  lighip" 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS, 

Vers.  11 — 19.— The  Old  Serpent  again.  As  the  ways  of  the  serpent  are  tortnons 
■o  are  those  of  Satan.  If  he  cannot  effect  his  purposes  by  moving  in  one  direction 
he  will  move  in  another,  and  thus  by  crooked  ways  he  advances  (Isa.  zxvii.  1 ;  Psa. 
oxxv.  5).  He  had  already  tempted  the  man  of  God  by  means  of  the  schismatic 
king,  and  failed ;  his  next  work  is  to  see  what  influence  an  old  prophet  may  have 
upon  him.  So  versatile  are  his  devices  that  it  is  our  wisdom  to  be  ever  on  the 
alert.  Observe  the  adroitness  with  which  he  lays  his  plans.  His  astuteness  is 
seen — 

L  In  CHOOSiNa  his  instbuhents.  These  were — 1.  "  The  sons  of  tlie  old  prophet." 
(1)  They  were  near  the  altar.  Whether  by  the  contrivance  of  Satan,  or  that, 
finding  them  there,  he  made  them  his  tools,  is  not  revealed.  Or  whether  they  were 
there  ont  of  curiosity,  or  sympathy  with  the  apostasy,  is  not  revealed.  But  they 
were  there — on  the  devil's  ground.  We  must  keep  from  that  if  we  would  escape 
miscbie£  (2)  They  were  witnesses  of  the  words  and  works  of  God.  So,  might  have 
been  rebuked  for  sympathy  with  evU  and  admonished  to  separate  themselves  from 
11  They  also  saw  the  way  the  man  of  God  took  in  returning  to  Judah.  (3)  They 
lost  no  time  in  reporting  to  their  father,  urged,  unconsciously  to  themselves,  by 
Satan.  We  cannot  always  tell  when  we  are  prompted  by  the  devil,  or  when  he  uses 
for  his  purposes  our  natural  promptings.  We  should  pray  God  to  spare  us  the 
humiliation  of  serving  Satan's  purposes.  2.  The  old  prophet  Jiimselfi  (1)  He  was 
an  "  old  "  prophet,  or  had  been  a  prophet  in  the  old  time  before  the  apostasy  of 
Jeroboam.  Probably  he  had  backslidden  fi-om  God ;  for,  though  he  did  not  appear 
at  Bethel,  he  allowed  his  sons  to  be  there.  Had  he  not  lost  his  old  fire  would  he 
not  have  lifted  his  voice  against  the  national  sin  ?  Backsliders  from  God  become 
the  devil's  dupes.     (2)  The  energy  of  Satan  is  seen  in  the  promptness  of  this  old 

Prophet's  action.  He  quickly  got  information.  He  lost  no  time  in  the  pursuit, 
'he  sluggishness  of  age  was  shaken  off  under  the  excitement  of  the  devil's  spur. 
(8)  But  what  was  the  old  man's  motive  ?  Probably  the  desire  to  display  that  hospi- 
tality which  the  Easterns  cultivated  so  carefully,  mingled  with  a  curiosity  to  know 
more  abont  the  wonders  the  man  of  God  was  conxmissioned  to  discover.  But 
Satan's  motive  was  very  different.  Beware  that  your  motives  become  not  subser- 
vient  to  those  of  the  devil.     Let  your  motives  be  pure  and  godly. 

II.  In  usino  theu.  1.  See  the  stratagem  in  Eden,  repeated.  (1)  Had  Satan 
tempted  Eve  in  his  proper  character  he  would  have  failed  (1  Tim.  xi.  14).  So  the 
man  of  God  was  proof  against  the  solicitations  of  the  king  whom  he  discerned  to  be 
the  "man  of  sin  "of  his  time.  (2)  Satan  therefore  concealed  himselfuBder  the  sleek, 
Instrons  form  of  a  serpent,  and  deceived  our  mother.  Then  transferring  himself  to 
the  fallen  Eve,  under  her  lovely  disguise,  overcame  Adam.  So,  enshrining  himself 
in  the  old  prophet,  he  vanquished  the  "man  of  God."  Beware  of  Satan's  disguises. 
Especially  beware  of  the  religions  devil.  (3)  The  offence,  again,  was  eating.  In 
Eden  it  was  eating  the  forbidden  thing.  Note :  The  place  may  be  right,  the  thing 
wrong.  At  Bethel  it  was  eating  in  the  forbidden  place.  Note  :  The  thing  may  be 
light,  the  place  wrong.  2.  See  the  spirit  of  the  devil.  (1)  The  spirit  of  cruelty. 
The  old  prophet  knew  that  the  man  of  God  was  forbidden  to  eat  in  Bethel,  yet 
he  importuned  Tnim  to  eat  bread  with  hmi.  Cruelty  is  no  less  real  because 
sheathed  in  professions  of  kindness.  Over-indulgent  parents  are  their  children's 
eraelest  enemies.   (2)  The  spirit  of  treachery.    The  man  of  God  had  refused  a  king : 

1  EINOS.  X 


806  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oa  xra.  11—34, 

will  he  withstand  a  prophet  ?  (Jer.  xxiii.  18 ;  Amos  ii.  11.)  (3)  The  spirit  of  lies 
{yet.  18).  Now  is  Satan  transformed  into  an  angel  of  hght.  Could  the  old  jjrophet 
nave  been  himself  thus  deceived  ?  He  deceived  the  man  of  God.  Beware  of  the 
devil  of  hospitality.  Perhaps  the  man  of  God  the  more  readily  yielded  being  weak 
with  fatigue  and  fasting  (compare  Diatt.  It.  2-^:).  No  example,  save  that  of  Jesus 
may  be  followed  impUcitiy. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — The  Voice  of  Beproof.  No  man  of  God  will  deliberately  sin 
against  God  (.Tohn  viii.  44  ;  1  John  iii.  9  ;  v.  18).  But  the  good  are  liable  to  be 
surprised  or  deceived  into  liansgression  (James  i.  13 — 15 ;  1  John  ii.  1, 2).  We  must 
be  ever  on  our  guard  against  the  "wiles"  and  "depths"  of  Satan.  For  lack  of 
vigilance  this  man  of  God  fell  into  the  snare,  and  we  see  here  how  he  was 
reproved. 

I.  He  sinned  against  the  wobd.  of  Jehovah.  1,  Thit  is  evident  upon  the  face 
of  the  narrative,  ^i)  He  came  out  of  Jud  ah  "by  the  word  of  Jehovah."  Cried 
against  the  altar  at  Bethel  "  in  the  word  of  Jehovah."  Gave  the  sign  upon  the  altar 
"  by  the  word  of  Jehovah"  (vers.  1,  2,  5).  (2)  He  professed  that  his  instructions 
not  to  eat  in  Mount  Ephraim,  but  to  return  to  Judah  by  another  road,  were  by  the 
same  word.  Professed  to  the  king  (ver.  9) ;  to  the  old  prophet  (ver.  17).  2.  But 
could  not  Ood  revolce  or  modify  His  word  f  (1)  Certainly.  He  did  so  to  Abraham 
(see  Gen.  xzii.  11,  12).  What  had  been  might  be.  (2)  Upon  the  recognition  of 
this_  principle  the  old  prophet  proceeded,  and  so  far  was  the  man  of  God  from  dis- 
puting it  that  he  was  taken  in  the  snare  (vers.  18, 19).  3.  Wherein,  then,  was  his 
fa/ult  f  The  revocation  here  came  not  with  the  evidence  of  the  command.  The 
command  was  immediately  from  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  21).  The  revoca- 
tion came  immediately  from  the  mouth  of  the  old  prophet.  Note :  We  are  respon- 
Bible  for  the  proper  use  of  reason  in  religion.  (2)  Faith  in  the  word  of  the  Lord 
must  be  implicit.  The  Bible  is  that  word.  The  evidence  that  it  is  snch  is  con- 
clusive— external,  internal,  collateral.  (8)  Other  voices  must  not  be  allowed  to 
replace  this.  The  voice  of  "  nature,"  of  "  reason,"  of  the  "  Church."  We  listen 
impUoitly  to  these  at  our  peril. 

II.  Bt  the  wobd  op  Jehotah  he  was  bepsoved.  1.  This  came  to  the  man 
of  Ood  himself.  (1)  The  reading  of  the  text  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  it 
came  to  the  old  prophet.  The  words  la^BTI  "ICS  here  rendered,  "  who  brought  him 
back,"  are  in  verse  23  construed,  "  whom  he  had  brought  back,"  and  might  be 
so  construed  here.  Josephus  asserts  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  here  came  to  the 
man  of  God ;  and  so  does  the  Arabic.  In  the  26th  verse  we  are  assured  by  the 
old  prophet  that  this  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  the  man  of  God.  (2)  According  to 
this  view  it  was  "  Jehovah  "  who  "  cried  nnto  the  man  of  God,"  viz.,  from  heaven 
as  He  called  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  11).  So,  coming  to  himself,  as  the  command 
did  in  the  first  instance,  he  had  not  to  weigh  contradictory  testimonies  from  the 
old  prophet,  but  was  left  without  a  doubt.  God  brings  home  sin  with  demonstra- 
tion. 2.  It  came  to  him  in  the  ripeness  of  his  transgression.  (1)  "  As  they  sat  at 
table."  Conscience  reproves  the  sinner  in  the  very  act  of  sin.  This  is  the  voice 
of  God  in  the  soul.  But  here  was  an  external  voice  to  which  the  internal 
voice  responded.  Conscience  responds  to  the  word  or  law  of  God.  (2)  It 
came  to  all  who  were  at  the  table.  To  the  old  prophet  as  well  as  to  the 
man  of  God.  His  conscience,  too,  would  respond  to  the  voice  of  God.  To  the 
sons  of  the  old  prophet,  if  present,  there  would  also  be  a  voice.  What  will 
our  emotions  be  when  in  the  day  of  judgment  all  the  mischief  to  which  we  have 
been  accessories  will  be  discovered  ?  8.  It  was  terribly  severe.  (1)  He  is  doomed 
to  die.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  We  all  die  in  conse- 
quence of  sin  entailed.  But  here  is  an  actual  "  sin  unto  death "  (1  John  v.  16). 
(2)  He  is  doomed  to  die  abroad.  The  mention  of  his  carcase  not  coming  to  the 
sepulchre  of  his  fathers  implied  a  violent  death  away  from  home.  Possibly  the 
manner  of  his  death  may  have  been  made  known  to  him  (compare  ver.  26 ;  ch.  xx. 
86).  The  word  of  God  is  not  violated  with  impunity.  What  will  be  the  ease  of 
those  who  seldom  take  pains  to  consult  it  ? — J.  A.  M. 


OH.  XIII.  11—84.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK, OF  KINGS.  807 

Vers.  28 — 29. — Ths  Visitation  of  Judgment.  The  man  of  God  from  Judah, 
deceived  by  the  old  prophet  of  Ephraim,  ate  and  drank  in  that  land  of  apostasy. 
This  was  a  disobedience  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  a  complicity  in  the  abomina- 
tions he  was  sent  to  denounce.  For  this  he  heard  the  Divine  voice  of  reproof, 
•nd  went  torth  to  suffer  accordingly,  as  detailed  in  the  text. 

L  Thb  sequei.  verified  a  bemabeablb  prophect.  1.  Review  the  prophecy. 
(1)  Ver.  22.  He  was,  therefore,  doomed  to  die  away  from  his  home ;  and, 
presumably,  by  violence.  (2)  With  what  solemn  feelings  would  he  see  his  ass 
saddled  with  the  prospect  of  such  a  journey  I  Ought  not  our  feelings  also  to 
be  solemn  to  whom  dealjh  is  certain,  though  the  moment  and  the  manner  be 
unknown  ?  2.  Note  the  fulfilment.  (1)  Vers.  29,  30.  He  was  met  and  slain  by 
a  Uon,  and  his  corpse  was  cast  in  the  way.  There  was  a  spectacle  for  all 
passengers  I  What  an  evil  thing  is  sin  I  (2)  Thus  suffered  for  disobedience  a 
*'  man  of  God.'-'  The  sanctity  of  his  profession  did  not  protect  him.  from  sin, 
neither  can  it  protect  him  from  punishment.  So  neither,  the  dignity  of  his  office. 
So  neither,  the  service  he  had  rendered  to  God  (see  1  Cor.  iz,  27 ;  2  Cor.  xiii. 
6,  6).  (8)  Judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God,  but  falls  more  terribly  upon  the 
wicked  (1  Peter  iv.  17,  18).  They  may  well  tremble  before  "  Him  that  can  destroy 
both  soul  and  body  in  helL"  (4)  The  man  of  God  came  not  to  the  sepulchre  of  his 
fathers,  yet  was  mourned  over  by  one  who  had  been  a  snare  to  him,  but  to  whom 
he  had  been  made  a  blessing.    There  are  strange  reciprocities. 

II.  The  ruMTLMENT  was  attended  by  remarkable  sions.  1.  Miracle  eon- 
trolled  th?  instincts  of  animala.  (1)  The  lion  was  moved,  not  by  thirst  for  prey, 
but  by  revenge.  But  this  revenge  was  the  Lord's.  The  animal  had  suffered 
nothing  from  the  hand  of  the  man  of  God.  (2)  Instinct  was  otherwise  controlled. 
For  here  were  the  Hon  and  the  ass  together  watching  the  carcase.  The  ass  did 
not  fly  from  the  face  of  the  lion ;  neither  did  the  Uon  molest  the  ass.  (3)  Nor  was 
this  strange  witnessing  the  accident  of  a  momentary  surprise.  It  was  maintained 
while  certain  passengers,  who  first  observed  it,  journeyed  to  the  city  and  reported  it ; 
and  untU,  in  consequence,  the  old  prophet,  divining  its  import,  came  upon  the 
scene.  2.  Here  let  «s  admire  the  Divine  resources.  (1)  He  that  moved  upon  the 
instincts  of  the  lion  and  the  ass  was  the  same  who  made  the  representatives  of  the 
animal  creation  defile  before  Adam  to  receive  their  names;  who  brought  them 
into  the  ark  of  Noah ;  restrained  the  lions  from  injuring  Daniel ;  the  same  who,  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh,  dwelt  among  the  wild  beasts  in  the  wUdemess,  and  who  con- 
trolled the  movements  of  fishes  in  the  depths  (Mark  i.  13 ;  Matt.  xvii.  27 ;  Luke  v. 
4 — 7).  This  power  over  the  instincts  of  the  lion  and  ass  is  but  a  sample  of  cor- 
responding dominion  over  every  department  of  nature.  And  the  resources  of  this 
power  are  the  resources  of  justice  and  mercy.  8.  But  what  is  the  mystical  meam- 
i/ng  of  the  signs  f  (1)  The  death  of  the  man  of  God  was  judgment  for  his  coin- 
plicity  with  the  sin  of  Ephraim  in  eating  and  drinking  in  that  polluted  place.  So  it 
was  the  last  of  the  series  of  warnings  to  Jeroboam  before  the  abandonment  of  his 
house  to  destruction  (see  ver.  83).  (2)  The  lion  that  inflicted  the  penalty  was  the 
symbol  of  Judah,  of  its  royalty,  and  especially  of  Shiloh,  in  whom  that  royalty  cul- 
minated. Hence  Messiah  is  described  as  the  "  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  "  (see 
Gen.  xlix.  9, 10  ;  Bev.  v.  6).  Of  this  glorious  Lion,  Josiah  was  to  be  a  type.  Messiah 
visits  the  sin  of  Ephraim  in  the  apostasy  of  the  son  of  Nebat,  and  the  sin  of  Judah 
for  complicity  in  its  abominations  (see  Hosea  v.  14).  &o  in  like  manner  will  He 
strike  down  the  forms  of  apostasy  extant  in  these  latter  times.  (3)  The  ass  was 
the  symbol  of  Issaehar  (Gen.  xlix.  14, 16) ;  but  not  of  Judah  ;  for  it  is  difficult  to 
justify  the  translation  in  verse  11,  which  is  Better  rendered,  "  and  him  shall 
the  peoples  obey;  binding  up  the  shoots  of  the  vine,  and  the  branches  of  the 
choice  vine."  (4)  As  the  ass  stood  as  a  witness  •  of  this  judgment  of  God  upon 
the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  and  then  carried  the  carcase  away  to  be  buried,  so  "  Baasha, 
the  son  of  Ahijah,  of  the  house  of  Issacha/r,^'  destroyed  and  put  out  of  sight 
the  house  of  Jeroboam,  fulfilling  the  prophecy  of  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  (ch.  xv. 
27 — 30).  How  manifold  is  the  wisdom  of  God  I  How  deep  are  His  judgments  t — 
J.  A  M, 


800  THE  FIRST-  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [lu.  xm.  11—8^ 

Vers.  80 — 84. — The  Law  of  Extremity.  God  has  made  us  free  to  choose  or 
refuse  good  or  eviL  Will  cannot  be  coerced  and  yet  be  free  ;  coercion  here,  there- 
fore, would  be  destruction.  But  while  God  does  not  compel  us  to  choose  the 
right,  He  induces  by  gracious  promises,  and  admonishes  by  alternative  penalties, 
StiU  we  remain  free  to  elect  the  good  with  its  blessings,  or  the  evil  with  its  entail- 
ments of  misery.  But  so  loth  is  He  to  see  His  creatures  wretched  that  He  has 
opened  a  way  of  repentance  and  reformation  for  sinners.  In  this,  mercy  is  carried 
to  the  extreme  limit  which  consists  with  the  welfare  of  the  universe,  which  must 
ever  depend  upon  the  order  and  harmony  of  righteousness.  At  this  point  there 
comes  in  the  law  of  extremity  ;  and  the  sinner  passing  it  has  to  encounter  "judg- 
ment without  mercy." 

I.  The  old  peophet  sought  mekcy.  1.  Hia  conduct  expressed  repentance.  (1} 
He  went  out  for  the  corpse  of  the  man  of  God,  and  brought  it  to  his  home,  dis- 
cerning the  hand  of  God  in  the  judgment.  Looking  now  upon  that  ghastly  form  of 
death  he  saw  his  own  sad  work.  He  had  caused  a  mischief  he  could  not  now 
repair.  How  inadequately  men  estimate  beforehand  the  consequences  of  their 
wrong-doing  1  (2)  He  decently  interred  the  body  in  his  own  grave.  This  was  the 
only  reparation  now  within  his  power  for  the  injury  be  had  caused.  But  how 
inadequate  I  What  a  bitter  thouglit !  (3)  He  "  mourned  over  him,  saying,  Alas, 
my  brother  I "  This  exclamation  ('OX  'in)  was  the  refrain  of  a  lamentation  (see 
Jer.  xxii.  18).  Ward,  in  his  "  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Hindoos,"  gives  two 
specimens  of  such  lamentations.  There  are  frequent  allusions  to  these  in  the  prophets 
(see  Jer.  xxx.  7 ;  Ezek.  vi.  11 ;  Joel  L  15  ;  Amos  v.  16, 17  j  Bev.  xvilL  10 — 19).  With 
the  old  prophet  this  was  more  than  a  conventional  mourning.  He  mourned  for  him- 
self before  God.  2.  His  conduct  also  expressed  faith.  (1)  He  commanded  his  sons, 
when  be  died,  to  lay  his  bones  beside  those  of  the  man  of  God.  He  believed  him 
to  be  a  man  of  God  in  reaUty,  notwithstanding  this  single  act  of  disobedience  for 
which  he  had  suffered  death.  There  are  "  sins  unto  death,"  viz.,  of  the  body, 
which  do  not  involve  the  final  death  of  the  soul.  He  desired  to  be  with  him  in 
the  resurrection.  The  concern  of  the  ancients  respecting  the  disposition  of  their 
bodies  after  death  arose  out  of  their  faith  in  a  resurrection  (see  Gen.  1.  24—26; 
Ezod.  xiii.  19 ;  Heb.  zi.  22 ;  see  also  2  Kings  xiiL  20,  21).  (2)  He  gave  as  the 
reason  of  his  command  the  faith  he  had  in  the  certainty  of  the  prophecy  of  the 
man  of  God  (ver.  82).  And  in  further  testimony  of  his  faith  put  an  inscription  on 
the  tomb  (see  2  Kings. xxiii.  17).  He  desired  to  be  associated  in  death  with  the 
denouncers  of  Jeroboam's  sin  rather  than  with  those  involved  in  that  sin.  Nor 
wonldhe  be  identified  in  the  judgment  with  perverters  of  true'worship.  (8)  By 
this  faith  his  bones  were  spared  when  those  of  the  priests  and  votaries  of  Jeroboam 
were  burnt  upon  the  altar  by  Josiah  (see  2  Kings  xxiii.  19).  By  a  corresponding 
faith  shall  we  be  saved  from  the  judgments  of  the  more  illustrious  Sou  of  David 
upon  the  man  of  sin  of  the  mystical  Babylon. 

II.  But  Jeroboam  encountered  the  bxtebmitt  of  wrath.  1.  He  disrenardeet 
the  goodness  of  Ood.  (1)  The  conditional  promises  by  the  hand  of  Ahijah  were 
Tery  gracious  fch.  xi.  87—39).  What  a  magnificent  opportunity  he  had  1  But  he 
missed  it.  (2)  What  opportimities  have  we  wasted  ?  Who  can  estimate  theur 
value  ?  No  opportunity  of  glorifying  God  should  escape  us.  2.  He  disrega/rded 
his  remonstrances,  (1)  The  judgments  upon  Behoboam  were  lessons  to  him. 
The  same  God  who  in  them  visited  the  sins  of  Solomon  had  also  set  him  upon  the 
throne  of  Israel,  and  would  deal  with  him  upon  the  same  principles.  But  he 
siimed  against  this  admonition.  (2)  Then  came  the  warning  from  the  man  of  God 
•t  the  altar.  That  God  was  in  this  warning  was  left  without  doubt  by  the  signs 
(vers.  8 — 6) .  These  staggered  him  for  a  moment ;  but  there  was  no  true  repentance. 
(8)  Then  came  the  final  warning  in  the  death  of  the  man  of  God  for  being  impli- 
cated, though  by  a  deception,  in  his  sin.  This  also  was  shown  to  be  from  God  by 
miraculous  signs  (ver.  64).  But  this  also  he  disregarded  (ver.  83).  (4)  Now, 
therefore,  the  law  of  extremity  must  take  its  course.  He  and  his  house  are  devoted 
to  destruction  (ver.  84).  This  last  warning  was  written  in  letters  of  blood.  God 
gave  it  to  Him  at  the  expense  of  His  own  servant.    And  He  warns  us  at  the  expense 


OH.  xm.  11—84.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KING3.  809 

of  His  own  Son  ;  and  if  we  finally  reject  Christ  the  extremity  of  mercy  is  spumed, 
and  we  must  encounter  the  extremity  of  wrath. — J.  A.  M. 

Yen.  18,  19. — Lead  ««  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  u$  from  evil.  The 
miraculous  element  in  -this  chapter  is,  with  many,  a  reason  for  its  rejection.  The 
■ame  reason  might  lead  us  to  reject  the  story  of  our  Saviour's  life,  and  deny  the 
possibility  of  supernatural  revelation.  If  miracles  and  signs  ever  occurred  they 
would  be  likely  to  do  so  at  the  time  described  in  this  chapter.  Idolatrous  practices 
were  being  set  up.  Many  who  had  been  worshippers  of  Jehovah  had  been  seduced. 
Worldly  policy,  social  influences,  moral  enervation,  following  on  the  extravagant 
prosperity  of  Solomon's  reign,  and  an  inherent  tendency  to  sensuous  worship,  were 
all  combining  to  induce  the  people  to  put  away  aU  belief  in  Jehovah.  Then,  if 
ever.  He  would  fitly  reveal  His  power,  as  He  did  at  the  later  crisis  when  Elijah 
faced  the  false  prophets  on  Carmel.  The  effect  on  Jeroboam  was  nil,  but  the 
godless  had  warning,  and  the  secret  worshippers  of  the  Lord  still  left  in  Israel  were 
encouraged.  The  stoiy  of  the  temptation  and  fall  of  this  prophet,  who  at  least 
delivered  one  message  with  fidelity,  is  tragic  and  suggestive.  After  reading  it  we 
have  left  with  us  the  following  thoughts : 

I.  Teat  a  strong  temptation  had  been  besisted.  Jeroboam  had  failed  to 
reaoh  the  prophet  by  violence,  but  resolved  to  overcome  him  by  craft.  Terrible  as 
had  been  the  effect  of  Jehovah's  wrath  (ver,  4),  the  king's  conscience  was  not 
stirred.  His  heart  was  not  touched,  though  his  arm  was  withered.  Hence  he  did 
not  ask  the  prophet  to  pray  that  his  sin  might  lae  forgiven,  but  that  his  arm  might 
be  restored.  Immediately  after,  with  a  show  of  civihty  and  gratitude,  he  invited 
him  to  his  house.  Clearly  this  was  not  in  order  to  honour  the  prophet,  bat  to 
weaken  the  effect  of  his  message.  The  people  had  heard  it,  and  had  been  moved 
by  it ;  but  if  they  saw  the  messenger  gomg  down  in  seeming  friendship  with  their 
long,  this  would  diminish,  perhaps  destroy,  the  effect  of  his  words.  Lest  this 
should  happen,  the  prophet  had  been  forbidden  to  enter  any  house.  As  the  repre- 
sentative of  Jehovah,  he  was  to  show  that  God  would  not  dwell  amongst  the  people. 
Firmly,  therefore,  he  rejected  the  invitation  of  the  king,  saying,  "  If  thou  wilt 
give  me  half  thine  house,  I  will  not  go  in  with  thee,  neither  will  I  eat  bread  nor 
drink  water  in  this  place,"  ko.  The  temptation  was  resisted ;  the  victory  won. 
Give  illustrations  of  similar  moral  conquests.  A  young  man  tempted  to  impurity 
says,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against  God?  "  Another  sits 
silent  among  the  scorners,  and  cannot  be  induced  to  join  or  smile  with  them,  &o. 
There  are  times  when  we  are  specially  able  to  resist :  e.g.,  when  we  come  fresh  from 
the  influences  of  a  Christian  home ;  when  we  arefeeUng  the  impression  of  an  earnest 
sermon  ;  when  we  are  made  serious  by  the  death  of  a  dear  friend.  Under  such 
influences  many  obey  the  command,  "  Besist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you  I  " 

II.  That  a  new  temptation  was  successful.  (Bead  vers.  11 — 19.)  (1)  What 
were  the  motives  of  this  old  prophet  of  Bethel  f  Probably  he  was  not  a  false 
prophet,  though  these  existed  ;  as  tares  amongst  the  wheat,  as  Judas  among  the 
apostles.  Nor  must  he  be  charged  with  the  malignant  wish  to  bring  this  man  to 
las  death.  Picture  him  as  one  -v^ho  knew  his  Lord's  will,  but  did  it  not.  He  had 
been  silent,  instead  of  protesting  against  the  impiety  of  Jeroboam,  and  now  felt 
rebuked  by  this  daring  stranger.  To  entertain  him  might  reinstate  him  in  his  own 
good  opinion,  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  people.  Hence  he  gives  the  invitation,  and 
when  it  is  resisted  another  sign  of  his  moral  decadence  appears,  and  he  tells  a  he 
about  receiving  a  message  from  the  Lord.  (2)  How  ecume  this  temptation  to 
tucceed  }  Not  improbably  there  was  some  self-complacency  in  one  who  had  just 
resisted  the  king  successfiuy,  and  a  sense  of  false  security  which  is  indicated  by  his 
resting  under  the  terebinth  instead  of  pressing  on  homewards.  Observe  here — 1. 
The  conquest  of  one  evil  m,ay  only  bring  on  the  assault  of  another  ;  _  e.g.,  when 
sensuality  is  repressed,  scepticism  may  arise  and  prevail.  We  sometimes  forget 
tljat  it  is  not  a  momentary  but  a  life-long  coDflict  we  have  to  wage.  If  the 
Egyptians  are  drowned,  the  Amorites  and  Canaanites  await  us.  A  gross  sin  faUg 
to  conquer  us,  but  a  subtle  sin  may  lead  us  to  bitter  bondage.    We  can  nerer  say 


tlO  THE  FIEST  J300K  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xui.  11—84. 

to  onr  soul,  "  Take  tliine  ease ;  "  but  always,  and  everywhere,  must  listen  to  the 
command,  "  Watch,  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation."  2.  Limgering  nea/r 
eceneg  of  temptation  may  imperil  us  fatally.  Had  the  prophet  not  rested  he  might 
not  have  been  overtaken,  but  would  have  crossed  the  border  line  of  the  two  king- 
doms. As  the  moth  flutters  round  the  candle,  so  do  some  hover  about  sin.  They 
read  of  vices  which  they  think  they  would  never  commit,  and  choose  associates 
unlike  what  they  mean  to  be,  and  yet  dare  to  pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation." 
He  who  "  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,"  as  one  half  inclined  to  join  them,  may  at 
last  "  sit  in  the  seat  of  the  scorners,"  as  one  who  has  united  with  them.  "  Avoid 
it,  pass  not  by  it,"  &c.  (Prov.  iii.  16). 

III.  That  a  trivial  act  of  disobedience  was  a  oreat  bin.  It  seemed  a 
small  offence  to  go  home  with  a  brother  prophet ;  but  observe  that  he  was  in  no 
doubt  as  to  the  wiU  of  God.  He  was  not  really  deceived  by  that  lie  about  the 
angel's  message.  He  knew  that  he  was  forbidden  to  enter  any  house,  and  that  the 
reason  for  that  inhibition  was  weighty  :  he  knew  further  that  God  would  not 
contradict  Himself,  or  alter  His  command,  yet  his  sensuous  wish  for  food  and  rest 
prevailed.  An  act  may  seem  trifling,  but  the  principle  involved  in  it  may  be 
momentous.  So  it  was  in  Eden.  To  eat  the  finiit,  or  to  leave  it  untouched,  might 
appear  a  question  of  small  consideration ;  but  man's  decision  of  it,  "  brought  death 
into  the  world,  and  all  our  woe."  It  is  in  trifles  that  we  test  the  willingness  ot  our 
children's  obedience.  If  they  refuse  to  do  an  unimportant  act  because  to  do  it 
would  be  to  disobey  ns,  we  are  more  satisfied  with  tiieir  sensitive  loyalty  than  if 
the  act  were  notoriously  evil.  To  sin  for  the  sake  of  a  passing  pleasure  is  morally 
worse  than  to  sin  for  the  sake  of  a  kingdom,  for  the  temptation  is  less. 

IV.  That  a  traoic  punishment  was  inflicted.  (Bead  vers.  23 — 26.)  Note  the 
points  which  marked  out  this  event  as  the  result  of  God's  displeasure,  and  not  of 
accident ;  e.g.,  that  Jt  was  foretold  (vers.  21,  22),  and  that  the  Hon  did  not  kill  the 
ass,  nor  eat  the  dead  body.  Show  how  Jesus  Christ  used  the  judgments  of  God,  as 
recorded  in  the  Old  Testament,  for  purposes  of  moral  and  religious  instruction.  Sin 
merits  punishment.  "  We  are  sure  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth, 
against  them  which  commit  such  things,"  &o.  (Eom.  ii.  2 — 5).  In  the  consciousness 
of  frequent  disobedience  let  the  prayer  arise,  "  God  be  merciful  to  m«  a  sinner." 
— A.  B. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — The  Disobedient  Prophet.  The  "  old  prophet,"  though  here  em- 
ployed as  the  medium  of  a  Divine  message,  had  acted  falsely  towards  his  "  brother  " 
("  he  lied  unto  him,"  ver.  18).  The  fact  that  he  was  content  to  remain  in  the  land 
under  the  rule  ot  Jeroboam  was  against  him.  As  the  Levites  had  been  supplanted  by 
a  base  priesthood,  so  the  prophets  in  Israel  wonld  seem  to  be  a  degenerate  race.  It 
must  have  aggravated  the  bitterness  of  the  remorse  the  "  man  of  Qod  "  felt,  that 
the  prophet  who  had  dealt  so  treacherously  with  him  should  be  commissioned  to 
pronounce  the  Divine  sentence  on  his  transgression.  His  case  seema  altogether  a 
hard  one.     How  shall  we  explain  it  ?    What  lessons  does  it  teach  ? 

I.  The  inflexibilitt  of  a  Divine  command.  The  command  had  been  given 
clearly  and  positively  (ver.  9),  and  He  who  gave  it  had  in  no  way  revoked  it.  The 
reasons  for  it  remained  as  they  were.  The  man  of  God  greatly  erred  in  giving 
more  weight  to  the  report  of  an  angelic  message  delivered  to  another  than  to  the 
clearvoice  of  "the  word  of  the  Lord"  in  his  own  soul.  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he 
should  he ;  nor  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent "  (Num.  xxiii.  19),  and  His  com- 
mands can  be  abrogated  only  by  others  that  are  equally  explicit  and  authoritative. 

II.  The  danoeb  of  parleying  with  the  tempter.  The  integrity  of  the  man  of 
God  was  imperilled  as  soon  as  he  began  to  listen  to  the  persuasion  that  would  lead 
him  astray.  The  first  deUverances  of  conscience  are  generally  right,  and  we  run 
great  moral  risk  when  we  begin  to  question  them.  He  who  had  resisted  the  allure- 
ments of  the  king  yields  to  those  of  the  seeming  prophet.  Moral  evil  is  always 
most  fascinating  when  it  assumes  a  sacred  disguise,  and  the  false  "  prophet "  is  the 
most  plausible  and  dangerous  of  all  tempters. 

HI,  The  auiLT   or  disouedienoe.      "  To  obey  is  better  than  saorifice,"  &o. 


OH.  xin.  11—84.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  811 

(1  Sam.  XV.  22,  23).  The  spirit  of  disobedience  is  the  root  of  all  practical  iniquity. 
"  By  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners"  (Rom.  v.  19).  A  seemingly 
trifling  offence  may  thus,  especially  under  certain  circimistances,  have  an  important 
meaning,  and  entail  fatal  consequences  out  of  aU  proportion  to  its  outward  form. 
It  is  on  this  principle,  that  every  act  of  wilful  wrong  is  a  violation  of  the  spirit  oi 
obedience,  that  St.  James  says,  "  Whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet 
offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  aU"  (James  ii.  10). 

IV.  The  tempokal  penalties  that  follow  the  sin  even  of  good  men.  The 
"  man  of  God  "  may  have  been  at  heart  a  true  prophet,  and  may  have  received  in 
another  world  the  eternal  reward  of  the  true  prophet ;  but  his  transgression  involved 
him  in  a  violent  death,'  and  he  was  denied  the  privilege,  so  much  desired  by  every 
Hebrew,  of  having  his  body  laid  in  the  "  sepulchre  of  his  fathers."  Sin  may  be 
pardoned  and  yet  punished.  The  temporal  penalty  may  be  inflicted  though  Divine 
mercy  cancels  the  eternal.  David's  sin  is  forgiven,  but  his  child  must  die  (2  Sam. 
xii.  13,  14).  Christ  is  "  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,"  and  His  blood  "  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin,"  but  He  promises  us  no  immunity  from  the  ill  effects,  the  shame  and 
loss  and  pain  and  sorrow  in  which  our  sin  may  in  this  world  involve  us. — W. 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  Tempter.  1.  The  Prophet's  sin  and  doom.  Evil  is  never 
wanting  in  emissaries.  It  finds  them  among  the  so-called  followers  of  God  as  well 
as  in  the  world.  This  was — 1.  a  propKet.  The  possession  of  privileges  does  not 
ensure  salvation.  Balaam  took  the  wages  of  unrighteousness.  "  Many  will  say  to 
me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name  ?  "  &c.  Is 
our  own  life  on  a  level  with  the  place  God  has  given  us  ?  If  not,  we  may  be 
among  those  whose  influence  and  suggestions  place  stumbling-blocks  in  the 
path  of  God's  children.  2.  He  dwelt  at  Bethel,  without  testifying  against  its 
sin,  and  unmoved  by  fear  of  God's  judgment.  How  many  who  know  God's  will 
and  have  declaimed  it  to  others  remain  in  Bethel  stiU !  3.  His  instant  resolve.  The 
very  story  of  the  prophet's  obedience  led  him  to  tempt  the  man  of  God.  His  own 
religion  was  not  like  this,  and  this  must  therefore  be  either  hypocrisy  or  delusion. 
Had  the  king's  request  not  been  made  publicly  it  might  have  been  acceded  to. 
There  must  be  a  weak  point  somewhere,  and  he  will  try  to  find  it.  Lower  life  is 
ever  suspicious  of  a  higher,  and  is  anxious  to  prove  that  it  is  not  higher.  The 
prophets  in  Bethel  are  ever  on  the  watch  to  break  the  credit  of  the  men  of  God 
from  Judah.  Is  thine  the  spirit  of  the  learner  or  of  the  scorner?  Does  the  higher 
life  I'adge  thee  and  fill  thee  with  desire  to  press  upward,  or  only  with  angry  sus- 
picion and  desire  to  show  it  is  no  betfer  than  thine  own  ?  -They  who  are  of  the 
wieke.-l  prophet's  spirit  still  do  his  ,work. 

II.  The  fall  of  the  man  of  God,  1.  How  the  tempter  found  him.  He  sat, 
weary  and  faint,  resting  under  the  shadow  of  the  tree.  The  invitation  to  eat  bread 
had  more  power  there  than  before  in  Bethel.  The  tempter  knows  his  opportunity. 
In  times  of  weakness  and  need  we  should  hide  ourselves  in  the  joy  and  strength  of 
God.  2.  The  weapons  he  uses.  When  an  appeal  to  appetite  fiiils,  he  professes  his 
oneness  with  him  and  uses  falsehood.  "  I  am  a  prophet  also  as  thou  art,  and  an 
angel  spake  unto  me,"  &c.  To  eat  bread  in  Bethel  with  a  prophet  did  not  seem 
quite  the  same  thing  as  eating  with  the  idolatrous  king ;  nor  does  fellowship  with 
those  who  profess  to  know  God,  but  yet  remain  in  communion  with  the  world,  seem 
the  same  thing  as  fellowship  with  the  world  itself.  It  is  thus  that  the  testimony  of 
the  Church  against  idolatry  and  iniquity  has  so  largely  ceased.  And  then  there  is 
Scripture  for  every  concession.  "  An  angel  spake  unto  me  .  .  .  but  he  lied  lonto 
him."  A  worldly  Church  ensnares  where  the  world  itself  cannot.  8.  The  fatal 
neglect.  God  was  as  near  to  him  as  He  could  be  to  his  tempter,  and  he  might  have 
inquired  of  Him;  But  in  the  weakness  of  the  flesh  he  desired  to  have  it  so.  There 
is  only  one  preservative  from  spiritual  shipwreck — a  sincere  desire  to  know  what 
the  Lord  saith,  and  a  determination  to  follow  that  only. 

III.  His  DOOM.  (Vers.  20-— 22.)  1.  It  was  uttered  as  he  sat  at  m,eat.  Conviction 
found  him  in  his  sin,  and  the  food  he  had  desired  became  as  wormwood  and  gall  to 
him.   2.  It  came  from  the  lips  of  his  seducer.   We  do  not  rise  in  the  world's  estimft- 


819 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINOa 


[CH.  XIV.  1—20. 


tion  through  oomplianoe  with  its  desires.  Ab  God  used  the  lying  prophet  so  will 
He  use  the  men  of  the  world  for  the  humbling  of  those  who  yield  before  their 
temptations.  3.  The  penalty.  Death  in  the  land  where  he  had  sinned.  His 
carcase,  buried  in  Bethel,  declared  the  truth  his  obedience  should  have  impressed. 
God  will  judge  His  unfaithful  servants.  If  not  glorified  in  their  service,  He  will  be 
glorified  in  their  punishmenti — J.  U. 

Vers.  23—84. — Judgment  and  its  result,  I.  Merot  displayed  ik  the  midst 
OF  JUDGMENT.  The  sin  may  have  been  forgiven  though  the  chastisement  fell. 
1.  His  body  was  preserved  from  dishonour.  The  lion's  ferocity  was  bridled;  the 
prophet's  body  was  neither  eaten  nor  torn;  he  guarded  the  remains  fi-om  the  fowls 
of  the  air  and  the  beasts  of  the  fi.eld.  (1)  Though  God  chastises  His  erring  people, 
He  will  not  utterly  cast  them  away.  (2)  The  fiercest  instruments  of  His  vengeance 
can  go  only  so  far  as  He  permits  them.  2.  The  message  he  had  borne  received 
added  weight  hy  his  punishment.  In  his  humiliation  God  was  exalted.  The 
circumstances  showed  that  the  blow  was  firom  the  hand  of  God,  and  the  question 
was  no  doubt  raised  in  many  a  heart,  if  the  Lord  has  so  punished  His  servant's 
error,  what  will  Israel's  judgment  be  ?  3.  He  still  preached  in  his  grame.  He 
was  buried  near  the  altar,  and  over  his  tomb  was  graven  the  story  of  hia  mission 
and  his  fate  (2  Kings  xxiii.  17). 

n.  The  punishment  op  dnfaithfuinHss.  'When  all  has  been  said  that  can 
be  of  the  attendant  mercy,  the  judgment  stUl  stands  out  in  terribleness.  The 
prophet  still  preached,  but  the  cry  came  up  from  the  dark  pathway  of  death. 
His  place  was  not  among  the  vessels  of  mercy,  but  among  the  vessels  of  wrath.  If 
we  eat  in  idolatrous  Bethel,  even  though  it  be  in  ignorance,  God's  hand  will  find  us. 
He  punishes  now  in  spiritual  leanness,  and  that  again  leads  to  deeper  judgment ; 
in  the  falling  away  of  our  children  into  indifference  and  worldhness  and  sin,  and 
will  not  God  demand  their  blood  at  our  hand  ?  God  will  have  perfect  compliance 
in  regard  to  the  conduct  of  His  own  worship ;  He  demands  "a  pure  offering." 
Are  we  making  His  word  our  only  law?  Whose  altar  are  we  serving,  Jehovali's  or 
Jeroboam's  ? 

III.  Bethel's  answeb  to  God'b  warnings.  1.  The  prop^efs  fear.  (1)  He 
owned  God's  servant.  He  cared  for  his  body,  mourned  over  him  with  the  cry, 
"Alas  my  brother! "  placed  him  in  his  own  tomb  and  had  his  own  bones  laid  beside 
those  of  the  man  of  God.  (2)  He  lifted  up  again  God's  testimony  (ver.  32).  The 
beginning  of  a  better  thing  in  Bethel  is  ever  after  this  fashion :  the  honouring  God's 
servants,  cleaving  to  them,  and  continuing  Iheir  work.  2.  The  king's  unconcern. 
We  are  not  told  that  he  did  anything  worse  than  he  had  done  before ;  he  simply 
"returned  not  fi-om  his  evil  way."  And  this  became  sin  to  his  house,  to  cut  it  off 
and  to  destroy  it,  &o.  To  bring  upon  ourselves  God's  judgmentg  we  need  do  no 
more  than  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  His  warnings. — J.  U. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIV.  1—20. 

Tei  sbatb  07  Jbboboam's  son. — The 
protest  of  the  prophet  of  Judah,  the  signs 
which  supported  it,  and  above  all  the 
Bolemn  visitation,  with  its  strange  portents, 
which  straightway  followed  it,  having  alike 
failed  to  arrest  Jeroboam  (ch.  xiii.  83)  in 
his  high-handed  and  Bhameless  depravation 
of  the  true  religion,  we  now  read  of  the 
retribution  which  came  upon  his  family,  and 
which  began  with  the  sickness  and  death  of 


his  firstborn.  We  can  harcDy  regud  this 
as  a  part  of  the  discipline  designed  to 
reform  the  Mug,  and  so  avert  the  schism, 
for  the  narrative  distinctly  conveys  the  im- 
piession  that  Jeroboam's  day  of  grace  was 
past,  and  that  judgment  was  already  begun. 
Moreover,  these  events  would  seem  to  belong 
to  a  much  later  period  than  that  of  which 
the  preceding  chapter  treats — a  period, 
indeed,  not  far  distant  from  the  dose  of 
Jeroboam's  reign.  He  then  heard,  as  was 
fitting,  from  the  venerable  prophet  who  had 


SH.  xnr.  1— 20.J 


THE  FIEST  BOOE.  OF  KINGS. 


818 


been  God's  messeKger  to  announce  to  him 
his  future  reign  over  the  ten  tribes,  that  the 
death  of  the  youth  whom  he  had  destined 
to  snoceed  him  was  but  the  beginning  of 
sorrows,  and  foreshadowed  the  speedy  and 
shameful  extinction  of  his  family  (ver.  14). 
He  too,  like  Solomon,  has  sown  to  the 
wind  and  now  reaps  to  the  whirlwind.  This 
section  is  omitted  in  the  Vat.  LXX. 

Ver.  1. — ^At  that  time  [or  about  (3)  that 
time.  The  king  is  now  settled  at  Tirzah 
(ver.  17).  In  cu.  ziL  25  we  left  him  resid- 
ing at  Shechem.  The  time  referred  to  is 
that  somewhat  indefinite  period  mentioned 
in  oh.  xiii.  vers.  33,  34.  These  opening 
words '  clearly  connect  the  sickness  with 
Jeroboam's  impenitence.  What  led  the  king 
to  move  his  Court  to  Tirzah,  Shechem 
being,  as  we  have  already  seen,  not  only 
the  capital  of  Ephraim,  but  "  the  natural 
capital  of  Palestine,"  "  its  central  situa- 
tion, its  accessibility,  and  its  wonderfully 
fine  water  supply"  giving  it  "  advantages 
not  enjoyed  by  any  other  city  in  the  land" 
(Conder),  we  are  not  told;  but  it  is  in- 
teresting and  instructive  to  find  that  it  has 
one  conspicuous  disadvantage  as  a  capital, 
viz.,  that  it  is  "commanded  by  a  hiU  on 
either  side  so  close  to  the  town,  that  the 
old  geographer,  Marino  Sanuto,  in  the  four- 
teenth century,  considers  the  place  to  be 
untenable  by  any  military  force,  because 
stones  might  be  roUed  down  upon  the 
houses,  from  either  Ebal  or  Gerizim" 
(Conder,  p.  16.  Cf.  Judg.  ix.  36).  It  is  very 
probable  that  this  consideration  suggested 
the  transfer,  of  which  Ewald  despaired  of  dis- 
covering the  cause  ("  Hist.  Israel,"  iv.  23)] 
Abljall  [Bawlinson  sees  in  the  name,  which 
means  "Jehovah  is  his  father,"  an  indication 
that  Jeroboam  "did  not  intend  to  desert  the 
worship  of  Jehovah."  But  the  name  was 
probably  bestowed  long  before  the  schism, 
possibly  in  Egypt.  It  is  more  likely  that 
it  connects  itself,  if  with  anything,  with  the 
message  of  Jehovah  to  him  (ch.  xi.  28).  But 
the  name  was  not  uncommon — ^it  was  borne 
by  a  son  of  Behoboam  (ver.  31;  compare 
Ahijah,  below),  and  inferences  from  names 
must  necessarily  be  -precarious]  tlie  son  of 
Jeroboam  fell  sick.  [The  historian  un- 
doubtedly means  us  to  see  the  finger  of  God 
in  this  sickness.  This  was  one  of  the 
penalties  of  disobedience  (Beut.  xzviii.  22, 
58—61;  Exod.  xxiii.  25]. 

Ver.  2. — ^And  Jeroboam  said  to  his  wife 
[Conscious  that  his  proceedings  would  merit 
Ahijah's  reproof,  he  is  afraiil  to  go  in  per- 
son. And  hio  wife — if  in  this  particular  we 
may  trust  the  LXX.,  an  Egyptian  princess — 
coiild  be  more  readily  disguised.     The  com- 


mission was  too  delicate  to  be  entrusted  to 
a  stranger.  "None  might  know  it  but  his 
own  bosom,  and  she  that  lay  in  ii,"  (Bp. 
Hall).  Jeroboam  evidently  suspected  that 
this  sickness  was  punitive,  and  he  would 
not  have  others  think  so  too] ,  Arise,  I  pray 
thee,  and  disguise  [lit.,  change.  The  word 
suggests  that  the  disguise  was  to  be  effected 
by  a  change  of  garments.  "  She  must  put 
off  her  robes  and  put  on  a  russet  coat"  {ib.) 
Possibly  the  queen  was  not  unknown  to 
the  prophet  (ver.  4)]  thyself,  that  thou 
[Observe  the  archaic  form  ^rii$  for  1^^$, 
which  latter  the  Eeri  would  substitute,  quite 
needlessly,  here]  be  not  known  [Eeb.  and 
they  {i.e.,  those  whom  she  met,  not  the 
prophet  only)  shall  not  know  that  thou  art, 
<&c.]  to  be  the  wife  of  Jeroboam ;  and  get 
thee  to  Shiloh  [the  modern  Seilun.  ' '  There 
is  no  site  in  the  country  fixed  with  greater 
certainty  than  that  of  Shiloh"  (Conder, 
p.  44.  See  Judg.  xxi.  19).  The  identifica- 
tion, however,  was  only  effected  in  1838, 
Conder  gives  some  interesting  particulars 
which  lead  him  to  believe  that  we  can 
identify  the  very  site  of  the  tabernacle. 
For  its  history,  see  Josh.  xvi.  5;  xviii. 
1 — 10  ;  Judg.  xviii.  31 ;  xxi.  19 ;  1  Sam.  iv. 
3;  Jer.  xli.  6.  Presuming  that  Tirzah  is 
to  be  identified  with  Teiaslr  (see  on  ver.  17) 
Shiloh  would  be  over  thirty  miles'  distant — 
more  than  a  day's  journey  to  the  queen,  as 
the  road  involves  some  toilsome  cliinbing]  : 
behold,  there  la  Abljah  tbe  prophet  [see  on 
oh.  xi.  29.  Shiloh  was  probably  the  birth- 
place, as  well  as  the  residence,  of  Ahijah. 
It  was  in  the  territory  of  Ephraim  (Josh, 
xvi.  6),  and  at  no  great  distance  from  Bethel. 
We  can  only  explain  Ahijah's  continued 
residence  there,  after  the  migration  of  the 
God-fearing  Israelites  to  the  southern  king- 
dom, not  by  his  great  age,  but  by  the  sup- 
position that,  having  been  concerned  in  the 
transfer  of  the  kingdom  to  Jeroboam,  he 
felt  it  a  duty  to  stay  and  watch  his  career. 
And  the  time  has  now  come  when  he  can 
be  useful.  His  relations  with  Jeroboam 
had  apparently  so  for  been  good.  He  had 
not  protested,  so  far  as  we  know,  against 
the  calf-worship,  but  then  God  had  sent 
another  prophet  to  do  that] ,  wMch  told  me 
that  I  should  be  king  [Heb.  he  spake  of  me 
for  king]  over  this  people.  [So  that  he 
had  already  proved  himself  a  true  prophet, 
and  so  far  a  prophet  of  good.] 

Ver.  3. — And  take  with  thee  [Heb.  in 
thine  hand]  ten  loaves  [Ten  would  seem 
to  have  been  a  usual  number  (1  Sam.  xvii 
18).  On  the  subject  of  gifts  or  fees  to  pro- 
phets, judges,  d'c,  see  on  ch.  xiii.  7],  and 
cracknels  [or  cakes,  as  marg.  The  original 
word  D'liiJJ  (T|23p"2)Hfl'!f)  means  "pricked," 

or  "  spotted.''     It  is  the  word  translated 


B14 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KiisUB. 


[CH.  XIV.  i— iiO. 


"monldy"  in  Josh.  ix.  6,  12,  where  Ge- 
senitsB  would  render  "  crumbs."  Mouldy 
bread  would  hardly  be  taken  as  a  present. 
These  cakea,  according  to  the  LXX.,  Cod. 
Alex.,  were  for  the  prophet's  children]  and 
a  cruse  [i.e.,  leather  bottle.  pSpIl  Bakbuk, 
is  clearly  an  onomatopoetio  word,  suggested 
by  the  bubbling  noise  of  liquids  in  empty- 
ing] of  lioney  [Spices  and  other  delicacies 
were  often  given  as  presents,  and  honey 
was  a  special  product  of  the  country  (Ezod. 
iii.  8;  Pent.  viii.  8;  2  Sam.  zvii.  29.  The 
honey  sent  by  Jacob  to  Joseph  was  prob- 
ably "honey  of  grapes").  The  present 
was  pnrposely  a  poor  one,  for  the  sake  of 
maintaining  the  deception ;  i.e.,  it  was  a' 
part  of  the  disguise] ,  and  go  to  blm :  he 
shall  tell  thee  what  shall  become  of  [Heb. 
be  to]  the  child.  [At  first  it  strikes  us  as 
strange  that  Jeroboam  merely  asks  what  the 
result  will  be.  He  does  not  petition,  that  is 
to  say,  as  in  ch.  xiii.  6,  for  a  cure.  But  we 
find  the  same  peculiarity,  which  some  would 
explain  by  the  fatalism  of  the  East,  in  2 
Kings  i  2,  and  ch.  viii.  9,  In  the  present 
Instance,  however,  no  such  explanation  is 
needed.  For  (1)  Jeroboam  could  hardly 
ask  a  favour  of  a  prophet  of  Jehovah,  or 
hope  that  it  would  be  granted  if  he  did,  and 
(2)  if,  as  he  feared,  the  sickness  was  judi- 
cial, it  would  be  useless  to  ask  for  healing. 
The  infatuation  which  insisted  on  a  dis- 
guise for  the  purpose  of  deceiving  the  pro- 
phet, who  nevertheless  was  believed  to  be 
able  to  divine  the  issue  of  the  sickness,  is 
very  characteristic,  and  has  had  many 
parallels  since. 

Ver.  4. — And  Jeroboam's  wife  did  so,  and 
arose,  and  went  to  Shlloh,  and  came  [prob- 
ably on  the  second  day]  to  the  house  of 
Ahljah.  But  [rather  Now]  Ahljah  could  not 
see ;  for  his  eyes  were  set  [Heb.  stood.  Same 
word  as  in  1  Sam.  iv.  15.  Cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  1. 
In  amaurosis  the  pupil  is  set,  and  does  not 
contract  with  the  light.  A  partial  para- 
lysis of  the  optic  nerve  is  common  in  ex- 
treme old  age]  by  reason  of  his  a^^e.  [Heb. 
for  hoariness,  i.e.  old  age.] 

Ver.  6.— And  theLord  said  unto  Ahfjah  [the 
attempted  deceit  was  frustrated  by  a  direut 
revelation,  the  same  which  disclosed  the  fate 
of  the  child.  '*  God  laughs  in  heaven  at  the 
frivolous  fetehesof  crafty  politicians"  (Hall)]. 
Behold,  the  wile  of  Jeroboam  cometh  to 
ask  a  thing  of  thee  for  her  sou  [or  con- 
cerning 7^,  properly  "to,"  od,  has  themean- 
ing  of  de,  after  verbs  of  speaking.  Of.  Gen. 
XX.  2;  1  Sam.  iv.  19,  &o.;  Jer.  xl.  16. 
Gesenins  remarks  on  the  similar  use  of 
elg  in  the  New  Testament :  Acts  ii.  25 ; 
Eph.  v.  32]  ;  for  he  is  sick :  thus  and  thus 
Tcf.  Judg.  zviii.  4 ;  2  Sam.  xi.  26.    DT  is  a 


form  of  n'XT]  Shalt  tbon  say  unto  her, 
for  it  shall  be,  when  she  cometh  in,  that 
she  shall  feign  herself  to  he  another  woman 
[Heb.  make  herself  strange] . 

Ver.  6.  And  it  was  so,  when  Ahljah 
heard  the  sound  [Heb.  voice]  of  her  feet 
as  she  came  in  [n^3  should   strictly  be 

plural,  in  agreement  with  n''^i'}feet.  It  is 
in  the  singular,  probably  because  the  writer 
is  thinking  of  the  woman.  But  see  Ewald. 
817  a,  and  of.  1  Sam.  iv.  16]  at  [Heb.  in] 
the  door,  that  he  said,  Come  in,  thou  wife 
of  Jeroboam ;  why  feigaest  then  thyself  to 
be  another  ?  [Heb.  makest  thyself  strange, 
as  iu  ver.  5]  for  [the  Heb.  "  aixJ"  brings 
out  the  meaning  much  better,  which  is, 
"  Thou  art  cleverly  playing  a  part,  and  I 
all  the  while  have  a  message,"  &c.]  I  am 
sent  to  thee  with  heavy  [same  word  as  in 
ch.  xii.  13 ;  there  translated  rough]  tidings. 
[Heb.  omits.  For  the  construction  sea 
Ewald,  284  c] 

Ver.  7. — Oo,  tell  Jeroboam,  Thus  salth 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Forasmuch  as  I 
exalted  thee  from  among  the  people  [com- 
pare 2  Sam.  xii.  8 ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  70 ;  1 
Eings  xvi.  2] ,  and  made  thee  prince  over  my 
people  Israel  [God  still  claims  dominion 
over  Israel,  despite  the  schism.  They  are 
still  His  people,  and  He  is  still  their  God] , 

Ver.  8. — And  rent  [same  word  as  in  tho 
former  prophecy  of  Ahijah,  ch.  xi.  30,  31] 
the  kingdom  away  from  the  house  of  David, 
and  gave  It  thee :  and  yet  thou  hast  not 
been  as  my  servant  David  [who  had  been 
proposed  to  Jeroboam  as  his  example,  ch.  xi. 
38.  This  name,  as  that  of  a  prince  of  the 
rival  house,  would  now  be  almost  hateful  to 
Jeroboam],  who  kept  my  commandments, 
and  who  followed  me  with  all  his  heart 
[cf.  ch.  xi.  33,  38;  xv.  5],  to  do  that  only 
which  was  right  in  mine  eyes ; 

Ver.  9. — ^Bnt  hast  done  evil  above  all 
that  were  before  thee  [perhaps  preceding 
kings  are  not  meant,  so  much  as  judges— 
indices  et  duces  Israelis  (Le  Clerc).  Kings, 
however,  are  not  excluded.  Both  Saul  and 
Solomon  had  sinned  (1  Sam.  passim;  1 
Eings  xi.  5,  6),  though  neither  had  set  up 
an  organized  idolism  and  "  made  Israel  to 
sin  "]  :  for  thou  hast  gone  and  made  thee 
other  gods  [in  defiance  of  the  decalogue 
(Exod.  XX,  4),  Jeroboam,  no  doubt,  in- 
sisted that  his  calves  were  not  idols,  but 
cherubic  symbols.  But  God  does  not  recog- 
nize this  distinction.  Practically  they  were 
•'other  gods,"  and  so  they  are  here  called 
derisively],  and  molten  images  [the  word 
is  used  of  the  golden  calf,  Exod.  xxxii.  4,  8. 
See  also  Exod.  xxxiv.  17;  Deut.  ix.  12; 
Judg.  xvii.  3,  i.  Tho  "  other  gods  "  and  the 
"  molten  images  "  are  but  two  names  foi 


OB.  xrv.  1— i:u.] 


THE  FlllST  BOOJi  OF  lilNGa 


B16 


the  same  thing,  viz.,  the  calves  of  Bethel 
and  Dan],  to  provoke  me  to  anger  [This 
was  the  result,  not,  of  ooorse,  the  object  of 
Jeiohoam'B  idolations  worship],  and  hast 
cast  me  [The  order  of  the  Hebrew  stamps 
the  "  me"  as  emphatic,  "  and  mb  liast  thou 
cast,  &a.]  behind  thy  back  [This  strong  ex- 
pression only  occm's  here  and  in  Ezek. 
xxiii.  35.  It  forcibly  expresses  Jeroboam's 
jutemptuous  disregard  of  God's  revealed 
will.  In  Psa.  1.  17,  Neb.  ix.  26,  we  have 
somewhat  similar  phrase!!] : 

Ver.  10.— Therefore,  heboid,  I  wlU  bring 
•vll  upon  the  house  [The  punishment  fell 
on  the  house  (ch.  xv.  29),  not,  however,  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  prime  offender  (2  Ohron. 
xiii.  20  ;  of.  ch.  xxi.  29).  The  reader  will 
observe  that  the  judgments  denounced 
against  Jeroboam's  sin,  hke  all  those  of  the 
Old  Testament,  are  temporal.  The  rei^om- 
pense  to  come  is  completely  ignored.  These 
severe  retributions  are  calculated  and  pro- 
portioned precisely  as  if  there  were  no  here- 
after] of  Jeroboam,  and  will  cut  off  from 
Jeroboam  him  that  plsseth  against  the 
wall  [This  phrase,  which  Bawlinson  observes 
is  confined  to  the  period  from  David  to  Jehu, 
is  by  him,  and  generally,  understood  to 
mean,"  every  male."  (It  is  found  in  1  Sam. 
XXV.  22 ;  1  Kings  xvi,  11 ;  xxi.  21 ;  and  2 
Kings  ix.  8.)  But  it  is  noteworthy,  as 
GeseniuB  has  remarked,  that  this  is  not  s 
habit  of  Eastern  men.  Every  traveller  in 
Egypt  will  confirm  the  remark  of  Herodotus 
(ch.  ii  35)  on  this  subject,  and  the  same 
applies  to  Palestine ;  i.e.,  the  men  sit  down 
for  this  purpose,  covered  with  their  garments 
(Judg.  iii.  21;  1  Sam.  xxiv.  3).  Some, 
consequently,  have  been  led  to  suppose  that 
the  reference  is  to  the  dog,  bat  animals 
would  hardly  share  in  the  destruction  of 
the  royal  house.  Geseuius  is  probably 
right  when  he  interprets  it  of  J^s.  Thus 
understood,  it  lends  additional  meaning  to 
the  passages  whore  it  occurs.  It  expresses 
extermination,  root  and  branch,  man  and 
boy] ,  and  him  that  Is  shut  up  and  left  In 
Israel  [A  proverbial  expression  (Deut.  xxxii. 
36  ;  1  Kings  xxi,  21;  2  Kings  ix.  8),  and 
involving  some  play  upon  words.  It 
evidently  means  "  men  of  all  kinds,"  but  as 
to  the  precise  signification  of  the  terms 
' '  shut  up  "  and  "  left,"  there  has  been  much 
difference  of  opinion,  some  (1)  interpreting 
them  to  mean  respectively  married  and  single 
(so  Keil,  al.) ;  others  (2)  bond  and  free 
(Gesen,  al.) ;  others  (8)  preeiom  and  vile; 
and  others  again  (4)  minors  and  those  of  age. 
(So  Bahr,  "  All  the  male  descendants,  even 
the  minors,  were  threatened  with  destruc- 
tion.") On  the  whole  perhaps  (2)  is  pre- 
ferable] ,  and  will  take  away  the  remnant 
[Heb.    "exterminate    after"     (Gesen.)    or 


"sweep  after"  (Keil).  The  first  rent'.eiing 
is  the  more  literal.  The  "  after  "  is  ex- 
plained, not  as  Bahr  ("  as  often  as  a  neiv 
scion  arises  I  will  take  it  away"),  but  by  the 
fact  that  one  who  expels  another  follows 
after  him  (Gesen.)]  of  the  house  of  Jero- 
boam, as  a  man  taketh  away  dung  [cL  2 
Kings  ix.  37  ;  Job  xx.  7 ;  Jer.  viii.  2 ;  ix. 
22;  xvi.  4.  This  word  expresses  the  loathing 
and  contempt  with  which  they  would  be 
treated],  till  it  be  all  gone. 

Ver.  11. — Him  that  dleth  of  Jeroboam 
[Heb,  to  Jeroboam,  i.e.,  belonging  to,  of  the 
house  of.  "Of  Jeroboam,"  conveys  the 
idea  of  his  seed.  It  is  possible  that  his  wife 
shared  in  the  general  doom],  in  the  city 
shall  the  dogs  eat ;  and  him  that  dleth  in 
the  field  shall  the  fowls  of  the  air  [Heb. 
heavens,  as  in  Gen.  i.  26  ;  ii.  19 ;  vii.  23,  <feo.] 
eat  [This  was  a  terrible  threat  to  a  jew — 
that  the  dead  body  should  fall  a  prey  to 
dogs  and  wild  beasts.  Of.  Psa.  Ixziz.  2 ; 
Jer.  vii.  33 ;  xvi.  4 ;  xxxiv.  20 ;  Ezek.  zxix. 
6,  &o.  For  him  it  had  a  factitious  horror, 
because  of  the  threatening  of  Deut,  xzviii. 
26;  of.  Bev.  xix.  17,  18.  It  was,  there- 
fore, the  cUmax  of  disgrace  and  misfortune  ; 
the  greatest  dishonour  that  oonld  be  offered 
to  the  dust  and  to  the  memory.  Hence  the 
threat  of  David  (1  Sam.  xvii.  46  ;  cf.  ver. 
44) ;  hence  the  devotion  of  Bizpah  (2  Sam. 
xxi.  10),  and  the  complaint  of  the  Fsahnist 
(Psa.  Ixxix.  2).    Cf.  Homer,  Uiad  i.  4,  6. 

**  Whose  limbs,  nnbilried  on  the  naked  shore, 
Deroaring  doga  and  biingry  vultores  tore.** 

Dogs,  it  is  well  known,  are  the  scavengers  of 
Eastern  cities.  They  exist  there  in  great 
numbers,  and  in  a  semi-savage  state,  and 
the  carcases  of  animals  and  carrion  of  all 
sorts  are  left  for  them  to  consame,  which 
they  do  most  effectually,  roaming  the  streets 
all  night  (Psa.  lix.  6, 14)  in  search  of  garbage. 
Vultures  and  other  birds  of  prey  perform  a 
similar  of&ce  in  the  open  country  (Job  xxxix. 
29,  30 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  28)]  :  tor  the  tord  hath 
spoken  it. 

Ver.  12. — Arise  thou  therefore,  get  thee 
to  thine  own  house :  and  when  thy  feet 
enter  into  the  city,  the  child  [Heb.  then 
the  child.  This  is  the  force  of  the  1]  shall 
die.  [This  was  "  the  sign  that  the  Lord 
hath  spoken"  (ch.  xiii.  3).  The  death  of 
the  oluld  at  the  precise  moment  of  the 
return  should  serve  as  an  earnest  and  fore- 
taste of  the  doom  jusi  denounced.] 

Ver.  13. — And  all  Israel  shall  mourn  for 
him  [no  doubt  he  was  heir  to  the  throne] 
and  bury  him  [mentioned  to  heighten  the 
contrast.  He  should  be  the  one  exception 
to  the  rule  of  ver.  11]  :  for  he  [Heb.  this'] 
OTlj  of  Jerobaam  shall  come  to  the  grave, 
becaise  In  blm  there  Is  found  [Heb.  uat 


810 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xit.  1—20. 


found]  some  [Heb.  a]  gfood  tblng  [The 
idea  is  not  merely  that  he  was  an  amiable 
youth,  but  the  words  imply  some  degree  of 
piety,  and  almost  suggest  that  he  dissented 
from  his  father's  eoolesiastioal  policy.  "The 
Babbina  have  a  fable  that  he  disobeyed  his 
father's  command  to  hinder  people  travel- 
ling to  Jerusalem  to  keep  the  feasts,  and 
that  he  even  removed  obstructions  in  the 
road"  (Bahr)]  toward  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  In  the  house  of  Jeroboam. 

Ver.  14. — Moreover  [Heb.  and]  the  Lord 
ahall  raise  him  up  a  Mng  over  Israel,  who 
shaU  cut  off  the  house  of  Jeroboam  [for  the 
fulfilment,  see  ch.  xv.  29]  that  day:  but 
what?  even  now.  [BawUnson  only  ex- 
presses a  general  feeling  when  he  says  that 
"  no  satisf  actoiy  sense  can  be  obtained  from 
the  Hebrew  text,"  and  suggests  that  it  is 
corrupt  or  defective.  The  passage,  no 
doubt,  is  one  of  extreme  difficulty,  and  in- 
asmuch as  the  MSS.  and  Versions  lend  us 
no  aid  to  its  interpretation,  affords  scope  for 
conjecture.  The  explanation  I  venture  to 
submit  may,  I  hope,  contribute — it  can 
hardly  do  more — to  the  elucidation  of  the 
text.    I  observe  that  in  ver.  13  ilT  is  used  of 

V 

Abijah, "  this  one  alone,"  &o.  I  assume  that 
it  has  the  same  import  here,  viz.,  "  this  one 
to-day,"  i.e.,  "  this  one  dies  or  is  cut  off 
to-day,  "DVObeing  nnderstood,as  constantly, 
adverbially,  "  hcdie  (see,  e.g.,  Gen.  iv.  14; 
xxii.  14;  1  Kings  ii.  24).  It  would  be  a 
natural  reflection  to  the  prophet  who  had 
just  been  speaMng  of  the  excision  of  the 
home  of  Jeroboam,  "  one  perishes  to-day, 
judgment  is  already  begun,"  i.e.  As  to  the 
rest,  for  njj^  I  would  read  flPlX,  -which  has 
practically  the  same  sound,  and  for  which, 
consequently,  nny  is  sometimes  substituted 
by  the  transcriber,  as  in  oh.  i,  18,  20,  and 
understand  "  And  what  wilt  thou  also  do  ?" 
i.e.,  what  will  become  of  thee  also  t  It  is 
quite  possible  (ver.  11)  that  Jeroboam's  wife 
perished  in  the  wholesale  destruction  of  his 
house,  as  it  is  clear  from  the  severe  punish- 
ment assigned  to  her  (ver.  12)  that  she  must 
have  shared  in  his  sin.  The  readiness  with 
which  she  lent  herself  to  this  deceit  (ver.  4) 
also  favours  the  supposition  that  she  had 
approved  his  policy.  She  would  then  have 
survived  her  husband  only  two  years. 
Keil's  explanation,  "  cut  off  the  house  of 
Jeroboam  this  day,"  appears  contrary  to 
actual  fact,  while  to  interpret  "  that  day " 
(with  the  A.  V.)  is  contiary  to  Hebrew 
grammar.] 

Ver.  15.— For  [Heb.  And.  The  prophet 
now  proceeds  to  state  the  share  of  ihe 
people  in  the  punishment.  They  had 
acquiesced  in  the  wicked  innovations  of 
Jeiobouu  and  had  joined  in  the  worship  ol 


the  calves]  the  lord  shall  smite  Israel,  as 
a  reed  [r\iQ  xawa,  canna,  cane]  Is  shaken 
[The  construction  is  pregnant,  viz.,  "shall 
smite  Israel  so  that  it  shall  be  shaken  as  a 
reed,"  &o.  (cf.  Luke  vii.  24).  "  The  image  il 
very  striking,  for  Israel  was  '  wrought  so  low 
that  every  political  influence  jore  it  along  " 
(Thenius)]  In  the  water,  and  he  shall  root 
up  [same  word  as  in  Deut.  xxix.  28 ;  Jer. 
xxiv.  6]  Israel  out  of  this  good  land,  which 
he  gave  to  their  fathers,  and  shall  scatter 
them  beyond  the  river  [i.e.,  the  Euphrates ; 
see  on  ch.  iv.  24.  TMs  is  the  first  cleui 
prophecy  of  the  captivity  foreshadowed  by 
Moses  (beut.  iv.  27  ;  xxviii.  25,  86,  63,  64), 
and  by  Solomon  (ch.  viii.  46 — 50).  For 
its  ful^lment,  see  2  Kings  xvii.  6 ;  xviii. 
11,  &o.],  because  they  have  made  their ^ 
groves  [Heb.  their  Asherahs,  i.e.,  images  of 
Astarte.  The  translation  "  grove  "  after  the 
LXX.  d\(Toe,  Vulg.  lueus,  is  now  abandoned. 
It  is  clear  some  sort  of  idol  is  intended  by 
the  term.  This  is  evident  from  ver.  23, 
where  it  is  said  the  Asherahs  (A.V.  groves) 
were  built  "  under  every  green  tree  "  (of.  2 
Kings  xvii.  10) ;  from  ch.  xv.  13  (where  sea 
note) ;  from  2  Kings  xxiii.  6,  which  tells 
how  Josiah  "  brought  out  the  Asherahs  out 
of  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  and  from  the 
connexion  in  which  the  word  is  found  with 
"  molten  images,  carved  images,"  &0.  (ver. 
23 ;  2  Chron.  xxxlii.  19 ;  xxxiv.  3,  4 ;  of. 
also  Judg.  iii.  7 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  19).  They, 
were  doubtless  effigies  of  Ashtoreth,  made 
of  wood  (Dent.  vii.  5 ;  cf .  2  Kings  xxiii.  6), 
planted  erect  in  the  ground  (Deut.  xvi  21), 
and  were  consecrated  to  her  impure  and 
revolting  worship.  It  is  clear  from  this 
passage  that  the  frightful  impuritiea  of  the 
Canaanitish  races  had  subsisted  in  the  new 
kingdom  by  the  side  of  the  new  sacra.  They 
had  probably  revived  under  Jeroboam's  rule, 
having  apparently  been  in  abeyance  since 
the  time  of  Gideon] ,  provoking  the  Lord  to 
anger.  [Ch.  xiv.  22;  xv.  30;  xii.  22;  2 
Kings  xvii.  11,  17 ;  xxii.  17 ;  Deut.  iv.  25 ; 
xxxii.  16,  21 ;  Judg.  ii.  12  ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  68, 

Ver.  16. — And  he  shall  [or,  that  he  should] 
give  Israel  up  because  of  the  sins  of  Jero- 
boam, who  did  sin,  and  who  made  Israel 
to  sin.  [These  words  became  almost  a  for- 
mula (oh.  XV.  33,  34 ;  xvi.  2,  19,  &c.)] 

Ver.  17. — And  Jeroboam's  wife  arose,  and 
departed,  and  came  [possibly  she  lingered 
for  some  time  on  the  road,  dreading  to 
return]  to  Tlrzah  [Identified  by  Eolinson 
and  Van  de  Velde  (Narrative,  ii.  334,  335), 
with  Telluzah,  or  Taluse,  a  place  in  the 
mountains,  six  miles  north  of  Shechem. 
See  Josh.  xii.  24.  Both  these  writers  admit, 
however,  that  if  this  is  indeed  Tirzah,  "  all 
traces  of  royalty  have  disappeared."  "  With 
the  exception  of  a  Saw  ■epuiohral  oavei, 


em.  XIV.  1—20.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


817 


Bn)>teTTanean  graiiEtries,  wells,  and  old 
hewn  stones,  nothing  of  ancient  Tirzah 
remains  in  Talftse."  Oonder  lecognizesthe 
name  in  the  modem  Teidsir — a  village  near 
Jezieel,  in  the  Great  Plain — ^which  "con- 
tains the  exact  letteis  of  the  Hebrew 
word,  though  the  two  last  radicals  are 
interchanged  in  position."  "  The  beauty 
of  the  position,  .  .  .  the  ancient  remains, 
and  the  old  main  rOad  from  the  place  to 
Shechem  seem  to  agree  well  with  the  idea 
of  its  having  once  been  a  capital "  ("  Tent- 
work,"  p.  57).  Some  of  its  "  numerous 
rook-out  sepulchres,"  he  thinks,  may  be  the 
tombs  of  the  early  kings  of  Israel.  It  was 
famed  for  its  beauty  (Cant.  vi.  4),  and  for 
this  reason,  perhaps,  among  others  (see  on 
ver.  1)  was  selected  by  Jeroboam  for  his 
residence.  It  is  not  certain  that  it  had 
taken  the  place  of  Shechem  as  the  political 
capital] :  and  when  she  came  [the  Hebrew  is 
much  more  graphic.  "  She  came  to  .  .  . 
and  the  child  died "]  to  the  threshold  of 
the  door  [Heb.  house],  the  child  died.  [This 
statement  seems  at  first  sight  to  contradict 
that  of  yer.  12,  which  says  the  child  should 
die  as  she  entered  the  city.  Bat  the  palace 
may  have  been  on  the  edge  of  the  city 
(Bawl.),  or  the  "  city  "  may  have  been  little 
more  than  the  palace.] 

Ver.  18.— And  they  burled  him  [see  on 
ver.  13]  ;  and  all  Israel  mourned  for  blm, 
according  to  the  word  of  the  I<ord,'  which 
he  spake  by  the  hand  [see  on  ch.  ii.  25]  of 
bis  servant  AbJJah  the  prophet,     [It  waa 


a  token  of  the  righteons  judgment  of  God 
that  the  same  prophet  who  announced 
Jeroboam's  exaltation  predicted  his  fall.] 

Yer.  19. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Jeroboam,  how  be  warred  [see  ver.  30 ; 
2  Chron.  xiii.  2],  and  bow  be  reigned,  be- 
hold, they  are  written  In  the  book  of  the 
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Israel.  [As  to 
this  work,  see  Introduction,  Section  VI. 
The  exact  title  is  "  the_  book  of  the  words 
(or  matters)  of  the  days',"  i.e.,  the  record  of 
daily  occurrences.] 

Ver.  20. — And  the  days  which  Jeroboam 
reigned  were  two  and  twenty  years  [Biihr 
remarks  that  the  exploits  of  this  long  reign 
find  no  mention  in  Scripture ;  the  historian 
dwells  exclusively  on  the  sin,  the  conse- 
quences of  which  were  of  so  much  greater 
moment]:  and  be  slept  with  bis  fathers 
[Jeroboam's  end  would  appear  to  have  beeu 
untimely.  After  his  defeat  by  Abijah,  we 
are  told,  "the  Lord  struck  him,  and  he 
died,"  which  may  either  mean  that  he  died 
by  a  lingering  disease  (2  Chron.  xxi.  18, 19) 
or  more  suddenly  (2  Sam.  xii.  15),  but  which 
certainly  implies  that  he  died  "by  the 
visitation  of  God."  I  have  suggested  else- 
where (Homil.  Quart.  IV.,  p.  257)  that  the 
"  stroke "  was  not  improbably  his  son's 
death,  which  was  at  once  so  tragical  and 
such  a  bitter  foretaste  of  judgment  to  come. 
He  may  have  "  warred  and  reigned  "  (ver. 
19)  after  this  event.  He  may  also  have 
steadily  drooped  to  his  grave],  and  Nadab 
1>ia  son  reigned  In  bis  stead. 


H0MILETI08. 

Vers.  1 — 20. — Abijah  and  Ahijah.  Perhaps  there  Is  no  single  section  of  this 
book  more  full  of  lessons,  and  lessons  of  the  most  varied  kind,  than  this.  Let  us 
try  to  gather  something  of  what  God  has  strawed  with  so  liberal  a  hand. 

1.  "  At  that  time  (ver.  1) '' — the  time  of  ch.  xui.  83.  The  sickness  of  the  ohild 
distinctly  connects  itself  with  the  father's  persistence  in  sin  (see  Deut.  viL  16 ; 
xxviii.  22,  61).  The  hard  and  impenitent  heart  treasures  to  itself  wrath  (Bom.  ii.  6). 
Warnings  (ch.  xiii.)have  been  miheeded :  it  is  now  the  time  for  judgment.  "  If  we 
sin  wilfully,"  &o.  ^eb.  x.  26,  27).  Beut  hahet  euat  horat  et  moras.  Aa  "  the 
folnesB  of  time  "  gave  as  a  Bedeemer,  so  it  will  give  ns  a  Judge. 

2.  "Abijah,  the  son  of  Jerohomn,  fell  sick"  (ib.)  Observe — (1)  The  piona  son 
sickened,  and  died  ;  the  impenitent  father  and  the  worthless  brother  lived."  Then 
sickness  is  no  invariable  proof  of  God's  displeasure.  "  Behold,,  he  whom  thou 
lovest  is  sick"  (John  xi.  8  ;  cf.  Heb.  xii.  6).  "  Whom  the  gods  love,  die  yonng." 
The  fable  of  Ganymede  is  full  of  significance. 

"  Te  rapuit  coelum,  tales  nam  gandet  haben 
Blustres  animas  degeneresque  fngit." 

"  Tis  ever  thus,  'tis  ever  thus  with  all  that's  best  below. 
The  dearest,  noblest,  loveliest  are  always  first  to  go  ; 
The  bird  that  sings  the  sweetest,  the  pine  that  crowns  the  rooke 
The  glory  of  the  garden,  the  flower  of  the  flock. 


318  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oa  xit.  1—20. 

"'Tis  ever  thus,  'tis  ever  thus  with  oreatures  heavenly  fair, 
Too  finely  framed  to  bide  the  brunt  more  earthly  creatures  bear ; 
A  little  while  they  dwell  with  us,  blest  ministers  of  love, 
Then  spread  their  wings  we  had  not  seen,  and  seek  their  home  above.* 

See  also  Longfellow's  poem  of  "  The  Eeaper  and  the  Flowers."  (2)  Sickness 
spares  none.  "  Neither  his  dignity  as  b,  prince,  nor  his  age  as  a  yowng  prince,  nor 
his  interest  with  heaven  as  a  pious  prince  could  exempt  him  from  sickness  "  (M. 
Henry).  As  to  the  purpose  of  sickness,  see  HomUetios,  pp.  12,  13.  Perhaps  this 
child ,  in  whom  was  some  good  thing,  only  needed  the  discipline  of  sickness  to  make 
him  fruitful  in  every  good  work.  "  After  ye  have  suffered  awhile,  make  you  perfect," 
&o.  (1  Peter  v.  10).  (3)  The  sickness  of  liis  son,  while  it  was  a  judgment  on  Jero- 
beam,  was  a  warning  to  Israel.  "  A  oloudand  darkness  "  to  the  one ;  it  gave  light 
to  the  other  (Ezod.  xiv.  20). 

"  Let  ns  be  patient  I    These  severe  afflictions 
Not  from  the  ground  arise, 
But  oftentimes  celestial  benedictions 
Assume  this  dark  disguise." 

8.  "  Oet  thee  to  Shiloh  "  (ver.  2).  But  Shiloh  was  not  one  of  his  sanotnaries. 
Why  not  to  Bethel  ?  There  were  his  priests  and  prophets  (see  on  ch.  xxii.  6).  Bat 
Jeroboam  only  does  what  many  more  have  done  since.  He  has  one  religion  for 
health,  another  for  sickness.  Like  Joab,  he  turns  in  adversity  to  the  altar  which 
he  scorned  in  prosperity.  He  would  fain  share  the  consolations  of  those  to  whose 
admonitions  he  nerer  listened.  This  sending  to  Ahijah  is  one  result  of  the  sickness 
of  Ab^ab. 

•"There  is  no  Ood,'  the  foolish  saith, 
But  none, '  there  is  no  sorrow ;  * 
And  nature  oft,  in  time  of  need, 

The  cry  of  faith  will  borirow. 
Eyes  that  the  preacher  could  not  school 

By  wayside  graves  are  raised. 
And  lips  say,  'Ood  be  pitiful,' 
Which  ne'er  said,  *  Qod  be  praised.' " 

4.  "  There  U  Ahijah  the  prophet "  (ib.)  Whom  he  has  never  troubled  since  the 
day  when  "  he  spake  of  him  for  king  "  (oh.  xi.  31).  "  Yet  did  not  the  chief  butler 
remember  Joseph,  but  forgat  him"  (Gen.  xL  81).  The  ministers  of  Christ  may 
well  be  content  if  they  are  sent  for  in  times  of  sorrow  and  sickness.  "  Lord,  in 
trouble  have  they  visited  thee  "  (Isa.  xxvi  16).  We  think  scorn  of  those  who  only 
come  near  us  when  they  want  something.   But  how  often  do  we  serve  God  thus  ? 

6.  "Disguise  thyself,  that  thou  be  not  hnown  to  be  the  wife  of  Jeroboam,"  (t6.) 
Was  ever  grosser  infatuation  than  this  ?  Jeroboam,  the  most  astute  of  poUticiaus, 
the  Machiavelli  of  the  Old  World,  thinks  that  a  prophet  who  can  peer  into  futurity 
cannot  penetrate  his  flimsy  disguises.  It  never  occurs  to  him  that  "  the  seer  "  can 
see  through  a  woman's  veil.  Ahithophel  is  not  the  only  statesman  whose  wisdom 
has  been  turned  into  foolishess  (2  Sam.  xv.  31).  What  an  illustration  does  this 
history  afford  of  that  saying  of  the  Temauite,  "  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own 
craflanesa  "  (Job  v.  13  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  19). 

6.  "  He  shall  tell  thee  what  shall  become  of  the  chdjd "  (ver.  8).  A  strange 
object  for  such  a  journey.  It  is  not,  "  what  to  do  for  the  child ; "  still  less,  "  what  to 
do  for  the  sin  /  "  but  simply,  what  should  be  the  issue  of  the  sickness.  But  that,  time 
would  show.  It  needed  no  ghost,  no  prophet  to  declare  that.  Ghe  sa/ra  sa/ra. 
Probably  Jeroboam  despaired  of  obtaining  more.  There  are  petitions  "  which  for 
our  unworthiness  we  dare  not  ask."  Despair  is  not  uncommonly  the  end  of 
presumption.  "  Sin  makes  such  a  strangeness  between  God  and  man,  that  the 
guilty  heart  either  thinks  not  of  suing  to  God,  or  fears  it"  (Bp.  Hall).  Or  was  it 
(ataUsm  prompted  this  inquiry?    'It  has  often  been  remarked  that  unbelief  and 


CH.  XIV.  1—20.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  819 

superstition  are  very  near  of  kin.  Man  cannot  divest  himself  of  all  belief.  Head 
and  heart  alike  "  abhor  a  vacuum."  Those  who  will  not  believe  in  one  God  shall 
b«  the  victims  of  strong  delusions,  and  shall  believe  a  lie  (2  Thess.  ii.  11). 

"  Hear  the  just  law,  the  judgment  of  the  Bkiea, 
He  that  hates  truth  shall  be  the  dupe  of  lies; 
And  he  that  will  be  cheated  to  the  last, 
Delusions  strong  as  hell  shall  bind  him  fast.* 

Witness  Julian  the  Apostate,  Lord  Herbert  of  Cherbury,  Bobert  Owen,  and  man; 
more.  The  Chinese  people  the  air  with  demons  and  spirits  of  the  dead.  Infidel 
France  tliiuks  it  unlucky  to  travel  on  a  Friday.  "  There  was  never  wicked  man 
that  was  not  infatuate  "  (Hall). 

7.  "  Mis  eyes  were  set "  (ver.  4).    Yet  "  having  his  eyes  open  "  (Nnm.  xxiv.  4). . 
Beason  is  "  the  candle  of  the  Lord."  Revelation  is  a  "  light  to  the  feet,  and  a  lamp 
to  the  path."    Inspiration  is  as  "  eyes  to  the  blind."     "  Visions  of  the  Almighty 
need  not  bodily  eyes,  but  are  rather  favoured  by  the  want  of  them  "  (Henry).    The 
eye  is  but  the  instrument  of  vision.    Eyes  of  fiesh  are  not  the  organs  of  the  spirit. 

8.  "  I  am  sent  to  thee  with  hewoy  ticUngs "  (ver.  6).  Compare  Ezek.  xiv.  4. 
"  I  the  Lord  will  answer  him  that  cometh  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  idols.* 
Heavy  tidings  for  heavy  transgression.  The  sentence  should  be  proportionate  to 
the  sin.    "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  &o. 

9.  "  I  exalted  thee  from  amvng  the  people  "  (ver.  7).  It  was  Jeroboam's  abuse 
of  the  singular  favours  he  had  received,  and  his  forgetfulness  of  Divine  benefits, 
that  so  much  enhanced  his  sin.  Cf.  ch.  xi.  9  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  17  ("  When  thou  wast 
little  in  thine  own  sight ") ;  2  Sam.  xii.  8, 9 ;  Psa.  Ixxiii  10  ("  Took  him  from  the 
sheepfolds,"  &o.) ;  Luke  xii.  48  ("  Unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,"  &c.) ;  ib,,  z.  16 
("Exalted  to  heaven,  thrust  down  to  hell").  It  is  well  to  remember  the  rock 
whence  we  were  hewn,  and  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  we  were  digged  (Isa.  IL  1). 

10.  "  Other  gods  and  molten  images  "  (ver.  9).  Men  often  disguise  their  sins 
under  specious  names.  "  Cherubic  symbols  "  was  perhaps  Jeroboam's  name  for  his 
calves.  He  would  not  allow  that  they  were  images  or  idols.  Josephns  happily 
reproduces  the  language  he  held  to  his  subjects :  "  I  suppose,  my  countrymen,  you 
know  that  every  place  hath  God  in  it,"  &c.  (Ant.  viii.  8.  4).  But  God  calls  things 
as  they  really  are.  Longfellow  truly  says  that  "  things  are  not  what  they  seem." 
But  they  ore  what  they  seem  to  the  Onmiscient. 

11.  "  And  rent  the  kingdom,  away  from,  the  house  of  Da/vid,"  &c.  Note  the 
contrast  between  this  language  and  the  discom-se  which  Ahijah  held  with  Jeroboam 
once  before.  That  meeting  was  full  of  promises ;  this  message  is  full  of  upbraid- 
ings.  Then  God  declared  that  He  would  rend  the  kingdom ;  here  He  complains 
that  He  has  done  so,  and  done  so  in  vain.  Then  He  proposed  David  as  Jeroboam's 
pattern — his  name  is  mentioned  six  times— here  He  accuses  the  king  of  contemning 
that  example.  There  He  speaks  of  a  "  sure  house ;"  here,  of  "taking  away  the 
remnant  of  the  house,"  "  as  a  man  taketh  away  dung."  Yet "  the  gifts  and  calling 
of  God  are  without  repentance."    It  is  Jeroboam's  sin  has  made  this  difference. 

12.  "I  will  bring  evil  on  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  and  will  cut  off,"  &c.  Compare 
oh.  xii.  27.  "  And  they  shall  kill  me."  So  the  very  means  which  Jeroboam  took 
to  secure  his  throne  procured  its  overthrow.  "  The  engineer  is  hoist  with  his  own 
petard."  If  he  could  but  have  trusted  God  his  kingdom  would  have  lasted.  But 
he  must  needs  prop  it  up  himself,  with  rotten  supports,  and  leaning  on  these  he 
brought  it  speedily  to  the  ground. 

13.  "  When  thy  feet  enter  into  the  eity  the  child  shall  die  "  (ver.  12).  For  the 
second  time  does  a  prophet  give  Jeroboam  a  sign  the  same  day.  And  the  second 
sign  was  hardly  less  significant  than  the  first.  For  the  mother  was,  in  some  sense, 
the  cause  of  her  chUd's  death.  Her  step  on  the  threshold  was  the  signal  for  the 
severance  of  his  "  thin-spun  life."  It  was  not  only  a  foretaste,  consequently,  of  the 
doom  awaiting  the  entire  house ;  it  was  also  a  shadowing  forth  of  the  cause  of  that 
destruction.     The  sins  of  the  father  were  visited  upon  the  children. 


820  THE  FIBST  BOOK  Of  KINGS.  [oh.  uv.  1—20. 

14.  "  And  all  Israel  shall  mom-n  for  him"  (yet,  18).  The  most,  and  the  most 
genuine,  tears  are  shed  over  the  graves  of  children.  (Is  it  that  many  of  ns,  as  we 
grow  older,  become  less  lovely  and  engaging,  less  desirable  as  companions  ?)  Yet 
of  this  child  it  might  justly  have  been  said,  "  Weep  ye  not  for  the  dead,  neither 
bemoan  him  "  (Jar.  xxii.  10).  For  (1)  he  was  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come 
(ver.  11).  (2)  He  escaped  the  butchery  of  Baasha.  And  he  escaped,  too,  the  danger 
of  contamination  and  moral  ruin.  His  life  was  not  unduly  shortened.  Life 
is  to  be  measured  not  by  the  beats  of  the  pulse,  but  by  the  life-work  we  hav« 
kooomplisbed.    "  He  being  made  perfect  in  a  short  time  fulfilled  a,  long  time." 

"  It  may  be  by  the  calendar  of  yeam 
Ton  are  the  elder  man  ;  but  'tis  the  sun 
Of  knowledge  on  the  mind's  dial  shining  bright 
And  ohionicling  deeds  and  thoughts  that  makes  true  time." 

(8)  The  "  good  thing  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Israel "  was  an  earnest  of  better  things 
to  come.  "  Little  faith  can  enter  heaven."  "  A  little  grace  goes  a  great  way  with 
great  people."  "  Those  that  are  good  in  bad  times  and  places  shine  very  bright  in 
the  eyes  of  God.  A  good  child  vn  the  house  of  Jeroboam  is  a  miracle  of  Divine 
grace  "  (Henry). 

15.  "  For  the  Lord  shall  smite  Israel"  (ver.  16).  For  if  Jeroboam  had  "made 
Israel  to  sin,"  Israel  had  loved  to  have  it  so  (ch.  xii.  30).  He  could  not  have  had 
his  calves  and  sanctuaries  without  priests;  and  calves,  sanctuaries,  and  priests 
would  have  been  useless  without  worshippers.  But  as  the  king,  so  the  people. 
Jeroboam  was  but  a  sample  of  many  thousands  of  his  subjects.  As  the  chief 
offender,  he  was  the  first  to  suffer,  and  suffered  most.  But  the  nation  that  had 
shared  his  sin  must  suffer  in  its  measure  and  turn. 

10.  "■Beyond  the  river"  {ih.)  The  judgments  of  God  are  governed  by  a  le* 
talionis.  Not  only  "an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  but,  "  Like  as  ye 
have  forsaken  me,  and  served  strange  gods  in  your  land,  so  shall  ye  serve  strangers 
in  a  land  that  is  hot  yours"  (Jer.  v.  19). 

17.  "And  Jerohoam's  wife  arose,  and  depa/rted,  and  catne  to  Tirzah"  (ver.  17). 
It  is  hardly  possible  to  realize  the  horror  virith  which  the  princess,  still  wearing 
her  disguise,  heard  the  doom  of  her  house,  and  who  shall  attempt  to  describe  the 
agonies  of  that  journey  home.  Bizpah,  the  daughter  of  Aiah  (2  Sam.  xxi.  10  sqq.), 
has  been  called  the  Mater  Dolorosa  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  the  title  equally 
belongs  to  Jeroboam's  wife.  But  why,  let  us  ask,  does  she  suffer  such  things? 
Why  must  this  sword  pierce  her  soul  ?  Was  it  not  because  of  her  share  in  the  sin? 
As  she  is  included  in  the  sentence  against  the  house  (ver.  11,  Heb.),  it  is  probable 
that  she  had  aided  and  abetted  her  husband  in  his  irreligious  and  schismatio  polioy. 
And  now  she  must  drink  of  his  cup :  she  must  be  the  first  to  taste  its  bitterness ; 
she  must  bring  death  to  one  child  and  tell  of  disgrace  worse  than  death  to  the 
rest. 

18.  "  And  they  huried  Mm  "  (ver  18).  In  Tirzah  the  beaatifal  (Cant.  vi.  4),  great 
lamentation  was  made  over  him.  And  indeed  his  seemed  to  be  a  case  for  tears. 
The  heir  to  the  throne,  he  was  never  to  ascend  it.  The  possessor  of  singular  gifts 
and  advantages,  he  was  never  to  exercise  the  former  or  enjoy  the  latter.  Had  he 
lived,  he  might  have  effected  a  reformation,  and  suppressed  uie  calf-worship.  But 
now  the  grave  closes  over  him,  and  he  is  no  more  seen.  What  a  proof  this  of 
a  life  to  come  1  Otherwise  there  would  be  injustice  with  God,  inequality  in  His 
deaUngs  with  men.  "But  the  righteous  live  for  evermore,  their  reward  also  is 
with  the  Lord."  "  We  fools  counted  his  hfe  madness  and  his  end  to  be  without 
honour.  How  is  he  numbered  among  the  children  of  God,  and  his  lot  ia  among 
the  saints  "  (Wisdom  v.  4,  6, 1&). 


«H.  XIV.  1—20.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGa  Wl 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  Impenitent  Seeker.  The  day  of  judgment  will  come  at  the 
«iid  of  the  world,  -when  the  heavens  and  earth  shall  be  burnt  up  (2  Thess. 
ii.  7 — 10 ;  2  Peter  iii.  7).  But  this  has  its  prelude  in  a  season  of  judgments  which 
overtakes  the  sinner  in  this  life.  Jeroboam,  having  sinned  away  his  day  of  grace, 
had  now  entered  into  such  a  season.  But  of  this  he  seems  to  have  been  doubtful. 
Hence  learn — 

I.  That  the  sinneb  mat  be  surprised  in  his  season  or  JtmaMENTS.  1.  That  there 
are  such  seasons  is  evident,  (1)  Witness  the  great  deluge  (Gen.  vi.  11 — 13).  Also 
the  rain  of  fire  on  the  cities  of  the  plain  (Gen.  xix.  13).  The  overthrow  of  nations. 
Signal  visitations  upon  notorious  sinners  (Exod.  ix.  13 — 16;  1  Sam.  xxviii.  15 — 19). 
(2)  Such  were  presages  of  the  awful  judgment  to  come  (Matt.  xxiv.  37 — 39 ;  2  Peter 
ii.  4 — 6;  Jnde  5— 7;  Rev.  xviii.  4).  2.  But  all  afflictions  are  not  such  retributions. 
(1)  Some  are  entailed  upon  us  through  the  fall,  and  alike  affect  the  penitent  and 
impenitent  (Gen.  iii.  16 — 18;  Job  v.  17;  1  Cor.  x.  13).  (2)  Some  come  to  us 
through  the  wickedness  and  blundering  of  those  around  us.  Many  suffer,  irrespec- 
tive of  their  character,  as  when  a  ship  is  wrecked  through  the  drunkenness  of  the 
master.  (3)  Some  are  appointed  or  permitted  for  disciplinary  and  educational 
purposes.  These  are  often  amongst  our  greatest  blessings.  (4)  Sometimes  we 
Buffer  for  the  benefit  of  others — vicariously.  When  this  is  voluntary  it  is  very 
-Christ-like  (see  Psa.  xxii.  11 ;  CoL  i.  24).  (5)  Under  all  these  we  have  a  refuge 
in  God  (Psa.  ix.  9, 13 ;  xlvi.  1).  8.  These  may  be  confounded.  (1)  Had  Jeroboam 
known  that  the  mercy  of  God  had  reached  its  limit,  and  that  the  season  of  retribu- 
tion had  set  in,  he  might  have  spared  his  queen  her  journey  to  Shiloh.  (2)  But 
what  else  could  he  have  expected  ?  Was  he  not  obstinately  wedded  to  his  sins  ? 
Had  he  not  before  him  the  history  of  Saul?  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  15 — 19.)  (3)  Men  still, 
in  our  day,  presume  upon  the  mercy  of  God  to  their  destruction.  Eminently  the 
■«as0  with  those  who  defer  repentance.    Learn  further — 

II.  That  a  sinner  mat  seek  the  Lord  to  no  good  purpose.  This  happens — 
1.  When  the  end  sought  is  tmprofitable.  (1)  Such  was  the  case  with  Jeroboam. 
His  inquiry  should  have  been,  not,  "  What  shall  become  of  the  child?  "  but,  "  How 
may  the  anger  of  God  be  averted  ?  "  (Compare  2  Sam.  xii,  16,  17.)  But  he  was  not 
prepared  to  repent  of  his  sin.  (9)  His  inquiry  was  one  of  curiosity  as  to  the 
-future.  Similar  curiosity  was  manifested  by  Saul  under  similar  circumstances. 
It  is  unseemly  for  a  sinner  to  pry  into  Divine  mysteries  rather  than  seek  the  salva- 
tion of  his  souL  2.  IVhen  the  spirit  of  the  seeker  is  improper.  (1)  He  did  not, 
indeed,  seek  his  calves  (compare  2  Kings  L  2).  He  rather  sought  Ahijah,  because 
the  spirit  of  prophecy  was  with  him  (ver.  2).  But  he  had  no  such  faith  in  his 
•oalves.  (2)  Why,  then,  did  he  not  renounce  them  ?  He  had  reasons  of  worldly 
poUcy  against  this  (see  ch.  xii  26 — 28).  He  was  therefore  a  deceiver  of  the  people. 
Hence  h6  would  have  his  queen  disguise  herself.  So  several  of  the  Popes  were 
known  to  have  been  infidels.  (3)  So  were  he  and  his  dupes  doomed  to  perish 
together  (see  Matt.  xv.  14;  2  Thess.  ii.  9— 12;  1  Tun.  iv.  1,  2),  8.  When  the 
manner  of  the  sea/rch  is  wtwortht/.  (1)  He  paid  a  respect  to  the  man  of. God. 
This  was  the  meaning  of  his  present  (see  1  Sam.  ix.  7, 8).  Hence  such  gifts  are 
-called  blessings  (see  Gen.  xxxui.  10,  11 ;  Judg.  i.  15 ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  17 ;  xxx.  26, 
jnarg. ;  2  Kings  v.  16).  (2)  Even  Jacob  would  eat  of  his  son's  venison  before  he 
proceeded  to  bless  him  (see  Gen.  xxvii.  4, 19,  25,  31 ;  see  also  1  Kings  xvii.  11). 
(8)  So  are  God's  blessings  and  sacrifices  offered  to  Him  commonly  associated  (see 
-Gen.  viii.  20 — 22 ;  ix.  1 — 17).  All  TTia  blessings  come  to  us  through  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ ;  and  especially  so  when  we,  by  faith,  present  Christ  to  Him.  (4)  But 
here  was  no  sacrifice;  and  the  value  of  the  gift  was  small.  What  were  a  few 
Joaves,  a  few  cakes,  and  a  cruse  of  honey  as  a  gift  from  a  king  I  (Compare  2  Kings 
▼.  6 ;  viu.  9.)  The  meanness  of  his  present  was  another  reason  why  he  would  have 
Ma  queen  disguised. 

What  an   argument  for  early  piety  is  hero  I     Surrender  to  Christ  before  you 

1    KINGS.  V 


32i  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xiv.  1— 2(>,. 

are  overtaken  by  a  season  of  judgments.  How  admonitory  is  this  subject  to  th& 
effect  that  prayer  should  be  true;  that  we  should  seek  the  right  thing,  in  the 
right  spirit,  and  in  the  right  manner  1 — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Spiritual  Vision,  When  the  season  of  retributions  set  in  upon 
Jeroboam,  and  his  son  Abijah  was  smitten  with  sickness,  he  sent  to  the  prophet 
Ahijah  the  Shilonite  to  inquire  of  the  word  of  Jehovah,  what  should  become 
of  the  chUd.  He  was  unwilling  it  should  be  publicly  known  that,  in  such  an 
emergency,  he  had  recourse  to  the  prophet  of  the  Lord  rather  than  to  his  calves 
(compare  2  Kings  i.  2).  He  accordingly  entrusted  this  delicate  business  to  his  wife, 
and  enjoined  that  she  should  disguise  herself.  The  text  evinces  how  fatUe  were 
these  expedients.    Note — 

I.  Sin  seeks  disguises.  1.  Truth  needs  none.  (1)  It  is  naturally  open.  "  He 
that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  Ught."  (2)  It  has  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  It 
is  self-consistent,  harmonious,  lovely.  (3)  It  ought  to  be  displayed ;  its  influence 
is  elevating  (Phil.  ii.  15,  16).  The  saint  who  hides  his  light  wrongs  his  race. 
(4)  Churches  are  constituted  that  Christians  should,  to  the  best  advantage,  witness 
for  Christ.  They  are  the  candlesticks  (see  Matt.  v.  14 — 16 ;  Rev.  i  20)  Note : 
Christians  should  discourage  the  eccentricity  that  would  lead  them  away  from  the 
Churches.  2.  It  is  otherwise  with  sin.  (1)  It  is  naturally  close.  The  sinner  has 
as  instinctive  an  aversion  to  the  light  as  the  owl  and  the  bat,  his  types.  (2)  It 
has  everything  to  be  ashamed  o£  It  is  self-contradictory,  discordant,  frightfully 
and  monstrously  ugly.  (3)  It  ought,  by  the  impenitent  sinner,  to  be  concealed. 
For  he  could  only  desire  to  disclose  it  in  order  to  infect- and  demoralize  others. 
(4)  But  the  true  should  drag  it  to  the  light,  that  its  deformity  might  be  seen^ 
abhorred,  and  execrated. 

il.  God  sees  throtioh  all  disguises.  1.  Nature'  itself  teaches  this.  (1)  He 
that  formed  the  eye,  can  He  not  see  ?  (Exod.  iv  10 — 12 ;  Pea.  xciv.  9.)  (2)  He 
that  formed  the  mind,  can  He  not  perteive?  (1  Chron.  xxviii  9 ;  Psa.  vii  9 ;  Prov. 
XV.  11 ;  Rev.  ii.  23.)  2.  It  is  evinced  in  the  visions  of  prophecy.  (1)  How  far- 
reaching  are  those  visions  I  The  end  was  seen  from  the  beginning.  The  instal- 
ments fulfilled  certify  the  remainder.  (2)  How  deep  their  insight  into  the  secret 
workings  of  the  heart  I  The  secret  ambition  of  Jeroboam,  when  he  was  yet  the 
servant  of  Solomon,  was  read  by  Ahijah  (ch.  xL  37).  Now  he  sees  through  tbe 
disguise  of  the  queen  and  reads  its  motives.  3.  This  should  he  considered.  (1) 
How  foolish  are  disguises  where  God  is  concerned  1  And  where  is  God  not  con- 
cerned ?  (2)  Those  who  would  deceive  God  only  deceive  themselves.  (3)  What 
disclosures  wiU  the  day  of  judgment  make  !  (1  Cor.  iii.  13 ;  iv.  5.)  What  a  day 
of  trembling  to  the  hypocrite  I 

III.  God  can  open  the  eyes  op  the  blind.  1.  Literally.  (1)  Miracles  upon 
the  sight  were  occasionally  wrought  in  ancient  times  (Gen.  xix.  11 ;  2  Kings  vi.  18). 
(2)  Many  such  were  wrought  by  Christ.  2.  Spiritually.  (1)  The  prophets  were 
gifted  with  spiritual  vision.  They  were  therefore  called  seers.  Their  prophecies 
were  called  visions.  (2)  Such  vision  had  Ahijah.  His  natural  sight  had  now  failed 
him  (ver.  4),  yet  he  saw  Jeroboam's  queen  before  she  came  into  his  presence,  saw 
through  her  disguises,  and  discerned  the  purpose  of  her  visit.  (3)  Spiritual  vision 
is  not  exclusively  the  privilege  of  prophets.  \a)  God  gives  this  to  the  sinner  when 
He  discovers  to  him  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  God  strips  him  of  the  disguises 
by  which  he  would  deceive  himself,  and  exhibits  his  own  life-likeness  to  his  con- 
science. (J)  God  gives  it  to  believers,  when  He  witnesses  His  pardon  and  their 
adoption,  to  theii'  spirits.  (See  Acts  xxvi.  17,  18 ;  Eph.  i  18.)  Have  your  eyes 
been  opened  ?  Pray  God  that  Satan  may  never  succeed  in  throwing  his  dust  into 
them. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — Hard  Tidings.  Such  is  the  character  given  by  the  prophet  to  thf 
matter  of  the  text  (ver.  6).  What  we  translate  "  heavy  tidings  "  is,  in  the  Hebrew, 
%s  in  the  margin,   hard.    The  uses  of  the  word  (iltfp)  in  several  places  suggest 


OH.  MV.  1—20.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  828 

that  it  shonld  be  here  taken  as  indicating  retributive  judgments  merited  by  one 
who  had  hardened  his  heart  in  sin.    Observe — 

I.  Privileges  dtvolvb  eesponsibilities.  Thus — 1.  Special  fa/vour  ealUi  for 
tpedal  gratitude.  (1)  Jeroboam  was  "  exalted  from  among  the  people."  He  was 
"  an  Epbrathite  of  Zereda,"  an  obscure  place,  mentioned  once,  and  that  only  in 
connection  with  his  birth  (ch.  zi  26).  The  names  of  his  parents  also  had  remained 
in  obscurity  but  for  tke  figure  he  cut  in  history.  (2)  He  was  made  "  prince  "  over 
the  "  people  of  God."  This  was  a  splendid  distinction.  A  people  is  great,  not 
through  its  number  or  the  extent  of  its  territories,  but  from  its  Virtues  (see  Deut. 
vii.  6 ;  xiv.  2;  xxvi.  18,  19).  What  an  influence  has  that  people  exerted  upon 
human  destinies  t  (3)  The  kingdom  rent  from  the  house  of  David  was  given  to 
him.  Jeroboam,  then,  was  placed  in  succession  to  that  David  who  had  led  the 
armies  of  Israel  to  victory  I  Also  to  that  Solomon  who  had  built  the  temple,  and 
who,  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  career,  filled  the  world  with  the  fame  of  surpassing 
wisdom  I  2.  The  favoured  are  com'pwred  with  their  peers.  (1)  Jeroboam  was  a 
compeer  to  David.  Both  were  hfted  from  humble  station — David  from  the  sheep, 
Jeroboam  from  the  army  (ch.  xi.  28).  Both  ascended  the  throne  of  Israel — ^founded 
dynasties.  (2)  But  how  do  they  compwre  f  "  David  kept  the  commandments  of 
God  " — followed  Him  "  with  all  his  heart."  This  did  not  Jeroboam.  Melancholy 
record,  he  did  nothing  for  God  I  3.  They  are  contrasted  with  their  peers.  (1) 
Jeroboam  "  had  done  evil  above  all  that  were  before  him."  More  than  Saul,  who 
never  worshipped  idols.  More  than  Solomon,  who  did  not  make  Israel  to  sin.  (2) 
Jeroboam  made  "  other  gods ;  and  "  (or  even)  "  molten  images."  Note :  He  intended 
his  calves  to  represent  the  God  of  Israel ;  but  the  God  of  Israel  Himself  calls  them 
"  other  gods."  So  are  the  images  of  Antichrist  other  gods  though  baptized  with 
Christian  names.  This  was  worse  than  the  idolatry  of  Solomon.  The  caricaturing 
of  the  true  God  is  more  offensive  to  Him  than  the  worshipping  of  His  creatures. 
Let  the  worshippers  of  barbarous  pictures  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  in  which  the  Almighty 
is  pourtrayed  as  a  decrepit  old  man,  and  such-like,  seriously  consider  this.  (3) 
Jeroboam  is  described  as  having  "  cast "  the  God  of  Israel  "  behind  his  back." 
What  a  startling  figure  1  How  descriptive  of  the  sin  of  those  who  now  neglect 
Godl 

II.  Responsibilities  abused  pbovoee  jxn>aMENTS.  Amongst  these  may  be  men- 
tioned— 1.  The  bitter  sense  of  wasted  opportunity.  (1)  Jeroboam  is  reminded  that 
he  once  had  the  graijd  chance  of  making  for  himself  a  "  sure  house  like  David  " 
(see  ch.  xi.  88).  What  golden  opportunities  may  we  not  have  wasted  I  (2)  That 
though  the  more  glorious  chance  was  missed  and  lost,  he  had  then  a  gracious  season 
of  warnings,  which  also  he  let  shp.  (See  events  recorded  oh.  xiii.)  This  respite 
improved  might  have  averted,  and  would  have  mitigated,  the  severity  of  the  judg- 
ments impending  (compare  ch.  xxi.  29).  2.  The  Ttnowledge  that  the  day  of  ven- 
geance has  set  in.  (1)  An  admonition  of  such  a  day  was  implied  in  the  earlier 
prophecy  of  Ahijah,  in  the  judgments  then  denounced  against  the  house  of  David 
for  the  sin  of  Solomon  (ch.  xi.  30—38).  (2)  This  admonition  was  declared  explicitly 
in  the  message  of  the  man  of  God  from  Judah,  and  solemnly  impressed  by  the  signs 
attending  and  following  (ch.  xiii.)  (3)  Now  Ahijah  announces  that  these  judgments 
are  taking  effect.  But  even  now,  bad  Jeroboam  come  to  God  in  the  spirit  of  re- 
pentance, though  his  sin  is  "  unto  death,"  yet  might  he  save  his  soul.  It  is  hard  now 
to  break  a  chain  so  riveted  as  that  is  by  which  he  has  bound  himself  No  repent- 
ance being  evinced,  the  knell  of  doom  sounds  forth  like  the  echoes  of  the  closing  door 
of  Noah's  ark,  which  announced  mercy  fled  and  wrath  begun.  3.  The  severity  of 
the  sentence.  (1)  The  honour  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam  is  to  be  brought  down  tc 
ignominy.  (2)  The  carcases  of  members  of  this  family  are  to  be  consumed  by 
carrion-feeders.  Such  are  the  swords  of  the  wicked  (compare  Gen.  xv.  11 ; 
Jer.  xxxiv.  18 — 20).  Whether  by  the  sword  of  Baasha,  or  literally,  after  that  sword 
bad  done  its  part,  the  words  of  Ahijah  came  true  (see  oh.  xv.  29).  "  The  doom 
of  the  house  of  Jeroboam  was  a  figure  of  that  of  the  house  of  this  man  of  sin 
(see  Rev.  xix.  17, 18).  God  knows  the  proud  afar  oft  But  He  gives  grace  to  the 
humble.— J.  A.  M. 


324  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xit.  1—20. 


Vers.  12 — 14. — The  Beprohaie'»  Doom,  In  the  qneen  of  Jeroboam  we  Bee  a 
remarkable  tuesBenger.  For  she  went  as  messenger  from  a  king  and  returned  as 
messenger  from  a  prophet.  Her  message  in  the  first  instance  was  simple,  but  in 
her  return  twofold.  She  brings  a  message  to  the  king,  and  with  it  a  message  also 
to  the  nation.     The  message  to  the  king  brings — 

I.  Heavy  tioinos  bespecting  Abijah.  1.  As  to  the  issue  of  his  illness.  (1) 
"  The  child  shall  die."  This  is  a  direct  answer  to  the_  question  with  which  the 
royal  messenger  was  charged  (ver.  8).  Here  was  the  withering  of  a  limb  of  Jero> 
boam's  family  answering  to  the  sign  of  the  withering  of  his  arm  (see  ch.  xiii.  4). 
(2)  The  king  does  not  now  ask  for  the  restoration  of  the  child  as  he  had  done  for 
the  restoration  of  his  arm  (ch.  xiii.  6).  He  did  not  even  ask,  in  time,  that  the 
judgment  might  be  averted.  How  could  he,  without  repenting  of  his  sin  ?  Note : 
The  descents  of  depravity,  like  those  of  natural  gravitation,  are  in  accelerating 
degrees.  (3^  This  judgment  is  the  signal  that  the  season  of  retributions  has  now 
fairly  set  in.  What  a  horror  to  wake  up  to  such  a  conviction  I  "  Be  sure  your  sin 
will  find  you  out."  2.  As  to  the  near  approach  of  his  death,  (1)  "  When  thy  feet 
enter  into  the  city."  Every  step  of  the  queen's  advance  over  that  twelve  miles  from 
Shiloh  to  Tirzah  measured  a  stride  of  death  towards  his  victim.  Do  we  suf&ciently 
realize  the  fact  that  this  is  the  case  with  us  in  passing  through  the  journey  of  Ufe  ? 
(2)  What  must  have  been  the  conflict  in  the  heart  of  the  queen  ?  Maternal  affeo- 
tion  would  urge  her  steps  with  speed  that  she  might  see  her  son  alive.  Tet  was  it 
a  race  with  death ;  and  death  was  first  at  the  palace.  That  monster  overtakes  the 
swiftest.  If  he  passes  one.  it  is  to  strike  another,  and  so  that  the  recoil  of  his  sting 
may  wound  the  trembling  heart  8.  As  to  the  circumstamces  attending,  "  All 
Israel  shall  mourn  for  him  and  bury  him ;  "  but  for  him  only  of  the  royal  family, 
"  because  in  him  there  is  found  some  good  thing  towards  the  Lord  God  of  Israel." 
Hence  learn  (1)  God's  punishments  are  discriminative.  He  does  not  overlook  the 
good  in  the  evil.  (2)  Yet  the  good  suffer  with  the  evil.  Abijah  dies  for  the  sin  of 
his  father.  Christ  dies  for  the  sin  of  the  world.  But  in  His  death  is  life  to  the 
believer.  (8)  Still  the  good  suffer  for  their  good.  They  are  taken  away  from  evil 
to  come.  Had  Abijah  hved  he  might  have  been  drawn  into  his  father's  sin.  God 
often  takes  them  soonest  whom  He  loves  best.  (4)  The  evil  suffer  in  the  good. 
Jeroboam  had  reason  to  mourn  the  loss  of  the  best  of  his  family.  So  had  Israel, 
since  the  succession  would  now  open  to  a  vricked  prince.  Note :  We  should  pray  for 
the  preservation  of  virtuous  and  nsefal  lives.  Especially  so  when  such  are  found 
in  seats  of  power  and  influence. 

XL  Heavy  tidings  bespecting  his  snBVivoBB.  1,  They  are  devoted  to  extermi- 
nation. (1)  This  as  a  general  fact  was  already  known.  (2)  It  is  now  published  with 
additional  circumstance.  The  agent  that  shall  effect  it  is  one  who  shall  himself 
mount  the  throne  of  Israel.  (3)  This  was  fulfilled  t»  the  letter  (see  ch.  xv.  27—30). 
2.  Judgment  will  come  speedily.  (1)  Some  think  this  exclamation  of  the  prophet, 
"  But  what  ?  Even  now  "  arose  from  his  having  seen  that  this  would  be  tiie  case. 
(2)  So  it  proved.  Within  two  years  Jeroboam  died.  He  was  succeeded  by  Nadab, 
who  two  years  later  was  slain  by  Baasha.  In  that  time  also,  and  by  the  same  hand, 
thepredicted  extermination  was  completed.  (3)  "The  wicked  do  not  live  out  half 
their  days."  This  is  true  of  dynasties  as  of  individuals.  The  dynasty  of  Jeroboam 
lasted  only  four  and  twenty  years. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  15—16. — The  Futwreof  Israel,  The  vision  of  the  Shilonite  eonoemhig  the 
house  of  Israel,  now  before  us,  ppems  to  have  come  upon  him  suddenly.  We  think 
the  exclamation,  "  But  what  ?  Even  now  I "  was  the  half-involuntaiy  expression 
of  the  surprise  of  tliis  new  rev  elation.  This  utterance  should,  then,  have  stood  at 
the  beginning  of  verse  15  rather  than  at  the  end  of  the  verse  preceding.  The 
connecting^ particle  "For,"  with  which  verse  15  now  opens,  favours  this  view. 
The  new  vision  describes  the  then  future  calamities  of  Israel,  together  with  Uieir 
provoking  causes. 

I.  He  was  hencefobth  to  bb  troubled  in  his  own  land.  He  is  there  to 
■tagger  and  tremble  under  the  stroke  of  God— 1.  "  A$  a  reed  is  shaken  im  th4 


CH.  WT.  1—20.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  825 

water."  (1)  The  reed  is  a  figure  of  frailty.  Kabshakeh,  in  describing  the  inability 
of  the  Egyptians  to  support  Hezekiah  against  the  Assyrians,  compares  them  to  a 
bruised  reed  (2  Kings  xviii.  21 ;  Isa.  xzxvi.  6 ;  see  also  Ezek.  xxxix.  6).  Contrariwise, 
our  Lord,  asserting  the  stability  and  yigour  of  John  Baptist,  said  that  he  was  no 
"reed  shaken  with  the  wind"  (Matt.  xi.  7).  In  derision  of  the  royalty  of  Jesus 
the  Boldiers  put  a  reed  in  His  band  for  a  sceptre  (Matt,  xxvii.  29).  Subsequent 
history  bore  emphatic  testimony  to  the  instability  and  feebleness  of  Ephraim.  (2) 
The  reed  is  "  shaken  in  the  water."  This  element  is  at  once  a  symbol  of  trouble 
and  oi people  (see  Psa.  Ixix.  17;  Bev.  xvii.  IS).  So  disquiet,  arising  from  popular 
tumults  and  civil  war,  is  suggested.  And  did  not  this  become  fact  ?  The  frequent 
changes  of  dynasty  kept  the  nation  in  perpetual  broils.  These  evils  were  aggra- 
vated by  wars  with  their  brethren  of  Judah.  2.  As  a  reed  shahen  by  the  wind.  (1) 
This  is  not  asserted,  but  implied,  since  reeds  shake  in  water  when  moved 
by  winds.  And  foreign  influences  had  much  to  do  v/ith  the  troubles  of  Israel.  (2) 
Foreign  idolatries  introduced  by  Solomon's  wives  were  at  the  root  of  the  troubles. 
(3)  The  wars  between  Israel  and  Judah  brought  foreign  armies  upon  the  scene — 
Egyptians,  Syrians,  and  Assyrians.  By  these  rough  winds  the  troubles  were 
aggravated. 

II.  Then  to  be  scattered  in  the  lands  of  stranoebs.  1.  A  captivity  of 
Israel  ia  foretold.  (1)  The  settlement  of  the  people  in  Canaan  is  frequently 
described  in  Scripture  under  the  figure  of  the  planting  of  a  vine  there  (see  Psa.  Ixiv. 
2 ;  Ixxx.  8  ;  Jer.  ii.  21 ;  xi.  17).  (2)  This  is  now  to  be  reversed.  "  He  shall  root 
up  Israel  out  of  this  good  land  which  he  gave  to  their  fathers."  Suppose  the  vine 
had  feeling ;  what  a  painful  process  I  2.  Also  the  region  of  their  dispersion.  (1) 
"  I  will  scatter  them  beyond  the  river,"  i.e.,  the  Euphrates,  for  thus,  by  emphasis, 
this  river  is  ever  distinguished  in  Scripture  (see  Gen.  xv.  18 ;  compare  Deut.  xL  24 
with  1  Kings  iv.  21  and  Psa.  IxziL  8).  (2)  This  river  also  stands  for  the  Assyrians, 
through  whose  territory  it  flowed.  Their  armies  invading  Israel  are  likened  to  the 
Euphrates  rising  and  overflowing  its  western  bank  (see  Isa.  viii.  7).  (3)  How 
literally  was  all  this  accomplished  (see  2  Kings  xv.  29  ;  xvii.  6,  18), 

III.  These  visitations  were  to  express  the  anoer  of  God.  1.  First  pro- 
voJced  by  their  Ca/naanitish  idolatries.  (1)  These  are  represented  here  by  "  their 
groves."  The  word  Asherah  (mtf  N.  m'CK)  occurs  thirty-nine  times,  and  is  every- 
where translated  groves,  yet  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  this  is  its  meaning. 
For  take  the  next  occurrence  after  that  in  our  text,  viz.,  ver.  23  of  this  chapter : 
How  could  a  grove  be  built  under  a  green  tree  ?  How  could  a  grove  be  made  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  9  (See_  2  Kings  xxi.  7 ;  zxiii.  6.)  (2)  These  Asheroth,  or 
Asherim,  appear  to  have  been  images  made  of  wood,  cased  in  metal,  perhaps 
fashioned  like  goats,  which  were  worshipped  with  abominable  rites.  They  were 
popular  Canaanitish  divinities,  and  for  this  reason  to  be  execrated  by  Israelites 
(see  Exod.  xxxiv.  18  ;  Deut.  xvi.  21).  (3)  But  for  all  this  they  fell  into  the  snare 
of  worshipping  together  with  the  Baaum,  or  Bulls,  and  other  Canaanitish  idols 
(Judg.  iii.  7  ;  vi.  26  ;  1  Kings  xvui.  19).  %  Then  by  their  complicity  in  the  sin  of 
Jeroboam.  (1)  This  addition  to  their  earlier  idolatries  filled  up  the  measure  of 
their  iniquity.  For  it  completely  alienated  them  from  the  worship  of  Jehovah  in 
His  temple.  (2)  They  forsook  tie  Lord,  so  He  threatens  to  "  give  up  Israel  for  the 
sin  of  Jeroboam,"  as  He  had  also  given  up  the  house  of  Jeroboam  to  judgment. — 
J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  17 — 18. —  Death  and  Mowming.  With  a  heavy  heart  the  queen  of 
Jeroboam  moved  along  the  road  from  Sliiloh  to  Tirzah,  and  received  the  salute 
of  death  at  the  threshold  of  the  palace.  This  sad  event  was  soon  followed  by  a 
state  funeral  and  by  a  public  mourning.     In  all  this  note  how — 

I.  Sorrow  tarnishes  humaw  splendour.  1.  Survey  this  palace  of  Tirzah. 
(1)  This  is  not  the  only  palace  of  Jeroboam.  Soon  after  his  promotion  to  the 
orown  of  Israel  we  find  him  building  a  palace  at  Shechem.  That  commemorated 
the  event  of  his  elevation  ;  for  there  those  circumstances  occurred  which  gave  rise 
to  it  (we  oh.  xii.)     (2)  But  this  palace  did  not  long  satisfy  the  royal  ambition.    We 


326  TUB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  Lch-  ^f-  1— iiO. 

find  the  king  presently  engaged  in  building  a  second  at  Fennel,  in  the  tribe  of  Gad, 
eastward  of  Jordan  (ch.  xii.  25).  Those  who  come  suddenly  to  fortune  commonly 
affect  great  splendour.  (3)  Now  we  find  him  occupying  a  third.  This  probably 
was  the  most  magnificent.  It  is  situated  in  a  place  famous  for  its  beauty  in  the 
days  of  Solomon  (see  Song  vi.  4).  From  this  it  had  its  name  (nSin),  which  signifies 
pleaacmtnesa.  Doubtless  the  palace  was  in  keeping  with  the  place,  for  it  was  pre- 
ferred as  the  royal  residence  until  its  destruction  by  fire  (oh.  xvi.  18).  2.  Behold 
in  this  pa/radise  a  corpse  I  (1)  Death  has  smitten  Abijah,  the  best  and  moat 
promising  of  the  royal  family.  What  a  scene  of  grief  when  the  mother,  arrived 
from  Shiloh,  entered  that  chamber  I  What  a  dense  gloom  would  rest  on  the 
household  I  In  that  solemn  moment  how  vain  must  earthly  splendour  have 
appeared  I  (2)  And  does  not  sorrow  stiU  mingle  vyith  all  earthly  scenes  t  Why, 
then,  should  we  not  rather  set  our  affections  upon  things  above  ?  (3)  Wealth 
cannot  bribe  death.  The  King  of  Terrors  enters  the  palace  of  royalty  as  cer- 
tainly as  he  enters  the  cottage  of  poverty.  To  the  great  this  enemy  is  even  more 
formidable  than  to  the  humble,  for  they  have  more  to  leave.  The  acquisitions 
of  the  worldling,  therefore,  are  only  giving  point  and  venom  to  the  sting  of 
death. 

II.  It  has  reliefs  and  aogravations.  1.  The  reliefs  are  the  fruits  of  virtue. 
(1)  The  public  mourning  would  be  a  solace  to  the  royal  family.  A  king  miglit 
provide  a  pompous  funeral  for  his  son,  but  he  could  not  command  the  heart  of  the 
nation  to  mourn  (2)  This  public  mourning  was  a  tribute  to  the  virtues  of  the 
prince  (see  ver.  13).  (3)  There  was  pure  comfort  in  the  reflection  that  the  spirit  of 
the  pious  youth  is  away  from  a  world  of  sin,  in  the  companionship  of  saints  and  holy 
angels.  2.  The  aggravations  are  the  fruits  of  sin.  (1)  How  the  grief  of  Jeroboam 
must  have  been  embittered  by  the  fact  that  this  bereavement  came  not  as  a  mes- 
senger of  mercy  to  him,  but  as  a  visitation  of  judgment !  (2)  How  it  must  have 
alarmed  him  to  know  that  it  was  but  the  first  of  a  series  of  judgments  destined  to 
issue  in  the  extermination  of  his  house  !  (3)  The  very  virtues  of  the  prince  first 
taken,  in  this  view,  became  an  aggravation,  for  he  is  removed  as  too  good  a  prince 
for  so  wicked  a  people,  and  to  make  way  for  the  succession  of  a  wicked  prince  to 
punish  them.— J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  19,  20. — The  Bevietu.    The  text  reminds  us — 

I.  That  the  season  of  death  is  a  time  for  reflection.  1.  In  presence  of 
»  corpse  the  giddiest  poMse.  (1)  This  is  seen  when  an  ordinary  funeral  passes 
along  the  streets,  in  the  sombre  countenances  of  the  bystanders,  if  not  in  more 
special  tokens  of  respect.  It  is  more  evident  still  when  the  deceased  may  have 
been  an  acquaintance  or  a  relative.  But  most  so  in  the  very  house  of  mourning, 
where  the  relics  are  seen  shrouded  in  their  pallor  and  immobility.  (2)  What 
trains  of  thought  are  started !  (a)  What  a  mystery  is  death !  (5)  What  a  mystery 
is  life  !  (c)  What  a  mystery  is  futurity  I — the  spirit  world — the  resurrection — the 
judgment — heaven — hell,  (c?)  Are  we  prepared  to  encounter  the  inevitable  ?  Who 
can  forecast  the  moment?  (e)  Why  should  we  defer  the  needful  preparation? 
2.  When  a  monarch  dies  a  nation  thinks.  (1)  This  is  so  under  ordinary  condi- 
tions. The  social  position  occupied  is  so  elevated  that  the  event  is  conspicuous  to 
all.  What  a  leveller  is  death  I  In  this  article  all  claim  kindred,  the  prince  and 
the  beggar  (Prov.  xxii.  2).     (2)  But  Jeroboam's  death  was  by  the  stroke  of  God 

i2  Ghron.  xiii.  20).  Such  a  conspicuous  judgment  was  fitting  to  the  man  of  sin 
see  Isa.  xi.  4;  2  Thess.  ii.  8;  Rev.  xix.  15).  How  alarmingly  would  such  a  death 
speak  to  workers  of  iniquity  1  (3)  The  demise  of  Jeroboam  opened  the  succession 
to  Nadab,  who,  without  the  genius  of  his  father,  followed  in  his  iniquities.  3.  But 
the  virtuous  only  are  lamented.  (1)  Jeroboam  was  buried.  He  did  come  to  the 
sepulchre  "  with  his  fathers."  And  he  may  have  had  the  formality  of  a  family 
mourning.  His  household  may  have  gone  barefoot,  wept,  torn  their  clothes,  smoie 
on  their  breasts,  lay  on  the  ground  and  fasted,  as  the  custom  was.  (2)  But  there 
was  no  national  mourning.  The  pubUc  mourning  for  Moses  and  Aaron  lasted 
tbirtiy  days,  that  for  Saul  seven  (Num.  xx.  29 ;  Deut.  xzxiv.  8 ;  1  Sam.  xxxi.  18). 


3H.  XIV.  1—20.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  W? 

For  Abijah,  a  pious  prince  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  there  was  a  national  mourning, 
though  he  never  came  to  the  throne  ;  but  for  Jeroboam,  after  a  reign  of  twenty- two 
years,  no  mourning  1  (Ver.  13.)  (3)  What  a  contrast-— the  apathy  of  the  nation, 
now  at  the  close  of  their  experiment  at  king-making,  to  the  enthusiasm  at  iti 
commencement  (ch.  xii.  20)  I  How  seldom  do  revolutionists  adec^uately  consider 
the  end  1     They  often  anticipate  a  paradise  and  find  a  hell. 

II.  That  we  should,  therefore,  so  live  thai  suoh  reflections  mat  prove 
GRATEFUL.  To  this  end  our  policy  should  be — 1.  Pure.  (1)  Such  was  not  the 
policy  of  Jeroboam.  When  his  people  became  restive  under  his  rule,  and  he  feared 
they  would  return  to  Eehoboam,  instead  of  looking  to  God,  he  forsook  Him  and 
made  Israel  to  sin.  (2)  The  policy  of  purity  is  the  policy  of  faith.  Faith  in  God — 
in  Christ — ^in  truth.  2.  Peaceable.  (1)  Peace  is  kin  to  purity  (James  iii.  17).  God 
made  peace  for  Jeroboam  before  he  had  departed  from  Him  (see  ch.  xii.  21 — 24). 
So  does  He  stiU  undertake  for  His  people  (Prov.  xvi.  7).  (2)  Wars  are  bom  of  evil 
lusts  (James  iv.  1).  When  Jeroboam  forsook  the  Lord,  then  commenced  an  embroil- 
ment in  hostilities  from  which  he  was  never  free.  First  with  Behoboam  (ver.  30), 
then  with  Abijah  (2  Chron.  xui).  8.  So  shall  we  a/void  disaster.  (1)  By  pursuing 
an  opposite  policy  Jeroboam  brought  disaster  upon  himself.  His  body  was  smitten 
by  God.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  repentance  to  the  saving  of  his  soul.  (2)  He 
brought  disaster  upon  his  family.  The  best  of  his  sons  died  prematurely  for  his 
sin.  Two  years  later  he  perished  himself.  StiU  two  years  later  and  his  race 
became  exterminated  vrith  violence.  (3)  He  brought  disaster  upon  his  people. 
Impatient  of  taxation  under  Eehoboam,  they  made  him  king,  but  got  no  relief, 
having  to  build  palaces  and  sustain  wars.  And  by  their  complicity  in  his  idolatry 
they  fiUed  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  and  incurred  the  anger  of  God,  which 
involved  them  in  the  miseries  of  foreign  invasion  and  captiviiy.  What  profit  is 
there  in  a  crown  that  is  retained  by  the  policy  of  sia  ?  The  whole  world  is  dearly 
pu'chased  with  the  loss  of  the  soul. — J.  A.  M. 

Ver.  18. — Early  Piety  in  an  Unexpected  Plact.  (A  Sermon  te  Tonng  People.) 
Jeroboam  had  married  ia  Egypt  a  princess  named  Ano.  She  was  the  elder  sister 
«f  Tahpenes,  the  wife  of  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt.  Their  home  had  been  gladdened 
by  the  birth  of  a  child,  whom  they  brought  with  them  on  Jeroboam's  return  to  his 
■own  tribe  and  country.  This  child,  Abijah,  on  whom  their  affections  and  the 
hopes  of  the  people  were  fixed,  was  stricken  by  illness,  and  seemed  likely  to  die. 
Then  the  parents  turned  to  the  Lord  in  their  trouble,  for  the  calves  at  Bethel  and  Dan, 
they  knew,  were  powerless  to  help  them.  [Note  the  frequency  with  which  those  who 
in  theory  deny  God,  or  in  practice  forget  Him,  seek  His  help  in  their  time  of  fear  and 
grief.]  They  would  not  send  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  for  several  reasons ;  but 
Jeroboam  remembered  the  old  prophet,  Ahijah,  who  had  spoken  to  him  in  the  field 
some  years  before  (ch.  xi.  29 — 31),  and  foretold  that  he  should  rule  over  the  ten  tribes 
of  Israel.  Accordingly,  Queen  Ano  secretly  set  out  for  Shiloh  (the  ancient  sanc- 
tuary), where,  in  a  humble  home,  the  prophet  lived.  She  disguised  herself  as  a 
poor  woman,  and  took  a  present  such  as  a  peasant  would  offer — ten  loaves,  two 
roUs  for  the  children  of  the  prophet,  a  bunch  of  raisins,  and  a  jar  of  honey. 
Jeroboam  hoped  he  might,  by  this  deceit,  get  a  word  of  hope  about  the  dying  boy, 
for  he  knew  that  he  could  not  expect  comfort  from  Ahijah,  because  he  had  grievously 
disobeyed  his  command.  He  feared,  therefore,  that  if  the  man  of  God  recognized 
Ano  he  would  rebuke  this  sin.  The  attempt  was  vain.  The  prophet,  nearly  blind 
though  he  was,  knew  by  revelation  who  was  coming.  Terrible  were  the  words  of 
doom  he  uttered  about  the  house  of  Jeroboam ;  and  the  only  gleam  of  comfort  for 
the  parents  was  that  in  Abijah  "  there  was  found  some  good  thing  towards  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel,"  so  that  he  should  not  have  the  curse  of  Uving  to  see  and  share 
the  woe  and  shame  which  were  coming.  Abijah  gives  us  an  example  of  pietj 
which  is  worthy  of  consideration,  especially  by  the  young. 

I.  Abijah's  PIETY  WAS  EARLY.     1.  Define  piety.    It  is  right  disposition  toward 
Ood,  resulting  from  the  secret  influence  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.     It  reveals  itself  in 
desires  after  what  is  good,  and  pure,  and  true ;  in  resolutions  to  seek  these ;  in 


B2S  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [ch.  xiv.  1—20. 

prayers,  through  which  the  heart  pours  out  its  love  and  longing  towards  God.  Thia 
should  be  more  natural  to  us  than  to  Abijah.  He  knew  of  God's  power,  we  know 
of  His  love.  He  had  heard  of  the  Shekinah ;  we  have  heard  of  Jesus  Christ,  who 
says,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Children  ran  to  Jesus  once, 
and  found  rest  and  gladness  in  His  love ;  why  not  now  ?  2.  Describe  early  piety. 
Show  how  it  is  cultivated,  hindered,  and  revealed.  Urge  upon  parents  and 
teachers  the  importance  of  expecting  it.  We  overlook  the  "blade,"  and  then  wonder 
we  do  not  see  later  "  the  full  com  in  the  ear."  If  we  accept  the  teaching  of  Jesus 
Christ,  it  is  evident  that  a  child  is  naturally  more  hkely  than  an  adult  to  enter  Hi» 
kingdom.  To  be  a  child  is  a  necessity ;  to"  become  a  child "  is  an  arduous  struggle, 
and  sometimes  a  sore  humiliation.  The  door  of  mercy  is  so  low  that  children  can 
most  easily  pass  through  it.  Happy  is  the  home  which  is  adorned  by  the  presence 
of  a  child-disciple.  There  are  those  now  estranged  from  God  who  may  have  a 
fulfilment  of  the  words,  "  a  little  child  shall  lead  them." 

II.  Abijah's  piety  was  sikcere.  1.  Some  good  thing  was  in  him — that  is,  in 
his  heart.  It  was  not  something  put  on  and  off,  like  a  garment ;  but  an  abiding 
principle,  influencing  the  thoughts  as  well  as  the  hfe.  Nothing  is  more  offensive 
to  God  than  pretended  piety.  The  long-faced  visage  which  never  smiles,  the  cant 
phrases  which  express  what  cannot  really  be  honestly  felt  by  a  chUd,  are  hideous 
to  man  and  God.  2.  Thia  good  thing  was  "  toward  the  Lord  Ood  of  Israel."  It 
reminds  us  of  the  phrase,  "  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  We  may  turn  from  sin  to  respectability,  but  that  is  not  repentance 
towards  Ood.  We  may  love  to  do  right  things  because  they  please  men,  but  thi» 
is  not  piety  towards  God.  "  The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth ;  for  man  looketh  on. 
the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart "  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7). 

III.  Abijah's  piktv  was  disceenible.  "  It  wa,B  found  in  him."  1.  God  saw  iK 
He  spoke  of  it  to  His  servant  Ahijah,  as  of  something  He  rejoiced  to  find.  God  is 
ever  looking  for  what  is  good,  in  the  world  and  in  your  heart.  Though  the  world 
is  corrupt,  and  men  have  done  abominable  works,  the  Lord  looks  down  from 
heaven  to  see  if  there  are  any  that  understand  and  seek  God.  See  Fsa.  xiv.  1,  2. 
Compare  this  with  the  Lord's  parables  of  the  woman  seeking  the  lost  piece  of 
silver,  and  of  the  father  going  out  to  look  for  and  meet  the  returning  prodigal. 
Not  only  your  faults  and  sins,  but  your  good  wishes  and  holy  thoughts  and  silent 
prayers  are  recognized  by  God.  2.  Man  saw  it.  Ahijah  did  not  proclaim  his 
piety — that  would  have  been  offensive,  especially  in  a  ohUd — but  it  was  "  found  " 
m  him.  He  was  so  young  that  he  could  take  no  active  part  in  the  service  of 
God,  and  was  unable  publicly  to  oppose  his  father's  idolatry ;  but  his  parents,  and 
the  courtiers,  and  the  servants  must  have  been  sometimes  shamed  by  his  earnest 
eyes.  A  noiseless  violet  makes  the  hedgerow  fragrant.  It  bewrays  itself  by  its 
sweetness. 

IV.  Abijah's  piett  was  unexpected.  He  belonged  to  the  house  of  Jeroboam, 
who  made  Israel  to  sin.  His  mother  was  probably  still  a  heathen  ;  his  father  was 
ambitious,  cruel,  and  irreligious,  and,  so  far  as  we  know,  thia  little  boy  alone,  in  all 
the  court,  loved  the  "  God  of  Israel."  His  piety  was  the  more  conspicuous  on 
this  account,  just  as  the  stars  are  bi-ightest  when  the  sky  is  d«,rk,  and  the  cedars 
ftre  most  beautiful  when  surrounding  trees  are  leafless.  Describe  the  position  of 
children  in  a  godless  home,  with  irreligious  companions,  &o.  Even  there  it  is  not 
impossible  to  love  and  serve  the  Lord. 

Conclusion.  It  seems  at  first  sight,  especially  to  children,  a  strcmge  rewari 
that  was  given  to  Abijah — to  die  young.  But  there  were  peculiar  reasons  for 
this.  He  was  delivered  from  a  sinful  world,  a  distracted  country,  and  evil  in- 
fluences ;  nor  did  he  ever  see  those  dear  to  him  murdered  and  dishonoured.  Ha 
was  "  taken  away  from  the  evU  to  come."  If  the  veil  were  rent,  and  we  could 
see  the  heavenly  home  in  its  beauty  and  sinlessness,  we  should  understand  what 
Paul  meant  when  he  said,  "  To  depart  and  to  be  with  Christ  is  far  better."  Every 
parent  whose  child  dies  in  the  Lord  may  hear  amidst  his  sobs  the  words  of 
Jesus,  "  Suffer  the  httle  children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not,  for  of  such 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 


OH.  XIV.  1— 20.j  THE  FliiSX  BOOK  Ob"  KINGS.  R'i» 

"Little  one,  precious  one. 

Summoned  away, 
Ere  life's  nprising  son 

Dawned  into  day, 
Gone  from  thy  mother's  arms, 

Gone  to  the  Saviour's  breast, 
Safe  from  life's  rude  alaims, 

Blissful  thy  rest."  A.  R. 

Vers.  17, 18. — The  Dead  Child.  Following  the  order  of  events  as  they  appear 
in  the  Hebrew  text  rather  than  in  the  Septuagint,  we  regard  this  as  the  first  of  th» 
calamities  that  befell  the  honse  of  Jeroboam,  until  it  became  extinct  on  the  death  oi 
Nadab  (oh.  xv.  29),  as  the  penalty  of  his  transgression  in  violating  the  religioufl 
unity  of  the  nation.  So  soon  was  he  made  to  feel  that  he  was  in  the  grasp  of  a 
Power  that  could  not  be  mocked  or  trifled  with,  and  against  which  it  was  vain  for 
him  to  rebeL  The  narrative  is  full  of  touching  interest,  and  has  many  points  of 
moral  teaching.    It  illustrates — 

I.  Thb  tenderness  of  natural  atfection  even  in  a  bad  man.  We  have  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  genuine  parental  feeling  prompted  both  Jeroboam  and  his  wife 
in  their  appeal  to  the  prophet.  One  cannot  but  sympathize  with  them  in  their 
distress  at  the  fatal  sickness  of  their  child.  Human  nature  in  its  deepest  degrada- 
tion is  not  altogether  lost  to  the  touches  of  tender  emotion.  The  thrill  of  parental 
love  may  be  found  in  hearts  so  debased  and  hardened  that  nothing  else  can  move 
them.  The  most  ferocious  savage  will  defend  his  own,  and  "  barbarous  people  "  are 
capable  of  "showing  no  little  Mndness"  even  to  strangers  (Acts  xxviii.)  Eut  in 
many  cases  there  is  no  real  moral  worth  in  these  affections  and  amenities.  They 
can  scarcely  be  called  "  redeeming  qualities."  Parental  feeling  is  often  little  else 
than  an  animal  instinct.  It  may  exist  side  by  side  with  the  most  grovelling  pas- 
sions and  the  most  complete  moral  obliquity.  Jeroboam  loved  his  child,  and  yet, 
in  proud  self-will  and  impious  defiance  of  the  Divine  authority,  he  could  secure  his 
own  carnal  ends  at  the  cost  of  the  utter  spiritual  degradation  of  the  people. 

II.  The  blindness  of  a  sinful  infatuation.  The  king  flies  in  his  distress  to 
the  prophet  whom  he  has  long  slighted  and  ignored.  He  sought  no  counsel  from 
him  in  the  setting  up  of  the  golden  calves  at  Dan  and  Bethel.  But  now,  as  if  he 
had  himself  fulfilled  all  the  conditions  of  the  Divine  promise,  he  thinks  to  get  from 
the  prophet  a  word  to  confirm  his  hope  of  a  "  sure  house  "  (ch.  xi.  38).  Such  is  the 
folly  of  human  nature.  When  the  shadow  of  adversity  falls  on  men  they  try,  with 
something  like  a  superstitious  impulse,  to  get  consolation  from  religious  sources 
which,  in  the  time  of  their  prosperity,  they  neglected  and  despised.  But  what  could 
Jeroboam  expect  from  the  oracle  of  a  God  whom  he  sinned  against  so  grievously  but 
"  heavy  tidings  "  respecting  his  child  ?  He  bids  his  wife  "feign  herself  to  be  another 
woman ; "  but  how  could  he  dream  that  a  prophet,  who  had  power  to  read  the 
future,  would  not  be  able  to  penetrate  the  false  disguise  ?  Thus,  when  men's  hearts 
are  "set  in  them  to  do  evil "  do  they  resort  to  vain  subterfuges,  and  flatter  them- 
selves with  a  delusive  hope.  Thus  do  they  often  rush  blindly  on  their  own  con- 
demnation and  ruin ;  provoking,  and  even  antedating,  the  very  calamities  they  have 
so  much  cause  to  dread. 

III.  The  cuese  of  sin  on  the  sacred  relationships  of  life.  It  is  terribly 
expressive  of  the  hatefulness,  in  God's  sight,  of  Jeroboam's  impiety  that  the  very 
flower  and  crov/n  of  his  house  should  be  thus  stricken — the  fairest  and  the  best, 
the  one  who  seemed  likely  to  justify  his  name  Abijah  ("  Jehovah  is  my  Father  ") 
— because  already  in  his  young  heart  there  was  found  "  some  good  thing  towards 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  So  is  it  often  in  the  course  of  human  history.  The  evil 
men  do  comes  back  to  them,  not  only  in  divers  forms  of  retribution,  but  often  in 
the  form  of  penalties  that  pierce  them  in  the  tenderest  part.  The  dearest  ties  of 
hfe  are  broken.  Or  they  see  their  own  moral  deformity  reflected  in  those  whom 
they  would  fain  shield  from  its  bitter  consequences.  Or  their  brightest  hopes  a)» 
withered  at  the  root,  and  that  which  might  have  been,  and  was  intended  to  be,  the 
source  of  the  purest  earthly  joy  becomes  the  occasion  of  keenest  sorrow. 


880  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  hv.  1—20 

rV.  The  blenoino  of  an  element  of  meecy  with  God's  sevesest  judgments. 
We  see  here  how  the  innocent  suffer  witli  the  guilty.  The  iniquity  of  the  fathera 
is  visited  upon  the  children  (Exod.  xi.  5).  Yet  to  the  ohUd  himself,  in  this  instance, 
it  was  a  gracious  visitation.  (1)  He  was  emphatically  "  taken  from  the  evil  to 
come."  (2)  His  incipient  piety  was  recognized  and  crowned  by  this  translation  to 
a  happier  sphere,  (3)  It  was  bis  special  privilege  to  die  a  natural  and  not  a  violent 
death — the  only  one  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam  who  should  "  go  to  the  grave  in 
peace."  Thus  in  the  darkest  Divine  judgment  there  is  a  gleam  of  mercy.  There  is 
"  light  in  the  cloud."  It  has  a  "  silver  hning."  The  sufferings  of  innocent  children, 
and  the  fact  that  so  large  a  proportion  of  the  human  race  die  in  infancy,  are  dark 
mysteries  to  us.  l!ut  even  here  we  see  the  dispensation  of  an  all-wise  Love,  remem- 
bering Him  who  said,  "  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  in  heaven  that  one  of  these 
little  ones  should  perish"  (Matt,  xviii.  14).  "  Suffer  the  Uttle  children  to  come  unto 
Die,  and  forbid  them  not ;  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (Mark  x.  14). — W. 

Vers.  1 — 20. — Affliction  and  judgment.  I.  The  stkicken  eino.  Abijah  seems 
to  have  been  heir  to  the  throne,  and  to  have  been  alike  the  king's  and  the  people's 
hope.  The  father's  heart  was  touched  :  the  king  saw  the  dynasty  threatened,  to 
establish  which  he  had  ventured  so  much.  The  voice  of  God,  against  which  the 
ear  was  closed,  will  be  heard  again  in  the  quietness  of  the  sick  chamber,  in  the 
silence  of  death.  God  follows  us  through  deepening  sorrows,  if  haply  we  may 
turn  ere  we  are  overwhelmed  by  the  waters  of  destruction. 

II.  The  eesoet  foe  help.  1.  His  trouble  drives  him  towa/rda  God.  It  is 
meant  to  do  this.    It  is  the  touching  of  God's  hand  that  we  may  look  up  and  live. 

"  Eyes  which  the  preacher  could  not  school 
By  wayside  graves  are  raised, 
And  lips  cry,  '  God  be  pitiful,' 
Which  ne'er  said,  '  God  be  praisSd.' " 

2.  Ee  it  drawn  by  the  rememhramce  of  pa»t  mercy.  "  Behold,  there  b  AJiijah  th« 
prophet,  who  told  me  that  I  should  be  king  over  this  people."  The  remembrances 
of  mercies  are  cords  to  draw  back  straying  hearts  to  God.  The  thought  of  what  God 
has  done  makes  a  holy  place  for  faith,  and  rears  an  altar  whence  may  rise  the 
incense  of  accepted  prayer.  8.  Eia  hope  is  defeated  by  his  own  deceit.  "  Disguise 
thyself,  that  thou  be  not  known  as  the  wife  of  Jeroboam."  He  thought  he  might 
find  help  without  owning  and  yielding  his  sin.  How  many  prayers  are  like  Jero- 
boam's embassy !  Men  wish  to  find  mercy  and  yet  cling  to  their  sinful  hfe,  and 
imagine  that  because  their  wicked  practices  are  kept  behind  their  back  they  are  not 
there  in  God's  sight  I  4.  Gifts  (ver.  8)  could  not  make  up  the  lack  of  a  true 
penitent  heart.  ' 

III.  The  Loed's  answeb.  1.  Disguise  is  impossible  before  God  (vers  5  6) 
We  can  conceal  nothing  from  Him  ;  and  one  word  of  His  ("  Come  in,  thou  wife  of 
Jeroboarn  1  ")  is  enough  to  rend  every  veil  of  pretence  from  the  soul  and  overwhehn 
It  wiih  shame.  We  may  now  close  the  ears  to  the  voice  of  accusing  conscience 
but  we  go  onward,  as  she  went,  towhere  the  Judge  will  name  us.  2.  Ood's  name 
"  '^^^  ^°^i^°^  of  Israel."  Not  only  will  the  covering  be  torn  from  the  sinner's 
heart  and  life ;  God  will  be  revealed.  He  is  the  mighty  avenger  of  those  who  have 
been  seduced  and  smned  against.  8.  Jeroboam's  ingratitude  (vers  7—9)  He 
was  taken  from  among  the  people,  and  yet  he  had  shown  no  anxiety  to  discharge 
anght  the  duties  of  the  high  oface  committed  to  him.  (1)  Human  patterns  were 
despised  ("Thou  hast  not  been  as  my  servant  David  ").  (2)  God  Hunself  was  cast 
behind  his  back.  4.  The  doom.  (1)  There  was  deepest  dishonour  for  him.  His 
house  was  overthrown  and  removed  as  the  vilest  refuse.  (2)  There  was  destruction 
for  his  people.  For  the  impenitent  and  all  who  are  led  by  them  there  is,  and  can 
be,  only  utter  and  eternal  ruin. 

,■  jy*  7^^  SHADOW  OF  FALLING  JUDGMENT  (vers.  17—20).  1.  Abijah's  death.  The 
hght  Of  the  home,  the  hope  of  the  land,  is  taken.  2.  Jeroboam's  death  "  The  Lord 
struck  him  and  he  died  "  (2  Chron.  xiii.  20).     The  clear  inteUect  and  the  strong 


OH.  UT.  81—81.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


381 


hand  are  smitten  and  removed.  Slowly  but  surely  the  word  advances  to  its  accom- 
plishment. Are  there  no  shadows  of  judgment  on  thy  path  ?  Have  no  words  com« 
true  that  make  thy  heart  tremble  because  of  those  other  words  which  God's  Upa 
have  alao  spoken  ?— J.  XJ, 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XIV.  31—31. 

The  biion  of  Behoboiu. — Ver.  21. — And 
Rehoboam,  the  son  of  Solomon,  reigned  In 
Judab.  Rehoboam  was  forty  [or  twenty. 
See  on  cb.  sii.  1]  and  one  years  old 
when  he  began  to  reign,  and  he  reigned 

[this  reign  is  related  at  greater  length  in  2 
Cbron.  zi.,  xii.]  seventeen  years  [of.  ch. 
XT.  1]  in  Jerusalem,  the  dty  which  the 
Lord  did  choose  [cf.  oh.  xi.  36 ;  Fsa.  Ixxviii. 
68;  Neh.  L  9]  out  of  all  the  tribes  of 
Israel  [cf.  2  Chron.  vi.  6 ;  2  Kings  xzi.  7] 
to  put  his  name  there.  The  historian  re- 
minds us  that  Jerusalem  was  by  God's  ap- 
pointment the  religious  centre  of  the  land  ; 
that  Bethel  and  Dan  were  no  sanctuaries  of 
His  choosing ;  and  that,  however  much  the 
reahn  of  Behoboam  was  restricted,  he  still 
reigned  in  the  capital  of  God's  choice.  It 
is  possible  the  words  have  some  reference 
to  the  next  verse,  and  imply  that,  though  it 
was  the  holy  city,  yet  even  there  they  fell 
away  from  God  (Bahr).  And  his  mother's 
name  was  Naamah  [or,  according  to  the 
LXX.,  Naanan.     See  on  oh.  xii.  24],  an 

[Heb.  tAe,  i.e.,theweU-known]  Anunonltess. 

[The  name  of  the  mother  is  given  with 
every  king  of  Judah,  principally  because 
of  the  position  of  influence  she  occupied 
in  the  kingdom.  See  on  ch.  ii.  13,  and  ver. 
81  below.] 

Yer.  22.— And  Judah  did  evU  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord  [not,  however,  before  the  fourth 
year  of  Behoboam's  reign.  For  the  first 
three  vears  the  nation  remained  steadfast  in 
the  faith,  and  the  kingdom  was  greatly 
strengthened  and  consolidated.  The  defec- 
tion commenced  when  Behoboam  began  to 
feel  himself  secure  (2  Chron.  xii.  1).  It  is  to 
be  observed,  however,  that  the  historian  says 
"Judah"  (not  Behoboam)  "did  evU,"  &o. 
It  is  probable  that  a  considerable  section  of 
the  people  approved  of  the  idolatrous  prac- 
tices introduced  in  the  preceding  reign,  and 
that  Behoboam  was  unable  to  repress  them. 
It  was  his  misfortune  to  have  to  reap  the 
bitter  fruits  of  Solomon's  unfaithfulness], 
and  they  provoked  him  to  jealousy  [Heb. 
made  him  jealous.  Same  word,  Exod. 
XX.  6 ;  xxxiv.  14 ;  Num.  v.  14.  The  words 
of  the  covenant  proclaimed  the  Lord  a 
"jealous  God."  This  is  of  course  anthro- 
pomorphic language.  The  nation  was  re- 
garded as  the  bride  of  Jehovah,  and  God 


is  said  to  be  made  jealous,  because  idola- 
try was  unfaithfulness  to  Him.  The  wor- 
ship of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth,  it  must  be 
remembered,  involved  unutterable  immo- 
ralities, hence  the  special  fituess  of  the 
word,  which  is  only  used  of  idolatry  of  one 
kind  or  other]  with  their  sins  which  they 
had  committed  [Heb.  sinned]  above  all  that 
their  fathers  had  done. 

Ver.  23. — For  they  also  [i.e.,  they  as  well 
as  the  ten  tribes]  built  them  high  places 
[i.e. ,  houses  of  high  places.  See  on  ch.  iii. 
2  and  xiii.  32]  and  images  [Heb.  pillars 
or  statues  (rt3-V9  ;  LXX.,  <rrqXat).    These 

were,  no  doubt,  originally  memorial  pillars 
or  stones,  erected  to  commemorate  some 
Divine  manifestation,  and  with  no  thought 
of  idolatry  (see  Gen.  xxxi.  13 ;  xxxv.  14, 
20 ;  xxviii.  18).  But  the  Canaanites  erected 
pillars,  which  were  also  statues  or  images,  to 
their  god,  Baal.  Hence  we  read  of  the 
"  image  "  (HI  VD)  of  Baal  (2  Kings  iii.  3 ; 

X.  26,  27  ;  cf.  xviii.  4 ;  xxiii.  14) ;  and  hence 
also  we  find  such  images  frequently  men- 
tioned side  by  side  with  the  so-called 
"  groves,"  i.e.,  the  "  Asherahs  "  (ver.  16  ; 
Exod.  xxxiv.  13  ;  Deut.  vii.  6 ;  xii.  B ;  xvi. 
21,  &o.)  Both  the  Mazzebah  and  the  Asherah, 
consequently,  was  an  upright  pillar  or  post, 
bat  the  former  was  of  stone,  the  latter  of 
wood ;  the  former  dedicated  to  Baal,  the 
god  of  nature,  of  generation ;  the  latter  to 
Ashtoreth,  the  goddess  of  nature  and  pro- 
ductive power.  The  gradual  transition  of 
the  memorial  pillar  into  the  Baal  statue  is 
hinted  at  in  Levit.  xxvi.  1.  It  is  observable 
that  these  idolatrous  and  immoral  rites  seem 
to  have  found  a  home  in  Judah  before  they 
were  introduced  into  Israel]  and  groves 
[Asherahs,  idols ;  see  on  ver.  15.  This  verse 
proves  conclusively  that  the  translation 
"  grove  "  is  a  mistaken  one]  on  every  high 
hill,  and  under  every  green  tree.  [The 
phrase  is  from  the  Pentateuch,  Deut.  xii.  2  ; 
of.  Jer. ii.  20 ;  iii.  6 ;  Hosea  iv.  13.  "Probably 
the  evil  example  of  Maaohah,  his  favourite 
wife  (2  Chron.  xi.  20 — 22),  whose  idolatrous 
tastes  were  displayed  under  Asa  (2  Chron. 
XV.  16),  was  not  without  a  pernicious  effect 
on  Behoboam"  (Wordsworth).] 

Ver.  24. — ^And  there  were  also  Sodomite* 
[B'^iJ,  a  collective  noun  =  D''JJ'li?n  (ch.  xT. 
12)  =  consecrated  persons  or  devotees,  be- 
cause they  were  set  apart  to  the  service  of 


882 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XTf.  21—81. 


Astarte,  the  Dea  Syria.  It  is  clear  from 
Deut.  zxiii,  18  (Heb.)  that  male  prostitutes 
are  here  spoken  of,  the  name  of  the  female 
leing  rHJOi?.    The  former  is  described  in 

ver.  19  I.e.  as  a  dog,  the  latter  as  a  whore] 
In  the  land  [cf.  ch.  xv.  12.  It  is  highly 
probable  that  these  infamous  persons  were  of 
Canaanito  or  Phoenician  origin  (this  being  a 
Phoenician  superstition,  Movers,  "  Phbniz." 
i.  671),  but  it  is  somewhat  precarious  to 
found  an  assertion  to  that  effect  on  these  last 
words  (as  Bahr)],  and  [Heb.  omits  and] 
they  did  according  to  aU  the  ahomlnatlons 
of  the  nations  [see  Levit.  xviii.,  zx.  ; 
Deut.  xviii.  9 — 12]  which  the  Lord  cast 
out  before  the  children  of  Israel.  ["  Here 
we  see  a  reason  for  God's  command,  re- 
quiring the  extirpation  of  the  CanaauiteB  " 
(Wordsworth).] 

Ver.  25. — And  it  came  to  pa«B  tn  the  fifth 
year  [that  is,  two  years  after  king  and 
people  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord  (2  Chron, 
xii.  1).  Betribution  seems  to  have  overtaken 
Judah  sooner  than  Israel.  They  had  the 
less  excuse,  and  they  seem  to  have  plunged 
deeper  into  idolatry  and  immoraUty  (see 
Homiletics,  p.  335)]  of  King  Behohoam,  that 
Shishak  king  of  Egypt  [to  whom  Jeroboam 
had  fled  (ch.  xi.  26,  40)J  came  np  against 
Jerusalem.  [This  expedition  is  related 
with  somewhat  more  of  detail  in  2  Chron. 
xii.  3—4.  For  Shishak,  see  ch.  zi.  40.  It 
was  in  the  twentieth  year  of  his  reign  that 
Shishak,  once  Jeroboam's  protector  and 
friend,  invaded  Palestine,  It  has  been 
conjectured  (Ewald,  al.)  that  he  was  incited 
so  to  do  by  Jeroboam,  and  that  the  two 
kings  waged  war  against  Judah  in  concert 
(see  on  ver.  30).  But  as  to  this  Scripture  is 
silent ;  and  moreover,  if  Jeroboam  sum- 
moned Shishak  to  his  assistance,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  his  own  kingdom  did  not  altogether 
escape  invasion;  and  it  is  perhaps  more 
probable  that  the  divided  and  weakened 
state  of  the  country  seemed  to  promise  the 
Egyptian  king  an  easy  capture  of  Jerusalem, 
of  the  treasures  of  which  he  had  doubtless 
heard.  It  is  well  known  tbat  a  record  of 
this  expedition  exists  in  the  sculptures  and  in- 
scriptions of  the  great  temple  at  Earnak.  The 
bassi  relievi  of  the  temple  wall  contain  over 
130  figures,  representatives,  as  the  names 
on  the  shields  show,  of  so  many  conquered 
cities.  Amongst  these  are  found  three  of 
the  "cities  for  defence"  which  Eehoboam 
had  built,  viz.,  Shoco,  Adoraim,  and  Aija- 
lon  (2  Chron.  xl  7 — 10),  while  many  other 
towns  of  Palestine,  such  as  Oibeon,  Taanach, 
Shunem,  Megiddo,  &o.,  are  identified  with 
more  or  less  of  probability. ,  One  feature  in 
the  list  is  remarkable,  viz.,  the  number  of 
Levitioal  and  Oanaanite  cities — oi ties  of  7<rae( 


— which  Shishak  is  said  to  have  conquered. 
The  usual  inference  is  that  such  cities,  al- 
though in  Jeroboam's  dominions,  had  never- 
theless held  out  against  his  rule — the  former 
for  rehgious  reasons;  the  latter,  perhaps,  in 
the  effort  to  recover  their  independence.  Mr. 
Poole,  however  (Diet.  Bib.,  art.  "  Egypt "  ), 
accounts  for  the  names  on  the  supposition 
that  Shishak  directed  his  forces  against  the 
northern  as  well  as  the  southern  kingdom, 
and  certainly  this  seems  to  agree  better  with 
the  facts.  It  is  hardly  hkely  that  Jeroboam, 
with  the  army  at  his  command,  would 
tolerate  so  many  centres  of  disaffection  in 
his  midst.  Besides,  the  Levites,  we  are 
told,  had  migrated  in  a  body  to  Judah; 
and  the  Canaanites  at  this  period  can 
hardly  have  been  in  a  position  to  defy  any 
Hebrew  monarch.  The  silence  aUke  of 
our  historian  and  of  the  chronicler  as  to  the 
invasion  of  Israel  is  easily  accounted  for  by 
the  fact  that  Judah  bore  the  brunt  of  the 
war.] 

Ver.  26.  — And  he  took  away  the  treasurM 
of  the  house  of  the  Lord  [The  historian 
omits  to  mention  the  interposition  of  She- 
malah  (2  Chron.  xii.  6 — 8).  The  account 
of  the  Chronicles  is  altogether  much  fuller] , 
and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house ;  i» 
even  took  away  all  [rather,  "and  every- 
thing  (sc.  that  he  could  lay  his  hands  on)  hi 
took  away."  The  spoil  must  have  been 
enormous]  :  and  be  took  away  all  the 
shields  of  gold  [of.  db.  x.  17]  which  Solomon 
had  made. 

Ver.  27. — And  king  Behohoam  made  In 
their  stead  brazen  shields  [lit.,  shields  of 
brass  or  copper;  a  striking  token  of  the 
decadence  of  the  kingdom ;  cf .  ch.  ix.  23 ; 
x.  22.  "He  changed  his  father's  religion, 
as  his  shields,  from  gold  to  brass"  (Hall)], 
and  committed  [Heb.  appointei]  them 
unto  the  hands  of  the  chief  of  the  guard 
[Heb.  commanders  of  the  runners  (see  on 
5ti.  i.  38)] ,  which  kept  the  door  of  the 
king's  house.  [Cf.  2  Kings  xi.  6.  The 
functions  of  the  body-guard  were  very  varied. 
A  primary  duty  was,  obviously,  to  supply 
sentinels  and  attendants  for  the  palace.] 

Ver.  28. — And  It  was  so,  when  the  king 
went  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord,  that  the 
guards  [runners]  bare  them  [Whatever 
idolatries  Beboboam  tolerated  or  en- 
couraged, it  is  clear  that  he  maintained  the 
temple  worship  vrith  great  pomp  and  cir- 
cumstance. The  state  visits  of  the  Sultan 
to  the  Mosque  may  perhaps  be  best  com- 
pared with  these  processions.  Ewald  sees 
in  this  circumstance  a  proof  of  Behoboam's 
vanity.  The  brazen  shields  were  "  boma 
before  him  in  solemn  procession,  as  if  every- 
thing were  the  same  as  before"],  and 
brought  them  haok  Into  the  gnard  chamber 


OH.  UT.  21—81.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


838 


[Heb. "  ehaviber  of  the  runnert."  Solomon's 
golden  Bhields  were  kept  "  in  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon  "  (ch.  z.  17).  These 
shields  of  brass  were  of  so  little  valne  that 
^he  guard  chamber  sufficed  fortheir custody. 

Ver.  29. — How  the  rest  of  the  acta  of 
Behohoam,  and  all  that  he  did,  are  they 
not  written  In  the  book  of  the  chronicleB  of 
the  ktngs  of  Judali  7    [See  on  ver.  19.] 

Ver.  30.  —  And  there  was  war  [of.  2 
Chron.  xii.  15,  "wars."  Keil  argues  from 
the  prohibition  of  war  by  Shemaiah  ^ch. 
xii.  23)  that  this  must  mean  "hostility, 

enmity.''  But  ilDrj?!?  sorely  implies  more 
than  angry  feelings  or  a  hostile  attitnde ; 
and  it  is  highly  probable  that,  even  if  there 
were  no  organized  campaigns,  a  desultory 
warfare  was  constantly  carried  on  on  the 
borders  of  the  two  kingdoms.  It  is  also 
possible  that  Jeroboam  took  a  part  in  the 
war  of  Shishak]  between  Reboboam  and 
Jeroboam  all  their  days. 

Ver.  31.— And  Behoboam  slept  With  llli 
fathers  [The  same  formula  as  in  ch.  ii.  10 ; 
zl.  43 ;  XT.  8,  24,  &c.  It  is  used  of  nearly 
all  the  kings  of  Judah] ,  and  was  buried  with 
his  fathers  [These  words  go  to  prove,  against 
Qesenius,  that  the  phrase  "slept  (ht.,  lay 
down)  with  his  fathers"  is  not  to  be  in- 
terpreted of  Sheol,  but  of  the  grave ;  see  on 
ch.  ii.  10]  In  the  city  of  David.  And  his 
mother's  name  was  Naamah,  an  Ammon- 
itess.  [Same  words  as  in  ver.  2I.  The  repe- 
tition can  hardly  be,  as  Bahr,  Wordsworth, 
al.,  imagine,  designed,  in  order  to  show  that 
the  warship  of  Moloch  was  brought  by  her 


to  Jerusalem  (oh.  zi,  7),  and  that  she 
exercised  a  sinister  influence  upon  her  son. 
As  she  is  twice  called  "  the  Ammouitess  "  it 
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  she  was  one  of 
the  "  Ammonitesses "  (oh.  xi.  1,  Heb.)  who 
turned  away  Solomon's  heart ;  and  it  is 
also  certain  that  Behoboam  did  not  inherit 
his  folly  from  his  father.  At  the  same 
time  these  words  are  more  easily  accounted 
for  on  the  supposition  that  the  historian 
found  them  in  this  position  in  one  or  more 
of  the  documents  from  which  he  compiled  his 
history.  It  is  also  to  be  remembered  that 
some  of  these  chronological  statements  are 
manifestly  by  a  later  hand,  and  have  been 
transferred  from  the  margin  to  the  text.  See 
on  oh.  vi.  1.]  And  Abljam  [elsewhere  called 
Abijah  (2  Chron.  xii.  lt> ;  xiii.  1),  or  Abijahu 
(2  Chron.  xiii.  21,  Heb.)  Some  MSS.  have 
Abijah  here.  The  variation  is  not  easily 
accounted  for  except  as  a  clerical  error. 
The  supposition  of  Lightfoot  that  the  name 
was  designedly  altered  by  the  historian  to 
avoid  the  incorporation  of  the  sacred  Jib 
into  the  name  of  a  bad  man  is  too  fanciful, 
the  more  so  as  Abijam  was  by  no  means  an 
exceptionally  bad  king.  It  is,  however, 
approved  by  Bahr  and  Bawlinson.  But  it 
is  as  little  probable  that  Abijam  is  the 
original  form  of  the  name  (Keil).  The  form 
Abijahu,  the  LXX.  'A/3iov,  and  the  analogy 
of  Abiel  (1  Sam.  ix.  1)  all  make  against 
this  idea.  On  the  whole,  it  is  more  likely 
that  Abijam  results  from  an  error  of  trans- 
cription, n  and  the  final  D  being  easily  coo- 
fouudedj  his  son  reigned  In  his  ateadt 


HOMILBTIOS. 

Ter.  26. — The  Invcuion  of  Shishak.  Three  years  after  tlie  death  of  David,  th* 
foundations  of  the  temple,  the  glory  of  that  age — some  have  called  it  orb  is  mir»- 
euluim,  the  marvel  of  every  age — were  laid.  Four  years  after  the  death  of  Solomon 
his  son — some  forty  years,  that  is  to  say,  after  its  foundation,  three  and  thirty  years 
after  its  completion,  according  to  some  only  twenty  years  after  its  dedication — the 
treasures  of  that  temple,  its  gold  and  gems,  were  carried  off  by  an  invader.  A 
short  time  after  his  accession,  again,  Solomon  made  alliance  with  the  strongest  and 
proudest  of  the  empires  of  that  age,  vrith  Egypt,  and  a  Hebrew,  one  whose  fore- 
fathers were  Pharaoh's  bondmen,  was  gladly  recognized  as  great  Pharaoh's  son-in- 
law.  A  short  time  after  his  death,  this  same  Egyptian  kingdom  is  become  an 
assailant  of  Solomon's  son,  and  Pharaoh  is  turned  to  be  the  oppressor  and  plun- 
derer of  his  realm.  For  a  great  part  of  Solomon's  reign  it  was  the  boast  of  the 
pejple  that  an  Egyptian  princess  occupied  one  of  his  splendid  palaces  in  Jerusalem, 
but  he  has  not  been  long  dead  before  those  same  palaces  are  rifled  by  Egyptian 
princes,  and  Jerusalem  is  environed  by  the  legions  of  Shishak. 

And  yet  that  temple,  the  magnificence  of  which  has  been  so  short-lived,  which 
was  hardly  completed  ere  it  was  despoiled,  was  built  to  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  and  as  a  habitation  for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.  And  as  such  it  was 
accepted  by  Him.  That  house  had  had  a  greater  glory  and  consecration  than  of 
gold  and  precious  stones,  for  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  fill?d  the  house  of  tha 
Lord"  (ch.   viii.  11).     Why,  then,  is  it,  we  may  well  ask,  as  the  men  of  that 


IM  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xiv.  21—81. 

age  would  ask,  that  it  is  bo  soon  left  comparatively  desolate?  Cannot  the 
Deity  to  whom  it  was  dedicated  protect  it  against  spoliation.  Or  have  His  wor- 
shippers provoked  Him  to  anger,  so  that  He  has  "  abhorred  his  sanctuary,"  and 
"  delivered  his  glory  into  the  enemies'  hand"? 

For  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  there  was  a  profound  reason  for  this  profound 
dishonour  and  disgrace.  We  cannot  account  for  the  fact  that  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  the  "  house  of  the  great  God"  (Ezra  t.  8),  was  stripped  bare  and  left  a 
wreck  within  a  few  years  of  its  erection,  on  the  supposition  that  a  chance  hap- 
pened to  it,  and  that  it  only  suffered  as  other  shrines  have  done  from  the 
vicissitudes  of  fortune  and  the  impartial,  inevitable  havoc  of  war.  "In  rebus 
bellicU,"  it  has  been  said,  "maxime  dominatv/r  Fortuna."  But  if  we  feel  at  liberty 
to  interpret  other  histories  by  a  theory  of  chance,  that  idea  must  be  excluded  in 
thinking  of  Qod's  people.  If  their  history  was  fortuitous,  then  the  Old  Testament 
is  a  delusion.  No;  we  may  not  be  able  always  to  trace  the  finger  of  God  in 
profane  history,  but  it  will  be  passing  strange  if  we  cannot  recognize  it  here. 

Now  the  immediate  BBiase  of  the  invasion  was,  no  doubt,  the  divided  and  therefore 
weakened  state  of  the  kingdom.  We  might  have  been  tempted  to  think  that 
Jeroboam  had  summoned  his  patron  Shishak  to  his  aid,  had  we  not  proof  that 
Israel  as  well  as  Judah  suffered  from  this  campaign.  And  of  course  it  is  possible 
that  Jeroboam  instigated  a  war  which  ultimately  extended  to  his  own  kingdom. 
But  it  is  obvious  that  Shishak  would  need  no  invitation  to  attack  Jerusalem.  The 
fame  of  its  immense  treasure  is  quite  sufiBcient  of  itself  to  account  for  his  advance. 
So  long  as  it  was  guarded  by  the  armies  of  Solomon  it  was  secure.  But  Behoboam, 
whose  troops  would  not  number  a  third  of  his  father's,  and  who  was  paralyzed  by 
the  hostility  of  Israel  crouching  like  a  vrild  beast  on  his  northern  border,  offered 
an  easy  prey  to  a  general  with  1,200  chariots  and  60,000  horsemen,  and  "  people 
without  number  "  under  his  command. 

We  see,  then,  that  it  was  the  treasures  of  the  Holy  City — the  vast  accumulation 
of  the  precious  metals — which  excited  the  cupidity  of  the  Egyptians,  while  their 
defenceless  state  suggested  the  idea  of  seizing  them.     Observe  here — 

I.  The  eeteibdtion  of  Solomon's  sin.  1.  Of  hia  greed  and  pride.  He  has 
"  multiplied  silver  and  gold  to  himself"  only  to  provoke  an  invasion  of  his  territory 
and  the  humihation  of  his  people.  If  he  had  obeyed  the  law ;  if  he  had  been 
content  to  embellish  the  house  of  the  Lord  and  leave  the  palaces  alone;  if  his 
overweening  pride  and  his  insatiable  thirst  for  fame  had  not  prompted  >iim  to 
amass  treasures  which  excited  universal  attention,  it  is  probable  that  Judah  would 
have  escaped  invasion.  In  this  case  "  pride  has  gone  before  destruction."  The 
very  magnitude  of  his  treasures  led  to  their  dispersion. 

2._  Of  hia  idolatry.  We  have  already  seen  how  this  sin  (ch.  xi.  6 — 8)  was 
punished  by  the  partition  of  his  realm.  In  the  plunder  of  his  palaces,  provoked 
and  made  possible  by  that  division,  we  see  a  further  recompense  of  his  outrage  and 
defiance  of  the  Almighty.  The  hills  on  which  his  idol  altars  were  erected  now 
swarmed  with  idolaters,  assembled  not  to  sacrifice,  but  to  slay.  We  are  reminded 
here  of  the  retribution  which  befell  the  Jerusalem  of  a  later  day.  On  one  of  the 
hiUs  before  Jerusalem  the  Jews  raised  a  cross — they  crucified  the  Prince  of  Life. 
On  all  the  hills  that  are  round  about  Jerusalem,  the  Bomans  raised  crosses,  the 
crosses  of  His  murderers  (Jos.,  Bell.  Jud.  v.  11.  1). 

8.  Of  hia  multiplication  of  horsea.  For  it  is  to  be  remembered  from  what 
quarter  the  retribution  came.  There  is  an  exquisite  judicial  propriety  in  an 
invasion  from  Egypt,  and  an  invasion  of  chariots  and  horses.  This  was  re-taliation 
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word  ;  it  was  like  for  like.  Why,  there  was  almost  a  beaten 
track  made  for  those  same  chariots  by  the  horses  and  chariots  which  Solomon 
had  imported  in  such  prodigious  numbers.  Literally  the  trade  horses  paved  the 
way  for  the  horses  of  war.  This  illegal  traffic  had  long  since  famiharized  Egyptian 
charioteers  with  the  shortest  way  to  the  Holy  City. 

4.  Of  hia  mvXtipUcation  of  wivea.  Solomon's  lawful  wife  came  from  Egypt. 
Had  he  been  true  to  her,  he  would  probably  have  been  true  to  his  Lord  God 
'ch.  xi.  3),  and  so  his  realm  would  have  escaped  invasion.     It  is  a  kind  of  Nemesis 


OH.  xiT.  21—81.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KING^  SM 

for  the  wrong  done  to  bis  Egyptian  consort  that  his  harem  was  plnndered  by 
Egyptians.  There  are  those  who  connect  Napoleon's  fall  with  the  repudiation  of 
Josephine.  The  "judge  of  the  widow"  (Psa.  Ixviii.  5)  is  also  the  avenger  of  the 
injured  and  dishonoured  wife  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  Human  laws  seldom  take  cognizance 
of  tiiese,  the  deepest  of  wrongs,  but  the  cry  of  the  heart-broken  woman  goes  np 
into  the  ears  of  One  who  has  said,  "  I  will  repay." 

II.  The  punishment  of  Behoboam's  folly  and  sin.  1.  Of  hit  ohstinacy.  For 
in  the  first  place,  but  for  his  infatuation,  humanly  speaking,  the  kingdom  would 
have  escaped  division,  and  the  land  would  have  escaped  invasion.  That  infatuation, 
it  is  true,  was  the  product  of  his  breeding  and  his  training,  but  that  consideration 
does  not  wholly  exonerate  him  from  blame.  No  man  can  charge  his  parents  or 
surroundings  with  his  sin.  The  law  does  not  excuse  the  thief  on  the  ground  that 
from  infancy  he  has  been  taught  to  steal.  Behoboam  was  a  free  agent,  and  ought 
to  have  acted  otherwise,  and  doubtless  he  knew  it  when  it  was  too  late. 

2.  Of  his  pride.  It  was  his  pride  had  rejected  all  compromise,  and  had  prated 
3f  scorpions,  &o.  It  had  been  humbled  once  in  the  dismemberment  of  his  realm. 
It  must  be  humbled  again  in  the  spoliation  of  his  palaces.  For  observe,  it 
was  when  he  "  had  strengthened  himself"  (2  Chron.  xii.  1)  that  Shishak  came  to 
prove  his  weakness.  St.  Paul  is  not  the  only  one  who  has  had  to  learn  the  lesson, 
"  When  I  am  weals,  then  am  I  strong."  It  is  extremely  probable  that  this  vain- 
glorious prince,  after  losing  most  of  his  realm,  still  piqued  himself  on  the  abundance 
of  his  treasures.  His  trust  was  in  his  shields  of  gold.  So  he  must  be  reduced  to 
shields  of  pinchbeck. 

8.  Of  hit  infidelity.  "  He  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord"  (2  Chron.  {.e.)  Much 
as  his  father  had  done  before  him.  "  What  the  old  sing,"  says  the  German  pro- 
verb, "  the  young  chirp."  That  is  to  say,  he  still  worshipped  Jehovah  (ver.  28  ; 
cf.  ch.  ix.  25),  but  he  sanctioned,  or  did  not  suppress,  idolatry.  The  son  of  an 
Ammonitess,  he  would  find  it  difficult  to  trample  on  the  gods  of  his  mother 
(ch.  xi.  6),  and  he  was  probably  too  much  afraid  of  another  insurrection  to 
stamp  out  the  abominations  of  vers.  23,  24. 

III.  The  recompense  of  Israel's  idolatbies.  Though  the  chronicler  informs 
us  that  Behoboam  "  forsook  the  law  and  all  Israel  with  him"  yet  it  seems  prob- 
able from  vers.  22,  24,  "  And  Judah  did  evil,"  &c.,  that  he  rather  followed  than 
led  his  people.  He  could  hardly  fail,  at  first,  to  see  that  his  strength  lay  in  a  rigid 
adherence  to  the  law  ;  that  his  policy  was  one  of  piety.  The  Levites  and  others  who 
streamed  into  Judah,  shocked  by  the  innovations  of  Jeroboam,  cannot  fail  to  have 
suggested  that  his  role  was  orthodoxy.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  it  was  not 
untU  a  large  section  of  his  people,  infected  vrith  the  superstitions  and  vices 
they  had  learned  in  Solomon's  reign,  clamoured  for  the  tolerance  of  shameful 
shrines,  that  he  yielded  to  idolatry.  Ver.  25  seems  to  connect  the  invasion  directly 
with  the  people's  sin.  But  for  the  high  places  and  images,  &c.,  the  land  would  have 
been  spared  this  humiliation.  It  is  to  be  carefully  noted  that,  so  long  as  king  and 
people  served  the  Lord,  Shishak  was  held  back  from  attacking  them.  Hence  we 
understand  why  Judah  receives  earlier  and  greater  stripes  than  Israel.  It  was 
Jeroboam  made  Israel  to  sin.  It  was  Judah  made  Behoboam  to  sin.  The  guilty 
people,  accordingly,  are  punished  by  the  invasion  of  their  land  and  the  spoliation  of 
their  teeasure  ;  the  guilty  king  by  the  destruction  of  his  house.  And  here  again, 
let  us  observe,  how  significant  that  the  chastisement  should  come  from  Egypt. 
Time  was  when  God  had  punished  the  idolatries  of  Egypt  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  the  Jewish  people  (Exod.  vii. — xiv.)  Now  the  tables  are  turned,  and 
Egypt  is  employed  to  avenge  the  idolatries  of  Judah.  This  was  the  first  time  that 
an  Egyptian  army  had  crossed  their  border — the  first  time,  indeed,  that  the  land 
had  sustained  the  brunt  of  any  invasion.  It  was  the  Sodomites  and  the  like  had 
drawn  forth  those  swords  from  their  scabbards.  What  a  contrast  between  Exod. 
xiv.  and  1  Kings  xiv.  Israel,  who  then  "  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea- 
-shore,"  now  feels  the  grip  of  Pharaoh  at  bis  throat,  and  ih»  iron  of  Pharaoh  in  faia 


886  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  mv.  21-»1 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yen.  21 — 24. — The  Sin  of  Judah.  Having  disconrsed  of  Jeroboam  and  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  the  eacred  historian  now  returns  to  Behoboam  and  the  sister 
kingdom  of  Judah.  To  have  found  a  better  state  of  things  here  would  have  been 
refreshing,  but  in  this  we  are  disappointed.  How  fearful  was  the  moral  state  of 
the  whole  world  in  those  days  I 

I.  Judah  had  fallen  into  the  grossest  idolatbt.  1.  He  Ttad  muUipUed 
Mghplacet.  (1)  High  places  were  not  necessarily  for  idolatry.  They  were  proper 
to  the  worship  of  the  true  God  in  patriarchal  times.  (2)  Even  after  God  had 
chosen  Jerusalem  to  put  His  name  there,  the  patriarchal  use  of  high  places  was 
upon  special  occasions  sanctioned  by  Him  (see  ch.  zviii.  88).  (3)  In  Judah  there 
was  little  need  for  these,  since  the  extremity  of  the  kingdom  was  not  very  remote 
from  Jerusalem.  The  distance  to  Beersheba  would  be  about  forty  British  statute 
nules.  (4)  But  the  high  places  of  Judah  were  mainly  designed  for  idolatry. 
Hence  their  association  in  the  text  with  "  images  and  groves  "  and  rites  of  Sodomites 
and  other  Canaanitish  abominations.  2.  He  had  built  many  temple$.  (1)  The 
term  (ni3VI3)  here  translated  "  images  "  is  elsewhere  commonly  rendered  pillart 
(see  Gen.  zxviii.  18 ;  sxxL  61 ;  xxzv.  20 ;  Exod.  xxiv.  4;  Isa.  xix.  19).  It  is  far 
from  evident  that  this  word  is  ever  used  for  any  image  or  figured  thing.  In 
places  where  it  is  construed  "  images,"  pilla/rs  would  give  as  good  sense  (see  Exod. 
xxiii.  24 ;  2  Kings  x.  26,  27).  Marginal  readings  bear  this  ont  (see  Deut.  vii  6 ; 
xvi.  22).  (2)  It  is  probable  these  pUlars  were  distributed  in  ranks,  as  those  of  the 
Druids  at  Stonehenge  and  Abiry,  to  serve  as  temples  in  which  the  powers  of  the 
material  heavens  were  worshipped.  S.  He  had  enshrined  idols  in  these.  (1)  The 
Asherim  (DRIB'S)  are  here  evidently  misrendered  "groves;"  for  how  conld  groves 
be  planted  "  under  every  green  tree "  ?  (See  Homily  on  vers.  16,  16,  supra.) 
(2)  They  were  idols  apparently  in  figure  like  goats.  For  Jeroboam  "  ordained  him 
priests  for  the  high  places  and  for  the  devils  (OnrtS'  goats),  and  for  the  calves 
which  he  had  made"  (2  Chron.  zl  16).  Here  we  have  no  mention  of  Asherim; 
of  goats,  however,  we  have  mention.  But  when  Josiah  destroyed  these  things,  there 
is  mention  of  the  AsJierah,  but  no  mention  of  the  goat  (compare  2  Kings  xxui.  16). 
The  Asherah  destroyed  by  Josiah  appears,  then,  to  be  the  goat  which  Jeroboam  had 
set  up.  (3)  These  Asherim,  or  Asheroth — for  they  appear  to  have  been  male  and 
female  idols — were  supposed  to  convey  blessings  to  their  worshippers,  and  hence 
their  name  (&om  Ili'K  to  proceed,  to  bless).  4.  His  idolatry  was  attended  tuith 
shocking  rites.  (1)  They  were  the  very  abominations  for  which  the  land  had 
spewed  out  the  Canaanites  as  with  abhorrence  (see  Levit.  xviii.  28 ;  xx.  22,  and 
contexts).  (2)  Conspicuous  amongst  these  were  the  Sodomites,  whose  orgies  were 
intimately  connected  with  the  Asherim,  and  to  encourage  which  the  women  wove 
hangings  (see  2  Kings  xxiii.  7).  How  fruitful  in  inventions  is  the  wickedness  of 
the  heart  1  (Eocles.  vii.  29.) 

II.  Fob  his  deoeneracy  he  was  without  excuse.  1.  He  had  Jerusalem  for 
his  capital.  (1)  This  was  the  city  chosen  of  God  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to 
put  His  name  there.  The  temple  of  Jehovah  was  there,  and  the  Shekinab  of 
Jehovah  was  in  it.  (2)  Every  appliance  for  acceptable  worship  was  there  at  hand. 
The  altars  were  there ;  the  priesthood  was  there ;  the  appointed  assemblies,  festival 
and  ferial,  were  there.  (8)  They  sinned,  therefore,  "  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,' 
as  in  His  very  presence.  Even  more  so  than  Israel,  who  covdd  not  now  claim 
Jerusalem  for  his  capital,  though  he  was  still  bound  to  go  there  to  worship.  Let 
us  remember  that  God  is  ever  near  us ;  this  thought  will  restrain  our  truancy. 
2.  He  liad  a  son  of  David  for  his  king.  (1)  The  mother  of  Rehoboam,  indeed, 
was  an  Ammonitess.  This  is  emphatically  (twice)  mentioned.  She  was  one  of 
those  strange  women  who  had  turned  the  heart  of  Solomon  from  the  right  way. 
The  abomination  of  her  country  was  MUcom  or  Molech,  whose  rites  were  most 
ferocious  and  demoralizing.  (2)  But  against  these  influences  were  noble  tradition! 
en  the  other  side.    His  father,  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  was  illustrious  in 


OS.  xiT.  81—81.1  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  M7 

wisdom  and  zeal  for  the  God  of  Israel.  The  memorieB  of  his  grandfather  were 
glorious.  To  this  must  be  added  the  most  material  circumstance  that  the  Covenant 
was  with  his  house  ;  for  Messiah  Himself  was  to  he  the  Son  of  David.  (3)  These 
things  were  not  without  their  influence.  For  three  years  after  the  revolution  under 
Jeroboam,  Behoboam  governed  Judah  in  the  tear  of  God,  and  so.  established  his 
throne  (see  2  Chron.  xi.  17).  (4)  When,  after  this,  Behoboam  "  forsook  the  law  of 
the  Lord,"  his  subjects  should  have  dissuaded  him  and,  if  necessary,  resisted  him. 
'  But  they  went  "  with  him  "  (2  Chron.  xiL  2).  (5)  To  such  excesses  did  they  go 
that  they  "  sinned  above  their  fathers  in  provoking  the  Lord  to  jealousy." — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  25 — 31. — The  Entailments  of  Sim.  During  the  three  first  years  of  his 
reign  in  Judah,  Behoboam  walked  in  the  steps  of  Solomon  and  David,  enjoyed 
peace,  and  became  established  in  his  throne.  Afterwards  he  gave  himself  up  to 
idolatrous  abominations,  and  brought  evil  upon  himself  and  upon  his  people.  The 
entailments  of  their  sin  were — 

I.  Trouble.  1.  There  was  continual  war  hetween  the  Jcingdoms.  (1)  WMle 
they  remained  faithful  to  God  they  had  peace.  God  interposed  to  preserve  peace 
by  the  hand  of  Shemaiah  (eh.  xii.  21 — 24).  (2)  But  when  they  forsook  the 
Lord,  they  soon  got  to  strife,  which  continued  as  long  as  the  kings  lived  (ver.  80). 
This  strife  was  also  handed  down  to  their  successors.  (3)  Thus  sinners  become 
God's  instruments  to  punish  one  another.  So  it  is  seen  to  this  day  in  the  conten- 
tions and  htigations  of  individuals.  Men  are  slow  to  see  the  hand  of  God. 
2.  ShishaTc  aggra/vated  the  mischief.  (1)  The  influences  which  brought  him  upon 
the  scene  may  be  discerned.  Hadad,  who  occasioned  so  much  trouble  to  Solomon, 
was  Shishak's  brother-in-law.  Sliishak  was  thus  disposed  to  give  asylum  to  Jeroboam 
when  he  fled  for  his  life  from  Solomon.  Shishak  now  conspires  with  Jeroboam  to 
ruin  Behoboam.  (2)  The  array  brought  against  Judah  by  Shishak  was  formidable 
(see  2  Chron.  xii.  3).  It  would  have  been  crushing  had  not  Behoboam  and  hia 
people,  in  their  extremity,  bumbled  themselves  before  God  (2  Chron.  ziL  7). 
(8)  But  they  stUl  had  to  feel  the  smart  of  their  sins. 

II.  FoBFEiTTJBE.  1.  In  wo/T  there  is  always  loss.  (1)  Necessarily  there  is  the 
forfeiture  of  peace.  Who  can  estimate  the  value  of  peace  ?  Perfect  peace  is  the 
resultant  of  perfect  harmony  as  the  white  light  is  composed  of  all  the  colours  in 
the  iris.  (2)  There  is  the  loss  ot  property.  Labour  is  the  source  of  wealth:  the 
labour  withdrawn  from  industry  to  wage  war  is  so  much  loss  of  wealth.  The 
soldier  also  is  a  consumer.  When  he  does  not  provide  for  his  own  sustenance,  the 
labour  of  others  must  be  taxed  to  feed  him.  (3)  There  is  the  loss  of  life.  War  is 
seldom  bloodless.  Often  the  slaughter  is  fearful.  Wellington  is  reported  to  have 
said  that  the  calamity  next  in  severity  to  a  defeat  is  a  victory.  2.  Shishak  despoiled 
the  temple  of  its  treasure.  (1)  The  booty  here  was  e.lormous.  The  spoils  of 
David's  victories  were  there  ;  also  the  accumulations  of  Solomon's  peaceful  com- 
merce. (2)  The  shields  of  gold  that  Solomon  had  made  are  particularly  mentioned. 
It  is  added  that  Behoboam  had  brazen  shields  made  to  replace  them.  How  sin 
reduces  the  fine  gold  to  brass  I  8.  ShishaTc  also  rifled  the  palace.  (1)  The  treasures 
here  also  were  immense.  Perhaps  there  never  was  such  plunder  as  this  in  human 
annals.  (2)  Behoboam  handed  down  a  diminished  inheritance  to  his  son.  By  his 
folly  he  alienated  ten  tribes  of  his  nation  from  liis  kingdom.  Abijam  likewise 
succeeded  to  a  kingdom  greatly  impoverished.  He  became  heir  also  to  embroil- 
ments. The  entailments  of  sin  pursue  the  spirit  into  the  invisible  world.  Forfeiture. 
Trouble.— J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  21 — 81. — TJnfaAthfulneii  ami  its  rebuke.  I.  Judah's  sin.  1.  The  nature 
of  the  transgression.  The  grossest  idolatry  was  set  side  by  side  with  the  pure 
worship  of  God.  The  temple  and  its  services  were  stiU.  His  (ver.  28),  but  on  every 
high  bill  and  under  every  green  tree  were  the  images  and  altars  of  the  false  gods. 
The  preservation  of  the  pure  worship  of  God  is  no  proof  that  all  is  yielded  which 
God  demands.  The  heart  may  be  ftdl  of  the  world's  idolatries,  of  its  covetousness 
and  lust  and  manifold  sin.    2.  Its  enormity.    (1)  It  was  wrought  in  Jerusalem, 

1  KINGS.  Z 


888 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  XT.  1—21 


"  the  city  which  the  Lord  did  choose,"  &o.,  and  this,  too,  in  the  face  of  the  defection 
of  the  ten  tribes.  It  is  high  treason  against  Jehovah  when  those  whom  He  has  called 
and  honoured  ore  faithless  to  the  trust  committed  to  them.  It  is  the  darkest  crime 
against  God  and  man  to  betray  the  last  earthly  refuge  of  the  truth,  (2)  It  was 
done  after  an  interval  of  repentance  and  religious  zeal  (2  Chron,  zi.  17 ;  xii.  1), 
They  had  known  and  yet  forsaken  the  better  way.  (3)  Their  idolatry  was  more 
unreetraiaed  and  daring  than  any  that  Israel  had  ever  known  (ver.  22).  8.  lit 
fruits  (ver.  24).  Errors  in  worship  become  vices  in  life.  The  soul  that  is  out  off 
from  the  fountain  of  life  must  needs  break  out  into  coiTuption. 

II.  Judah's  chastisement.  It  inflicted  deep  humiliation  and  loudly  proclaimed 
God's  indignation.  1.  Jt  was  inflicted  by  am  old  and  beaten  foe.  Their  temple 
songs,  celebrating  the  ancient  triumph  over  "  Bahab,"  must  have  deepened  their 
shame.  2.  Tlie  holy  city  and  the  temple  itself  were  spoiled,  God  loathed  their 
holy  things.  We  need  not  marvel  that  rationausm  and  infidelity  are  rampant  in  a 
faithless,  worldly  Church.  It  is  God's  way.  Israel's  idolatry  is  punished  by 
Egypt's  triumph.  8.  It  left  its  mark  in  endmring  poverty  (vers.  26 — 28).  The 
splendour  passed  away  from  the  royal  pomp,  and  doubtless  also  from  the  temple 
service.  The  nation  and  Church  which  Egypt  has  spoiled,  whose  faith  has  been 
shaken  by  doubt,  or  swallowed  up  in  unbelief,  have  lost  their  strength  and  glory. 
They  are  but  the  shadows  of  what  a  true  and  pure  faith  once  made  them. — J,  U. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV.  1—24. 
Thji  BsiaNS  OF  Abuau  and  Asa,  zntu 

OF    JUDAB. 

The  Reign  of  Abijam. 

Ver.  1.  —  Now  In  the  eighteenth  year 
of  king  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat, 
reigned  Abijam  [see  note  on  ch.  ziv. 
31.  It  is  implied  in  2  Chron.  zi.  20—22 
that  he  was  not  the  first-bom  among 
Beboboam's  twenty-eight  sons,  but  the 
eldest  son  of  the  favouiite  wife.  As  he  left 
behind  him  thirty-eight  children  (2  Chron. 
ziii.  21)  at  his  decease,  some  three  years 
later,  he  must  have  been  of  considerable 
age  at  his  accession.  This  consideration 
rather  favours  the  idea  that  Behoboam  was 
"forty  and  one  years  old  when  he  began  to 
reign  "  {ib.,  xii  13)]  over  Judah. 

Ver.  2 — Three  years  [The  Alex.  LXX. 
says  SiKdt^  sixteen.  The  "  three  years  "  are 
not  to  be  interpreted  strictly.  As  he  as- 
cended the  throne  in  the  eighteenth  and 
died  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Jeroboam's 
reign,  he  cannot  have  completed  three  years. 
But  it  does  not  follow  that  "he  cannot  have 
reigned  much  more  than  two  years  "  (Baw- 
linson,  and  similarly  Keil) ,  He  may  have 
reigned  all  but  three]  reigned  he  In  Jeru- 
salem. And  his  mother's  name  was  Maa- 
ehali  [in  2  Chron.  xiii.  2  called  Michaiah, 
Heb.  Michajahu.  That  the  same  person  is 
meant  is  proved  as  well  by  the  context  as 
by  2  Chron.  xi.  21,  where  the  name  is 
given  as  here.  EeU  (cf.  Diet.  Bib.  ii.  162) 
ascribes  the  discrepancy  to  an  error  of  the 
oopyist ;  but  the  names  are  so  nnlike  in  the 
original  as  to  discountenance  this  assump- 


tion. I  ventnre  to  suggest  that  Mchajalm 
was  the  significant  form — the  word  means 
"  Who  is  fike  Jehovah  t " — which  the  name 
Maachah,  "oppression,"  borne  by  the  Geshn- 
rite  princess  who  married  David  (2  Sam.iii. 
8)  assumed  when  she  joined  the  Lord's  peo- 
pie,  and  embraced,  as  no  doubt  she  would  do, 
the  religion  of  Jehovah.  Such  a  change 
would  be  quite  in  accordance  with  the 
genius  and  traditions  of  the  Semitic  races 
(Gen.  zvii.  6, 16;  xxx.  passim;  zxxii.  28; 
xii.  45  ;  Exod.  vi.  3,  <fec.  Of.  2  Kings  xxtii. 
34;  zxiv.  17;  Hosea  i.  4,  6),  and  there 
may  well  have  been  special  reasons  in  this 
case,  apart  from  the  piety  of  David,  why  it 
should  be  made.  For  the  name  Maachah 
appears  to  have  been  taken  from  the  town 
and  district  of  that  name  near  Geshur — 
a  part  of  Syria  was  called  Syria  Maachah 
(1  Chron.  zix.  6 ;  of .  2  Sam.  z.  6—^).  In  2 
Sam.  XX.  14,  16  we  read  of  a  district  of 
Beth  Maachah — ^and  it  not  improbably  wit- 
nessed to  unhappy  memories.  How  natural 
it  would  be  that  David's  bride  should  take  a 
name  of  better  omen  and  of  a  religious  import, 
and  how  natural  that  the  grand-daughter 
who  bore  her  name  should  be  called  by  that 
name  in  both  its  forms.  Since  writing  the 
aboTe,  I  find  that  a  somewhat  similar  idea 
has  occurred  long  since  to  others.  Both 
Kimchi  and  Jarchi  hold  that  she  had  two 
names.  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  she 
assumed  the  name  Michaiah,  as  more  digni- 
fied, on  becoming  queen.  Wordsworth  thinka 
that  Michaiah  was  her  real  name,  and  that 
it  was  degraded  into  Maachah  when  she  wai 
deposed  for  idolatry.  This  latter  view  dove- 
tails with    the  one  suggested  above.     It 


«H.  XV.  1 — 24.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGH. 


8»9 


would  be  quite  in  accordance  with  Jewish 
usages  and  habits  of  thought  that  the  name 
which  had  been  changed  into  Michaiah 
-when  the  giandmother  became  a  proselyte, 
should  be  changed  back  into  Maachah  when 
this  princess  apostatized] ,  the  daughter 
[lather,  grand-daughter.  113  includes  all 
female  descendants,  as  □($  (see  ver.  10)  all 
ancestresses]  of  Abishalom.  We  can  hardly 
doubt  that  Absalom,  the  son  of  Dayid,  is 
meant  here.  We  have  (1)  the  express  state- 
ment of  2  Chron.  xi.  21,  "Behoboam  loved 
Maachah,  the  daughter  of  Absalom,"  &o.  (2) 
The  fact  that  twp-of  Behoooam's  other  wives 
were  of  the  family  of  David,  which  shows 
that  it  was  part  of  his  policy  to  marry  the 
daughters  of  that  house.  (3)  The  mother  | 
of  Absalom  was  named  Maachah  (2  Sam. 
iii.  3).  (4)  The  name  is  bo  uncommon — in 
fact,  it  is  dvai  \ey — that  another  person 
can  hardly  be  intended.  Moreover,  the 
variation  in  spelling  is  extremely  sUght.  It 
has  been  held,  however,  that  a  different 
person  is  designated  by  the  name,  principally 
because  Absalom  had  but  one  daughter 
whose  name  was  Tamar  (2  Sam.  ziv.  27), 
whereas  Abijah's  mother  is  said  to  have 
been  the  daughter  of  Uriel  of  Gibeah  (2 
Chron.  xiii.  2).  But  this  difficulty  admits 
of  an  easy  solution,  Tainar  was  doubtless 
married  to  Uriel,  and  Maachah  was  the 
fruit  of  this  marriage.  And  with  this  ex- 
planation agrees  the  account  of  Josephns 
{Ant.  viii.  10,  1). 

Yer.  3.— And  he  walked  In  all  the  BlnB  of 
iis  fiither,  which  he  had  done  before  him 
[sins,  i.e.,  from  the  theocratic  standpoint. 
See  ch.  xiv.  22,  25.  It  does  not  appear 
that  either  Abijah  or  Behoboam  was  a 
vicious  jnan,  and  from  his  pious  language 
on  Mount  Zemaraim  (2  Chron.  xiii.  10 — 12) 
we  should  certainly  have  thought  that  Abijah 
was  a  god-fearing  prince.  But  ver.  13  proves 
that  he  had  sanctioned  idolatry,  and  this 
was  no  doubt  his  principal  sin,  as  the  next 
words  explain] :  and  his  heart  was  not  per- 
fect with  the  Lord  and  his  God,  as  the  heart 
of  David  his  father  [the  words  used  of 
Solomon,  ch.  ii.  4]. 

Ver.  4.— Nevertheless  p3  hut,  sed,s<mdem, 
Oesen.  393]  for  David's  sate  did  the  Lord 
his  God  give  him  a  lamp  [Better  than 
margin,  candle.  The  word  is  "  always  used 
figuratively  of  progeny."  See  note  on  ch.  ii. 
26 ;  and  of  2  Sam.  xxi.  17 ;  Job  xviii.  S,  6 ; 
Psa,  exzzii.  17]  In  Jerosalem,  to  set  up 
his  son  after  him,  and  to  establish  Jeru- 
salem [But  for  David's  piety,  that  is  to  say, 
his  faiuily  wonld  have  been  dethroned,  if 
not  destroyed,  as  was  that  of  Jeroboam 
<1  Kings  xiv.  10),  of  Baasha  (oh.  xvi.  2), 
of  Ahab  (2  Kings  z.  11),  &e.    Abijah  was 


the  third  prince  of  that  line  who  had  per- 
mitted idolatrous  worship,  so  that  that 
dynasty  had  richly  deserved  to  forfeit  its 
position.  The  stability  of  the  family  of 
David  on  the  throne  for  nearly  400  years, 
amid  all  the  changes  and  chances  of  that 
period,  and  whilst  in  Israel  there  were 
"  nine  changes  of  dynasty  within  250  years  " 
is,  as  Bawhnaon  remarks,  very  "  difficult  to 
account  for  on  mere  grounds  of  human 
reason  "] ; 

Ver.  5.  Because  [^{^'K,  here  causative  for 
'N  jyi.  Comp.  quod]  David  did  that  which 
was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and 
turned  not  aside  from  anything  that  he 
commanded  him  all  the  days  of  his  life, 
save  only  in  the  matter  of  Vilah  the 
Hlttite.  [2  Sam.  ii.  4.  But  this  last  clause 
is  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  and  such  a  state- 
ment was  more  likely  to  be  inserted  by 
transcribers,  having  first  appeared  in  the 
margin  as  a  gloss,  than  to  be  omitted,  had 
it  ever  formed  part  of  the  text.  And  in 
support  of  this  view  it  may  be  alleged  that 
(1)  the  matter  of  Uriah  was  by  no  means 
David's  only  sin,  and  (2)  it  is  not  the 
manner  of  our  writer  thus  to  qualify  hia 
words.     See  next  verse.] 

Ver.  6. — ^And  there  was  war  between 
Behoboam  and  Jeroboam  all  the  days  of 
his  life.  [Practically  identical  with  oh.  xiv. 
30,  where  see  note.  Thenius  thinks  the 
insertion  of  the  words  were  due  to  the  care- 
lessness of  some  copyist,  and  Bahr  admits 
that  our  present  text  is  possibly  not  the 
original  one.  For  Sehoboam,  some  MSS., 
with  the  Syriac  and  Arabic,  read  Abijah, 
but  this  is  clearly  an  emendation,  which  in 
turn  begets  another  repetition  (ver.  7),  and 
there  is  really  no  need  either  to  alter  or 
suspect  the  text.  Such  repetitions  are 
quite  in  accordance  with  Eastern  usage, 
and  Behoboam  here  stands  for  the  house 
of  Behoboam,  or  the  cause  and  kingdom 
which  Behoboam  represented.  The  object 
of  mentioning  his  name  can  hardly  be  "  to 
remind  the  reader  that  Abijam  inherited 
this  war  from  his  father"  (Eawlinson),  for 
it  was  only  on  Behoboam's  death  that  the 
slumbering  hostility  blazed  out  into  actual 
war.  That  there  was  warfare  between  Abi- 
jam and  Jeroboam  we  know  not  only  from 
ver.  7,  but  from  2  Chron.  xiii.  3—20  also. 

Ver.  7.— Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Abijam  and  all  that  he  did,  are  they  not 
written  In  the  book  of  the  chronicles  [see 
note  on  ch.  xiv.  29.  The  marginal  rrfer- 
ence  to  2  Chron.  xiii.  misleads  the  casual 
reader]  of  the  kings  of  Judah  7  And  there 
was  war  [not  only  hostiUty,  but  open  war 
(Vulgate,  praelium),  hence  the  repetition] 
hetween  Abijam  and  Jeroboam. 


310 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XT.  I — 24 


Ver.  8.  — And  Abljam  slept  with  Us 
fiitbers;  and  tbey  burled  him  In  the  city 
of  David  [This  fact  alone  should  negative 
Lightfoot's  theory  as  to  his  name ;  see  note 
on  ch.  ziv.  31]  :  and  Asa  his  son  reigned 
in  bis  stead. 

The  Reign  of  Asa. 

Ver.  9. — ^And  In  the  twentieth  year  of 
Jeroboam  king  of  Israel  reigned  Asa 
[Gesen.  interprets  the  name  to  mean 
"physician"]  over  Judab.  [This  reign 
is  related  at  much  greater  length  in  2  Chron. 
xiv. — ^xvi.  We  are  there  told  of  the  Ethio- 
pian invasion,  of  the  prophecies  of  Azariah 
and  Hanani,  of  the  league  with  Syria,  Ac.] 

Ver.  10. — ^And  forty  and  one  years  reigned 
he  in  Jerusalem  [Corn,  k  Lapide  points  out 
that  Asa  saw  eight  kings  of  Israel  on  the 
throne,  Jerohoam,  Nadab,  Baasha,  Elah, 
Zimri,  Tibni,  Omri,  and  Ahab],  And  Ms 
mother's  [or  grandmother's,  as  margin] 
name  was  Maachah,  the  daughter  of  Abl- 
shalom.  [The  same  words  as  in  ver.  2, 
and  the  reference  can  hardly  be  to  a  differ- 
ent person,  Bahr  indeed  questions  whether 
□^  can  here  stand  for  grandmother,  (1) 
because  in  every  other  case  it  designates 
the  king's  motlier,  (2)  Because  the  mother 
of  the  king,  and  not  the  grandmother,  en- 
joyed the  dignity  and  position  of  Gebirah 
(ver.  13;  2  Chron.  xv.  16).  Some  would 
read  for  Abishalom,  Uriel  of  Gibeah;  others, 
strengthened  by  the  Michaiah  of  2  Chron. 
ziii.  2,  think  the  historian  mistaken  in 
mentioning  the  name  of  Abijam's  mother 
(ver.  2 ;  2  Ohron.  zi.  21)  as  Maachah.  The 
difficulty  by  no  means  admits  of  a  ready 
solution,  but  perhaps  the  best  explanation 
is  that  the  grandmother,  Maachah,  Beho- 
boam's  favourite  wife,  retained  her  position, 
poseibly  by  force  of  character,  or  because 
Asa's  mother  was  dead.  It  is  not  certain, 
however,  that  if  the  latter  had  lived  she 
would  have  displaced  Maachah,  of  whose 
influence  and  imperious  temper  we  have 
several  indications ;  e.g.,  in  the  appoint- 
ment of  her  son,  though  not  the  first-born, 
to  succeed  his  father,  and  in  her  open 
maintenance  of  idol-worship,  and  above 
all  in  the  fact  that  she  was  publicly  deposed 
by  Asa. 

Ver.  11.— And  Asa  did  that  which  was 
right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  as  did  David 
his  father.  ["It  is  a  wonder  how  Asa 
should  be  good,  of  the  seed  of  Abijam,  of 
(he  soil  of  Maachai  "  (Hall).] 

Ver.  12. — ^And  he  took  away  the  Sodom- 
ites [see  on  oh.  xiv.  24,  and  Eom.  i.  23 — 27. 
It  appears  from  oh.  xxii  46  that  this  abomi- 
nation was  not  wholly  suppressed]   out  of 

the  land,  and  removed  aU  the  idols  [D^^^j 

from  ?7|  volvit-    A  term  of  contempt  (see 


Dent.  xxix.  17,  where  it  is  coupled  with 
"  abominations ;  "  Ezek.  xxiii  .S7) ;  but  whe- 
ther the  word  is  to  he  interpreted  by  77J  a 

ball  of  dung,  in  which  case  these  idols 
(Dei  stercorei)  would  have  a  designation  like 

BeelzehiU  ("  the  lord  of  dung"),  or  with  ?4 
a  heap  of  stones  (Gen.  xxxi.  46,  48),  Dei 
lapidei,  is  uncertain.  Eeil  would  translate 
logs,  Gesenius  trunks,  stodks,  which  from 
being  rolled  might  well  bear  this  name] 
that  his  fathers  had  made. 

Ver.  13. — ^And  also  Maachah  his  mother, 
even  her  he  removed  ftom  being  otueen 
[Bather,  qtteen-mother.  Gebirah,  as  already 
pointed  out  on  ch.  ii.  19,  answers  to  the 
Sultana  Valide.  The  Vulgate  reads,  Ne  esset 
princeps  in  sacris  Priapi.  Wordsworth  re- 
minds us  of  the  position  which  the  qneen- 
mother  Atossa  holds  in  the  Persae  (vers. 
159 — 850).  A  queen  consort  is  hardly  pos- 
sible in  a  polygamous  household  ;  see  Kitto, 
iv.  177]  because  [Heb.  which,  as  in  ver.  5]  she 

had  made  an  idol  [nyPBD  from  ^73  terruit, 

signifies  an  object  of  fear,  formido — not 
pudendum,  a  thing  of  shame,  as  the  Babbis 
and  others  have  held,  i.e.,  a  phallic  image 
{simulacrum  obscoenum,  Jerome),  bat  hor- 
rendum.  The  devout  Jew  could  not  but 
regard  such  objects  with  horror]  In  a  grove 

[Heb. /or  (i.e.,  to  serve  as)  an  Asherah.  See 
note  on  oh.  xiv.  15,  23.  Asherah  is  not  the 
name  of  the  goddess  {=  Astarte),  as  Words- 
worth thinks,  but  of  the  image] ,  and  Asa 
destroyed  [Marg.  cut  off,  Heb.  simply  cut, 
which  here  must  mean  cut  down.  The  image 
was,  no  doubt,  planted  erect  in  the  ground] 
her  idol  [horror,  as  above] ,  and  burnt  it 

[this  shows  that  it  was  made  of  \iood]  by 
the  brook  Eldron.  [Of.  Exod.  xxxii.  20. 
Here,  as  in  ch.  xvii.  3  (where  see  note),  our 
translators  have  been  unable  to  adhere 
strictly  to  the  original  "in  the  brook,"  &c., 

from  not  knowing  that  ?n3,  which  primarily 
means  "  brook,"  also  means  "  watercourse," 
w&dy.  It  is  probable  that  the  brook  was  at 
this  time  flowing,  and  that  the  ashes  of  the 
wooden  Asherah  were  oast  into  it ;  but  the 
burning  also  took  place  in  the  Wddy,  or 
valley.  We  read  of  another  similar  burning 
in  2  Eings  xxiiL  4,  6 ;  but  in  this  case  the 
ashes  were  either  carried  to  Bethel  or  cast 
upon  the  graves,  to  defile  them.  It  is  a  fair 
inference  that  on  this  latter  occasion  the 
Kedron  was  dry.  The  valley,  "  the  fields  of 
the  Eedron "  (ver.  4  i.e.),  is  conveniently 
placed  for  such  a  purpose.] 

Ver.  14. — But  the  high  places  [evidently 
snch  as  are  referred  to  in  ch.  iii ,  i.e.,  un- 
authorized shrines  of  Jehovah  ;  cf.  2  Kings 
uv,  4]    were  not    taken   away    [lit.,  iJ'- 


CH.  xy.  1—24.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


S4] 


farted  7wt,  Tet  we  read  in  2  Chron.  xiv, 
3,  that  Asa  "  took  away  the  high  places  (cf. 
▼er.  5).  But  it  is  clear,  even  from  2  Chron. 
XV.  17,  that  'all  of  them  were  not  re- 
movedrand  the  discrepancy  arises  from  the 
'well-known  Eastern  idiom  of  putting  the 
whole  for  the  part,  of  which  we  have  in- 
stances in  Gen.  vii.  19 ;  Exod.  is.  25,  &c. 
Cf.  ver.  32  ;  2  Kings  xix.  35,  and  see  below. 
Asa  probably  aimed  at  removing  all,  and  he 
may  have  removed  all  out  of  the  cities  (2 
■Chron.  xiv.  5),  but  some  remained  in  the 
•country  districts  or  in  remote  places.  Or 
he  may  have  swept  them  away  for  a  short 
time,  and  they  may  have  been  stealthily 
And  gradually  re-introduced.  It  may  be 
interesting  to  remark  here  that  down  to  the 
present  day  the  cultus  of  the  high  places 
«xists — under  a  modified  form,  it  is  true — in 
Palestine.  Every  traveller  will  r^mimher 
the  Muk&ms  which  crown  almost  every  hill. 
The  religion  of  the  Fellahin,  though  nomi- 
nally Mohammedan,  is  really,  like  that  of 
China,  a  worship  of  the  dead.  "  In  almost 
«very  village  of  the  country  a  small  build- 
ing, surmounted  by  a  whitewashed  dome,  is 
observable,  being  the  sacred  chapel  of  the 
place ;  it  is  variously  called  Kubbeh,  "dome," 
il^zor,  "shrine,"  or  Mukdm,  "station," 
the  latter  being  a  Hebrew  word,  used  in  the 
Bihle  for  the  places  of  the  Cannanites 
(D^^^ut.  xH.  2).  .  .  .  Just  as  in  the  time  of 
Moses,  so  now  the  position  choien  for  the 
31ak&m  is  generally  conspicuous.  .  .  .  This 
llukfim  represents  the  real  religion  of  the 
peasant"  (Couder,  pp.  304  sqq.)]:  never- 
tlieless  Asa's  heaxt  was  perfect  with  the 
lord  all  his  days.  [We  have  here  a  notable 
instance  of  the  Oriental  exaggeration  just 
leferred  to.  For  the  very  same  exprtssion 
is  used  by  the  chronicler  (2  Chron.  xv.  17), 
who  in  the  next  chapter  (ch.  xvi.  7 — 12)  tells 
us  of  Asa's  unfaithfulness  in  his  old  age.] 

Ver.  15. — And  he  brought  in  the  thln^ 
-which  his  father  had  dedicated  [Heb.  the 
holy  things  of  his  father.  These  were  prob- 
ably the  spoils  Abijah  had  taken  in  his 
war  with  Jeroboam  (2  Chron.  ziii.  18)] ,  and 
-i'jis  things  which  himself  had  dedicated 
[These  were  probably  the  spoils  of  the 
Ethiopians  (2  Chron.  xiv.  15  ;  cf.  xv.  11)] , 
Snto  [the  Hebrew  omits  this  word.  Keil  says 
that  "  house "  is  an  accusative  governed 
by  "brought"],  the  bouse  of  the  Lord, 
«ilver,  and  gold,  and  vessels. 

Ver.  16. — ^And  there  was  war  between 
Asa  and  Baasha  king  of  Israel  all  their  days. 
[This  statement  must  be  compared  with  2 
■Cbron.  xiv.  1,  6,  from  which  we  gather  that 
during  the  first  ten  years  of  Asa's  reign 
there  cannot  have  been  war,  properly  so 
-called,  between  them.  Indeed,  it  would 
«eeiu  from  2  Chron.  xt.  19,  xvi.  1,  that  it 


was  not  until  the  36th  year  of  Asa's  reign 
that  it  first  broke  out.  But  these  numbers 
have  clearly  not  escaped  corruption  (see  note 
there),  as  at  the  date  last  mentioned  Baasha 
must  have  been  dead  (cf.  ver.  83  below). 
It  is  probable  that  war  is  to  be  taken  here, 
as  elsewhere  (cf,  xiv.  30),  in  the  sense  of 
hostility,  and  in  any  case  we  have  here 
another  instance  of  the  hyperbolical  habit 
of  the  Eastern  mind.] 

Ver.  17. — And  Baasha,  king  of  Israel, 
went  up  against  Judah  [This  statement 
probably  refers  to  the  reconquest  of  the 
three  cities  which  Abijah  had  taken  from 
Jeroboam  (2  Chron.  xiii.  19),  as  Eamah 
could  hardly  have  been  rebuilt  whilst  Bethel 
remained  in  the  hands  of  Judah],  and 
built  Ramah  [Heb.  the  Kamah,  i.e.,  "  the 
elevation,"  or  "high  place.''  Now  er  R&m 
(=the  height),  in  Benjamin  (Josh,  xviii. 
25;  Judg.  xix.  13,  14),  five  miles  distant 
from  Jerusalem,  near  the  frontier  of  the 
two  territories,  and  also  then,  as  now, 
on  the  great  north  road.  It  waa  the  key, 
consequently,  to  both  kingdoms.  Hence 
the  struggles  to  possess  it,  vers.  21,  22 ; 
2  Chron.  xvi.  1,  &a.'\ ,  that  he  might  not 
suffer  any  to  go  out  [Heb.  not  to  give  any 
going  out,  &c.]  or  come  in  to  Asa,  king  of 
Judah.  [The  object  of  Baasba  in  fortifying 
this  place  is  evident.  It  was  not  merely  to 
have  an  advanced  post  as  a  menace  to  Jem- 
salera  (BawUnson),  but  primarily,  by  its 
command  of  the  high  road,  to  prevent  his 
s'lbjects  from  falling  away  to  the  kingdom  of 
Judah,  or  even  from  going  up  to  Jerusalem 
to  worship ;  in  fact,  to  isolate  Judah  and  to 
blockade  its  capital.  That  there  was  a  great 
defection  to  Asa  at  this  time  we  know  from 
2  Chron.  xv.  9.  This  was  an  exodus  which 
Baasha  felt  must  be  checked.  Blunt 
('  Coincidences,"  pp.  176 — 8)  has  happily 
shown  from  2  Chron.  xvi.  6,  &c.,  how  the 
primary  object  must  have  been  to  "  stop  the 
alarming  drainage  of  all  that  was  virtuous 
out  of  their  borders."  Eawlinson  sees  in 
the  fortification  of  this  place  "  the  first 
step  towards  a  conquest  of  the  southern 
kingdom."  But  as  to  this  the  text  is  sUent, 
or  rather  it  assigns  an  entirely  different 
reason.] 

Ver.  18. — Then  Asa  took  all  the  silver 
and  the  gold  that  were  left  [LXX.  to 
evptSiv,  which  Eawlinson  thinks  points  to 
a  corruption  of  our  text.  He  says,  ' '  The 
Jewish  treasuries  should  now  have  been 
tolerably  full,"  because  (1)  of  the  long  peace 
(2  Chron.  xiv.  I — 6),  and  (2)  the  "very 
much  spoil "  they  had  taken  from  the 
Ethiopians  (ib.,  ver.  13).  Compare  ver.  16 
above.  But  the  historian  has  in  mind  the 
depletion  of  the  treasury  by  Shishak  (ch, 
xiv.  26).    It  is  true   there   was  nothing 


sa 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  xv.  1 — 24. 


"  left  "  on  that  occasion,  bnt  the  treasures 
since  accumulated  are  referred  to  under  this 
term.  It  may  be  the  phrase  is  not  strictly 
accurate,  but  the  LXX.  reading  looks 
Buspiciousily  like  an  emendation]  In  the 
treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
treasures  of  the  kind's  house,  and  delivered 
them  Into  the  hand  of  his  servants :  and 
blng  Asa  sent  them  [cf.  2  Kings  xvi.  8. 
For  this  act  of  faithlessness  he  was  reproved 
by  Hanani  the  seer  (2  Chron.  xvi.  7) :  "  O 
Asa,  where  was  thy  piety,  while  thou  robbedst 
Ood  to  corrupt  an  infidel  for  the  slaughter 
of  the  Israelites  ? "  (Hall)]  to  Ben-hadad 
["  the  son  of  the  sun "  (see  note  on  ch. 
zi.  23).  Three  Mngs  of  Damascus  at  least 
bore  this  name,  viz.,  this  king,  his  son 
(ch,  XX,  1),  and  the  son  of  Hazael  (2  Kings 
ziii.  24)] ,  the  son  of  Tabrlmon  [the  name 
means,  Good  is  Rimvum,  as  to  which  deity 
see  note  on  2  Kings  v,  18] ,  the  son  of 
Hezlon  [by  some  identified  with  Bezin  (ch. 
zi.  23),  but  on  insufficient  grounds]  king: 
«f  Syria,  that  dwelt  at  Damascus  ["  The 
centre  of  the  Aramaean  power  west  of  the 
Euphrates  "  (Ewald)] ,  saying, 

Ver.  19. — There  Is  a  leagxie  [RawlicBon 
would  render,  "  Let  there  be  a  league  .  .  . 
as  there  was,"  but  the  A.V.  is  equally  good. 
Asa  claims  that  a  league  does  exist,  and, 
in  fact,  has  never  been  broken]  between  me 
and  thee,  and  between  my  father  and  thy 
fother  [Syria  would  seem  to  have  been 
the  first  of  the  possessions  of  Solomon  to 
regain  its  independence  (ch.  xi,  24).  Its 
friendship  would  naturally  be  sought  by 
Jndah,  as  a  counterpoise,  perhaps,  to  the 
alliance  between  Israel  and  Egypt  (Ewald)] : 
behold,  I  have  sent  unto  thee  a  present 
[elsewhere  a  bribe.  Psa.  xv.  5  ;  xxvi.  10 ; 
1  Sam.  viii.  3]  of  silver  and  gold;  come 
and  break  [Heb.  come,break  now,  n cohorta- 
tive]  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of  Israel, 
that  he  may  depart  from  me.  [Heb.  go  up 
from  wpon  me."] 

Ver.  20. — So  [Heb.  and:\  Ben-hadad 
bearkened  unto  king  Asa,  and  sent  the 
captains  \or princes;  same  word  as  in  ch. 
sxii.  81 ;  cf.  xx.  24]  of  the  hosts  which  he 
bad  against  the  cities  of  Israel,  and  smote 
IJon  [now  represented  by  Tell  Dibbin,  a 
mound  near  the  north  end  of  the  Merj 
'Ayun  (which  probably  preserves  the  name), 
a  "  meadow  of  fountains,"  afew  miles  north- 
west of  Dan.  This  hill  would  offer  a  com- 
manding site  for  a  stronghold,  and  traces  are 
found  there  of  a  large  and  ancient  city  (Robin- 
son, iii.  p.  375;  Diet.  Bib.,  i.  p.  868],  and 
Dan,  [near  the  northemextremity  of  Palestine 
(oh.  iv.  25 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  20,  &o.)  Now  cer. 
tainly  identified  with  Tell  el  Kadi  the  "  hill 
of  the  Judge  "  (which  preserves  the  meaning 
nl  the  name),  near  the  main  source  of  the 


Jordan.  The  Tell,  apparently  an  extinct 
crater,  is  covered  with  ruins.  Stanley,  S. 
and  P.,  p.  395—6.  Thomson,  "  Land  and 
Book,"  i.  p.  320.  Van  de  Velde,  u.  p.  420. 
The  situation  is  described  as  superb,  and 
the  country  as  extremely  fertile.  This  is 
the  last  mention  of  the  place  in  Scripture. 
Betribution  has  soon  fallen  on  one  of  the 
centres  of  Jeroboam's  schism] ,  and  Abel- 
beth-maachali  [now  known  as  Abil  elKamh 
(Robinson,  iii.  p.  372;  but  see  Stanley, 
S.  and  P.,  p.  390,  note  6 ;  Thomson, i.  p.  324. 
Bawlinson  argues  from  2  Sam.  xz.  14  that 
there  were  originally  two  towns,  but  ver.  15 
leads  us  to  question  the  present  text  of  ver. 
14.  Ver.  19  shows  it  to  have  been  a  place 
of  considerable  importance.  In  2  Chron. 
xvi.  4.  it  is  called  Abel  Maim,  "  the  meadow 
of  the  waters,"  not  only,  it  is  probable,  be- 
cause of  the  lake,  but  of  the  huge  marsh, 
the  Ard  el  Hulek,  which  drains  into  it  (see 
Stanley,  l.c.}  All  these  towns  are  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Lake  Huleh  (Merom),  and 
all  being  in  the  extreme  north,  bore  the 
brunt  of  the  invasion.  The  name  Maachah  is 
to  be  noticed  in  connection  with  ver.  2] , 
and  ail  Clnneroth  [in  Num.  zxxiv.  11; 
Deat.  iii.  17,  Cinnereth;  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, Gennesaret."  "  The  expression  '  all 
Giuneroth'  is  unusual,  and  may  be  com- 
pared with  'aU  Bithron,'  probably  like 
this,  a  district  and  not  a  town"  (Grove,  Diet. 
Bib.,  i.  p.  830).  It  is  the  district  on  the 
western  shore  of  the  lake  of  Galilee,  north  of 
Tiberias,  which  gave  its  name  to  the  adjoin- 
ing sheet  of  water.  A  city  Chinnereth,  per. 
haps  the  capital  of  the  district,  is  mentioned 

Josh.  xix.  35],  with  [yV  not  uncommonly 
has  this  meaning.  Cf.  Gen.  xxxii.  12  (Heb.)i 
"the  mother  with  the  children ;"  Exod.  xxxv- 
22,  "  men  with  women."]  .all  the  land  of 
NaphtaU.  [Not  only  were  the  fortresses  of 
Naphtali  just  mentioned  smitten  by  the 
Syrians,  but  they  laid  waste  all  the  surround- 
ing district.] 

Ver.  21. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when 
Baasha  heard  thereof,  that  he  left  off 
building  of  Ramah  [He  could  not  prosecute 
it  when  he  had  enemies  on  every  side.  He 
at  once  assumes  the  defensive] ,  and  dwelt 
in  Ttrzah.  [Ch.  xiv.  17.  He  retired  to 
his  capital.  It  is  not  implied  that  he  had 
entertained  the  idea  of  dwelling  at  Eamah.] 

Ver.  22. — Then  king  Asa  made  a  pro- 
clamation [Heb.  made  all  to  hear]  throt^h- 
out  all  Judah ;  none  was  exempted  [Heb. 
none  free] ,  and  they  took  away  [Heb.  took 
up]  the  stones  of  Bamah,  and  the  timber 
thereof,  wherewith  Baasha  [It  is  noticeable 
that  it  is  generally  "  king  Asa,"  but  never 
"king  Baasha"]  had  buUded;  and  king 
Asa  built  with  them  Geba  of    Benjamin 


CH.  XT.  1 — 24.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


848 


[Sometimea  "the  Geba,"  f.*.,  height;  in 
Josh,  xviii.  24,  Gaba ;  now  Jeba,  only  45' 
north-east  of  Bamah.  This  was  the  northern 
limit  of  the  southem  kingdom  (2  Einga 
zxiii.  8).  It  occupied  a  striking  position, 
standing  on  a  rocky  knoll  on  the  south  side 
of  the  great  gorge  of  Michmash  (now  known 
as  the  W&dy  Suweinit),  a  "  great  crack  or 
fissure  in  the  country,  with  vertical  pre- 
cipices some  800  feet  high"  (Conder,  p. 
254 ;  cf.  Diet.  Bib.,  i.  p.  658  and'  Porter,  i. 
p.  214],  As  Geba  would  command  the  pass, 
it  is  easy  to  understand  why  Asa  fortified 
it,  the  more  so  as  this  defile  "  appears  to 
have  been  more  than  once  the  meeting- 
place  between  the  Jews  and  their  enemies  " 
(Conder)] ,  and  Mlzpah.  [Heb.  the  Mizpah, 
i.e.,  watch-tower  (Gen.  zxxi.  49).  The 
name  points  to  an  eminence,  but  it  is 
remarkable  that  while  ao  many  sites  of 
minor  importance  have  been  recovered,  this 
old  gathering-place  of  the  tribes  (Judg.  xxi, 
1 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  5 ;  x.  17 — 25),  and  the  seat 
of  Gedaliah's  government  (Jer.  xl.  6),  cannot 
be  identified  with  certainty.  It  has  been 
conjectured  that  it  is  now  represented  by 
the  commanding  eminence  of  Nebi  Samwil 
(Robinson,  ii.  p.  828 ;  Van  de  Yelde,  ii.  p. 
63),  but  Stanley  (S.  and  P.,  ii.  p.  213—4)  and 
Grove  (Diet.  Bib.,  ii.  p.  389)  argue  in  favour 
of  Scopus,  and  "  the  survey  has  done  little 
to  throw  light  on  this  question  "  (see  Con- 
der, pp.  257 — 9).  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the 
"  pit,"  or  well,  which  Asa  made  (Jer.  xli.  9), 
probably  "  to  provide  Mizpah  with  a  plenU- 


fnl  supply  of  water  in  case  of  a  siege" 
(Ewald),  may  yet  be  brought  to  light. 

Yer.  23. — ^And  the  rest  of  all  the  acts  ol 
Asa,  and  all  his  might  [see  2  Chron.  xlv., 
zv.] ,  and  all  that  he  did,  and  the  dtles 
which  he  hullt  [during  the  peace  in  the 
earlier  part  of  his  reign  (2  Chron.  xiv.  5,  6)], 
are  they  not  yrrltten  ik  the  book  of  the 
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Judah  7  Never- 
theless [Heb.  only.  There  was  one  exception 
to  his  otherwise  happy  and  prosperous  reign"] 
In  the  time  of  his  old  age  [see  notes  on  ch. 
i.  1;  xi.  4.  "Old  age"  means  here,  as 
there,  the  end  of  life.  Asa  cannot  well 
have  been  more  than  fifty.  It  was  in  the 
39th  year  of  his  reign  (2  Chron.  xvi.  12) 
that  this  disease  attacked  him]  be  was 
diseased  In  his  feet.  [It  is  generally  sup- 
posed that  this  disease  was  the  gout.  In 
the  Chronicles  (i.e.)  he  is  reproached  for 
seeking  "  not  to  the  Lord  but  to  the  phy- 
aicians."  We  must  remember  what  the  art 
of  medicine  at  that  day  was  like  (see  Eitto, 
"  Daily  Bib.  Illus.,"  iv.  195  sqq.),  and  that 
the  Jews  regarded  sickness  and  heaUng  as 
alike  the  immediate  acts  of  God. 

Ver.  24. — ^And  Asa  slept  with  his  fitthers, 
and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  ["in  his 
own  sepulchre  which  he  had  made  for  him- 
aelf "  (2  Chron.  xvi.  14,  which  also  notices 
"  the  bed  filled  with  sweet  odonrs,"  in 
which  he  was  laid  and  the  "  very  great 
burning"  made  for  him)]  In  the  city  of 
David  his  father :  and  Jehoabaphat  hit  win 
reigned  In  bis  stead. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  11 — 26. — The  Reign  of  Asa.  _  Though  this  prince  reigned  forty  and  one 
years — a  longer  period  than  any  of  his  predecessors,  and,  with  two  exceptions,  a 
longer  period  than  any  of  the  kings  who  came  after  him — yet  his  reign,  eo  &r  as  it 
is  recorded  here,  may  be  aummed  up  in  few  words.  "  Happy  is  the  nation,"  it  has 
been  said,  "  which  has  no  history."  But  happier  still  the  nation  whose  history, 
like  that  of  Judah  in  the  time  of  Asa,  may  be  comprehended  under  theae  two  heads 
— internal  refurms,  and  external  discipline. 

I.  Internal  beforms.  Two  questions  present  themselvea  for  consideration  here. 
First,  What  were  Asa's  reforms  ?    Secondly,  In  what  way  were  they  accomplished  ? 

1.  His  reforms  were  practically  of  two  kinds :  (a)  Moral,  and  (i)  Bdigiout.  It 
JB  not  implied  that  he  either  put  morality  before  religion,  or  believed  that  the  one 
oould  be  separated  from  the  other.  It  may  be  a  question  in  these  days — it  is  at 
least  hotly  disputed — ^whether  morality  can  long  support  itself  without  a  reUgioua 
basis  and  religious  sanctions ;  but  it  was  no  question  in  that  dark  age,  or  for  many 
hundred  years  afterwards.  Then  it  was  a  choice  between  the  one  true  religion  and 
the  most  shameful  immoralities  practised  under  the  name  of  religion.  All  that 
is  meant  here,  therefore,  is  that  Asa's  reforms  resulted  in  purging  and  raising  the 
tone  of  publio  morality  by  suppressing  the  idolatry  which  sancti&ued  and  con- 
secrated impurity. 

(1)  The  moral  reformation  is  suggested  to  our  minds  by  the  words  "  He  took 
away  the  Sodomites  out  of  the  land"  (ver.  12).  What  an  abyas  of  corruption  does 
this  one  brief  sentence  reveal  to  us.    "  It  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  at  tLoae  things 


044  .  THE  FIIIST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xv.  1—24. 

■which"  were  "done  of  them  in  secret"  (Bph.  v.  12).  And  this  among  the  holy 
people,  the  bride  of  the  Lord  I  No  wouder  that  Asa's  fii'st  effort  was  directed 
against  these  horrible  enormities.  This  suppression  of  the  Sodomites  was  a  first 
step  towards — 

(2)  J  he  religious  reformation.  He  next  "removed  all  the  idols  that  his  fathers 
had  made."  "His  fathers."  Solomon,  as  well  as  Eehoboam  and  Abijah.  Probably 
none  of  the  three  had  himself  reared  idol  slirines.  But  all  the  three  had,  to  say 
the  least,  permitted  idolatry,  and  connived  at  it.  It  was  sin  enough  that  they  had 
not  vigorously  and  promptly  suppressed  it.  They  were,  each  in  his  turn,  the 
representative  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.  What  were  they  doing  that  they  per- 
mitted any  rivalry  between  the  bestial  gods  of  the  heathen  and  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  ?  But  probably  we  see  here  the  bitter  fruits  of  Solomon's  sin — so  true  it  is 
that  "the  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them."  When  that  powerful  prince  had 
once  granted  to  foreign  deities  and  shameful  snperstitions  a  footing  in  Immanuel's 
land,  it  was  more  than  his  comparatively  feeble  successors  could  do  to  dislodge 
them.  The  people  loved  to  have  it  so,  and  neither  Rehoboam  nor  Abijah  was 
strong  enough  to  say  them  nay.  Thus  did  Solomon,  down  to  Asa's  days,  yes,  and 
down  to  the  time  of  the  captivity  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14),  go  on  sinning  in  his  grave. 

And  let  us  notice  here  an  instructive  contrast  between  Asa  and  Solomon.  It 
was  the  wise  king,  the  most  magnificent  of  the  monarchs  of  the  earth,  at  the 
height  of  his  prosperity,  and  towards  the  end  of  a  long  and  peaceful  reign,  built 
altars  for  the  abominations  of  neighbouring  nations.  It  was  a  young  prince, 
unknown  to  fame,  with  no  special  giflis  or  endowments,  with  a  restricted  dominion, 
and  encompassed  with  difficulties,  who  was  the  first  to  stem  this  tide  of  sin  and 
shame  with  which  his  great  ancestor  had  flooded  the  land.  "  The  first  last,  and  the 
last  first."     Compare  1  Cor.  i.  27 — 29,     Wealth  has  greater  dangers  than  adversity. 

2.  But  let  us  now  consider  the  way  in  which  these  great  reforms  were  brought 
about. 

(1)  He  began  at  the  right  place.  "Even  Maachah  his  mother  he  removed,"  fto. 
The  Gebirah,  the  first  lady  in  the  land,  whose  conduct  would  of  course  be  an 
example  to  all  the  women  of  his  realm  (Esther  i.  17, 18),  was  deposed  from  her 
lofty  station.  The  history  of  Israel  shows  repeatedly  how  the  country  took  its  tone, 
as  indeed  every  coimtry  must  do,  more  or  less,  from  the  court.  It  is  not  only 
in  dress  that  the  queen  sets  the  fashion.  The  Japanese  have  a  striking  proverb, 
"  Fish  begin  to  stink  at  the  head."  If  the  court  be  corrupt,  profligate,  irreligious, 
the  commonalty  will  soon  follow  suit,  for  we  all  imitate  our  superiors.  In  this  sense 
is  that  word  true,  corrujitio  optimi  pessima.  It  would  consequently  have  been  of 
httle  use  for  Asa  to  put  down  idols  elsewhere  had  he  tolerated  them  in  the  harem, 
the  nursery  of  his  successors.  This  hydra  could  not  be  slain  by  hewing  its  feet,  or 
piercing  its  body;  it  was  only  mortal  in  its  head.  Maachah's  "horror"  must  be 
destroyed  or  idolatiy  will  Uve  and  flourish.  Moreover,  in  beginning  with  her,  Asa 
shows  that  he  appraised  aright  the  power  of  female  influence.  He  might  have 
realized  that  those  who  "  rock  the  cradle,  rule  the  world."  The  sinister  influence 
of  the  harem  had  ruined  Rehoboam ;  it  should  not  ruin  Jehoshaphat.  Here,  again, 
let  us  mark  the  contrast  between  the  conduct  of  Asa  and  that  of  Solomon;  between 
the  cases  of  Maachah  and  Naamah.  Solomon  built  idol  altars  for  his  wives:  Asa 
burnt  the  idol  of  his  mother.  The  strong  kins  was  brought  into  subjection  by 
weak  and  foolish  women ;  the  weak  king  humbled  and  degraded  the  proudest  and 
strongest  woman  of  her  time.  The  fonner  could  not  resist  the  blandishments  of 
one  of  his  many  foreign  mistresses  when  she  petitioned  for  the  gods  and  rites  of 
her  native  country ;  the  latter  was  deaf  to  the  entreaties  of  his  mother  when  she 
prayed  to  retain,  not  her  idol,  but  her  place.  It  must  have  cost  him  an  efiort  to 
deal  with  the  queen-mother  who  had  exercised  so  great  an  influence  in  former  reigns. 
It  has  been  said  that  the  devU  often  "  comes  to  a  man  in  the  shape  of  his  vrife  and 
children"  (J.  Hinton),  and  truly  a  man's  real  foes  are  not  unfrequently  those  of  his 
own  household.  Just  as  their  flattery  is  the  most  insidious  and  mischievous 
(Whately),  so  are  their  faults  too  often  considered  venial,  and  their  sins,  when 
manifest,  lure  the  hardest  to  reprove  (cf.  ch.  i.  6;  1  Sam.  iii.  13).    These  ore  the 


en.  XV.  1—84.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  846 

**  hand  "  and  the  "  eye,"  which  cause  men  to  offend,  and  which  they  must  cut  off  o» 
pluck  out  and  cast  from  them  (Matt.  v.  29  sqq.)  Hence  the  charge  of  Deut.  siii.  6 
■qq. ;  of.  Matt.  x.  87. 

And  the  moral  effect  of  this  act,  the  public  deposition  of  the  queen-mother,  can 
hardly  be  over-estimated.  It  showed  the  country  that  the  king  was  in  real  earnest ; 
that  he  was  no  respecter  of  persons ;  that  no  idolatry  could  expect  tolerance  at  his 
hands.  Probably  but  for  this  he  could  neither  have  taken  away  the  Sodomites 
Dor  removed  the  idols.  Possibly  it  was  because  neither  Behoboam  (see  2  Chron. 
xi.  21)  nor  Abijam  dared  to  deal  with  the  idolatries  of  Maachab,  who  would  seem 
to  have  been  a  woman  of  imperious  will,  that  these  foreign  superstitions  had  defiled 
the  land  so  long.    Asa  struck  at  their  root  in  removing  her  from  being  queen. 

(2)  He  did  not  stop  half-way.  He  destroyed  "  with  both  hands  earnestly " 
{Mioah  vii.  3).  He  not  only  cut  down  her  idol,  he  burnt  it  in  the  valley  of  the 
Kedron.  There 'was  no  place  left  her  for  repentance.  He  had  burnt  his  ships 
behind  him;  had  destroyed  the  nests,  so  that  the  rooks  might  not  return.  This 
public  burning,  witnessed,  no  doubt,  by  crowds  of  spectators,  spoke  louder  than 
a.ny  words  or  ordinances  could  do.  When  they  saw  the  "  horror  "  reduced  to  ashes, 
and  the  ashes  cast  into  the  brook,  they  could  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  purpose  of 
their  king.    They  would  remember  how  Moses  had  acted  before  (Exod.  xxxii.  20). 

(3)  He  did  what  he  could.  It  is  no  reproach  to  him  that  "  the  high  places  were 
not  removed"  (ver.  14),  for  the  chronicler  (ohs.  xiv.  6 ;  xv.  12,  13,  17),  as  well  as 
our  author,  testifies  that  this  was  no  fault  of  his.  "  His  heart  was  perfect  all 
his  days."  He  did  what  in  him  lay,  and  his  service  was  accepted  accordingly 
(2  Cor.  viii.  12).     "  The  fleetest  horse  cannot  escape  from  its  tail." 

(4)  His  reformation  was  followed  by  a  restitution.  It  was  not  merely  de- 
structive, as  too  many  so-called  reforms  have  been.  (1)  He  gave  up  to  the  sacristy 
•of  God  the  silver  and  gold  he  had  taken  from  the  Ethiopians.  It  was  his  happiness 
to  restore  to  it  some  of  the  treasure  of  which  it  had  been  denuded  in  the  reign  of 
Behoboam.  (Observe :  When  idolatry  came  in,  the  treasures  went  out  of  the  land. 
"When  idolatry  was  expelled,  prosperity  retirrned.  Godliness  has  the  promise  of 
the  life  that  now  is.)  His,  consequently,  was  no  cheap  reform.  He  offered  of  that 
which  cost  him  something  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  24).  He  might  have  converted  his  spoil 
into  drinking  vessels  of  pure  gold  (ch.  x.  21),  but  he  surrendered  it  to  the  service 
and  keeping  of  the  Most  High.  (2)  He  induced  his  people  to  dedicate  themselves 
anew  to  the  Lord  (2  Chron.  xv.  12  sqq.;  c£  2  Cor.  viii  5).  This  was  the  crown 
and  blossom  of  his  reformation.     "  They  sware  unto  the  Lord  with  a  loud  voice." 

And,  as  the  fruit  of  this  righteous  poUcy,  we  find  that  he  enjoyed,  for  a  part  of 
his  reign  at  least,  (1)  quietness  (2  Chron.  xiv.  1),"  The  Lord  gave  him  rest"  (ver.  6) 
— the  effect  of  righteousness  is  quietness  and  assurance  (Isa.  xxxii.  17) ;  (2)  prosperity 
{ver.  7),  and  (3)  growth,  in  the  shape  of  a  large  accession  of  God-feaiing,  law-aLiiding 
subjects.  "  They  fell  to  him  out  of  Israel  in  abundance  when  they  saw  that  the 
Lord  his  God  was  with  him."  Not  all  the  numerical  superiority  of  Israel,  not  all 
its  fruitful  territory,  availed  against  the  attraction  of  a  realm,  in  one  sense  a  rival 
kingdom,  where  respect  for  God's  law  promised  security,  liberty,  and  peace. 

But  let  us  now  observe  that  these  reforms  and  this  courageous  piety  did  not 
exempt  him  from — 

II.  External  troubles.  The  quiet  only  lasted  ten  years  His  fenced  cities 
did  not  save  him  from  invasion.  He  had  to  encounter,  first,  the  invasion  of  Zerah 
(2  Chron.  xiv,  9),  and  secondly,  the  aggression  of  Baasha  (1  Kings  xv.  17).  He  may 
iave  been  tempted  to  tljink  when  that  overwhelming  host  of  swart  barbarians 
marched  against  him  that  his  piety  profited  him  nothing.  He  may  have  argued, 
when  he  saw  the  fortress  of  Bamah  threatening  his  very  capital — ^the  city  God  had 
<!hosen  to  put  His  name  there — that  God  made  no  difference  between  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked,  between  His  faithful  people  and  the  calf-worshipping  Israelites. 
But  observe  :  both  these  troubles  were  really  blessings  in  disguise.  Afflictions  and 
Adversities  may  he  either  punitive  or  disciplinary.  Solomon's  were  of  the  former, 
Asa's  of  the  latter  class.  For  (1)  when  Asa  had  learned  his  own  weakness,  and  learnt 
-whither  to  look  for  help  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11) — lessons  both  of  them  of  singulax  blessed- 


840  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [cH.  xv.  1—24. 

ness— the  Lord  smote  the  Ethiopians.  This  invasion  resulted  in  the  enrichment 
of  the  country.  The  spoil  was  enormous.  And  the  victory  ministered,  not  to 
pride,  but  to  piety  (ib.,  xv.  8).  (2)  The  only  result,  so  far  as  we  know,  of  the 
menaces  of  Baasha  was  that  uiat  Hng  drew  upon  himself  an  invasion  of  Syrians 
(in  which  it  is  to  be  observed,  Dan,  one  of  the  seats  of  the  calf- worship,  was  smitten), 
and  Asa  gained  two  fortresses  as  a  protection  against  future  inroads  (ver.  22).  It  is 
true  that  Asa  betrayed  a  want  of  faith  in  taking  the  consecrated  gold  and  silver 
wherewith  to  bribe  the  northern  barbarians  (2  Ghron.  xvi.  7,  8),  and  that  he  was 
chastised  for  the  deed  (ver.  9),  but,  aU  the  same,  his  generally  "  perfect  heart "  was 
rewarded  by  more  than  deliverance.  If  he  ever  cried  with  Jacob,  "  AU  these 
things  are  against  me,"  he  must  have  subsequently  exclaimed  vrith  Joseph,  "  Ye 
thought  evil  against  me,  but  God  meant  it  unto  good  "  (Gen.  1.  20).  His  troubles 
must  have  taught  him  this  lesson,  "  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous,  but 
the  Lord  dehvereth  him  out  of  them  all "  (Psa.  xxxiv.  19). 

And  so  we  see  in  the  dangers  and  aesanlts  which  this  reformer  underwent  proofs 
of  the  loving  discipline  of  God — trials  intended  for  Ms  reformation  and  for  the 
chastening  of  his  country.  It  is  difficult  at  first  sight  to  see  how  so  brutal  and 
hateful  a  thing  as  war  can  ever  be  for  the  good  of  any  people,  especially  when  we 
remember  that  a  "  victory  is  the  next  worst  thing  to  a  defeat."  But  those  have 
some  reason  on  their  side  who  tell  us  that  war  is  the  purgatory  of  nations,  and  that 
battles  in  the  moral  are  something  like  thunderstorms  in  the  physical  world. 
There  are  victims  in  either  ease — what  hecatombs  of  victims  in  some  cases — but 
the  atmosphere  is  all  the  clearer  afterwards.  The  campaign  of  Zerah  probably 
taught  him  and  his  people  to  bridle  their  ambition,  and  to  leave  their  neighbours 
alone ;  it  certainly  taught  Asa  and  Israel  to  trust  in  the  Lord  and  to  cling  closer 
to  Him.  They  learned  that  "Providence  does"  not  "always  help  the  biggest 
battalions  " — that  everything  turns  on  the  blessing  of  God.  *  They  proved  the 
truth  of  that  promise, "  Five  of  you  shall  chase  an  hundred,  and  an  hundred  of  you 
shall  put  ten  thousand  to  flight,"  &c.  (Levit.  xxvi.  8),  Psalm  xx.  might  have  been 
penned  with  reference  to  this  war.  It  certainly  breathes  the  spuit  of  Uiat  time. 
"  Deo  adjuvamU " — this  is  its  keynote.  And  this,  too,  is  the  burden  of  Asa's 
prayer  (2  Chron.  xiv.  H),  of  Azariah's  prophecy  (ih.,  xv.  2  sqq.),  of  Judah's  praises 
(vers.  12,  14,  15). 

It  has  been  remarked  that  in  the  history  of  the  covenant  people  we  may  see 
pourtrayed  the  trials,  deliverances,  &o.,  of  the  covenant  soul  (Keble).  And 
certainly  the  prosperous  reign  of  Asa  is  a  picture  of  what  a  truly  Christian  life 
involves.  Happy  are  those  whose  lives,  in  their  main  features,  may  be  thus 
characterized  :  "Internal  reforms,"  "external  discipline."  The  three  things  which, 
Luther  said,  made  the  minister  also  make  the  man,  "  Prayer,  meditation,  and 
temptation."  The  idols  must  be  utterly  abolished  by  "  the  expulsive  force  of  a 
new  affection ; "  "  the  horror,  "  the  fear  and  horrible  dread  that  possesses  the 
unreconciled,  must  be  cast  out  by  perfect  love;  "everything  that  defileth"  must 
be  consumed  by  its  ardent  flames;  the  heart  must  be  "  dedicated,"  and  then  the 
loving  correction  of  God  wiU  do  the  rest,  and  after  we  have  suffered  awhile,  in 
the  battle  of  life,  in  the  chamber  of  sickness  (oh.  xv.  23),  will  make  us  perfect 
(1  Peter  v.  10),  and  grant  us  "  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever." 

Ver.  22. — Church  and  Dissent.  The  building  and  subsequent  demolition  of 
Eamah— its  building  by  Baasha  to  clieck  the  defection  of  his  subjects  to  the 
southern  kingdom  and  the  Jewish  Church  ;  its  removal  by  Asa  in  order  that  the 
highway^  to  Judah  _  and  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  might  be  open  to  returning 
schismatics  —  this  incident  may  serve  to  introduce  a  comparison  between  the 
kingdom  of  Asa  and  the  kingdom  of  Christ;  or  rather,  the  history  and  relations  of 
the  two  kingdoms  of  Palestine  after  the  schism  may  suggest  some  thoughts  as  to 
the  proper  attitude  and  relations  of  the  Catholic  Church  towards  her  separated 
children. 

And  that  our  view  of  those  relations,  so  far  as  it  is  disclosed  to  ns  by  this  history, 
•  "  la  Gottes  Segen  ist  alios  gelegen.'' 


OH.  x>.  1—24.]  THE  PIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  847 

may  not  be  partial  and  incomplete,  it  is  proper  that  we  should  begin  the  survey, 
not  with  the  accession  of  Asa,  but  some  two  decades  earlier  ;  in  fact,  with  the 
commencement  of  the  schism.     And  we -may  learn — 

I.  That  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  heresy  should  be  strong  and 
AOOEESSIVB.  Ten  tribes  worshipped  the  calves ;  only  two  were  faithful  to  the  Lord. 
Jeroboam's  novelties  carried  "all  Israel"  away  after  them.  Even  so  "the  churches 
of  Jerusalem,  Alexandria,  Antioch,  and  Borne  have  erred  "  (Art.  xix.)  Donatists, 
Montanists,  Arians,  Apolliuarians — how  many  were  the  sects  of  the  first  days  1 
And  now,  out  of  the  two  hundred  millions  of  Christendom,  how  many  are  there 
whom  with  the  profoundest  sorrow  we  must  pronounce  either  heretical  or  schis- 
matioal.    And  no  wonder,  for 

"  The  search  for  truth  is  not  one  half  so  pleasant, 
As  sticking  to  the  views  we  hold  at  present." 

Most  of  our  schisms  have  had  their  origin  in  pride  and  emulation ;  most  of  our 
heresies  spring  out  of  our  corrupt  human  nature.  It  is  every  way  pleasanter  to' 
choose  among  doctrines  than  to  take  them  as  revealed  by  God. 

II.  That  there  must,  nevertheless,  be  no  fightings  amongst  Christians, 
The  armies  of  Judah  were  solemoly  forbidden  to  attack  those  of  Jeroboam  (ch.  xii. 
24).  Though  a  host  of  near  two  hundred  thousand  armed  men  had  mustered  for 
battle,  yet  they  must  "  return  every  man  to  his  house."  They  were  reminded  that 
the  children  of  Israel  were  their  "brethren,"  and  that  the  division  in  the  kingdom — 
not  that  in  the  Church — was  ordained  of  God.  A  special  messenger  is  entrusted  witb 
a  special  revelation  (ver.  22)  to  prevent  tlie  unseemly  spectacle  of  brethren,  the 
children  of  the  same  Father,  meeting  in  the  shook  of  battle.  And  observe  that, 
though  there  was  undoubtedly  war  at  a  later  period  between  the  divided  brandies 
of  the  Hebrew  family  (oh,  xiv.  30 ;  xv.  6,  16,  &o. ;  2  Chron.  xiii.  3),  yet  it  is  by  no 
means  certain  that  these  wars  ever  had  the  Divine  sanction.  Observe,  too,  that 
hostility  and  antagonism,  short  of  actual  organized  warfare,  is  here  described  as 
"  war  "  (oh.  xiv.  30,  note).  Now  may  we  not  justly  infer — ^what,  indeed,  is  certain 
on  other  grounds — that,  whatever  their  heresies,  there  must  be  no  hostiUties 
between  the  divided  sections  of  the  Christian  family  ?  There  liave  been  "  wars  and 
fightings  "  amongst  them,  it  is  true,  but  this  is  against  the  will  and  prayer  of  theii 
head  (John  xvii.  21 ;  xiii.  35 ;  c£  1  Cor.  i.  11 ;  xi.  18  ;  James  iv.  1).  For  they  are 
"  brethren  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  8)  by  a  much  closer  bond  than  were  the  Jews.  Spiritual 
ties  are  far  more  real  and  binding  than  those  of  flesh,  of  mere  matter  (Matt.  xii.  48, 
49 ;  Bom.  xvi.  13 ;  Titus  i.  4 ;  Philem.  10).  And  if  it  was  unseemly  and  unnatural 
for  Jew  to  lift  up  hand  against  Jew,  how  much  more  for  members  of  the  same  body 
(Eph.  V.  30 ;  Bom.  xii.  5),  professors  of  the  same  gospel  of  love  ?  And  not  only  the 
hand,  but  the  tongue.  There  must  be  no  stabbing  and  wounding  of  brethren  by 
words  any  more  than  by  swords.  "There  is  nothing,"  says  Which  cote,  "more  un- 
natural to  religion  than  contentions  about  it."  Christians  have  fighting  enough  to 
do  without  falling  upon  each  other.  There  are  the  common  enemies  of  the  Christian 
life — ^the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  There  are  the  enemies  of  the  faith,  the 
hosts  of  devilry,  and  uncleanness,  and  unbelief,  and  indifference.  It  is  well  when 
disputing  about  "  modes  of  faith  "  that  we  should  remember  that  there  are  untold 
millions  of  men  still  worshipping  cows  and  even  demons.  It  is  well,  too,  that  we 
should  consider  that  we  are  none  of  us  infallible,  and  may  easily  confound  friends 
and  foes.  It  has  been  justly  said  that  many  of  our  disputes  are  Uke  that  midnight 
conflict  at  Syracuse,  where  each  party  mistook  the  watchword  of  the  other,  and  all 
was  hopeless  confusion  (Stanley.)  We  must  "  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith 
once  for  all  delivered,"  &o.,  it  is  true,  but  there  are  two  ways  of  doing  that.  "  It 
is  not  the  actual  differences  of  Christians  that  do  the  mischief,  but  the  mismanage- 
ment of  those  differences "  (P.  Henry).  "Nous  avons  eu  assez  de  polemique," 
said  a  French  ecclesiastic ;  "  il  nons  reste  4  avoir  un  peu  A'irenique." 

III.  That  there  must  be  no  sacrifice  op  truth  or  compromise  of  principle: 
FOE  THE  SAKE  OF  CONCILIATING  HERETICS.    Asa,  like  Eehoboam,  was  only  too  glad 


848  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xv.  1—24. 

to  welcome  desprters  from  Jeroboaun'B  Church  and  kingdom;  his  action  with 
respect  to  Eamah  proves  that.  But  neither  of  them  ever  thought  of  accommodating 
the  worship  or  polity  of  Jerusalem  to  suit  the  wishes  or  prejudices  of  the  schismatic 
Israelites.  To  neither  of  them  did  it  occur  to  allow  that  calf- worship  was  right 
worship ;  neither  would  admit  that  there  was  any  true  Church  but  that  of  Judah, 
or  any  sanctuary  but  that  of  Jerusalem ;  neither  could  or  would  recognize  the  orders 
or  ministrations  of  Jeroboam's  man-made  priests.  In  fact,  it  would  have  been 
impolitic,  as  well  as  nnfaithful,  to  have  done  so.  It  was  because  Judah  was  true  to 
its  convictions,  and  consistently  repudiated  the  schism,  and  stood  resolutely  on  the 
old  paths,  that  such  numbers  of  pious  Israelites  came  over  to  its  side.  Even  so 
now,  nothing  but  harm  can  come  of  sacrificing  one  iota  of  principle  for  the  sake  of 
the  unioa  of  Christendom.  We  may  be  branded  as  iUiberal  and  bigots  if  we  ask 
tor  the  credentials  of  every  eoi-discmt  minister  of  Christ ;  if  we  deny  the  name  of 
"  Oliurch  "  to  each  of  the  manifold  sects  and  societies  of  human  origin;  if  we 
repudiate  an  unorganic  Christianity,  a  religion  of  mere  emotionalism.  But  all  the 
same,  we  have  no  right  to  exercise  a  spurious  charity  and  to  give  what  is  not  ours ; 
we  have  no  right  to  surrender  one  jot  of  Catholic  truth  for  the  sake  of  conciliating 
outsiders.  That  would  be  indeed  to  "  make  a  solitude  and  call  it  a  peace."  In 
that  way  our  religion  might  soon  be  watered  down  so  that  truth  and  life  and 
efficacy  would  all  be  gone,  and  the  thin  residuum  would  be  stale,  flat,  and  unprofit- 
able. Only  the  infidel  could  ultimately  gain  by  such  a  process.  Our  answer,  then, 
to  the  separatist  must  be  this :  "  All  that  thou  desirest  of  me  I  will  do,  but  this 
thing  I  may  not  do."  Deeply  as  we  desire  unity,  we  dare  not  purchase  it  at  such  a 
price.     "  Amicus  Plato,  a/micus  Socrates,  sed  magis  arnica  Veritas." 

IV.  That  there  must  bb  no  calling  in  the  aid  of  unbelievers  against 
SEPARATED  BRETHREN.  This  was  doue  more  than  once  in  Jewish  history,  but  the 
result  was  always  disa-^trous.  If  Jeroboam  called  in  the  aid  of  Shishak  against 
Eehoboam,  he  suffered  himself,  as  we  have  seen  (note  on  oh.  xiv.  25),  from  the 
Egyptian  invasion.  Nor  was  Asa's  appeal  to  Beu-hadad  less  ill-advised.  In  the 
first  place,  it  betrayed  a  lack  of  faith  in  God  ;  then  (2)  he  had  to  rob  the  Lord's 
treasury  of  the  gifts  he  had  recently  dedicated  thereto  ;  and  (3)  the  bauds  of  Syria, 
having  once  tasted  the  sweets  of  conquest,  were  ever  afterwards  threatening  or 
ravaging  (chs.  xx.,  xxii. ;  2  Kings  v.  2 ;  vi.  8,  Ac.)  the  Holy  Land.  Asa's  son, 
Jehoshaphat,  found  it  necessary,  as  he  thought,  to  join  forces  with  those  of  Israel 
against  this  very  power  which  Asa  invoked.  And  how  often  have  Christians 
pursued  the  same  policy.  How  often  have  the  armies  of  the  Ottomans,  e.g.,  been 
employed  by  Christians  against  Christians.  The  cannon  by  means  of  which 
Constantinople  was  taken  were  east  by  Christian  engineers.  For  four  centuries 
have  Mussulman  legions  been  largely  officered  by  Christian  renegades,  and  reciuited 
from  Christian  lands — Albania,  Wallachia,  &c.  The  "  unspeakable  Turk "  has 
only  been  tolerated  in  Europe  because  of  the  divisions  of  Christendom.  And  is  not 
tlie  same  thing  being  done  in  another  way  at  the  present  time  ?  There  are  Chris- 
tians who  think  it  right  to  make  common  cause  with  atheists,  seculansts,  &c., 
against  their  brethren.  If  the  example  of  Asa  (2  Chron.  xvi.  7 — 9)  is  not  decisive 
against  such  a  proceeding,  surely  that  of  Jehoshaphat  (ib.,  xix.  2)  and  Amaziah 
{ib.,  XXV.  6—10)  prove  that  we  should  neither  help,  nor  seek  help  from,  the 
ungodly.  The  result  of  such  alliances,  as  Asa  found  to  his  cost,  wiU  be,  "From 
lienceforth  thou  slialt  have  wars."  The  mercenaries  we  have  hired  against  one 
another  will  end  by  doing  battle  against  all  who  bear  the  Christian  name.  The 
]  iiitons  who  called  in  the  Saxons  to  their  aid  presently  found  their  new  aUies 
settled  in  their  homes  and  themselves  driven  forth  into  the  wUdemess. 

V.  That  no  obstacles  must  be  raised  in  the  path  of  reunion.  That  this 
should  be  done  by  the  separatists  need  cause  us  no  surprise.  Baasha  could  not 
ajjord  to  have  the  highway  to  Judah  open.  His  occupation  would  be  gone  if  the 
breach  were  healed  and  the  nation  or  the  Church  again  became  one.  And,  alas  t 
there  are  similar  "  vested  interests  "  in  the  perpetuation  of  division  amongst  Chris- 
tians. But  just  as  it  was  Asa's  care  to  puU  down  the  frontier  fortress  of  Bamah, 
just  as  the  stones  and  timber  were  carried  away  bodily  by  the  labour  of  all  hi* 


OH.  XV.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOIL  OF  KINGS.  849 

subjects,  so  should  it  be  the  great  concern  of  the  Church  and  of  every  Christian  to 
remove  the  barriers  which  separate  those  for  whom  Christ  died.  The  national 
Church,  for  example,  should  be  as  wide  and  comprehensive  as  possible.  Sects  must 
of  necessity  have  harrow  and  restricted  boundaries;  for  their  raison  d'etre  is 
almost  invariably  to  be  found,  not  in  the  propagation  of  error,  but  in  the  assertiou 
of  some  forgotten  or  neglected  truth,  which  they  have  made  theix pecuUuitn,  and  treat 
as  if  it  were  the  sum  total  of  revelation  to  the  neglect  of  the  "  proportion  of  faith." 
But  why  should  we  multiply  our  tests  and  articles  of  membership  ?  The  Apostles' 
Creed  was  thought  to  embody  everything  of  necessity  to  salvation  in  the  first  age 
of  the  Church ;  and  when  at  a  later  period  truth  had  become  mixed  with  error,  the 
Nicene  symbol  was  still  the  only  test  of  the  Christian  layman.  Why  should  it  not 
be  a  sufficient  test  of  Catholicity  now  ?  Why  must  we  refine  and  define,  and  so 
make  iuteroommunion  almost  impossible  ? 

*'  Must  it  be  Calvin,  and  not  Ohristt 

Must  it  be  Athanasian  Creeds, 
Or  )joly  water,  books,  and  beads? 
Must  struggling  souls  remain  content 
With  councils  and  decrees  of  Trent  ?  " 

It  is  partly  because  we  have  built  Bamahs  round  our  Zion  that  our  schisms  are 
BO  many.  We  have  insisted  on  forcing  our  sliibboleths  on  those  who  could  not 
receive  them,  forgetting  that,  however  true  any  dogma  may  be  in  itself,  still,  if  it 
is  not  of  necessity  to  be  believed,  and  we  make  it  an  essential  part  of  our  system 
of  doctrine,  it  may  straightway  become  a  source  of  discord  and  division.  There 
are  many  such  barriers  and  obstacles  of  our  own  creation — sometimes  in  the  shape 
of  practical  abuses — which  require  to  be  removed,  and  no  Christian  should  be 
"  exempt "  from  the  work  of  "  building  sUver  bridges  for  flying  enemies  and  golden 
bridges  for  returning  friends." 

YI.   That,    instead    of   baisikg   barriers   between   brethren,  we  should 

STRENGTHEN  OUR  DEFENCES  AGAINST  THE  COMMON  ENEMY.      The  StoneS  and  timber  of 

Eamah,  Asa  used  to  build  Geba.  of  Benjamin  and  Mizpah.  Thereby  the  road  to 
Jerusalem  was  left  open  to  fi'iends,  whilst  these  two 'fortresses  oonunanded  it 
against  foes.  Against  Baasha,  if  he  would  wage  war  against  his  kinsmen  ;  against 
the  Assyrian  at  a  later  date  (Isa.  x.  28,  29).  And  is  there  no  lesson  for  Christians 
here  ?  Too  often  they  are  fighting  amongst  themselves  about  the  "  infinitely  little  " 
— about  the  date  of  Easter,  about  unleavened  bread,  about  the  "  five  points,"  about 
lights  and  vestments,  about  wafer  bread,  or  about  imfermented  wine  in  the 
Holy  Communion — while  the  enemy  is  marshalling  his  forces.  Intemperance, 
sensuality,  devilry  in  every  form,  are  destroying  the  Church's  children  by  thousands, 
and  her  watchmen  the  while  are  fencing  with  each  other.  The  siege  of  Jerusalem 
(Jos.,  Bell.  Jud.  V.  1)  is  reproduced  amongst  ourselves.  The  enemy  is  thundering 
at  our  gates,  and  the  Church  is  paralyzed  by  factions.  We  keep  raising  barricades 
in  the  streets  of  Zion  whilst  hostile  legions  are  swarming  on  the  adjoining  heights. 
We  have  our  Geba,  our  Mizpah  to  build,  and  we  perversely  build  Kamahs  instead. 
VII.  That  a  house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand.  First  Samaria,  then 
Jerusalem  fell  before  the  enemy.  Christianity  is  now  comparatively  powerless  for 
aggressive  purposes ;  indeed,  it  hardly  keeps  pace  with  the  population ;  and  its 
enemies  are  asking  how  much  longer  it  can  stand  on  its  defence.  Divide  et  impera, 
thus  have  many  empires  fallen.  True,  the  CathoUc  Church  cannot  perish,  but 
national  Churches  have  fallen  again  and  again.  There  has  been  some  talk  amongst 
the  Brahmins  of  sending  a  mission  to  England.  And  we  may  see  in  France,  in 
Germany,  a  foreshadowing  of  what  is  in  store  for  us  here.  "  The  class  which  has 
recently  attained  supreme  political  power  is  ahenated  from  Christianity  in  its 
present  forms."  Are  the  Church  and  the  sects  alike  to  be  broken  up  one  by  one  ? 
Or  shall  we  lay  aside  our  "  fratrieidal  dissensions,"  and  combine  against  the  legion 
of  foes — Atheism,  Agnosticism,  Socialism,  and  the  rest  ?  Of  one  thing  we  may  be 
sure,  that  as  long  as  our  "  unhappy  divisions  "  last  we  shall  never  win  England, 
much  less  the  world,  for  Christ. 


360  THE  PIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xt.  1—24. 


HOMILIES  BT  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  succession  of  Abijam  to  the  throne  of  Judah  appears  to  have 
had  one  limiting  principle,  viz.,  that  the  successor  should  be  of  the  house  and 
lineage  of  David  (see  2  Chron.  xiii.  8).    Within  this  limit  it  seems— 

I.  It  was  detbeminbd  by  the  will  op  the  KEWNiNa  KING.  1.  The  principle  of 
primogeniture  was  not  considered.  (1)  Else  Abijam  could  not  have  ascended  the 
throne  :  for  he  had  elder  brothers,  sons  of  Mahalath  and  AbihaU,  and  we  know  not 
how  many  besides  (see  2  Chron.  3d.  18 — 21).  (2)  These  were  deliberately  set  aside 
by  the  choice  of  the  king.  The  reason  given  for  that  choice  is  arbitrary,  Eeho- 
boam  "  loved  Maachah,  the  daughter  of  Absalom,  above  all  his  wives,"  and  there- 
fore he  "made  Abijah,  the  son  of  Maachah,  the  chief  ruler  among  his  brethren: 
for  he  thought  to  make  hun  king"  (2  Chron.  xi.  22,  23).  (3)  For  this  he  had 
precedent.  We  have  no  proof  that  Behoboam  was  not  the  only  eon  of  Solomon ; 
but  Solomon  was  a  younger  son  of  David  (see  2  Sam.  iii.  2—6  ;  xiii.  13,  14),  and 
was  preferred  before  his  elder  brethren  upon  the  designation  of  his  father  (see 
ch.  L  13,  32—85).  2.  Abijam  represented  Behohoam  by  walking  in  Ms  sins. 
(1)  He  recognized  the  God  of  Israel.  This  he  did  formally  in  his  address  to  Jero- 
boam before  engaging  him  in  battle  (see  2  Chron.  xiii.  4 — 12).  So  did  Behoboam 
recognize  the  God  of  Israel  (see  2  Chron.  xii.  10—12.  (2)  "But  his  heart  was 
not  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God,  as  the  heart  of  David  his  father."  David 
never  followed  idols ;  but  Behoboam  forsook  not  the  sins  of  Solomon,  and  Abijam 
forsook  not  the  sins  of  Eehqboam.  (3)  Their  mixed  worship  was  hke  that  of  the 
Samaritans  of  later  times,  who  "  feared  the  Lord  and  served  their  own  gods  "  (2  Kings 
■cvii.  32).  If  this  was  not  worshipping  other  gods  ^'■before  the  Lord,"  it  was 
worshipping  them  "  beside  Him"  (see  2  Cor.  vi.  16).     Yet — 

n.  The  choice  of  Behoboam  had  the  Divine  sanction  (ver.  4).  1.  PrimogetU- 
ture,  therefore,  cannot  plead  Divine  right.  (1)  Else  would  not  God  have  set  aside 
the  choice  of  Behoboam  in  favour  of  his  elder  son,  or  rather,  of  the  representative 
of  the  elder  son  of  David  ?  (2)  David  himself  was  a  younger  son  in  the  family  of 
Jesse.  And  if  we  go  back  to  earlier  times,  Judah,  a  younger  son,  was  preferred 
before  Eeuben,  in  the  family  of  Jacob.  Jacob  himself  was  chosen  to  the  prejudice 
of  Esau,  and  Isaac  before  Viim  to  the  prejudice  of  Ishmael.  (8)  God  had  His  own 
reasons  for  confirming  the  election  of  Behoboam,  which,  however,  were  different 
from  those  which  moved  the  king.  3.  God  had  respect  to  His  servant  David. 
(1)  "  Because  David  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord."  He  had  no 
compHcity  with  idolatry,  but  worshipped  the  one  true  God  with  pure  delight 
When  away  from  the  courts  of  the  Lord  he  longed  for  them  with  vehement  desire. 
What  a  worthy  example  t  How  it  rebukes  the  half-day  worshippers  of  modern 
times  I  (2)  He  failed  only  "  in  the  matter  of  Uriah."  That  was  a  foul  blot.  How 
sad  80  grand  a  life  should  have  been  so  darkly  blurred  !  (3)  Yet  "  his  heart  was 
perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God."  For  he  heartily  repented  of  that  sin,  and-was  for- 
given (see  2  Sam.  xii.  13 ;  Pss.  xxxii.  1 — 5 ;  IL)  God  giveth  hberally  and  upbraideth 
not.  8.  Therefore  for  David's  saJce  Abijam  reigned.  (1)  "  That  he  might  always 
have  a  lamp  " — a  man  of  his  line.  Abijam  was  a  son  of  David  by  an  unbroken 
male  descent,  and  also  by  a  female  descent.  "  Hia  mother's  name  was  Maachah, 
the  daughter  of  Abishalom."  Abishalom  is  written  "  Absalom  "  in  2  Chron.  xi.  21. 
Maachah  was  the  daughter  of  Absalom  as  Abijam  was  the  son  of  David,  viz.,  as 
being  descended  from  him.  Her  father's  name  was  "  Uriel  of  Gibeah,"  who  ap- 
peared to  have  married  a  daughter  of  Absalom,  who  left  no  son  (2  Chron.  xiii.  2). 
She  bore  the  name  of  her  grandmother,  who  was  "  Maacah,  the  daughter  of  Talmai, 
king  of  Geshur  "  (2  Sam.  iii.  3).  (2)  Christ  is  the  true  lamp  of  David  (see  Psft. 
cxxxii.  17).  For  His  sake  the  line  of  David  must  be  preserved.  (3)  The  lamp,  too, 
must  shine  in  Jerusalem.  "  God  gave  him  a  lamp  in  Jerusalem,  to  set  up  a  son 
after  him,  and  to  estabhsh  Jerusalem."  The  Bedeemer  must  come  to  Zion,  there 
to  turn  away  iniquity  from  Jacob.   So  before  the  Bomans  destroyed  Jerusalem,  and 


CH.  XV    1—24.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  861 

the  family  of  David  had  lost  their  genealogies,  Jesus  came  and  became  an  ezpiatoiy 
eacri£ce  for  sin. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  9 — 15. — Reformation,  The  moral  condition  of  Jndah  was  fearful  when  Asa 
came  to  the  throne.  The  apostasy  of  Solomon  had  inaugurated  a  retrogression 
which  was  aggravated  in  the  reigns  following,  bo  that  for  three  generations  the 
abominations  of  the  heathens  were  increasing.  The  condition  of  Israel  was  even 
worse,  under  the  system  introduced  by  Jeroboam,  to  which  the  successors  of  that 
monarch  tenaciously  held.  When  the  Holy  Land  was  in  such  a  state  of  degeneracy, 
what  was  the  condition  of  the  world  at  large  t  There  was,  therefore,  the  greatest 
need  for  reformation. 

I.  Of  this  Asa  became  the  subject  and  specimen.  Beformations  have  ever 
been  inaugurated  by  individuals  who  have  embodied  and  exemplified  their  prin- 
ciples. Witness  Luther  in  Germany,  Knox  in  Scotland,  &o.  Such  also  was  Asa. 
1.  He  "  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord."  (1)  To  do  right  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world  is  praiseworthy.  For  wicked  men  "  know  better ;  "  and  they 
have  keen  vision  to  discover  inconsistencies  in  professors  of  religion  (see  PhU. 
ii.  15 :  1  Pet.  ii.  11 — 15).  (2)  To  do  right  in  the  eyes  of  good  men  is  a  higher  com- 
mendation. They  have  a  purer  light,  and  consequently  a  finer  appreciation  of 
moral  qualities.  Things  which  the  world  will  allow  they  cannot  approve.  (3)  But 
to  do  right  in  the  "  eyes  of  the  Lord  "  is  the  highest  praise.  He  reads  the  heart — 
surveys  the  motives — ^requires  "  truth  in  the  inward  parts."  What  a  searching 
vision  shall  we  pass  under  in  the  day  of  judgment  I  If  that  vision  approve  us  now 
we  shall  then  have  nothing  to  fear.  2.  In  this  he  is  compared  with  David.  (1) 
David  never  followed  idols.  The  one  blur  of  his  life  was  the  matter  of  Uriah,  of 
which  he  heartily  repented.  Who  amongst  us  has  nothing  to  repent  of?  (2) 
David's  loyalty  to  God  was  sincere  and  fervent.  What  a  warm  spirit  of  piety 
breathes  in  the  Psalms  I  Are  they  not,  even  in  our  gospel  age,  a  fine  vehicle  for 
spiritual  worship  ?  (3)  David  was  a  prophet.  This  Asa  was  not.  He  had  the 
grace,  not  the  gifts,  of  the  founder  of  his  house.  Gifts  are  not  equally  within  the 
reach  of  all ;  graces  are.  8.  Such  commendation  was  eminently  creditable  to  Asa. 
(1)  He  stands  out  in  remarkable  contrast  to  his  father.  Abijam  was  wicked ;  Asa 
was  good.  The  influence  of  the  father  was  vicious ;  the  son  resisted  it  and  was 
virtuous.  (2)  Asa's  mother  seems  to  have  died  early,  for  Maachah,  the  daughter  of 
Absalom,  who  was  his  grandmother,  is  here  mentioned  as  his  mother.  Uniler  the 
influence  of  Maachah,  Abijah  developed  badly;  notwithstanding  that  evil  influence 
Asa  developed  well.  (3)  We  must  not  ignore,  but  fully  recognize,  individual  moral 
responsibility.  The  will  cannot  be  compared  to  a  pair  of  scales  which  is  mechani- 
cally moved  by  weights. 

II.  Of  this  also  he  became  the  instrument.  This  is  God's  order  (1  John  i.  8). 
What  he  felt  he  tried  to  promote.  1.  Beginning  with  Ms  own  house.  (1)  He  re- 
moved the  idols  which  his  father  had  made.  He  felt  especially  bound  to  do  this  in 
order  to  out  off  the  entail  of  sin  from  his  house.     (2)  He  frowned  also  upon  the 

idolatry  of  his  grandmother.  "  She  made  an  idol  in  a  grove  "  (mK'N?  nsVsD)  a 
glory  for  an  Ashere.  The  word  is  used  for  terribleness  or  majestic  glory  Jer. 
xlix.  16.  Setting  an  image  in  the  cloud  of  glory  was  setting  it  on  an  ark  or 
chariot  of  cherubim  to  he  worshipped.  (See  -Psa.  1.  3,  where  myE^J  is  used  for  the 
cloud  of  glory  about  Jehovah.)  Asa  demohshed  this  nimbus,  or  glory,  together  with 
the  Ashere,  or  idol,  and  probably  threw  the  ashes  into  the  Kedron  in  contempt  (com- 
pare Dent.  ix.  21 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  12 ;  2  Chron.  xv.  16).  (3)  Furthermore,  he  re- 
moved Maachah  from  being  queen  (dowager).  He  thus  merited  the  commendation 
of  Levi  (see  Deut.  xxxiii.  9 ;  see  also  Math.  x.  37).  2.  Then  influencing  the  nation, 
(1)  He  removed  the  Sodorbites  out  of  the  land.  What  prosperity  can  there  be  in  any 
state  where  public  immorality  is  tolerated  by  the  magistrates  ?  (2)  He  destroyed 
the  high  places  of  idolatry  with  their  altars  and  idols,  in  the  country  and  in  the 
cities  (see  2  Chron.  xiv.  3,  5).  (3)  The  high  places  used  in  the  worship  of  Jehovah 
after  the  fashion  of  the  patriarchs,  he  spared.    For  this  he  is  but  Hghtly  censured ; 


Ml  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  EINOa  [oh.  zt.  1—24 

to  have  limited  the  ordinances  of  public  worship  to  the  temple  would  have  been  the 
more  excellent  way.  (4)  He  encouraged  the  worship  of  Jehovah  (see  2  Chron.  xiv, 
4).  Not  by  precept  only,  but  by  example  also.  He  dedicated  to  the  Lord  the  things 
which  his  father  had  vowed,  but  either  neglected  to  pay  or  died  before  he  could 
carry  his  purpose  into  effect.  Also  the  spoil  which  he  himself  had  taken  from  the 
Ethiopians  (see  2  Chron.  xv.  11,  12).  Where  the  heart  of  God's  people  is 
loyal  the  treafiuries  of  His  house  will  be  folL — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  16 — 24. — The  War  Policy  of  Asa.  "  Forty  and  one  years  reigned  he  in 
Jerusalem"  (ver.  10).  The  evil  kings  of  Judah  were  about  as  numerous  as  the 
good,  but  their  reigns  were  shorter.  "  The  wicked  do  not  Uve  out  half  their  days." 
But  though  the  reign  of  Asa  was  long  and  glorious,  his  war  policy  with  Baasha  was 
not  creditable. 

I.  The  object  was  bight.  1.  The  war  teas  provoked  hy  the  enemy.  (1) 
Baasha  was  the  aggressor  (ver.  17).  War  is  such  a  fearful  evil  that  whoever  pro- 
vokes it  is  greatly  culpable.  (2)  Therefore  on  Asa's  part  it  was  defensive.  If  human 
war  is  ever  defensible  it  is  when  defensive.  2.  It  was  provoked  by  impious  inten- 
tion. (1)  Asa  had  set  his  heart  upon  the  reformation  of  true  religion,  in  which  he 
was  blessed  by  God  with  peace  and  prosperity  (2  Chron.  xiv.  1 — 1^.  (2)  The  more 
pious  Ephrathites  were  attracted  in  great  numbers  to  Jerusalem  to  join  in  the  pure 
worship  of  the  temple ;  and  the  reformation  was  influencing  the  northern  kingdom 
(2  Chron.  xv.  9).  (3)  Baasha  now  feared,  as  Jeroboam  did  when  he  set  up  his 
calves  (ch.  xii.  26 — ^28),  that  his  people  would  return  to  the  house  of  David.  To  pre- 
vent this  he  proceeded  to  fortify  the  frontier  town  of  Eamah  (2  Chron.  xvi.  1).  (4) 
This  was  to  coerce  the  Ephrathites  to  transgress  the  law  of  God  (see  Deut.  xii.  H  ; 
xiv.  23 — 26 ;  xvL  2).  To  resist  this  persecution  was  as  pious  in  Asa  as  the  perseon- 
tion  was  impious  in  Baasha. 

II.  The  means  were  weono.  1.  They  were  human.  (1)  Asa  did  not  rely  upon 
the  Lord.  This  was  the  less  excusable  since  God  had  wrought  such  signal  dehveranoe 
for  him  from  the  vast  multitude  of  the  Ethiopians  (see  2  Cliron.  xiv.  9 — 15).  What 
was  the  host  of  Baasha  compared  with  that  army  ?  (2)  He  did  not  even  inquire  of 
the  Lord.  Had  God  sanctioned  his  recourse  to  Een-hadadthen  had  he  been  blame- 
less. (3)  Though  in  other  particulars  ho  had  listened  to  the  advice  of  Azariah,  the 
son  of  Oded,  with  blessed  advantage,  yet  in  this  he  had  disregarded  that  advice  (see 
2  Chron.  xv.  1,  2).  2.  They  were  unworthy.  (1)  What  right  had  he  to  engage  a 
heathen  to  fight  with  his  brethren  ?  (2)  What  right  had  he  to  bribe  a  heathen  to 
break  his  covenant  (T\'''\2  pwriflcation)  with  Baasha,  in  which  the  blood  of  sacrifice 
had  been  sprinkled  to  express  his  pwriiy  of  intention,  as  we  now  take  the  sacrament  ? 
What  opinion  could  the  heathen  form  of  the  religion  of  one  who  could  ofier  a  bribe 
for  such  a  purpose?  (3)  What  right  had  he  to  take  the  treasure  of  the  temple  for 
such  a  purpose  ? 

III.  The  success  was  partial.  1.  The  end  was  answered.  (1)  The  Syrians 
attacked  Israel  in  the  north.  The  news  of  this  drew  Baasha  away  from  Eamah 
(vers.  20,  21).  (2)  This  gave  Asa  the  opportimity  to  demolish  the  fortifications  in 
progress  so  as  to  open  the  road  Baasha  sought  to  close.  He  also  removed  the 
material  so  that  the  road  might  be  kept  open.  (3)  The  material  was  useful  to  him 
in  building  Geba  of  Benjamin  and  Mizpah.  2.  But  the  price  was  too  great.  (1) 
He  missed  an  opportunity  of  spoiUng  the  Syrians  as  he  had  spoiled  the  Ethiopians. 
This  fact  is  revealed,  though  by  what  means  Providence  purposed  to  have  brought  it 
about  is  not  disclosed  (2  Chron.  xvi.  7).  (2)  The  treasures  of  the  temple  and  of  the 
palace  were  therefore  needlessly  alienated.  (3)  His  brethren  in  "  Ijon,  and  Dan, 
and  Abel-beth-Maachah,  and  all  Cinneroth,"  or  Gennesaret,  "  with  all  the  land  of 
Naphtali,"  were  exposed  to  the  horrors  of  the  Syrian  invasion.  The  heart  of  Israel 
would  be  ahenated  from  Asa  in  consequence,  and  the  reformation  hindered.  (4) 
Asa's  own  heart  became  hardened,  else  he  would  not  have  imprisoned  Hanani,  and 
oppressed  some  of  his  people  (who  probably  sjnmpathized  with  the  prophet).  (5) 
^d  he  inherited  the  judgment  of  wars  to  the  end  of  his  days.  Also  a  disease  in 
the  feet,  respecting  which  besought  to  "physicians  rather  than  the  Lord"(2Chrou4 
XTi.  10,  12). 


OH.  XV.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  863 

Note  :  Asa's  blunders  followed  upon  his  prosperity.  Few  abide  this  test.  Loss 
of  spirituality  and  religious  zeal  accompanies  the  growing  worldly  prosperity  of 
churches  t — jf.  A.  M. 

Vers.  1—8. — "  Beloved  for  the  father's  saTce.''  I.  The  stoey  of  a  misused 
CPPOKTUNITY.  Even  in  a  three  years'  reign  much  might  have  been  done.  Israel 
had  its  troubles,  the  past  its  lessons  of  wisdom ;  but  there  was  no  ear  to  hear  the 
one,  and  no  heart  to  attempt  redress  of  the  other.  1.  The  secret  of  failure.  (1) 
He  was  content  with  things  as  he  found  them.  It  is  not  said  that  he  introduced 
any  new  idolatries  :  "  He  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  his  father,  which  he  had  done 
before  him."  The  sin  and  responsibUity  of  those  who  continue  to  wali  in  the 
paths  of  sinful,  though  general  and  time-honoured,  customs,  and  who  do  not  for- 
sake the  idolatries  and  iniquities  of  their  fathers.  (2)  nis  love  was  not  set  upon 
God.  The  worship  of  Jehovah  was  stiU  continued.  Abijah  had  experienced  the 
signal  mercy  of  God  (2  Chron.  xiii.)  His  heart  might  have  been  won,  but  it  "  was 
not  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God  as  the  heart  of  David  his  father."  'There  was  no 
thirsting  after  God,  no  dehght  in  the  sense  of  the  favour  which  is  Ufe,  and  the 
loving-kindness  which  is  better  than  hfe.  The  love  of  God  the  only  source  of 
work  for  God.  2.  The  sinful  was  also  a  troubled  reign:  "there  was  war,"  &c., 
and  it  was  war  with  brethren.  8.  The  opportwrdty  was  soon  ended:  "he 
reigned  three  years."  Opportunities  abused  may  be  soon  removed.  The  life 
which  sin  has  marred  death  may  swiftly  seal. 

II.  A  RIGHTEOUS  LIFE  AN  UNDYING  POWER  WITH  GoD.  "  For  David's  Bake  did 
the  Lord  his  God  give  him,"  &c.  Our  good  does  not  die  with  us  or  with  our  gene- 
ration. The  memory  of  it  dwells,  and  prevails,  with  God.  1.  The  sinful  kmg  has 
a  son  to  succeed  him,  and  one  whom  God  directs  and  blesses.  2.  The  city  is  pre- 
served and  the  flood  of  evil  driven  back — "  to  estabhsh  Jerusalem."  God's 
promises,  our  prayers,  and  our  purposes  are  alike  remembered.  They  bloom  amid 
our  dust.     Our  love  and  loyalty  to  God  will  fall  in  blessing  upon  ages  yet  to  come. 

III.  Sin  leaves  its  stain  on  the  fair  record  of  a  righteous  life.  "  Save 
only  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hittite."  God  will  not  wink  at  or  cloak  our 
iniquity.  Is  there  any  matter  of  which  thou  and  all  will  hear  when  the  books  are 
opened  ?    If  there  be,  is  it  not  a  call  for  htmiiliation  and  for  prayer  ? — J.  IT. 

Vers.  9—24. — "  Zeal  without  trust."  An  opportunity  recognized  and  used. 
The  need  of  the  time  was  manfully  met.  Brought  up  in  an  idolatrous  home,  he 
nevertheless  saw  that  this  sin  was  sapping  the  foundation  of  the  nation's  stability 
and  strength,  and  he  set  himself  to  root  it  out.  1.  The  land  was  cleansed  from 
filthy  abomvnalion,  from  legalized,  and  even  sanctified,  sin  ("  And  he  took  away 
the  Sodomites,"  &c.)  The  nation  that  legalizes  sin  will  reap  corruption  and 
shame :  that  which  suppresses  it  by  righteous  enactment  will  pass  up  into  pu"ty 
and  strength  and  truest  glory.  2.  He  put  down  idolatry  with  unflinching  faith- 
fulness. He  "  removed  all  the  idols  which  his  father  had  made.'>  "  Aid  also 
Maachah  his  mother,  even  her  he  removed  from  being  queen,"  &o.  Neither 
reverence  for  the  dead  not  fear  of  the  living  was  suffered  to  stand  in  the  way  of 
his  obedience  to  God.  It  is  easy  to  condemn  sin  in  the  abstract.  It  is  hard  to 
stand  face  to  face  with  him  who  is  its  servant  and  say,  "  Thou  art  the  man."  Is 
our  faillifulness  after  the  pattern  of  Asa's  ?  3.  His  failure  was  one  of  ability,  not 
of  will  (ver.  14).  We  may  not  be  able  to  accomplish  all  we  desire,  or  that  is 
needful,  but  if  our  heart  be  "  perfect  with  the  Lord  "  all  is  well.  4.  He  did  not 
keep  bacTc  the  Lord's  portion.  The  "  silver  and  gold  and  vessels,"  which  his 
father  and  he  himself  had  vowed,  were  brought  into  the  Lord's  house.  His  faith- 
fulness was  shown  m  wTiai  he  gave  as  well  as  in  what  he  condemned. 

II.  There  may  be  zeal  fob  God  without  perfect  trust  in  God.  The  man 
of  action  is  not  always  a  man  of  prayer.  1.  Baasha's  attempt  (see  2  Chron.  xvi.  7, 
&c.)  The  danger  was  great,  but  to  the  politician  there  seemed  a  way  out  of  it. 
He  was  not  shut  up  to  God's  help,  as  in  the  invasion  by  the  Ethiopian  king,  and 
therefore  God  was  not  sought.    (1)  Forsaking  the  path  of  trust,  he  entered  the 

1   KINGS.  2  A 


364 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [<'=•  »▼•  1—24. 

crooked  ways  of  worldly  policy.  He  bribed  Eeu-hadad  to  break  faith  with  Baasha. 
How  often  is  self-help  stained  with  meanness  and  unrighteousness  I  (2)  God  does 
not  always  forsake  His  people  when  they  forsake  Hun.  Asa's  plan  succeeded. 
The  fortress  that  was  being  buUt  against  him  became  two  for  him.  If  unbelief  was 
80  blessed,  what  mercies  might  have  crowned  faith  !  2.  The  disease  which  embit- 
tered his  latter  days.  "  Nevertheless  in  the  time  of  his  old  age  he  was  diseased  in 
his  feet."  Here,  again,  his  faith  was  tried  and  found  wanting.  "  In  his  disease 
he  Bought  not  to  the  Lord  but  to  the  physicians  "  (2  Chron.  xvi.  12) ;  and  he  found 
no  relief.  There  is  a  limit  to  God's  forbearance  even  with  His  people.  How  much 
is  there  of  our  weakness  and  trouble  and  distress  over  which  the  words  are  written, 
"  Ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not"  1— J.  U. 

Ver.  14. — Bellgious  nneerity.  A  beautiful  flower  often  eprings  from  the  midst 
of  corruption.  The  more  we  realize  the  moral  condition  of  Asa's  surroundings  the 
more  we  wonder  at  the  grace  which  made  him  what  he  was.  His  father  was 
Abijam  (or  Abijah),  the  second  king  of  Judah,  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  He  walked  in 
all  the  sins  of  his  father,  which  he  had  done  before  him."  His  education  appears 
to  have  been  entrusted  to  Maachah,  his  grandmother,  a  daughter  of  Absalom  the 
rebel,  and  herself  a  gross  idolatress.  The  remembrance  of  these  facts  makes  the  state- 
ment respecting  this  young  prince  the  more  surprising — "  Asa  did  that  which  was 
right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  as  did  David  his  father."  An  independent  spirit  and 
a  resolute  will  must  have  been  coupled  with  his  piety.  [Show  from  this  the  possi- 
bility of  triumphing  over  the  most  adverse  circumstances  by  those  who  sincerely 
seek  to  serve  God.]  It  is  not,  however,  to  his  manly  resolution,  to  his  vigour,  or 
to  his  political  wisdom  that  our  attention  is  specially  called  by  the  text,  but  to  his 

EBLIGIOUS   SINCERITY. 

I.  Belioioits  sincerity  asserts  itbielf  im  BSFORUiNa  zeal  (vers.  12,  13).    It 
was  only  twenty  years  since  the  death  of  Solomon,  yet  irreligion  and  vice  had 
corrupted  the  nation.     EvU  spreads  more  rapidly  than  good  in  a  fallen  world. 
The  deadly  fungus  springs  up  in  a  night,  the  fruit-tree  grows  slowly  to  perfection. 
A  half-hearted  or  timid  man  would  have  been  content  to  worship  Jehovah  himself, 
and  thus  silently  rebuke  the  idolatry  of  his  people ;  but  Asa,  being  an  earnest  man, 
could  not  content  himself  with  any  laissez  favre  principle.    With  a  strong  hand  he 
would  put  down  evil  wherever  he  could  reach  it.    Often  in  God's  sight  to  leave  evil 
alone,  unrebuked,  and  nncombated  is  to  share  the  guilt  of  those  who  commit  it. 
It  is  the  spirit  of  Cain,  and  not  of  Christ,  that  asks, "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  " 
Asa's  reforming  zeal  contains  lessons  to  rulers,  to  employers,-  to  parents,  indeed 
to  all  who  can  mould  the  circumstances  of  others.    See,  therefore,  how  it  made 
itself  felt.    1.  OpportiMiitiea  for  sin  were  diminished.    Ver.  12  impUes  that  there 
were  those  in  Judah  who  made  a  trafl5o  of  vice.    Corrupt  themselves,  they  cor- 
rupted others.    There  are  places  in  Christian  cities  which  should  be  swept  away  by 
the  strong  hand  of  law.    2.  Incentives  to  sin  were  destroyed.    The  idol  refened  to 
(in  ver.  13)  is  literally  "  the  horror."    The  obscene  rites  ooimected  with  its  oaltus 
will  not  bear  investigation.    Suffice  it  to  say  that  this  so-called  worship  provoked 
to  vice  of  the  most  hideous  kinds.     Against  provocations  and  incentives  to  sin  how 
earnestly  should  parents  guard  their  children,  and  masters  and  mistresses  their 
servants.     Impui-e  literature  is  in  the  forefront  of  these ;  not  only  that  which  offends 
by  its  grossness,  but  that  which  secretly  stains  by  its  suggestions.     3.  Influences 
for  sin  were  removed.     Sometimes  vice  is  made  popular  by  leaders  of  fashion  or  of 
poUoy.     The  unrighteousness  of  a  clever  man,  the  impurity  of  a  leader  in  society 
are  woefully  far-reaching  in  their  effects.     Maachah,  the  queen-mother,  was  one 
of  the  most  potent  in  Asa's  court,  was  his  near  relation,  his  early  instructress ;  yet, 
with  as  much  wisdom  as  courage,  "  he  removed  her  from  being  queen,"  and 
destroyed  her  idol  publicly  and  shamefully.    It  might  be  said  that  he  was  in- 
debted to  her,  that  she  was  aged  and  should  be  respected,  or  that  she  could  not 
live  long,  and  might  therefore  be  tolerated.    Such  pleas  would  not  avail  with  a 
man  whose  "  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord."     (Apply  this.) 
II.  BELiaions  sikosbitt  pboolaims  itself  bt  confidence  in  Qoo.    This  eon' 


CH.  XV.  25- XVI.  28.J       THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


8S< 


fidenoe  was  at  the  heart  of  Asa's  courage.  Bead  onr  text  in  the  light  of  the  fuller 
history  of  the  king  (given  in  2  Chron.),  and  see  how  his  oonfidenoe  displayed  itself. 
1.  He  fownd  rest  m  God  in  peril.  Many  adversaries  would  be  raised  by  a  refor- 
mation which  was  ruthless  in  its  rigour.  Idolatrous  priests,  the  party  led  by 
Maaehah,  &o.,  would  rebel ;  but  Asa  was  not  perturbed,  God  was  his  refuge  and 
strength.  2.  He  offered  prayer  to  Ood  in  his  difficulty.  As  an  example  read 
2  Chron.  xiv.  Describe  the  incursion  of  the  Ethiopian  host,  and  this  prayer  of  the 
king,  "  Lord,  it  is  nothing  with  thee  to  help,  whether  with  many,  or  with  them 
that  have  no  power :  help  as,  O  Lord  our  God,  for  we  rest  on  thee,  and  in  thy 
name  we  go  against  this  multitude."  A  victory  followed  which  was  unique  in 
the  history  of  God's  people.  Conquest  waits  on  prayer  in  every  struggle  with  eviL 
8.  He  conaeerated  himself  and  his  people  to  Ood  after  their  deliverance  (see  ver. 
15,  and  compare  with  it  2  Chron.  xv.)  He  renewed  the  covenant,  and  afresh 
dedicated  all  he  possessed  to  the  Lord.  So  he  deserved  the  high  commendation, 
"Asa's  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord  all  his  days."  It  remains  yet  to  be 
observed  that — 

III.  Belioious  sinceritt  mat  be  associated  with  iMPEiirECT  sEKviOE.  Ha 
failed  to  remove  the  high  places.  This  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  did.  To  leave  them 
was  to  provide  a  way  of  return  to  the  idolatrous  practices  he  had  put  down. 
Beware  of  leaving  lesser  sins  oneouquered,  after  victory  has  been  attained  ovar 
grosser  crimes. — ^A.  & 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XV.  26-XVl.  28. 
Thb  bbionb  or   Nadab,  Baisba,  Elah, 

ZlUBI,   AMD  OUBI,   KINSS  OV  ISBAEL. — After 

biinging  op  the  history  of  the  kings  of 
Judah,  which  has  engaged  his  pen  since 
ch.  xiv.  21,  to  the  date  of  the  death  of  Asa, 
our  author  goes  back  some  forty  years  to 
record  the  contemporary  history  of  the  king- 
dom of  Israel,  with  which  the  rest  of  this 
book,  the  last  thirteen  verses  alone  excepted, 
is  occupied.  On  the  other  hand,  none  of 
these  reigns  are  even  noticed  by  the  chroui- 
eler,  who  only  refers  to  the  history  of  Israel, 
BO  far  as  it  is  inextricably  connected  with 
the  object  of  bis  work ;  in  other  words,  so 
far  as  is  necessary  to  explain  or  illustrate 
the  reigns  of  the  kings  of  Judah. 

Ver.  25. — ^And  Nadab  [=  hberat]  the  son 
of  Jeroljoam  began  to  reign  [Heb.  reigned] 
over  Israel  in  the  second  year  of  Asa  king 
of  Judah,  and  reigned  over  Israel  two  years. 
[The  reigns  of  these  five  kings  of  Israel  are 
related  with  great  brevity.  It  was  not  the 
object  of  the  author  to  chronicle  secular 
history — for  this  he  refers  us  to  "  the  books 
of  the  days" — he  is  only  concerned  with 
the  events  of  their  reigns  in  so  far  as  they 
relate  to  the  kingdom  of  God.] 

Ver.  26.— And  he  did  evU  in  the  sight  of 
fhe  Lord,  and  walked  In  the  way  of  his 
lather  [Jeroboam  begat  all  his  sons,  save 
one,  "  in  his  own  likeness  "  ] ,  and  In  his  sin 


wherewith  lie  made  Israel  to  sin.     [!.«., 

not  the  rebellion,  but  the  schism  (ohs.  xii. 
30 ;  xiv.  16  ;  cf .  vers.  30,  34 ;  xvi  2, 13, 19, 
&a. ;  see  Homiletics,  p.  274).  All  the  succes- 
sors of  Jeroboam,  it  Is  clear,  either  thought 
themselves  compelled,  by  the  exigencies  ol 
their  position,  to  adhere  to  his  ecclesiastical 
policy,  or  found  themselves  more  and  mora 
entangled  in  its  toils.] 

Ver.  27.— And  Baasha  the  son  of  AhtJali 
[not  the  prophet  of  that  name  (ch.  xiv.  2), 
who  was  an  Ephraimite,  whereas  this  Ahijah 
was] ,  of  the  house  of  Issachar  [This  fact  ig 
perhaps  mentioned  to  distinguish  tlie  father 
of  Baasha  from  the  prophet.  Or  it  may 
owe  its  insertion  to  the  insignificance  of  this 
tribe  (Gen.  xlix.  14,  15)  up  to  this  date. 
This  change  of  dynasty,  nuUke  the  last,  was 
in  no  way  connected  with  tribal  jealousies. 
Baasha  owed  his  elevation  to  his  own  abili- 
ties or  to  his  unscrupulous  daring],  con- 
spired [The  word  implies  associates.  There 
was  a  plot  formed  for  Nadab's  assassination] 
against  him:  and  Baasha  smote  him  at 
Glbbethou  [=  eminence.  In  the  tribe  of 
Dan  (Josh,  xix.  44)  and  a  Levitical  city: 
one  of  the  four  assigned  to  the  Levites  in 
the  territory  of  that  tribe  {ib.,  xxi.  23).  It 
has  not  been  identified.  Evidently  it  was 
on  the  border  of  Philistia.  Some  would  con- 
nect it  with  the  modern  Mejdel,  a  little  to 
the  north  of  Ascalon.  '  The  reader  will  ob- 
serve  how  large  a  number  of  the  names  of 
towns  indicate  their  elevation.  The  cities 
of  those  days  were  set  on  a  hill.  It  was 
dangerous  to  build  in  the  plain],   whloh 


856 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.       [ch.  xv.  25— xw.  2& 


belonged  to  the  Philistines  [Blunt  sugsests 
("  Ooineidences,"  p.  181)  that  it  was  because 
the  place  had  been  deserted  by  the  Levitea, 
in  the  general  exodus  to  Judah,  that  the 
Philistines  availed  themselves  of  the  oppor- 
tunity to  seize  and  fortify  it.  But  the 
divided  and  consequently  weakened  state 
of  the  kingdom  would  of  itself  have  encou- 
raged them  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  Israel 
(Ewald)];  for  Kadal)  and  all  Israel  laid 
siege  to  Olbbethon. 

Ver.  28.— Even  In  the  third  year  of  Asa 
[We  have  here  (an  in  ch.  xvi.  8,  23)  a  con- 
spicuous instance  of  the  Hebrew  habit  of 
counting  parts  of  years  as  entire  years.  It 
is  obvious  that  if  Nadab  succeeded  to  the 
throne  in  the  seccmd  (ver.  25)  and  died  in 
the  third  year  of  Asa,  lie  cannot  have  reigned 
two  fnll  years]  king  of  Judah  did  Baasha 
slay  Urn  [As  the  assassination  took  place 
during  the  siege,  it  is  extremely  probable 
that  Baasha,  like  Omri,  was  the  captain  of 
the  host] ,  and  reigned  in  bis  stead.  [Prob- 
ably Nadab  had  showed  himself  qnite  un- 
equal to  the  task  of  governing,  of  which 
leading  the  army  was  in  tliat  age  a  principal 
function  (1  Sam.  viii.  20).  It  is  just  pos- 
sible that  in  the  occupation  of  Gibbethon  by 
Philistines  we  have  a  proof  of  his  feebleness 
and  incapacity.  Anyhow,  when  the  strong 
hand  of  Jeroboam  is  removed,  the  fruits  of 
the  rebellion  at  once  begin  to  appear.  The 
contempt  and  defiance  which  Jeroboam  had 
showed  towards  constituted  authority  are  now 
manifested  towards  his  successor.  Baasha 
only  takes  a  leaf  out  of  Jeroboam's  book 
(oh.  zi.  26).] 

Yer.  29.— And  It  came  to  pass,  wben  he 
reigned,  that  he  smote  all  the  house  of 
Jeroboam ;  he  left  not  to  Jeroboam  any 
that  breathed  [Same  expression  in  Josh.  xi. 
14;  of.  Dent.  xx.  16.  Males  and  females 
alike  were  destroyed;  see  ch.  xiv.  11], 
until  he  had  destroyed  him,  according 
unto  the  saying  of  the  lord,  which  he 
■pake  by  his  servant  Ahijah  the  Shllonlte 
[oh  xiv.  10.  It  is  not  implied  that  it 
was  becaute  of  this  prophecy  that  Baasha 
exterminated  the  house  of  Jeroboam.  It 
is  probable  that,  so  far  from  setting  him- 
self to  fulfil  it,  he  knew  nothing  about  it, 
and,  as  he  thought,  merely  took  effectual 
measures  for  his  own  security.  His  seat 
could  never  be  safe,  go  long  as  one  of  Jero- 
boam's house  survived.  Grotius  aptly  cites, 
with  reference  to  these  wholesale  murders, 
the  saying,  vqmoc  8c  rarcpa  Kreifac,  viovc 
tariXiire]  \ 

Ver.  BO. — Beeaiue  of  the  sins  of  Jeroboam 
which  be  sinned,  and  which  he  made  Israel 
to  sin,  by  his  provocation  wherewith  he 
provoked  the  Lord  Qod  of  Israel  to  anger. 
[Of.  eb.  xvi.  3, 7, 18, 26.  «o.] 


Ver.  31. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Nadab,  and  all  that  he  did,  are  tliey  not 
written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the 
kings  of  Israel  7 

Ver.  32.— And  there  was  war  between 
Asa  and  Baasha  king  of  Israel  all  their 
days.  [Verbatim  as  ver.  16,  where  see 
note.  Several  commentators  suggest  that 
this  latter  statement  was  copied  from  the 
chronicles  of  Israel,  and  that  of  ver.  16 
from  those  of  Judah.  It  is  held  by  others, 
however,  that  for  Baasha  we  should  here 
read  Nadab,  and  in  favour  of  this  view  is 
the  fact  that  the  reign  of  Nadab  is  still 
under  consideration,  the  history  of  Baasha 
only  beginning  with  the  following  verse.] 

Ver.  33.— In  the  third  year  of  Asa  king  of 
Jndah  began  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahljah  to 
reign  [Practically  a  repetition  of  ver.  28. 
These  iterations  are  thoroughly  in  accord 
with  Eastern  usage  (of.  vers.  26, 30,  34 ;  eh. 
xvi.  1,  7,  &e.)]  over  all  Israel  in  Tirzah, 
twenty  and  four  years. 

Ver.  34.— And  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord,  and  he  walked  in  the  way  of  Jero- 
boam, and  In  his  sin  wherewith  he  made 
Israel  to  sin. 

CHAPTER  XVL 

This  division  of  chapters,  immediately 
after  the  commencement  of  the  narrative 
of  the  reign  of  Baasha,  is  somewhat  unfor- 
tunate, inasmuch  as  it  obscures  the  close 
connexion  between  the  sin  of  Baasha  and 
the  prophecy  which  it  provoked.  The  idea 
the  historian  would  convey  is  clearly  this 
— the  analogy  between  the  dynasty  of  Jero- 
boam and  that  which  supplanted  it,  (1)  in 
their  sin,  (2)  in  the  denunciation  of  each  by 
a  prophet,  and  (3)  in  the  punishments 
which  followed  their  sins — an  analogy  so 
close  that  the  prophet  Jehu  almost  employs 
the  ipsissima  verba  of  his  predecessor, 
Ahijah. 

Ver.  1. — Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
to  Jehu,  the  son  of  Hanaul  [Hanani  is 
mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xvi.  7 — 10  as  having 
admonished  Asa,  and  as  having  been  thrown 
into  prison  for  so  doing.  Both  he  and  bis 
son  would  seem  to  have  belonged  to  the 
kingdom  of  Judah.  We  find  the  latter  in 
2  Ohron.  xiz.  2  a  resident  in  Jerusalem, 
and  protesting  against  the  alliance  between 
Jehoshaphat,  whose  historian  he  became, 
and  whom,  consequently,  he  must  have  sur- 
vived (2  Ohron.  xz.  34),  and  Ahab.  He  is 
mentioned  in  the  verse  last  cited  as  *'  made  to 
ascend  on  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel" 
(see  Introduction,  p.  ziii.)    His  prophetit 


OB.  X9.  26— XVI.  28.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


8S7 


oareei  must  have  extended  ovei  at  least 
half  a  centary]  against  Baasha,  saying, 

Yei.  2. — ^ForaEmacb  as  I  exalted  thee  oat 
of  the  dust  [cf.  ch.  xlv.  7  ;  2  Sam.vii.  8  ;  Psa. 
IxxYiii.  70.  These  words  assuredly  point  to 
a  lowly  origin.  He  may  well  have  risen 
from  the  ranks] ,  and  made  thee  prince  [The 
original  word  is  used  of  leaders  of  yaiious 
degrees,  comprehending  even  the  king :  ch. 
i.  35 ;  1  Sam.  ix.  16 ;  x.  1 ;  cf.  Dan.  ix.  25] 
over  my  people  Israel  [There  is  no  approval 
implied  here  of  the  means  by  which 
Baasha  had  raised  himself  to  the  throne. 
All  that  ia  said  is  that  he  had  been  an 
instrument  in  Ood's  hands,  and  owed  his 
throne  to  God's  sanction  and  ordering. 
Even  his  conspiracy  and  cruelties  had  been 
overruled  to  the  furtherance  of  the  Divine 
purpose] ,  and  thou  hast  walked  In  the  way 
of  Jerol]oam,and  hast  made  my  people  Israel 
to  sin,  to  provoke  me  to  anger  [better  vex, 
one  word]  with  their  sins ; 

Yer.  3.— Behold,  I  will  talce  away  [Heb. 
exterminate  ;  same  word  as  in  chs.  xiv,  10 
(where  see  note) ;  xxi.  21  ;  xxii.  47,  <&c.]  the 
posterity  of  [Heb.  after\  Baasha,  and  the 
posterity  of  \_after\  his  house,  and  wlU 
make  thy  house  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam 
the  eon  of  Mebat  [Cf .  ch.  xv.  29;  xxi.  22,  &o.] 

Ver.  4 Him  that  dleth  of   [Heb.  to  ; 

see  note  on  ch.  xiv.  11]  Baasha  in  the  city 
ahall  the  dogs  eat ;  and  him  tbat  dleth  of 
Us  in  the  fields  shall  the  fowls  of  the  air 
eat.  [It  may  be  these  words,  like  those  of 
the  next  two  verses,  were  almost  a  formula, 
bat  if  so,  it  is  noticeable  that  precisely  the 
same  formula  was  used  of  Jeroboam  a  few 
years  before,  and  Baasha  knew  well  how  it 
had  been  accomplished.  "  All  the  prophets 
in  succession  have  the  same  message  from 
God  for  the  same  sins  "  (Wordswortib).] 

Ver.  6. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
BaAsha,  and  what  he  did,  and  his  might 
[as  to  which  see  oh.  xv.  17 — 21.  He  could 
hardly  have  given  a  stronger  proof  of  his 
might  than  by  fortifying  a  post  but  five 
miles  distant  iiam  Jerusalem.  Eeil,  how- 
ever, would  interpret  the  word,  both  here 
and  in  ch.  xv.  23,  of  his  energy  and  strength 
in  government.  Better  Bahr,  twpfere 
Thaten.  Ewald  hence  infers  that  Baasha 
was  "  a  man  of  distinguished  bravery  "] , 
are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Israel  7 

Ver.  6.— So  Baasha  slept  with  his 
fathers,  and  was  hurled  in  Tlrzah  [cf .  ch.  xv. 
21,  38.  This  place  is  twice  mentioned  as 
his  residence] ,  and  Elah  his  son  reigned  in 
his  stead.  [It  is  perhaps  more  than  a  mere 
coincidence  that  this  uncommon  name, 
Elah  ("terebinth,''  see  note  on  ch.  xiii.  14),  is 
also  the  name  of  the  great  valley  (1  Stun. 


zvii.  2, 19 ;  xxi.  9)  near  to  Gibbetbon,  where 
Baasha  was  proclaimed  king.] 

Ver.  7.— And  also  by  the  hand  of  the 
prophet  Jehu,  the  son  of  Hananl,  came  the 
word  of  the  Lord  against  Baasha  [This 
does  not  refer,  as  some  have  thought,  to  a 
second  prophecy  on  Jehu's  part,  but  is 
rather  explicative  of  ver.  2.  Bawlinson 
thinks  the  object  of  the  historian  herein 
was  to  point  out  that  Baasha  was  punished 
for  the  "  murder  of  Jeroboam  [?]  and  his 
family,"  as  well  as  for  the  calf-worship. 
Eeil  and  Bahr  hold  that  it  is  designed  to 
guard  against  a  perversion  of  ver.  2,  "I 
made  thee  prince,"  &c. ,  from  which  it  might 
be  inferred  that  he  was  commissioned  of 
Qod  to  mnrder  Nndab.  But  it  is  simplei 
to  suppose  that  his  primary  idea  was  to 
convey,  by  this  repetition,  which  no  donbt 
is  derived  from  a  different  source  from  the 
statement  of  ver.  2,  that  Baasha  was  visited 
Iry  God  for  his  various  sins.  It  was  no 
chance  that  happened  to  him.  The  exci- 
sion of  his  house,  like  that  of  Jeroboam, 
was  distinctly  foretold],  and  against  his 
boose,  even  for  all  the  evil  that  he  did  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord,  in  provoking  him  to 
anger  with  the  work  of  his  hands  [ver.  2 ; 
note  the  coincidence  with  ch.  xv.  30,  in  con- 
nexion with  the  next  words.  Bahr  explains 
"  the  works  of  his  hands  "  as  idols,  Dii 
factitii,  after  Deut.  iv.  28,  but  this  appears 
somewhat  far-fetched] ,  in  being  Uke  the 
house  of  Jeroboam,  amd  because  he  killed 
him  [i.e.,  Nadab]. 

The  Reign  of  Elah. 

Ver.  8. — In  the  twenty  and  sixth  year  of 
Asa,  king  of  Judah,  began  Elah,  son  of 
Baasha,  to  reign  over  Israel,  two  years  [cf. 
ch.  XV.  and  see  note  on  ch.  xv.  28] . 

Ver.  9. — ^And  his  servant  [Not  only  "  sub- 
ject," as  Bawlinson,  but  officer.  The  same 
word  is  used  of  Jeroboam ;  oh.  zi.  26,  note. 
We  may  almost  trace  here  a  Ux  talionis, 
Baasha  was  Kadab's  "servant,"  as  Jeroboam 
was  Solomon's]  Ztmrl[From  the  occurrence 
of  this  name  among  those  of  the  descend- 
ants of  Jonathan  (1  Chron.  viii.  36),  it  has 
been  supposed  (Stanley)  that  this  was  a 
last  effort  of  the  house  of  Saul  to  regain 
the  throne] ,  captain  of  half  his  chariots 
[331  as  in  oh.  ix.  19  ;  x.  26.  The  violation 
of  the  law  of  Deut.  xvii.  16  brings  its  own 
retribution],  conspired  against  him  [pre- 
cisely as  Elah's  father  had  "  conspired  "  (ch. 
XV.  27)  against  Nadab] ,  as  he  was  In  Tlrzah, 
drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  house  of 
Arza,  steward  of  [Heb.  which  woe  over  ;  of. 
chs.  iv.  6  ;  xviii.  3 ;  2  Kings  x.  6 ;  xviii.  37]  hll 
house  in  Tlrzah.  [Several  points  present 
themselves  for  notice  here.    Fint,  the  a- 


8S8 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.       [oh.  xv.  26— xti.  2a 


ample  of  Jeroboam  has  clearly  had  its  full 
influence  on  the  nation.  "  The  Lord's 
anointed  "  is  no  longer  had  in  reverence,  a3 
in  the  days  of  David  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  6,  10  ; 
xxvi.  9, 16  ;  2  Sam.  i.  14),  nor  is  it  accounted 
a  sin  to  grasp  at  che  crown.  (2)  Zimri 
only  does  what  Baasha  had  done  before 
him.  That  prince  was  "  hoist  with  his 
own  petard."  (3)  Elah  would  seem  to 
have  been  a  dissolute  and  pusillanimons 
prince.  His  place  was  clearly  with  his  army 
at  Gibbethon  (ver.  15 ;  of.  Joa.,  viii. 
12.  4),  And  as  clearly  it  was  Twt  in  the 
house  of  one  of  his  subjects,  even  the  in- 
tendant  of  his  palace.  "  An  Oriental 
monarch  ...  is  precluded  by  etiquette 
from  accepting  the  hospitality  of  his  sub- 
jects "  —  Eawlinson,  who  further  remarks 
that  the  low  tastes  which  we  here  find  Elah 
indulging  "  had  probably  been  formed  before 
his  father  was  exalted  out  of  the  dust."  As 
probably  they  were  inherited  direct  from 
his  father.  Aiiyhow,  they  led  to  his  destruc- 
tion. It  is  clear  that  Elah's  want  of 
character,  hke  Nadab's,  suggested  the  con- 
spiracy of  Zimri.  (4)  It  is  extremely  prob- 
able, though  not  absolutely  certain,  as 
Bahr  a£Srms,  that  Arza  was  one  of  the 
conspirators,  and  that  the  wretched  prince 
had  been  decoyed  to  his  house  and  made 
drunk,  with  a  view  to  his  murder  there.] 

Ver.  10. — And  Zimri  went  in  [of.  Judg.  iii. 
20 ;  2  Sam.  iv.  7]  and  smote  Mm  and  killed 
him,  in  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of 
Asa  Tslae  of  Judah,  and  reigned  In  his 
stead.  [Cf.  ch.  xv.  28  and  2  Kings  xv.  23.  It 
is  curious  how  it  happened  three  times  in 
the  history  of  Israel  that  ' '  the  only  power- 
ful prince  in  a  new  dynasty  was  its  founder, 
and  after  his  son  and  successor  reigned  two 
years,  the  power  passed  into  other  hands  " 
<Ewald).J 

TJie  Reign  of  Zimri. 

Ver.  11. — And  It  came  to  pass  when  be 
began  to  reign,  as  soon  as  he  sate  on  hla 
throne,  that  he  slew  all  the  house  of  Baasha 
[see  note  on  oh.  xv.  29.  The  LXX.  Vat. 
omits  the  rest  of  this  verse  and  the  first 
clause  of  ver.  12] :  lie  left  him  not  one  that 
plsseth  against  a  wall  [i.e.,  not  a  boy. 
See  ch,  xiv.  10  note] ,  neither  of  [Heb.  and] 

his  kinsfolks  [The  7^1  is  strictly  the  per- 
son to  whom  (1)  the  right  of  redemption 
S[ievit.  XXV.  26 ;  Buth,  passim)  and  (2)  the 
uty  of  avenging  blood  (Num.  xxxv.  19) 
belonged.  And  this  being  the  next-of-kin 
(Buth  ii.  12, 13),  the  word  came  to  mean 
near  relative,  kinsman,  as  here ;  of.  Euth  ii. 
20.  All  the  same,  it  discloses  to  us  Zimri's 
object,  which  was  to  destroy  the  avenger  of 
blood.    And  it  shows  (iu  connexion  «rith 


ver.  16)  that  none  of  Baasha's  children,  it 
he  had  other  children,  had  gone  to  the  war] , 
nor  of  his  Mends.  [Zimri  went  a  step 
farther  than  Baasha  had  gone.  He  was  not 
content  with  extirpating  the  royal  family, 
but  put  to  death  the  partizans  of  the  ho  use, 
all  who  would  be  likely  to  sympathize  with 
Elah  or  to  resent  his  mnrder.] 

Ver.  12.— Thus  did  Zinul  destroy  all  the 
house  of  Baasha,  according  to  the  word  of 
the  Lord  which  he  spake  against  Baasha,  by 
[Beb.  in  the  hand  of]  Jehu  the  prophet 
[Vers.  1,  7 ;  cf .  ch.  xv.  29.  The  analogy  is 
now  complete] , 

Ver.  13. — For  [7^  eorresponds  with  the 
73/  of  ver.  7  =  propter;  cf.  chs.  xiy.  6;  xxi. 
22]  all  the  sins  of  Baasha,  and  the  sins  of 
Elah  his  son,  by  which  they  sinned,  and  by 
which  they  made  Israel  to  sin,  in  provoking 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  anger  [the  for- 
imila  of  ch.  xv.  30,  &c.]  with  their  vanities. 
[The  calves,  not  idols,  are  referred  to  here. 
Cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  21 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  4.  The 
same  idea  is  embodied  in  the  word  Belli- 
aven;  Hosea  iv.  15  ;  v.  8.] 

Ver.  14 Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 

Elah,  and  aU  that  he  did,  are  they  not 
written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of 
the  kings  of  Israel  ? 

Ver.  15 .— In  the  twenty  and  seventh  year 
of  Asa  king  of  Judah  did  Zlmrl  reign  [The 
same  word  elsewhere  translated  in  A.  V. 
began  to  reign.  It  is  really  an  aorist  •> 
succeeded  to  the  throne]  seven  days  in  Tlr- 
zah.  And  the  people  were  encamped 
[Heb.  encamping]  against  Gibbethon,  which 
belonged  to  the  FMUstines.  [It  has  at 
first  sight  a  suspicious  look  that  two  kings 
of  Israel,  within  an  interval  of  about  twenty- 
five  years,  should  have  been  slain  by  con- 
spirators daring  a  siege  of  this  place.  But 
when  the  narrative  is  examined,  its  proba- 
bility and  consistency  become  at  once 
apparent.  Stanley  assumes  that  the  siege 
lasted  over  the  whole  of  this  period,  bnt  it 
is  more  likely  that  when  Baasha  found  him- 
self king,  he  discovered  that  he  had  domestia 
matters  enough  upon  his  hands,  without  a 
foreign  war,  and  so  he  raised  the  siege.  It 
is  very  probable  that  he  feared  opposition 
such  as  Zimri  and  Omri  subsequently  ex- 
perienced. And  his  wars  with  Asa  and 
with  Syria  may  well  have  prevented  his 
renewing  the  undertaking.  On  the  accession 
of  Elah,  however,  with  the  usual  ambition 
and  impetuosity  of  youth,  it  was  decided  to 
recommence  the  siege  and  to  win  this  city 
back  for  Israel.  But  the  fate  of  Nadab,  and 
the  consequent  ill  omen  attaching  to  the 
place  would  not  be  forgotten,  and  this,  si 
well  as  his  voluptuo\is  habits,  may  have 
deterred  the  faineant  Elah  from  besieging 


I.  XV.  26— XVI.  28.]       THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


869 


it  in  peT80Ii,  while  the  conspiracy  which 
narked  the  former  siege  may  at  the  same 
time  have  soggested  to  Zimri  and  others  the 
thought  of  conspiring  against  Elah,] 

Yer.  16. — And  the  people  tbat  were  en- 
camped heard  say,  Zlmrl  bath  conspired, 
and  hatb  also  slain  the  Tring :  wherefore  all 
Israel  [obviously,  all  the  army.  Gf.  ch. 
siL  1,  16,  18]  made  Omrl,  the  captain  of 
the  host,  king  over  Israel  that  day  tn  the 
camp.  [It  'was  hardly  Ukely  they  would 
submit  to  the  usurpation  of  Zimri.  Not 
only  had  he  occupied  a  subordinate  position, 
hnt  his  murder  of  all  Elah's  friends  must 
have  made  him  a  host  of  enemies  in  the 
camp.  It  was  the  natural  thing  for  them, 
therefore,  to  turn  to  Omri.  He  had  the 
advantage  of  being  in  possession.  The  cap- 
tain of  the  host  stood  next  to  the  king 
(2  Kings  IT.  18 ;  2  Sam.  v.  8 ;  ziz.  IS ;  zx. 
23),  and  twicd  stepped  into  his  place  (2 
Kings  iz.  6).  This  history  has  many  parad- 
lels  in  that  of  the  Boman  empire.] 

Ver.  17. — And  Omrl  went  np  from  Olh- 
bethon  ["The  ezpression,  'went  up,' 
accurately  marks  the  ascent  of  the  army 
from  the  Shephelah,  where  Gibbethon  was 
situated,  to  the  hiU  country  of  Israel,  on  the 
edge  of  which  Tirzah  itood  "  (Bawlinson)] , 
and  all  lerael  [see  on  ver.  16]  with  him, 
and  they  besieged  Tirzah.  [It  is  probable 
that  they  arrived  before  the  city  on  the 
eizth  or  seventh  day  after  the  assassination 
of  Elah.  This  period  would  just  allow 
sufficient  time  for  the  news  of  the  con- 
spiracy to  travel  to  Gibbethon  and  for  the 
march  of  the  army.] 

Ver.  18.^And  It  came  to  pass,  when 
Slmil  saw  that  the  dty  was  taken  [the 
meaning  is  probably  that  which  Josephus 
gives:  "When  he  saw  that  the  city  had 
none  to  defend  it,"  or  possibly,  "  when  he 
saw  that  a  breach  was  made  "] ,  that  be  went 
Into  the  palace  [{^D'^l^  citadel,  fortress,  from 
B^K  altus  fuiu  So  Gesen.,  Eeil,  Bahr,  al. 
The  palace,  no  doubt,  consisted  of  a  string  of 
buildings  (ch.  vii.  2 — 9)  of  which  this  was 
the  highest  and  strongest  part.  Ewald 
thinks  that  the  harem — a  word  which  has 
almost  the  same  radicals — or  women's 
apartment,  is  meant — the  most  lecluded 
portion  of  the  great  palace  (Josephus 
nnderstands  it  to  mean  "  the  inmost  part "), 
and  hence  infers,  as  also  from  2  Emgs  iz. 
81,  that  the  women  of  the  palace  had 
willingly  submitted  to  the  eSeminate 
murderer  of  their  lord,  and  that  even  the 
qneen-mother  had  made  advances  towards 
bim  (vol.  iv.  p.  36).  But,  as  Bahr  remarks, 
there  is  nothing  of  this  in  the  tezt,  and 
Zimri's  desperate  act  rather  shows  daring 
and  eontempt  of  death  than  effeminacy  or 


sensuality.  And  2  Kings  zv.  26  (cf.  Fsa. 
cxxii.  7)  seems  to  point  to  a  stronghold 
rather  than  a  seragUo]  of  the  king's  house, 
and  burnt  the  king's  honse  [probably  tha 
palaoe  which  Jeroboam  had  built.  Ewald 
thinks  it  was  this  structure  gave  Tirzah  its 
reputation  for  beauty ;  Cant.  vi.  4]  over 
him  with  fire  [According  to  the  Syriac,  the 
besiegers  set  fire  to  the  palace.  Similarly 
Jarchi.  But  the  tezt  is  decisive.  The 
parallel  deed  of  Sardanapalns  will  ocour  to 
all  readers.  Bawlinson  also  refers  to  Herod. 
i.  176,  and  vii.  107] ,  and  died.  [This  word 
is  intimately  connected  with  the  verse  fol- 
lowing. But  there  is  no  need  to  rearrange 
the  verses.  The  tezt,  as  it  stands,  conveys 
clearly  enough  that  Zimri's  tragical  death 
was  a  retribution  for  his  sins.  Bahr  re- 
marks that  of  Elah  and  Zimri  we  learn 
nothing,  apart  from  the  fact  that  they  held 
to  the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  except  how  they 
died.] 

Yer.  19. — ^For  bis  sins  which  he  sinned 
In  doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  in 
walking  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam,  and  In 
bis  sin  which  he  did,  to  make  Israel  to  sin. 
[It  is  quite  clear  that  in  his  reign  of  one 
week  Zimri  cannot  have  done  much  to  show 
his  complicity  in  the  schism  of  Jeroboam, 
and  it  is  probable  that  the  sacred  writer 
means  that  his  character  and  antecedents 
were  such  as  to  prove  that  all  his  sympa- 
thies were  with  the  irreligious  party.  Bahr 
thinks  that  he  had  "  formerly  displayed  much 
partiality  for  the  calf-worship."  But  it  is 
quite  as  likely  that  the  idea  in  the  historian's 
mind  was  that  all  these  events  were  the 
bitter  fruits  of  Jeroboam's  misguided  and 
impious  policy,  into  the  spirit  of  which, 
Zimri,  like  his  predecessors,  had  been  bap- 
tized. It  is  interesting  to  remember  here 
the  aspect  these  repeated  revolutions  and 
assassinations  would  wear  to  the  kingdom 
of  Judah,  then  enjoying  quietness  and 
prosperity  under  Asa.  We  cannot  doubt 
for  a  moment  that  they  were  regarded  as  so 
many  manifestations  of  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God,  and  as  the  outcomes  of  that 
spirit  of  insubordination  and  impiety  which, 
in  their  eyes,  had  brought  about  both  the 
division  of  the  kingdom  and  the  schism  in 
the  church.] 

Yer.  20.— Nov  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Smri  [We  see  here  the  tendency  of  the 
historian  to  express  himself  in  formulae. 
He  checks  himself,  however,  aBd  does  not 
add  "  and  all  that  he  did,"  &c.] ,  and  his 
treason  that  he  wrought  [Heb.  his  con- 
spiracy which  he  conspired.  Though  this 
was  all  there  was  to  tell  of  him,  yet  no 
doubt  it  would  be  recorded  at  greater  length 
by  the  historians  of  the  day.  We  can  hardly 
suppose  that  the  "  books  of  the  words  of  tfaie 


360 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.        [ch.  xv.  25— xvi.  2a 


days "  would  dismiss  bo  striking  an  event 
in  a  few  sentences],  are  they  not  written 
In  tbe  book  of  tbe  chronicles  of  the  kings 
of  Israel  1 

The  Interregnum. 

Ver.  21.— Then  were  the  people  of  Israel 
divided  into  two  parts :  hall  of  the  people 
followed  [lit.,  was  after.  Same  expression 
2  Sam.  ii.  10 ;  cf.  ch.  i.  7]  Tlhnl  the  son  of 
Ginath  [Who  he  was,  or  why  he  was  set  up 
in  opposition  to  Omri,  it  is  impossible  to 
say.  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  army 
was  divided  in  its  preferences,  and  that  part 
of  the  soldiery  wished  to  make  Tibni  king, 
and  this  is  perhaps  the  most  probable  con. 
jectnre.  It  is  to  be  considered  that  the 
entire  army  was  not  encamped  before  Gib- 
betbon.  Nor  are  vers.  16,  17  fatal  to  this 
view,  as  Bahr  maintains,  because  "  all 
Israel "  there  clearly  means  all  the  army 
under  the  command  of  Omri.  It  is  hardly 
likely  that  Tibni  was  set  np  by  the  people 
of  lirzah,  after  the  death  of  Zimri,  to  con- 
tinue the  struggle.  The  only  thing  that  is 
eertain  is  that.the  hereditary  principle  being 
overthrown,  the  crown  appeared  to  be  the 
legitimate  prize  of  the  strongest;  and  Tibni, 
who  may  have  occuj)ied  a  position  of  im- 
portance, or  have  had,  somehow,  a  consider- 
able following,  resolved  that  Omri  should 
not  wear  it  without  a  fierce  contest] ,  to 
make  him  king  [Omri  bad  been  already 
made  king,  i.e.,  anointed,  ver.  16] ;  and  half 
followed  OmrL 

Yer.  22.— But  the  people  that  followed 
Onul  prevailed  against  the  people  that  fol- 
lowed ^bnl  the  son  of  Ginath  [It  appears, 
however,  from  the  following  verse  that  the 
struggle  lasted  four  years]  :  so  Tlhnl  died 
[According  to  Jos. ,  Ant.  viii.  12.  §  5,  he  was 
slain  by  the  oongueror.  The  LXX,  has  here 
a  curious  and  probably  genuine  addition. 
"  And  Thabni  died,  and  Joram  his  brother 
at  that  time],  and  Omri  reigned,  [The 
jingle  of  the  Hebrew  words  ia  probably 
designed.] 

The  Reign  of  Omri. 
Ver,  23. — In  the  thirty  and  first  year  of 
Asa  Idnf  of  Judah  began  Omri  to  reign  over 
Israel,  twelve  years  [As  Omri  was  pro- 
claimed king  in  the  twenty-seventh  and 
died  in  the  thirty-eighth  year  of  Asa  (cf. 
vers.  15,  29),  he  cannot  in  any  case  have 
reigned  twelve  full  years  ;  whereas  if  his  , 
reign  is  to  be  dated,  as  it  is  here,  from  the 
thirty-first  year  of  Asa,  it  is  obvious  that 
he  would  only  have  reigned  seven,  or, 
according  to  the  Jewish  mode  of  reckoning, 
eight  years.  Eawlinson  proposes  to  get  over 
the  difficulty  by  rearranging  the  text.  He 
would  attada  the  first  clause  of  this  verse 


to  ver.  22,  and  read,  "  And  Omri  reigned  in 
the  thirty-first,"  iSic.  But  to  this  there  are 
two  serious  objections.  First,  that  ver,  23, 
as  it  now  stands,  only  follows  the  usual  for- 
mula with  which  a  new  reign  is  announced 
(cf.  vers.  8,  15,  29)  ;  and,  second,  it  is  ex- 
tremely doubtful  whether  any  prose  sentence 
in  the  Hebrew  ever  begins  as  ver.  23  would 
then  do,  "  Reigned  Omri  over  Israel  twelve 
years."  Such  a  sentence  would  certainly  be 
quite  alien  to  the  usus  loquendi  of  our 
author.  We  are  therefore  reduced  to  the 
conclusion  either  (1)  that  the  text  here,  as 
in  some  other  instances  (ch.  vi.  1 ;  2  Kings 
i.  17 ;  cf.  iii.  1 ;  xiii.  1, 10,  &o.),  has  suffered 
at  the  hands  of  a  reviser,  or  (2)  that  the 
numbers  have  been  corrupted  in  transcrip- 
tion ;  or  (3)  that  the  historian  expresses 
himself  in  a  somewhat  confused  way.  Of 
these  suppositions  perhaps  (1)  is  the  most 
likely.  Anyhow,  it  is  clear  that  the  twelve 
years  of  Omri's  reign  are  to  be  counted  not 
from  the  thirty-first,  but  from  the  twenty- 
seventh  year  of  Asa,  i.e.,  from  the  date  of 
Zimri's  death  (see  vers.  10,  15,  29).  The 
confusion  has  arisen  from  the  fact  that  it 
was  not  until  Tibni  was  slain ,  after  four  years 
of  conflict,  that  Omri  became  sole  ruler] :  six 
years  reigned  he  in  Tlrzah. 

Ver.  24. — ^And  he  bought  [i.e.,  after  the 
six  years  just  mentioned.  During  the  four 
years  of  anarchy  Omri  would  seem  to  have 
retained  possession  of  the  capital  which  he 
had  taken  (ver.  18)  on  Zimri's  death.  But 
the  palace  being  burnt  and  the  defences 
perhaps  weakened  by  the  siege,  he  deter- 
mined, rather  than  rebuild  it,  to  found  a 
capital  elsewhere]  the  hUl  Samaria  [Heb. 
ShomerSn,  called  by  Herod  Sebaste,  whence 
its  modern  name  Sebintieh.  In  his  selection 
of  Samaria  for  the  seat  of  government, 
Omri  acted  with  singular  judgment.  It  has 
been  said  that  "  Sliechem  is  the  natural 
capital  of  Palestine,"  and  no  doubtit  enjoys 
a  commanding  position  and  great  advan- 
tages, but  Samaria  has  even  superior  recom- 
mendations. It  is  a  site  with  which  no 
traveller  can  fail  to  be  deeply  impressed. 
Even  Van  de  Velde,  who  says,  "  I  do  not 
agree  with  Dr.  Bobinson  and  other  writers 
who  follow  him  that  the  mountain  of 
Samaria  presents  so  admirable  a  combina- 
tion of  strength,  feitility,  and  beauty,  that 
the  like  is  hardly  to  bs  found  in  Palestine  " 
(vol.  i.  pp.  374,  375),  nevertheless  readily  al- 
lows its  superiority  to  Tirzah,  and  remarks 
on  the  strength  of  its  position.  "  Many 
travellers  have  expressed  a  conviction  that 
the  spot  was  in  most  respects  much  pre- 
ferable to  the  site  of  Jerusalem"  (Kitto). 
It  is  a  large  oval  or  oblong  mound,  with 
a  level  surface,  adapted  for  buildings, 
with  steep  sides  to  make  its  position  im< 


OH.  XV.  26— XVI.  28.]       THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


86i 


pregnaWe,  and  Burrounded  by  an  amphi- 
theatre of  hills.  "  Samaria  is  in  a  position 
of  great  strength  . .  .  and  must  before  the  in- 
vention of  gunpowder  have  been  almost  im- 
pregnable. It  stands  some  400  feet  above 
the  valley,  the  sides  of  the  hill  being  steep 
and  terraced  in  every  direction  for  cultiva- 
tion, or  perhaps  for  defensive  purposes  .  .  . 
broad  and  open  valleys  stretch  north  and 
south,  and  the  hill  is  thus  almost  isolated," 
Conder,  p.  47,  who  adds,  "Strategical  rea- 
Eona  may  be  supposed  to  have  dictated  the 
choice  of  the  capital  of  Omri,  for  on  the 
north  the  hill  commands  the  main  road  to 
Jezreel  over  a  steep  pass,  on  the  west  it 
dominates  the  road  to  the  coast,  and  on  the 
east  that  to  the  Jordan  "  (p.  49).  Grove 
(Diet.  Bib.  iii.  1099)  speaks  of  "  the  singular 
beauty  of  the  spot,"  and  Stanley  ("  Jewish 
Church  "  ii.  p.  284)  justly  sees  in  the  selection 
of  this  spot  a  proof  of  Omri's  sagacity.  But 
perhaps  the  best  proof  is  that  which  the 
Subsequent  history  supplies.  Shechem  and 
Tirzah  had  each  been  tried,  and  each  in 
turn  had  been  abandoned.  But  Samaria 
continued  to  be  the  capital  so  long  as  the 
kingdom  lasted]  of  Sbemer  for  two  talents 
of  silver  [variously  estimated  at  £500  and 
£800.  This  purchase,  obviously  of  the 
freehold,  i.e.,  in  perpetuity,  was  in  contra- 
vention of  the  law  of  Levit.  xxv.  23.  David 
had  bought  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman,  but 
that  was  (1)  from  a  Jebusite,  and  (2)  for  a 
high  religious  purpose  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  24).  It 
has  been  suggested  that  this  purchase  may 
have  inspired  Ahab  with  the  idea  of  buying 
the  vineyard  of  Naboth],  and  built  on  [Heb. 
built]  the  bin,  and  called  the  name  of  the 
city  which  he  built,  after  the  name  of 
Shemer,  owner  of  the  hUl,  Samaria.  [It  is 
not  improbable  that  the  vendor  bargained 
that  the  land  should  retain  his  name  (cf. 
Psa.  xlix.  11).  The  reluctance  of  the 
Israelite  to  part  with  his  patrimony,  even  to 
the  king,  is  brought  out  very  strikingly  in 
ch.  xii.  Shemer,  in  selling  his  choice  par- 
cel of  land  for  a  capital,  might  well  wish  to 
connect  his  name  with  it.  The  fact  that 
j'npB'  means  watch-mountain  (Gesen.),  and 
that  we  should  have  expected  a  name  formed 
from  Shemer  to  take  the  form  Shimron — 
Shomeron  would  strictly  imply  an  original 
Shomer — is  not  by  any  means  a  proof  that  our 
historian  is  at  fault  in  his  derivation.  For,  in 
the  first  place,  the  names  Shomer  and  Shemer 
are  used  of  the  same  person  in  1  Chron.  vii. 
32,  34.  And  secondly,  nothing  would  be 
more  in  accordance  with  Jewish  ideas  than 
that  Omri,  in  naming  the  hill  after  its 
owner,  should  give  a  turn  to  the  word  which 
would  also  express  at  the  same  time  its 
characteristic  feature.  A  pun.  or  play  upon 
words,  was  the  form  which  wii  assumed 


amongst  the  Semitic  races  (as,  indeed,  is  the 
case  still,  see  Conder,  p.  301),  and  the  form 
Shovieron  would  at  once  perpetuate  the 
memory  of  Shemer,  and  express  the  hope  and 
purpose  of  Omri.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that 
the  later  Samaritans  did  play  upon  this  very 
word,  representing  themselves  as  guardians 

(D^'iptJ')  of  the  law  (Ewald).  The  Greek 
form  of  the  name,  'Sajjiapua,  would  seem  to 
have  been   derived  through  the  Chaldea 

l.npE'  as  found  in  Ezra  iv.  10,  17.] 

Ver.  25. — But  Omri  wrought  evU  In  the 
eyes  of  the  lord,  and  did  worse  than  aU 
that  were  before  him.  [It  has  been  thought 
that  Micah  vi.  16  ("  the  statutes  of  Omri, 
&c.")  points  to  a  fresh  departure  from  the 
Jewish  faith  ;  to  the  organization  of  the 
calf-worship  into  a  regular  formal  system, 
or  to  "  measures  for  more  competely  iso- 
lating the  people  of  Israel  from  the  services 
of  the  honse  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem" 
(Kitto). 

Ver.  26.— For  he  walked  In  all  the  way 
of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  He'oat,  and  In  hla 
sin  wherewith  he  made  Israel  to  sin,  to 
provoke  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  anger 
with  their  vanities. 

Ver.  27. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acta  ot 
Omri  which  he  did,  and  his  might  that  h« 
showed  [Not  only  in  the  war  with  Tibni, 
but  certainly  in  the  subjugation  of  the 
Moabites,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the 
recently  discovered  Moabite  stone.  He  may 
well  have  had  other  wars,  which,  like  this, 
have  escaped  notice  in  Scripture.  If  the 
king  of  Syria  spoke  truly  (1  Kings  xx.  34), 
the  war  with  that  power  had  been  extremely 
disastrous.  Yet  the  Assyrian  inscriptions 
prove  that  Omri's  name  was  more  widely 
and  permanently  known  in  the  East  than 
those  of  his  predecessors  or  successors. 
Samaria,  for  example,  down  to  the  time  of 
Tiglath-Pileser,  appears  as  Beth  Khumri, 
the  "house  of  Omri ; "  Athaliah,the  daughter 
of  Ahab,  is  called  a  daughter  of  Omri;  and 
Jehu  appears  in  the  Black  Obelisk  Inscrip- 
tion as  "  the  son  of  Omri "  (Bawlinson, 
"  Hist.  lUus.  of  0.  T.,"  pp.  111—12).  It  is 
perhaps  an  evidence  of  "  his  might  "  that 
his  dynasty  retained  the  throne  to  the  third 
generation],  are  they  not  written  in  the 
book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of 
Israel  ?  [Vers.  26,  27  are  an  exact  repeti- 
tion, mutatis  mutandis,  of  ch.  xiii.  14 ;  cf. 
XV.  30.] 

Ver.  28. — So  Omri  slept  with  his  fathers, 
and  was  burled  in  Samaria  [After  the  ex- 
ample of  earlier  kings,  he  found  a  grave  in 
his  capital  city ;  cf.  chs.  ii.  10 ;  xi.  43  ;  xiv. 
31 ;  xvi.  16] :  and  Ahab  his  son  reigned  In 
his  stead. 


863  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.      [oH.  xv.  25— xvi.  2ft. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  29. — Th«  PunisTvment  of  Jeroboam's  Sin,  We  hav«  already  oonsidered  the 
true  character  of  Jeroboam's  Bin  (pp.  274  sqq.)  It  now  remains  for  us  to  observe, 
first,  the  punishment  which  it  provoked,  and  secondly,  its  workings  in  later  genera- 
tions. And  its  punishment  was  so  great  and  so  varied  that  it  will  of  itself  occupy 
the  rest  of  this  homily. 

But  let  us  remember,  in  the  first  place,  that  there  were  two  parties  to  this  sin. 
Jeroboam  sinned  himself  and  also  "  made  Israel  to  sin."  King  and  people  ahke 
were  involved  in  the  schism.  If  the  one  suggested  it,  the  other  embraced  it. 
Originating  with  the  former,  it  was  approved  and  perpetuated  by  the  latter.  There 
were  two  parties,  consequently,  to  the  punishment.  That  was  impartially  shared 
between  sovereign  and  subjects.    We  have  to  consider,  therefore— 

I.  The  retribution  which  befell  the  boyal  house. 

II.  The  betbibution  which  otebiooe  the  people  at  labob. 

I.  And  in  considering  the  pain  and  loss  in  which  this  sin  involved  thoRe  who 
sate  upon  the  throne  of  Israel,  we  must  discriminate  between  Jeroboam  and  his 
successors.  Jeroboam  was  the  prime,  but  not  the  only  offender.  If  he  was  the 
author,  subsequent  kings  were  continuators  of  the  schism.  And  as  he  had  his 
punishment,  so  they  had  theirs.  Let  us  therefore  take  account  first  of  the  sorrows 
and  sufferings  of  the  heresiarch,  Jeroboam..    Amongst  these  were  the  following: 

1.  The  forehnowledge  that  Ms  leingdom  would  be  overthrown.  This  dismal 
foreboding  must  have  clouded  all  his  reign,  for  it  dated  fi-om  the  day  of  that  first 
sacrifice  at  Bethel.  Then  he  learnt  that  a  child  of  David's  house  should  cover  his 
schemes  and  memory  vrith  disgrace.  He  knew  that  the  dynasty  he  had  founded 
should  not  endure,  and  moreover  that  he  was  the  author  of  its  ruin,  and  he  knew 
that  others  knew  it  too.  "  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  What  shall 
we  say  of  the  crowned  head  disquieted  by  such  forebodings  as  these  ? 

2.  The  foretaste  of  the  destruction  of  his  family.  As  he  had  learnt  from  the 
man  of  God  of  the  liiumph  of  his  rival  and  the  dishonour  of  his  priesthood,  so  he 
learnt  from  Ahijah  of  the  excision  of  his  family.  This  ambitious  prince  knew  that 
his  posterity  would  be  swept  away  like  dung,  would  be  devoured  Hke  carrion.  And 
he  was  assured  of  this,  not  only  by  prophetic  word  'and  by  signs  following,  but  he 
had  an  earnest  thereof  in  the  death  of  his  firstborn.  He  knew  that  that  was  but 
"the  beginning  of  the  end."  It  was  a  sharp  pang,  bat  it  was  the  lightest  part  of 
his  punishment  (ch.  xiv.  13). 

8.  Remorse  and  vexation.  He  oonld  not  fail  to  compare  the  two  messages  of 
Ahijah  (chs.  xi.  31 — 89  ;  xiv.  7 — 16).  The  first  gave  him  dominion  over  ten 
tribes.  The  second  left  him  neither  subject  nor  survivor.  God  had  promised  to 
"build  him  a  sure  house."  God  now  threatens  Viim  and  his  with  annihilation. 
And  why  this  change  ?  He  knew  why  it  was.  "The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are 
without  repentance."  It  was  because  of  the  calves  (ch.  xiv.  9).  How  he  must 
have  repented  that  piece  of  folly  and  faithlessness :  how  he  must  have  cursed  his 
infatuation — the  more  inexcusable,  as  he  had  the  example  of  Solomon  before  him. 
It  is  possible  that  this  remorse  was  so  poignant  that  it  shortened  his  days ;  that  it 
was  thus  "  the  Lord  struck  him,  and  he  died  "  (2  Chron.  xui.  20). 

4.  The  shwmeful  murder  of  his  famAVy.  We  can  readily  believe  that  a  ^aumerM 
like  Jeroboam,  a  servant  who  had  raised  himself  to  the  throne,  would  have  been 
content  to  suffer  for  the  rest  of  his  days,  if  thereby  he  oould  have  averted  the 
dishonour  of  his  name  and  the  destruction  of  his  posterity — of  all  evils  the  greatest 
in  the  eyes  of  a  Jew.  But  no  ;  he  foresaw  that  butchery  awaited  his  nearest -and 
dearest,  and  he  had  jjot  slept  long  in  his  grave  before  the  knife  of  Baasha  was  at 
his  children's  throats.  '  And  this  murder  of  his  posterity,  though  after  the  manner 
of  Eastern  despotisms,  would  seem  to  have  been  marked  by  circumstances  of 
pecuUar  cruelty  (oh.  xvi.  7).  It  was  so  truculent  that  it  brought  down  vengeance 
on  the  instrument.  Our  history  gives  no  details,  but  it  is  easy  to  picture  the  divans 
dripping  with  blood,  the  corridors  choked  with  the  corpses  of  Jeroboam's  wife  and 


OH.  XT.  25— XVL  28.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  86» 

children.  The  annala  of  Turkey  and  other  Eastern  kingdoms  would  supply  many 
illnstrations  of  this  deed. 

6.  His  own  wntimely  end.  For  he  died  by  the  visitation  of  God — ^by  a  strohe 
of  some  kind  or  other.  He  may  have  perished  like  Antiocbus  Epiphanes,  like 
Sylla,  like  Herod,  like  Philip  of  Spain.  Or,  like  our  Henry  the  First,  he  may  have 
never  smiled  again  after  his  pon's  death,  but  steadily  drooped  to  his  grave.  Some- 
how his  life  was  cut  short.     "  The  wicked  shall  be  silent  in  darkness." 

Such,  then,  was  the  fourfold  penalty  which  Jeroboam  paid  for  his  sin.  Let  ns 
now  consider  the  punishment  which  befell  his  successors,  who  "  walked  in  his  way  " 
and  "  departed  not"  from  his  heresy.    We  may  trace  it— 

1.  In  the  ihortneu  of  their  reigns.  Nadab,  Elah,  Ahaziah,  all  reigned  two 
years.  Zimri  one  week.  None  of  the  kings  of  Israel  reigned  like  David  and 
Solomon,  or  like  Asa  and  other  kings  of  Judab.  In  the  250  years  that  the  kingdom 
of  Israel  lasted,  nineteen  kings  occupied  the  throne,  as  against  eleven  kings  of 
Judah.  Asa  saw  seven  kings  in  turn  rise  and  fall  during  his  reign  ;  Uzziah  saw 
six ;  and  we  have  but  to  remember  that  long  life  was  one  of  the  principal  sanctions 
of  ike  Mosaic  dispensation  to  be  assured  that  these  brief  reigns  were  a  mamfestation 
of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God. 

2.  In  the  revolution  and  assassination  which  often  closed  them.  In  these  250 
years  the  dynasty  was  changed  no  less  than  seven  times,  and  we  know  what  a 
change  of  dynasty  meant,.in  that  and  a  later  age.  It  was  one  of  its  traditions  that 
"  the  man  was  a  fool  who  when  he  slew  the  father  spared  the  children."  Six  times 
this  tragedy  of  Tirzah  was  repeated.  Once  an  unhappy  prince,  to  escape  the  hat- 
chery awaiting  him,  devoted  himself  and  his  household  to  the  flames.  Once  seventy 
ghastly  heads,  in  two  heaps  at  the  city  gate,  witnessed  to  the  work  of  extermination. 

II.  But  now  let  us  note  the  share  of  the  people  in  this  dispensation  of  suffering. 
What  befell  the  priests  who  ministered  at  Dan  and  Bethel — what  the  worshippers 
who  resorted  thither  ?     They  or  their  children  suffered  these  six  penalties  at  least. 

1.  Misgovemment.  Of  the  kings  of  Israel  there  was  not  one  who  did  not  "  do 
evil "  in  tiie  sight  of  the  Lord.  By  which  we  are  not  only  to  understand  that  he 
worshipped  the  calves ;  oppression,  exactions,  intolerable  cruelties  may  be  compre- 
hended under  the  words.  The  case  of  Naboth  (ch.  xxL)  was  probably  not  the  only  one 
of  its  kind.  We  may  be  sure,  too,  that  when  Elah  was  drinking  himself  drunk,  in- 
justice was  being  practised  in  his  name.  Incapacity— on  the  part  of  the  king — may 
have  been  the  cause  of  some  insurrections,  but  oppression  is  a  much  more  probable 
reason.  We  know  what  Borne  was  like  when  the  purple  fell  to  military  adventurers. 
Probably  Israel  fared  no  better  at  the  hands  of  its  Baashas,  Omris,  and  Menahems. 
What  Buffering  a  change  ot  dynasty  involved  on  the  people  we  may  gather  from 
2  Kings  XV.  16.  An  Eastern  kingdom  at  the  best  was  a  despotism,  at  the  worst  a 
davildom. 

8.  Oimil  war.  The  four  years'  struggle  between  Omri  and  Tibni  and  their 
respective  partisans,  which  was  a  war  to  the  death  (ch.  xvi.  22),  entailed  no  less 
miaeiies  on  the  country  than  civil  war  always  does.  Lands  ravaged,  homesteads 
fired,  women  violated — these  were  some  of  its  incidents.  It  has  been  said  that  no 
one  can  give  any  adequate  description  of  a  battle.  What  shah  be  said  of  a  battle 
lasting  over  four  years?  for  in  a  coimtry  not  so  large  as  Yorkshire  civil  strife  would 
mean  unceasing  conflict. 

8.  Invasion.  (1)  By  Abijah  (2  Chron.  xiii.  4),  (2)  by  Shishak,  (3)  by  Syria,  (4) 
by  Assyria.  Shishak  was  primarily  appointed  to  chastise  Judah,  Syria  was  the 
lash  of  Israel,  Observe  that  in  the  invasion  of  ch.  xiii.  4,  19,  Bethel  was  captured 
by  the  men  of  Judah,  whilst  in  that  of  ch.  xv.  20,  Dan — Jeroboam's  other  shrine — 
was  among  the  first  to  suffer.  The  priests  of  Dan  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
surrounding  territory,  the  worshippers  at  its  temple,  bore  the  brunt  of  Ben-hadad's 
invasion.  But  the  bands  of  Syria  were  always  invading  the  land  (ch.  xx ;  2  Einga 
vi^    And  many  a  "little  maid  "  (2  Kings  v.  2)  was  carried  off  to  dishonour. 

"  Many  a  childing  mother  then 
And  new-bom  baby  died," 


364  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.       [ch.  xv.  25— xvi.  2& 

What  a  picture  of  tho  horrors  of  war  have  we  in  2  Kings  viii.  12.  Yet  such  hoiTort 
must  have  been  of  common  occurrence  in  Israel.  And  they  culminated  in  the  sack 
of  Samaria  and  the  captivity  of  the  nation. 

4.  Loss  of  territory.  Israel  was  "  cut  short "  (2  Kings  x.  82).  In  2  Kings  i.  1 
(of.  iii.  6)  Moab  rebels.  Syria,  its  great  adversary,  was  once  an  appanage  of  Israel. 
Now  Israel  is  made  a  dependency  of  Assyria  (2  Kings  xv.  19,  20). 

6.  Famine,  It  was  the  Lord  called  for  this  (2  Kings  viii.  1).  It  was  one  of  His 
"  sore  judgments  "  (Ezek.  xiv.  18,  21).  And  it  would  seem  to  have  been  almost 
chronio  in  Israel  (cf.  chs.  xvii.  1,  12-;  xviii.  2;  2  Kings  iv.  88;  vi.  25  sqq. ;  vii. ; 
viii.  1).  And  the  terrible  straits  to  which  the  people  were  reduced  thereby  may  be 
inferred  from  2  Kings  vi.  25,  29 ;  cf.  Deut.  xxvih.  66,  67. 

6.  Captivity.  For  the  carrying  away  beyond  Babylon  into  the  cities  of  the 
Medes  was  part  of  the  reckoning  for  Jeroboam's  sin,  and  for  the  allied  sin  of 
idolatry  (ch.  xiv.  15  ;  2  Kings  xvii.  22,  23).  The  "  carrying  into  captivity"— these 
are  familiar  words  on  our  hps.  But  which  of  us  can  form  any  conception  of  the 
untold,  unspeakable  miseries  which  they  cover  ?  The  gangs  of  prisoners  tramping  to 
Siberia  give  us  but  a  faint  idea.  "Hermann  and  Dorothea"  is  a  tale  of  modern 
times,  and  the  flight  it  pictures  conveys  no  just  impression  of  the  horrors  of  a 
wholesale  transportation.  When  the  land  was  swept  as  with  a  drag  net  (cf.  2  Kings 
xxi.  13,  and  compare  Herod,  iii.  149,  vi  81,  where  the  manner  in  which  the  Persians 
carried  away  the  population  of  some  of  the  Greek  islands  is  described),  and  the 
entire  population  marched  in  gangs  across  the  burning  plains,  under  brutal  and 
lustful  overseers — ^tnen  in  comparison  with  whom  a  "  Legree"  would  be  mildness 
itself — we  may  imagine  some  of  the  horrors  of  that  journey .  Nor  did  those  suffer- 
ings end  in  the  land  of  their  captivity.  Before  the  people  was  absorbed  amongst 
the  neighbouring  nations,  and  so  effaced  from  the  page  of  later  history,  we  may  be 
pretty  sure  they  paid  a  constant  tribute  of  suffering  for  their  sin.  Vae  victis,  this  was 
the  unvarying  law  of  ancient  warfare,  and  the  exiles  of  Assyria  proved  it  in  their 
own  persons.  Two  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the  schism,  &e  seed  sown  by 
Jeroboam  was  BtiU  reaped  in  cruelty  and  agony  and  blood. 

Ver.  2. — The  Working  of  Jeroioam's  Sin.  The  punishment  which  Jeroboam's 
sin  brought  down  upon  himself,  his  successors,  and  his  people,  was  not  its  worst 
part.  Its  influences  upon  others,  the  lessons  of  disobedience  and  defiance  taught 
by  that  malign  example,  were  even  more  disastrous.  Let  us  now  trace,  as  far  as  we 
can,  its  workings ;  let  us  see  how  the  leaven  of  the  calves  leavened  the  whole  lump. 

1.  He  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness.  "  The  evil  that  men  do  Uves  after  them" 
— ^it  Uves  in  their  children ;  it  is  inwrought  into  their  constitution.  As  a  rule,  the 
ohUd  reproduces  the  character  of  the  parent,  the  moral  traits,  quite  as  closely  as 
the  physical.  There  are  exceptions — Abijah  was  one — but  they  help  to  prove  the 
rule.  He  was  the  only  exception  in  the  house  of  Jeroboam  (ch.  xiv.  8).  Fortes 
creantur  fortibus  et  bonis,  and  the  converse  is  equally  true.  Nabab,  and  the  other 
children  of  that  house,  not  only  practised  the  lessons  they  had  learned  in  Jero- 
boam's school,  but  they  reproduced  in  their  own  persons  the  self-will,  the  impa- 
tience of  control,  and  the  other  faults  and  vices  of  their  father.  What  wonder  if 
"  Nadab  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  ?  he  only  "  walked,"  as  the  next  words 
remind  us,  "  in  the  way  of  his  father  "  (ch.  xv.  26). 

2.  He  begat  a  spirit  of  lawlessness  a/nd  insubordination  among  his  people. 
There  are  not  a  few  indications  of  demoralization  and  corruption  in  Israel,  corre- 
sponding with  the  depravation  of  religion.  The  very  revolutions,  which  followed 
one  after  another,  are  in  themselves  a  proof  of  this.  The  chronic  disaffection  and 
the  periodical  upheavings  of  society  in  the  northern  kingdom,  especially  when  con- 
jarasted  with  the  quietness  and  security  of  Judah,  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the 
influences  of  the  court.  North  and  south  were  of  one  blood,  and  Uved  under  one 
sky.  It  was  because  the  former  had  been  taught  disobedience  and  disregard  of 
constituted  authority,-  it  was  because  the  sense  of  reverence  and  duty  had  been 
weakened  by  the  action  of  Jeroboam,  that  it  became  like  a  reed  shaken  in  the 
water — so  often  rebelled  against  its  sovereigns.    Jeroboam  had  accustomed  them 


<JH.  XV.  25— XVI.  28.]       THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  866 


to  play  faBt  and  loose  with  the  commandments  of  Heaven  ;  what  wonder  if  they 
made  small  account  of  their  obligations  to  their  earthly  king? 

3.  He  taught  Baasha,  Zim/ri,  and  Omri  to  lift  wp  their  hamds  against  the  Tting. 
Just  as  David's  religious  veneration  for  the  person  of  the  "  Lord's  anointed"  tended 
to  make  his  throne  and  that  of  his  successors  the  more  secure,  so  did  Jeroboam's 
rebellion  (ch.  xi.  26)  afford  an  example  of  aggression  to  later  ages.  His  subjects 
were  not  likely  to  beUeve  in  the  "  divinity  that  doth  hedge  a  king."  Why  should 
they  scruple  to  grasp  at  the  crown  if  it  came  within  their  reach  ?  Why  was  Nadab 
more  sacred  than  Eehoboam?  Why  should  the  son  of  Baasha,  again,  have  more 
respect  than  the  son  of  Solomon  ? 

4.  He  taught  his  subjects,  indirectly,  to  hold  life  clieap.  There  had  been  two 
changes  of  dynasty  before  Baasha  had  learned  from  him  to  attack  the  king  and  to 
exterminate  his  family,  but  both  of  these  had  been,  so  far  as  the  royal  family  was 
concerned,  bloodless.  David  never  thought  of  slaying  the  children  of  Saul.  His 
inquiry  was,  "  Is  there  not  yet  any  of  the  house  of  Saul  that  I  may  show  the  kind- 
ness of  God  unto  him  ?  "  (2  Sam.  ix.  8.)  And  when  "  Israel  rebelled  against  the 
house  of  David,"  they  never  contemplated  a  massacre  of  Solomon's  harem,  or  even 
of  insolent  Behoboam.  But  observe  the  change  in  succeeding  revolutions.  "He 
left  not  to  Jeroboam  any  that  breathed  "  (ch.  xv.  29  ;  of.  xvi.  11 ;  2  Kings  x.  11). 
Why  this  thirst  of  blood  ?  It  is  because  Jeroboam  has  returned  from  Egypt,  and 
his  godless  proceedings  have  depraved  pubho  morality,  and  the  restraints  of  law 
have  been  enfeebled,  and  men  have  grown  more  reckless  and  desperate  (oh.  xvi. 
18,  24).  It  is  clear  to  the  most  cursory  reader  that  a  daring  impiety  charac- 
terizes the  whole  period  from  Jeroboam  to  Hoshea,  and  for  this  "  the  sin  of  Jero- 
boam "  is  mainly  responsible.  That  was  the  "  first  step  "  which  makes  the  test  of 
the  road  easy. 

5.  He  entailed  his  sin  upon  Ms  sueeessora.  Of  each  of  the  kings  of  Israel  do  we 
read  that  he  "  walked  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam,  and  in  his  sin  wliioh  he  did,"  and 
we  wonder,  j^erhaps,  how  it  was  that  not  one  of  these  nineteen  kings,  spmng  as 
many  of  them  were  from  different  lineages,  had  the  courage  and  the  piety  to  retrace 
his  steps,  and  revert  to  the  primitive  faith  and  mode  of  worship.  But  a  httle  reflec- 
tion will  show  that  this,  under  the  circumstances,  was  well-nigh  an  impossibility. 
For  Jeroboam  had  made  the  calf-worship  an  integral  part  of  the  national  life.  It 
was  so  intertwined  with  the  existence  of  Israel  as  a  separate  people,  that  to  abandon 
it  would  be  to  repudiate  all  the  traditions  of  the  kingdom,  and  tacitly  to  acknow- 
ledge the  superiority  of  Judah.  Any  king  attempting  such  a  reformation  would 
appear  to  be  a  traitor  to  his  country.  The  attempt  would  have  provoked  a  seeond 
schism.  No,  it  was  clear  to  each  monarch  at  his  accession,  if  he  reflected  on  the 
subject  at  all,  that  the  calf-worship  must  go  on.  The  damnosa  hereditat  which  he 
had  received  he  must  transmit.    There  was  no  place  for  repentance. 

6.  He  paved  the  way  for  idolatry.  Already,  in  ch.  xiv.  15,  we  find  the  "groves  " 
following  directly  upon  the  calves,  the  images  of  Asherah  upon  the  images  of 
Jehovah.  Ahab  and  Jezebel  are  not  wholly  responsible  for  the  abominations  of 
Baal  and  Ashtaroth.  It  was  the  daring  innovations  of  Jeroboam  had  prepared  the 
minds  of  men  for  this  last  and  greatest  violation  of  the  law.  "  Man  does  not 
become  base  all  at  once."  The  plunge  into  wholesale  idolatry  would  have  been  im- 
possible, had  not  the  deep  descent  to  the  calf-worship  been  traversed  first.  Pecati 
poena  peecatum.  That,  too,  begets  children  in  its  own  likeness.  Those  who 
despised  the  "  tabernacle  of  witness  "  in  the  wilderness  were  given  np  to  take  up 
"  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch  and  the  star  of  the  god  Bemphan  "  (Acts  vii.  42, 43).  £f 
men  will  not  have  God  in  their  thoughts.  He  gives  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind 
(Bom.  i.  28). 

7.  We  see  his  hand  in  the  building  of  Jericho.  It  was  Hiel,  a  Bethelite,  braved 
the  curse  and  rebuilt  the  walls  and  reared  the  gates  of  the  city  of  palm  trees. 
Here  we  see  the  influence  of  a  prior  violation  of  law.  Whether  he  acted  in  igno- 
rance of  law,  or  defiance  of  law,  it  is  to  Jeroboam's  sin  the  deed  owed  its  perpetra- 
tion.  The  law  might  well  be  forgotten  which  had  been  so  completely  ignoied.  And 
iha  subject  had  been  encouraged  to  violate  it  by  bis  sovereign. 


866  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.       [ch.  xv.  25— xvi.  28. 

8.  We  Jiear  Ma  voice  in  the  curse*  of  the  children  of  Bethel.  Where  but  at 
Bethel  would  children  have  dared  thus  to  revile  a  prophet  of  the  Lord?  Th» 
children  only  reflected  the  impiety  and  hatred  of  their  parents.  And  from  whom 
had  these  latter  learned  their  hatred  hut  from  the  king,  who  "  made  an  house  of 
high  places  "  there,  and  inaugurated  the  schismatic  worship  with  his  own  hands  ? 
From  the  day  when  a  man  of  God  laid  the  city  under  an  interdict,  the  prophets  of 
Jehovah  must  have  been  unpopular  at  Bethel,  and  as  the  time  passed  by,  and  the 
breach  was  widened,  passive  dislike  ripened  into  open  scorn  and  hatred,  and  a  new 
prophet,  of  whose  powers  they  had  had  no  experience,  could  not  pass  by  without 
insult  and  defiance. 

The  Jews  have  a  saying,  that  in  all  the  scourgings,  plagnes,  and  chastisements 
which  they  have  endured,  there  is  not  one  but  has  in  it  an  ounce  of  the  dust  of  the 
golden  calf  which  Aaron  made.  The  saying  holds  equally  good  of  the  calves 
which  Jeroboam  made.  There  is  not  one  of  the  troubles  which  befell  both  the 
orown  and  the  kingdom,  not  one  of  the  bitter  sufferings  which  the  ten  tribet 
e&duiedi  bat  had  its  starting-point  in  the  sin  of  Jeroboam. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Yen.  25 — S4. — The  Seed  of  Evil-doers.     1.  The  subject  before  as  fomishei 

illustration  of  the  following  propositions,  viz. : 

I.  Wicked  abe  the  seed  of  the  wicked.  1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  this 
is  generally  true.  (1)  Jeroboam  "  made  Israel  to  sin."  Nadab  "  did  evil  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  and  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and  in  his  sin  whereby  he 
made  Israel  to  sin."  (2)  Baasha  murdered  Nadab  and  usmrped  his  throne.  Then 
he  exterminated  the  whole  house  of  Jeroboam.  In  this  he  fulfilled  the  words  of 
Ahijah  the  Shilonite.  Yet  was  it  not  out  of  zeal  for  God,  but  to  serve  his  o^wn 
selfish  ambition.  So  under  the  same  evil  promptings  he  continued  in  the  sin  of 
Jeroboam  (ver.  34).  And  his  son  after  him  walked  in  his  steps.  (3)  Do  we  not 
still  find  that  those  who  loyally  serve  God  are  children  or  grandchildren  of  godly 
persons  ?  "  The  seed  of  the  righteous  is  blessed."  (4)  This  is  the  rule,  but  not 
without  its  exceptions ;  else  missions  to  the  heathen,  abroad  and  at  home,  would 
be  hopeless,  which,  thank  God,  they  are  not.  2.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  this  is 
universally  true.  (1)  "Seed"  is  not  always  reckoned  according  to  the  flesh. 
"  The  children  of  the  promise  are  counted  for  the  seed  "  (R&m.  ix.  8 ;  see  also  the 
reasoning,  Kom.  ix.  18—18).  (2)  Thus  God  can,  out  of  the  very  stones,  raise  up 
children  to  Abraham.  Gentile  believers  in  Christ  are  such  (see  Matt.  iii.  9  ; 
Gal  iii.  26,  29).  (3)  In  this  sense  all  are  not  Israel  who  are  of  Israel.  Descend- 
ants of  Abraham  who  follow  not  his  true  faith  and  good  works  are  not  his  seed 
(see  John  viiL  37,  40 ;  Rom.  ii.  28 ;  ix.  7 ;  Gal.  vi.  15).  (4)  As  the  good,  whether 
sprung  from  evil  or  good  ancestors,  are  the  seed  of  God ;  so  are  the  wicked,  whether 
sprung  from  evil  or  good  ancestors,  the  seed  of  the  devil  (see  Gen.  iii.  15  ;  John 
viii.  44;  1  John  iu.  8).  So  are  the  wicked,  without  exception,  the  seed  of  the 
wicked. 

II.  The  trtomphino  of  the  wicked  is  bhobt.  1.  Eow  brief  was  the  reign  of 
these  Tcinga  I  (1)  "  The  days  which  Jeroboam  reigned  were  two  and  twenty  years" 
(ch.  xiv.  20).  But  this  was  little  more  than  half  the  ^erm  of  Asa's  reign  (ver.  10). 
(2)  Nadab  "  reigned  over  Israel  two  years."  This  was  really  but  a  portion  of  two 
years,  for,  according  to  the  usage  of  Scripture,  a  year  entered  is  reckoned  as  if 
completed.  He  "  began  to  reign  over  Israel  in  the  second  year  of  Asa,"  and 
"in  the  third  year  of  Asa"  did  Baasha  slay  him  (vers.  25,  28).  (8)  Baasha 
reigned  "  twenty  and  four  years,"  stiU  little  more  than  half  the  time  of  Asa's  reign. 
This  son  of  David  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Judah  long  enough  to  see  eight  kings 
npon  the  throne  of  Israel,  viz.,  Jeroboam,  Nadab,  Baasha,  Elah,  Zimri,  Tibni, 
Oxnri,  and  Ahab.  In  these  he  witnessed  no  less  than  five  dynasties!  3.  Eow 
little  happiness  had  they  in  their  rule  I  (1)  Sin  brings  the  vexation  of  an  evil 
GOQsoience,  wiUi  its  attendant  disquiet,  sospioion,  and  fear.    (2)  Also  the  razatioit 


OH.  XV.  26— XVI.  28.]       THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  867 

of  an  angry  Providence.    They  that  take  the  sword  take  the  blade  with  the  haft. 
The  wars  of  these  ever-changing  dynasties  left  little  room  for  repose.    (8)  How 
difficult  for  men  to  lesirn  that  worldly  ambition  and  vexation  are  sisters ;  that 
abiding  happiness  is  found  only  in  the  ways  of  God  I 
III,  The  knd  or  the  wicked  is  destbuotion.    1.  This  it  written  in  hiatory. 

(1)  It  is  recorded  in  the  history  of  these  kings.  Jeroboam  in  person  died  upon  his 
bed,  but  in  his  family  his  light  was  extinguished  in  blood.  Baasha  in  like  manner 
died  on  his  bed,  but  in  his  family  he  too  perished  by  the  sword,  (i)  These 
examples  are  but  samples  of  history  at  large — sacred,  secular.  2.  His  also  written 
in  prophecy.     (1)  We  meet  with  it  in  the  alternatives  to  the  conditions  of  salvation. 

(2)  This  destruction  follows  the  spirit  into  the  invisible  world,  and  is  a  "  much 
sorer  punishment"  than  that  which  terminates  in  natural  death.  (3)  The  judg- 
ments upon  the  wicked  recorded  in  history  are  but  figures  of  the  more  terrible  doom 
threatened  in  prophecy. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  26 — 84. — Ood's  threatewings  find  at  last  a  eomplele  fulfilment  I.  Th« 
LAST  STEP  IN  A  CABEEB  OF  REBELLION  AND  FOLLY.  Kadab  might  havo  been 
warned.  His  way  to  the  throne  was  opened  up  by  God's  judgment  in  the  removal 
of  Abijah.  He  must  have  heard  of  the  Divine  threatenings;  he  might  have  seen 
the  evil  results  of  his  father's  sin.  But  in  the  face  of  all  these  things  he 
adopted  the  sinful  policy  of  his  father.  1.  "He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord." 
His  heart  and  life  were  estranged  from  God  and  righteousness.  This  is  the  ex- 
planation of  all  that  follows.  Contempt  of  the  claims  of  revelation,  and  rebeUion 
against  God  are  but  the  revelation  to  men  of  a  heart  and  hfe  which  have  already 
grieved  and  provoked  God.  2.  He  continued  in  a  path  already  dark  with  the 
frown  of  Ood :  "  and  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father."  The  son  who  continues 
in  his  father's  sin  may  incur  thereby  a  deeper  guilt  than  his.  The  iniquity  of  it 
may  not  have  been  at  first  so  fully  manifested.  It  might  have  been  considered  and 
abandoned  in  the  shadow  of  the  father's  death.  As  the  ages  roU  on  sins  manifest 
themselves,  and  the  nation  which  will  not  turn  from  them  seals  itself  for 
destruction.  Are  there  sins  with  us  the  evil  of  which  we  know  to-day  as  we  did 
not  know  before  ?  Then  the  guilt  of  their  retention  is  greater  than  that  of  their 
first  commission.  8.  He  resolutely  pursued  a  path  which  meant  destruction,  not 
for  himself  only,  hut  for  am  entire  people :  "  and  in  his  sin  wherewith  he  made 
Israel  to  sin."  It  was  nothing  less  than  an  attempt  to  rob  God  of  His  chosen 
people,  and  them  of  Him,  in  order  that  the  house  of  Jeroboam  might  reign  in 
safety.     The  terrible  selfishness  and  the  murderous  heart  of  sin  I 

II.  The  judgment.  1.  He  was  smitten  in  the  midst  of  his  army.  The  host 
of  his  warriors  could  not  save  him.  There  is  no  place  where  God's  hand  cannot 
reach  ns.  2.  He  was  slain,  not  by  the  Philistines,  but  by  one  of  his  oum  servants. 
Treachery  and  rebellion  were  visited  with  fitting  punishment.  The  strict  justice  of 
the  Divine  vengeance.  His  judgments  are  repayments  :  "  I  will  repay."  8.  The 
Divine  threatening  literally  fulfilled  {■ver.  29).  God's  words  against  sin  are  not 
lightly  spoken.  'The  end  is  hid  from  us,  but  His  eye  is  resting,  while  He  speaks, 
upon  the  woe. — J.  U. 

Ch.  XV.  88 — ^xvi.  7. — Unrighteous  Zeal.  I.  Smitees  of  the  sinful  are  not  neobs- 
SABILT  EiGHTBOUS  (ch.  XV.  33,  44).  1.  Baasha's  crime.  Behind  the  slaughter  of  his 
master  and  his  master's  house  lay  the  threatening  of  God.  The  Divine  decree 
seemed  to  legaUze  the  crime.  But  God's  command  did  not  come  to  him,  nor  was 
he  moved  by  righteous  indignation  against  the  sins  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam.  He 
served  his  own  passions,  and  it  was  sin  to  him  before  God,  "  because  he  killed  him." 
The  iniquity  of  those  who  rush  in  to  smite  wrong  and  hypocritically  veil  their  hatred 
and  spite  and  greed  under  the  plea  of  zeal  for  God  and  righteousness  (Bom.  ii.  1). 
2.  His  evil  life.     "  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."     State  reforms  are  im- 

Eossible  for  men  whose  own  heart  refuses  God's  yoke.     Our  work  can  never  rise 
igher  than  the  level  of  our  Ufe.     There  is  also  a  spiritual  law  of  gravitation :  the 
streams  of  our  influence  can  only  fiow  downward.    8.  His  hurtful  reign.    He 


868  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.       [ch.  xv.  25— xvl  28. 

"  walked  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam,"  &c.  He  may  have  condemned  Jeroboam's  sin 
in  regard  to  the  calves,  &c. ;  but  when  begirt  with  the  same  state  exigencies  ha 
continued  the  course  he  himself  had  punished  with  death.  It  is  easy  to  condemn 
the  sins  of  others.  God  has  nobler  work  for  us :  it  is,  when  surrounded  by  their 
temptations  to  triumph  over  them,  and  to  serve  not  by  words  only  but  by  deeds. 

II.  God's  message  to  Baasha  (ch.  xvi.  1 — 7).  1.  His  exaltation  was  of  God. 
"  I  exalted  thee  out  of  the  dust."  The  throne  was  not  secured  by  his  wickedness. 
The  Lord  had  stilled  opposition  and  given  him  success.  2.  It  was  great  and 
unlooTted  for.  His  tribe  had  no  claim  to  the  throne,  and  his  own  place  among  his 
people  was  a  mean  one.  But  God  had,  step  by  step,  advanced  him,  and  was  now 
enabling  him  to  reign  in  peace.  The  Lord's  help  is  not  witliljeld  from  those  who 
do  not  know  and  do  not  serve  Him.  "  Despisest  thou  the  riches  of  His  goodness 
and  forbearance  and  long-suffering,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth 
thee  to  repentance  ?  "  (Eom.  ii.  4.)  3.  The  retv/rn  made  to  Ood.  He  had  changed 
nothing.  Israel  was  still  being  led  down  the  path  of  darkness  and  judgment,  "  to 
provoke  Me  to  anger  with  their  sins."  Every  higher  interest  was  sacrificed  to  the 
policy  of  keeping  the  ten  tribes  separated  from  the  other  two.  Statesmen  out  of 
office  condemn  that  which,  when  in  office,  they  are  afraid  to  change.  And  how 
many  are  there  who  are  neglecting  the  trusts  God  has  committed  to  them.  Once 
they  said,  "  Itwe  had  only  place  or  wealth,  &c.,  God  would  be  served  and  men  blessed." 
These  have  been  given  and  what  has  been  done  ?  Has  the  vow  been  performed  ? 
4.  Baasha's  punishment  worse  thorn  Jeroboam's.  "  I  will  take  away  the  posterity 
of  Baasha  and  the  posterity  of  his  house  "  (see  ver.  11,  "  Neither  of  his  kindred  nor 
of  his  friends"),  l/he  Divine  justice  is  shown  in  the  differing  penalties  of  sin.^^ 
J.  U. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Jehu's  Prophecy,  Jehu  was  a  prophet  and  the  son  of  a  prophet.  Of 
his  father  Hanani  we  read  in  2  Chron.  xvi.  7 — 10,  where  it  is  recorded  to  his 
honour  that  he  suffered  imprisonment  for  the  fidehty  of  his  testimony  against  Asa. 
This  son  was  worthy  of  such  a  father.  His  testimony  before  Baasha,  a  man  of 
desperate  resolution  and  unscrupulous  irreligion,  was  admirably  com-ageous.  We 
hear  of  him  again  after  an  interval  of  forty  years  (see  2  Chron.  six.  2 ;  xx.  34).  In 
his  prophecy  here — 

I.  He  recites  the  crimes  of  Baasha.  These  were — 1.  That  he  "  walked  in  the 
way  of  Jeroboam."  This  implies  (1)  that  he  was  influenced  by  a  like  ambition. 
An  ambition  to  be  great  in  the  eyes  of  men — to  be  a  king.  (See  ch.  xi.  37.)  (2) 
That  to  compass  this  he  resorted  to  unscrupulous  measures.  He  rebelled  against 
his  king.  He  rebelled  against  his  God.  2.  That  he  made  the  people  of  the  Lord 
to  sin.  (1)  To  make  any  people,  or  person,  to  sin  is  a  great  crime.  And  who  can 
gin  only  to  himself  ?  Directly  or  indirectly  sin  must  exert  an  influence  beyond. 
(2)  To  make  God's  covenanted  people  to  sin  is  a  higher  crime.  The  oath  upon 
them  is  violated.  The  salt  of  the  earth,  too,  loses  its  savour,  and  the  world  is  left 
to  putrefy.  (3)  To  make  God's  people  to  sin,  not  as  by  accident,  but  of  set  pur- 
pose, is  the  highest  crime.  This  Baasha  did  in  upholding  Jeroboam's  calves — the 
"  work  "  of  men's  "  hands  "  (ver.  7).  He  did  this  fearing,  as  Jeroboam  had  feared, 
that  if  the  people  went  to  Jerusalem  to  worship  they  might  repent  of  their  rebellion 
against  the  house  of  David.  For  the  same  reason  Baasha  opposed  the  reformation 
under  Asa,  and  to  this  end  set  about  the  building  of  Eamah  (see  2  Chron.  xvi.  1). 
8.  That  he  thereby  provoked  the  anger  of  the  Lord  against  them.  (1)  This  ex- 
pressed itself  in  the  incessant  wars  by  which  they  were  shaken  "  as  a  reed  is  shaken 
in  the  water  "  (ch.  xiv.  15).  (2)  This  is  laid  at  the  door  of  Baasha.  His  house  if 
implicated  with  him.  Jehu,  therefore,  had  a  message  also  to  his  bouse  (ver.  7). 
4.  And  heca/use  he  Tdlled  Jeroboa/m.  (1)  This,  however,  he  did  not,  in  person. 
Jeroboam  died  on  his  bed  (ch.  xiv.  20).  (2)  But,  in  his  house,  he  slew  him  (oh. 
XV.  27 — 29).  A  man  lives  in  his  posterity ;  when  his  posterity  are  destroyed  or 
exterminated,  he  is  extinct.  (8)  Perhaps  the  words  "  because  he  killed  him''  might 
be  fairly  rendered  "  because  he  killed  it,"  viz.,  the  house  of  Jeroboam.  This  any- 
how is  the  meaning  (see  ch.  xv.  27,  29).    The  notion  that  he  killed  Jehu  is  incon- 


«H.  XT.  26- XVI.  aa]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  869 

Bistent  with  the  records  of  history,  which  bring  Jehu  upon  the  scene  again  in  the 
days  of  Jehoshaphat. 

n.  He  utters  ths  judgments  of  the  Losd.  1,  The  poaterity  of  BocuTm  wan 
to  be  taken  away.  (1)  His  own.  He  was  to  have  no  male  representative.  (2) 
That  of  his  house.  His  female  aa  weU  as  male  issue  was  to  be  destroyed.  He  was 
to  be  utterly  rooted  out  2.  Hittory  repeats  itself,  (1)  It  does  this  because  crime 
must  provoke  appropriate  punishment.  God  recognizes  the  lea  taUonia — eye  for 
eye,  tooth  for  tooth.  (2)  The  house  of  Baasha  being  like  to  that  of  Jeroboam,  the 
doom  is  similar.  As  Baasha  executed  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  upon  the  house 
of  Jeroboam,  another  aspirant  to  royalty  is  to  execute  the  judgment  of  the  Lord 
upon  the  house  of  Baasha.  Note  8.  There  are  poathmnoua  pumaJimienta.  (1) 
Baasha  was  as  great  a  criminal  as  any  of  his  house,  yet  he  came  to  his  grave  in 
peace  and  honour.  He  died  on  his  bed  and  was  buried  in  state.  Must  there  not  be 
a  foture  reckoning  and  retribution  ?  (2)  Baasha  is  punished  in  the  extermination 
of  his  house.  But  this  judgment  came  upon  him  after  his  decease.  How  could 
that  affect  Mm  unless  there  be  a  future  state?  (8)  The  same  inference  follows 
from  the  judgment  upon  the  bodies  of  his  posterity  after  their  decease.  What 
matter  would  it  be  to  him  or  them  to  have  their  bodies  eaten  by  dogs  or  by  vultures 
when  the  life  was  gone,  unless  the  spirits  survived  ?  (4)  How  such  things  react 
npon  the  disembodied  spirit  is  a  mystery.  "  There  are  many  things  in  heaven  and 
earth  that  do  not  enter  into  our  philosophy." — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  8 — 14. — The  House  of  Baasha.  The  character  of  Baasha  is  drawn  in  the 
paragraphs  immediately  preceding,  which  also  contain  an  account  of  liis  end, 
which  was  better  than  he  desei-ved,  and  suggests  the  reality  of  a  fature  retribution. 
His  family  so  fuUy  followed  in  his  steps  that  we  have  no  mention  of  an  Abijah 
amongst  them,  "in  whom  was  found  some  good  thing  towards  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel "  (see  ch.  xiv.  13).  The  judgment  of  God  upon  this  wicked  house  is  written 
in  the  words  before  us.    We  have  to  reflect  upon — 

I.  The  depeavitt  of  the  house  of  Baasha.  1.  The  prophecy  of  Jehu  came  to 
them  aa  a  warning.  (1)  Such  is  the  natiure  of  this  class  of  prophecies.  The 
threatenings  of  God,  like  His  promises,  are  conditional.  So,  had  they  repented, 
the  judgments  denounced  would  have  been  removed  or  moderated.  (2)  Of  this 
principle  the  Scriptures  furnish  many  illustrations.  Take,  e.g.,  the  argument  of 
Abraham's  prayer  for  Sodom  and  its  success  (Gen.  xviiL  28—82).  See  the  effect 
of  the  contrition  of  Ahab  (ch.  xxi.  27 — 29).  How  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  upon 
Nineveh  was  averted  through  their  humiliation  before  God  (Jonah  iii.,  iv.).  (8)  This 
prophecy,  therefore,  came  in  mercy,  as  a  respite,  to  give  space  for  repentance. 
Else  judgment  might  have  fallen  without  remonstrance,  as  it  did  in  the  issue.  By 
timely  repentance  and  reformation  let  us  seek  to  avert  all  threatened  judgments. 
2.  But  here  was  no  repentance.  (1)  Elah  walked  in  the  steps  of  his  father.  He 
followed  the  sin  of  Jeroboam.  Their  idolatries  are  called  "  vanities."  The  gods 
they  worshipped  could  neither  profit  nor  help  them.  "  Happy  is  that  people  whose 
God  is  the  Lord."  Miserable,  those  whose  gods  are  vanities  I  (2)  Moreover,  Elah 
abandoned  himself  to  sensuality.  See  him  in  Tirzah,  a  palace  beautifully  situated 
(Cant.  vL  4),  where  he  might  have  found  ionooent  and  rational  enjoyment.  But 
there  he  is  in  the  apartments  of  Arza,  his  major  domo,  drunk  !  What  a  condition 
for  a  king  I  (8)  What  a  condition  for  a  nation,  to  be  ruled  by  such  a  king !  The 
Ephrathites  had  reason  to  repent  of  their  revolution.  They  did  not  improve  upon 
the  house  of  David.  Eevolutionists  have  generally  found  their  dreams  of  a  pohtical 
Paradise  illusory.  (4)  The  wisdom  of  Christians  would  be  to  make  the  best  of  the 
political  system  they  may  inherit,  and  pray  for  the  speedy  coming  of  the  kingdom 
of  Christ.  This  was  the  spirit  of  Paul's  exhortations,  even  when  such  a  monster  as 
Nero  ruled  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  (see  Bom.  aii.  1 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2 ;  Tit.  iii.  1 ; 
also  1  Pet.  ii.  18, 17). 

II.  The  instruments  op  the  judgments  of  Gk>D.  1.  The  wicked  follow  their 
own  devices.  (1)  Zimri  had  an  ambition  to  reign.  Such  an  ambition  is  not  un- 
common.   Few  can  ascend  the  throne  of  a  kingdom.    But  there  are  tyrants  on  the 

1   KINGS.  8   I 


370  THE  FIK8T  BOOK  OF  KINGS,      [oh.  xv.  25— x-.i.  28. 

magisterial  bench,  in  the  factory,  in  the  shop,  in  the  mansion,  in  the  college.  (2) 
Zimri  had  also  a  desperate  resolution  to  bend  circumstances  to  his  object.  TTis 
rank  as  a  oavaby  officer,  commanding  half  the  chariots  of  Elah,  gave  him  access  to 
the  palace.  There,  finding  his  lord  helplessly  drunk,  he  sacrificed  gratitude  and 
duty,  and  struck  the  fatal  blow.  What  a  warning  to  drunkards  1  Death  is  especially 
terrible  when  it  surprises  the  sinner  in  his  sin  (see  Luke  xxi.  34).  (3)  With  infernal 
promptitude  Zimri  proceeded  to  slaughter  the  whole  of  the  seed  royaL  In  the 
massacre  he  involved  also  the  "  kinsfolk  and  friends,"  so  as  to  leave  no  rival  to 
contest  the  throne.  (4)  But  how  little  did  he  dream,  after  wading  through  this  sea 
of  blood,  that  his  reign  should  be  limited  to  a  single  week  I  How  disproportionate 
was  the  end  to  the  means  t  If  men  could  duly  estimate  the  end,  how  it  would  lead 
them  to  hesitate  over  the  employmient  of  the  means  t  2.  But  the  providence  of 
Qod  is  over  all.  (1)  God  foresaw  everything.  This  is  evident  in  the  word  of 
prophecy.  And  He  so  controlled  the  actors  that  the  results  answered  the  ends  of 
justice.  This  also  is  evident  in  the  same  word.  (2)  But  this  did  not  excuse  the 
wickedness  of  the  executioners.  God  allows  the  wicked  to  punish  each  other  for 
Him.  So  makes  He  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him  (see  2  Kings  ix.  81).  (3) 
He  has  better  work  for  His  saints.  To  bless  is  more  congenial  to  them  than  to 
destroy.  The  ambition  of  the  spiritual  is  too  noble  to  be  satisfied  with  an  earthly 
CTOwnj  or  to  pay  its  price. — J.  A.  M, 

Vers.  8 — 20. — A  Divine  judgment  cmd  its  instrvmimi.  I.  Thk  jtidombnt.  1.  It 
was  dela/yed  in  God's  long-suffering.  Baasha  had  reigned  nearly  twenty-four 
years ;  Elah  nearly  two.  The  Lord  is  swift  to  bless  but  slow  to  strike.  He  has  no 
delight  in  a  sinner's  death.  Do  we  remember  that  God's  long-suffering  to-day  is 
not  forgetfulness  or  indifference,  but  the  restraining  of  infinite  love  ?  2.  It  came 
wpon  mm  in  his  sin.  The  army  was  in  the  field,  but  be  was  not  there.  He  was 
deaf  to  the  calls  of  duty  and  honour.  He  had  lost  his  self-respect ;  he  "  was 
drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  house  "  of  his  chamberlain.  And  now  in  a  moment 
pleasure  was  swallowed  up  in  terror,  the  misused  life  in  death.  The  suddenness 
of  God's  judgments :  "  at  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not,"  &c.  3.  Its  extent.  It  was 
not  less  than  was  predicted.  His  kindred  and  his  friends  were  out  oft  and  their 
offspring  (ver.  11).  Every  word  was  fulfilled.  God's  threatenings  are  not  exaggera- 
tions meant  to  frighten  us  away  from  sin;  they  are  descriptions.  God's  eye  is 
resting  on  the  woe  which  is  hid  from  us,  and  His  words  are  those  of  perfect  truth 
and  tenderest  love. 

II.  The  INSTEUMBNT.  1.  Zimri  was  his  servant.  He  had  trusted  and  advanced 
him.  Again  we  notice  how  ingratitude  and  rebellion  against  God  are  repaid  in 
kind.  If  there  be  no  love  and  truth  toward  God  in  us,  let  us  not  be  surprised  if  we 
find  these  wanting  in  others  toward  ua.  2.  Though  his  deed  fulfilled  Ood'i  word, 
it  was  not  of  God :  "  he  sinned  in  doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord ; "  it  was 
"  treason  that  he  wrought."  That  which  punishes  evil  may  itself  be  sin.  God's 
shield  was  withdrawn  from  around  the  Louse  of  Baasha,  and  an  ambitions,  cruel 
heart  was  allowed  to  work  its  will  upon  them.  It  is  no  justification  of  our  act  that 
the  nation  or  persons  against  whom  it  is  done  were  wicked  and  deserved  their  fate; 
the  question  remains.  Were  we  righteous  in  inflicting  it  ?  8.  The  scourge  was  soon 
broTeen  a/nd  cast  a/wa/y.  He  reigned  but  seven  days.  In  slaying  the  king  he  was 
but  ending  his  own  life  ;  in  entering  the  palace  gained  by  blood,  he  was  laying  him- 
self upon  his  funeral  pjrre.  The  cup  we  covet  may  be  a  cup  of  death.  Take  God'l 
way,  and  bide  God's  time :  He  will  give  that  which  is  good. — J.  U. 

Vers.  15— 22.— r^e  Kingdom  of  Mm.  Though  "the  Most  High  mlethin  the 
kingdom  of  men,"  yet  is  He  not  responsible  for  the  principles  by  which  such 
kingdoms  are  actuated.  For  these  are  in  striking  contrast  to  those  which  shall 
obtain  in  the  "  kingdom  of  God."  In  the  kingdom  of  men  as  represented  in  the 
specimen  before  us  we  encounter — 

I.  Folly.  1.  True  religion  is  pure  wisdom.  (1)  It  is  the  "  wisdom  of  God" 
revealed — outwardly,  in  His  word — inwardly,  by  being  written  by  His  Spirit  ia 


«H.  XV,  86— xvL  28.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  871 

the  heart.  (2)  To  euooorage  this  is  man's  highest  wisdom.  Godliness  has  promise 
«f  this  life — of  that  to  come.  2.  False  religion  it  sv/pr erne  foUy.  (1)  It  is  in  some 
respects  even  worse  than  no  religion.  It  is  more  than  a  negation  in  respeot  to 
irnth;  it  is  pertinacions  antagonism  to  truth.  (2)  It  is  foUy  in  relation  to  the 
liighest  interests  of  man.  It  demoralizes  in  the  proportion  of  its  ascendancy.  It 
forfeits  the  heaven  it  professes  to  seek.  It  aggravates  the  hell  it  professes  to  avoid. 
(8)  It  expresses  itself  in  vanity.  What  more  vain  than  the  idols  of  the  heathen  ? 
The  very  forms  of  those  idols  evince  the  monstrosity  of  foUy.  Witness  a  monkey 
or  an  onion  for  a  God ;  a  fish  with  a  man's  head ;  a  satyr ;  a  griffin  I  (see  Dent,  xxxii. 
SI ;  Isa.  xU.  29.)  8.  Of  such  folly  was  the  kingdom  of  Israel  flagrantly  gviUij. 
(1)  The  calves  with  which  they  so  deeply  sinned  were  introduced  by  the  kingcraft 
4>i  Jeroboam.  (2)  They  are  maintained  by  the  kingcraft  of  all  his  saccessora,  of 
whatever  dynasty.  Even  Zimri,  who  only  reigned  seven  days,  and  in  those  days 
was  occupied  in  exterminating  the  house  of  Baasha,  yet  found  time  to  pronounce 
Iiimself  in  their  favour.  (3)  What  a  substitute  for  tiie  Lord  God  of  Israel  who 
brought  them  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  1 

II.  Bestlessness.  1.  Witnessed  infrequent  iynastio  ohanget,  (1)  The  honse 
of  Jeroboam  lasted  twenty-four  years.  This  gave  place  to  that  of  Baasha,  which 
lasted  twenty-six.  Zimri  wore  the  crown  seven  days.  Then  came  a  four  years' 
struggle  for  it  between  Onui  and  TibnL  At  length  "  Tibni  died  and  Omri  reigned." 
2.  These  changes  represented  strong  passions,  (1)  There  was  the  impatience  of 
the  rule  of  the  house  of  David  which  resulted  in  the  revolution  in  favour  of  Jeroboam. 
Tet  so  little  did  they  benefit  by  the  change,  that  when  Baasha  destroyed  that  honse 
they  accepted,  without  a  murmur,  the  rule  of  the  regicide.  (2)  But  when  Zimri  treated 
the  house  of  Baasha  as  Baasha  had  treated  that  of  Jeroboam,  they  did  not  accept 
the  second  regicide.  They  now  evinced  some  sense  of  right  and  wrong ;  but  it  was 
*  wayward  sense.  There  was  no  inquiry  after  the  will  of  God.  The  army  set  up 
Omri,  their  general ;  but  the  civUians,  apparently,  chose  Tibni.  Here  was  a  con- 
fusion which  lasted  until  the  death  of  one  competitor.  8.  These  commotions  were 
MOMgvMia/ry.  (1)  The  division  of  the  nation  into  two  kingdoms  induced  civil  war. 
(2)  Civil  war  also  attended  the  treason  of  Zimri.  For  the  army  was  occupied  with 
the  siege  of  Gibbethon  when  the  news  of  this  treason  reached  them,  which  deter- 
mined them  to  raise  the  siege  and  invest  Tirzah  instead.  The  capture  of  Tirzah  was 
sot  unbloody.  A  desperate  character  like  Zimri  would  not  tamely  ^eld,  when, 
rather  than  fall  into  we  hands  of  Omri,  he  burnt  the  palace  over  his  head  and 
perished  in  the  flames.  (8)  The  competition  for  the  crown  between  Omri  and  Tibni 
protracted  the  civil  war  four  years.  Omri  is  not  said  to  have  resigned  until  the  "  thirty- 
first  year  of  Asa,  whereas  Zimri's  treason  occurred  in  the  twenty-seventh  year  of  Asa," 
upon  which  Omri  was  chosen  by  the  army.  (Compare  vers.  16  and  23.)  The 
d&erence  here  is  about  four  years. 

m.  Crimb.  1.  Foremost  under  this  head  is  idolatry.  (1)  We  mentioned  this 
nnder  the  head  of  "  foUy,"  but  it  is  not  thereby  removed  from  the  category  of 
"  crime."  Idolatry  is  the  grossest  and  most  direct  insult  to  the  hving  God.  (2) 
Hence  no  crime  is  in  Scripture  more  heavily  denounced  and  more  signally  obnoxious 
to  punishment.  2.  Next  com^s  the  capital  crime  of  mv/rder,  (1)  As  idolatry  is 
the  highest  affront  to  God,  so  is  murder  the  greatest  offence  against  man.  (2)  The 
txowD.  of  Israel  was  deeply  stained  with  the  blood  of  murder — with  that  of  the 
house  of  Jeroboam;  with  that  of  the  house  of  Baasha.  (3)  Suicide  also  disgraced 
these  violent  times.  And  the  note  is  significant  that  in  his  suicide  Zimri  perished 
"  for  his  sins  which  he  sinned  in  doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  in  walking  in 
the  way  of  Jeroboam,  and  in  his  sin  which  he  did  to  make  Israel  to  sin  "  (vers. 
18, 19).    Note :  Men  with  their  own  hands  may  punish  their  sin. 

What  a  contrast  is  the  kingdom  of  Godt  Its  principles  are  peace,  righteomnesB. 
«nd  joy.  Of  this  those  have  the  earnest  who  in  heart  accept  Jesus  as  their 
Melchisedeo. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  21 — 84. — Chamge  vnthout  improvement.  I.  Ombi's  indebtednebs  to 
Divine  ooodness    1.  -His  success  against  Zimri  (vers.  16 — 25).    The  traitor  fell 


872  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.      [cu,  xv.  25— xvl  2a 

before  him  almost  without  a  struggle.  2.  Against  Tibm.  Israel  was  equally 
divided,  yet  his  life  was  preserved  and  the  kingdom  given  to  him.  Men  pass 
up  to  place  and  means  and  influence  through  a  pathway  which,  if  it  is  only  looked 
back  upon  and  considered,  is  full  of  power  to  touch  the  heart  and  bow  it  under 
the  wUL  of  God.  Do  we  read  the  story  of  our  past,  and  let  it  touch  us  with  the  tal» 
of  God's  marvellous  meroy  ? 

II.  His  sin.  1.  Eis  hardness  of  heart.  Not  only  was  he  blind  to  God's  mercy. 
He  passed  up  nnawed  through  the  midst  of  the  terriblest  judgments  and  the  most 
marked  fulfilment  of  God's  threatenings.  Neither  the  goodness  nor  the  severity  of 
God  was  allowed  to  touch  him.  2.  He  "  did  worse  them  all  that  were  before  Ivrni." 
He  was  a  man  of  energy  and  worldly  wisdom.  Both  were  bent  to  strengthen  his 
power.  He  went  furtlier  than  Jeroboam,  who  seduced  Israel,  for  he  seems  to  have 
compelled  them  (see  the  mention  of  Omri's  statutes,  Micah  vL  16)  to  sacrifice 
before  the  calves.  Great  talents,  if  joined  to  a  selfish,  hardened  heart,  only  carry 
men  further  away  from  God. 

III.  His  sin's  fruit  (vers.  29 — 84).  1.  In  Ms  son's  character  and  reign.  (1) 
"  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  above  all  that  were  before  him."  (2)  It  was 
possible  only  to  an  Ahab  to  set  Jezebel — the  great  enemy  of  God  and  TTia  people — 
upon  the  throne  of  Israel.  (3)  It  was  not  enough  to  worship  the  calves  of  Bethel 
and  Dan.  He  must  turn  wholly  away  from  the  God  of  Israel  and  worship  Baal. 
2.  In  the  people's  contempt  of  Jehovah.  Hiel's  act  was  done  in  the  face  of  Israel, 
yet  it  was  not  forbidden  ;  its  commission  awakened  no  fear.  The  man  was  left 
childless,  yet  judgments  so  harrowing  and  fulfilments  of  prophecy  bo  marked  had 
no  effect  upon  his  own  soul.  The  legislation  that  blots  out  God's  ordinances 
deUvers  a  people  over  to  darkness  and  judgment. — J.  U. 

Vers.  28 — 28. — Omri's  Reign.  After  a  four  years'  contest  with  Tibni,  the  son  of 
Ginath,  for  the  crown  of  Israel,  the  followers  of  Omri  prevailed  over  the  adherents 
of  his  rival.  The  issue,  then,  was  that  "Tibni  died  and  Omri  reigned."  Whether 
Tibni  died  in  battle,  or  whether,  when  his  followers  were  overcome,  he  was  taken 
and  put  to  death,  is  not  written ;  but  the  record  illustrates  how  in  the  revolutions 
of  the  wheel  of  fortune  the  fall  of  one  makes  way  for  the  rise  of  another.  Let  us 
now  view  this  new  monarch — 

I.  In  his  palaces.  1.  "  Six  years  reigned  he  in  Tirzah."  (1)  This  was  once  » 
lovely  palace.  Beautiful  for  its  situation  like  Jerusalem  (Cant.  vi.  4),  and  beautified 
during  the  reign  in  it  of  all  the  earher  kings  of  Israel.  Por  it  was  the  third  and 
last  palace  built  by  Jeroboam,  the  first  of  these  kings,  to  which  he  removed  from 
his  palace  at  Penuel.  (2)  But  it  was  now  damaged  by  fire.  When  Zimri  shut 
himself  up  in  it  as  his  defences  were  driven  in  by  the  forces  of  Omri  in  the  siege  of 
the  city,  he  set  it  on  fire  and  perished  in  the  conflagration.  Thus  in  a  moment  the 
labour  of  years  was  demolished.  Destruction  is  easier  than  construction.  This 
principle  also  holds  in  morals.  (3)  Stai  for  six  years  Omri  held  his  court  in  this 
oity.  Whether  he  occupied  a  portion  of  the  palace  which  escaped  the  flames,  or 
resided  temporarily  elsewhere  in  the  city,  is  not  revealed.  The  omissions  of  Scrip- 
ture are  instructive.  Things  of  minor  importance  must  not  be  allowed  to  divert 
attention  from  momentous  things.  2.  Six  years  he  reigned  in  Sam,aria.  (1)  The 
origin  of  this  new  capital  is  here  recorded  (ver.  24).  Seven  hundred  pounds  of 
our  money  seems  a  small  price  for  a  hill  considerable  enough  to  be  the  site  for 
the  capital  of  a  kingdom.  (Compare  1  Chron.  xxi.  25 :  600  shekels  of  gold= 
^1,095.)  Perhaps  Shemei  was  animated  by  public  spirit  when  he  disposed  of 
his  hill  for  so  trifling  a  sum.  Perhaps  he  did  so  to  perpetuate  his  name.  His 
motive  is  withheld  from  us.  Herein  also  is  instruction.  We  are  not  judges  of  the 
motives  of  our  fellows.  God  surveys  the  motives  of  aU  hearts.  (2)  Henceforth 
Samaria  figures  prominently  in  the  history  of  Israel.  It  gives  its  name  to  the 
middle  portion  of  Canaan.  Tirzah,  Penuel,  Shechem,  are  henceforth  little  heard 
o£  Men  give  importance  to  places  rather  than  places  to  men.  The  importance 
even  of  heaven  will  be  rather  that  of  its  inhabitants  than  of  its  situation.  Learn 
the  paramount  value  of  spiritual  qualities. 


OH.  XVI.  29—84.] 


TKE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINOa 


b73 


II.  At  the  altab.  1,  " He  walked  in  all  the  wayt  of  Jeroboam,"  (1)  Thia 
means  that  he  encouraged  the  worship  of  the  calves,  if  not  that  he  even  appeared 
at  the  altar  as  high  priest  (see  ohs.  zii.  33 ;  xiii.  1).  (2)  It  means  further  that  he 
was  moved  by  the  same  state  policy.  He  desired  to  keep  his  people  from  Jeru- 
ealem  lest  they  should  repent  of  their  revolution  from  the  house  of  David.  (8) 
Note  :  Batan  has  his  opportunities.  While  the  pride  of  Israel  smarted  under  the 
insolence  of  Behoboam,  Jeroboam  oould  impose  his  calves  upon  them.  Had  he 
missed  that  opportunity,  it  might  have  been  impossible  afterwards  to  have  effected 
his  purpose.  ~  Omri  could  not  have  done  it.  We  should  be  wise  as  serpents,  viz., 
in  avoiding  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  availing  ourselves  of  our  opportunities  for 
good.  2.  He  "  Md  worse  them  all  that  were  before  Mm."  (1)  He  "  made  Israel 
to  sin"  as  Jeroboam  did,  persuading  them  to  halt  at  Bethel  or  visit  Ban,  for  that 
Jerusalem  was  too  far  from  them.  Persuading  them  also  that  his  calves  were 
images  of  the  true  God  (see  ch.  xii.  28).  (2)  He  bound  them  by  statute  to 
worohip  the  calves  (compare  Mioah  vi.  16).  In  this  he  went  farther  than  Baasha, 
who  had  set  about  building  Bamah  to  prevent  the  people  from  going  to  Jerusalem 
(2  Ohron.  xvi  1). 

III.  In  his  exit.  1.  He  "  was  htiried"  (1)  He  had  a  state  fdneral.  Money 
might  procure  that.  He  left  a  son  to  succeed  him  on  the  throne  who  would  pay 
this  public  respect  to  his  remains.  (2)  How  variously  is  the  same  subject  viewed 
by  men  in  the  flesh,  and  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  spiritual  world  i  The  funeral 
of  the  corpse  is  the  event  upon  earth  ;  the  destiny  of  the  spirit  is  the  event  yonder. 
2.  He  "slept  with  his  fathers."  (1)  This  expression  does  not  mean  that  he  was 
buried  with  them  in  their  sepulchre,  for  Omri  was  buried  in  Samaria,  a  city  which 
had  no  existence  in  the  days  of  his  fathers.  Of  Baasha  also  it  is  said  that  he 
"  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried  in  Tirzah "  (ver.  6),  though  there  is  no 
evidence  that  any  of  his  fathers  were  buried  in  Tirzah.  (2)  It  seems  to  import 
that  he  died  upon  his  bed,  as  the  generality  of  mankind  finish  their  course.  This 
oxpression  does  not  appear  to  be  used  when  any  die  by  the  hand  of  violence  as  a 
judgment  of  the  Lord  upon  their  sin.  (3)  Yet  a  violent  death  was  deserved  by 
Omri,  as  it  was  also  by  Baasha  and  Jeroboam,  who,  like  him,  came  peacefully  to 
(he  grave.  They  laid  up  sin  for  their  posterity  (see  Job  xxi.  19).  But  are  they 
thus  to  escape  the  punishment  of  their  own  iniquity  9  Surely  there  must  be  a 
"judgment  to  oome  1 " — J.  A,  M. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XVI.  29—34. 

Thb  Eeion  of  Ahab. — With  the  acces- 
non  of  Ahab  a  new  main  section  of  our 
history  begins — ^the  section  which  has  its 
close  in  the  destruction  of  the  house  of 
Omri  by  Jehu,  as  related  in  2  Kings  z. 
And  this  reign  is  recorded  at  unusual  length ; 
in  fact,  it  occupies  nearly  all  the  remain- 
ing portion  of  this  volume,  whereas  the 
reigns  of  preceding  kings  have  in  several  in- 
stances been  dismissed  in  a  few  verses.  It 
owes  this  distinction  to  the  ministry  of  the 
great  prophet  Elijah  by  which  it  was  marked, 
and,  indeed,  was  profoundly  influenced ;  but 
this  ministry,  it  must  be  remembered,  was 
necessitated  by  the  critical  circumstances  of 
the  time.  It  may  be  that  "  every  age  thinks 
itself  a  crisia."  but  no  one  can  fail  to  see  that 


this  was  one  of  the  veritable  turning-point* 

of  Jewish  history.  One  of  the  real  "  decisive 
battles  of  the  world" — that  between  the 
Lord  and  Baal — ^was  then  fought  out.  No 
wonder  that  our  historian  felt  constrained  to 
chronicle  at  length  the  transactions  of  a 
reign  so  pregnant  both  with  good  and  evil 
for  the  people  of  the  Lord  and  for  the  faith 
with  which  they  had  been  put  in  trust.  In- 
deed, the  same  guiding  principle  which  led 
him  to  devote  so  many  of  his  pages  to  the 
reign  of  Solomon,  when  the  theocratic  king- 
dom was  at  its  highest,  impelled  him  to 
linger  over  the  reign  of  Ahab  when  religion 
was  at  its  lowest  ebb.  Tho  secular  his- 
torian, too  often  like  the  sun-dial  which 
"  counts  no  hours  save  those  serene,"  drawl 
a  veil  over  the  time  of  his  country's  deca- 
dence, or  touches  its  misfortunes  with  • 


S74 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XVI.  29— S*. 


light  hand.  It  is  only  in  the  inspired 
records  that  we  have  an  impartial  register 
both  of  the  glory  and  shame  of  a  common- 
Trealth. 

Yer.  29.— And  In  the  thirty  and  eighth 
year  of  Asa  king  of  Judah  [see  notes  on 
ver.  23]  began  Ahab  ["  Father's  brother." 
The  name  is  apposite.  He  was  Omri's  alter 
ego  in  impiety]  the  son  of  Omrl  to  reign 
over  Israel:  and  Ahab  the  son  of  Omrl 
reigned  over  Israel  In  Samaria  twenty  and 
two  yeaxB. 

Ver.  30.— And  Ahab  the  son  of  Omrl  [The 
lepetition  is  noticeable.  It  is  possible  that 
the  preceding  verse  has  been  revised  by  a 
chronologer.  The  LXX.  text  is  much  more 
condensed]  did  evil  In  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
above  all  that  were  before  him.  [The  same 
words  are  used  of  his  father  in  ver.  26.  It 
is  not  difficult  to  see  in  what  way  Ahab's 
rule  was  worse  even  than  Omri's.  The 
latter  bad  gone  beyond  his  predecessors  in 
the  matter  of  the  calf -worship.  See  note  on 
ver.  25.  But  the  calf-worship,  however-  it 
may  have  deteriorated  in  process  of  time — 
and  it  is  the  tendency  of  such  systems  to 
wax  worse  and  worse — ^was  nevertheless  a 
cult,  though  a  corrupt,  and  unauthorized, 
and  iUicit  cultns,  of  the  one  true  God. 
Under  Ahab,  however,  positive  idolatry  was 
established  and  fostered — the  worslup  of 
foreign  and  shameful  deities.] 

Yer.  81. — And  It  came  to  pass,  as  If  It  bad 
been  a  light  thing  for  him  [Heb.  as  marg. 
Kos  it  a  light  thing  I  Ewald  (362  a)  explains 
this  to  mean  "  because  it  was."  But  it 
seems  better  to  understand,  "  was  it  such  a 
light  thing  .  .  .  that  he  must  needs  also  ?  " 
&c.]  to  walk  in  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the 
son  of  Nebat  [i.e.,  the  sins  of  heresy  and 
schism],  that  he  took  to  wife  Jezebel 
[  =  "  Without  cohabitation,"  "chaste,"  Ge- 
senius,  who  compares  it  with  Agnes.  It  is 
hardly  the  original  of  Isabella]  the  daughter 
of  Ethbaal  [="With  Baal."  The  Greek 
form  '196l3a\os  or  M9ii^a\oc,  fonnd  in  Jos., 
Ant.  viii.  13. 1 ;  of.  Contr.  Ap.  i.  18,  suggests 

as  its  original  7V3  'WK  I.e.,  "  with  him  is 
Baal."  In  either  case  the  name  well  be- 
came him,  for,  according  to  Mecauder  {apud 
Jos.  I.e.),  he  was  tjie  priest  of  Astarte,  who 
gained  for  himself  the  throne  of  the  Zido- 
nians  by  the  assassination  of  Pheles.  He  is 
further  said  to  have  reigned  thirty-two  years, 
and  to  have  lived  sixty-eight  years.  He 
would  therefore  be  thirty-six  years  old  at 
the  time  of  his  accession.  It  does  not  ap- 
pear that  (Eeil)  he  was  the  brother  of 
Pheles.  Pheles,  however,  was  certainly  a 
fratricide.  (RawUnson  reminds  us  that 
Jezebel  was  great-aunt  to  Pygmalion   and 


Dido.)  This  statement  helps  to  explain. 
Jezebel's  fierce  and  sanguinary  character,, 
and  at  the  same  time  accounts  for  her  great 
devotion  to  the  gods  of  her  country,  and  for 
her  determined  efforts  to  establish  their 
impnre  rites  in  her  husband's  kingdom.  It- 
was  only  what  one  would  expect  from  the 
child  of  such  a  parent]  king  of  the  Zldonlana- 
[This  alliance,  it  is  extremely  probable,  was- 
made  for  purely  political  reasons,  as  a 
counterpoise  against  the  active,  ambitious, 
and  encroaching  power  which  had  arisen  in 
Damascene  Syria.  The  army  which  had 
already  humbled  Omri  (ch.  xx.  31)  could 
not  fail  to  be  a  source  of  danger  to  Tyre]  „ 
and  went  and  served  Baal  [Heb.  the  Boat,. 
i.e.,  the  lord  or  master ;  of.  i  iciptos.  Iher 
name  appears  among  the  Babylonians  as 
Bel  (Isa.  xlvL  1) — Greek  pijXas,  Eeferenoe- 
has  already  been  made  to  the  freqnent  re- 
currence of  the  word  in  different  compoun* 
names,  and  in  different  parts  of  Palestine, 
as  showing  how  widespread  must  have  been, 
his  worship  at  an  earlier  age.  We  are  also- 
familiar  with  the  word  in  the  names  Hanni- 
bal,  HasdruiaZ,  &e.  Baal  was  the  supreme 
male  god  of  the  Canaanitish  races,  as  Ash- 
toreth  was  their  great  female  divinity.  Thet 
former  was  regarded,  not  only  as  tiie  pos- 
sessor, but  as  the  generator,  of  all],  anct 
worshipped  him. 

Yer.  32. — And  he  reared  up  an  altar  for 
Baal  in  [Heb.  omits  in;  cf.  oh.  xv.  15,  &c.] 
the  house  of  Baal  [A  temple,  we  can  hardly 
doubt,  of  considerable  splendour.  Jezebel- 
would  not  be  satisfied  with  less] ,  which  he- 
had  built  In  Samaria  [According  to  2  Eingr 
iii.  2,  X.  27,  he  also  raised  a  pillar  (A,  Y. 
image)  in  the  house  of  BaaL  We  learn 
from  Dins  and  Menander  that  Hiram  had 
raised  a  golden  piUar  to  Baal  in  Tyre. 
Perhaps  .^ab  may  have  copied  this.  But 
it  is  probable  that  this  image,  which  repre- 
sented the  generative  powers  of  nature,  was 
an  essentiai  part  of  the  impure  worship  of' 
Baal.  The  house  and  its  contents  alike 
were  destroyed  by  Jehu  (2  Kings  z,  27). 

Yer.  33.— And  Ahab  made  a  grove  [Heb. 
an  Aslierah,  i.e.,  image  of  Astarte,  a  femalft. 
figure  corresponding  to  the  male  effigy  just 
described.  See  note  on  ch.  xiv.  23] ;  and  Ahalr 
did  more  to  provoke  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
to  anger  than  all  the  kine;s  of  Israel  thaV 
were  before  him. 

Yer.  34.— In  Us  days  did  Hlel  the  Beth- 
elite  [Observe  the  form  ^^gp  n^3>  and  see 
note  on  oh.  ii.  8.  It  is  noticeable  that  it- 
was  reserved  for  a  mtuj  of  Bethel  to  commit 
this  act  of  impiety.  It  was  to  such  results 
the  worship  of  the  calves  contributed]  build 
[i.«.,  rebuild,  fortify,  as  in  ch.  xii.  25 ;  of.  ch. 
ix.  17.     It  is  clear  from  Judg.  iii.  13  anc( 


OH.  XVI.  29—84.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


87S 


2  Sam.  z.  5  that  it  bad  not  been  entirely 
uninhabited.  But  the  Arab  village  was  now 
converted  into  a  town  with  gates  and  bars] 
Jeiltfbo  [We  learn  from  Josh,  xviii.  21  that 
Jericho  then  belonged  to  Benjamin.  It  had 
evidently  passed,  however,  at  this  date  into 
the  possession  of  Israel.  It  has  been  sug- 
gested that  the  transference  took  place  in 
the  reign  of  Baasha  (Bawlinson).  But  it 
would  seem  that  from  the  very  first,  parts  of 
Benjamin  (notably  Bethel,  Josh,  xviii.  13)  be- 
longed to  the  northern  kingdom.  See  Ewald, 
"  Hist.  Israel,"  iv.  2,3.  It  is  not  quite  clear 
whether  the  rebuilding  ol  Jericho  is  men- 
tioned as  a  proof  of  the  daring  impiefy  of 
that  age  and  of  the  utter  contempt  with 
which  the  warnings  of  the  law  were  treated, 
or  as  showing  the  ignorance  and  consequent 
disregaid  of  law  which  prevailed.    But,  on 


the  whole,  it  seems  to  be  implied  that  Hiel 
knew  of  the  threatening  of  Joshua,  and 
treated  it  with  defiance.  It  has  been  sug- 
gested that  the  rebuilding  had  really  been 
instigated  by  Ahab,  and  for  his  own  pur- 
poses, hoping  thereby  to  "  secure  to  himself 
the  passage  across  the  Jordan "  (Keil),  but 
the  text  aSords  but  slight  warrant  for  this 
conjecture] :  he  laid  the  foundation  thereof 
In  Ablram  his  firstborn  [i.e.,  at  the  cost  of, 
in  the  life  of,  Abiram] ,  and  set  up  the  gates 
thereof  in  bis  youngest  son  Segub,  accord- 
ing to  the  word  of  the  Lord  [Josh.  vi.  26], 
'Which  he  spake  by  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun. 
[The  exact  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  is 
mentioned,  as  showing  that  even  in  those 
dark  and  troublous  times  God  did  not  leave 
Himself  without  witness,  and  that  law  could 
never  be  violated  with  impunity,] 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  29 — S3 ;  oh.  xvii.  1. — ^Ahab  represents  the  culminating  point  of  the  perversity 
of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  At  once  more  able  and  more  profane  than  his  pre- 
decessors, he  fostered  to  an  unprecedented  degree  the  corruption  of  morals, 
private  and  public  injustice,  and  idolatrous  practices.  Ahab,  prompted  by  Jezebel, 
became  the  more  dangerous  enemy  of  the  cause  of  God.  At  tins  period  of  the 
national  history  arose  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  Elijah,  virho  vreU  bore  out  his 
name — ^the  strength  of  God — and  who  v^as  tiie  faithful  type  of  John  the  Baptist,  the 
immediate  forerunner  of  Christ.  In  the  coming  of  Elijah  at  such  a  crisis,  we  have 
an  illustration  of  a  general  and  permanent  rule  of  God's  kingdom.  The  excess  of 
evil  calls  out  the  strongest  manifestations  of  good.  Never  was  the  powerof  Satan 
more  rampant  than  at  the  time  when  the  Son  of  God  appeared  upon  earth.  So  in 
the  end  of  time,  the  day  of  Antichrist  -will  be  also  the  day  in  which  Christ  will 
intervene  most  directly  in  the  great  drama  of  history.  Let  us  not,  then,  yield  to  a 
hopeless  pessimism  when  the  powers  of  darkness  seem  to  be  let  loose,  for  the  two 
following  reasons :    - 

I.  The  LETTiNa  loose  o»  evil  brings  its  owk  condemnation.  By  showing  its 
true  nature  it  passes  sentence  on  itself,  and  brings  to  maturity  aU  the  seeds  of 
death  latent  within  it.  Ahab,  casting  ofE  aU  restraints  and  rushing  recklessly  on 
his  ruin,  writes  his  own  condemnation. 

II.  An  Ahab  always  calls  forth  an  Elijah.  Whenever  the  army  of  God 
seems  on  the  verge  of  defeat,  its  Divine  leader  takes  the  direct  command.  Re- 
flections like  these  may  reinforce  onr  courage  in  view  of  the  giant  evils  of  our 
own  day. — ^E.  de  P. 

Vers.  30—33. — Moral  Bain  through  Moral  WeaknesB.  This  was  the  taming- 
point  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  Till  now  the  people  had  professedly 
worshipped  Jehovah  under  the  symbol  of  the  calf.  Now  idolatry  of  a  grosser  kind 
was  avowedly  set  up  as  the  national  religion,  on  a  scale  of  great  magnificence.  The 
text,  therefore,  is  worthy  of  our  study  as  the  record  of  an  event  of  deep  historic 
significance,  but  we  propose  to  consider  it  as  a  suggestive  example  of  the  way  in 
which  a  man  of  moral  weakness  may  be  betrayed  into  the  worst  depravity,  to  the 
undoing  of  himself  and  others.  We  learn  the  foUoviring  lessons  from  Ahab's  life,  of 
which  a  sommary  is  given  here : 

I.  That  a  foolish  choice  mat  result  in  lasting  dishonoub.  .  Ahab's  marriage 
was  the  cause  of  his  ruin.  Jezebel,  his  wife,  was  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal,  who  had 
been  the  high  priest  of  Astarte,  bat  was  led  by  his  ambition  and  nnscrupnlonsnesa 
to  usurp  his  brother's  throne.    Her  parentage  and  her  surroundings  would  have 


878  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvi.  29— B4. 

been  a  Bofficient  wamiBg  to  a  pmdent  king.  But  besides  these  Ahab  had  the 
Divine  law  before  him  (Exod.  xxxiv.  16),  which  distinctly  forbade  union  with  the 
Cauaanites.  Such  a  marriage  was  unprecedented  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and 
was  the  more  fatal  because  of  the  character  of  the  queen,  the  Lady  Macbeth  of 
Scripture.  She  was  reckless  and  licentious,  fanatical  and  cruel,  with  a  temper  as 
vindictive  as  her  will  was  resolute.  Her  husband  became  a  mere  tool  in  her  hands. 
He  could  not  foresee  all  the  issues  of  his  choice,  but  he  knew  the  choice  was  sinful. 
Show  from  this — illustrating  by  example — 1.  How  one  wrong  step  leads  to  another. 
This  marriage  to  the  establishment  of  idolatry.  Indicate  the  nature  of  the  false 
religion  set  up.  2.  How  compamionsTiip  influences  character.  The  stronger  moulding 
the  weaker.  "  A  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed."  3.  How  personal  fascina- 
tion may  ca/use  men  to  swerve  from  rectitude.  Jezebel's  fascinating  power  was 
regarded  as  witchery  and  became  proverbial  (Bev.  ii.  20).  4.  How  young  people 
should  he  wa/rned  against,  unholy  alliances.  Marriage  makes  or  mars  character, 
hope,  and  blessedness  (2  Cor.  vi.  14).  "  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with 
unbelievers." 

II.  That  east  good  nature  may  prove  the  sodeoe  of  deep  degradation.  Ahab 
was  not  destitute  of  good  feelings  and  right  impulses.  Had  he  been  firm  instead  of 
pliable,  and  resolutely  refused  to  gratify  the  queen  by  the  estabhslimentof  idolatry, 
he  might,  with  God's  help,  have  neutralized  the  effect  of  the  false  step  he  had 
taken.  But  he  was  of  a  yielding  nature,  while  she  was  resolute ;  and  so,  Uke 
Samson,  he  lost  his  kingliness.  Point  out  the  special  dangers  of  those  who  are 
kindly  and  genial.  Their  unwillingness  to  disobhge,  their  wish  to  be  popular,  their 
dread  of  derision,  their  love  of  ease  and  pleasure,  &c.,  may  have  fatal  issues. 

III.  That  brilliant  talents  will  not  compensate  for  moral  weakness.  This 
king  was  gifted  with  mUitaiy  skill,  with  artistic  taste,  &c.,  but  these  could  not  help 
him  in  the  hour  of  spiritual  conflict.  Give  examples  from  history  of  the  careers  of 
clever  but  unprincipled  men,  their  meteoric  success,  their  future  punishment,  here 
er  hereafter;  e.g..  Napoleon  L  Many  men  of  genius  have  been  ruined  by  drunken- 
ness and  often  high  education  has  served  only  to  alter  the  form  and  increase  the 
influence  of  the  sin.  The  clever  forger  is  worse  than  the  common  thief;  the 
viciousnesB  of  a  leader  of  society  does  more  injury  than  the  licentiousness  of  an 
ignorant  peasant. 

IV.  That  architectural  splendours  and  military  victories  abe  not  pboovs 
OF  national  prosperity.  Describe  Ahab's  magnificent  buildings,  his  ivory  house, 
his  daring  restoration  and  fortification  of  Jericho,  his  palace  and  park  in  Jezreel, 
which  became  to  Samaria  what  Versailles  once  was  to  Paris.  Show,  how  often  in 
history  such  costly  expenditure,  has  been  a  sign  of  decay.  Extravagance  and 
luxuriousness  are  omens  of  ruin  to  a  people.  "  The  Decline  and  Fall "  of  the 
Eoman  Empire  is  an  abiding  illustration  of  this.  Nor  wiU  successful  wars  give 
stability  to  a  kingdom.  Ahab's  victories  were  great  military  achievements,  but  of 
what  avail  to  him  and  to  his  house  ?  "  The  throne  must  be  established  in  righteous- 
ness." 

V.  That  ample  possessions  do  not  content  an  unquiet  heart.  In  Tezreel,  the 
perfection  of  taste,  Ahab  was  wretched,  because  he  wanted  Naboth's  vineyard. 
(Kead  that  story.)  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  earthly  things  to  satisfy  a  hungering 
soul.  The  richest  man  is  not  content  if  he  has  only  his  riches,  nor  will  any  addition 
to  them  give  him  satisfaction.  "  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetousness :  for  a 
man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth" 
(Luke  lii.  15).  "Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  for 
they  shall  be  filled."  God  "  satisfleth  the  longing  soul,  and  fiUeth  the  hungry  BOOl 
with  goodness." 

VI.  That  partial  befentanoe  does  not  avert  God's  punishment  of  sik.  Ahab 
"  put  sackcloth  upon  his  flesh,  and  fasted,  and  lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went  softly," 
when  he  heard  Elijah's  final  threat ;  but,  though  this  first  sign  of  penitence  was 
graciously  encouraged  by  a  promise,  the  change  went  no  further.  He  dreaded 
punishment,  but  his  heart  did  not  turn  from  sin,  and  therefore,  though  he  disguised 
nimself  in  the  battle,  the  arrow  "  shot  at  a  venture  "  was  winged  by  Divine  retri- 


CH.  XVI.  29— 34.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  877 

bntion  to  his  heart.  God  is  our  Judge,  as  well  as  our  King.  For  the  iinpeniteot 
there  will  be  no  escape.  In  vain  will  they  "  call  on  mountains  and  rocks  to  fall  on 
them,  and  hide  them  from  the  wrath  of  God."  Now  in  this  day  of  mercy,  God  calls 
on  all  to  repent,  and  find  pardon  and  hope  in  Him,  who  has  come  "  to  seek  and  to 
nve  that  which  was  losL"— A.  B. 

Vers.  29 — S3. — AhaVt  wickedneit.  The  evil  genins  of  the  son  of  Omri  appeared — 
L  In  his  WALKmo  in  the  sins  op  Jekoboam.  1.  In  this,  prohably,  he  en- 
eowraged  his  father.  (  He  appears  to  have  been  associated  with  Omri  in  the 
kingdom.  Omri  reigned  twelve  years — viz.,  six  in  Tlrzah,  and  sis  in  Samaria ; 
but  his  reign  commenced  "  in  the  thirty-first  year  of  Asa  "  (ver.  23).  This  would 
bring  the  close  of  his  reign  to  the  second  year  of  Jehoshaphat,  whereas  in  the  text 
we  read  that  "  in  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Asa,  king  of  Judah,  began  Ahab, 
the  son  of  Omri,  to  reign  over  Israel."  Hence  it  is  evident  Ahab  must  have  been 
four  or  five  years  associated  with  his  father  in  the  throne.  (2)  The  extreme 
wickedness  with  which  Omri  is  charged  was  probably  owing  to  Ahab's  evU 
influence  ;  for  the  "  statutes  of  Omri  "  seem  to  have  been  inspired  by  the  "  counsels 
of  Ahab  "  (see  Micah  vi.  16).  So  the  note  that  "  he  sinned  above  aU  that  were 
before  him  "  is  aUke  applied  to  the  father  and  son  (see  verse*  25,  80).  And  the 
leading  influence  of  Ahab  may  explain  why  we  commonly  read  of  the  "  house  of 
Ahab  "  rather  than  of  the  house  of  Omri.  Parents  are  often  demoralized  by  vricked 
children.  2.  He  did  not  alter  his  course  after  his  father's  death.  (1)  The  sin  of 
Jeroboam  was  perpetuated  in  Israel  down  to  the  time  of  their  captivijy.  The  cap- 
tivity seemed  necessary  to  break  its  power  over  them.  Judgment  is  the  last  re- 
source of  mercy.  (2)  The  same  reasons  of  state  continued  to  influence  the  successive 
rulers  of  the  nation.  Beasons  of  state  are  too  often  more  potent  than  reasons  of 
piety  and  righteousaess.  Else  we  had  been  spared  the  discredit  of  wicked  wars, 
vidcked  laws,  vidcked  trading. 

II.  In  his  haibimoniai.  ai^lianoe  with  Jezebel.  1.  She  was  a  pronotmced 
idolater.  (1)  She  was  a  Zidonian,  and  for  any  Israelite  to  marry  one  of  that 
nation  were  a  violation  of  the  law  of  God  (Exod.  xxxiv.  11 — 16 ;  Deut.  vii.  3 ; 
Josh,  xxiii.  11 — 13).  For  a  king  of  I^ael  to  do  this  was  the  more  reprehensible. 
Office  brings  responsibilities.  (2)  These  people  were  worshippers  of  strange  gods, 
and  in  particular  of  Baal.  Hence  the  name  of  this  queen  (73t^K),  which  may 
be  derived  from  TWat,  where  f  and  73,  a  contraction  of  ?ya,  Baal,  thus :  Where 

ii  Baal  f  q.d.,  a  seeker  of  Baal,  Hence  also  her  father's  name  Q]}2m(),Ethl)aal, 
which  Gesenius  construes  to  denote,  "  Living  with  Baal,  i.e.,  enjoying  the  favour 
and  help  of  Baal."    2.  Such  alliances  have  ever  proved  demoralizing.    (1)  The 

giants  (D*7£33),  monsters,  viz.,  in  wickedness,  perhaps,  rather  than  in  stature,  whose 
violence  provoked  the  judgment  of  the  deluge,  were  the  issue  of  marriages  between 
the  "  sons  of  God,"  or  holy  race  of  Seth,  and  the  "  daughters  of  men,"  or  profane 
descendants  of  Cain  (Gen.  vi.  1—4).  (2)  Solomon's  heathen  wives  and  concubines 
made  a  fool  of  the  wisest  of  men,  and  brought  his  house  and  nation  into  infinite 
trouble  (ch.  xi.  1 — 13).  (3)  The  history  of  this  alliance  also  was  most  disastrous. 
8.  For  typical  reasons  also  they  were  forbidden.  (1)  The  marriage  union  should 
represent  the  union  between  Christ  and  His  Church  (Eph.  v.  32).  Therefore  a 
husband,  that  he  may  justly  represent  Christ,  is  bound  to  be  holy;  and  so  is  his 
wife,  that  she  may  sviitably  represent  the  Church.  (2)  Should  the  reverse  happen, 
then  is  the  woman  an  emblem  of  an  apostate  Church,  of  which  the  husband  repre- 
sents the  Antichristian  head  (see  1  Cor.  vi.  IS,  16).  Jezebel,  accordingly,  is  viewed 
in  this  Kght  in  the  imagery  of  the  Apocalypse  (see  Eev.  ii  20). 

III.  In  his  encoukagement  aiVEH  TO  Baal  and  Asheee.  1.  To  Baal.  (1)  To 
this  god  he  built  a  temple  in  Samaria.  This  was  the  more  audacious  since,  being 
placed  in  his  capital,  it  seemed  to  vie  with  the  temple  of  the  Lord  in  the  capital 
of  Judah.  (2)  To  Baal  also  he  reared  an  altar  there.  This,  of  course,  meant  a 
service  of  priests  and  sacrifices.  (8)  Furthermore  he  himself  worshipped  Baah 
Thus  he  gave  the  influence  of  his  position  to  the  encoiiragement  of  this  idolatry. 


878  THE  FinST  UOOR  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvi.  29— 34. 

That  influence  was  therefore  also  given  to  discourage  the  pure  worship  of  the  God 
of  Israel.  2.  To  Ashere.  (1)  This  word  is  construed  "  grove  "  in  the  text  as  else- 
where. But  a  little  reflection  will  teach  ns  that  groyes  do  not  spring  np  in  a  day. 
Beside,  it  is  not  here  said  that  Ahab  pltmted  (yoi),  but  that  he  made  (JVifV)  the 
Ashere.  (2)  The  Ashere  was  a  Canaanitish  idol,  probably  of  the  fi^e  of  a  goat,  in 
the  worship  of  which  there  appear  to  have  been  very  abominable  rites. 

No  wonder,  then,  the  anger  of  the  Lord  should  be  provoked.  If  we  would  not 
provoke  it  we  must  avoid  the  spirit  of  idolatry.  This  spirit  is  shown  in  the  love  of 
illicit  things.    Also  in  excessive  love  of  lawful  things.— J.  A.  M. 

Ver.  84. — The  Temerity  of  niel.     In  discusBing   this  snbjeot  we  have  to 

consider — 

I.  "  The  wobd  or  the  Lobd  which  He  spake  by  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun." 
The  record  of  this  word  is  found  in  Josh.  vi.  26.  And  the  questions  now  arise — 1. 
Why  did  God  thus  curse  Jericho!  (1)  That  its  desolate  condition  might  be  a 
standing  testimony  to  His  abhorrence  of  the  wickedness  of  the  place.  So  abandoned 
were  that  people  to  idolatry  that  Bahab  the  hostess  alone  was  accounted  worthy  of 
being  saved.  And  "  all  her  kindred" — (rTninSK'D'PD) — all  heifamiUea — ^the  word 
is  plural ;  families,  viz.,  on  her  father's  and  mother's  side,  both  were  given  to  her 
(Josh.  vi.  28).  Note :  The  faith  of  an  individual  is  not  only  a  personal  blessing,  but 
also  a  blessing  to  Ms  family,  to  his  nation,  to  the  world,  in  tune,  in  eternity.  (2) 
That  it  might  be  a  standing  sign  prophetic  of  judgments  to  come,  (a)  Jericho  was 
the  first  city  which  offered  resistance  to  the  people  of  God ;  and  it  was  proper  it 
should  stand  forth  as  a  figure  of  the  last  city  that  shall  offer  resistance,  viz..  Great 
Babylon,  (h)  As  Jericho  was  compassed  about  six  days  before  it  feU,  so  is  Great 
Ba^bylon  destined  to  last  until  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  age  of  prophetic 
chronology,  (c)  As  Jericho  fell  at  the  seventh  blast  of  the  trumpet,  so  at  the 
sounding  of  the  seventh  Apocalyptic  trumpet  will  Great  Babylon  come  into 
remembrance  before  God.  (i)  As  Eahab,  through  the  righteousness  of  faith, 
escaped  the  plagues  of  war  and  fire  which  destroyed  the  city,  so  are  the  people 
of  God  urged  to  come  out  of  Babylon  lest  they  partake  her  plagues  also  of  war  and 
fire.  8.  Why  did  Ood  thus  curse  the  reJmilder  of  Jericho  f  (1)  Consider  the 
import  of  the  curse.  His  eldest  son  was  to  perish  by  a  judgment  of  Heaven  as  soon 
as  the  work  commenced;  and  if,  notwithstanding  the  judgment,  he  persisted  in 
the  imdertaking,  he  should  see  the  death  of  his  youngest  sen.  It  is  thought  the 
intermediate  members  of  his  family  would  also  perish  as  the  work  advanced.  That 
the  curse  involved  the  penalty  of  death  is  evident,  since  the  curse  upon  the  city 
meant  the  death  of  its  inhabitants  (see  Josh,  vi.  17).  The  law  of  God  also  expresses 
that  devoted  things  must  die  (see  Levit.  xxvii.  29).  (2)  The  curse,  then,  came  to 
keep  up  the  testimony  for  God  against  sin ;  also  to  be  a  public  sign  of  the  judgment 
npon  Babylon  to  come.  Whoever  would  remove  such  a  testimony  must  be  a  man 
of  determined  wickedness,  and  therefore  deserving  execration.  Let  us  beware  how 
we  oppose  or  discredit  any  faithful  testimony  for  Christ. 

II.  The  temerity  op  Hiel  to  encounter  this  malediction.  1.  The  historical 
fact  is  before  us.  (1)  He  did  bmld  Jericho.  Not  only  did  he  lay  the  foundation, 
but  he  also  set  up  the  gates.  Eesolution  and  persistency  are  fine  qualities  when 
they  are  concerned  with  truth  and  goodness.  But  it  was  otherwise  here.  (2)  He 
paid  the  penalty  accordingly.  When  he  laid  the  foundation  his  first-bom  Abiram 
perished.  This  did  not  deter  him.  So  when  he  set  up  the  gates  "  his  youngest  son 
pegub  "  was  smitten.  2.  But  what  could  have  possessed  him  f  (1)  The  general 
answer  to  this  question  is,  that  the  spirit  of  wickedness  possessed  him.  No  godly 
man  could  be  so  rashly  defiant.  Even  reputable  men  of  the  world  would  shrink 
from  such  an  audacious  undertaking.  The  respect  for  sacred  things  manifested  by 
such  unconverted  men  encomrages  the  hope  that  they  may  yet  seek  His  grace  and 
mercy.  Hiel  must  have  been  a  hardened  sinner  to  have  attempted  this.  (2)  A 
more  particular  answer  is  suggested,  (a)  He  was  a  "  Bethelite."  This  expression 
may  mean  that  he  was  bom  in  Bethel,  though  this  is  not  clear.  It  suggests  rather 
that  he  was  wedded  to  the  sin  r>t  T.v.^i,(,aiQ  •  fg^  Bethel  was  the  head-quarters  of  that 


<IH.  xvii.  1  -  24] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


S'l* 


apostasy.  There  Jeroboam  placed  one  of  his  famous  calves.  There  he  built  aa 
altar.  There  also  he  bmlt  a  temple.  There  his  priests  congregated,  and  there  he, 
in  person,  officiated  as  high  priest.  The  service  of  the  calves  would  so  harden  the 
heart  of  Hiel  as  to  prepare  him  to  disregard  the  curse  of  Jehovah.  (6)  Then,  he 
lived  in  the  days  of  Ahab.  These  were  days  of  fearful  degeneracy.  For  Ahab 
provoked  the  Lord  by  wickedness  more  than  all  that  had  been  before  him.  Hiel 
might  argue  that  if  Ahab  could  thus  outrage  the  law  of  the  Ood  of  Israel  and 
survive,  so  might  his  own  children  survive,  though  he  should  transgress  the 
adjuration  of  Joshua.  It  is  dangerous  to  do  evil  because  others  have  done  it, 
apparently,  with  impunity,  (c)  The  curse  was  denounced  a  long  time  ago.  Since 
then  five  centuries  and  a  half  had  passed  away.  Time  weakens  memory  with  men, 
and  when  man  has  a  purpose  to  serve,  he  may  argue  that  this  also  is  the  case  with 
God.  But  He  that  remembers  mercy  for  ever  also  remembers  justice  and  judgment. 
Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves.  Let  us  pray  God  to  bring  our  sins  to  our  remem« 
brance,  that  we  may  repent  of  them  bofore  Him,  for  with  Him  they  are  neTor  for- 
gotten till  forgiven.— J.  A.  M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XVn.  1—24. 

Elijah  and  ieb  obeat  obouoht. — The 
picture  trhioh  the  historian  has  just  drawn 
of  the  shameless  idolatry  and  the  gross  de- 
generacy of  the  earlier  part  of  Ahab's  reign 
forms  a  fit  prelude  to  an  account  of  th« 
ministry  ol  the  great  prophet  Ehjah,  whicli 
occupies  this  and  several  succeeding  chap- 
ters ;  for  the  two  stand  togetner  m  the 
closest  connexion.  It  was  only  the  unpre- 
cedented corruption  of  that  age  wnich 
necessitated  such  a  mission,  and  a  miision 
armed  with  such  credentials  as  his.  It  wUl 
be  obvious  to  the  most  cursory  reader  that 
the  narratives  comprised  in  the  remaining 
portion  of  this  book  and  the  earlier  part  of 
2  Kings  are  of  a  very  different  character 
from  those  which  have  so  far  been  before  us. 
The  ministry  of  EUjah  and  EUsha  alike  is 
little  more  than  a  series  of  miracles.  Of 
their  words  comparatively  few  are  recorded ; 
we  hear  of  little  but  the  signs  and  wonders 
that  they  wrought.  And  on  this  ground — 
because  it  is  miraculous — this  portion  of 
our  history  is  summarily  discarded  by  many 
recent  writers,  not  as  wholly  unhistorioal, 
but  as  mythical  ;  as  contaimng,  indeed, 
many  germs  of  truth,  and  as  having  a  basis 
of  fact,  which,  however,  has  been  distorted 
into  its  present  legendary  shape  by  the 
credulity  and  fancy  of  a  later  age,  or  by. 
the  half-unconscious  exaggeration  of  some 
poetieo-prophetio  writer.  But  without  enter- 
ing upon  the  question  of  miracles  generally, 


for  whiflh  this  Is  not  the  place,  two  remarks 

may  be  hazarded  here,  first,  that  the 
narrative  is  so  sober,  so  circumstantial,  so 
full  of  touches  which  have  every  appear- 
ance of  having  been  painted  from  the  life, 
that  were  it  not  for  its  supernatural  element, 
the  most  destructive  critic  would  never  have 
thought  of  questioning  its  veracity.  Secondly, 
that  if  miracles  are  ever  allowable  or  con- 
ceivable, if  there  ever  have  been  occasions 
in  the  history  of  our  race  when  we  might 
eoncede  to  the.  Necessary  Being  the  Uberty 
which  we  ourselves  possess,  of  varying  the 
so-called  order  of  nature,  or  of  impressing 
a  visible  purpose  npon  its  forces,  then 
assuredly  the  time  at  which  we  have  now 
arrived,  the  beginning  of  Ahab's  reign,  was 
such  an  occasion.  It  is  quite  true  that  no 
new  revelation  was  then  given  to  the  world. 
Neither  Elijah  nor  EUsha,  as  Ewald  has 
observed,  "  originated  anything  essentially 
new,"  but  the  task  assigned  them  was  one 
which  needed  supernatural  support  and 
attestation,  no  less  than  the  promulgation 
of  a  new  law  or  gospel.  It  was  their  work, 
at  the  veiy  darkest  hour  in  the  spiritual 
history  of  Israel,  when  a  determined  effort 
was  being  made  to  stamp  oht  the  faith  of 
Qod's  elect,  when  the  nation  chosen  of  God 
to  be  the  depositary  of  His  truth  was  fast 
lapsing  into  heathenism,  and  more,  into  un- 
utterable abominations,  it  was  their  work  to 
witness  for  Ood  and  truth  and  purity.  If 
God's  purposes  of  grace  to  our  world,  which 
had  been  ripening  from  age  to  age,  were  not 


B8U 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.    XTIL    1 — 24. 


now  to  be  bustrated;  if  the  one  lamp 
which  oast  a  ray  on  the  world's  thick  dark- 
ness was  not  to  be  utterly  extinguished, 
then,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  God  must  send 
special  messengers,  and  arm  them,  in  token 
of  their  mission  and  authority,  with  super- 
human powers.  The  age  demanded  the 
messenger;  the  messenger  must  have  cre- 
dentials ;  the  credentials  could  only  be 
miraculous.  If  it  is  objected,  therefore, 
against  our  history  that  it  contains  a  mass 
of  miracles,  our  answer  is  that  the  crisis 
necessitated  them,  and  that  only  miracles 
would  have  availed  to  accomplish  the  moral 
and  religious  reformation  which  Elijah  is 
Allowed  on  all  hands  (see,  e.^.,Ewald,"  Hist. 
Israel,"  iv.  63)  to  have  wrought ;  that  only 
signs  such  as  he  was  commissioned  to  show 
would  have  suf&ced,  in  that  age,  to  counter. 
Mt  the  influences  of  such  a  princess  as 
Jezebel  and  of  such  a  propaganda  as  her 
eight  hundred  and  fifty  priests ;  to  rescue 
the  world  from  corruption,  and  to  preserve 
to  distant  generations  the  treasury  of  truth 
and  hope  with  which  the  Jewish  people  had 
been  entrusted  by  the  Most  High.  "  The 
times,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  were  fit  for  Elijah, 
and  Elijah  for  the  times.  The  greatest 
prophet  is  reserved  for  the  worst  age.  Israel 
had  never  such  an  impious  king  as  Ahab, 
nor  such  a  miraculous  prophet  as  Elijah." 
"  The  profusion  of  God's  miraculous  work- 
ing in  Elijah  was  due  to  the  exorbitant 
wickedness  of  the  rulers  of  Israel  at  that 
time,  which  required  an  extraordinary  maui- 
testation  of  God's  Divine  power,  in  order  to 
recover  His  people  from  the  ruin  and  misery 
into  which  they  had  fallen  "  (Bishop  Words- 
worth), 

The  grandeur  of  the  eharaeter  of  Elijah, 
however,  has  been  universally  recognized, 
and  not  least  by  those  who  have  disputed 
his  miracles.  Indeed,  it  may  weU  be  ques- 
tioned whether  the  inteDect  and  conceptions 
of  that  or  a  much  later  age  were  adequate 
to  create  such  a  character  and  personality 
as  his,  a  character  which  has  profoundly 
impressed  men  of  all  ages  and  of  all  creeds. 
The  glowing  panegyric  of  the  son  of  Sirach 
(Ecolus.  xlviii.)  need  only  be  hinted  at  here. 
The  colossal  proportions  he  assumes  in  the 
traditions  and  belief  of  the  Mohammedans  is 
Will  known.     "  Omnium   suae  aetatis  pro- 


phetarum  facile  princeps ;  et  si  a  Mose  disces- 
seris,  nuUi  secundus,"  is  the  testimony  of  an 
illustrious  Jew  (Abravauel).  "The  grandest 
and  most  romantic  character  that  Israel  ever 
produced  "  is  the  verdict  of  a  brilliant  writer 
amongst  ourselves  (Stanley).  His  highest 
praise,  however,  is  that  "in  the  New  Testa- 
ment no  prophet  is  mentioned  and  extolled 
so  frequently  as  Elijah  "  (Bahr).  Nor  must 
it  be  forgotten  here  that  he  it  was  who  was 
chosen  to  appear  with  Moses  in  gloiy  at  our 
Lord's  transfiguration,  and  to  speak  of  the 
exodus  He  should  accomplish  in  Jerusalem 
(Luke  ix.  31). 

The  chapter  divides  itself  into  four  parts. 
In  ver.  1  we  see  Elijah  standing  before  Ahab 
and  denouncing  the  drought ;  in  vers.  2 — 7 
we  find  him  hiding  in  the  W&dy  Cherith 
and  fed  by  the  "  Orebim ; "  in  vers.  8—19 
he  is  resident  at  Zarephath,  feeding  the 
widow  and  her  houses  in  vers.  17 — 24  he 
restores  the  widow's  son  to  life  and  health. 

Yer.  1. — And  Elijah  [This  name,  which 
appears  both  as  -inj^S,  and,  less  frequently, 
n^7K,  means  my  God  it  Jehovah,.  It  is  so 
singularly  appropriate  to  the  man  who  bore 
it,  and  so  exactly  expresses  the  idea  of  his 
Ufe  and  the  character  of  his  work  (see  espe- 
cially oh.  xviii.  39),  that  it  is  difficult  to  resist 
the  belief  that  it  was  assumed  by  him.  This 
is  certainly  more  probable  than  that  it  was 
due  to  the  prescience  of  his  parents.  It  may, 
however,  mark  their  piety  and  hopes,  and 
may  have  influenced  the  life  of  their  son. 
Of.  1  Chron.  iv.  lOJ,  the  Tlshblte  [So  he  is 
called  without  any  further  designation  in 
ch.  xxi.  17;  2  Kings  i.  3,8,  &c.  The  pre- 
sumption is  altogether  in  favour  of  ^aBTl 
being  the  name  of  his  birthplace.  Cf .  ch.  zi. 
29] ,  who  was  of  the  inhabitants  of  Gilead 
[The  interpretation  of  these  words  is  much 
disputed.  The  Heb.  stands  'JB'Fip  'aB^riil 
"l^pJ.  It  wiU  be  observed  that  the  first 
and  second  words  have  the  same  radicals, 
and  it  has  been  hence  inferred  that  they 
cannot  mean  "  two  entirely  distinct  things" 
(Eawlinson,  al.),  and  that  either  the  Maso- 
retio  pointing  must  be  set  aside,  when  the 
words  would  yield  the  meaning,  "  Elijah, 
the  Tishbite  of  Tisbbe  of  Gilead,"  or  they 
must  be  interpreted,"  Elijah,  the  stranger  of 
the  strangers  of  Gilead."  But  it  is  by  no 
means  certain  that  the  current  interpreta- 
tion is  not  the  best.  Suoh  a  play  upon 
words  as  it  involves  is  not  at  all  uncom- 
mon in  Hebrew.  The  meaning  would  then 
be  that  Elijah,  who  was,  if  not  by  birth,  by 


CB.  xvn.  1 — 24,J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


B81 


domicile,  of  Tishbe;  was  one  of  the  strangera 
— 3^in  is  found  in  the  sense  of  iripoucog, 
inquilinus,  in  Gen.  zziii.  i ;  Ezod.  zii.  4S ; 
Levit.  xzii.  10 ;  zxv.  35,  47,  &o. — oi:  immi- 
grauis  who  had  settled  in  Qilead.  The  only 
objection  to  this  rendering — apart  from  the 
identity  of  radicals  just  mentioned — ^is  that 

we  should  have  expected  to  find  ^il^D 
written  plene,  as  the  word  always  is  else- 
where. It  is  alleged  by  Eeil,  Bahr,  al., 
however,  that  the  stat.  constr.  plur.  may 
well  he  an  exception  to  the  rale,  and  in  sup- 
port of  this  view  it  may  be  mentioned  that 

the  cognate  word,  Sj^Vi  is  constantly  found 
in  the  constr.  plural  as  *|}t^*  (see  Gesen., 
Thes.  635).  It  is  clear,  'then,  that  the 
nsnal  interpretation  is  by  no  means  to  be 
lightly  set  aside.  It  is  certainly  preferable 
to  the  rendering,  "Elijah the  stranger," &o., 

for  we  have  no  proof  that  ^^^JflD  otia  bear 
this  meaning.  In  favour  of  the  alternative 
rendering  "the  Tishbite  of  Tishbe,"  it  may 
be  said  that  it  has  the  support  of  the  LXX., 
i  Ik  6e(t;30v,  and  of  Josephus  (Ant.  viii. 
13.  2),  l/c  noKtuii  Qfafiiivijc  rijc  VoKaaSiTiSoe 
X^pas.  Nor  is  it  any  weighty  objection  to 
this  view  that  we  now  here  read  of  a  Tishbe 
in  Gilead :  as  for  the  matter  of  that,  we  have 
no  undoubted  traces  of  any  such  place  west 
of  the  Jordan ;  the  passage  in  Tobit  (ch.  i,  2, 
LXX.),  which  is  often  alleged  as  proving 
that  there  was  a  Tishbe  in  Galilee,  and  from 
which  Gesenins,  Bahr,  Keil,  &o.,  conclude 
that  this  must  be  the  Tishbi  here  referred 
to^  being  too  uncertain  to  permit  us  to  build 
any  positive  conclusions  thereupon.  See 
Diet.  Bib._  iii.  pp.  1489,  1516.  In  any  case 
— and  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  decide 
positively  between' this  and  the  rendering  of 
the  A.Y. — it  is  clear  that  Elijah,  even  if 
bom  in  Galilee  (but  see  John  vii.  52,  for  the 
belief  of  the  Jews),  was  trained  for  his  work 
in  Gilead.  It  was,  therefore,  a  rugged,  un- 
settled, half-oivilized,  trans-Jordanio  region 
gave  to  the  world  the  greatest  of  its  pro> 
phets.  In  this  respect  he  was  like  Moses 
(Exod.  iii.  1),  and  his  antitype  the  Baptist 
(Luke  i.  80).  "  The  fact  that  this  mission 
was  entrusted  not  to  a  dweller  in  royal  city 
01  prophetic  school,  but  to  a  genuine  child 
of  the  deserts  and  forests  of  Gilead,  is  in 
exact  accordance  with  the  dispensations  of 
Providence  in  other  times "  (Stanley)]  said 
nnto  Ahab  [The  abrupt  way  in  which  Elijah 
appears  upon  the  scene  without  a  word  of 
introduction  or  explanation  is  certainly  re- 
markable. Ewald  observes  that  "  his  first 
entry  within  the  province  of  the  history 
seems  almost  as  unique  and  inexplicable  as 
his  final  disappearance."     "  Elijah  comes  in 


with  a  tempest,  and  goes  ont  with  a  whirl- 
wind "  (Hall).  But  there  is  no  sufficient 
ground  for  believing  (Thenius,  al.)  that  a 
part  of  oni  history  which  described  some  of 
his  antecedents  has  been  lost  to  us,  or  that 
our  text  merely  recites  the  issite  of  a  long 
conference  which  Elijah  had  held  with  Ahab, 
for  other  prophets  of  this  period,  Ahijah, 
Shemaiah,  Jehu,  are  introduced  to  us  in  a 
similar  manner,  though  it  must  be  allowed 
that  their  respective  ministries  were  of  very 
different  proportions  and  importance  from 
Elijah's.  Tnis  sudden  appearance,  how- 
ever, is  thoroughly  characteristic  of  the 
man.  He  presently  disappears  just  as 
suddenly  (ver.  5.  Cf.  xix.  3  ;  2  Kings  i.  8). 
It  was  thought  by  some  in  that  age  that  he 
was  borne  hither  and  thither  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  (oh.  xviii.  12),  and  men  of  a  later  time 
caught  this  as  one  of  his  prominent  charac- 
teristics (Ecclus.  xlviii.  1 — 12).  Hence, 
too,  the  traditions  of  a  still  later  period, 
according  to  which  he  was  "  the  fiery 
Fhinehas  returned  to  earth,  or  an  angel 
hovering  on  the  outskirts  of  the  world," 
Stanley],  Aa  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  llvetb 
[This  formula  here  occurs  for  the  first 
time,  and  it  is  fuU  of  meaning.  It  asserts 
first  that  Jehovah,  not  Baal,  is  the  God  of 
Israel,  and  it  suggests,  in  the  second  place, 
that  he  is  the  living  God,  such  as  Baal  was 
not,  and  that  though  ordinarily  He  keeps 
silence.  He  is  one  who  can  make  His  power 
felt] ,  before  whom  I  stand  [i.e.,  "  Whose  I 
am  and  whom  I  serve"  (Acts  xxvii.  23).  Cf. 
ch.  xviii.  15.  The  slaves  of  the  East  stood 
before  their  masters.  See  note  on  ch.  i.  28, 
and  of.  1  Sam.  iii.  1 ;  Luke  i.  19.  Elijah  claims 
to  speak  in  God's  name,  and  as  His  ambas- 
sador], there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain 
[Observe  the  order  of  the  words.  Dew  is 
perhaps  put  first  as  more  essential  to  vege- 
table life.  Elijah  only  denounces  a  plague 
already  threatened  in  the  law  as  the  punish- 
ment of  idolatry  (Dent.  xi.  16,  17 ;  zzviii. 
23 ;  Levit.  xxvi.  19).  He  came  forward  as 
the  vindicator  and  restorer  of  the  law]  these 
years  [An  indefinite  period.  Its  duration 
depended  on  Elijah's  word,  and  that  again 
on  the  penitence,  &e.,  of  the  people.  It 
was  because  of  the  obdmracy  of  king  and 
people  that  it  lasted  so  long]  but  according 
to  my  word.  [The  idolatrous  priests  no 
doubt  claimed  for  Baal  the  dominion  over 
nature  and  absolute  control  over  the  clouds 
and  rain — a  power  which,  it  may  be  worth 
observing,  the  monks  of  the  convent  of  St. 
Katherine  at  Sinai,  where  Elijah  was,  are 
thought  to  possess  by  the  Arabs  of  the 
Sinaitic  peninsula.  Elijah  directly  chal- 
lenges them  to  a  trial  of  strength.  It  was 
as  if  he  had  said,  "  The  God  that  answereth 
by  rain,  let  him  be  God."     On  the  fitness 


8sa 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xvu.  1—24. 


of  this  miracle,  both  as  a  sign  and  as  a 
punisbment,  see  "  Homil.  Quart."  v.  100, 101. 
"To  Eastern  and  Southern  nations,  where 
life  and  water  go  always  together,  where 
vegetation  gathers  round  the  slightest 
particle  of  moisture  Mtd  dies  the  moment 
it  is  withdrawn,  .  .  .  the  withholding  of 
rain  is  the  withholding  of  pleasure,  of 
sustenance,  of  life  itself"  (Stanley).  "My 
word  "  is  somewhat  emphatio,  "  Nisi  ego,  et 
nan  alius  vir  .  .  .  dixero  "  (Seb.  Schmidt). 
No  doubt  there  is  a  special  reference  to  the 
prophets  of  Baal.  Their  inability  to  remove 
the  ban  would  prove  the  impotenoy  of  their 
god.  Elijah  had  aslced  for  the  supematural 
powers  which  he  here  claims  (James  v. 
17,  18).] 

Ver.  2.— And  the  word  of  the  lord  came 
unto  him,  saying  [cf .  ver.  8 ;  ch.  xviii.  1 ; 
xxi.  17  ;  2  Kings  i.  3] , 

Ver.  3.— Get  thee  hence^  and  turn  thee 
[fox  the  construction  {dat.  commodi)  ef. 
Gen.  zii.  2 ;  xxii.  2 ;  Cant.  ii.  11]  eastward 
[This  he  must  do,  whichever  side  of  the 
Jordan,  east  or  west,  the  brook  Oherith  was, 
for  bis  interview  with  Ahab  had  probably 
taken  place  at  Samaria.  But  Uie  word 
would  be  specially  appropriate,  if  the 
Cherith  was  beyond  Jordan.  Ewald,  in- 
deed, holds  that  our  text  is  decisive  on 
this  point] ,  and  hide  thyself  [Heb.  be  hid, 
t.e.,  lie  hid,  Niphal.  It  does  not  seem  to 
have  occurred  to  the  prophet  that  such  a 
calamity  as  he  had  denounced  against  the 
country  almost  made  his  disappearance 
from  the  scene  a  necessity,  or  if  it  did,  he 
still  waited  for  instructions.  Cf.  ver.  9; 
oh.  xviii.  1,  &e.  Not  merely  was  his  flight 
necessary  in  order  to  escape  persecution  or 
punishment — the  search  which  Ahab  insti- 
tuted for  him  in  part  explains  his  disappear- 
ance— bnt  to  avoid  importunity.  It  would 
have  been  morally  impossible  for  him, 
though  a  man  of  inflexible  will  (Bahr)  to 
dwell  among  the  people,  while  the  land 
groaned  nnder  the  terrible  burden  which 
he  had  laid  upon  it,  and  which  he  alone 
was  able  to  remove.  His  life  would  not 
have  been  safe — see  ch.  xviii.  4— and  the 
ordeal  would  have  been  intolerable.  And 
oh.  zix.  2  shows  that  the  prophet's  na- 
ture had  its  weaker  side.  Wordsworth 
observes  that  Elijah's  escapes  and  de- 
partures into  unknown  places  are  "faint 
resemblances  of  the  mysterious  vanishings 
of  our  blessed  Lord,  after  He  had  delivered 
some  of  His  Divine  messages  which  excited 
the  anger  of  the  people ; "  Luke  iv.  29 ; 
John  Tiii.  69 ;  x,  89]  by  [Heb.  in}  the  brook 

[Heb.  7ri};  {.«.,  watercoune,  wddy.  This 
TTord  hM  two  mMknings.  Its  primary  mean- 
I'lTr  ii  torrent  t  its  secondary  and,  from  the 


fact  that  the  torrents  of  the  East  are  for  tho 
most  part  dried  up  daring  the  greater  part 
of  the  year,  its  common  meaning  is  torrent- 
bed,  or  ravine,  valley.  Both  meanings  are 
brought  out  here.    Elijah  should  dwell  in 

and  drink  o/the  7112..  Cf.  oh.  zv.  3]  Cherith 
[The  word  means  separation,  a  name  which 
may  possibly  indicate  that  it  was  extremely 
secluded,  or  it  may  have  been  a  boundary 
line  of  some  sort.  Tradition  identifiea  the 
brook  Cherith  with  the  Wddy-el-kelt,  i.e., 
the  great  valley,  west  of  the  Jordan,  which 
debouches  into  the  Ghor,  baU  a  mile  Bontb 
of  Jericho,  and  Boblnson  and  Porter  pro- 
nounce in  its  favour.  Van  de  Yelde  (ii. 
810,  811)  suggests  the  Wddy  Fasael,  a 
few  miles  to  the  north.  But  it  is  much 
more  probable  that  it  is  to  be  sought  in 
the  region  east  of  the  Jordan,  where, 
indeed,  Eusebius  and  Jerome  place  it. 
It  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  the 
W&dy-el-kelt,  or  any  Cis-Jordanio  ravine, 
would  afford  sufficient  privacy.  Probably 
Jericho  was  already  rebuUt.  As  we  cannot 
decide  with  certainty,  we  may  reasonabl}- 
oonjecture  that  it  is  to  be  sought  in  Elijah's 
own  country  of  Gilead,  and  probably  in  the 
Wddy  Alias,  i.e.,  at  no  great  distance  from 
'Abara  (Couder,  "  Tent-work,"  p.  230),  the 
Jordan  ford  nearly  opposite  Bethshan,  where, 
indeed,  an  old  tradition  places  it]  that  Is 
before  [Nothing  positive  can  be  concluded 

from  *Ji  bv.  In  Gen.  xvi.  12 ;  xziiu  19 ; 
xzv.  18 ;  Josh,  xviii.  14,  &a.,  it  means  east- 
ward. But  this  meaning  is  gathered  from 
the  context]  Jordan.  [The  Cherith  wat 
clearly  one  of  the  lateral  valleys  which  run 
into  the  Ghor,  It  is  just  possible  that  th. 
name  may  be  recovered  by  the  survey  of  th- 
country  east  of  the  Jordan,  which  i*  now 
(1880)  being  organized.] 

Ver.  4.— And  It  shall  be  that  thou  shalt 
drink  of  the  brook  [There  was  clearly 
nothing  miraculous  about  the  supply  ol 
water.  No  miracle  was  wrought  even  to 
continue  the  supply,  ver.  7]  ;  and  X  have 
commanded  [cf.  ver.  9;  Isa.  v.  6;  Amos 
ix.  3,  &c.]  the  ravens  to  feed  thee  there. 
[Despite  the  general  agreement  of  scholars 
that  by  D^31U  we  must  understand  "  ravens," 
I  think  probability  favours  the  meaning 
Orbites,  i.e,,  inhabitants  of  Orbo.  In  sup- 
port of  the  received  rendering  is  the  vary 
powerful  consideration,  that  it  is  the  inter- 
pretation of  all  the  versions  (except  the 
Arabic)  and  of  Josephus,  who,  beyond  all 
question,  represented  the  belief  current  in 
his  own  time  (Ant.  viii.  13.  2).  It  is  also 
certain  that  elsewhere  in  Scripture  we  find 
some  of  the  inferior  animals  supematniaUy 
constrained  to  effect  God's  purposes,  both 
of  mercy  and  of  judgment  (1  Kings  xiii.  24 ; 


1—24.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


688 


•I  Kings  ii.  24 ;  Dan.  vi.  33  ;  2  Peter  ii.  IG), 
though  never,  it  must  be  said,  iu  so  rational 
and  methodical  a  way.     Nor  can  it  rightly 
be  contended  that  the  words  "  I  have  com- 
manded," 'irilV,  imply  human  agency,  for 
dsewhere  we  find  the  Almighty  commondinj 
'  (same  word)  the  serpent  (Amos  iz.  8)  and 
;  the  clouds  (Isii.  v.  6  ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  23).    It 
/  is  not,  however,  a  sufficient  account  of  this 
narrative  to  say  that  the  prophet  merely 
helped  himself  to  the  food  which  the  ravens, 
whose  habitat  was  in  the  WSdy  Oherith, 
brought,  day  by  day,  to  their  nests  and 
their  young,     For,  not  to  insist  on  the 

words,  ib  D*!|J»5P,  bringing  to  him  (ver,  6), 
the  expressions  "bread  {or  food,  dIJJ)  and 
flesh,"  and  "moming  and  evening"  cer- 
tain!; point  to  something  more  than  such 
»  fortuitous  supply.  Whether  the  Orebim 
were  "  ravens  "  or  not,  they  certainly  acted 
in  an  intelligent  and  rational  way:  they 
brought  food,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  prophet, 
and  they  brought  it  for  months  together 
with  unfailing  regularity.  But  against  this 
WW  the  following  considerations  may  be 
urged.  1.  It  is  hardly  in  accord  with  God's 
usual  way  of  working,  that  he  should  em- 
ploy birds  of  the  air  and  those  unclean 
(Levit.  zi.  IS ;  Deut.  ziv.  14)  and  ravenous 
birds,  to  feed  and  succour  His  saints,  rather 
than  men  or  angels.  Of  course,  no  one  who 
does  not  altogether  repudiate  the  super- 
natural will  deny  for  a  moment  that  the 
Almighty  could,  had  it  seemed  good  to  Him, 
have  sustained  His  prophet  by  the  instru- 
mentality of  ravens,  just  as  easily  as  by  any 
other  means.  But  it  appears  to  be  almost 
•  fixed  principle  of  His  dealings  with  men, 
not  to  resort  to  miracles  when  ordinary 
means  will  suffice;  or  if  He  does  employ 
miracles,  they  are  never  bizarre  or  fantastic ; 
they  are  not  such  as  to  suggest  the  idea  of 
fable  or  legend ;  they  are  invariably  the 
simplest  and  directest  means  to  the  end. 
And  it  is  submitted  that  this  prolonged  and 
methodical  ministry  of  ravens  is  altogether 
nnlike  God's  method  of  procedure  on  other 
oooasions.  It  was  an  angel  succoured  Hagar 
and  Ishmael  in  their  need  (Gen.  xvi.  7).  It 
vas'on  angel  fed  Elijah  himself,  a  few  years 
later  (1  Eings  ziz.  6,  6).  They  were  angels 
who  ministered  to  onr  blessed  Lord  aiter 
His  long  fast  (Matt.  iv.  11).  But  God's 
"  chief  means,"  it  is  always  to  be  remem- 
bered, "  is  man."  And  it  is  to  be  carefully 
observed  that  when,  about  this  very  time, 
not  one,  but  one  hundred  prophets  were 
threatened,  just  as  Elijah  was,  with  death, 
no  miracle  was  wrought  to  save  their  lives 
01  to  supply  their  wants,  but  they  were  fed 
by  human  agency,  with  bread  and  water 
(oh.  ZTiii.  18).    But  it  is  still  more  signifi- 


cant that  elsewhere  in  this  narrative,  whioh 
is  characterized  by  the  profonndest  sobriety 
and  reticence,  there  is  what  we  may  almost 
call  a  studied  absence  of  the  miraculous 
element.  No  miracle  is  wrought  to  protect 
Elijah  against  Jezebel,  but  he  must  consult 
for  his  own  safety  by  flight.  He  is  sent  to 
the  brook  Cherith,  because  there  is  water 
there ;  in  other  words,  God  chose  that  hiding 
place  in  order  to  obviate  the  necessity  for  a 
miracle.  And  when  the  water  of  the  brook 
dries  up,  no  miracle  is  wrought  to  prolong 
the  supply,  but  the  prophet,  at  the  risk  of 
detection,  must  go  forth  and  seek  it  else- 
where. And  at  Zarephath  he  is  fed,  not 
by  ravens,  but  by  human  agency  -by  a 
widow  woman.  It  is  true  a  miracle  appears 
to  have  been  wrought,but  the  narrative  has 
so  little  idea  of  effect  and  gives  so  little 
prominence  to  the  supernatural  that  even 
that  is  doubted.  To  put  the  interpretation 
of  "ravens,"  consequently,  on  the  word 
D»31J?,  provided  it  will  yield  any  other 
meaning,  appears  to  be  to  do  violence  to 
the  spirit  of  the  context,  and  to  the  tenour 
of  Scripture  generally.  2.  It  is  somewhat 
difficult  .to  believe  that  such  a  prodigy  as 
this,  so  altogether  unique  and  irregular, 
would  not  have  been  mentioned,  had  it 
really  happened,  elsewhere  in  Scripture. 
The  absence  of  all  reference  thereto  is  re- 
markable,  when  we  consider  how  constantly 
the  ministry  of  Elijah  and  its  lessons  (Luke 
iv.  25,  26  ;  ix.  64  ;  James  v.  17;  Eev.xi.  6, 
6)  are  referred  to  in  the  New  Testament ;  b«t 
when  we  observe  what  an  admirable  and  un- 
equalled illustration  of  God's  providential 
care  this  incident  would  have  supplied  to 
some  of  our  Lord's  discourses,  and  notably 
to  that  of  Luke  xii.  22  sqq.,  this  silence 
becomes  almost  suspicious.  3.  Despite  the 
practical  unanimity  of  the  versions,  the 
interpretation  "ravens"  has  been  disputed 
from  very  early  times.  St.  Jerome  among 
Christians,  Babbi  Jndah  Hakkodesh  and 
Eimchi  amongst  Jews — these  are  but  some 
of  those  who  have  repudiated  this  render- 
ing. 4.  A  very  slight  change  in  the  vowel 
points— D'?"!y  instead  of  D*3'lV— yields  the 
meaning  "  Arabians. "  That  a  fugitive 
wonld  readily  find,  not  only  shelter  bnt 
sustenance  among  the  Bedouin,  whose 
generous  hospitality  and  loyalty  to  strangers 
is  proverbial,  is  obvious,  and  we  know  that 
about  this  time  some  AJab  tribes  had  deal- 
ings with  the  Jews  (2  Ghron.  xvii.  11) ;  but 
without  any  change  at  all,  a  sufficient 
meaning  may  be  extracted  from  the  word. 
For  we  find  that  somewhere  in  the  Cieear, 
ot  plaia  of  the  Jordan,  ofi  whioh  the  Wfidy 

Oherith  lay,  was  a  rook  Oreb  (^^iV,  Jndg 
Til.  25),  apparently  east  of  th*  Jordan  (Jodg 


884 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  xvu.  1 — 'H. 


viii  1),  bnt  in  any  case,  at  no  great  distance 
Irom  Bethabara  (John  1.  28).  Now  Beth- 
abara  has  been  identified,  almost  to  a  cer- 
tainty (Conder,  "  Tent-work,"  pp.  229—232) 
with  the  modem  'Abarah  (i.e.,  passage  or 
ferry),  "  cue  of  the  main  fords  of  the  Jordan 
just  above  the  place  where  the  JalM  river, 
flowing  down  the  valley  of  Jezreel  and  by 
Beisdn,  debonches  into  Jordan."  But  we 
learn  from  an  ancient  and  independent 
source,  the  Bereshith  Rabba  (see  Diet.  Bib. 
ii.  464),  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bsisdn, 
i.e.,  Bethshean,  there  was  anciently  a  town 
named  Orbo,  \yyS} — a  word,  it  is  to  be 
observed,  which  preserves  the  radicals  of 
2lfiV  transposed.  We  may  safely  assume 
that  these  two  places,  Orbo  and  Oreb,  were 
identical ;  that  the  former  was  the  repre- 
sentative at  a  later  day  of  the  latter,  or  was 
the  shape  which  the  name  assumed  when 
bestowed  on  the  hamlet,  as  distinct  from  the 
rook.  The  inhabitants  of  this  place  would, 
of  oonrse,  be  called  DO.IlV)  jnst  as  the  in. 
habitants  of  Ziph  were  known  as  Ziphim 
(1  Sam.  xxvi.  1),  or  the  men  of  Zidon  as 
Zidonim  (1  Kings  v.  6).  We  find,  conse- 
quently, that  this  word,  whicli  means 
"ravens,"  also  designates  the  inhabitants 
of  a  village  near  Bethshean,  and  probably 
east  of  the  Jordan ;  that  is  to  say,  in  or 
near  Elijah's  native  country  of  Gilead.  And 
with  this  agree  the  testimonies  of  Eabbi 
Judah  and  Jerome  already  referred  to.  The 
former  held  that  the  Orebim  were  not  ravens 
at  all,  but  inhabitants  of  Orbo  or  the  rock 
Oreb,  while  the  latter  says,  with  eqnal 
positiveness,  Orbim,  accolae  villae  in  finu 
bat  Arabum,  Eliae  dederwnt  alimenta.  It 
only  remains  for  ns  to  notice  the  perfect 
naturalness  and  consistency  of  the  narrative 
thus  interpreted.  Elijah  is  bidden  to  go 
eastward ;  to  hide  in  the  WSdy  Oherith, 
where  he  would  be  among  tribesmen  or 
friends.  For  water,  there  is  the  brook; 
for  food,  the  Orbites,  whose  name  would 
be  familiar  to  him,  and  whom  he  may  have 
known,  are  commanded  to  feed  him.  He 
goes ;  he  is  received  with  Arab  hospitality ; 
the  Eastern  law  of  Dakheel,  by  which  any 
man  at  any  time  is  entitled  to  throw  himself 
upon  the  mercy  and  protection  of  another, 
ensures  his  safety.  The  Orebim  minister 
assiduously  to  his  wants.  Every  morning 
before  the  dawn,  every  evening  after  dark, 
they  bring  him  bread  and  flesh.] 

Ver.  5. — So  he  went  and  did  according 
onto  the  word  of  the  Lord :  for  [Heb.  and] 
he  went  and  dwelt  by  [Heb.  in]  the  brook 
Oherith,  that  Is  before  Jordan. 

Ver.  6. — And  the  ravens  brought  [Heb. 
bringing]  him  bread  and  Cesh  in  the  mom- 
bur   and  bread  and  fleah  In  the  evening 


[the  Vat.  LXX.  has  "  bread  in  the  morning 
and  flesh  in  the  evening."    It  has  been 
objected  that  this  verse  is  fatal  to  the  view  ad- 
vanced above — that  the  D'3"1J?  were  not  birds 
but  men — that  no  men  would  have  "  come 
regularly  twice  alday,  .  ~.  .  thus  giving  them- 
selves needless  trouble  and  increasing  the 
chance  of  detection,  when  they  might  easily 
have  left  him  a  supply  for  several  days" 
(Bawlinson).    Bnt  if  we  may  believe  that 
the  prophet  was,  if  not  among  kinsmen  or 
friends,    yet   among    the   pastoral,    senii- 
nomadic  people  of  Gilead,  a  people,  that  is 
to  say,  like  the  Bedawin  in  their  instincts 
and  customs,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that 
having  taken  him  under  their  protection, 
they  would  make  a  point  of  visiting  hira 
regularly,  not  only  to  show  him  aU  possible 
honour,  as  a  person  endued  with  super- 
natural powers  (ct  ch.  xviii.  7, 13),  but  to 
afford  him  some  measure  of  sympathy  and 
companionship.     And  we  can  then  see  a 
reason  for  the  morning  and  evening  being 
mentioned.    Their  visits  would  be  made  in 
the  twilight,  which  is  really  longer  in  the 
East  than  is  generally  supposed];  and  lie 
drank  [Hebrew  drinks.  The  Heb.  future  often 
has  the  force  of  an  imperfect,  and  expresses 
continued  or  repeated  action]  of  the  brook, 
Ver.  7. — And  It  came  to  pass  after  a  while, 
[Heb.  at  the  end  of  days.    Not  necessarily 
post  annum.    The  words  no  doubt  have  this 
force  elsewhere,  Levit.  xxv.  29;  Judg.  xi. 
40 ;  xvii.  10 ;  1  Sam.  xxvii.  7,  &o. ;  but  in 
all  these  cases,  the  meaning  is  not  resident 
in  the  words  themselves,  bnt  in  the  context. 
It  is  impossible  to  say  how  long  EUjah 
remained  in  the  Wfidy.     All  we  can  be  sure 
of  is  that  he  must  have  been  more  than  two 
years,  out  of  the  three  and  a  haU,  at  Zare- 
phath.     See  on  oh.  xviii.  1]  that  the  brook 
dried  up,  because  there  had  been  no  rain 
In  tbe  land,    [pp^,  imber,  signifies  heavy 
rain.   The  word  used  in  ver.  1  is  IQI^,  rain 
of  any  kind.} 

Ver.  8.— And  tbe  word  of  the  Lord  oaine 
unto  him,  saytnir, 

Ver.  9. — Arise,  get  thee  to  Zarephath 
[Of.  Obad.  20.  The  name  points  to  furnaces 
or  workshops  for  the  refining  of  metals,  f|1S, 
liquavit.  LXX.  Saptwrd ;  of.  Luke  iv.  26. 
It  is  now  represented  by  an  insignificant 
village.  Sura/end,  which,  however,  preserves 
the  original  name.  It  lies  still,  as  no  doubt 
it  did  then,  on  the  high  road  between  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  and  on  the  shore.  The  prophet 
would  thus  be  in  the  lion's  den,  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  dominions  of  Ethbaal.  See 
Porter,  ii.  397.  Stanley  (S.  and  P.  p.  268) 
shows  how  the  memory  of  this  visit  still 
lingers  in  the  traditions  of  the  neighbour- 
hood], which  belongeth  to  Zldon  [Sidon  if 


XVII.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS. 


B85 


yiaible  from  a  Bpot  a  quarter  of  an  honr 
distant.  "  The  depenclenoe  of  Barepta  on 
Sidon  is  indicated  in  the  inscriptions  of 
Sennacherib,  where  it  is  mentioned  as  be- 
longing to  Luliya,  king  of  Sidon,"  Eawlin- 
6ou],  and  dwell  there:  behold,  I  have  com- 
manded a  widow  woman  there  to  sustain 
thee  [In  considering  these  words  the 
generally  destitute  condition  of  the  widow 
of  the  East  should  be  borne  in  mind  (Aots 
vi.  1 ;  1  Tim.  v.  3—5,  &a.)  We  gather  from 
XjQke  iv.  25,  26,  that  it  was  for  her  sake  as 
well  as  his  that  the  prophet  was  sent 
thither.  Matt.  xv.  21—28  tells  of  another 
SiTO-Phoeracian  woman.] 

Ver.  10. — So  he  arose  and  went  to  Zare- 
phath  [It  does  not  follow  that  his  route  lay 
over  the  "  White  Promontory,"  or  Ladder  of 
Tyre,  the  way  our  Lord  took  when  He  "  de- 
parted into  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  " 
'(Matt.  xv.  21).  If  his  place  of  concealment 
was  anywhere  near  'Abara,  or  Bethsbean, 
it  is  probable  he  would  keep  east  of  the 
Jordan,  as  far  as  Banias  or  Dan,  where  the 
river  is  fordable,  and  whence  a  road  leads 
direct  to  Sidon.  He  would  thus  avoid  Tyre]. 
And  when  he  came  to  the  gate  of  the  city 
[the  ruins  of  Surafeud  are  still  very  con- 
siderable (see  Thomson, "Land  and  Book,"  i. 
235)  and  prove  it  to  have  been  a  place  of 
importance,  a  town  with  gates  and  walls. 
"  G-ate,"  however,  is  used  somewhat  loosely 
in  the  0.  T. — of  the  entrance  to  a  viUage, 
or  even  of  the  place  of  concourse  and  of 
judgment],  behold,  the  [Heb.  a.  He  did 
not  yet  know  that  this  was  tlie  widow  to 
whom  he  was  sent.  Her  replies  to  his  re- 
quests first  informed  him  that  this  was  the 
object  of  his  search]  widow  woman  was 
there  [Heb.  behold  there,  a  widow  woman] 
£atbeitng  of  sticks  [This  was  not  a  promis- 
mg  sign.  It  only  proved  her  poverty] :  and 
he  called  to  her,  and  said,  Fetch  me,  I  pray 
thee,  a  little  water  In  a  vessel  [Heb.  the 
vessel.  Bahr  understands  the  drinking-cup 
that  Elijah  had  brought  vrith  him  from  the 
Wfidy  Cherith ;  but  surely  it  is  extremely 
improbable  that  he  would  carry  either  cup 
or  bottle  with  him.  "  2'he  vessel "  probably 
imports  the  ordinary  vessel  used  for  the 
purpose— the  "potter's  earthen  bottle" 
{Jer.  xix.  1).  That  this  was  used  for  fetch- 
ing water,  we  know  from  Isa.  xxx.  14],  that 
I  may  drink. 

Ver.  11. — And  as  she  was  going  to  fetch 
It  [The  gift  of  water  to  the  thirsty  is  always 
regarded  as  a  sacred  duty  in  the  East. 
"  Never  yet  during  many  years'  residence  in 
Syria  and  many  a  long  day's  travel,  have  I 
leen  refused  a  draught  of  water  by  a  single 
individual  of  any  sect  or  race.  The  Bedawy 
in  the  desert  has  shared  with  me  the  last 
drop  in  his  water-skin"  (Porter).  It  is  clear 

1    KINGS. 


that  the  water  supply  of  Phoenicia  had  not 
entirely  failed.  "  The  fresh  streams  of 
Lebanon  would  retain  their  life-giving 
power  long  after  the  scantier  springs  of 
Palestine  had  been  dried  up,  "  Stanley] 
he  called  to  her,  and  said,  Bring  me,  I  praj 
thee,  a  morsel  of  bread  [The  request  fo^ 
food  wiU  soon  reveal  to  him  whether  this  is 
the  widow  woman  who  is  to  sustain  him) 
In  thine  hand.  [Bahr  would  understand 
here,  "  Give  me  a  morsel  of  the  bread  which 
thou  hast  in  thine  hand  " — einen  BUsen  de> 
Erodes  das  du  hesitzest — and  he  has  the 
LXX.,  yjjoiuiv  dprov  rov  Iv  ry  x^ipi  aov,  to 
support  him.    But  it  is  fatal  to  this  view 

(1)  that  the  verb  is  'Pli?? — the   same  ai 

already  used  in  the  request  for  water  (ver. 
10),  and  (2)  that  there  is  no  article  before 
bread.  "  The  bread  in  thine  hand  "  would 
have  been  clear,  but  the  words  as  they  stand 
can  only  mean,  "  Bring  me,  together  with 
the  water  in  the  vessel,  a  morsel  of  bread 
in  thine  hand."  Besides,  "  in  thy  posses- 
sion "  would  probably  have  been  expressed 
by  "  under  thine  hand,"  as  in  1  Sam.  xxi. 
3,  4,  8,  though  "  in  the  hand  "  is  found  in 
Eccles.  V.  18 ;  Ezra  vii.  2.5,  in  a  somewhat 
similar  sense.J 

Yer.  12.—  And  she  said,  As  the  Lord  thy 
God  Uveth  [Bahr,  Eeil,  al.  conclude  from 
this  formula  that  the  woman  was  a  wor- 
shipper of  the  God  of  Israel.  Bahr  is 
extremely  positive  on  this  point,  affirming 
that,  had  she  been  a  heathen,  the  words 
would  have  been  positively  hypocritical, 
and  more,  that  Elijah  would  never  have 
been  sent  (Luke  iv.  26)  to  an  idolater.  He 
further  suggests  that  possibly  she  was  an 
Israelite  by  birth,  who  had  been  married  to 
a  Phoenician.  But  all  this  is  extremely 
doubtful.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  note- 
worthy that  the  words  are,  "  Jehovah  thii 
God,"  words  which  show  that  she  recognized 
Elijah,  perhaps  by  his  Jewish  face,  probably 
by  bis  prophetic  dress  (2  Kings  i.  8)  as  a 
worshipper  of  Jehovah.  But  had  she  also 
been  the  same,  it  is  probable  that  she 
would  have  said  "  my  God,"  for  that  form 
would  not  only  have  given  greater  force  to 
her  obtestation,  but  would  have  established 
a  bond  of  sympathy — such  as  Jews  in  a 
foreign  land  were  only  too  glad  to  recognize 
— between  them.  And  the  remark  that  it 
is  hypocrisy  to  swear  by  a  god  in  whom  one 
does  not  believe  is  disposed  of  by  the  con- 
sideration that  she  may  well  have  believed 
in  the  Lord  as  well  as  in  Baal.  See  note  on 
ch.  v.   7.      The  Tyrians  knew  nothing  of 

monotheism] ,  I  have  not  a  cake  [J'WD,  th« 
synonym  of  ilj^  (ver.  13),  the  smallest  kind 
of  bread.    It  was  baked  in  the  ashes  ;  hence 
2  c 


886 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  XTn.  1—24 


the  LXZ.  lyKpv^las.  We  gather  from  this 
pitiful  diBoInsure  that  the  famine  had 
already  extended  to  Phoenicia,  as  it 
natuT^y  \ronld  do,  considering  how  de- 
,  pendent  that  co  nntry  was  on  Israel  for  its 
breadstuSs ;  see  note  on  ch.  ▼.  9, 11.  Josephus 
(Ant.  viii.  13,  2)  cites  Menanderas  attesting 
to  a  year's  dronght  in  the  reign  of  Ethbaal], 
but  an  handful  of  meal  In  a  [Heb.  the] 
barrel  [13,  probably  connected  with  eadta, 
cadeau,  &e.;  bucket,  pail],  and  a  little  oil  In 
a  cmse :  and,  behold,  I  am  gathering  two 
sticks  [i.e.,  a  few  sticks  (Gesenius).  We 
may  compare  the  German  idiom  ein  Paar 
and  onr  "two  or  three."  But  "two"  in 
this  sense  oconrs  nowhere  else  in  the  Bible 
— "  two  01  three  "  is  found  in  2  Kings  iz. 
32;  lea,  zrii.  6;  Amos  iv.  8.  According 
to  Boherts,  the  word  is  constantly  used  for 
"  few  "  by  the  natives  of  India.  This  widow 
waa  evidently  reduced  to  the  greatest  ex- 
tremities], that  I  may  go  In  and  dress  tt 
for  me  and  my  son  [The  LXX.  has  r»>'oi£ 
here  and  in  ver.  13,  and  rd  nieva  in  ver. 
16.  Bahr  contends  that  Elijah  first  learnt 
from  these  words — the  mention  of  a  son 
and  the  absence  of  any  mention  of  her 
husband — that  he  was  addressing  a  "  widow 
woman."  But  we  read  Gen.  xxxviii.  14,  19, 
of  "  garments  of  widowhood "  (of.  Deut. 
xxiv.  17),  and  ver.  10,  "a  widow  woman," 
Ao.,  almost  implies  that  Elijah  from  the 
first  recognized  her  as  Buch],  that  we  may 
eat  It,  and  die. 

Yer.  13. — ^And  Elijah  said  unto  her  [This 
looks  at  first  Uke  a  further  test.  But  it  is 
pretty  clear  that  the  prophet  now  knew  that 
the  widow  of  whom  God  bad  spoken  was 
before  him] ,  Fear  not ;  go  and  do  as  thou 
hast  said  [Heb.  according  to  thy  word] 
but  [Heb.  only,  however] :  make  me  thereof 
[Heb.  thenee,  i.e.,  of  the  oil  as  well  as  the 
meal.  The  former  took  the  place  of  butter. 
Bread  was  sometimes  baked  in  oil]  a  little 
cake  first,  and  bring  it  tinto  me,  and  after 
make  for  thee  and  thy  son.  [The  "  first " 
and  "  afterwards  "  are  emphatic  by  position. 
When  Bahr  says  that  Elijah  would  never 
have  made  this  demand,  and  that  still  less 
would  the  widow  have  paid  any  attention  to 
it,  had  she  been  a  heathen,  he  appears  to 
forget  the  words  that  followed  (ver.  14). 
When  one  in  the  garb  of  a  prophet  swore, 
as  this  man  did,  by  the  sacred  name,  a 
heathen,  with  the  belief  of  the  heathen  in 
miracles,  might  well  be  persuaded  that  the 
word  was  truth.  Elijah's  manner  alone 
would  carry  conviction  with  it.] 

Ver.  14. — For  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of 
Csrael  [The  words,  "  God  of  Israel,"  if  any- 
thing, favour  the  supposition  that  he  was 
spefOong  to  one  who  was  not  of  Israel.  See 
on  ver.  1.    There  the  words  were  addressed 


to  one  who  was  denying  the  God  of  Israel] 
The  barrel  of  meal  shall  not  waste,  neither 
shall  the  cmse  of  oil  fiill,  until  the  day 
that  the  lord  sendeth  [Heb.  giveth.  For 
]D?I  see  note  on  oh.  vi.  19]  rain  upon  the 
earth.  [Heb.  on  the  face  of  the  ground.  Like 
expression  ch.  xviii.  1 ;  Gen.  ii.  6.  It  has 
been  said  that  there  is  not  a  syllable  here  to 
imply  a  miracle,  and  it  has  been  contended 
that  this  Sareptan  household  was  sustained 
for  over  two  years  simply  by  the  blessing 
of  God  on  the  use  of  natural  means.  But 
clearly,  if  there  was  nothing  else,  there  was 
supernatural  knowledge  on  Elijah's  part. 
And  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  literal  con- 
struction of  the  words  points  to  a  "  super- 
natural and  inexplicable  multiplication  of 
food"  (Bawliuson),  similar  to  those  of 
which  the  Gospels  tell.  It  is  just  possible 
that  this  was  a  figure  of  speech,  which 
practically  meant  no  more  than  the  neces- 
saries of  life  should  somehow  be  provided, 
directly  or  indirectly,  by  God.  Nor  is 
this  view  efiectually  negatived,  as  Bahr 
contends,  by  Luke  iv.  26 ;  but,  in  view  of 
2  Kings  iv.  44,  Matt.  xiv.  15—21,  xv. 
82 — 38,  it  is  extremely  improbable.  It  is 
curious  how  many  miracles  of  Elijah  and 
Elisha  foreshadowed  those  of  our  blessed 
Lord. 

Yer.  16. — ^And  she  went  and  did  according 
to  the  saying  of  Elijah  [the  echo  of  ver. 
IS,  "  Go  and  do  according  to  thy  saying  "] : 
and  she,  and  be,  [or  he  and  she,  according 
to  Ghethib]  and  her  house  [probably  her 
friends  or  poor  relatives  who  came  to  partake 
of  her  plenty  (Bahr)] ,  did  eat  many  daya 
[Heb.  days,  i.e.,  an  indefinite  period.  See 
note  on  ver.  7.  The  word  does  not  refer 
to  the  first  baking  (ver.  13),  hut  it  is  to  be 
explained  by  the  next  verse. 

Yer.  16. — And  [Omit.  This  verse  is  ex- 
plicative, not  additional]  the  barrel  of  meal 
wasted  not,  neither  did  the  cruse  of  oU  fall, 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  which 
He  spake  by  [Heb.  by  the  hand  of]  Elijah. 
[Having  received  a  prophet  in  the  name  of 
a  prophet,  she  received  a  prophet's  reward. 
(Matt.  X.  41,  42).  Stanley  suggests  that  our 
Lord,  when  He  spoke  of  the  "  cup  of  cold 
water,"  may  have  had  this  incident  in  his 
mind. 

Yer.  17. — And  it  came  to  pass  after  these 
things,  that  the  son  of  the  woman,  the 
mistress  of  the  house,  fell  sick;  and  his 
sickness  was  so  sore,  that  there  was  no 
breath  left  in  him.  [Does  this  mean  that 
he  was  dead  ?  Keil  thinks  it  perfectly  clear 
that  it  does.  Bahr  is  as  firmly  persuaded 
that  it  does  not.  He  justly  remarks  (1) 
that  the  same  expression  occurs  in  Dan. 
X.  17  (of.  1  Kings  x.  5)  where  it  does  not 
imply  death.     (2)  That  as  the  text  does  not 


oa.  xvn.  1 — 24.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


S87 


■ay,  "  and  he  died,"  we  must  conclude  that 
it  did  not  mean  to  say  it.  (3)  Verses  18,  20 
do  not  necessitate  the  behef  that  he  was 
dead  (see  belowj.  (4)  Josephus,  who  was  not 
afraid  of  the  muacnlous,  has  interpreted  the 
words  thus:  £ie  xal  rqi'  ifwx^"  ^^eixat  ca2 
t6lai  veKpov.  To  this  it  may  be  added  that 
tVp^)  simply  means  breath,  and  that  where 
it  is  desired  to  convey  the  idea  of  life,  addi- 
tional words  are  nsed  (as  in  Oen.  ii.  7,  "  the 
breath  of  life ;  Oen.  vii.  22,  "  the  breath  of 
the  spirit  of  life."  Cf .  Job  xxvii.  ^  Prov.  xx. 
37  (where  the  intelligence  or  reason  appears 
to  DO  meant),  Ecoles.  iii.  21.  It  must  be 
confessed  also  that  the  statement,  "his 
riokness  was  so  sore,"  &o.,  ia  quite  apropos 
and  intelligible,  if  we  may  understand  that 
he  lay  in  a  state  of  coma,  but  would  be  an 
extremely  roundabout  way  of  affirming  that 
he  was  dead. 

Ver.  18. — ^And  she  said  unto  EUJah,  What 
have  I  to  do  wltli  tliee  [Heb.  what  to  me 
and  thee.  Same  formula,  Judg.  xi.  12 ;  2 
Sam.  xyi.  10 ;  2  Sings  iii.  13 ;  Hatt.  viii. 
29 ;  John  ii.  4.  It  means,  "  What  is  there 
between  us  1 "  or  praotioally,  "  What  have  I 
done  f "  "Is  this  the  result  of  my  association 
with  thee?  Must  such  sorrow  befal  me 
because  thou  art  with  me  1 "  Bahr] ,  0  thou 
man  of  God  7  [This  woman,  U  a  Phceuician, 
was  evidently  famihar  with  the  titles  borne 
by  the  Hebrew  prophets  (ch.  xli.  22 ;  xiii. 
passim ;  Judg.  xiii.  6,  8).  Nor  is  this  to  be 
wondered  at.  The  intercourse  between  the 
two  nations  had  been  very  considerable] 
art  tliou  come  unto  me  to  call  my  aln  [not 
necessarily  any  "  special  sin  in  her  past 
life,"]  to  remembrance  [her  idea  evidently 
is  that  the  prophet  by  residing  with  her, 
seeing  her  life,  &e.,  had  become  acquainted 
with  her  sinfulness,  and  had  called  it  to  the 
remembrance  of  the  Almighty.  She  does 
not  mean  that  he  had  recaUed  it  to  her 
mind,  but  that  he  had  been  the  I^StD  or 
remembrancer  of  God.  Cf.  Gren.  xl.  14 ; 
Ezek.  xxi.  23 ;  Jer.  iv.  16]  and  to  slay  my 
son  7  [Observe,  she  does  not  speak  of  him 
as  slain.] 

Ver.  19.— And  he  said  onto  her,  Give  me 
tby  Boa  And  he  took  blm  out  of  lier  bosom, 
[the  age  of  the  child  may  henee  be  roughly 
inferred]  and  carried  him  up  Into  a  loft  [Heb. 
flJ?HfJ  tft«  upper  chamber.  IiSX.  ri  vrrepipov. 
Loft  is  most  misleading.  The  upper  room 
"  was  often  [rather,  always]  the  best  apart- 
ment in  an  Eastern  house"  (Bawhuson). 
It  was  sometimes  the  guest-chamber  (Luke 
xxii.  11,  12),  and,  from  the  uses  to  which  it 
was  pnt,  must  have  been  large  (Acts  i.  13 ; 
ix.  39;  xz.  8;  2  Kings  i.  2).  Thomson 
(L.  &  B.  i.  235)  infers  from  the  fact  that 
the  widow's  house  had  an  upperroom,  "that 


the  mode  of  building  in  Elijah's  time  and 
the  custom  of  giving  the  'alliyeh  to  the 
guest  were  the  same  as  now ;  also  that  this 
poor  widow  was  not  originally  among  the 
poorest  classes  (who  have  no  'alliyeh),  but 
that  her  extreme  destitution  was  owing  to 
the  famine  "] ,  and  laid  liim  upon  his  own 
bed.  .[It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  verb 
4rI33l£'2  ht.,  made  him  to  lie  down,  would  be 
nsed  of  a  corpse.j 

Ver.  20. — And  he  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and 
aald,  0  tord  my  God,  hast  Thou  also  [i.e. 
in  addition  to  the  misery  and  suffering 
brought  through  me  upon  my  country] 
brought  evil  upon  the  widow  with  whom 
I  sojourn,  by  slaying  [Heb.  to  slay.  Words- 
worth partly  bases  his  conclusion  that  the 
child  was  dead  on  the  inexact  translation  of 
the  A.  v.]  her  son  7 

Ver,  21.  —  And  he  stretched  himself 
[marg.  measured  himself,  but  Gesenius  holds 
that  stretch  out  is  the  primary  meaning  of 
the  root]  upon  the  child  [of.  2  Eingg  iv. 
34,  The  commentators  are  again  at  variance 
as  to  whether  these  words  imply  the  use  of 
natural  means  or  not.  Those  who  hold 
that  the  child  was  dead  naturally  adopt  the 
negative,  and  some  (Eeil,  Bawhnson,  al.) 
compare  with  it  the  action  of  our  Lord  in 
the  case  of  the  blind,  deaf  and  dumb  (Matt. 
ix.  35 ;  Luke  vii.  14 ;  John  ix.  6,  7).  But 
surely  the  circumstances  and  the  purpose 
alike,  in  these  latter  cases,  were  entirely 
different.  The  object  of  the  touch,  of  anoint- 
ing the  eyes,  &o. ,  in  these  cases  of  healing, 
appears  to  have  been  to  awaken  a  sufficient 
faith — without  which  "  He  could  do  no 
miracle"  (Matt.  xiii.  58) — ^iu  men  whose 
infirmities  of  blindness,  deafness,  &o.,  pre- 
vented their  attaining  faith  through  the 
ordinary  channels  of  seeing  and  hearing  the 
mercifiU  and  gracious  Son  of  man.  Bat 
here  the  child,  if  not  dead,  was  senseless. 
We  are  driven,  therefore,  to  the  belief  that 
the  prophet  "  used  rational  means  for 
warming  and  revivifying  "  the  child,  "  not 
with  the  hope  that  of  themselves  they 
would  prove  effectual,  but  in  the  sure 
confidence  that  God,  in  answer  to  his 
weeping  supplication,  would  impart  super- 
natural force  to  the  natural  human 
agencies,"  Bahr]  three  times  [Not  oJily 
in  his  prayer  but  also  in  this  triple  repeti- 
tion do  we  recognize  Elijah's  profound  con- 
viction that  only  by  the  Almighty  power  of 
God  could  the  child  be  restored,  and  that 
whatever  means  were  used,  God  alone  could 
make  them  effectual.  For  three  is  the  num- 
ber and  signature  of  the  Godhead — "  die 
eigentlich  gottUche  Zahl,  die  Signatur  des 
gottlichen  Wesena"  (Bahr,  Symb.  i.  143). 
Hence  it  ia,  inter  alia,  that  "  the  calling 
npon    the  name  of    Jehovah    in   the  old 


888 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XTU,  1—24. 


covenant" — ^he  might  hare  added,  "and 
in  the  new ;  "  of.  Mark  xiv.  39,  41 ;  2  Cor. 
xii.  8 — "  was  a  threefold  act : "  Psa.  It.  17  ; 
Dan.  vi.  10, 13  ;  Num.  vi.  24-26  ;  Isa.  vi.  8 
(Bahr) .  The  correspondence  with  2  Cor.  xii. 
8  is  very  striking]  and  cried  unto  the  Lord, 
and  Bald,  0  Lord  my  God,  I  pray  Thee 
[Heb.  now]  let  this  child's  soul  come  Into 
tiitn  [B.eb.uponhis  inside ;  7J)  is  here,  as  else- 
where, used  for  7(<l]  again.  [Though  Ei'S}, 
here  translated  "  soul,"  constantly  means 
"  Ufe,"yet  it  by  no  means  settles  the  question 
whether  the  child  was  really  living  or  dead. 
For  (1)  the  primary  meaning  of  the  word  is 
"  breath  "  (Gesen.,  Thesaurus,  ».  o.),  and  (2) 
the  words  might  with  perfect  propriety,  even 
if  we  interpret  "  life  "  or  "  soul,"  be  used  of 
one  who  lay  in  a  lifeless  and  inanimate 
condition.  Massillon's  graphic  language 
(vol.  i.  p.  91,  ed.  1838),  showing  the  con- 
trast between  Elijah's  procedure  and  that 
of  our  blessed  Lord  (Luke  vii.  14  ;  viii.  54 ; 
John  xi.  48),  iB  worth  citing  here :  "  Elie 
ressuscite  des  morts,  il  est  vrai ;  mais  il  est 
oblig§  de  se  concher  plusieurs  fois  sur  le 
corps  de  I'enfant  qu'il  ressuscite ;  il  soufSe, 
il  se  r6tr6cit,  il  s'agite;  on  voit  bien  qu'il 
invoqne  une  puissance  Strang&re ;  qu'il 
rappelle  de  I'empire  de  la  mort  une  &me  qui 
n'est  pas  soumise  k  sa  voix,  et  qu'il  n'est  pas 
lui-mlme  le  maitre  de  la  mort  et  de  la  vie : 
Jesus-Christ  ressuscite  les  morts  comme  il 
fait  lei  actions  les  ploa  oommunes ;  U  parle 


en  maitre  k  ceux  qui  dorment  d'nn  lommeil 
6ternel,  et  Ton  sent  bien  qu'il  est  le  Diea 
des  morts  comme  des  vivants,  jamais  phis 
tranquille  que  lorsqu'il  opSre  les  plus  grander 
choses."] 

Yer.  22. — And  the  Lord  heard  the  voice 
of  Elijah ;  and  the  soul  of  the  child  came 
Into  him  again,  and  he  revived  loi  recovered., 
Cf .  2  Kings  i.  2  ;  viii.  8] . 

Yer.  23.— And  Elijah  took  the  Child,  and 
brought  him  down  out  of  the  chamber  Into 

the  house  [Probably  the  iT/JJ  was  reached 
by  an  outside  staircase,  and  did  not  directly 
communicate  with  the  lower  rooms.  Of. 
Matt.  xxiv.  17  ;  Mark  ii.  4  ;  2  Kings  ix.  13] 
and  delivered  him  unto  his  mother:  and 
Elijah  said.  See,  thy  son  llveth. 

Yer.  24. — And  the  woman  said  to  Elijah, 
Now  by  this  [Heb.  tWs.  Gesenius  interprets 
nt  ilFiO  just  now.  Similarly  Bahr,  nunjiwftr] 

I  know  that  thou  art  a  man  of  God  [not 
that  she  had  doubted  it  before.  See  ver.  18. 
In  the  face  of  what  Elijah  had  done  for  her, 
she  could  not  doubt  it.  All  that  she  means 
is  that  this  is  a  great  fresh  proof  of  his 
mission] ,  and  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in 
thy  mouth  la  truth.  [This  last  word  11 DX 
from  which  Amittai  (Jonah  i.  1)  is  formed, 
perhaps  gave  rise  to  the  tradition  that  this 
boy  was  afterwards  known  as  the  prophet 
Jonah.  Amittai  was  held  to  have  been  thil 
widow's  husband. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — The  Mission  and  Ministry  of  Elijah.  The  appearance  on  the  arena 
of  Israel's  history  of  such  a  champion  as  Elijah,  armed  with  such  high  credentials, 
wielding  such  supernatural  powers,  marks  a  crisis  in  the  history  of  God's  ancient 
Church.  We  have  but  to  see  him,  to  hear  him  for  one  mom.ent,  to  know  that  a 
great  straggle  is  impending.  God,  like  Nature,  which  is  but  a  name  for  God, 
"  does  nothing  in  vain."  Such  high  powers  as  his  foreshadow  great  issues.  Four 
points  consequently  may  well  engage  our  attention,  viz.,  the  man,  his  mission,  his 
message,  his  ministry. 

I.  The  Mas.  1.  He  was  a  wild  man  (Gen.  xvi.  12 ;  Heb.  a  wild-ass  man). 
Abraham  has  been  called  an  "Arab  sheykh."  We  have  in  Elijah  a  veritable 
Bedawy,  if  not  by  birth  or  tribe,  by  training  and  in  character.  The  rough  sheep- 
skin (ch.  xii.  13),  the  shaggy  hair  (2  Kings  i.  18),  the  marvellous  bodily  endurance 
(ch.  xvuL  46),  the  careful  avoidance  of  the  city,  the  flight  into  the  desert  (ch.  xix.  4), 
the  whole  bearing  of  the  man  suggests  to  us  the  child  of  the  wilderness.  He,  the 
greatest  of  the  prophets,  one  of  the  "  first  three  "  of  those  bom  of  women,  has  the 
exterior,  the  instincts,  the  heart  of  an  Ishmaelite.  He  was  thus  a  fit  successor  of 
Moses,  the  shepherd  of  Horeb,  who  in  the  very  haunt  and  home  of  the  Bedawin, 
was  trained  for  his  high  vocation ;  he  was  meet  to  be  the  forerunner  and  pattern  of 
the  Baptist  who  was  bred  in  the  desert,  clad  in  Arab  dress,  and  fed  with  Arab  food 
(Matt.  iii.  1,  4).  It  is  impossible  to  understand  the  man  and  his  work  unless  thil 
be  borne  in  mind.  The  gaunt  dervish  who  one  day  strode  into  the  presence  of  the 
king  and  lifted  up  his  sinewy  arm  and  denounced  the  great  drought ;  the  shaggy, 


OH.  xvn.  1—24.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  889 

long-haired  sheykh,  who  single-handed  faced  the  hierarchy  of  Baal,  and  knew  no 
fear,  his  were  the  asperities,  tlie  privations,  the  scant  fare,  the  primitive,  semi- 
nomadic  life  of  a  GHeadite.  The  sweet  uses  of  adversity  had  moulded  this  man  foi 
the  crisis.  Our  great  chancellors,  it  has  been  said,  come  to'u3  from  tlie  garret : 
the  desert  has  ever  been  the  school  of  the  greatest  prophets.  The  rugged,  unsettled 
pastmages  of  Basbau  were  a  meet  nurse  for  a  prophetic  child.  This  champion  was 
cast  "  in  the  clay  ground  "  (see  p.  142). 

2.  fl«  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves  (James  v,  17).  An  "  earthen 
vessel"  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  "  In  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,"  and  not  "without 
£in"(neb.  iii  16).  The  Bible  never  pictures  men  as  perfect.  The  phrone'ma  aarkos 
remains  even  in  the  regenerate. 

II.  His  MusiON.  Consider — 1.  Whence  it  was  derived.  He  was  not  tanght  of 
men  (Gal.  i.  12,  17).  He  was  tSvorrit  Kai  dyp«ft/iorof.  The  God  who  separated  him 
from  his  mother's  womb  called  him  by  His  grace  {ibid.  T.  15).  He  was  an  extra- 
ordinary messenger  for  a  great  emergency.  But  observe ;  when  God  employs  such 
messengers,  men  whose  mission  is  derived  directly  from  on  high,  the  "  signs  of  an 
apostle  "  are  wrought  by  them.  We  are  not  to  listen  to  an  angel  from  heaven,  unless 
he  shows  us  his  credentials.  We  have  a  right  to  ask  of  those  who  run  without  being 
sent  to  show  us  a  sign.  When  the  missionary  Dr.  Wolff  told  one  of  the  Eastern 
bishops  that  the  "  Lord  had  sent  him,"  the  prelate  not  unreasonably  asked  him  for 
a  display  of  his  powers.  If  God  should  send  us  an  Ellas  again,  He  will  give  us  at 
the  same  time  a  sign  from  heaveu. 

2.  When  it  was  conferred.  It  was  (1)  When  iniquity  abounded.  When  Hiel  had 
buUt  Jericho ;  when  Ahab  had  raised  a  temple  for  Baal ;  when  Jezebel  had  gathered 
round  her  an  army  of  false  prophets ;  when  the  faith  of  God's  elect  was  in  jeopardy. 
The  darkest  hour  is  ever  before  the  dawn.  Cimi  duplicantv/r  lateres,  venit  Moses. 
"  Man's  extremity  is,"  &o.  "  Israel  was  sore  wounded  when  God  sent  them  this 
bahn  from  Gilead  "  (Henry).  (2)  When  ordinary  means  were  insufficient.  There 
were  true  priests  in  Jerusalem ;  there  were  "  sons  of  the  prophets,"  it  is  probable,  in 
Bethel  and  Samaria ;  there  were  seven  thousand  faithful  ones  in  Israel ;  but  what 
were  these  against  such  a  queen  as  Jezebel,  against  such  a  propaganda  and  such  a 
system  as  hers  ?  It  was  then  no  longer  a  question  of  heresy  or  schism,  of  calves 
or  cherubim,  of  Jeroboam's  or  Jehovah's  priests  ;  the  very  existence  of  the  Church 
was  at  stake.  Elijah  was  summoned  to  the  court ;  he  was  armed  with  "  power  to 
shut  heaven  that  it  rained  not  in  the  days  of  his  prophecy  "  (Rev.  xi.  6),  with  power 
to  call  down  fire  to  devour  his  enemies,  and  the  like,  because  only  thus  could  the 
elect  people  be  stayed  from  throwing  themselves  into  the  arms  of  an  organized  pro- 
stitution; from  yielding  themselves,  body  and  soul,  to  the  whoredoms  and  witch- 
crafts of  "  that  woman  Jezebel ; "  because  only  thus  could  the  light  of  truth,  the  one 
lamp  which  illumined  the  world's  darkness,  be  preserved  from  utter  extinction. 

III.  His  Message.  It  was  a  denunciation  of  immediate  drought,  one  of  the 
most  terrible  calamities  that  can  befal  an  Eastern  land.  In  Palestine,  animal  as  well 
as  vegetable  hfe  is  directly  dependent  on  the  rain.  Not  only  do  the  showers  which 
irrigate  the  land  feed  the  springs,  but  they  axe  carefully  stored  up  in  cisterns  for 
daily  use.  It  is  only  as  compared  with  the  arid  wastes  of  Egypt  that  the  Holy  Land 
could  be  called  "  a  land  of  brooks  and  waters,  of  fountains  and  depths,"  &o.  (Deut. 
viii.  7).  And  it  is  also  described  by  the  same  writer  as  a  land  that  "  driuketh  water  of 
the  rain  of  heaven  "  (ihid.xi.  11).  Consequently  rain,  everywhere  a  prime  necessity 
of  existence,  is  doubly  indispensable  in  Palestine.  The  rainfall  of  Jerusalem  is  on  the 
average  three  times  as  great  as  that  of  London.  It  is  clear,  consequently,  that  this 
message  threatened  a  terrible  plague,  that  it  portended  long  and  protracted  suffering. 
There  are  some  who  will  not  hear  of  the  "  terrors  of  the  Lord,"  who  woidd  never 
have  them  mentioned  in  the  pulpit.  Yet  pain  and  privation  are  among  the  first 
sanctions  of  God's  law,  and  we  have  the  authority  of  many  eminent  divines  for 
saying  that  more  men  are  won  to  God  and  right  by  fear  than  by  love.  It  sounds 
fine  and  philosophic  to  speak  of  fear  as  an  unworthy  motive,  but  men  forget  what 
an  unworthy  animal  is  man.  Besides,  this  drought  was  a  part  of  the  punishment, 
and  was  admirably  adapted  to  serve  as  a  punishment  for  apostasy.    It  was  meet  that 


390  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvn.  1—24 

men  who  practically  denied  the  living  God  should  be  practically  reminded  of  their 
dependence  on  Him.  It  was  well  that  those  who  held  Baal  to  be  lord  of  nature,  should 
be  left  to  discover  his  impotence  (c£  Judg.  x.  14 ;  Jer.  xiv.  22).  "  Are  there  any 
of  the  Tanitiea  of  the  heathen  that  can  give  rain  ?  "  And  it  was  a  punishment  this, 
which  penitence  might  avert.  Moreover,  it  was  the  penalty  foretold  in  the  law 
(Deut.  xxviiL  23).  Elijah  was  not  left  to  scatter  plagues  at  hie  pleasure.  Like  an 
earlier  prophet,  he  could  not  "go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  do  less  or  more" 
(Num.  zzii.  18).  Of  himself,  he  could  do  nothing  {ibid.  v.  33).  His  message  was, 
"  As  the  Lord  liveth."  If  the  rain  should  only  come  "  according  to  his  word,"  it 
was  because  his  word  was  God's  word.  If  his  prayer  for  the  drought  had  been 
answered  (James  v.  17),  it  had  first  been  inspired.  He  speaks  here  as  the  minister, 
not  the  master.  He  is  the  willing,  patient  slave  of  Jehovah.  "  Before  whom  I 
stand." 

IV.  His  Mikistbt.  From  this  initial  message  let  ns  tnin  to  his  ministry  as  • 
whole.     And  it  presents  to  our  view  these  broad  features — 

1.  It  was  exercised  in  silence.  How  few  are  Elijah's  recorded  words,  and  those 
few  are  the  uttei-ances  of  but  five  or  six  occasions.  He  was  not  "  mighty  in  word." 
He  had  no  sooner  delivered  his  first  brief  message  than  he  disappears,  andfor  three 
years  and  a  half  Israel  hears  him  no  more.  He  speaks  for  a  moment :  he  ia  dumb 
for  a  triennium.  And  when  he  reappears,  it  is  but  for  a  day.  That  one  day's 
ministry  ended,  he  is  again  hidden  from  our  view.  Thrice  more  he  reappears  in&e 
history,  but  each  time  it  is  but  for  a  day,  and  then  he  goes  into  the  silent  heavens, 
aiLd  save  on  the  night  of  transfiguration,  speaks  to  men  no  more.  How  like  to  the 
revelations  of  God  to  man.  He  "  keepeth  silence  (Psa.  L  8).  He  too  hideth  Himself 
"He  spake  audit  was  done."  How  uuhke  the  everlasting  chatter  of  some  of  our  later 
prophets.  "  Ministers,"  it  is  sometimes  said,  "  are  mere  talkers."  Elijah  proclaims 
the  dignity,  if  not  "  the  eternal  duty,  of  sUenoe."  "All  real  work,"  some  one  has 
said,  "  is  quiet  work."  How  many  of  our  sermons,  fall  of  sound  and  fuiy,  leave  not 
a  trace  behind  them.  But  the  silent  Elias  accomplished  the  regeneration  of  his 
country. 

8.  It  was  a  ministry  of  deed.  There  was  no  need  for  him  to  speak.  The  works 
that  he  did  bore  witness  of  him.  Declamation,  argument,  remonstrance,  would 
have  been  absurd.  The  time  for  that  was  past.  And  he  had  actions  to  speak  for 
him.  Surely  there  is  a  lesson  for  Christ's  ministers  here.  It  is  true  they  cannot 
work  wonders  like  Elijah ;  and  it  is  also  true  that  they  are  sent  to  "  preach  the 
Word,"  to  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort,  &o.  ;  but  we  are  reminded  here  that  a  fruitful 
ministry  must  be  one  of  action.  Words,  however  eloquent,  in  the  long  turn  count 
for  less  than  a  holy  life.  The  age,  however  it  may  hanker  after  sensationalism,  is 
nevertheless  suspicious  of  all  talk.  Why  is  it  that  our  holy  rehgion  has  but  such  an 
indifferent  hold  on  the  masses  of  our  countrymen  1  One  reason  is  that  while  we 
"  point  to  heaven,"  we  do  not  always  "  lead  the  way."  "  Cvjus  vita  contemniiur, 
ejus  praedicatio  despicitwr,"  The  life  of  their  parish  priest  is  the  only  Bible 
many  Englishmen  ever  read,  and  alas,  what  a  smeared  and  blotted  page  that  some- 
times is.  And  those  who  do  hear  our  sermons  have  learned  to  discount  them.  They 
know  full  weU  that  words  are  cheap,  and  that  emotion,  and  even  unction,  can  be 
simulated.  They  often  wonder  how  much  of  our  discourse  we  reaUy  believe  and 
practise  ourselves,  and  they  turn  to  our  lives  for  an  answer.  That  familiar  paradox, 
consequently,  is  full  of  truth  and  meaning,  that,  "in  preaching,  the  thing  of  least 
importance  is  the  sermon."  It  was  well  said  that  actio— action  in  the  truest  sense 
of  the  word,  not  gesture  or  manner,  but  conduct — is  the  first,  second,  and  third 
great  essential  of  eloquence  (see  "  Guesses  at  Truth,"  ii.  pp.  146  seqq.)  A  French 
ecclesiastic,  the  Abb5  Mullois,  has  laid  it  dowh,  as  one  of  the  canons  of  preaching, 
that  "to  address  men  successfully,  they  must  be  loved  much."  "Nothing  influ- 
ences others  so  much  as  character.  Few  people  are  capable  of  reasoning,  and 
fewer  still  like  the  trouble  of  it ;  and  besides,  men  have  hearts  as  well  as  heads. 
Hence,  consistency,  reality,  ever-present  principle,  shining  through  the  person  in 
whom  they  dwell,  and  making  themselves  perceptible,  have  more  weight  than 
many  arguments,  than  much  preaching"  (Heygate,  "  Ember  Hours").  It  is  Baitei 


«H.  XVII.  1—24.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KIKGS.  891 

who  speaks  of  clergymen  who  "  cut  the  throats  of  their  sermons  by  thoir  lives  ;  " 
but  there  are  many  who,  without  doing  this,  invalidate  their  words  by  their  actions. 
It  is  well  for  ns  to  remember  that  personal  character  is  the  best  preparation  for  the 
pulpit.  "  Facta,  non  verba;  "  this  is,  and  will  be  increasingly,  the  demand  of  the 
age  upon  the  prophetic  order.  "  Non  magna  elogwi/mmr  ted  vwinvus."  This  must 
be  more  and  more  the  response  of  the  ministry. 

8.  It  was  brave  and  fearless.  On  three  occasions  this  court  preacher  took  his 
life  in  his  hand  (oh.  xvii.  1 ;  zviii.  2 ;  xxi.  19).  On  one  occasion  he  seems  to  have 
quailed  (ch.  xix,  3),  but  even  then  it  does  not  appear  that  he  fled  from  any  present 
duty,  or,  like  Jonah,  declined  any  commission.  His  ministry  as  a  whole  was  boldly 
discharged  as  in  the  presence  of  the  Eternal,  "  Before  whom  I  stand."  He  saw 
none  other  than  his  Master.  Like  another  preacher  before  royalty,  Masdllon,  he 
spoke  as  if  he  saw  Death  standing  at  bis  elbow.  Like  Daniel,  he  knew  that  his  God 
could  deliver  him.  The  fear  of  man  is  cast  out  when  we  realize  the  presence  of 
God  (Isa.  li.  12, 13). 

4.  It  was  seemingly  a  failwre.  If  others  did  not  think  so,  he  did.  We  know 
that  no  work,  really  and-truly  done  for  God,  can  be  wasted  (Isa.  Iv.  11) ;  but  we  are 
often  tempted  to  think  it  is.  But  it  must  be  such  work  as  wiU  stand  the  trial  by  fire 
(1  Cor.  iii.  13).  It  has  been  strikingly  said,  "If  any  man's  work  is  a  failure,  the 
probability  is  that  it  is  because  he  is  a  failure  himself."  Still,  it  is  for  our  comfort 
to  remember,  in  times  of  depression,  that  the  greatest  of  the  prophets  saw  Uttle  or 
no  fruit  of  his  labours.  He  was  persuaded  that  even  the  unexampled  miracles  that 
he  wrought  were  of  little  or  no  avail  (ch.  xix.  10).  We  find  that  when  there  were 
seven  thousand  secret  followers  of  the  Lord  God,  Elijah  thought  himself  left  alone. 
And  indeed  the  state  of  Israel,  even  after  the  ordeal  of  Carmel,  might  well  lead  him 
to  take  the  gloomiest  and  most  despahing  view  of  the  situation.  Jezebel  pursues 
her  infamous  way.  The  son  of  Ahab  sends  to  consult  a  foreign  oracle,  and  ignores 
the  God  of  Israel.  The  fire  must  come  down  a  second  time  and  bum  up  the 
idolaters  instead  of  the  bullock  and  the  altar.  But  all  the  same,  we  know  that  his 
work  was  not  in  vain.  Nor  can  ours  be,  if  done  like  his.  We  have  nothing  to  do 
with  immediate  successes.  "  One  man  soweth,  another  reapeth."  Nor  is  success 
in  any  shape  mentioned  in  our  instructions.  That  is  God's  part,  not  ours.  We 
have  but  to  sow  the  seed.  He  must  make  it  grow.  The  world  worships  success — 
or  what  it  calls  success — and  the  greatest  of  ministries — Elijah's,  Jeremiah's, 
Ezekiel's,  our  blessed  Lord's — ^were  all  failures  from  a  worldly  point  of  view. 

Vers.  8 — 7. — The  SoUiary  Place.  We  have  just  seen  that  it  was  from  th« 
wilderness  that  EUjah  went  forth  into  the  busy,  wicked  world,  and  to  the  anxious, 
dangerous  work  of  a  prophet.  He,  like  his  antitype,  was  in  the  desert  "until  the 
time  of  his  showing  unto  Israel"  (Luke  i.  80).  There,  in  secret  communion  with 
God,  he  had  gained  strength  for  the  encounter ;  there  he  had  meditated  over  the 
grievous  apostasy  of  his  people,  and  had  "  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day 
with  their  evil  deeds"  (2  Pet.  ii.  8).  And  there,  as  he  "prayed  earnestly  that  it 
might  not  rain,"  the  word  of  tKe  Lord  came  to  him  and  burned  in  his  bones  (Jer. 
XX.  9),  and  bore  him  into  the  presence  of  the  king  (Amos  iii.  8).  But  it  is  now  for 
ns  to  observe  that  no  sooner  had  he  entered  upon  his  ministry,  and  delivered  his 
first  brief  message,  than  he  was  sent  into  the  desert — it  may  be,  the  same  desert — 
again.  The  word  of  the  Lord  straightway  bids  him  turn  eastward  and  hide  in  the 
brook  Cherith.  Now  the  word  Cherith  means  separation.  This  section  conse- 
quently may  fittingly  speak  to  us  of  the  need  of  separation,  of  the  uses  of  solitude 
and  retirement  in  the  disciphne  of  the  saints.  From  Elijah's  separation  from  liis 
work  and  the  world  we  may  glean  some  lessons  as  to  our  own.     Observe — 

1.  Solitude  was  necessary  to  Elijah's  safety.  He  must  hide  or  lose  his  head. 
When  Jezebel  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  (ch.  xviii.  13),  we  may  be  sure  he 
would  not  be  spared.  Was  it  not  because  of  him  indeed  that  the  others  were 
attacked?  Had  his  dwelling  been  with  men,  the  messengers  of  Ahab  would 
assuredly  have  foimd  him  and  slain  him  (ch.  xviii.  10).  So  it  is  sometimes  neces- 
•ary,  for  the  life  of  our  souls,  that  we  should  flee  into  the  desert.     It  is  at  our  peri) 


393  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  xvn.  1—24 

that  yre  stay  in  Sodom.  We  mnst  "  escape  to  the  monntam."  It  may  be  from 
some  enchantress,  whose  whoredoms  and  witchcrafts  are  as  cruel  as  Jezebel's ;  it 
may  be  from  companions  whose  snares  are  more  perilous  than  Ahab's  sword ;  it 
may  be  from  a  society  hardly  less  pestilent  than  that  of  Israel.  There  are  times 
when  our  only  safety  is  in  flight.  Those  hermits  who  buried  themselves  in  the 
Thobaid,  or  who  burrowed  in  the  rocks  of  the  Wftdy  Feiran,  the  world  has  only  a 
smile  for  their  folly,  and  it  is  no  doubt  true  that  God  would  have  ns  leaven  the 
world,  not  leave  it.  But  it  would  have  been  well  if  some  had,  for  a  time  at  least, 
followed  their  example.  How  many  souls  have  perished  because  they  would  not 
enter  into  their  chambers  and  shut  their  doors  and  hide  themselves  until  the  indig- 
nation be  overpast  (Isa.  xxvi.  20) ;  because  they  had  not  the  courage  to  disappear 
for  a  while,  if  only  into  their  closets.  "He  that  wilfully  stands  still  to  oatob 
dangers,  tempteth  God  instead  of  trusting  him." 

2.  Solitude  was  neceasa/ry  to  his  soul's  health.  It  is  remarkable  how  God'* 
elect  messengers,  each  in  his  turn,  have  been  sent  "  apart  into  a  desert  place  to  rest 
awhile  "  (Mark  vi.  31).  '  Moses  must  spend  forty  years  in  the  great  and  terrible 
wilderness ;  must  spend  forty  days  and  forty  nights  in  Horeb,  the  Mount  of  God. 
EUjah  himself  only  emerges  from  the  Cherith  to  go  to  another  hiding-place  at 
Zarephath,  and  from  Zarephath  he  passes  almost  directly  to  the  same  wilderness 
and  the  same  mount  where  Moses  was.  The  Baptist's  life  was  almost  divided 
between  the  desert  and  the  prison.  St.  Paul  must  learn  his  gospel  in  Arabia.  And 
our  Holy  Lord,  He  must  begin  His  ministry  by  a  forty  days'  fast,  and  from  time  to 
time  must  seek  a  quiet  place  to  rest  and  pray.  All  men  who  are  much  before  the 
world  need  their  times  of  retirement.  In  the  "  loud  stunning  tide  of  human  care 
and  crime  "  it  is  difficult  to  hear  the  whispers  of  God  in  the  souL  Now  the  voices 
of  nature,  such  as  men  hear  in  solitude,  are  among  the  voices  of  God.  Natnre  baa 
been  called  "  God's  great  green  book." 

"  One  impulse  from  a  vernal  wood 
May  teach  you  more  of  man. 
Of  moral  evil  and  of  good. 
Than  all  the  sages  can.' 

"  Thet«  are  two  books,"  says  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  "  from  whence  I  collect  my 
divinity.  Besides  that  written  one  of  God,  another  of  his  servant  nature,  that 
universal  and  pubhc  manuscript  that  hes  expansed  unto  the  eyes  of  all."  And  is 
not  every  tree,  every  leaf,  in  its  way  a  mute  witness  for  God  and  purity  ?  It  is 
remarkable  that  the  greatest  crimes  and  brutalities  are  committed  in  those  districts 
of  this  country  where  men  can  have  neither  nature  nor  solitude — ^in  the  dens  of 
Liverpool,  amid  the  cinder  heaps  of  the  Black  Country,  in  the  dingy  pit  villages  of 
Durham.  It  is  only  in  quiet,  under  the  silent  stars,  amid  the  purple  heather,  by 
the  murmuring  brook,  or  in  the  inner  chamber,  that  we  can  know  ourselves  ana 
our  God.    The  "  Ancient  Mariner's  "  conception  of  his  "  wide,  wide  sea" — 

"  So  lonely  'twas,  that  God  Stmielf 
Scarce  seemed  there  to  be," 

fine  though  it  is,  contradicts  the  experience  of  the  saints,  who  have  found  that  il 
is  precisely  the  profoundest  solitude  that  is  instinct  with  His  presence. 

And  now  let  us  consider  how  God  calls  us  aU  in  turn  to  a  brook  Cherith.  (1)  He 
calls  us  to  separation  from  sin.  The  Church  is  a  Cherith.  Baptism  is  a  "  water  of 
separation,"  the  token  and  pledge  of  our  renunciation  of  world  and  flesh  and  devil, 
of  our  admission  into  the  family  of  God.  While  in  the  world,  we  may  not  be  of  it. 
Our  calling  is  to  holiness  (1  Pet.  i.  15  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9).  We  are  to  be 
sacrifices  (Kom.  xii.  1),  and  the  root  idea  both  of  holiness  and  of  sacrifice  is  a  sepa- 
ration to  God.  (2)  Sometimes  He  calls  us  to  a  chamber  of  sickness,  sometimes  to 
the  very  "  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death."  How  often  is  bodily  sickness  for  the 
soul's  health  I  That  vale  of  separation  becomes  a  vale  of  blessing ;  the  Cherith 
leads  to  a  BeracJiah  (2  Chron.  xx.  'ii5 ;  cf.  Psa.  Ixxxiv.  6).     What  a  school  of  the 


OH.  XVII.  1—24]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  e9» 

heart  has  that  enforced  solitude  often  proved  1  See  Homfletios,  p.  13.  (3)  Noi 
must  we  forget  here  the  Retreat — those  opportunities  for  meditation  and  prayer, 
happily  revived  amongst  us  of  late  years.  The  name  may  possibly  be  Romish,  but 
the  thing  is  sensible  and  scriptural  enough — a  voluntary  retirement  for  a  short 
period  from  the  world  that  we  may  hear  and  think  only  of  the  things  which  mak& 
for  our  peace.  The  saying  stiU  holds  good,  "He  goeth  before  you  into  Galilee  " — 
a  retired  mountain  place  it  was  (Matt,  xxviii.  16) — "  there  shall  ye  see  him." 

8.  Elijah's  retirement  was  for  the  ultimate  welfare  of  Israel,  So  long  as  he 
remained  amongst  them,  the  people  would  have  looked  to  him  as  the  author  ot 
their  calamities,  or  would  have  cried  to  him  to  avert  them.  His  disappearance 
afforded  them  leisure  to  examine  themselves  and  face  their  sins,  and  left  them, 
only  God  or  Baal  to  cry  to.  It  is  sometimes  well  that  the  prophet  should  keep 
Bilenee.  Deua  hahet  auas  moras.  It  is  not  always  that  He  stretches  out  his  hands 
all  day  long  to  the  disobedient  and  gainsaying.  Having  spoken  by  BHjah  to  Ahab- 
and  Israel,  now  He  and  His  prophet  must  withdraw  into  the  darkness,  and  the 
drought  must  do  its  silent  work.  And  there  are  times,  too,  when  Christ's  ministera 
must'  be  silent.  When  the  Gadarenes  besougbt  our  Lord  to  depart  out  of  their 
coasts,  He  straightway  took  them  at  their  word  (Matt.  viii.  34;  ix.  1 ;  cf.  ch.  xxiii. 
88,  89).  The  apostles  were  to  shake  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  against  the  city  that 
received  them  not,  and  to  depart  from  it  (Matt.  x.  14),  and  they  did  so  (Acts  xiii.. 
51).  When  the  Jews  counted  themselves  unworthy  of  eternal  hfe,  Paul  and 
Barnabas  turned  to  the  Gentiles  (Acts  xiii.  46).  When  the  churches  of  Asia  fell 
and  repented  not,  their  candlestick  was  removed  out  of  its  place  (Rev.  ii.  6).  Their 
loss  is  our  gain,    "  These  things  were  written  for  our  admonition." 

Vers.  4 — T. — The  Food  of  the  Saints,  We  have  just  seen  the  prophet  in  his  solitude. 
Let  us  now  consider  the  manner  in  which  he  was  sustained  there.  His  needs  werfr 
supplied  in  two  ways,  partly  by  natural,  partly  by  supernatural  means.  No  miraclfr 
was  wrought  to  give  him  water.  He  must  make  his  home  in  the  wady  and  drink 
of  the  rivulet  that  flowed  past  his  feet.  It  was  there^  and  he  must  help  himself  to 
it.  But  with  his  food  it  was  quite  different.  He  could  not  find  that,  and  so  it  was 
brought  to  him  ;  it  was  provided  him  by  God.  For  even  if  it  was  not  laid  at  hia 
feet  morning  and  evening  by  ravens — and  we  have  seen  reason  to  think  that  it  wa& 
not — even  if  it  was  furnished  him  by  the  villagers  of  Orbo,  his  tribesmen  and  friends, 
or  by  the  loyal  and  hospitable  Arabs  who  roamed  over  the  adjoining  region,  still  it 
was  supplied  by  the  ordering  and  special  Providence  of  God.  For  it  is  as  much  a 
Bupernatiu-al  work  to  control,  by  an  unseen  Power,  the  minds  of  men  as  the  instincts 
or  liabits  of  birds.  If  we  get  rid  of  the  ravens  we  do  not  get  rid  of  the  miracle. 
It  is  clear,  consequently,  that  he  was  sustained  in  part  by  natural,  in  part  by 
Buperhuman  agency.  Now  our  food,  like  his,  is,  though  in  a  different  way,  natural 
and  supernatural.  We  use  the  terms  in  the  popular  sense,  for  who  shall  say  that  all 
food  is  not  supernatural.  True,  it  comes  to  us  by  what  we  call  "  natural  processes," 
in  what  we  call  the  "  order  of  Nature  ;  "  but  it  is  obvious  that  the  so-caUed  "  laws 
of  Nature  "  are  only  "  statements  of  the  observed  course  of  Nature,  or  the  uniform. 
results  of  known  physical  causes  ending  in  some  prime  cause  or  causes  not  merely 
physical "  (Sir  E.  Beckett,  "  Origiu  of  the  Laws  of  Nature  ").  Nature  only  means 
what  is  fixed,  settled,  uniform  (Bp.  Butler).  But,  using  the  words  as  they  are 
nsed  in  common  parlance,  part  of  our-sustenance,  the  supply  of  our  bodily  wants  is» 
for  the  most  part  natural;  and  another  part,  the  satisfaction  of  our  spiritual 
necessities,  is  for  the  most  part  supernatural.  Our  needs,  that  is  to  say,  are 
supplied  something  like  Elijah's  were.  Let  us  trace  the  resemblance  a  little 
more  in  detail,  and  let  us  see  first  how  it  holds  good  of  our 

I.  Bodily  sustenance.     We  learn  from  this  history — 

1.  That  we  must  use  the  means  within  ov/r  reach.  Not  even  for  His  elect 
messenger,  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  does  God  work  an  unnecessary  miracle. 
"Dieu  n'agit  pas  par  des  volontis  particuliJres  "  (Malebranche).  No  doubt  God' 
eouldhave  supplied  his  drink  just  as  easily  as  his  daily  bread,  in  an  extraordinary  way, 
but  He  would  not.     No  ;   in  a  valley  debouching  into  the  Jordan  was  a  stream,  fe J 


894  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xvn.  1—24 

from  Bome  hidden  source,  such  as  the  snows  of  Heimon,  or  springing  from  the  roots 
of  the  hills  of  Gilead,  and  the  prophet  must  seek  it,  and  take  up  his  abode  near  it. 
What  do  we  learn  from  this  but  that  God  "will  have  our  endeavours  concur  to  oui 
preservation,"  a  truth  somewhat  roughly,  but  strikingly,  put  in  the  Puritan  mot 
d^ordre,  "  Trust  in  God,  and  keep  your  powder  dry."  It  is  no  real  kindness  to  do 
for  Elijah  what  he  can  do  for  himself.  There  are  lands  where  daily  bread  is  to  be 
had  without  care  or  labour ;  where  a  man  has  but  to  put  forth  his  hand  and  take 
the  bread-tree  fruit  and  eat  and  be  satisfied,  but  that  is  said  to  be  a  doubtful  boon. 
It  is  found  that  the  natives  of  those  lands  will  not  work,  and  their  life,  which  should 
le  full  of  high  endeavour,  which  should  aim,  if  at  nothing  more,  at  "  making  two 
blades  of  grass  grow  where  only  one  grew  before,"  is  wasted  in  basking  in  the 
eternal  sunshine.  The  primffival  law,  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  thou  shalt  eat 
bread,"  though  we  call  it  a  curse,  is  really  a  blessing.  "  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour  " 
is  as  much  a  Divine  command  as  the  command  to  rest  on  the  seventh.  It  is  God 
decrees,  "If  any  man  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat"  (2  Thess.  iii.  10).  The 
imperious  necessity  to  provide.our  daily  bread  is  one  of  the  springs  which  keeps 
the  world  in  motion:  it  is  the  salt  which  keeps  our  life  from  stagnation  and 
corruption.  It  is  in  vain  we  cry  to  Jupiter  for  help.  God  has  given  us  fields  and 
seed.    He  gives  us  rain  and  sunshine  ;  it  is  for  our  good  that  we  should  do  the  rest. 

2.  That  then  Ood  will  supply  what  is  lacking.  When  we  have  done  our  best 
we  may  justly  look  to  Him  to  give  what  we  cannot  get.  And  this  He  wiU  do. 
"  Thy  bread  shall  be  given  thee,  and  thy  waters  shall  be  sure"  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16). 
"Never  have  I  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  their  bread" 
(Psa.  xxxvii.  25).  In  the  barren  wilderness.  He  gave  bread  from  heaven.  "  In  th« 
daysof  famine,  they  shall  be  satisfied  "  (Psa.  xxxvii.  19).  What  a  commentary  on 
these  words  does  this  history  furnish  1  Elijah  had  "called  for  a  famine  on  the 
land  "  (ch.  xviii.  2 ;  Luke  iv.  25),  and  had  "  broken  the  whole  staff  of  bread  "  (Psa. 
cv.  16) ;  but  he  himself  had  enough  and  to  spare.  God  spreads  for  him  "  a  table 
in  the  wilderness  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  16),  and  almost  "  in  the  presence  of  his  enemies  " 
(Psa.  xxiii^  5).  The  stars  shall  fall  from  their  courses,  but  he  shall  have  enough. 
It  has  been  thought  by  some  that  the  ravens  brought  him  bread  and  flesh  from 
Ahab's  own  table.  It  would  have  been  so,  had  it  been  necessary.  If  he  was 
supplied  with  food  by  human  instrumentality,  it  was  none  the  less  by  God's 
command.  And  this  is  God's  ordinary  way  of  hearing  "  the  prayer  of  the  poor 
destitute ; "  he  puts  it  into  the  hearts  of  others  to  help.  "  God  works  by  means,  and 
the  chief  means  is  man"  (Bossuet). 

8.  That  God  gives  us  owr  hread  da/ily.  Elijah  only  received  a  small  supply  ol 
food  at  once.  Though  he  had  no  lack,  he  had  no  profusion.  He  had  "  daily 
bread" — for  "  morning  and  evening  are  one  day  "  (Gen.  i.  6) — and  no  more.  Even 
he  must  walk  by  faith  and  learn  to  "  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow."  And  daily 
bread  is  all  that  is  promised  us  ;  all  that  we  are  taught  to  pray  for  (Matt.  vi.  11). 
And  that,  perhaps,  because  a  day  is  a  life  in  miniature  ;  each  day  is  rounded  by 
dawn  and  dusk,  by  sleep  and  darkness,  into  a  perfect  little  life.  Whether  the  birds 
brought  him  food  or  not,  he  and  they  received  it  alike,  tov  iviovaiov  dprov,  the  bread 
of  a  day  in  its  day.  The  lesson  of  the  manna  (Exod.  xvi.  20)  is  taught  us  again  by 
the  brook  Cherith. 

4.  That  Ood  guarantees  us  necessaries,  not  luxuries.  Elijah's  fare  was  frugal. 
"  Water,  bread,  and  flesh"  (cf.  Isa.  xxxiii.- 16).  As  a  rule,  He  gives  us  food 
"  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think."  How  prodigious  la 
the  variety  of  our  food,  how  lavish  its  supply  I  What  rich  provision  has  the 
Eternal  Goodness  made  for  the  gratification  of  our  tastes.  Fish,  flesh,  fowl,  fruits, 
— the  list  is  endless.  And  of  the  flesh  or  fruits,  again,  how  many  genera,  and  in 
the  genera  how  many  species,  and  in  the  species  what  countless  varieties.  Lavish 
profusion  marks  His  gifts.  But  all  the  same  he  covenants  to  give  us  less  than  the 
fare  of  Cherith,  even  bread  and  water.  "  God  gives  order  for  competency,  not  fol 
wantonness"  (Hali). 

II.  Spiritual  food.  But  we  are  now  to  consider  thnt  "  man  doth  not  live  by 
bread  alone,  but  by  evei-y  word,"  &c.  (Deut.  viii.  8  ;  Matt.  iv.  4).     The  saints  h»v« 


OH.  xvn.  1—24.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  898 

meat  to  eat  of  which  the  world  knows  nothing  (John  iv.  34).  Elijah  had  other  food 
than  that  which  the  ravens  brought  him.  In  giving  "  daily  bread,"  God  does  not 
forget  man's  spiritual  part,  even  if  he  forgets  it  in  his  prayer  for  bread.  And  God 
supplies  the  soul's  needs  by  laws  not  unlike  those  which  govern  {he  supply  of 
material  food. 

1.  We  mast  use  the  means  of  grace.  The  treasury  of  the  Church  contains  an 
abundant  provision.  There  are  "  Uving  waters,"  there  is  "  super-substantial  bread," 
there  is  word  and  sacrament,  prayer  and  psahn.  But  we  must  come  to  the  waters 
and  drink  (John  viL  87;  Eev.  xxii.  17).  Our  fadth  needs  something  to  feed  upon, 
and  it  is  in  vain  we  ask  for  luiracles,  so  long  as  we  do  not  use  means.  If  we  want 
to  love  God  more,  we  must  seek  to  know  God,  through  His  word  and  works,  better. 
If  we  want  to  be  more  Uke  Christ,  we  must  be  more  with  Christ,  in  His  word  and 
ordinances,  for  it  is  "  association  produces  assimilation."  There  is  a  tendency  to 
decry  the  means  of  grace.  There  is  a  rehgion  which  is  wholly  subjective,  which 
seeks  its  growth  and  expansion  in  everlasting  self-introspection  or  mystical  contem- 
plation of  the  Divine  perfections.  But  "  Thou  shalt  drink  of  the  brook."  True,  the 
channel  is  nothing — Annus  non  ager,  facit  fruetv/m — but  a  chauneL  It  is  God 
must  fill  it,  but  if  God  has  dug  it,  it  is  presumption  to  discard  it, 

"The  means  that  Heaven  yields  must  be  embraced. 
And  not  neglected  ;  else  if  Heaven  would 
And  we  will  not,  Heaven's  offers  we  refuse." 

2.  If  we  a/re  debcurred  from  the  meam,s  of  grace,  Ood  will  give  graee  without 
means.  It  is  a  blessed  truth,  gratia  non  ligaiwr  mediis.  We  may  not  dispensa 
with  them,  but -God  can,  and  does.  He  did  so  in  the  oft-cited  instance  of  the  dying 
thief.  He  was  saved  without  sacraments,  but  St.  Paul  was  not  (Acts  xxii.  16). 
And  how  often  have  the  saints  and  martyrs,  cut  off,  amid  fierce  persecutions,  from 
the  communion  of  the  saints,  found  their  deserts  or  their  cells  glorified  by  direct 
communion  with  God.  Matthew  Henry  quaintly  says  that  "  if  we  cannot  go  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  we  can  go  to  the  Lord  of  the  house."  The  Church  of  England 
proclaims  that  there  may  be  a  true  Eucharist  without  the  elements  (vide  The 
Communion  of  the  Sick,  8rd  Rubric).  But  it  is  only  when  we  are  deprived  of  the 
means  that  we  can  justly  expect  God  to  dispense  virith  them.  He  has  commanded 
His  ministers  to  feed  His  Church  (Acts  xx.  23  ;  1  Peter  v.  2) ;  He  has  given  them 
word  and  sacrament,  bread  and  wine,  wherewith  to  nourish  it ;  but  He  is  indepen- 
dent both  of  means  and  ministers. 

8.  Supplies  of  grace  aure  granted  day  by  day.  Our  soul's  bread  is  a  daily  bread. 
Every  day  we  ask  for  forgiveness,  for  grace  (Matt.  vi.  11) ;  and  as  our  days,  so  oui 
strength  shall  be  (Deut.  xxxiii.  25).  If  we  have  not  morning  and  evening  prayer 
in  the  Church,  we  may  have  it  in  the  house.  And  morning  and  evening  may  be 
sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer,  in  private.  Each  may  find  a  Cherith  in 
the  closet ;  each  receive  there  his  portion  of  meat  in  due  season. 

4.  Grace  is  given  without  measure.  God  does  not  promise  luxuries,  because 
they  are  often  hurtful.  But  there  is  no  over-indulgence  here.  It  is  significant  how 
excess  in  wine  is  contrasted  with  being  fiUed  with  the  Spirit  (Ephes.  v.  18).  One 
cannot  drink  too  deep  of  the  living  waters  (John  vii.  83).  They  are  given  freely 
(Kev.  xxii.  17). 

Vers.  8 — 16. — The  Furnace  of  Trial.  The  vUlage  of  Zarephath  appears  to  have 
borrowed  its  name  from  the  furnace  or  furnaces  created  there  for  the  smelting  of 
metals.  See  note  on  ver.  9.  A  great  lexicographer  interprets  the  word  to  mean,  a 
"  workshop  for  the  melting  and  refining  of  metals."  But  that  name  might  with 
scarcely  less  propriety  have  been  bestowed  upon  it  from  the  circumstances  recorded 
in  this  section.  It  was  a  veritable  furnace  for  men ;  a  place  of  assay  and  refining 
both  for  the  prophet  and  the  widow  with  whom  he  lodged.  "  Siuely  .  .  .  there  ia 
ft  place  for  gold  where  they  fine  it "  (Job  xxviii.  1). 

I.  It  was  a  place  of  tbiai.  fob  Elijah.  In  connexion  with  it  he  was  subjected 
to  the  following  trials  of  his  faith  and  courage— 


896  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  fcH.  xvn,  1—24. 

1.  He  had  to  leave  his  hiding  place.  For  months  he  had  dwelt  safely  in  tha 
deep,  sequestered,  peaceful  wady.  That  he  must  hide  there,  and  hide  so  long, 
showed  how  great  was  the  danger  to  which  he  was  exposed.  But  now  he  is  com- 
manded to  quit  his  asylum,  to  go  forth  into  the  world,  to  run  the  risk  of  recognition, 
of  betrayal,  of  death ;  and  to  do  so,  we  cannot  doubt,  would  cost  him  a  struggle, 
and  put  his  faith  in  God  to  ttie  proo£ 

2.  He  had  to  seek  a  home  in  Zidon,  How  those  words  would  strike  upon  his 
ears,  "  Which  belongeth  unto  Zidon  "  1  Zidon  was  the  capital  of  Ethbaal.  The 
father  of  Jezebel,  his  implacable  enemy,  held  sway  there.  It  was  like  going  into  the 
lion's  den.  His  feeling  would  be  sometbing  Uke  that  of  David's  men,  "  Behold,  we 
be  afraid  here  in  Judah :  how  much  more  then  if  we  come  to  KeUah "  (1  Sam. 
xxiii.  3).  Of  all  hiding  places,  that  would  seem  to  him  to  be  the  most  to  be  dreaded. 
How  can  he  escape  detection  there  ?  He  might  well  have  taken  fright,  as  at  a 
later  period,  and  have  fled  further  into  the  desert.  Or  he  might  have  petitioned, 
like  Lot  (Gen.  xix.  20),  to  be  allowed  to  find  some  other  refuge.  But  he  did 
neither.  "He  arose  and  went  to  Zarephath."  He  was  "strong  in  faith,  giving 
glory  to  God  "  (Eom.  iv.  20). 

3.  He  had  to  be  sustained  by  a  widow  woman.  The  position  and  circumstances 
of  the  Eastern  widow  are  to  be  remembered  here.  The  seclusion  in  which  Oriental 
women  hve  makes  its  difficult  for  a  widow  to  find  a  livelihood,  even  if  there  were 
work  for  her  to  do.  And  we  have  only  to  consider  what  the  position  of  widows 
amongst  ourselves  would  be,  if  there  were  no  such  things  as  investments,  no 
means  of  putting  out  money  to  usury  (Deut  xxiii  19).  Hence  the  repeated 
injunctions  to  remember  the  widow  {ibid.  xiv.  29;  xvi.  11,  14;  xxiv.  17, 19 — 21; 
Job  xxiv.  21 ;  xxix.  13 ;  Fsa.  cxlvi.  9).  Hence  the  special  provision  for  widows  in 
the  early  Church  {Acts  vL  1 ;  1  Tim.  v.  4 — 9).  The  widow  wals  an  object  for 
charity,  and  needed  sustenance.  And  now  Elijah  learns  that  by  a  widow  he  is  to 
be  sheltered  and  sustained.  And  this  widow  a  foreigner,  probably  an  idolater — an 
aUen  both  in  race  and  religion.  Surely  there  was  a  trial  both  of  has  faith  and  of  his 
obedience  here. 

4.  Ee  finds  the  widow  in  the  extremest poverty.  He  encounters  her  "gathering 
of  sticks."  That  in  itself  was  not  an  encouraging  sign.  Next  he  hears  from  her  Ups 
that  her  cupboard  is  empty.  She  has  not  food  for  herself,  much  less  for  a  stranger. 
"  A  handful  of  meal,"  a  "little  oil,"  this  is  all  her  store.  She  who  was  to  sustain 
his  Ufe  is  herself  ready  to  die.  But  he  knows  in  whom  he  has  behoved.  He 
"  argued  not  against  Heaven's  will."  He  did  not  "  bate  a  jot  of  heart  or  hope." 
"  Make  me  a  little  cake  first."  He  is  assured  that  "  they  shall  not  be  asham^ed  in  the 
evil  time,  and  in  the  days  of  famine  they  shall  be  satisfied"  (Psa.  xxxvii.  9).  He 
knows  that  "  God  will  not  suffer  his  word  to  fail,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone 
out  of  his  lips  "  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  84). 

6.  He  is  irnvmu/red  in  her  house  for  two  years.  Those  two  years  were  years  of 
banishment  from  his  country  and  his  work.  Three  years  and  a  half  had  he  to  wait, 
and  most  of  the  time  in  a  strange  land,  ere  his  recal ;  cut  off,  "  not  from  hfe,  yet 
from  usefulness,  which  is  the  end  and  comfort  of  life."  Which  of  us  would  not  have 
been  impatient,  or,  like  the  Baptist  in  his  fortress-prison,  tempted  to  think  God  had 
forgotten  us  ?  And  he  knew  that  all  this  time  his  people  were  suffering.  We 
think  it  strange  if  a  servant  of  God  is  laid  aside  for  a  few  months  from  his  ministry. 
But  the  greatest  of  the  prophets  was  silenced,  was  buried  alive,  for  the  mystical 
period  of  forty  and  two  months,  for  "  time  and  times  and  half  a  time  "  (Kev.  xi. 
2,  8 ;  xii.  6,  14).  "  When  we  cannot  work  for  God  we  must  sit  BtUl  quietly  for 
him  "  (Henry).     "  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait." 

6.  His  presence  there  is  no  protection  ayainst  sicltness.  Of  the  three  inmates  of  the 
cottage  home,  one  sickens  and  droops  to  his  grave.  This  sickness  causes  us  no  sur- 
prise, but  it  did  Elijah  (ver.  20) ;  and  that  because  he  lived  under  the  dispensation 
of  temporal  rewards.  Sickness  was  then  regarded  as,  and  it  often  was,  the  scourge 
of  the  Almighty  (Deut.  vii.  16 ;  xxviii.  61 ;  cf.  1  Cor.  xi.  30).  It  was  a  trial,  conse- 
quently, of  Ehjah's  faith.  It  looked  as  if  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  gone  out  against 
him.    It  seemed  as  if  he  was  to  be  always  the  autlior  of  misfortune  ("  Hast  thon 


OH.  XVII.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  897 

also,'^  &c.);  as  if  the  widow  by  whom  he  had  been  housed,  and  who  had  hidden 
him  at  the  risk  of  her  Ufe,  was  to  be  requited  with  cruel  punishment  for  her  good 
deed.    But  let  us  now  see  in  Zarephath 
II.  A  FHENACB  OF  TRIAL  FOR  THE  WIDOW.    It  was  this  in  two  ways — 

1.  A  stranger  demands  a  share  of  her  last  meal.  Or,  rather,  he  demands  the 
first  share.  '*  Make  me  a  httle  cake  first."  Now  consider  her  position.  She  ia 
reduced  to  her  last  morseL  So  sore  is  the  famine  that-she  and  her  son,  after  they 
have  eaten  this  meal  together,  are  about  to  he  down  and  wait  for  death.  They 
must  have  suffered  hunger  enough  already ;  they  must  have  dreaded  the  hunger 
even  unto  death  which  awaited  them.  At  this  moment  a  stranger  suddenly 
appears  before  her,  and  says  he  must  eat  first.  It  is  true  that  he  wears  the  aspect 
'ol  a  prophet,  and  appeals  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  but  prophets  were  often 
deceivers  (ohs.  xiii  18  ;  xxii.  12),  and  foreign  gods  could  be  expected  to  show  her  no 
favour.  And  at  home,  her  own  flesh  and  blood,  the  son  of  her  womb,  stretches  out 
his  skinny  fingers,  attenuated  by  famine,  and  cries  for  all  she  has  to  give.  More- 
over, if  this  prophet  could  multiply  food,  as  he  professed  to  be  able  to  do,  why 
fthoidd  he  ask  her  for  bread  ?  Was  it  reasonable  that  she  should  part  with  her 
last  morsel  on  the  strength  of  such  a  promise  ?  "  Charity  begins  at  home."  "  Let 
the  children  first  be  filled."  "  Shall  I  take  my  bread  and  my  water  and  give  it  to 
one  that  I  know  not  whence  he  is  "  (1  Sam.  xxv.  11)  ?  Thus  she  might  justly  have 
argued.  We  could  not  have  wondered  had  the  ordeal  been  too  great  for  her  ;  had 
she  kept  fast  hold  of  her  children's  bread  and  denied  it  to  "  dogs,"  But,  like  that 
other  Byro-Phoenician  woman  (Matt.  xv.  21  sqq.),  her  feith  was  equal  to  the  test; 
she  "went  and  did  according  to  the  saying  of  Ehjah."  And,  therefore,  of  her 
idso  it  might  justly  be  said,  "  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no  not  in  Israel." 

2.  Her  son  falls  siele  and  lies  apparently  lifeless.  The  tie  between  a  mother  and 
an  only  son  is,  perhaps,  the  closest  and  tenderest  of  all  blood  relationships  ;  and  it 
has  been  remarked  that  it  is  pecuUarly  strong  and  sacred  in  the  East.  "  The  only 
son  of  his  mother  and  she  was  a  widow  "  (Luke  vii.  12) :  who  does  not  feel  the 
pathos  of  these  words  ?  And  the  tie  would  be  all  the  stronger  in  this  case  because 
they  had  suffered  together ;  because  he  had  been  given  back  to  her  from  the  jaws 
of  death  (ver.  12).  It  is  said  by  some  that  we  value  things  in  proportion  to  what 
they  have  cost  us,  and  on  this  principle  they  would  explain  the  deep  love  of  the 
mother  for  her  offspring.  Goethe's  mother  used  to  say  that  "  she  and  her 
Wolfgang  had  always  clung  to  each  other,  because  they  had  been  young  together ; " 
but  to  have  hungered  together,  to  have,  hand  in  hand,  looked  Death  in  the  face, 
to  have  seen  the  spectre  retreating,  surely  this  communion  in  suffering,  this 
avfiirdOaa,  this  compassio,  would  beget  a  much  profounder  sympathy.  And  now 
this  boy,  whose  Ufe  had  been  miraculously  preserved,  is  so  sick  that  there  is  no 
breath  left  in  him.  What  could  this  fond  and  anxious  mother  think  ?  Was  the 
prophet  who  had  given  them  bread  unable  to  defend  them  &om  sickness  ?  Or  was 
this  God's  recompense  for  her  hospitahty  ?  She  might  have  had  hard  thoughts 
of  God,  or  unworthy  thoughts  of  the  prophet.  It  is  a  wonder  she  held  fast  her 
integrity.  But  she  only  thought  hardly  ol  herself.  It  must  be,  she  argued,  a 
judgment  for  her  sin.  The  man  of  God  had  read  her  life  ;  had  brought  her  sin  to 
the  remembrance  of  his  Master  (ver.  18).  It  never  occiurs  to  her,  strong  as  was 
the  temptation,  to  arraign  God's  providence.  But  her  faith  and  patience  must  hare 
been  sorely  tried. 

It  now  remains  for  na  to  consider  how  these  assays  of  faith,  which  have 
given  to  this  Phoenician  workshop  its  fame  and  immortality,  were  "more 
precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire "  (1  Peter 
i.  7).     In  that  workshop  God  Himself  sat  "  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver." 

It  is  said  that  when  the  crucible,  the  fining  pot  for  silver  (Prov.  xvii.  3),  is  put 
into  the  furnace,  the  chymist  has  a  sure  and  ready  test  of  its  purity  ;  a  means  of 
knowing  when  his  long  processes  nave  accomplished  their  object.  When  he  sees  his 
face  reflected  in  the  glowing  and  untarnished  metal,  he  knows  that  the  purification 
la  complete. 

It  was  that  Ehjah  and  his  hostess  might  learn  to  know  God,  might  be  trans- 


898  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xvu.  1—24. 

formed  into  the  image  of  God,  that  they  experienced  this  two  years'  purgation  in 
the  furnace.  It  was  that  the  dross  might  be  purely  purged,  and  the  tin  taken 
away  (Isa.  i  25) ;  that  they  might  be  changed  into  the  image  of  their  Creator 
(Col.  iii.  10  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18). 

Now  the  historian  does  not  record  the  results  of  this  assay,  except  incidentally. 
But  we  can  clearly  see  that  the  faith  of  Elijah  and  the  widow  alike  grew  stronger 
by  the  exercise.  How  much  Elijah  gained ;  how  the  discipline  told  on  his  subse- 
quent career ;  how  the  trying  of  his  faith  wrought  patience  (James  i.  8),  we  cannot 
now  discover.  But  we  can  see  that  it  resulted  in  the  widow's  conversion,  or  in 
the  confirmation  of  her  faith,  and  in  the  glory  and  praise  of  God  (ver.  24).  And  that 
is  not  all.  Its  issues  are  in  eternity.  The  cross  was  the  forerunner  of  the  crown 
(James  i.  12). 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — BUjah.  In  this  sudden  manner  the  Tishbite  is  introduced,  upon  which 
Bishop  Hall  remarks,  "  He  comes  in  with  a  tempest  who  went  out  with  a  whirl- 
wind." And  Lamartine  says,  "  Becalling  his  life  and  his  terrible  vengeance, 
it  seems  as  if  this  man  had  the  thunder  of  the  Lord  for  a  soul,  and  that  the 
element  in  which  he  was  borne  to  heaven  was  that  in  which  he  was  brought 
forth."    Let  us  consider — 

I.  His  PRESENCE.  1.  n  is  owful  in  its  vat/ueness.  (1)  It  was  of  the  in- 
habitants of  Gilead — "  The  hard,  stony  region,'*  south  of  the  river  Jabbok. 
This  was  one  of  the  wildest  parts  of  the  Holy  Land.  The  awful  scenery  of 
that  district  harmonized  well  with  the  ruggedness  of  the  spirit  of  this  prophet. 
John  the  Baptist  first  appeared  in  a  wilderness.  Out  of  a  wilderness  Jesus 
came  up  when  He  entered  upon  His  public  ministry  (Matt.  iiL  1 ;  Luke  iv. 
1,  14,  15).  (2)  He  is  distinguished  as  the  Tishbite.  Cahnet  says  'Tishbe  was 
a  city  beyond  Jordan  in  the  tribe  of  Gad,  and  in  the  land  of  Gilead.  Gesenius, 
from  Eelandi,  mentions  Tishbe  as  "  a  town  of  Napthali."  Could  there  have 
been  two  Tishbes ;  and  were  the  words  "  Of  the  inhabitants  of  Gilead"  added 
to  distinguish  ?  (3)  "  The  Tishbite,"  we  incline  to  think,  was  a  name  of  office 
or  commission.  It  designates  Elijah  as  the  Converter  ('DBTI  &om  2^  to  turn). 
In  this  he  resembled  John  the  Baptist,  whose  commission  also  was  to  preach 
repentance,  (See  Matt.  xi.  13,  14;  xvii.  12;  Luke  i.  17.)  When  EUjah  comes 
again  "before  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  the  Lord,"  it  will 
be  in  his  character  of  Tishbite  or  Converter,  viz.,  "  to  tm-n  the  heart  of  the  fathers 
to  the  children,  and  the  heart  of  the  children  to  their  fathers."  (See  Matt.  iv. 
6,  6).  2.  It  is  awful  also  in  its  intensity.  (1)  His  name  (in^7K)  some  interpret 
to  be,  "  My  God  Jehovah  is  he,"  others,  "  God  is  my  strength."  In  either  case  it 
reminds  us  of  God,  and  God  is  the  very  centre  of  all  reality.  (2)  EHjah  brings  us 
into  the  very  presence  of  God  also  by  the  manner  in  which  he  annoimces  himself. 
"  As  Jehovah  hveth,  before  whom  I  stand."  In  this  way  also  the  angel  Gabriel 
announced  himself  to  Zacharias,  and  that  too  when  he  revealed  the  coming  of  the 
Baptist.  (See  Luke  i.  19.)  It  is  probable  Elijah,  like  John  the  Baptist,  also  was  a 
priest,  and  the  expression  under  review  may  intimate  this.  (Compare  Deut.  x.  8.) 
About  940  years  after  this,  Elijah,  with  Moses,  in  a  remarkable  manner  stood,  in 
the  presence  of  Jehovah,  in  the  mount  of  transfiguration  (Matt.  xvii.  1 — 3). 
(8)  This  declaration  of  the  Kving  God  was  appropriately  timed.  For  the  calves  or 
young  buhs  of  Jeroboam,  and  the  bulls  and  goats  of  Sidon  established  through  the 
influence  of  Jezebel,  had  so  occupied  public  attention  that  He  was  forgotten. 
Lamentable  is  the  suhstitution  of  death  for  life  I 

His  faith.  1.  It  is  bold  in  its  assertion.  (1)  "There  shall  be  neither  dew  nor 
rain."  The  material  elements  which  mechanically  produce  dew  and  rain  were 
worshipped  by  the  Phoenicians,  and  now  by  the  Israehtes,  while  the  God  that 
made  them  was  forgotten.  Is  not  this  the  very  error  of  modem  atheistic  physicists  t 
They  worship  Baal,  Ashtoreth,  and  Ashere  under  other  names,  and  ridicule  faith 
nd  prayer.     But  Elijah  asserts  the  living  God  as  superior  to  natitre,  who  will 


OH.  XTO.  1—24.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  »99 

restxam  both  dew  and  rain,  and  bo  make  the  gods  to  worship  him.  (See  Deut. 
zi.  16, 17;  Jer.  xiv.  22.)  (2)  "There  shall  be  .neither  dew  nor  rain  these  yeara.'' 
Dew  and  rain,  according  to  the  coiirse  of  nature,  may  be  withbolden  for  days,  for 
weeks,  even,  in  rare  cases,  for  months;  but  not  for  years.  When  therefore  for 
"  three  years  and  six  months  "  these  meteors  were  awanting,  the  phenomenon  was 
snpematural.  2.  The  qualification  it  no  less  remavlcdble — "But  according  to  my 
word."  (1)  Unless  divinely  authorized  to  say  this,  such  a  declaration  would  be 
most  presumptuous.  And  the  inevitable  failure  of  the  prediction  would  cover  the 
pseudo-prophet  with  ridicule  and  confusion.  (2)  But  Elijah  was  a  genuine  man. 
He  spoke  under  the  inspiration  of  Jehovah  before  whom  he  stood.  Such  inspiration 
makes  aU  the  difference  between  presumption  and  faith.  This  is  just  the  dis- 
tinction made  by  James,  who  describes  Elijah's  faith  as  {ivepymifieviji)  imorougJit 
persuasion  of  a  righteous  man  (James  v.  16).  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God.  8.  The 
directness  is  admiraible.  (1)  This  address  is  to  Ahab.  It  comes  not  to  him  as  a 
hearsay,  but  with  the  highest  authenticity.  The  inspired  messenger  of  God  is 
above  kings.  (See  Jer.  i  10.)  (2)  It  is  fearlessly  delivered.  When  a  man  is 
conscious  that  he  stands  before  Jehovah  he  may  use  great  freedom  of  speech.  The 
courage  of  the  lion  is  in  the  heart  of  faith.  EUjah  was  a  man  of  faith  because  he 
was  a  man  of  prayer.  It  is  an  encourag&ment  to  our  faith  to  know  that  "  EUas 
was  a  man  of  like  passions  as  we  are"  (James  t.  17). — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  2—6. — Besowrees  of  Providence.  When  the  heavens  are  shut  up  by  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  what  will  become  of  the  prophet  who  declared  that  word  ?  Will 
he  not  suffer  from  the  drought  in  common  with  the  sinners  on  whose  account  the 
dew  and  rain  are  restrained  ?  Will  he  not  be  exposed  to  the  rage  of  an  idolatrous 
king  and  queen  whose  humbled  gods  cannot,  in  this  crisis,  vindicate  themselves  ? 
Will  not  a  demoralized  populace  resent  their  sufferings  upon  the  man  of  God  ? 
God  knows  all,  and  is  equal  to  aU,  emergencies. 

I.  He  has  resources  for  the  pbotbction  of  his  servants.  1.  He  could 
defend  Elijah  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies.  (1)  The  power  that  had  shut  up 
the  heavens  could  surely  do  this.  The  elemental  fire  which  now  scorched  the 
earth,  He  could  cause  to  fall  upon  the  heads  of  any  who  would  threaten  his  servant. 
(See  2  Kings  i.  10 — 15.)  (2)  Without  recourse  to  violence,  he  could  dispose 
the  hearts  of  men  to  respect  His  messenger,  as  afterwards  He  did.  (See 
chap,  xviii.)  But  this  was  not  now  His  way.  2.  Be  has  also  placet  of 
refuge  for  His  servants.  (1)  If  there  be  a  valley  secluded  from  human  intrusion 
God  knows  it.  In  the  courses  traversed  by  the  brook  Cherith  Elijah  may  safely 
hide.  These  recesses  lay  "  eastward"  from  Samaria,  where  probably  the  prophet 
had  encountered  the  king ;  and  eastward  from  the  Jordan,  for  this  is  the  import  of 
the  phrase  "  before  Jordan."  Probably  this  seclusion  was  in  his  own  wild  district 
of  Gilead.  (2)  Ahab  will  not  suspect  that  EUjah  is  here ;  for  how  could  he  possibly 
subsist  in  such  a  desolate  region.  Water  he  might  find  in  the  streams  of  the  moun- 
tains ;  but  where  can  he  get  bread  from  bald  rocks  in  time  of  drought  9  (Matt, 
xiii.  6,  6.)  8.  Into  such  asylums  He  can  guide  His  saints.  (1)  "  The  word  of  the 
Lord"  came  to  Elijah.  Christ  is  that  Word  (John  i.  1 — 14).  He  was  the  Memba 
of  the  Targums — that  personal  Word,  who  "appeared"  to  patriarchs  and  prophets. 
(See  Gen.  xv.  1. ;  xxviii.  20.)  He  will  be  ever  with  his  people  guiding  them  into 
safety.  (2)  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him  saying,"  or  expressing  His 
wisdom  in  human  vocables.  To  Elijah  the  direction  was,  "  Get  thee  hence,"  &e. 
To  all  He  comes  in  the  promises  and  precepts  of  holy  Scripture.  (3)  Those  who 
believe  and  obey  God's  Word,  as  Elijah  did,  are  in  safe  keeping.  They  need  never 
fear  the  combinaMons  of  wickedness  against  them. 

II.  He  has  resources  also  fob  theib  support.  1.  Their  water  is  sure. 
"Thou  shalt  drink  of  the  brook."  (1)  There  was  refreshment  for  the  body.  The 
stream  of  that  brook  continued  to  flow  for  a  whole  year.  Such  is  supposed  to  be 
the  import  of  (D'D')  days,  when  there  is  nothing  to  limit  it  (as  in  ver.  7,  marg.  ; 
see  also  ver.  16,  marg. ;  Gen.  iv.  8).  (2)  His  soul  meanwhile  was  refreshed,  as, 
by  faith,  he  realized  the  wells  of  salvation  which  flow  from  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 


400  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvn.  1-  24 

(See  Psa.  xlvi.  4;  John  iv.  14 ;  vii.  37—39;  Bev.  xxii.  17.)  2.  Their  bread  shaU 
he  given.  "  I  have  commanded  ravens  to  feed  thee  there.  (1)  What  an  unlikely 
thing !  Eavens  were  unclean  creatures  (Levit.  xi.  15).  They  are  insect-feeding, 
«arrion-eating  birds,  themselves  fed  by  special  providence  of  God.  (See  Job 
xxxviii.  41 ;  Psa.  cxlvii.  9.)  (2)  Yet  God  coulA  do  it ;  for  the  instincts  of  all 
■creatures  are  in  His  hands.  He  restrained  hungry  lions  from  harming  Daniel ; 
instructed  a  fish  how  to  behave  to  Jonah ;  and  another  to  lift  a  piece  of  silver  from 
the  bottom  of  a  lake  and  then  fasten  upon  a  hook.  "  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the 
Lord  ? "  (8)  But  would  He  do  it  ?  Would  He  employ  an  unclean  creature  to 
feed  His  servant  ?  He  might  have  His  own  reasons  even  for  this.  Elijah  sustained 
for  three  years  and  a  half  in  the  wilderness  was  a  type  of  the  Christian  Church 
nourished  by  the  word  of  God  for  three  and  a  half  prophetic  years  (Rev.  xii. 
6,  14).  Babylon  the  great,  from  whose  face  the  Church  had  to  fly,  was  the  mystical 
Jezebel,  as  the  true  Church  was  the  mystical  Elijah.  But  in  this  Church  the 
destruction  of  clean  and  unclean  creatures  had  no  place.  (See  Acts  x.  15,  28 ; 
XV.  7 — 11.)  Might  not  this  gospel  have  been  foreshadowed  in  the  manner  in 
which  Elijah  was  fed  ?  8.  But  is  it  certain  that  ra/uens  were  employed  ?  (1)  He 
might  have  been  fed  hy  Arabians  f  For  the  word  (D'STl?)  translated  "ravens" 
also  denotes  Arabians.  (See  it  so  used  in  the  singular,  Isa.  siii.  30  ;  Jer.  iii.  2 ; 
Neh.  11.  19 ;  and  in  the  plural  as  here,  2  Chron.  xxi.  16 :  xxii.  1.)  And  Gilead 
bordered  upon  that  tract  of  coxmtry  more  especially  described  in  Scripture  as 
Arabia.  (2)  Or  he  might  have  been  fed  by  merchants.  For  this  word  also  desig- 
nates merchants.  (See  Ezek.  xxvii.  9,  27.)  If  Israehtish  merchants  supplied  the 
prophet's  needs,  then  probably  would  they  be  of  the  seven  thousand  who  scorned  to 
bow  the  knee  to  Baal  (oh.  xix.  18),  and  so  would  not  discover  his  hiding  place  to 
Ahab.  (8)  Or  he  might,  have  been  sustained  by  certain  inhabitants  of  Oreb,  a 
rooky  place  beyond  Jordan.  (See  Judg.  vii.  22 ;  Isa.  z.  26.)  This  opinion  ia 
favoured  by  Jerome,  who  says,  "  The  Orbim,  inhabitants  of  a  town  on  the  confines 
of  the  Arabs,  gave  nourishment  to  Elijah."  (See  more  In  A.  Clarke.)  (4)  Whether 
by  ravens,  Arabians,  merchants,  or  people  of  Oreb  or  Orbo,  matters  little ;  God  can 
spread  a  table  in  the  wilderness.  He  can  give  us  the  bread  of  the  day  in  the  day 
— "  bread  and  flesh  in  the  morning,  and  bread  and  flesh  in  the  evening."  Neces- 
sary things  are  sure  ;  luxuries  we  may  dispense  with.  The  greatest  luxury  to  the 
wise  and  good  is  the  feast  upon  ttie  spiritual  food  which  accompanies  faithful 
obedience  to  God  (John  iv.  32-— 34). — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  7 — ^9. — The  Widow  of  Zidon.  Towards  the  close  of  EUjah's  year  of 
eeclusion,  to  use  the  words  of  Dr.  Macduff,  "  the  brook  began  to  sing  less  cheerily; 
once  a  full  rill  or  cascade,  which,  night  by  night,  was  wont  to  luU  the  prophet  of 
Israel  to  sleep,  it  becomes  gradually  attenuated  into  a  silver  thread.  In  a  few  days 
it  seems  to  trickle  drop  by  drop  fi:om  the  barren  rock,  until,  where  pools  of  refresh- 
ing water  were  before,  there  is  nothing  now  left  but  sand  and  stones."  It  is  time 
for  the  prophet  to  look  to  God  for  further  direction ;  and  in  response  to  his  prayer, 
"  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him,  saying.  Arise,"  &c.  How  different  are  the 
resources  of  the  believer  from  those  of  the  worldling  I  When  the  Cherith  of  the 
worlding  fails  he  has  nothing  further  to  look  to,  but  when  from  the  believer  one 
«omfort  is  withdrawn  another  is  at  hand  (Psa.  xxxvii.  19).    Let  us  meditate  upon — 

I.  The  command  of  God  to  the  widow.  1.  She  is  to  sustain  the  prophet  of 
the  Lord.  (1)  What  an  honour  is  this  I  For  two  years  and  a  half  to  entertain  the 
man  that  "  stands  before  Jehovah,"  at  whose  word  the  clouds  are  sealed  or  the 
windows  of  heaven  opened  1  (See  ver.  1  and  xviii.  41.)  The  man  whose  prayer  was 
to  briag  fire  down  upon  the  sacrifice  on  Carmel  to  the  confasion  of  idolatry  I  (eh. 
Tviii.  88.)_  Who  was  to  bring  tlie  same  element  down  upon  the  soldiers  of  Ahaziah  I 
(2  Kings  i.  10 — 12).  Who  was  destined  to  ride  alive  into  the  heavens  in  a  chariot 
of  fire  I  (2  Kings  11. 11).  Who  was  destined,  many  centuries  later,  to  appear  in 
glory  with  Messiah  on  the  mount  of  transfiguration  !  (Matt.  xvii.  8).  And  who  Ib 
yet  to  come  before  the  great  day  of  judgment  to  gather  back  the  children  of  Israel 
from  their  dispersion!    (Mai.  iv.  6,  6).     (2)  How  could  she  hope  for  such  distino- 


OH.  xvn.  1— 24.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  401 

tion  ?  A  poor  widow,  so  poor  that  she  has  no  servant  and  no  fuel  in  her  house  ! 
A  widow  with  her  son,  hoth  at  the  point  of  death  1  A  stranger,  and  a  stranger  of 
Zidon  too — the  land  of  Baal — and  the  land  of  the  wicked  Jezebel  I  Note  :  God's 
ways  are  not  as  our  ways.  He  brings  unlikely  things  to  pass.  How  httle  do  we 
know  what  may  be  the  thoughts  of  His  heart  concerning  ns  i  2.  But  how  is  she  to 
aeeompUsh  this  f  (1)  Unbelief  might  murmur  at  such  a  requisition.  It  might 
charge  God  foolishly  as  a  tyrant  requiring  brick  where  he  had  not  supplied  straw. 
Those  who  shrink  from  Church  work  because  of  fancied  incompetence  fall  into  this 
error,  neglecting  to  trust  God.  (2)  It  is  enough  that  God  has  commanded. 
His  commands  are  promises.  (See  Ezod.  iii.  10 — 12 ;  Judg.  vi.  14.)  See  how  the 
meal  and  oil  are  multiplied  in  the  hands  of  the  widow.  The  more  difficult 
(humanly  considered)  the  undertaking,  the  more  gloriously  will  the  excellency 
of  the  power  of  God  appear.  (See  2  Cor.  zii.  9.)  Attempt  great  things  for  God. 
Expect  great  things  from  God. 

II.  The  reasons  or  the  oomuand.  1.  Elijah  needed  succour.  (1)  The  brook 
is  dried  up.  Now  is  the  time  to  test  the  prophet's  faith.  But  he  is  a  man  of 
prayer,  so  ia  familiar  with  God.  Those  who  best  know  God  have  most  confidence 
in  Him.  Let  ns  be  much  in  prayer.  (2)  Then  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  came." 
Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity.  In  no  strait  let  us  despair  of  help  while  wa 
keep  a  single  heart.  ^God  knows  all>things.  He  can  do  whatever  He  wiU. 
2.  The  woman  needed  succour.  (1)  She  too  had  come  to  extremity — to  the  last 
handful  of  meal.  What  a  touching  spectacle  is  that  widow  at  the  gate  of  Zarephath 
gathering  a  few  sticks  to  prepare  the  last  meal  for  herself  and  her  son  I  (2)  Had 
she  not  prayed  ?  No  doubt ;  and  most  sincerely.  She  was  evidently  a  believer  in 
the  God  of  Israel.  Jehovah  was  not  unknown  in  the  land  of  that  Hiram  who 
"  was  ever  a  lover  of  David,"  and  so  materially  aided  Solomon  in  building  the 
temple  (1  Kings  V.)  (8)  But  then  she  was  not  an  Israelite  to  whom  "were  the 
promises."  So  in  addressing  Elijah  her  words  are,  "  As  the  Lord  thy  God  liveth." 
She  believes  in  the  "  living  God,"  but  cannot  presume  to  call  Hi  w  her  God.  (See 
Bom.  ix.  4.)  What  right  had  a  poor  stranger  of  Zidon  to  lot  k  for  any  special 
consideration  from  the  Lord  ?  (4)  "  He  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble."  He  that 
reads  the  heart  saw  that  she  would  believe  if  only  she  had  a  promise  to  authorize 
her  faith.  He  accordingly  gave  her  the  opportunity  which  she  seized  and  im- 
proved. (See  Acts  x.  1 — 6.)  Let  ns  act  up  to  our  light,  and  God  will  guide  us  into 
all  the  truth.  3.  But  were  there  no  widows  im,  Israel  t  (1)  Upon  the  best 
authority  we  know  that  there  were  "  many,"  and  as  needy  as  this  Zidonian.  In 
the  severity  of  such  a  famine  deaths  from  starvation  were  no  rare  occurrence. 
(2)  But  the  same  authority  informs  us  that  there  were  none  so  worthy  as  this 
widow  of  Sarepta  (Levit.  iv.  24 — 26).  No  widow  in  Israel  would  have  received  the 
prophet  as  this  widow  received  him.  The  moral  is  that  if  we  would  have  special 
favour  of  God  we  must  have  special  faith  to  receive  it.  Let  us  ever  be  in  that 
attitude  of  whole-hearted  consecration  to  God  which  will  make  us  eligible  for  any 
service  he  may  be  pleased  to  promote  us  to.  To  be  permitted  to  do  anything  for 
God  ia  an  unspeakable  honour. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  10 — 16. — The  Barrel  of  Meal.  In  the  East  the  people  kept  their  com  in 
earthen  jars  to  protect  it  from  insects  which  swarm  in  the  heat  of  the  sun.  What 
in  OUT  translation  is  called  a  "  barrel "  (13)  was  one  of  these  vessels.  The  store  in 
this  case  was  run  low ;  there  was  but  a  "  handful "  left ;  yet  this  was  so  multiplied 
by  the  power  of  God  that  three  persons  found  at  least  in  it  sufficient  provision  for 
two  and  a  half  years.     Let  us  inquire — 

I.  How  ITS  CONDITION  BECAME  KNOWN.  1.  Elijah  came  to  Zarephath  in  quest 
of  the  widow,  (1)  Such  were  his  instructions  (vers.  8,  9).  But  was  there  only  one 
widow  in  this  city  of  "  smelting  furnaces  "  (comp.  ch.  vii.  14),  this  hive  of  industry, 
this  centre  of  population  ?  How,  then,  is  he  to  discover  the  right  one  ?  (2)  God 
knows  her,  and  that  is  enough  for  the  prophet.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  who  came 
to  him  at  Samaria  and  at  Cherith  will  now  guide  him.  (See  Isa.  xlii.  16.) 
(8)  Let  ns  follow  the  light  we  have  and  God  will  give  us  more.    So  was  Abraham'r 

1   KINGS.  2  D 


40a  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xyu.  1—24. 

faitliful  servant  guided  to  Eebeoca  (Gen.  xxiv.)  2.  Ee  found  her  at  the  gate  of 
the  city.  (1)  She  was  tbere  on  an  errand  of  her  own,  viz.,  to  gather  a  few  dry 
Bticks  to  kindle  a  fire  to  cook  her  last  meal  in  this  world.  (2)  She  was  there  also, 
though  unknown  to  herself,  on  an  errand  from  God.  She  was  commanded  to 
sustain  the  prophet  of  Israel.  (8)  Yet  these  two  errands  harmonize.  God  nses 
man's  purposes  to  work  out  His  own.  Man  proposeth;  God  disposeth.  8.  Be 
readily  identified  her.  (1)  He  asked  her  for  water,  which,  with  admirable 
promptitude,  she  went  to  fetch.  This  was  the  sign  by  which  Abraham's  servant 
identified  Bebecca  (Gen  ixiv.  14),  The  cup  of  cold  water  has  its  promise  of 
reward  (Matt.  x.  42).  (1)  Then  he  asked  for  bread,  which  further  request  opened 
the  way  for  the  whole  truth,  "  As  the  Lord  thy  God  liveth,  I  have  not  a  cake,  but," 
&o.  (ver.  12).  From  these  words  it  is  evident  that  she  recognized  Ehjah,  at  least 
as  an  IsraeKte,  and  probably  as  the  prophet  of  Israel ;  for  he  was  a  person  of 
pronounced  individuality.  His  profusion  of  hair,  probably,  placed  Elisha  in  such 
contrast  to  him  that  Ehsha  was  mocked  as  a  "  bald  head."  (Comp.  2  Kings  i,  8, 
and  ii.  23.) 

II.  How  ITS  RESOURCES  WERE  MAINTAINED.  1.  By  the  mirocle-toorMng  power 
of  God.  (1)  "  The  barrel  of  meal  wasted  not,  neither  did  the  cruse  of  oU  fail, 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  he  spake  by  Elijah."  This  suppUed  not 
only  the  guest  but  the  widow  and  her  son  for  two  years  and  a  half.  As  Bp.  Hall 
remarks,  "  Never  did  corn  or  olive  so  increase  in  the  growing  as  these  did  in  the 
using."  (2)  This  miracle  was  siinilar  to  that  of  the  manna.  The  oil  was  used  as 
butter  for  the  meal,  and  the  taste  of  the  manna  was  like  fresh  oil  (Num.  xi.  8). 
Also  to  Clirist's  miracles  of  the  loaves.  (3)  The  lessons  are  the  same.  The 
miracles  all  teach  that  "man  lives  not  by  bread  alone,  but  by  the  word  of  God." 
That  this  spiritual  food  is  the  gift  of  God.  That  it  differs  essentially  from  the 
bread  tliat  perishes.  Not  only  is  it  imperishable,  but  it  multipUes  in  the  using, 
grows  as  it  is  dispensed.  How  delightftd  were  the  spiritual  feasts  of  that  two  years 
and  a  half  in  the  widow's  dwelling  1  (See  Eev.  iii.  20.)  2.  Through  the  faith  of 
the  widow.  (1)  She  was  predisposed  to  believe.  God  saw  this,  else  He  had  not 
honoured  her  with  His  command  to  sustain  his  prophet.  (See  Luke  iv.  24 — 26.)  Let 
us  ever  live  in  that  moral  fitness  to  be  employed  by  God.  (2)  This  disposition 
was  encom-aged.  She  waited  for  something  to  justify  her  faith  in  God,  and  she 
got  it:  "And  Elijah  said  unto  her,  Pear«ot ;  go  and  do  as  thou  hast  said,"  &o. 
(vers.  13,  14).  She  knew  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  with  Elijah  And  this 
instruction  to  make  first  a  little  cake  for  the  prophet  was  according  to  God's  order. 
(See  Num.  xv.  20,  21.)  (3)  She  proved  the  genuineness  of  her  faith  by  her 
works.  "  She  did  according  to  the  saying  of  Elijah."  By  works  faith  is  perfected. 
And  God  justified  the  faith  that  justified  him. — J.  A.  M. 

Verte.  17,  18. — The  Beproaches  of  Death.  In  verse  16  we  read  that  the  widow 
and  her  household  did  eat  of  the  multiplied  meal  "  days  "  (D'D*),  a  term  which  is 
by  some  Hebraists  understood,  when  used  withoat  qualification,  to  denote  a  year. 
So  the  plirase  with  which  the  text  opens,  "  And  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things," 
imports  that  the  miracle  of  raising  the  widow's  son  occurred  "  after  "  Elijah  had  been 
one  year  in  her  house.  The  "  things  "  to  which  this  miracle  succeeded  were  the 
earUer  signs  of  the  presence  of  God  with  the  prophet,  meanwhile  the  widow  read 
the  bereavement  her  own  way. 

1.  She  saw  the  hand  of  God  in  it.  1.  She  attributed  it  to  Elijah.  "  Art  thou 
come  unto  me,  to  slay  my  son."  (1)  Not,  however,  under  any  notion  of  tmkind- 
ness  to  her  in  the  heart  of  the  prophet.  For  (a.)  had  she  not,  and  her  son  with  her, 
been  saved  from  death  by  famine  in  connexion  with  his  sojourn  in  her  house? 
(6)  The  heavenly  conversation  they  must  have  had  during  the  year  would  preclude 
such  an  idea.  (2)  Yet  here  is  the  fact ;  and  it  is  written-  for  our  learning.  The 
incidents  in  Scripture,  given  under  Divine  inspiration,  are  therefore  to  be  very 
particularly  noted.  They  cannot  be  too  carefully  or  too  prayerfully  studied.  2.  She 
attributed  it  to  him  as  a"  man  of  Ood."  (1)  This  was  not,  in  her  estimation,  an 
ordinary  case  of  death.    The  oircumstanoes  surrounding  it  were  all  extraordinary. 


OT.  xvn.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  408 

(2)  At  leaat  she  saw  that  it  was  intended  by  God  for  some  high  purpose.  She  was 
right.  We  should  not  be  wrong  so  to  regard  ordinary  providences.  All  God's 
purposes  are  high.  All  His  providences  are  important.  His  providence  is  in 
«verything.    Life  therefore  is  no  stale  thing. 

II.  She  read  his  repboaohbs  in  it.  "  Art  thon  eome  to  call  my  sm  to  my 
remembrance  ?  "  1.  We  should  never  forget  that  we  are  sinmers.  (1)  Whatever 
reminds  ua  of  God  should  remind  us  of  sin.  For  all  sin  is,  directly  or  indirectly, 
against  Him ;  and  this  is  the  gravest  side  of  the  offence  (Psa.  li.  4 ;  Luke  xv.  21). 
(2)  Death  especially  should  remind  us  of  God,  before  whose  tribunal  it  conducts  ua. 
So  it  should  especially  remind  us  of  sin,  for  it  is  its  wages  appointed  by  God.  3. 
The  remembramce,  however,  will  affect  us  va/riously  according  to  owr  moral  state. 
■(1)  Sin,  in  the  first  instance,  is  called  to  the  remembrance  of  all  that  they  may  hate 
it  and  forsake  it.  (2)  To  those  who  have  endeavoured  to  do  this,  it  is  still  called  to 
remembrance,  that  they  may  trust  in  Christ  for  forgiveness  and  salvation.  (3)  To 
the  justified  it  is  called  to  remembrance  that  they  may  praise  God  for  His  mercy. 
In  this  sense  sin  will  be  remembered  even  in  heaven.     (See  Bev.  y.  9 ;  vii.  9,  17.) 

III.  She  oonneotbd  these  befboaches  with  the  presence  op  Elijah.  "What 
have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  thou  man  of  God  ?  "  &c.  1.  Why  did  she  do  this .'  (1) 
Prophets  were  sent  usually  to  reprove,  and  denounce  judgments.  Hence  the 
coming  of  Samuel  to  Bethlehem  inspired  the  magistrates  and  people  with  alarm. 
(See  1  Sam.  xvi.  4.)  This  bereavement,  therefore,  might  suggest  to  the  widow  bet 
flin  in  general,  or  some  particular  sin,  though  not  clearly  defined  to  her  as  yet. 
(2)  Or  it  might  have  brought  home  to  her  some  imperfection  in  the  service  of  God 
which  she  had  not  previously  sufficiently  considered.  Had  she  adequately  appr«> 
oiated  the  great  privilege  of  having  such  a  guest  ?  (8)  Was  there  not  in  this  a  con- 
fession that  she  was  unworthy  of  such  an  hononr,  and  a  desire  impUed  that  she 
should  be  made  worthy,  lest  otherwise  his  continued  presence  must  become  as 
occasion  of  judgments  ?  Was  not  the  expression  of  Peter,  with  whom  Jesus  lodged, 
of  similar  import  when  the  divinity  of  the  Master  was  brought  vividly  before  him 
by  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes,  and  he  exclaimed,  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am 
a  sinful  man,  O  Lord?  "  (Luke  v.  8).  2.  Did  she  not  here  recognize  a  great  truth! 
(1)  What  sanctifications  and  consecrations  Levites,  and  more  especially  sons  of 
Aaron,  needed,  who  had  to  draw  near  to  God ;  and  how  perilous  to  them,  even  then, 
were  their  approaches  to  that  sacred  presence  I  (Exod.  zxviii.  43;  Levit.  viii.  35;  xr. 
81 ;  xvi.  2, 13 ;  xxii.  9 ;  Num.  iv.  15  ;  zvU.  13).  (2)  How  clean  should  they  be  who 
bear  now  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  I  How  careful  unsanctified  persons  shoidd  be  not 
to  tamper  with  holy  things  I   Witness  the  judgments  upon  Uzzah  and  Uzziah.    (See 

1  Sam.  yL  19;  2  Sam.  vi.  7;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  19,  20.)  The  sanctification  now 
required  is  moral,  of  which  the  ceremonial  was  the  type.  (3)  All  shall  have  to 
Appear  in  the  very  presence  of  the  Judge.  How  shall  we  stand  then  ?  Let  as  nov 
prepare  for  that  solemnity. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  19 — 24. — The  Sign  of  the  Widow's  Son,  Here  is  a  tonohing  scene — »poor 
•widow  pressing  to  her  bosom  the  corpse  of  her  only  child,  while  in  the  agony  of  her 
bereaved  soul,  addressing  Elijah,  she  says,  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  0  thou 
man  of  God  ?  art  thou  come  to  call  my  sin  to  my  remembrance,  and  to  slay  my 
flon  ?  "  Now  note  the  words  of  the  text :  "  And  he  said  unto  her.  Give  me  thy  son," 
&c.     In  this  history  we  have — 

I.  An  example  op  the  power  of  faith.  Behold  here— 1.  The  spirit  of  faifh. 
(1)  He  had  confidence  in  God  before  he  prayed.  This  is  evident  from  the  manner 
in  which  he  asked  the  widow  for  the  corpse.  He  did  not  tell  her  what  he  intended ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  neither  did  he  express  any  hesitation  as  to  the  comfort  she 
might  expect.  (2)  This  confidence  must  have  been  divinely  authorized,  else  it 
would  have  been  presumption  which,  instead  of  conciliating  the  favour,  would  have 
•wakened  the  displeasure  of  God.  (3)  This  was  what  EUsha  and  the  sons  of  the 
prophets  called  "the  Spirit  of  EUjah,"  i.e..  the  Spirit  of  God  abiding  with  him.  (See 

2  Kings  ii.  9,  IS.)  2.  The  pra/yer  of  faith.  (1)  He  recognized  the  hand  of  God  in 
the  bereavement:  "Hast  thou  also  brought  evil  upon  the  widow  with  whom  I 


lOi  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvu.  1—24. 

Bojoum  by  slaying  her  son  ?  "  He  oallB  it  "  evil,"  yet  attributes  it  to  God.  Mora] 
evil  God  cannot  perpetrate,  bnt  evil  which  comes  in  the  form  of  affliction  or  punish- 
ment is  a  very  different  thing.  (See  Job  ii.  10;  Isa.  xlv.  7;  Amosiii.  6;  Jolinix.  1 — 3.) 
(2)  He  entreated  God  to  restore  the  child's  life.  "  He  cried  unto  the  Lord."  Here  ia 
the  "  fervency  "  which  characterizes  "  eflectual "  prayer.  (3)  He  entreated  Him 
confidingly:  "  0  Lord  my  God."  This  appealing  to  God  in  the  possessive  expresses 
a  loving  trust  in  a  Covenant-Friend.  (See  Levit.  xxvi.  12 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  83 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 ; 
Heb.  xi.  16 ;  Eev.  xxL  8.)  (4)  Hence  his  success.  "  The  Lord  heard  the  voice  of 
Fhjah."  He  saw  in  Elijah  those  moral  quaiifioations  which  make  it  fitting  that 
He  shoTild  answer  prayer.  So  the  prophet  was  able  to  restore  the  ohUd  alive  to  his 
mother.  8.  But  what  example  is  this  for  us  /  (1)  Elijah's  success  in  prayer  was 
not  because  be  was  a  prophet.  James  repUes  to  this  objection  when  he  assures  us 
that  "  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we  are."  For  this  is  the  gioiind 
on  which  he  proceeds  to  lay  down  the  broad  principle,  via.,  that  "  the  effectual 
fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much  "  (James  v.  16 ;  see  also  Acts  xi 
24).  (2)  Therefore  toe  also  may  be  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  we  must  be  so 
moved  if  we  would  pray  effectually.  True  feith  is  "  of  the  operation  of  God " 
(Luther's  prayer  for  the  recovery  of  Myoonius  instanced  in  Krummacher).  (3)  But 
how  may  we  know  that  we  are  so  influenced  7  God  will  make  it  plain  as  one  of 
the  secrets  of  holy  communion  with  Him  (Psa.  xxv.  14 ;  John  vii.  17 ;  xv.  16). 
When  we  are  free  from  selfish  desire,  and  above  all  things  seek  God's  glory,  there 
is  little  danger  of  being  led  astray.  (4)  The  widow  was  no  prophetess,  but  she  also 
was  an  example  of  faith.  (See  Heb.  xi.  36.)  Witness  her  recognition  of  God,  and  the 
readiness  with  which  she  gave  her  son  from  her  bosom  at  the  prophet's  request. 
Her  faith  was  honoured  as  well  as  his. 

IL  A  PROPHETIC  stoN.  1.  So  the  widow  interpreted  it  (ver.  24).  (1)  It  authen- 
tioated  Elijah  as  a  "  man  of  God."  Not  only  that  he  was  a  good  man,  but  that  he 
was  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  (2)  Consequently  "  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  his 
month  "  was  no  sham.  (Comp.  on.  xxii.)  Spurious  prophets  could  not  give  miraculous 
signs.  8.  Such  signs  were  parables.  The  question,  then,  is,  what  did  this  parable 
teach  ?  (1)  Could  it  be  a  sign  that  the  drought  would  be  removed  which  had  now 
lasted  two  years,  working  fearful  ravages,  and  must,  if  continued  long,  destroy  the 
nations  visited?  For  the  "  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  mouth  of  EUjah"  did  encourage 
the  hope  that  rain  should  come  upon  the  earth  (ver.  14).  The  coming  of  rain  woidd 
be  a  national  resurrection.  (2)  Could  it  be  a  pledge  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
at  the  last  day  ?  The  gospel  has  thrown  floods  of  iUustration  upon  this  subject,  but 
is  old  times  it  was  obscure.  This  miracle  taught  the  separate  existence  of  the  soul. 
Also  that  the  disembodied  spirit  may  and  shall  be  reunited  to  its  organic  companion. 
(8)  Why  did  Elijah  stretch  himself  upon  the  child  ?  He  was  a  type  of  Christ.  So 
be  made  himself  like  the  dead  to  foreshow  that  Christ  by  dying  in  our  room  should 
give  us  life.  This  He  does  morally.  Also  physically,  viz.,  in  the  resurrection  of 
the  body.  (Comp.  2  Kings  iv.  84 ;  John  xi.  43—46 ;  Acts  xx.  10.)  Is  there  any 
correspondence  between  the  "three  times"  mentioned  in  the  text  and  the  "three 
times"  in  which  our  Lord  prayed  for  the  removal  of  the  cup  of  TTia  suffering? 
(Matt.  xxvi.  44).— J.  A.  M. 

Ver.  1.^ — The  Messenger  of  Jehovah.  Stanley  is  justified  in  describing  Elijah  as 
"  the  grandest  and  most  romantic  character  that  Israel  ever  produced  "  (S.  &.  P., 

L328).  He  appears  suddenly,  and  disappeai-s  miraculously.  Hence  imagination  has 
d  scope.  Some  Eabbins  beUeved  that  he  was  Phineas,  the  grandson  of  Aaron, 
and  others  that  he  was  an  angel  fi'om  heaven.  The  impression  his  ministry  made 
upon  the  mind  of  the  people  re-appeared  again  and  again  after  the  lapse  of  centuries. 
When,  for  example,  the  miracles  of  our  Lord  aroused  the  wonder  of  the  people, 
many  said,  "  It  is  Ehas."  Such  a  character  and  work  as  were  his  deserve  careful 
rtudv.  Describe  the  social  and  religious  condition  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  after 
Ahab's  accession  and  marriage  with  the  dauntless,  fanatical,  idolatrous  Jezebel. 
Never  was  reformation  more  called  for,  and  never  were  supernatural  works  mora 
necessary  as  the  credentials  of  a  Heaven-sent  ambassador.    Onr  text  presents  for 


CH.  XTH.  1— 24.J  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  406 

OTir  consideration — I.  A  meisenger  from  a  forsaken  Ood,  and  II.,  A  measagtfor  an 
upostate  people. 

I.  A  Messenoeb  from  a  forsaken  Ood.  Ahab  was  congratulating  biiaself  on  the 
success  of  his  policy.  It  had  been  greater  than  he  could  have  expected.  The  old 
faith  and  fervour  of  the  people  had  died  out  so  completely  that  they  were  quiet 
under  the  bold  introduction  of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth.  The  Sidonians  were  linked 
with  the  kingdom  of  Israel  against  Syria.  Scarcely  a  protest  had  been  heard 
agalast  these  political  and  religious  movementa.  Suddenly  there  appeared  before 
the  king  and  queen,  perhaps  as  they  were  enthroned  in  their  ivory  palace,  Elijah 
the  Tishbite ;  rough  in  appearance,  as  he  was  bold  in  utterance.  Above  the  ordiuair 
height,  of  great  physical  strength,  a  girdle  roimd  his  loins,  and  a  sheepskin  cloak 
over  his  brawny  shoulders,  his  long  thick  hair  streaming  down  his  back,  he  was 
even  in  appearance  a  memorable  man  ;  and  there  was  something  very  startling  in 
this  his  sudden  dash  into  the  royal  presence,  to  thunder  out  his  curse,  and  the 
rebuke  which  no  doubt  preceded  it.  His  appearance  may  be  compared  to  the  flash, 
of  lightning  that  for  a  moment  makes  everything  which  was  before  in  darkness 
vividly  distinct.  Some  points  are  worthy  of  note.  1.  The  obscurity  of  his  origin. 
The  Tishbite  means  the  "  converter,"  and  would  fitly  describe  his  work.  The 
endeavour  to  discover  a  town  of  such  name  in  Palestine  appears  to  have  failed. 
I'lie  phrase,  "  from  the  residents  of  Gilead,"  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  he  was 
an  Israelite.  He  may  have  been  an  Ishmaelite  or  a  heathen  by  birth.  It  was 
designed  that  obscurity  should  thus  hang  over  his  origin.  To  the  people  he  would 
eeem  to  come  aU  the  more  directly  from  God.  The  human  element  was  over- 
shadowed by  the  Divine.  Show  the  mightiness  of  secret  forces  in  nature,  in  thought, 
and  in  the  kingdom  ot  God.  2.  The  signs  of  hisfitnesB.  A  rough  man  was  needed 
to  do  rough  work.  The  settler  in  the  backwoods  wants  the  strong  sharp  axe  to 
effect  a  clearing,  before  more  delicate  implements  are  required.  Elijah  had  his 
constitutional  strength  and  courage  fostered  by  his  surroundings.  Gilead  was  a 
wild,  unsettled  country  compared  with  Ephraim  and  Judah.  Instead  of  stately 
palaces  and  flourishing  towns,  it  boasted  tent  villages  and  mountain  castles ;  and 
desperate  and  frequent  were  the  fights  with  surrounding  freebooters.  (See  1  Chron. 
V.  10, 19 — 22.  Compare  with  it  "  Bob  Boy,"  chap,  xix.)  The  Gileadites  were  to 
Israd  what  the  Highlanders,  a  century  back,  were  to  the  Lowlands.  Amid  scenes 
af  conflict,  of  loneliness,  probably  of  poverty,  this  strong  character  was  moulded. 
Compare  vrith  Moses  in  Midian,  with  John  the  Baptist  in  the  wilderness.  God 
gives  each  servant  the  right  training  for  the  service  appointed  for  him  both  on  earth 
and  in  heaven.  8.  The  secret  of  his  strength.  His  name,  Elijah,  and  his  formula, 
"  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth,"  indicate  it.  An  overpowering  conviction  that 
Jehovah  lived,  that  He  was  near,  that  He  was  the  God  of  this  people,  and  that  He 
would  assert  His  supremacy  over  all  false  gods  is  implied  in  the  verse.  This  is  the 
secret  of  spiritual  strength  in  all  ages.  The  disciples  were  weak  when  Josus  was 
on  the  mount  of  transfiguration,  strong  when  He  returned ;  they  were  despondent 
after  the  crucifixion,  exultant  at  Pentecost.  The  revelation  of  God's  presence  and 
power  is  what  all  Churches  now  need.  4.  The  completeness  of  his  consecration. 
"  Before  whom  I  stand."  This  he  said,  not  with  a  sense  of  God's  nearness  only, 
nor  ot  His  favour,  but  to  express  that  he  was  the  Lord's  consecrated  servant, 
through  whom  and  by  whom  he  might  do  what  He  willed.  Standing  is  an  attitude 
of  attention,  expectancy,  readiness.  So  in  ancient  Scripture  servants  are  repre- 
sented as  all  standing  looking  towards  the  king,  with  loins  girded,  eyes  intent,  ready 
to  do  his  will.  Note  :  We  cannot  stand  before  the  Lord  until  we  have  knelt  before 
Him  in  penitence  and  humility  and  prayer.     This  Elijah  had  done  in  Gilead. 

II.  A  MESSAGE  FOB  AN  APOSTATE  PEOPLE.  "  There  sliall  not  be  rain  nor  dew 
these  years,  but  according  to  my  word."  We  assume  here  the  credibility  of 
miracles  and  content  ourselves  with  indicating  the  suitability  of  this  co  its  purpose. 
1.  This  was  revealed  in  prayer,  Elijah  had  "  prayed  earnestly  that  it  might  not 
lain  "  (James  v.)  He  felt  that  such  a  chastisement  would  move  the  haarts  of  the 
people,  and  turn  their  thoughts  towards  God,  as  it  ultimately  did.  The  prayer  was 
the  o£bpting  of  God's  Spiiit.    The  human  utterance  was  the  echo  of  uie  Divine 


40«  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [CH.  xvh.  1-24. 

will.  The  mystery  of  prayer  is  revealed  (1  John  ▼.  14,  16).  2.  This  was  a  response 
to  the  challenge  of  Baal-worahip.  The  productive  powers  of  nature  were  adored 
under  the  idolatrous  symbol.  Here  they  were  shown  to  be  dependent  on  the 
unseen  God.  All  natural  laws  are.  They  are  the  expressions  of  the  Divine  will. 
It  was  in  vain  to  cry,  "  O  Baal,  hear  us  1,"  3.  This  man  would  affect  all  classes  of 
the  people.  They  had  shared  the  sin,  and  therefore  must  share  the  penalty.  The 
loftiest  are  not  beyond  God's  reach,  the  lowliest  are  not  hidden  from  God's  notice. 
The  tiny  garden  of  the  peasant  was  cursed,  as  well  as  the  splendid  park  of  the  king. 
National  sin  brings  national  calamities.  The  message,  not  to  some,  but  to  all,  is, 
"  Eepent,  and  be  converted."  4.  This  was  associated  with  estrangement  from  Ood. 
It  was  to  be  "according  to  the  word  "  of  His  servant.  The  change  would  be  fore- 
seen and  foretold,  not  by  the  false  priests,  but  by  the  praying  prophet.  The  curse 
eame  because  of  sin,  as  had  been  proclaimed  by  the  law.  (See  Levit.  xxvi.  19 ; 
Deut.  xi.  16  ;  xxviii .  23.)  It  was  removed  on  repentance  (1  Kings  xviii.)  Listen 
.  to  the  message  Ood  still  sends  to  men,  bidding  them,  root  out  idolatry  fi  om  everif 
nation  and  from,  every  heart.  May  the  God  of  Israel,  before  whom  they  stand, 
prosper  all  His  messengers  1 — A.  B, 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Strange  Provision  in  a  Sad  Necessity.  The  miracles  associated 
with  the  ministry  of  Elijah  aud  Elisha  have  led  some  to  deny  the  historical 
credibility  of  the  Books  of  Kings.  It  should  be  remembered  that  great  miracles 
were  rendered  necessary  by  a  great  and  general  apostasy.  It  was  essential  to  the 
survival  of  true  faith  that  Jehovah  should  indicate  His  unseen  sovereignty.  In 
Israel  such  attestation  was  more  required  than  in  Judah,  where  the  sanctuary  and 
the  priesthood,  in  the  worst  times,  testified  for  God.  This  passage  sets  before  ns 
I.  Silent  suffering.  II.  Divine  deliverance.  III.  Restful  retreat.  Each  of  which 
points  we  will  consider. 

I.  Sn.ENT  suFFBEiNa  is  implied  by  all  that  we  know  of  the  prophet's  oiroum- 
stances.  The  famine  he  had  foretold  had  come  ;  and  he  shared  the  privations  of 
the  people.  Others  might  have  kindness  shown  them,  but  there  was  none  for  this 
man.  Regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  calamity,  he  was  an  accursed  outcast.  Upon 
such  a  temperament  the  steady  persistent  pressure  of  hunger  and  hatred  would 
tell  severely.  He  would  feel  pity  for  others — ^for  the  poor  dumb  beasts,  for  the 
innocent  children— and  would  be  tempted  to  ask,  "  Was  I  right  in  praying  for  this, 
and  bringing  this  woe  on  the  people  ?  "  Meantime  he  was  himself  suffering  the 
rigours  of  famine,  and  no  chariot  of  fire  came  to  bear  him  away  from  the  desolated 
laud.  Like  Samson,  it  seemed  as  if  he  had  shaken  the  house,  and  was  bringing 
destruction  on  himself  as  well  as  on  the  idolators.  Yet  not  a  word  of  complaint. 
He  was  sustained  by  the  conviction  that  he  had  done  right,  and  that  God  would 
see  to  the  issues.  Apply  the  teaching  firom  this  to  occasions  on  which  men  are 
still  called  upon  to  do  God's  wUl,  to  utter  God's  truth,  regardless  of  consequences. 
Sometimes  we  are  able  to  "  count  the  cost,"  and  then  we  should  do  so.  But  often 
this  is  impossible.  The  love  of  Christ  may  constrain  us  to  do,  or  to  say,  something 
which  will  place  us  in  unexpected  difficulties.  Illustrate  by  Peter's  zeal,  which 
prompted  him  to  step  out  of  the  boat  upon  the  sea.  He  was  terrified  at  a  result  he 
had  not  taken  into  calculation ;  but  he  was  perfectly  safe,  for  he  was  going  towards 
Christ.  Exemplify  by  instances  from  ordinary  life — e.y. ,  an  assistant  in  business 
refuses  to  tell  a  lie,  or  to  act  one,  and  loses  his  situation.  A  daughter  confesses  her 
love  to  Christ,  and  finds  her  home  a  place  of  torment,  &o.  The  one  thing  that  can 
support  us  in  such  circumstances  is  the  humble,  yet  confident,  conviction  that  we 
liave  done  what  God  willed.  And  offcHu  from  those  straits  He  delivers  us  in  the 
most  unexpected  way,  before  we  ask  Him,  as  He  delivered  Elijah. 

II.  Divine  deliverance.  1.  It  was  unexpected.  No  one  would  have  imagined, 
and  some  cannot  now  credit  the  means  adopted.  The  ravens  have  been  a  sore 
offence  to  critics.  Discuss  some  of  their  theories — that  they  were  merchants, 
Arabiiins,  &c.  The  difficulties  are  not  removed  by  the  interpretations  suggested, 
nor  do  they  seem  warranted  by  the  text.  Had  men  brought  food  to  the  hidden 
prophet,  Ahab  would  soon  have  discovered  his  whereabouts ;   nor  would  they  b* 


OH.  XVII.  1—24.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  407 

likely  to  bring  food  twice  daily,  when  a  store  might  have  been  conveyed  with  only 
one  risk.  The  supernatural  is  always  startling,  but  to  those  who  reject  materialism 
it  is  not  incredible.  If  God  notices  a  sparrow  fall,  and  if  diseases  obey  Him,  as 
soldiers  obey  their  general  (Matt.  viii.  8 — 10),  this  feeding  by  the  ravens  might  well 
be.  God  often  uses  strange  instruments  to  effect  His  purposes.  Give  examples 
from  Scripture  and  history.  Even  the  plans  and  the  deeds  of  the  wicked  are  under 
His  control.  All  things  work  His  wih.  2.  It  was  revealed.  "  The  word  of  the 
Lord  came  to  him."  It  comes  to  us.  Sometimes  the  inward  impulse  after  prayer 
impels  us  to  take  God's  way  ;  and  sometimes  all  other  paths  are  closed,  and  of  the 
one  left  open  Providence  says,  "This  is  the  way,  walk  in  it."  Are  we  seeking  to 
know  Ood's  will  about  ourselves  ?  Are  we  concerned  that  our  way  should  be  His 
choice,  and  not  our  own  ?  "  In  all  thy  waya  acknowledge  him,  and  he  shall  direct 
thy  paths." 

III.  Restful  retreat.  Describe  the  wild  ravine  of  the  Kelt,  which  Eobinson 
and  Stanley  identify,  with  some  probability,  as  the  Cherith.  The  precipitous  rocks, 
in  places  600  feet  high,  the  caverns  in  the  limestone,  in  one  of  which  the  prophet 
hid,  &c.  Such  a  man  needed  quiet.  He  had  it  afforded  to  him  again  in  Horeb. 
No  great  activity  for  God  can  be  worthily  sustained  without  much  waiting  on 
Him.  In  this  retreat  Elijah  had  two  sorts  of  provision.  1.  Daily  bread.  It  ia 
only  that  which  we  are  taught  to  expect,  and  pray  for.  The  daily  reception  of 
blessing  teaches  us  our  constant  dependence.  The  manna  fell  every  morning,  and 
could  not  be  hoarded  for  the  future.  Daily  strength,  too,  is  given  for  daily  duties. 
2.  Quiet  communion.  All  nature  would  speak  to  Elijah  of  his  God.  The  brook 
woidd  whisper  of  the  water  of  life ;  the  birds  would  celebrate  the  cars  of  God,  See. 
In  the  world  around  him,  in  secret  converse  with  his  own  heart,  and  in  earnest 
prayer  to  the  God  of  Israel,  before  whom  he  stood,  Elijah  would  get  refreshment 
and  strength  for  coming  conflict  and  conquest.  Befer  to  the  iuvahd,  to  the  aged, 
to  the  httle  children,  as  those  to  whom  God  gives  a  time  of  quiet,  to  prepare  them 
for  the  future  service. 

1.  Expeet  Ood's  deliveremce  whenever  you  are  in  the  path  of  duty.  2.  Be 
content  that  God  should  worTc  in  His  own  way.  3.  Seek  to  hiwe  a  spirit  of 
contentment,  and  a  heart  that  i*  "qmet  from  the  fea/r  of  tvil." — ^A.  B. 

Ver.  16. —  The  Widow's  Cruse.  Describe  this  incident  in  the  life  of  Elijah.  Show 
some  of  tlie  advantages  which  arose  from  his  visit  to  Zarephath ;  e.g.,  1.  It  was  a 
means  of  blessing  to  himself.  He  found  a  true  worshipper  of  Jehovah  even  in 
the  coasts  of  Tyre,  where,  under  the  rule  of  Jezebel's  father,  one  was  least  to  be 
expected.  This  would  strengthen  his  faith,  and  it  would  keep  alive  his  hope  that 
his  work  in  Israel  would  "  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  We  may  sometimes 
assure  ourselves  of  the  vitaUty  of  Christianity  by  witnessing  its  effects  among  the 
heathen.  A  visit  to  the  South  Sea  islands  would  prove  a  tonic  to  debilitated  faith. 
2.  It  was  a  means  of  blessing  to  the  widow.  Not  only  was  she  kept  ahve  in 
famine  for  the  prophet's  sake,  but  she  received  spiritual  blessing.  Christ  refers  to 
Elijah's  visit  as  a  sign  of  the  care  God  had,  even  under  the  old  dispensation,  for 
the  heathen  peoples,  where  He  left  not  Himself  without  witness.  (Compare  Luke 
iv.  25.)  Show  that  as  Elijah  turned  from  Israel  to  Zidon,  so  the  apostles  turned  to 
the  Gentiles  (Acts  xviii.  6).     Learn  from  the  story  the  following  general  lessons : — 

I.  That  God  provides  fob  the  necessities  of  His  servants.  In  the  famine  He 
had  already  made  provision  for  Elijah  at  Cherith,  and  now  that  the  supply  there 
had  failed,  other  resources  were  opened.  Not  always  in  our  way,  but  in  some  way, 
He  answers  the  prayer,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread."  He  does  not  promise 
luxuries  or  wealth,  but  our  "bread  shall  be  given  to  us,  and  our  water  shall  be 
sure."  We  are  not  to  be  anxious  about  our  future,  but  are  to  remember  that  it  is  in 
the  hands  of  God,  It  is  said  of  our  food  and  raiment,  that  our  "  heavenly  father 
knoweth  that  we  have  need  of  these  things."  When  a  child  is  at  home  he  learns 
his  lessons,  obeys  the  rules  of  his  parents,  &o.,  but  he  has  no  care  about  the  food  he 
wiU  want  on  the  morrow.  He  never  dreams  but  that  it  will  be  provided.  Such 
should  be  our  spirit,  whatever  may  be  our  powers  of  productive  work.     We  ara 


4U8  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xtu.  1—24. 

diligently  and  earnestly  to  do  -nrhatsoever  onr  hands  find  to  do,  feeling  certain  that 
"  they  who  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  want  any  good  thing."  The  Israelites  followed 
the  cloud,  though  it  led  them  into  the  wilderness,  with  the  conviction  that  God 
was  leading  them ;  and  when  it  was  necessary  He  provided  manna  in  proportion  to 
their  wants.  If  God  does  not  ignore  our  temporal  necessities.  He  will  certainly 
not  faU  to  supply  our  spiritual  wants.  In  the  Father's  house  there  is  bread  enough 
»nd  to  spare.  This  we  may  prove  on  earth,  but  its  highest  fulfilment  will  be  neen 
in  heaven,  where  the  Lamb,  who  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  shall  feed  us. 

II.  That  God  uses  what  mbk  would  despise.  With  limitless  resources,  we 
should  have  imagined  that  God  would  miraculously  create  what  was  required,  dis- 
regarding "  the  handful  of  meal"  and  the  little  oil  left  in  a  omse.  Not  so,  however. 
There  is  no  waste  in  the  Divine  economy.  The  breath  of  men,  the  exhalations 
of  plants,  the  refuse  cast  into  the  field,  or  into  the  sea,  the  rising  mist,  the  falling 
shower,  are  all  accounted  for,  and  have  a  purpose  to  fulfil,  a  work  to  do.  There  is 
no  physical  force  which  becomes  utterly  extinct,  though  it  passes  firom  one  form  of 
manifestation  to  another.  Motion  passes  into  heat,  heat  into  electricity,  &;c.,  in  tea 
endless  cycle.  The  economy  of  force  asserts  itself  everywhere  nnder  the  rule  of 
God.  This,  which  is  proclaimed  by  science,  is  constantly  illustrated  in  Scripture, 
It  is  the  same  God  who  worketh  all  in  all.  If  manna  is  given  to  the  Israehtes,  it 
oeases  directly  the  people  can  eat  of  the  oom  of  the  country.  The  snpematural 
rises  out  of  the  natural.  The  miraculous  provision  for  Elijah  was  not  a  new 
creation,  but  an  increase  of  what  already  existed ;  and  in  the  use  of  this  there  wm 
no  prodigaUty  or  waste.  Compare  with  Christ's  miracle  of  the  feeding  of  the  five 
thousand.  After  showing  that  He  had  infinite  resom-ces.  He  said  to  His  disoiplee, 
"  Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain,  that  nothing  be  lost" 

III.  That  God  reveals  oub  way  step  by  step.  Picture  Elijah  sitting  by  the 
brook  Cherith,  watching  its  waters  becoming  shallower  day  by  day  nnder  the 
drought.  He  knew  not  what  he  should  do  next,  bat  he  waited,  and  trusted,  and 
prayed ;  and  when  the  brook  was  dried  up,  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  nnto  him, 
Baying,  Arise,  get  thee  to  Zarephath,"  &o.  God  does  not  reveal  the  future  to  us,  but 
draws  across  it  an  impenetrable,  or  at  most  a  semi-transparent  veil.  We  know  not 
with  absolute  certainty  what  a  day  may  bring  forth.  The  advantages  of  this  are 
evident — 1.  It  savet  ub  from  sorrow  cmdfrom  sin.  (1)  From  sorrow,  because  if 
we  foresaw  all  that  we  should  have  to  endure,  if  we  knew  the  day  of  our  death,  the 
extent  of  our  losses,  do.,  our  burden  would  be  greater  than  we  could  bear.  "  Suffi- 
cient nnto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  (2)  From  sin,  becanse  we  shonld  grow 
absorbed  in  worldly  occupations  it  we  were  certain  life  would  be  long ;  or  become 
despondent  and  spiritless  in  work  if  we  knew  it  would  be  short.  2.  It  fosters  in 
us  the  graces  of  trust  and  prayer.  If  we  know  nothing  of  the  future  ourselves, 
and  cannot  feel  confident  about  our  own  plans,  we  are  led  to  confide  in  Him  who 
foresees  what  is  before  us,  and  to  ask  Him  in  prayer  for  daily  guidance  and  support. 

IV.  That  God  kewaeds  our  consecration  of  what  wb  have  to  Him.  It  was 
a  generous  act  towards  a  stranger,  a  pious  act  towards  a  servant  of  Jehovah,  to 
fetch  for  Elijah  the  water  which  was  now  so  costly,  and  to  be  willing  to  share  with 
him  what  appeared  to  be  her  last  meal.  "  There  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  in- 
oreaseth."  Even  in  temporal  affau-s  this  is  true.  Hoard  seed  in  the  springtime, 
and  you  cannot  be  enriched ;  scatter  it,  and  the  harvest  will  come.  Give  to  the 
poor  in  the  name  of  their  Lord,  and  you  will  not  fail  of  reward — either  here  or  here- 
after. We  are  to  give,  however,  not  for  the  sake  of  applause  or  recompense,  but 
"  as  unto  the  Lord,"  to  whom  we  owe  all  that  we  have.  This  woman  not  only 
gave  to  the  prophet,  but  gave  to  him  in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  and  therefore 
"received  a  prophet's  reward"  (Matt.  x.  40 — 42).  May  He  who  commended  the 
widow  when  she  gave  her  two  mites  so  accept  our  gifts  and  services,  and  so  approve 
our  motives,  as  at  last  to  say,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least 
of  these,  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me  I  "    (Matt.  xxv.  40.) — A.B. 

Ver.  21.— Prayer  for  the  Dead.  The  portrait  of  the  widow  of  Zarephath  li 
nmarkably  natural.     Her  calmness  in  speaking  of  tiie  trouble  that  was  aalj 


CB.  xvu.  1—21]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  408 

threatened  (ver.  12),  is  contrasted  with  her  agony  when  trouble  actually  oomes  (ver 
18).  She  believed  in  Jehovah  though  in  a  heathen  kingdom ;  yet  there  was  a  blend- 
ing of  superstition  with  her  faith.  She  supposed  that  God  might  have  overlooked 
her  sin,  had  it  not  been  that  He  was  present  with  His  prophet  in  her  home ;  and 
she  oonfoundcd  disciphue  with  retribution.  The  latter  was  the  mistake-  of  the  bar- 
barians  at  Mehta.  (Compare  Acts  xxviii.  4.)  See  also  our  Lord's  teaching,  Luke 
\m.  4.  The  death  of  this  child  is  to  be  explained  on  the  principle  which  asserted 
itself  in  the  blindness  of  the  man  whom  Jesus  cured  (John  iz.  8),  or  in  the  illness 
of  Lazarus,  concerning  which  our  Lord  said,  "  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but 
for  glory,  of  God  "  (John  xi.  4).  Bembrandt  has  depicted  the  scene  brought  before 
ns  in  this  chapter.  In  a  roughly  built  upper  room  the  dead  chUd  Ues  upon  th* 
bed ;  one  hand  rests  upon  his  breast,  whUe  the  other  has  fallen  heavily  at  his  side, 
giving  a  wonderful  idea  of  the  weight  of  death.  Elijah  stands  on  the  further  side 
of  the  bed  with  his  rugged,  earnest  face  upturned  towards  heaven  and  his  hands 
clasped  in  an  agony  of  supplication  as  he  says,  "  0  Lord  my  God,  I  pray  thee  let 
(his  child's  soul  come  into  him  agaia  1 "  This  event  was  not  intended  to  be 
wondered  at  as  a  prodigy,  nor  was  it  merely  to  benefit  the  widow,  but  for  aU  time 
has  spiritual  significance.    With  this  behef  we  see  in  it — 

I.  Am  emblem  of  spiritual  death.  The  child  had  died  suddenly,  or  Elijah 
would  have  been  told  of  his  illness.  His  death  was  real,  and  was  more  than  the 
insensibility  of  Eutychus  (Acts  xx.  10).  We  say  that  a  thing,  susceptible  of  life, 
is  dead  when  it  cannot  receive  what  is  essential  to  its  growth  and  weU-beiog ; 
e.ff.,  a  tree  is  dead  when  it  is  no  longer  able  to  absorb  the  nutriment  without 
which  it  must  fade,  and  ultimately  fall.  An  animal  is  dead  which  can  no  longer 
breath  air  or  assimilate  food.  The  mind  is  dead — as  is  that  of  an  idiot — when  it 
receives  no  true  mental  impressions.  The  soul  is  dead  which  is  insensible  to 
spiritual  influence.  As  it  is  possible  to  have  physical  without  mental  life,  so  it  i; 
possible  to  have  mental  without  spiritual  life.  "  Spiritual  death  "  is  not  a  mere 
figure  of  speech.  It  may  be  Elustrated  by  the  condition  of  this  child.  The  food 
provided  for  him  was  useless  now,  the  tenderest  words  of  his  mother  were  un- 
heeded, and  the  voice  that  so  lately  was  musical  with  laughter  was  silent.  Simi- 
larly the  spiritually  dead  are  indifferent  to  God's  provision,  unconscious  of  their 
own  possibilities,  irresponsive  to  the  Father's  voice.  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  again 
he  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  He  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  life." 
"  Dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  "  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath,  and  breathe 
upon  these  slain  that  they  may  live." 

II.  An  example  op  inteeoessoey  peateb.  A  man  of  Elijah's  strong  nature 
would  have  strong  affections,  and  we  can  imagine  how  intensely  he  hud  come  to 
love  this  chUd.  On  hearing  of  his  death  he  could  only  say  to  the  distracted  mother, 
'•  Give  me  thy  son,"  and  then  carried  him  up  to  his  own  room,  and  cried  to  God  in 
an  agony  of  prayer.  1.  It  was  offered  in  solitude.  Not  even  the  mother  waa 
there.  Such  intense  crises  in  life  must  be  met  alone.  Jesus  Christ  was  wont  to 
"  depart  into  a  solitary  place  "  to  pray.  Understanding  our  needs  He  said,  "When 
tliou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet,  and  shut  to  the  door,  and  pray  to  thy  Father 
which  seeth  in  secret."  "  Jacob  was  left  alone  "  when  he  wrestled  with  the  angel. 
Compare  Elijah's  miracle  with  that  of  the  Lord,  who,  when  He  went  into  the  room 
where  Jairus'  daughter  lay  dead,  "suffered  no  man  to  go  in,"  beyond  those  who 
were  one  with  Him  in  sympathy  and  prayer.  2.  It  was  peculia/rly  definite.  There 
was  one  want  in  his  heart,  one  cry  on  his  lips.  Our  prayers  too  often  are  medita- 
tions on  the  Divine  attributes,  or  general  confessions,  and  thanksgivings.  If  oar 
King  asked  "  What  is  thy  petition  ?  "  we  should  sometimes  be  at  a  loss  for  am 
answer.  Pray  for  one  grace,  for  one  unbeheving  friend,  &o.  8.  It  was  intensely 
earnest.  Elijah  could  not  be  denied.  His  was  not  a  speech,  but  a  cry.  He  looked 
for  the  awakening,  and  flung  himself  on  the  dead  in  an  agony  of  earnestness  as  if 
he  would  infuse  his  own  warmth  and  life.  The  touch  was  similar  to  that  of  Peter, 
when  he  took  the  cripple  by  the  hand  (Acts  iii.  7) — not  the  cause  of  blessing,  bat 
the  medium  of  blessing.     The  Divine  power  works  through  the  human  agency. 

III.  An  eabnest  ov  true  resubrkction.  Elijah  could  not  give  life,  but  he  couUI 


410  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvn.  1—24 

ftsk  God  for  it.  Nor  can  we  arouse  to  new  life  by  preaching,  thongh  God  can  do  so 
tliroiigh  preaching.  Our  words  are  only  the  media  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
works.  The  Atlantic  cable  is  useless  except  as  the  message  is  flashed  forth  by  mys- 
terious unseen  power.  This  distinguishes  the  miracles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  from 
those  of  His  servants.  (Compare  Luke  vii.  14  with  Acts  iii.  12 — 16.)  There  is  a 
resurrection  wherein  saints  shall  be  raised  by  the  power  of  God  to  a  life  of  immor- 
tality, the  promise  and  pledge  of  which  we  have  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  who 
is  the  "  firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep."  There  is  also  a  spuitual  resurrection,  to 
which  Paul  refers  when  he  appeals  to  Christians  as  those  "risen  with  Christ;  and 
of  this,  as  well  as  of  that,  is  there  an  illustration  in  our  text.  Baised  to  newness  of 
life  we,  hke  the  child  Elijah  prayed  for,  have  to  live  for  awhUe  in  the  old  sphere. 
The  prophet  gave  the  child  to  his  mother.  Jesus  restored  Lazarus  to  his  sisters, 
the  young  man  at  Nain  to  his  mother,  and  the  ruler's  daughter  to  her  parents ;  and 
80  to  us,  who  have  "  passed  from  death  unto  life,"  He  says,  "  Eeturn  to  thine  own 
house,  and  show  how  great  things  God  hath  done  for  thee.''  This  miracle  con- 
strained the  widow  to  accept  as  God's  truth  the  declaration  of  His  servant  (ver.  24). 
How  much  more  reason  have  we,  who  believe  in  the  supernatural  works  of  His 
Son,  to  say,  "  We  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God ;  for  uo  man  can  do 
these- miracles  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him  1 " — ^A.  B. 

Vers.  1 — ^.—Elijah  the  Tishhiie.  One  of  the  noblest  of  the  noble  figures  that 
cross  the  stage  of  Okl  Testament  history  appears  before  us  here.  Few  names  have 
sneh  a  halo  of  glorious  associations  surrounding  them  as  that  of  Ehjah.  The 
mystery  of  his  origin,  the  grandeur  of  his.  mission,  his  physical  and  moral 
characteristics,  the  peculiar  nature  of  his  miracles,  his  wonderful  translation  and 
reappearance  with  Moses  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's  transfiguration,  together  with 
the  place  that  he  occupies  in  the  last  utterances  of  inspired  prophecy,  and  in  the 
anticipations  of  the  Jewish  people — aU  combine  to  invest  the  person  of  this  great 
prophet  with  a  peculiar  and  romantic  interest.  This  opening  chapter  in  the  story 
of  his  prophetic  ministry  is  full  of  instruction.     Note — 

I.  His  abrupt  appearance.  There  is  nothing  actually  unique  in  thisi  Other 
prophetsof  the  age  are  introduced  thus  suddenly  (Ahijah,  Jehu,  Shemaiah,  Ac.) 
But  considering  the  circumstances  of  the  time  it  is  remarkable.  1.  It  proclaims 
God's  continued  interest  in,  and  sovereignty  over,  Israel  as  well  as  Judah.  The 
revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  had  not  broken  the  bond  between  Him  and  them,  or 
altered  the  fact  of  His  supremacy.  Nor  had  their  religious  defection  nulHfied  His 
purpose  of  mercy.  2.  It  is  called  forth  by  a  dread  moral  crisis.  The  seed  sown 
by  Jeroboam  was  fast  developing  its  most  deadly  fruits.  The  Baal  worship  broiight' 
in  by  Ahab  and  Jezebel  was  a  far  worse  "  abomination "  than  the  worship  of  the 
calves.  A  cruel  persecution  was  raging,  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  were  being  slain, 
and  it  seeined  as  if  the  true  religion  would  perish  out  of  the  land.  8.  It  was  a  reve- 
lation of  irresistible  power.  The  worship  of  Baal  was  essentially  the  worship  of 
power ;  probably  the  productive  power  of  nature.  Here  is  the  messenger  of  Him 
"  to  whom  aU  power  belongeth,"  that  great  unseen  Power  that  can  arrest  the  order 
of  nature,  seal  up  the  foimtains  of  heaven,  wither  those  resources  of  earth  on  which 
the  life  ahke  of  man  and  beast  depends.  We  are  reminded  of  the  various  ways  in 
which  God  may  see  fit  to  fulfil  His  sovereign  purposes.  All  powers,  human  and 
material,  are  at  His  command.  "  All  things  serve  his  might."  In  the  darkest 
hour  in  the  history  of  clinrch  or  nation,  let  us  believe  that  still  "the  Lnrd 
reignsth."  Let  us  trust  Him  to  "  plead  his  own  cause,"  and  vindicate  the  claims 
of  truth  and  righteousness. 

II.  His  personal  dignity.  It  is  the  dignity  of  one  who  sustains  a  special 
relation  towards  "the  hving  God."  His  name  implies  this:  "Jehovah  is  my 
God."  And  this  solemn  asseveration,  "As  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth,  before 
whom  I  stand,"  is  suggestive  of  the  dignity  (1)  of  personal  fellowship  ;  (2)  face  to 
face  vision  ;  and  (8)  Divine  proprietorship  ;  (4)  consecrated  servitude.  One  would 
think  the  old  Jewish  tradition  were  true.  It  sounds  like  the  voice  of  an  angel. 
But  lofty  as  this  utterance  is.  majestic  as  is  the  relation  towards  the  Divine  Being 


OB.  xvn.  1—24.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  EIKG3.  411 


which  it  indicates,  it  has  its  Christian  counterpart.  Think  of  St.  Paul's  words , 
"  There  stood  "by  me  this  night  the  angel  of  God,  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve '' 
(Acts  xxvii.  23).  This  is  not  an  exclusive,  exceptional  dignity.  We  may  all  in  our 
measure  share  it.  And  as  no  earthly  position  sheds  any  real  glory  upon  a  man 
except  so  far  as  he  recognizes  a  Divine  element  in  it,  fills  it  as  before  God  with 
holy  fear ;  so  there  is  no  work  or  office  of  common  life  which  may  not  be  eonobled. 
by  this  feeling.  We  stand  there  before  God  as  His  servants  to  do  that  very  thing. 
"  Such  honour  have  all  his  saints." 

III.  His  oouiuaB.  It  is  the  courage  of  one  who  knows  that  God  is  with  him, 
that  he  is  the  messenger  of  the  Divine  will,  the  instrument  of  a  Diviae  purpose, 
the  channel  of  Divine  strength.  He  holdly  confronts  Ahab,  "  not  fearing  the 
wrath  of  the  king,"  bearding  the  lion  in  his  den.  Does  not  mingle  with  the- 
people,  antedating  their  sufferings  by  spreading  among  them  the  evil  tidings,  but 
goes  straight  to  him  who  is  the  fountain-head  of  the  mischief  and  can  avert  the 
calamity  by  his  repentance.  Such  is  the  brave  spirit  with  wiiich  God  fills  his 
heroes.  Whether  in  the  defiance  of  danger,  or  the  endurance  of  sufferiug,  it  is 
the  sense  of  God — a  Divine  inspiration.  Divine  support — that  has  ever  been  the 
spring  of  the  noblest  form  of  courage.  "  Greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,"  &o.  "  If 
God  be  for  us,"  &o.  "  Be  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  but  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in 
your  heart,"  &o.  This  is  the  principle — ^the  solemn  fear  of  God  taking  possession 
of  a  man  casts  out  all  other  fear ;  in  the  sense  of  the  sovereignty  of  a  Divine  claim, 
he  fears  nothing  but  the  dread  of  being  unfaithful  to  it.  Now  this  brave  spirit  waS' 
not  kindled  in  the  breast  of  Elijah  all  at  once.  Such  a  moral  phenomenon  is  not 
the  birth  of  an  hour  or  a  day.  We  may  believe  that  it  was  developed  in  him 
gradually  among  the  mountains  of  Gilead — a  iitting  scene  for  the  nurture  of  such 
a  moral  constitution  as  his.  The  fire  burned  within  him  as  he  mused  on  the 
degradation  of  his  country.  St.  James  speaks  of  the  fervency  of  Elijah's  prayer: 
"He  prayed  earnestly  that  it  might  not  rain,"  &c.  (James  v.  17).  No  doubt  the 
withholding  of  the  rain  was  given  as  a  "sign"  in  answer  to  his  prayer;  but  after 
all,  may  we  not  regard  his  prayer  most  as  the  means  of  preparing  him  to  be  the 
prophet  and  minister  of  this  great  "  sign "  ?  Not  that  the  order  of  nature  was 
placed  at  the  caprice  of  a  poor,  frail  mortal ;  but  that  he,  "  a  man  of  like  passions- 
with  US,"  was  able  in  the  fervour  of  his  faith  and  prayer  to  rise  up  and  lay  hold  on 
the  strength  of  God,  to  read  the  purpose  of  God,  reckoned  worthy  to  become  the 
agent  in  the  execution  of  that  purpose.  The  historic  incident  is  not  so  far  removed 
as  it  may  seem  to  be  from  the  range  and  level  of  our  common  life.  Heaven  gives 
back  its  answer  to  supphant  faith.  As  regards  the  fellowship  of  the  human  soul 
with  the  mind  and  with  the  power  of  God,  it  must  ever  be  true  that  "  the  effectual' 
fervent  prayer  of  the  righteous  man  availeth  much." 

IV.  His  extraobdinast  pbesebvation.  A  type  of  the  providential  care  that 
God  will  ever  exercise  over  those  who  are  faithful  to  Him  in  the  path  of  daty  and 
of  trial.  Whether  "  ravens"  or  "  wandering  Arabians  were  the  instruments  in  his 
preservation,  it  little  signifies,  so  that  we  recognize  the  positive  Divine  inter- 
position. AJad  what  is  the  supply  of  our  daily  wants  hut  the  fruit  of  a  perpetual 
Divine  interposition?  "Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread."  Walk  uprightly 
before  God,  be  true  to  Him  in  all  the  sacred  respousibihties  of  life,  and  trosl  ta 
Him  to  provide  (Matt.  vi.  83).— W. 

Ver.  16. — Entertaining  a  Stranger.  We  naturally  ask  why  EUjah  should  have 
been  sent  at  this  crisis  to  Zarephath.  The  fact  that  it  lay  so  near  to  the  birthplace 
of  Jezebel,  and  in  the  very  home  of  the  Baal  worship,  may  have  had  something  to 
do  with  this.  It  might  be  a  safer  place  of  retreat  for  the  prophet  than  it  seemed 
to  be,  for  Ahab  would  scarcely  dream  of  following  him  there.  But  other  reasons 
are  suggested  by  the  use  our  Lord  makes  of  this  incident  (Luke  iv.  25,  26).  The 
prophet  was  not "  accepted  in  his  own  country,"  but  found  a  confiding  welcome 
amd  generous  hospitality  at  the  hands  of  an  aUen.  God  rebuked  the  proud 
nnbeUef  of  His  own  people  by  making  this  poor  lone  widow,  in  the  midst  of  her 
idolatroiu  assooiatious,  tiie  instrument  of  His  purposes.    And  tiaaa  that  early  ag* 


il9  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  xvn.  1—24 

had  its  foreshadowings  of  the  grace  that  Bhonid  hereafter  be  bestowed  on  the 
Gentiles.     The  lessons  of  the  narrative  lie  upon  the  surface. 

I.  God's  sure  guardianship  over  His  beevants.  Elijah  is  perfectly  safe 
ttnder  the  shield  of  Divine  protection,  as  safe  in  the  region  of  Sidon  as  he  was  by 
the  brook  Chenth.  He  who  commanded  the  ravens  to  feed  him  can  put  it  into  the 
heart  and  into  the  power  of  the  Phoenician  woman  to  do  the  same.  When  one 
resort  fails  He  can  provide  another.  He  causes  one  and  another  to  fail  that  He 
may  show  how  boundless  His  resources  are.  There  is  absolutely  no  limit  to  the 
possibilities  of  God's  sustaining  and  protective  power.  "  He  shall  give  his  angelg 
charge  concerning  thee."  The  angels  of  God  are  many  and  various.  There  is 
nothing  which  He  cannot  make  to  be  the  instrument  of  His  purpose,  the  vehicle  of 
His  power.  And  He  causes  them  to  wait  in  duteous  ministry  on  those  whom  He 
has  called  to  high  and  holy  service  in  His  kingdom.  God  has  a  grand  mission  for 
Elijah  to  accomplish  in  Israel  and  will  take  care  that  he  shall  be  able  to  fulfil  it. 
"  Man  is  immortal  till  his  work  be  done." 

II.  The  honour  God  puts  on  the  lowly.  We  see  here  not  only  the  Divine 
preservation  of  Ehjah,  but  a  special  act  of  grace  towards  the  woman  of  Zarephath. 
It  was  a  signal  honour  to  have  been  thus  singled  out  from  the  crowd  for  such  a 
Divine  visitation,  to  be  used  as  an  important  link  in  the  chain  of  great  public 
«vents,  to  have  her  name  handed  down  to  future  ages  as  the  "  woman  of  Sarepta," 
whose  glory  it  was  to  "  entertain  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  and  receive  a 
prophet's  reward."  And  in  this  there  was  not  merely  a  providential  arrangement 
of  outward  circumstances,  but  a  gracious  influence  exerted  on  her  own  soul ;  for 
G-od  lays  His  sovereign  hand  not  only  on  the  course  of  external  events,  but  on  the 
secret  springs  of  moral  life.  Her  readiness  to  respond  to  the  prophet's  appeal  was 
from  Him.  Poor  and  humble  as  she  was  His  eye  was  upon  her  for  good.  "  He 
regarded  the  low  estate  of  his  handmaiden."  Thus  has  God  often  put  distinction 
upon  those  who  might  least  have  expected  it.  Let  none  think  themselves  beneath 
His  notice,  or  too  insignificant  to  be  made  by  Him  the  instrument  of  some  high 
and  holy  purpose.  "  Though  tiie  Lord  be  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  nuto  the 
lowljr "  (Psa.  osxxviii.  6). 

"  He  hears  the  uncomplaining  moan 
Of  those  who  sit  and  weep  aJone." 

The  forlorn  and  desolate,  if  only  they  walk  humbly  and  reverently  before  Him,  are 
•the  objects  of  His  tenderest  regard.  He  is  nearer  to  them  than  He  seems  to  be, 
and  often  has  surprising  grace  in  store  for  them.  The  poor  widow  casts  her  two 
mites  unnoticed  into  the  treasury,  but  He  to  whom  the  secrets  of  aU  hearts  are 
open  clothes  her  with  honour  above  all  the  rich  pretentious  people  who  only  gave 
-what  they  so  well  could  spare.  The  sinful  woman,  in  self-forgetting  devotion, 
pours  her  rich  ointment  on  the  head  of  the  incarnate  Love  ;  captious  onlookers  see 
no  glory  in  her  deed,  but  a  word  fi-om  Him  crowns  it  with  an  everlasting  halo  of 
world-wide  fame  (Matt.  xxvi.  13 ;  Mark  xii.  43,  44). 

III.  The  reward  of  trustful  and  obedient  faith.  The  poor  widow  "  showed 
her  faith  by  her  works,  and  by  works  was  her  faith  made  perfect."  At  the  prophet's 
word  she  drew  freely  from  her  scanty  store,  and  "  the  barrel  of  meal  wasted  not, 
neither  did  the  cruse  of  oil  fail."  The  reward  of  her  faith  came  in  the  form  of  a 
■miracle  similar  to  thnt  of  Christ's  multiplication  of  the  loaves  and  fishes  to  feed  the 
hungry  multitude.  It  surpasses  our  comprehension,  but  is  not  more  wonderful 
ihan  the  mysterious  process  that  is  ever  going  on  in  the  building  up  of  the  tissue 
of  plants  and  of  the  animal  frame.  Shall  not  the  Power  that  is  perpetually  chang- 
ing the  elements  of  earth  and  air  and  water  into  nourishing  food  for  man  and 
beast  be  able  to  increase  "  the  meal  and  the  oil"  as  it  pleases?  The  true  life  of 
iaith  is  one  of  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,"  coupled  with  calm  dependence 
on  that  ever-active  power.  Of  the  righteous  God  says,  "  Bread  shall  be  given  him," 
ko.  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16).  « In  the  day  of  famine  they  shall  be  satisfied  "  (Psa.  xxxvii. 
19).    Christ  did  not  mock  us  when  He  taught  us  to  pray  to  our  Father  in  heaven, 


CH.  xvn.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  418 

"  GiT6  ns  this  day  ottr  daily  bread."  Tread  faitMully  the  path  of  duty,  and  "  He 
that  ministereth  seed  to  the  sower  will  both  minister  bread  for  your  food,  and 
multiply  your  seed  sown,  and  increase  the  fruits  of  your  righteousness  "  (2  Oor.  ix. 
10).— W. 

Vers.  17 — 24. — liife  from  the  Dead.  The  miracles  wrought  by  Elijah  or  associated 
with  his  name  were  for  the  most  part  of  the  nature  of  severe  judgments,  and  present 
the  person  of  the  lowly  prophet  in  a  stern  and  terrible  light  before  us.  But  the  t  wo 
miracles  that  mark  the  opening  of  his  career  were  miracles  of  mercy,  and  show 
that  there  was  another  side  to  his  character,  one  that  was  tenderly  sympathetic  and 
humane.  Having  at  first  brought  hope  and  a  new  lease  of  life  to  the  starving 
mother  and  her  child,  he  now  lifts  the  dark  shadow  of  death  from  off  the  desolated 
home  and  turns  its  sorrow  into  joy.  This  narrative  has  a  peculiarly  pathetio 
interest,  and  is  suggestive  of  lessons  that  touch  the  deepest  realities  of  human  Ufa. 
It  natm-ally  divides  itself  into  two  parts,  in  which  we  see  (1)  the  saduess  of  death 
and  (2)  the  joy  of  restoration. 

I.  The  sadness  of  death.  That  the  child  was  really  dead  we  cannot  doubt. 
"Tliere  was  no  breath  left  in  him."  The  gleam  of  hope  in  the  poor  widow's 
condition  was  suddenly  beclouded,  and  a  strange,  yet  not  altogether  unnatural, 
revulsion  of  feeling  took  possession  of  her  breast.  Thus  does  an  unexpected 
calamity,  especially  perhaps  when  it  takes  the  form  of  personal  bereavement,  often 
work  for  a  while  a  sad  change  in  the  attitude  of  the  soxd.  1.  It  darkens  the  whole 
horizon  of  Ufe — quenches  the  light  of  other  joys.  The  abundance  of  meal  and  oil, 
and  the  honour  of  the  prophet's  presence  are  as  nothing  while  the  child  hes  dead 
in  the  house.  There  are  sorrows  which  seem  utterly  to  blot  out  the  sunshine  of 
one's  existence,  and  to  be  aggravated  rather  than  relieved  by  the  joys  that  accom- 
pany them.  2.  It  creates  resentment  against  the  supposed,  or  perhaps  the  real, 
author  of  it.  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  0  thou  man  of  God  ?  "  The  prophet, 
who  had  proved  himself  so  beneficent  a  friend,  is  regarded  as  an  enemy.  8.  It  it 
a  severe  test  of  one's  faith  in  God.  This  woman,  it  may  be,  was  in  an  inter- 
mediate state  of  mind  between  blind  devotion  to  the  old  idolatries  and  the  full 
acceptance  of  the  faith  of  Israel.  How  rude  a  check  did  this  event  seem  to  give  to 
her  progress  into  clearer  hght  I  Thus  is  the  faith  of  men  often  sorely  tried  by  the 
adversities  of  life.  This  is  part  of  their  Divine  purpose.  The  "fiery  trial"  seems 
"  strange  at  first,  but  the  meaning  and  reason  of  it  are  revealed  afterwards."  Happy 
they  whose  faith,  in  spite  of  the  severe  strain  put  upon  it,  holds  fast  to  the  Uving 
God — too  deeply  rooted  in  the  soul  to  be  torn  up  by  any  sudden  sweeping  blast. 
4.  It  a/walcens  the  sense  of  sin.  "  Art  thou  come  to  me  to  bring  my  sin  to  remem- 
brance ?  "  It  is  significant  that  the  thought  of  her  own  sin  should  be  her  first 
thought.  The  calamity  brought  this  to  her  remembrance  because  it  seemed  to  her 
a  sign  of  God's  remembrance  of  it.  Learn  that  though  particular  afflictions  are 
not  always  to  be  connected  with  any  particular  transgression  as  their  cause  (John 
ix.  2,  8),  yet  all  sorrow  must  be  traced  ultimately  to  its  source  in  moral  evil.  It 
is  a  true  instinct  that  leads  us  to  think  of  our  sins  in  times  of  adversity.  Whenever 
affliction  comes  to  us  it  shoidd  produce  tenderness  of  conscience  and  call  forth  the 
prayer, "  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me,"  in  order  that  if  there  be 
any  secret  wrong  in  ourselves  that  demands  this  severe  discipline  we  may  have 
grace  to  fight  against  it  and  cast  it  out. 

II.  The  joy  op  restoration.  The  behaviour  of  Elijah  isbeautiftilly  expressive 
of  his  deep  human  sympathy,  and  also  of  the  intimacy  of  the  relation  between 
himself  and  God  as  a  man  of  prayer  and  the  instrument  of  the  Divine  energy. 
Having  special  regard  to  the  nature  and  effect  of  this  miracle  of  restoration,  observe 
that — 1.  It  is  typical  of  the  beneficent  ministry  of  Christ.  In  Him  the  power  of 
God  came,  as  it  never  had  before,  into  healing  contact  with  the  frame  of  our 
diseased  and  dying  humanity.  He  took  our  nature  upon  Him  that  He  might 
effectually  cure  its  infirmities  and  sicknesses.  "  Virtue  "  continually  went  forth 
from  Him.  He  was  the  great  health-restorer  and  life-giver ;  and  as  all  the  heahng 
ministries  of  former  ages  had  anticipated  His  coming,  so  all  true  philanthropy 


414  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  xvn.  1—24. 

Binee  has  caught  its  highest  inspiration  from  the  constraint  of  His  love  and  tlie 
force  of  His  example.  2.  Itia  prophetio  of  the  future  glorious  resurrection.  We 
Bee  here  one  of  the  many  witnesses  that  gleam  out  amid  the  obscurity  of  the  olden 
times  to  the  truth  that  God  would  surely  one  day  "  bring  life  and  immortahty  to 
light,"  while  it  points  us  on  to  the  time  when,  "  at  the  voice  of  the  son  of  God,  all 
that  are  in  their  graves  shall  come  forth."  "  Then  shall  he  brought  to  pass  the 
saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory "  (Isa.  xxv.  8 ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  54).  3.  It  illustrates  the  joy  of  a  soul  that  for  the  first  time  is  made  fully 
conscious  of  the  gracious  presence  amd  'power  of  God.  "  Now  by  this  I  know  that 
thou  art  a  man  of  God,"  &c.  There  is  a  tone  of  deep  satisfaction  in  these  words. 
It  is  the  satisfaction  that  springs  from  the  discovery  of  Divine  truth  and  the  vivid 
sense  of  God.  There  is  no  satisfaction  of  which  the  soul  of  man  is  capable  that 
can  he  compared  with  this.  The  end  of  all  forms  of  Divine  manifestation — 
prophetic  visitations,  miracles,  providences,  &c. — is  this.  We  reach  the  highest 
joy  possible  to  us  upon  earth  when  we  can  say  with  St.  John,  "  We  know  that  the 
Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that  we  may  know  him 
that  is  true,  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  sou  Jesus  Chiut.  This  is 
ibe  true  God  and  eternal  hfe  "  (1  John  iv.  20). — W. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Elijah's  Advent  amd  Service.  I.  The  Gbeat  Prophet.  1.  His  name: 

Elijah,  my  God  (is)  Jehovah.  It  was  a  symbol  of  his  spirit.  It  expressed  his 
judgment  of  Israel's  idolatry  and  the  choice  which  with  his  soul's  whole  strength 
he  had  made  of  God.  Light  and  fidelity  are  the  only  foundations  of  any  true  work 
for  God  or  man.  2.  His  origin.  The  words  {"  of  the  inhabitants,"  &c.)  seemed  to 
indicate  that  he  belonged  to  none  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  (1)  His  mission  was 
prophetio  of  that  of  the  Gentiles.  Israel,  forsaking  God,  were  to  feel  that  God 
was  also  forsaking  them  (Eom.  x.  19).  The  very  meanness  of  the  origin  of  God's 
faithful  ones  lends  power  to  their  testimony.  (2)  It  proved  the  infinitude  of  God's 
resources.  Ahab  and  Jezebel  might  slay  His  prophets  ;  they  could  not  arrest  the 
progress  of  His  work.  From  the  most  unthought-of  quarter  there  arises  a  mightier 
than  all  whose  Hves  had  been  taken.  The  power  of  a  devoted  life  to  make  the 
world  feel  the  impossibility  of  its  prevailing  in  its  contest  with  God.  3.  His  atti- 
tude toward  God.  "  Before  whom  I  stand."  He  was  the  Lord's  servant.  He 
lived  for  Him.  His  eye  rested  on  Him.  The  whole  man  stood  girded  for  prompt, 
unquestioning  obedience.  Tliis  is  the  spirit  of  all  true  service.  Is  God  as  real  to 
us  ?    Do  we  thus  stand  before  Him  ? 

II.  His  Message.  1,  The  judgment.  It  was  that  predicted  from  of  old  as  the 
ohastisement  of  Israel's  idolatry  (Dent.  xi.  17).  The  land  was  to  be  consumed  by 
drought.  The  blessings  which  God  withholds  from  the  soul  that  forsakes  Him 
are  imaged  in  those  withheld  from  the  land.  There  is  "  neither  dew  nor  rain." 
The  refreshment,  the  rich  consolation,  once  imparted  by  the  word  or  found  in 
prayer,  are  no  longer  known.  The  stimulating  of  loving  zeal  after  what  is  nobler 
and  purer  has  ceased.  2.  Through  whom  it  fell :  "  According  to  my  word."  Those 
who  reject  God  will  be  judged  by  man.  God  will  still  confront  them  in  their 
fellows.  God  is  magnified  in  His  servants.  The  kingly  power  and  priesthood  of 
beUevers  in  their  relation  to  the  world. 

III.  His  retirement.  1.  It  served  Qocl,  Ahab  and  Israel  were  left  face  to  face 
with  Him.  Man  disappeared  that  the  eye  might  rest  on  God  alone.  There  are 
times  when  He  is  best  served  by  silence.  Many  words  often  undo  the  efifeot  of  the 
homethrust  dealt  by  a  few.  2.  It  was  his  safety.  He  was  shielded  from  Ahab's 
anger.  We  may  be  hid  by  affliction  from  the  power  of  our  great  foe.  Temptation 
and  danger  may  have  been  darkening  the  path  that  lay  before  us  when  God  led  OS 
aside  and  made  us  rest  awhile  with  Him.  3.  It  prepared  him  for  after  service. 
He  was  taught  God's  unfailing  power  and  care.  His  wants  were  provided  for 
though  no  man  knew  of  his  dwelling  place ;  and  that  by  the  most  unhkely  instru- 
ments. He  learned  how  fully  he  might  trust  God.  He  to  whom  God  is  thus 
revealed  wiU  not  fear  the  fice  of  man. — U. 


SH.  XVII.  1— 24.J  THE  FIEST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS.  416 

Vers.  7 — 16. — Divine  Care.  I.  The  endlessness  of  God's  resgueobs.  1.  The 
brooTc  failed;  and  one  essential  of  life  eould  no  more  be  had  there.  But  it  was  only 
that  this  wondrous  provision  might  give  place  to  greater  marvels.  When  means  are 
threatened,  the  heart  sinks ;  but  He  who  has  provided  these  for  a  season  knows  ol 
the  failure ;  and  He  who  sent  to  Cherith  can  send  elsewliere.  One  channel  of  help 
fails  only  that  the  soul  may  be  quickened  by  a  fresh  revelation  of  God's  kindness. 
^.  He  was  sent  to  what  seemed  to  he  the  most  dangerous  of  all  places— to  the 
territory  of  Jezebel's  father.  And  yet  the  very  unlikelihood  of  his  seeking  shelter 
there  increased  his  safety.  God's  path  can  only  be  trod  by  faitli,  but  that  faith  is 
soon  changed  to  praise.  8.  He  was  sent  to  a  most  v/nlikely  quarter.  The  hostess 
whoin  the  Lord  had  chosen  was  a  widow  and  one  who  possessed  sufficient  to 
furnish  only  one  more  meal  for  herself  and  her  child.  But  here  again  faith  was  to 
break  forth  into  praise.  God's  power  is  infinite,  and  the  meanest  as  well  as  the 
mightiest  may  be  used  to  glorify  Him. 

II.  The  reward  of  obedient  faith.  1.  For  Elijah.  He  went  nndoubting ;  he 
fiought  the  city,  and  lo,  at  the  gate  (yet.  10)  he  met  his  hostess.  Those  who  act 
on  God's  promises  will  meet  with  the  revelation  of  His  truth  and  graoiousness.  2. 
For  the  woman  (vers.  11 — 16).  It  was  her  last  meaL  Love  of  her  child  and  her 
own  hunger  must  have  made  it  hard  to  obey,  but  the  seed  she  sowed  in  faith 
yielded  a  thousandfold.  God's  call  to  sacrifice  for  His  service,  for  honesty  and 
truth,  is  the  path  to  plenty  not  to  loss.  3.  For  both.  The  woroan  entered  a 
new  world.  The  unseen  was  unveiled ;  she  knew  God.  Elijah  found  in  a  heathen 
land  a  home  which  God  had  sanctified.  The  communion  of  faith  glorifies  all  human 
relationship. — U. 

Vers.  17 — 24. — Affliction  and  its  Fruits.  I.  The  discipline  of  trui..  1.  It  it 
no  proof  of  God's  anger.  Sorrow  darkens  the  homes  of  God's  beloved.  This  was 
a  home  of  faith  and  ministering  love.  Affliction  is  no  more  proof  of  wrath  than  is 
the  farmer's  ploughing  of  his  field.  To  him,  with  his  eye  upon  the  future  harvest, 
it  is  only  the  needful  preparation  of  the  soil.  And  the  great  Husbandman,  with 
His  eye  upon  the  eternal  glory,  must  open  up  a  bed  within  the  soul's  depths  for 
the  seed  of  life.  2.  Ood's  blow  may  be  very  heavy.  Her  son,  her  only  child,  is 
taken.  God's  plough  sinks  deep  that  His  work  may  be  rightly  done.  The  very 
greatness  of  our  anguish  is  a  measure  by  which  we  may  gauge  the  greatness  of 
vie  Lord's  purpose  and  of  the  love  which  will  not  suffer  us  to  miss  the  blessing. 

II.  The  peuits  it  yields.  1.  It  reveals  our  need.  She  may  have  been  conscious 
4aily  of  the  goodness  of  God  and  yet  been  bUnd  to  the  fact  that  she  needed  more 
than  she  had  yet  received,  God  now  awakens  her  (1)  to  the  sense  of  her  unworthi- 
ness :  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  "  (2)  to  the  remembrance  of  her  transgressions : 
^' Art  thou  come  to  call  my  sins  to  remembrance  ?  "  The  darkness  of  trouble  is  the 
shadow  of  guilt.  There  is  discipline  because  there  is  need  of  salvation.  Sins  may 
le  pardoned,  but  God  must  open  up  a  gulf  between  the  soul  and  them.  The  time 
of  trouble  is  meant  to  be  a  time  of  heart-searching  and  of  confession.  2.  It  stirs  up 
to  prayer.  Elijah's  heart  was  poured  out  in  bold  expostulation  and  earnest  entreaty 
{vers.  20,  21).  In  the  sharpness  of  our  need  om:  cry  gains  strength;  we  press,  in 
our  urgency,  into  the  Divine  presence.  These  times  open  up  a  way  to  God  by 
"which  we  find  ready  access  ever  after.  8.  It  leads  to  the  vision  of  Qod's  glory. 
"  And  the  Lord  heard,"  &o.  (ver.  22).  The  prayer  was  followed  by  a  revelation  of 
■God's  power  such  as  till  then  man  had  never  seen :  the  dead  was  raised.  "Ask 
and  ye  shall  receive."  The  soul  that  ashs  wUl  see  God's  salvation  and  be  filled 
"with  the  light  of  the  Divine  glory.  4.  It  deepens  trust.  "  Now  by  this  I  know," 
■&o.  (ver.  24).  When  man's  need  meets  God's  help,  the  soul  is  bound  to  Him  by  the 
«trongest  ties. — U. 

Vers.  1. — 7. — First  Prepa/ration  of  Flijahfor  Ms  great  Mission.  After  Elijah's 
:first  appearance  before  Ahab  to  announce  to  him  the  Divine  visitation  of  sterility 
«nd  dearth  which  was  to  come  upon  the  land  as  the  chastisement  of  his  sin,  the  pro- 
phet was  sent  away  into  a  solitary  place  to  prepare  himself  for  his  great  and  solemn 


418  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xvn.  1—24. 

mission,  wMeh  was  to  overthrow  idolatry  and  vindicate  the  worship  of  the  true 
God.  This  work  of  preparation  was  divided  into  two  great  periods.  1.  The 
preparation  of  the  desert.  2.  The  lonely  life  of  the  prophet  in  the  house  of  tha 
widow  of  Sarepta. 

The  Desert  was,  from  the  time  of  Moses  to  the  days  of  John  the  BaptiEi,  the 
great  school  of  the  prophets.  These  men  of  God  were  trained  for  their  work:  1. 
By  heing  brought  face  to  face  with  their  sacred  mission  in  all  its  greatness,  and 
free  from  the  prejudices  and  petty  influences  of  human  society.  There  they  could 
steadfastly  contemplate  the  Divine  ideal,  undistracted  by  the  rude  realities  of  man's 
fallen  condition.  2.  There  they  were  also  cut  off  from  all  human  aid,  left  to  test 
their  own  strength,  or  rather  to  prove  their  own  utter  weakness,  and, overwhelmed 
with  the  sense  of  it,  to  oast  themselves  whoUy  on  Divine  strength.  Thus  they 
received  directly  from  God,  as  did  Elijah,  the  supplies  by  which  they  lived,  and 
realized  the  conditions  of  absolute  and  immediate  trust  in  Him.  Coming  forth  from 
this  discipline  of  the  desert,  they  were  enabled  to  say  with  Paul,  "  When  I  am 
weak,  then  am  I  strong  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  8.  This  loving  converse  of  the  prophets 
with  their  God  brought  them  into  closer  fellowship,  more  intimate  union,  with  Him. 
Thus  they  came  forth  from  the. desert,  like  Moses  from  the  Mount  of  Sinai,  bearing 
unconsciously  upon  them  the  reflection  of  His  glory.  As  St.  Paul  says,  "  We, 
beholding  as  with  open  face  the  glory  of  the  Lord  as  in  a  mirror,  are  changed  into 
the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord"  (2  Cor. 
iii.  18).  Considerations  lie  these  have  a  fit  application  to  the  pastor,  who  ought 
to  be  much  in  solitary  communion  with  God,  in  order  to  be  raised  above  the  com- 
promises  of  principle  so  common  in  society,  and  to  get  his  whole  nature  permeated 
with  Divine  strength.  Every  Christian  soul  has  in  like  manner  a  prophet's  mission, 
and  ought  therefore  often  to  seek  the  desert  sohtude,  in  which  the  Invisible  it 
brought  near,  and  to  frequent  those  sacred  mountain  tops  of  prayer,  where  tha 
disciple,  like  the  Master,  renews  his  strength  (Luke  v.  16). — E.  de  P. 

Vers.  7 — 24. — Second  Preparation  of  Elijah.  Elijah  passed  through  his  second 
phase  of  preparation  under  the  humble  roof  of  the  widow  of  Sarepta.  He  is  in  the 
right  attitude  for  gaining  a  holy  preparedness  for  his  work,  for  he  has  placed 
himself  absolutely  and  directly  under  the  guidance  of  God.  When  the  word  of  God 
comes  to  him,  he  is  ready  to  arise  and  go  whithersoever  it  bids.  Thus  was  Christ 
"  led  of  the  Spirit "  to  commence  His  public  ministry  (Matt.  iv.  1) ;  and  throughout 
Hie  whole  course  He  recognized  the  same  unfaUing  guidance.  The  purpose  of 
God  in  sending  Elijah  to  the  poor  widow  was  to  show  him,  before  ho  entered  on 
the  great  conflict  with  idolatry,  that  he  had  at  his  disposal  a  Divine  power  which 
nothing  would  be  able  to  resist.  Ehjah  was,  so  to  cpeak,  to  prove  his  arms,  far 
from  human  observation,  bt  a  fabsaob  of  seep  peksonai.  experience.  Hence 
the  double  miracle  of  the  barrel  of  meal  and  the  cruse  of  oil  always  fuU.  Hence, 
yet  more  distinctly,  that  gloriouB  miracle  of  the  raising  of  the  widow's  son  by  the 
prophet.  This  mJracle  had  no  witnesses ;  nor  must  we  marvel  at  this.  God  does 
not  perform  miracles  to  fascinate  onlookers ;  He  does  not  make  a  spectacle  of  His 
marvellous  working.  His  glory  is  sufficiently  magnified  in  the  deliverance  of  a 
humble  believer,  like  the  widow  of  Sarepta,  and  in  the  quahfication  of  the  prophet 
for  his  missioii.  Jesus  Christ  refused  to  work  any  miracles  for  show,  and  the 
snblimest  manifestations  of  His  power  were  reserved  for  humble  hearts  and  lowly 
dwellings.^  Ehjah  has  learnt  to  know  the  strength  of  God  which  is  in  him ;  he  has 
proved  it  in  the  seoresy  of  his  soul.  He  has  a  full  assurance  that  it  will  be  mani- 
fested in  him  when  he  stands  before  Ahab,  no  less  mightily  than  in  the  obscurity 
of  the  widow's  house.  This  intimate  personal  experience  of  the  grace  of  God  is  of 
incomparable  value  to  His  servants.  If  we  would  have  Divine  strength  to  use  in 
the  great  conflict  with  sin  around  us,  we  must  prove  its  miraculous  energy  in  our 
private  life.  And  let  us  remember  also  that  our  homes  may  be  the  scene  of  .the 
mightiest  manifestations  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  of  the  most  signal  providential 
deliverances,  if  only  our  hearts  be  open  to  TTiin  in  humility  and  love,  like  the  heart 
of  the  widow  of  Sarepta. — E.  de  P. 


OE.  XVUL  1 — 16.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


41T 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBE  XVra.  1— 48. 

Eluab'8  beiubn  and  tbb  obsbaii  or 
Mount  Oabmel. — The  preceding  chapter 
haying  been  exclusively  oooupied  with  the 
fortunes  of  Elijah  during  hie  enforced  ab- 
sence of  three  and  a  half  years  from  the 
land  of  Israel,  we  are  left  to  conjecture 
what  the  course  of  events  in  the  northern 
kingdom  during  this  period  of  drought  and 
suffering  must  have  been.  But  it  is  not 
difficult  to  picture  in  our  minds  the  steadily 
increasing  alarm  and  distress  which  the 
solemn  ban  he  had  pronounced  must  have 
occasioned.  At  one  time,  it  maybe,  especially 
if  the  prophet  up  to  that  period  had  been 
unknown,  both  king  and  people,  under 
the  malign  influence  of  Jezebel,  professed 
to  regard  his  threatening  with  contempt, 
the  more  so  as  the  priests  of  Baal  would  not 
fail  to  assure  them  of  the  protection  and 
blessing  of  "the  Iiord  "  of  nature.  But  as 
the  months  and  years  passed  by;  and  neither 
dew  nor  rain  fell — as  the  heavens  were 
brass  and  the  earth  iron — and  the  paaiures 
languished,  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth 
failed,  and  the  cisterns  became  dry,  and 
man  and  child  and  beast  began  to  suffer  the 
extremities  of  thirst,  we  cannot  doubt  that 
the  tone  and  temper  of  the  country  under- 
went a  great  change.  At  first,  threats  had 
been  freely  uttered  against  Klijah,  who  was 
perversely  regarded  as  the  author  of  all  this 
misery,  and  that  and  the  neighbouring  coun- 
tries were  scoured  to  find  him.  Moreover, 
reprisals  were  made  on  the  system  which  he 
represented,  by  a  fierce  persecution  of  the 
prophetic  order,  of  which  he  was  recognized 
as  the  head.  But  it  is  probable  that  when 
the  drought  lasted  into  the  third  and  fourth 
year,  and  when  absolute  ruin  and  death 
stared  the  country  in  the  face,  that  then  de- 
fiance had  given  place  to  dread  and  regret  in 
every  bosom,  save,  perhaps,  that  of  the  queen 
and  the  sycophants  who  ate  of  her  table. 
The  conviction  was  steadily  gaining  posses- 
sion of  the  minds  of  all  Israel  that  Baal  and 
Ashtoreth  were  vanities,  and  that  the  Lord 
alone  made  the  heavens  and  covered  them 
with  clouds.  The  great  drought,  and  the 
manifoldsufferings  which  it  entailed— suffer- 

1    EIKOS. 


ings  which  the  animated  description  of  the 
prophet  Joel  (ch.  i.)  enables  us  to  reaUze — 
were  doing  their  work.  The  heart  of  the 
people  was  being  slowly  turned  backward, 
and  in  the  third  year  of  his  sojourn  at 
Zarepbath  the  time  was  ripe  for  Elijah's 
return,  which  our  author  now  describes, 
together  with  the  striking  results  which  fol- 
lowed it.  In  the  first  fifteen  verses,  we  have 
the  meeting  of  Elijah  and  Obadiah ;  in  vers. 
16 — 20,  the  meeting  of  Elijah  and  Ahab ; 
vers.  21 — 38  describe  the  ordeal  of  Mount 
Carmel ;  vers.  39, 40,  its  immediate  results; 
while  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  depicts 
Elijah's  prayer  for  rain,  the  bursting  of  the 
storm,  and  the  return  to  Jezreel. 

Yer.  1. — And  It  came  to  pass  after  [This 
word  is  wanting  in  the  Heb.  except  in  a  few 
MSS.]many  days  that  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  to  EUJah  In  the  tbtrd  year  [From 
what  date  is  this  "  third  year "  to  be 
counted  7  The  prima  facie  view  is  that  the 
words  refer  to  "  these  years  "  mentioned  in 
ch.  xvii,  1,  i.e.,  to  the  date  of  the  announce- 
ment of  the  drought,  and  this  is  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  Babbins  and  some  of  the 
moderns.  But  it  is  almost  fatal  to  this  view 
that  the  duration  of  the  drought  is  dis- 
tinctly stated  in  the  New  Testament  to  have 
been  "  three  years  and  six  mouths  "  (Luke 
iv.  25 ;  James  v.  17).  It  is  every  way  better, 
therefore,  to  connect  the  words  with  ch. 
xvii.  7,  {.«.,  with  the  date  of  the  sojourn  at 
Zarepbath.  It  follows  hence  that  the 
prophet  spent  about  one  year  in  the  Wfidy 
Cherith,  and  two  and  a  half  in  the  house  of 
the  widow] ,  saying',  Go,  show  thyself  [Heb. 
be  seen]  unto  Ahab ;  and  I  will  send  [Heb. 
give]  rain  upon  the  earth.  [Heb.  on  ths  fact 
of  the  ground.    Cf .  xvii.  14.] 

Yer.  2. — ^And  Elijah  went  to  show  btm- 
self  mito  Ahab.  And  [or  Now.  It  would, 
perhaps,  have  been  better  to  begin  a  new 
verse  here,  as  this  is  the  beginning  of  a 
parenthesis,  explanatory  of  the  circum- 
stances under  which  king  and  prophet  met. 
It  was  the  famine  led  to  Ob&diah's  en- 
countering Elijah  on  the  road]  there  was  a 
sore  famine  in  Samaria.  [The  effect  of  m 
three  years'  drought  would  be  to  reduce  the 
entire  people  to  the  verge  of  starvation.  The 
severity  of  the  famine  was  no  doubt  miti- 
gated, as  on  a  former  occasion  (Gen.  xli.  57), 
by  the  importation  of  com  from  Egypt.] 

Yer.  3. — And  Ahab  called  [Bather,  had 
called.  "  The  verbs  Npi?'!.  '0?1  &°-  (vera- 
8,  4,  5,  6),  carry  on  the  ciroomstantial 
2e 


lis 


THE  EIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  XTin.  1—46. 


clauses "  (Eeil).]  Obadlah  [This  name  is 
almost  as  remarkable  as  Elijah's,  or  would 
be,  if  it  were  not  more  common.  It  means 
"servant  of  Jehovah."  Compare  the  modern 
Arabic  Abdallah.  Although  borne  by  one 
who  "  feared  the  Lord  greatly  "  (ver.  3),  and 
"  from  his  youth  "  (ver.  12),  it  occurs  too 
frequently  (1  Chron.  iii.  21 ;  vii.  3  ;  viii.  38 ; 
ix.  16 ;  2  Chron.  zvii.  7  ;  zxziv.  12 ;  Ezra 
viii.  9 ;  Obad.  i.,  iSso.)  to  justify  the  belief 
that  it  was  assumed  or  bestowed  as  an 
indication  of  his  character  (Bawlinaon)] , 
which  was  the  governor  of  his  [Heb.  over 
t/iej  house.  [See  note  on  ch.  iv.  6,  and  cf. 
oh.  xvi.  9.  Eawlinson  says  it  "  tells  in 
favour  of  the  monarch's  tolerance  that  he 
should  have  maintained  an  adherent  of  the 
old  religion  in  so  important  an  o£Sce."  But 
it  is  just  as  probable  that  it  was  because  of 
his  religion  that  he  occupied  this  post  of 
trust.  Ahab  could  depend  on  his  fidelity 
and  conscientinusness] .  (Now  Obadlah  [here 
begins  a  second  parenthesis  within  the  first] 
feared  [Heb.  was  fearing]  the  Lord  greatly. 
Ver.  4. — For  It  was  bo,  when  Jezebel  cut 
off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  [Our  author 
now  instances  a  proof  of  Obadiah's  devotion. 
The  incident  to  which  he  refers  is  other- 
wise unknown  to  us,  nor  can  we  refer  it  with 
certainty  to  it's  proper  place  in  the  history. 
But  it  is  extremely  probable  that  this  work 
of  extermination  was  begun  as  an  act  of  re- 
prisals for  the  drought  denounced  by  Elijah. 
Ver.  13  almost  implies  that  it  had  taken 
place  during  his  absence.  We  see  here,  con- 
sequently, an  additional  reason  for  his 
flight  (cf.  cb.xiz.  2).  These  "  prophets  "  are 
the  same  as  those  elsewhere  called  the 
"  sons  of  the  prophets,  i.e.,  members  of 
the  prophetic  schools ;  cf.  2  Kings  ii.  3,  6,  7, 
&c.]  that  Obadlah  took  an  hundred  prophets 
[This  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the 
great  majority  escaped.  But  see  ver.  19  and 
ch.  xzii.  6.  That  we  find  so  large  a  number 
still  in  the  land,  not\7ithstanding  the  exodus 
(2  Chron.  xi.  16),  and  the  steady  growth  of 
impiety,  shows  that  God  had  not  left  Him- 
self without  witnesses] ,  and  hid  them  by 
llfty  [Keil  would  insert  a  second  D'B'pn 
as  do  some  MSS.  (Gardiner),  and  as  in 
ver.  13.  Such  a  word  might  easily  be 
omitted  in  transcription,  it  is  true.  But 
■' proclivilectioni," &0.']  Inacave  [Tdeh.  the 
cave ;  but  LXX.  Iv  awtiXu'itii.  Similarly  in 
ver.  13.  What  is  the  force  of  the  article 
here  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  say.  It  has 
licen  suggested  that  these  caves  were  in  the 
sides  of  Mount  Carmel ;  there  are  large 
caves  under  the  western  cliffs  (Stanley) ; 
more  than  two  thousand,  according  to 
others;  "often  of  great  length  and  ex- 
tremely tortuous  "  (Die.  Bib.  i.  p.  278) ;  but 
this  is  mere  guesswork,  as  Palestine,  being 


of  limestone  formation,  abounds  in  caverns. 
See  Stanley,  S.  and  P.  pp.  151, 62.  From  the 
earliest  times  we  find  men — outlaws  and  the 
like— taking  up  their  abode  therein.  Cf. 
Josh.  X.  17  ;  Judg.  vi,  2  ;  1  Sam.  xxii.  1 ; 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  27 ;  Heb.  xi.  38.  Probably 
the  division  into  two  companies  was  partly 
for  the  sake  of  security  (see  Gen.  xxii.  8), 
and  partly  for  the  sake  of  convenience.  The 
greater  the  number  to  be  fed,  the  greater 
the  chance  of  detection.  Compare  also 
Jacob's  precautions  Gen.  zzxii.  8],  and 
fed  them  with  bread  [pT,food]  and  water.) 
[It  is  to  be  observed,  as  bearing  on  ch.  xvii. 
4 — 6,  that  these  hundred  prophets,  though 
preserved  by  the  special  providence  of 
God,  were  nevertheless  maintained  through 
human  agency  and  by  natural  means. 

Ver.  5. — And  Ahab  said  [had  said]  imto 
Obadlah,  Go  hito  [Heb.  in]  the  land,  unto 
all  fountains  [Heb.  places  of  fountains.  Cf. 
with  t;rQ  from  pj;,  lisp  from  liS  <So.] 
of  water,  and  unto  all  brooks  Iwddies ;  see 
on  ch.  xvii.  3] :  peradventure  we  may  find 
grass  to  save  the  horses  and  mules  alive 
[It  has  been  inferred  from  Ahab's  concern 
for  his  stud  that  he  viewed  the  sufferings  of 
his  subjects  with  comparative  indiffeience, 
or  at  least  regarded  them  as  of  altogether 
secondary  importance.  But  this  is  a  too 
hasty  conclusion.  His  subjects  were,  for 
the  most  part,  as  well  able  to  find  water  for 
themselves  as  he  was  for  them,  and  he 
might  safely  tmst  to  their  instinct  of  self- 
preservation  to  do  their  best  to  meet  the 
emergency.  But  the  dumb  cattle,  con. 
fined  to  the  stall,  could  not  act  for  them- 
selves. Hence  this  expedition  in  search 
of  'fodder],  that  we  lose  not  all  th» 
beasts.  [Marg.  that  we  cut  njt  ourselves 
off  from,  &o.  But  this  rendering,  and 
still  more  that  of  the  text,  misintt-rpiets 
the  force  of  the  Hiphil  nnipj-  The  hteral 
translation  is, "  That  wc  miy  not  have  to  cut 
off  from  (i.e.,  a  portioj  of,  JD  partitive, 
as  in  ver.  13  below,  *8U3D).  What  Ahab 
means  is  that,  unless  they  soon  find  fodder, 
they  will  have  to  slaughter  a  portion. of 
their  animals.  So  Baiir,  Und  nicht  von  dem 
Vieh  (einen  Theil)  umbringen  miisten.  Simi- 
larly Keil.] 

Ver.  6. — So  they  divided  the  land  between 
them  to  pass  throughout  it  ["  This  personal 
inspection  by  the  king  and  one  of  his  chief 
oifioers  marks  the  extreme  straits  to  which 
the  Israelites  were  now  reduced "  (Eawhn- 
son).  The  difierenoe,  however,  between  an 
Eastern  and  an  European  monarch  must 
not  be  overlooked.  "  None  (of  the  emirs  of 
Arabia  or  the  chiefs  of  central  Asia)  think 
it  beneath  them  to  lead  an  expedition  ia 
search  of  grass  or  water"  (Kitto)]:  Ahafr 


OH.  xYin.  1 — 16.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SINGS. 


«lt 


went  one  way  by  IilnueU  [Heb.  alone. 
Bawlinaou  says,  "This  does  not  mean 
that  either  Ahab  or  Obadiah  was  nn- 
accompanied  by  a  retinue,"  but  it  may  very 

well  mean  that  Hy?,  solus;  LXX.  /tdfoci 
Bahr  allein.  Cf.  ver.  22),  if,  indeed,  it  must 
not  necessarily  mean  it;  and  ver.  14 
certainly  implies  that  Obadiah  at  least  was 
unattended],  and  Obadiah  went  another 
way  by  himselt 

Yer.  7. — And  as  Obadiah  was  In  the  way, 
behold,  Elijah  met  him  [Heb.  to  meet  him] : 
and  he  knew  [i.e.,  recognized.  Same  word. 
Gen.  xxvii.  23 ;  xlii.  7,  &o.]  him,  and  fell  on 
bis  face,  and  said,  Art  thou  that  [Heb.  this, 
probably  used  adverbially  (like  hie)  for  here 
=  nTa]  my  lord  Elijah?  [The  humble 
obeisance  and  the  terms  in  which  he  ad- 
dresses him  alike  show  the  profound  rever- 
ence  with  which  Obadiah  regarded  him,  as 
well  he  might  do,  considering  the  terrible 
power  he  wielded.  The  whole  land  was,  so 
to  speak,  at  his  mercy.] 

Yer.  8.— And  he  answered  him,  I  am 
[Heb.  I] :  go,  tell  thy  lord.  Behold,  Elijah 
is  here.  [The  last  two  words  are  not  in  the 
Hebrew,  and  the  sentence  is  much  more 
graphic  without  them.] 

Ver.  9. — And  he  said.  What  have  I  sinned, 
that  then  wouldst  deliver  [Heb.  that  thou 
art  giving]  thy  servant  Into  the  hand  of 
Ahab,  to  slay  me  7 

Ver.  10.— As  the  Lord  thy  God  llveth 
[Obadiah  uses  precisely  the  same  adjuration 
as  the  widow  of  Zarephath,  ch.  xvii.  12. 
But  then,  though  Jehovah  was  undoubtedly 
his  God,  He  was  in  a  more  special  and  in- 
timate manner  Elijah's  God.  The  oath 
corresponds  well  with  the  prophet's  name], 
there  is  no  nation  or  kingdom,  whither  my 
lord  hath  not  sent  to  seek  thee  [Keil  says 
the  hyperbole  is  to  be  explained  by  the  "  in- 
ward excitement  and  fear"  of  the  speaker. 
But  the  Orientals  use  similar  exaggerations 
in  their  calmest  moments.  All  that  is 
meant  is  that  all  neighbouring  and  acces- 
sible courts  had  been  communicated  with. 
This  search  for  Elijah  shows  that  Ahab  re- 
garded him  as  the  author  of  the  drought, 
and  did  not  recognize  it  as  sent  by  God. 
The  belief  in  occult  and  magical  powers 
has  always  held  possession  of  the  Eastern 
mind]:  and  when  they  said,  He  Is  not 
there  [Heb.  Not,  and  lie,  &o.];  he  took  an 
oath  [LXX.  evkirpijo'e,  which  has  been 
thought  by  some  to  point  to  acts  of  ven- 
geance. But  more  probably  it  is  a  clerical 
error,  perhaps  for  UpKuie,  or  ivapaat.  On 
the  icequenoy  of  oaths  in  that  age  see  on 
ch.  i.  51]  of  the  kingdom  and  nation,  that 
they  found  thee  not. 

Ver.  11. — And  now  thou  sayeat,  Ck>,  teU  thy 


lord.  Behold,  EUJata  Is  here.    [Heb.  Behold, 
Elijah.  Obadiah  echoes  the  words  of  ver.  8.] 

Ver.  12.— And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
as  soon  as  I  am  gone  from  thee,  that  [Heb. 
/  shall  go  from  thee,  and]  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  shall  carry  thee  whither  I  know  not 
[These  words,  which  literally  translated  are 
"shall  lift  thee  up  upon  where,"  &a.,  are  to 
be  explained  by  2  Kings  ii  16,  "lest  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  taken  him  up  "  (same 
word)  "  and  cast  him  upon  some  mountain," 
&o.  Seb.  Schmidt,  Wordsworth,  al.  think 
that  such  a  transportation  mnst  have 
already  occurred  in  the  history  of  Elijah, 
but  the  sudden,  mysterious  disappearance 
and  the  long  concealment  of  the  prophet  if 
quite  sufficient  to  account  for  Obadiah*! 
fear.  Compare  Acts  viii.  89.  The  words 
do  suggest,  however,  that  it  had  been 
believed  by  some  that  the  Lord  had  hid 
Elijah,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  during 
his  long  absence  rumours  had  often  gained 
credence  that  he  had  been  seen  and  had 
suddenly  disappeared,  just  as  later  Jews 
have  held  that  he  "has  appeared  again 
and  again  as  an  Arabian  merchant  to  wise 
and  good  Babbis  at  their  prayers  or  in 
their  journeys"  (Stanley)];  and  so  when  I 
come  and  tell  [Heb.  and  I  come  to  tell] 
Ahab,  and  he  cannot  find  thee,  he  shall 
slay  me  [This  is  just  what  a  prince  like 
Ahab,  or  any  prince  who  was  under  the 
guidance  of  a  Jezebel,  would  do,  out  of  sheer 
vexation  at  losing  his  prey  when  so  nearly 
in  his  grasp] :  but  [Heb.  and]  I  thy  servant 
fear  the  Lord  fi:om  my  youth,  [Obadiah's 
meaning  clearly  is  not  that  be,  "as  a  God- 
fearing man  and  a  protector  of  the  prophets, 
cannot  have  any  special  favour  to  expect 
from  Ahab"  (Keil;  similarlyEwald),but  that 
it  was  hard  that  one  who  was  a  steadfast 
worshipper  of  Elijah's  God  should  be  slain 
for  his  sake.  It  is  extremely  unlikely  that 
Ahab  knew  of  Obadiah's  having  protected 
the  prophets.  He  could  hardly  have  main- 
tained him  in  his  post  had  he  known  that 
the  steward  of  the  palace  had  thwarted  the 
designs  of  his  queen.] 

Ver.  13. — Was  it  not  told  my  lord  what  I 
did  when  Jezebel  slew  the  prophets  of  the 
Lord,  how  I  hid  an  hundred  men  of  [Heb. 
from]  the  Lord's  prophets  by  fifty  In  a  cave, 
and  fed  them  with  bread  and  water  T 
[Stanley  happily  calls  Obadiah  "  the  Sebas- 
tian of  this  Jewish  Diocletian."] 

Ver.  14. — And  now  thousayest  [="Thil 
is  to  be  the  reward  of  my  devotion,  is  it  f  "] , 
Go,  tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  EUJah  Is  here: 
and  he  shall  slay  me. 

Ver.  15. — And  Elijah  said.  As  the  Lord  of 
hosts  Uveth,  before  whom  I  stand  [Thie 
formula  should  be  compared  with  that  of 
ch.  xvii,  1.    The  repetition  is  suggestive  ■■ 


480 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGa 


[oh.  xviu.  1 — M. 


exhibiting  the  habit  of  the  man.  He  was 
the  ready  and  patient  slave  of  Jehovah. 
The  niK^V  ^s  apparently  introduced  not  bo 
much  to  "elevate  the  solemnity  of  the 
oath"  (Keil, Bahr) — for  Burely  Elijah  wotdd 
wish  to  make  the  affirmation  of  ch.  xvii.  1 
as  strong  and  solemn  as  possible — nor  yet 
to  convey  the  meaning  that  "it  is  not 
Baal  or  Ashtaroth  who  are  the  rulers  of  the 
heavenly  bodies"  (Wordsworth),  for  Oba- 
diah  knew  that  perfectly  well,  but  because 
it  was  thus  better  adapted  for  a  believer. 
In  addiessing  Ahab  it  suited  Elijah's  pur- 
pose better  to  give  prominence  to  the  idea 
that  Jehovah  was  "  the  God  of  Israel "] ,  I 
will  surely  show  myself  unto  him  to-day. 

Yer.  16. — So  Obadlah  went  to  meet  Ahab, 
and  told  him :  and  Ahab  went  [Very  readily, 
it  would  seem.  Anything  was  better  than 
suspense  and  famine.  And  Elijah's  very 
return  contained  in  it  a  promise  of  lain]  to 
meet  EUJali. 

Ver.  17. — And  It  came  to  pass,  wben 
Ahab  saw  Elijah,  that  Ahab  said  unto 
him.  Art  thou  he  [Bather,  here:  same 
words  as  in  ver.  7.  "Do  I  at  last  see 
thee  again  f  Hast  thou  ventured  into  my 
presence?  "]  that  troubleth  Israel  7  [Heb. 
thcu  troubler  of  Israel.  For  the  word 
(IDl?)  see  Gen.  xxxiv.  30;  Josh.  vi.  18;  vii. 
25;  Prov.  xi.  17;  1  Sam.  xiv.  29.  "When 
Bawlinson  says  that  this  charge  of  troubling 
Israel  has  "  never  been  before  brought 
against  any  one  but  Achan,"  he  apparently 
forgets  the  passage  last  cited.  "  My  father 
hath  troubled  the  land."  Wordsworth 
paraphrases,  "  Art  thou  the  Achan  of 
Israel?"  but  it  is  very  doubtful  whether 
this  thought  was  in  Aiab's  mind.] 

Ver.  18. — ^And  he  answered,  I  have  not 
troubled  Israel ;  but  thou,  and  thy  father's 
house  [It  has  been  supposed  that  Ahab 
"  hoped  to  abash  the  Tishbite,  perhaps  to 
have  him  at  his  feet  suing  for  pardon " 
^Bawlinson).  If  so,  he  must  have  com- 
pletely misjudged  his  man.  And  why  the 
prophet  should  sue  for  pardon,  when  he  was 
40  Nearly  master  of  the  situation,  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  imagine.  It  is  quite  as  likely  that 
Ahab  expected  denunciation  and  defiance 
such  as  he  now  provokes] ,  In  that  ye  have 
forsaken  the  commandments  of  the  Lord, 
and  thou  [The  change  from  plural  to  sin- 
gular is  instructive.  Preceding  kings 
and  the  people  at  large  had  broken 
God's  commandments  by  the  calf-worship, 
but  Ahab  alone  had  introduced  the  Baal- 
oultus  into  the  land]  hast  followed  [Heb. 
goest  after']  Baalim.  [The  plural  may  either 
Tefer  to  the  various  names  and  forms  under 
vwhieh  Baal  was  worshipped — Baal-Berith, 
fiaal-Zebub,  ifco.  (Bahr,  ai.)— or  more  prob- 


ably to  the  various  images  or  statues  of  this 
god  set  up  in  the  land  (Gesenius).  "This 
boldness,  this  high  tone,  this  absence  of  the 
slightest  indication  of  alarm,  seems  to  have 
completely  discomfited  Ahab,  who  ventured 
on  no  reply,"  &o.  (EawUnson).  It  is  prob- 
able that,  though  he  put  on  a  bold  front,  he 
was  from  the  first  thoroughly  cowed. 

Ver.  19.— Now  therefore  send,  and  gather 
to  me  all  Israel  [i.e.,  by  representation,  the 
heads  of  the  people,  elders,  <bc.  Cf.  ch.  viii. 
2,  65 ;  xii.  16,  18 ;  xvi.  16,  17]  unto  Mount 
Carmel  [Heb.,  as  almost  always,  the  Carmel, 
i.e.,  the  park.  Cf.  1  Sam.  xxv.  1—5.  It  is 
"the  park  of  Palestine."  It  is  indebted  foi 
this  name  to  the  luxuriant  vegetation — "  the 
exceUenoy  of  Carmel"  (Isa.  xxxv.  2) — which 
clothes  its  southern  slopes  (Porter,  p.  371 ; 
Stanley,  S.  and  P.  pp.  352 — 54,  and  App.  p. 
14 ;  Van  de  Velde,  i.  pp.  317, 318).  It  is  now 
generally  called  Mar  {i.e..  Lord  or  Saint) 
Elyas,  after  the  great  prophet.  No  one 
who  has  seen  the  locality  can  have  any 
doubts  as  to  which  part  of  the  mountain 
was  the  scene  of  the  sacrifice,  or  can  fail  ta 
be  struck  with  the  singular  fitness  of  the 
place  to  be  the  theatre  of  this  thrilling  his- 
tory. Carmel  is  rather  a  ridge  than  a  moun- 
tain, some  twelve  miles  in  length.  Ita 
western  (or  strictly  N.N.W.)  extremity  is  a 
bold  headland,  some  600  feet  in  height, 
which  dips  almost  directly  into  the  waters 
of  the  Mediterranean.  Its  highest  point, 
1728  feet  above  the  sea  level,  is  about  four 
miles  from  its  eastern  extremity,  which,  at 
an  elevation  of  1600  feet,  rises  like  a  wall 
from  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon.  -  It  is  at 
this  point,  there  can  be  no  question,  we  are 
to  place  the  scene  of  the  burnt  sacrifice. 
The  identification  has  only  been  effected  in 
comparatively  recent  days  (1852),  but  it  is 
beyond  dispute.  Not  only  does  the  Arab 
name  which  it  bears — El  Murahkah,  "  the 
Burning,"  or  "Sacrifi.ee" — afford  striking 
witness  to  the  identity,  but  the  situation 
and  surroundings  adapt  themselves  with 
such  wonderful  precision  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  narrative  as  to  leave  no  reason- 
able doubt  in  the  mind.  For  (1)  it  is  a  sort 
of  natural  platform,  or  pulpit,  raised  1000 
feet  above  the  adjoining  plain,  and  therefore 
well  calculated  to  aSord  a  view  of  the  pro- 
ceedings, or  at  least  of  the  descent  of  the 
Holy  Fire,  to  spectators  of  all  Israel.  The 
flame  would  probably  be  seen  by  Jezebel  in 
her  palace  at  Jezreel.  This  eminence  is 
visible  from  Nazareth,  some  twenty  milel 
away.  "  There  is  not  a  more  conspicuous 
spot  on  all  Carmel  than  the  abrupt,  rocky 
height  of  El  Murahkah,  shooting  up  so 
suddenly  on  the  east "  (Van  de  Velde,  i.  pp. 
322,  323).  "The  summit  .  .  .  commandi 
the  last  view  of  the  sea  behind  and  the  first 


OH.  XTUI.  1 — 46.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


4M 


view  of  the  gieat  plain  in  front "  (Stanley). 
In  fact,  it  was  in  its  way  just  as  weU 
adapted  for  the  solemn  vindication  of  the 
law  which  took  place  there  as  Jebel  Sufsafeh 
was  for  the  giving  of  the  law.  (2)  A  sort  of 
platean  near  the  summit — the  table-land 
where  the  altars  were  built,  &o. — ^would  ao- 
commodate  a  vast  number  of  spectators 
(ver.  21).  (S)  There  is  a  spring  of  water 
close  at  hand — less  than  100  yards  distant 
— and  a  spring  which  is  said  to  flow  even  in 
the  driest  seasons,  which  would  supply  the 
water  of  which  we  read  in  vers.  4,  33-3S. 
JosephuB  (Ant.  viii.  13, 6)  says  it  came  from^ 
thefountam.  (4)  The  sea,  though  not  visible 
from  the  plateau  itself,  is  seen  from  a  point 
some  300  feet  higher,  a  detail  which  accords 
admirably  with  the  account  of  vers.  42 — 44. 
It  may  be  added  that  the  place  is  still  held 
sacred  by  the  Druses,  and  reverenced  by 
"  Jews,  Ohristians,  Moslems,  and  Bedouin 
as  the  site  of  these  miracles  of  Elijah" 
(Thomson).  The  traveller,  consequently, 
oannot  doubt  for  a  moment,  as  he  stands 
on  the  table-land  of  El  Murahkah  and  looks 
across  the  great  plain  to  Jezreel  and  the 
heights  of  OaUlee  and  Samaria,  that  he  is 
on  the  very  spot  sanctified  by  the  descent  of 
the  heavenly  fire.  It  should  be  added,  as 
explaining  the  selection  of  Oariuel  by 
Elijah,  that  its  situation  is  central  and 
convenient ;  that  it  is  near  the  sea,  from 
whence  the  rain-clouds  would  come;  that 
it  is  easy  of  access  from  Jezreel;  and  that  it 
was  not  only  a  holy  place  &om  earlier 
times  (of.  2  Eings  iv.  23),  but  also  had  its 
altar  of  Jehov^,  an  altar,  no  doubt,  in 
constant  use  when  the  people  "sacrificed 
and  burnt  incense  on  the  high  places,"  but 
which  had  in  later  days  fallen  into  neglect, 
and  was  now  broken  down.  It  was  everyway, 
therefore,  a  most  appropriate  locality  for  the 
public  vindication  of  the  despised  and  out- 
raged law  of  God.  "  No  place  could  be  con- 
ceived more  fitted  by  nature  to  be  that 
wondrous  battle-field  of  truth  "  (Tristram  in 
Wordsworth)] ,  and  the  prophets  of  Baal  [so 
called  not  because  they  were  Weissager  und 
VerkUnder  (Bahr)  of  the  god,  nor  yet  be- 
cause  they  were  teaohers  and  emissaries  of 
his  religion,  but  because  of  the  prophetic 
frenzy  (ver.  28)  into  which  they  worked 
themselves  (Keil)]  four  hundred  and  fifty, 
and  the  prophets  of  the  groves  [Heb.  of  the 
Aiberah,  {.«.,  of  Astarte,  not  "  grove,"  as 
BawUnson.  See  note  on  ob.  xiv.  15]  four 
hundred  [BawUnson  remarks  that  "  the 
number  400  seems  to  have  been  one  espe- 
cially affected  by  Ahab."  He  reminds  us 
that  we  find  400  prophets  at  the  close  of  his 
teign  (1  Kings  xxii.  6),  and  also  remarks 
on  "the  prevalence  of  the  number  40  in 
the  religious  systems  of  the  Jews  (Exod. 


zzzvi.  24, 26 ;  Dent,  xxv,  8,  Ac.)"  But  when 
it  is  remembered  that  Baal's  prophets  were 
450,  and  the  prophets  of  oh.  xxii.  6  were 
about  400  men,  the  solitary  instance  of  the 
400  prophets  of  Astarte — who,  by  the  way, 
were  Jezebel's  rather  than  Ahab's  ministers 
— affords  but  a  slender  basis  for  his  cou- 
clusion],  which  eat  at  Jezebel's  table. 
[Heb.  eaters  of.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
Hebrew  to  imply  that  they  sat  with  her  at 
the  same  board ;  and  it  is  certain  that  this 
would  be  altogether  repugnant  to  Eastern 
ideas  of  propriety.  All  that  is  meant  is 
that  they  were  fed  by  her  bonni^.  Sea 
note  on  ch.  ii.  7.] 

Yer.  20.— So  Ahab  sent  unto  all  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel^  and  gathered  the  prophets 
together  unto  Mount  CarmeL  ["The  per- 
secuting king  became  a  passive  instrument 
in  the  hand  of  the  persecuted  prophet" 
(Stanley).  His  ready  compliance  with 
Elijah's  request,  notwithstanding  the  bitter 
hatred  of  the  man  which  he  had  just  be- 
trayed, is  easily  explained.  It  was  not  so 
much  that  "  he  bowed  before  the  spiritual 
supremacy  of  the  prophet,  which  impressed 
him  "  (Bahr),  as  that  he  hoped,  from  his 
reappearance,  that  he  was  now  about  to 
speal:  the  word  (ch.  xvii.  1)  and  give  rain 
upon  the  earth,  and  Ahab  was  willing  to 
take  any  measures  which  would  conduce  to 
that  result.  It  would  take  some  days  to 
collect  the  representatives  of  the  tribes.] 

Yer.  21. — ^And  Elijah  came  unto  all  tbs 
people  [He  is  concerned  not  so  much  with 
the  king  as  the  people  of  the  Lord.  His 
object  was  not  "  to  prove  that  Ahab  and  not 
he  had  troubled  Israel,"  but  to  prove  that 
Jehovah  and  not  Baal  was  God.  There  is 
abundant  room  on  the  platean,  or  "  wide 
upland  sweep "  (Stanley),  above  referred 
to,  to  accommodate  a  large  concourse  of 
people],  and  said,  Howlong  halt  ye  between 
two  opinions  7  [This  is  a  faithful  and  felici- 
tous rendering.  But  it  must  be  remembered 
that  "  halt "  is  used  in  the  sense  of  "  limp." 
Valg.  Usquequo  claudicatis  in  dxuis  partes. 
The  same  word  is  used  in  ver.  26  of  the 
swaying,  tottering  dance  of  the  Baal  pro- 
phets.] If  the  Lord  be  God  [Heb.  i/  Jehovah 
the  God]  ,  follow  him  [Heb.  go  {i.e.,  walk 
straight)  after  him] :  but  if  Baal,  then  follow 
him.  Aiid  the  people  answered  him  not  a 
word,  pifot  only  were  they  awed  by  the 
presence  of  the  king  and  the  priests  of  Baal 
on  the  one  side,  and  of  Elijah  on  the  other, 
but  they  were  "  convicted  by  their  own 
consciences,"  and  so  were  speechless  (Matt, 
zxii.  12).] 

Yer.  22. — Then  said  EUJah  onto  tbs 
people,  I,  even  I  only,  remain  [Heb.  I,  I  am 
left  alone.  Cf.  Gen.  xxxii.  24 ;  LXX.  [iovu- 
TnTog]    a  prophet  of  the    Lord    [Theniua 


491 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  xvin.  1 — 46. 


lienoe  concludes  that  the  "hundred  pro- 
phets "  of  whom  we  read  in  vers.  4,  13  had 
been  discovered  in  their  hiding  place  and 
had  been  put  to  death.  But  this  by  no  means 
follows  from  Elijah's  statement  here  or  in 
oh.  xix.  10  (where  see  note) ;  and  we  know 
that  the  schools  of  the  prophets  had  not 
ceased  to  exist  (2  Kings  ii.  3,  6,  7 ;  cf.  1 
Kings  xxii.  8).  All  that  Elijah  says  Is  that 
he  stood  that  day  alone  as  a  prophet  of 
Jehovah.  "I  only  remain  in  the  exercise  of 
the  office  of  a  prophet  "  (Eawlinson).  The 
lest  might  well  hesitate,  after  the  fierce 
persecution  which  they  had  undergone,  to 
face  the  king  and  their  bitter  enemies,  the 
Baal  prophets.  It  must  be  remembered 
that  Elijah  had  had  no  opportunity  of  com- 
municating with  them,  and  he  may  have 
been  quite  ignorant  as  to  what  number  had 
remained  steadfast  and  true.  One  thing  he 
knew,  that  he  alone  was  left  to  prophesy, 
and  to  confront  the  whole  hierarchy  of  tlie 
false  God] ;  but  Baal's  prophets  are  four 
hundred  and  fifty  men.  [It  is  clear,  not 
only  from  the  silence  of  this  verse  and  of 
Ter,  25,  respecting  them,  but  stillmore  from 
the  fact  that  they  escaped  in  the  general 
slaughter  (ver.  40),  that  the  prophets  of 
Astarte  were  not  present,  and  the  natural 
uference  is  that  either  Jezebel  had  for- 
bidden their  presence  or  that  they  shrank 
from  the  ordeaL  The  LXX.  inserts  "  and 
the  prophets  of  the  grove,  four  hundred," 
but  the  words  are  evidently  added  from 
▼er,  19.  The  Baal  prophets  would  doubtless 
have  been  only  too  glad  to  do  the  same,  but 
they  were  under  the  immediate  command  of 
the  king.  It  is  not  certain  that  they  had 
any  forebodings  of  evil,  or  dreaded  reprisals 
on  Elijah's  part,  but  they  had  had  proof 
conclusive  of  his  power  and  of  their  impo- 
tence. We  must  remember  that  all  through 
the  triennium  prayers  and  eiicrifices  had, 
no  doubt,  been  constantly  offered  with  a 
▼iew  to  procure  rain.  We  learn  from 
Menander  (Jos.,  viii.  13.  2)  that  even  in 
Phoenicia  supphcation  had  been  made  for 
tain  by  Ethbaal. 

Yer.  23. — Let  them  therefore  give  us  two 
bullocks ;  and  let  them  choose  one  bullock 
for  themselves,  and  cut  it  In  pieces  [same 
word  Exod.  xxix.  17  ;  Levit.  i.  6,  12 ;  Judg. 
XX.  6],  and  layit  on  wood  [Heb.  Ihe  woods'] , 
and  put  no  fire  under  [Heb.  and  fire  they 
ehall  not  set  to] :  and  I  will  dress  [Heb. 
make,  nb'J?,  like  ttouiv  in  the  LXX.,  is  con- 
stantly used  in  a  sacrificial  sense  =  offer. 
Cf.  Exod.  xxix.  36,  38,  41 ;  Levit.  ix.  7 ; 
XV.  16  ;  Judg.  vi.  19,  Ac.  This  is  to  be  re- 
membered in  interpreting  our  Lord's  roCro 
irouire,  k.t.X.  (Luke  xxii.  19)]  the  other 
buIloCk,  and  lay  It  on  wood  [tlie  wood], 


and  put  no  fire  under  [and  fire  I  icill  not 
set  to]  : 

Ver.  24. — And  call  ye  on  the  name  of 
your  gods  [As  Elijah  is  still  addressmg  the 
people,  not  the  prophets  of  Baal  (see  ver. 
25),  this  change  of  person  Is  significant. 
He  sorrowfully  assumes  that  they  have 
taken  Baal  and  Astarte  for  their  gods],  and 
I  will  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord :  and  the 
God  that  answereth  by  fire,  let  Mm  be  God. 
[Heb.  he  shall  be  the  God,  i.e.,  the  true  God 
and  their  God.  Cf.  ver.  39.  Not  only  was 
a  "  sign  from  heaven  "  (Mark  viii  11)  ever 
esteemed  a  more  powerful  and  direct  proof 
of  Divine  energy — perhaps  as  being  less 
liable  to  be  counterfeited,  and  as  excludiu<,' 
the  idea  of  the  operation  of  infernal  powers 
(Matt.  xii.  24)^— but  it  must  be  remembereil 
that  Baal  claimed  to  be  the  Sun-god  and 
Lord  of  the  elements  and  forces  of  nature ; 
while  Jehovah  had  already,  according  to  the 
law,  identified  Himself  with  this  token 
(Levit.  ix.  24 ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  26 ;  2  Ckrou. 
vii.  1).  Indeed,  this  sign  bad  a  double  fit- 
ness as  a  test  of  the  true  religion.  It  would 
not  only  put  the  powers  of  the  rival  deities 
to  the  proof;  it  would  als6  at  the  same 
time  decide  which  of  the  rival  systems  of 
worship  was  acceptable  to  the  Supreme 
Being.  It  is  observable  that  there  is  no 
mention  of  rain.  We  might  have  expected, 
after  the  long  drought,  that  this  would  be 
the  test.  But  that  could  not  be  promised 
until  the  Lord  had  first  been  recognized  as 
God.]  And  all  the  people  answered  and 
said.  It  is  well  spoken.  [Heb.  Good  the  word. 
They  accepted  Elijah's  proposition,  but  whe- 
ther eagerly  or  reluctantly  it  is  difficult  to 
say.  The  Hebrew  merely  conveys  that  they 
admitted  its  fairness  and  reasonableness. 

Having  gained  the  assent  of  the  people, 
for  whose  verdict  he  and  the  Baal  prophets 
were  now  contending,  and  who  were,  con- 
sequently, entitled  to  be  consulted  as  to  the 
sign  which  would  satisfy  them,  he  turns  to 
the  band  of  400  prophets,  who,  probably  in 
all  the  bravery  of  their  sacrificial  vestments 
(2  Kings  X.  22),  occupied  a  separate  position 
on  the  hill  top,  between  the  king  and  the 
people,  and  repeats  his  projiosal  to  them. 

Ver.  25.— And  Elijah  said  unto  the  pro- 
phets of  Baal,  Choose  you  one  bullock  for 
yourselves,  and  dress  [or  offei,  as  in  ver. 
23]  It  first;  for  ye  are  many  [Heb.  ihe 
many.  Every  pre-eminence  and  advantage 
which  he  gives  to  them  will  make  his 
triumph,  when  it  comes,  all  the  greater.  It 
is  quite  po^isible  that  be  meant  again  to  hint 
at  their  immense  superiority  in  point  of 
numbers.  But  no  doubt  he  was  only  too 
glad  to  find  a  reason  for  their  taking  the 


UH.  xviii.  1—46.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


49S 


lead.  "  He  is  anxions  that  their  inability 
■hall  be  fuUy  manifested  before  he  shows 
his  own  power  "  (Eawlinson).  Whether  the 
idea  was  also  present  in  his  mind  that 
they  "  could  prepare  their  victim  in  a  much 
shorter  time  than  he  could  prepare  his" 
(i.').)  is  by  no  means  so  certain]  ;  and  call  on 
ilie  naqie  of  your  gods  [or  goid,  i.e.,  Baal], 
but  put  no  fire  under.  [The  repetition  (cf. 
ver.  24)  shows  that  the  ordeal  was  proposed 
separately  to  the  people  and  the  prophets.] 

Yer.  26.— And  they  took  the  bullock 
Which  was  given  them  [Heb.  which  he  (or 
one)  gave ;  i.e. ,  they  declined  to  choose] ,  and 
they  dressed  It,  and  called  on  the  name  of 
Baal  firom  morning  even  until  noon,  saying, 
0  Baal,  hear  us  [Heb.  answer  us.  Same 
word  as  below.  They  thought  they  would 
be  heard  for  their  much  speaking].  But 
there  was  no  voice  [Heb.  and  not  a  voice] , 
Bor  any  that  answered.  And  they  leaped 
[or  Uniped.  Same  word  as  that  translated 
"  halt "  in  ver.  21.  Gesenius  thinks  the  word 
is  "  used  scornfully  of  the  awkward  dancing 
of  the  priests  of  Baal."  But  it  seems  more 
natural  to  understand  it  as  descriptive  of 
what  actually  occurred,  i.e.,  of  the  reeling, 
swaying,  bacchantic  dance  of  the  priests, 
which  was  probably  not  unlike  that  of  the 
dancing  dervishes  or  the  Indian  devil- wor- 
shippers of  our  own  time]  upon  [or  near, 
i.e.,  around]  the  altar  which  was  made. 
[Heb.  he,  that  is,  one  made,  H^^  impersonal. 
But  some  MSS.  and  most  versions  read  ■IK'^]. 

Ver.  27. — And  it  came  to  pass  at  noon, 
that  EUJah  mocked  [or  deceived]  them,  and 
said,  Cry  aloud  [Heb.  with  a  great  voice] : 
for  he  is  a  god  [i.e.,  in  your  estimation. 
"  Here  is  one  of  the  few  examples  of  irony 
in  Scripture  "  (Wordsworth)]  ;  either  he  Is 
talking  [the  marg.  he  mcditateth  is  prefer- 
able. Cf.  1  Sam.  i.  16;  Fsa.  cxlii.  3.  But  the 
word  has  both  meanings  (see  2  Kings  iz. 
11),  fairly  preserved  in  the  LXK.,  aSo\ca)(ia 
avTiy  hrt] ,  or  he  is  pursuing  [Heb.  for  lie 
hath  a  withdraival,  i.e.,  for  the  purpose  of 
reUeving  himself.  A  euphemism.  Cf.  Judg. 
iii.  24 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  3.  Stanley  attempts 
to  preserve  the  paronomasia,  IT'B'.  J*{^',  by 
the  translation,  "  he  has  his  head  full "  and 
"  he  has  his  stomach  full "] ,  or  he  is  in  a 
Journey  [the  thrice  repeated  ^3  must  be 
noticed.  It  heightens  the  effect  of  the 
l^ockeiy],  or  peradventure  he  sleepeth 
{Though  it  was  noon,  it  is  not  clear  that 
tnere  is  a  reference  to  the  usual  midday 
liesta  of  the  East] ,  and  must  be  awaked. 

Ver.  28. — ^Aud  they  cried  aloud  [Heb.  in 
a  great  voice,  as  above.  It  was  not  that 
they  took  Elijah's  words  au  sirieux,  but  his 
scorn  led  them  to  redouble  their  efforts,  if 
only  to  testify  their  faith  in  their  god.     The 


frantic  cries  of  the  Greek  Easter  (see  Porter, 
i.  168 ;  Conder,  176—178)  in  Jerusalem,  the 
prajers  of  the  pilgrims  for  the  descent  of 
the' holy  fire,  may  help  us  to  realize  the 
scene  here  described] ,  and  cut  themselves 
[cf .  Deut.  xiv.  1 ;  Jer.  xvi.  6 ;  xli.  5  ;  xlvii.  5] 
after  their  manner  [Keil  quotes  from 
Movers,  Phoniz.  i.  pp.  682—83,  a  description 
of  the  religious  dances  offered  to  the  Dea 
Syria.  "  A  discordant  howling  opens  the 
scene.  Then  they  rush  wildly  about  in 
perfect  confusion,  with  their  heads  bowed 
down  to  the  ground,  but  always  revolving 
in  circles,  so  that  the  loosened  hair  drags 
through  the  mire ;  then  they  begin  to  bite 
their  armi,  and  end  with  cutting  themselves 
with  the  two-edged  swords  which  they  are 
in  the  habit  of  carrying.  A  new  scene  then 
opens.  One  of  them,  who  surpasses  all  the 
rest  in  frenzy,  begins  to  prophesy  with  sighs 
and  groans,"  &o.  In  the  "  Contemporary 
Beview,"  vol.  xxvii.  pp.  371  sqq..  Bishop 
Caldwell  has  graphically  described  the 
devil-dances  of  Southern  India — a  descrip- 
tion which  may  be  read  with  profit  in  this 
connexion.  One  sentence  may  be  tran- 
scribed here:  "He  cuts  and  hacks  and 
hews  himself,  and  not  nnfrequently  kills 
himself  there  and  then."  Kitto  mentions 
"  the  furious  gashes  which  the  Persians 
inflict  upon,  themselves  in  their  frantic 
annual  lamentation  for  Hossein."  Bawlin- 
son  says  this  was  also  common  among  the 
Cariansand  Phrygians]  with  knives  [Heb. 
swords]  and  lancets  (^eb.  lances,  spears. 
The  A.  V.  is  misleading.  The  instruments 
they  used  were  weapons  of  heavy-armed 
troops.  For  D'HIO"!,  see  Num.  xxv.  7; 
Judg.  V.  8;  Jer.  xlvi.  4],  tUl  the  Mood 
gushed  out  upon  them.  [Heb.  until  the 
shedding  of  blood  upon  them.  It  is  perfectly 
clear  that  their  faith  in  Baal  was  sincere 
and  profound.  Making  due  allowance  for 
the  fact  that  they  were  under  the  eyes  of 
their  king  and  patron,  and  of  representa- 
tives of  the  entire  people,  it  is  still  impos- 
sible to  doubt  their  sincerity.^  _  Some  of 
them,  it  is  probable,  were  Phoenicians.  "  Of 
one  thing  I  am  assured — the  devil-dancer 
never  shams  excitement "  (Caldwell).] 

Yer.  29.— And  it  came  to  pass,  when  mid- 
day was  past  [EliJEuh  allowed  them  all  the 
time  he  could,  consistently  with  the  great 
work  he  had  himself  to  do,  which  would 
absorb  aU  the  rest  of  the  day], and  they 
prophesied  [Notice  the  striking  coincidence 
with  the  description  of  the  worship  of 
Ashtoreth  given  above.  We  are  not  to 
think  of  vaticinations,  but  of  frenzied  cries, 
&o.  It  is  not  clear,  however,  that  any  fresh 
element  in  their  worship  is  intended,  as 
Keil  imagines.  Their  service  as  a  whole, 
seeing  they  were  prophets,  would  be  called 


4M 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  XTm.  1— 4S. 


a  "  prophesying, "  and  the  word,  conse- 
quently, may  merely  mean  "  they  pursued 
their  calling,"  "they  cried  and  prayed," 
(Sc]  until  the  time  of  the  offering  [KeU 
and  Bawlinson  would  translate,  "  until  to- 
wards the  time,"  <fco.     There  is  certainly 

some  indefiniteness  in  the  words  Dvl??  IJfi 
until  [the  hour]  for  placing,  &o.,  but  we 
may  well  believe  that  their  dances  and 
cries  continued  up  to  the  moment  of  Elijah's 
prayer  (ver.  36)]  of  the  evening  sacrifice 
[Heb.  the  Minchah,  i.e.,  the  meat  offering 
or  unbloody  sacrifice.  In  Gen.  iv.  3 — 6  the 
word  would  appear  to  be  used  of  any 
offering;  but  at  a  later  day  it  was  re- 
stricted to  bloodless  offerings,  and  was 
opposed  to  n5J.  Cf.  Psa.  xl.  7 ;  Jer.  xvii.  26. 
Directions  as  to  the  offering  of  the  Minchah 
are  given,  Exod.  xxix.  38 — 41  ;  Num. 
xxviii.  3—8.  The  evening  sacrifice  was 
probably  offered  then,  as  it  certainly  was 
at  a  later  day,  at  the  ninth  hour.  Gf.  Acts 
iii.  1 ;  z.  3,  30,  and  see  Jos.,  Ant.  ziv.  4.  3. 
Wordsworth  thinks  this  synchronism  very 
tignifioant,  as  suggesting  that  the  true 
worship  of  God  was  that  of  the  temple  in 
Jerusalem] ,  that  there  was  neither  voice, 
Bor  any  to  answer  [as  in  ver.  26] ,  nor  any 
that  regarded.  [Heb.  and  not  attention.  The 
LXX.  has  a  curious  variation  and  addition 
here  i  "  And  Elijah  the  Tishbite  said  to  the 
prophets  of  the  idols,  Stand  back ;  I  will  now 
make  ready  my  offering."] 

Ver.  80. — And  Elijah  Bald  unto  all  the 
people  [He  has  now  done  with  the  priests. 
They  have  had  their  opportunity  ;  his  turn 
is  come] ,  Come  near  unto  me.  [Hitherto 
they  had  gathered  round  the  altar  of  Baal, 
and  some,  it  may  be,  had  joined  their  prayers 
to  those  of  the  priests  (ver.  24).  In  ver.  21, 
he  "  drew  near  " — same  word — to  them. 
Now  they  must  stand  round  the  altar  he 
is  about  to  build.  He  will  have  "eye- 
witnesses and  ear-witnesses"  (Keil).  There 
must  be  no  suspicion  of  imposture.]  And  all 
the  people  came  near  unto  him.  And  he 
repaired  the  altar  of  the  Lord  that  was 
broken  down.  [It  has  been  already  suggested 
that  this  altar  may  have  dated  from  the 
time  when  there  was  no  house  built  unto 
the  name  of  the  Lord.  But  it  is  just  as 
likely  that  It  had  been  restored,  if  not 
raised,  by  some  of  the  "  seven  thousand 
who  had  not  bowed  their  knees  unto  Baal," 
or  by  some  of  the  faithful  remaining  in  Israel 
after  the  call-worship  and  the  hostility 
between  the  two  kingdoms  had  made  wor- 
ship at  Jerusalem  an  impossibility.  Anyhow 
we  can  hardly  be  mistaken  in  holding  that 
this  was  one  of  the  "  altars "  (ch.  xix.  10) 
"  thrown  down  "  by  command  of  Ahab  or 
Jezebel.     Elijah's  repairing  it  was  an  aoi 


of  profound  significance.  It  showed  him 
as  the  restorer  of  the  law  and  the  tme 
religion.] 

Yer.  31. — And  EUJah  took  twelve  Btonei 
[This  number,  too,  was  fall  of  significance. 
Not  only  would  it  carry  back  their  thoughts 
to  the  giving  of  the  law  (Exod.  xxiv.  4 ;  xxviii. 
21),  and  to  their  fathers'  entrance  into  the 
promised  land  (Josh.  iv.  3,  9),  but  it' would 
remind  them  of  the  essential  unity  of  the 
people,  notwithstanding  the  division  of  the 
kingdom.  The  act  was  thus  a  protest 
against  the  schism.  We  cannot  hold  with 
Eeil,  Wordsworth,  al.  that  it  was  "a  prac- 
tical declaration  on  the  part  of  the  prophet 
that  the  division  of  the  nation  into  tuo 
kingdoms  was  at  variance  with  the  will  ol 
God,"  because  we  are  distinctly  told  that 
that  division  was  "  from  the  Lord"  (oh.  xiL 
15).  But  it  was  certainly  a  witness  against 
a  divided  Church,  and  a  reminder  of  the 
unity  of  the  race] ,  according  to  the  number 
of  the  tribes  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  unto  whom 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  [Gen.  xxxii.  28] , 
saying,  Israel  shall  IM  thy  name.  [He  thug 
protests  against  the  exclusive  assumption  of 
the  name  of  Israel,  and  the  exception  of  the 
southern  kingdom  from  the  glorious  heritage 
and  calling  of  Israel,  by  the  ten  tribes.  But 
we  cannot  follow  Bahr  in  the  belief  that 
Jacob  received  ' '  from  Jehovah  the  name  of 
Israel,"  i.e.,  the  "soldier  of  God,"  because 
he  commanded  his  house  to  "  put  away  the 
strange  gods  "  (Gen.  xxxv.  2,  10  sqq.),  or 
that  Elijah  would  teach  that  "only  those 
who  did  as  Jacob  did  had  a  claim  to  his 
name."  The  gieat  idea  is  that  the  people 
are  one,  and  are  the  Lord's.] 

Ver.  32. — And  with  the  stonei  [the  twelve 
he  had  chosen  out  of  the  ruins.  Cf.  Exod. 
XX.  25]  he  built  an  altar  In  the  name  of  the 
Lord  [not  "  by  the  command  of  Jehovah  " 
(Bahr),  but  rather  as  the  minister  and  for  the 
service  of  Jehovah,  or,  as  KeU,  "  by  the 
authority  and  for  the  glory  of  Jehovah." 
Nor  is  it  certain  that  "  he  called,  as  he  buUt 
it,  on  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  so  dedi- 
cated it  to  His  service"  (Bawl.)  See  Gen. 
xii.  8 ;  xiii.  4  ;  xxxiii.  20 ;  xxxv.  7] :  and  he 
made  a  trench  [or  channel,  2  Kings  xviii.  17 ; 
Isa.  vii.  3  ;  xxxvi.  2  ;  Ezek.  xxxi.  4.  The 
word  implies  that  it  was  for  holding  the 
water,  not  for  keeping  off  the  people]  about 
the  altar,  as  great  as  would  contain  twe 
measures  of  seed  [Heb,  a>  the  in»ide  (lit., 
house)  of  two  seahs  of  seed.  These  words 
have  been  variously  interpreted.  Keil,  with 
Thenius  and  Wordsworth,  understands  that 
"  the  trench  was  so  large  that  you  could  sow 
two  seahs  of  seed  upon  the  ground  which  it 
covered."  But  apart  from  the  fact  that  D^S 
must  refer  to  capacity  rather  than  super- 
ficial   extent,    one    does  not    meaauie   • 


OB.  XTm.  1 — 16.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


425 


trench,  as  Bahr  observes,  by  the  ground 
which  it  covers,  but  by  its  depth.  He 
vrould  follow  Gesenius  in  understanding 
that  the  trench  was  bo  deep  as  to  hold  two 
seabs  of  seed;  i.e.,  as  deep  as  the  grain 
measure  containing  two  seahs.  The  ilXD 
was  the  third  of  an  epbab.  Gf.  Jos.,  Ant.  iz. 
4.  5,  and  the  adra  rpia  of  Matt.  ziii.  33.] 

Ver.  33. — And  lie  put  the  wood  In  order, 
•ad  cut  the  bullock  in  pieces,  and  laid  him 
on  the  wood  [Bawlinson  says  "  He  obeyed, 
that  is,  all  the  injunctions  of  the  law  with 
lespect  to  the  ofieriog  of  a  burnt  sacrifice 
(see  Levit.  i.  8 — 9),  and  adds,  "  He  thus 
publicly  taught  that  all  the  ordinances  of 
the  law  were  binding  on  the  kingdom  of 
Israel,"  But  it  is  very  probable  that  the 
priests  of  Baal  had  done  the  same  things. 
All  sacrifice  involved  sueh  manual  acts.  Cf. 
Gen.  zxii.  9,  where  the  same  word  TQI}  is 
nsed.  No  doubt  the  prophet  did  everything 
in  an  orderly  and  regular  way;  but  the 
people  could  hardly  learn-  a  lesson  ot 
obedience  from  such  elementary  acts  as 
these,  and  the  less  so  as  the  law  provided 
that  the  sacrifice  should  be  offered  only 
"  by  the  priests,  the  sons  of  Aaron  "  (Levit. 
L  8),  and  Elijah's  ministrations,  coiise- 
quently,  might  seem  to  warrant  or  condone 
the  ministrations  of  Jeroboam's  intrusive 
priesthood.  That  they  did  not  lend  any 
real  sanction  to  those  irregularities  is  clear, 
however,  to  as.  For,  in  the  first  place, 
priests  were  not  to  be  had,  all  having  Jong 
since  left  the  kingdom.  In  the  second  place, 
the  higher  comiuission  of  the  prophet  em- 
braced within  itself  the  authority  for  all 
necessary  priestly  acts.  Cf.  1  Sam.  xvi.  2. 
Elijah  acted,  as  Grotius  well  observes,  Jure 
prophetico,  minoribits  lepibus  exsolutus,  ut 
majores  servaref] ,  and  said,  Fill  four  barrels 
[Heb.  Dn|l.  Cf.  oh.  xvii  12.  It  designates 
the  ordinary  water-pitcher,  generally  carried 
then,  as  now,  by  women :  Gen.  xxiv.  14 — 20 ; 
Judg.  vii.  16 ;  Eccles.  zii.  6]  with  water, 
and  pour  It  on  the  burnt  sacrifice,  and  on 
the  wood.  [Tne  water,  as  already  remarked, 
was  doubtless  brought  from  the  adjoining 
spring  (though  it  is  clear  from  ver.  40 
that  the  Kishon  was  not  dry,  and  Thomson 
thinks  that  its  sources,  and  particularly  the 
fountain  of  Saadieh,  furnished  the  supply). 
"  In  such  springs  the  water  remains  always 
cool,  under  the  shade  of  a  vaulted  roof,  and 
wiih  no  hot  atmosphere  to  evaporate  it. 
While  all  other  fountains  were  dried  up,  I 
can  well  understand  that  there  might  have 
been  found  here  that  superabundance  of 
water  which  Elijah  poured  so  profusely 
over  the  altar"  (Van  de  Velde,  i.  p.  325).] 

Ver.  34. — And  he  said,  Do  It  the  second 
time.    And  they,  did  it  the  second  time. 


[Heb.  Repeat,  and  they  repeated.]  And  be 
said,  Do  It  the  third  time.  And  they  did  It 
the  third  time.     [See  note  on  ch.  xvii.  21.] 

Ver.  35. — And  the  water  ran  round 
[Heb.  the  waters  went  round]  about  the 
altar,  and  he  filled  the  trench  also  [i.e., 
the  trench,  which  was  only  partially  filled 
with  the  water  of  the  twelve  D'^S,  he  now 
filled  to  the  brim]  with  water.  [The  object 
of  these  repeated  drencliiogs  of  the  victim 
and  altar  was  to  exclude  all  suspicion  of 
fraud.  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  tricki 
not  unlike  that  practised  year  by  year  at  the 
Greek  Easter  at  Jerusalem  were  familiar 
to  that  age.  Some  of  the  fathers  expressly 
state  that  the  idolatrous  priests  of  an 
earUer  time  were  accustomed  to  set  fire  to 
the  sacrifice  from  hoUow  places  concealed 
beneath  the  altar,  and  it  was  an  old  tradi- 
tion (found  in  Ephrem  Syrus,  and  Chrysos- 
tom)  that  the  Baal  prophets  had  concealed 
a  man  for  that  purpose  beneath  their  altar, 
but  that  he  had  died  from  suffocation 
(Stanley).  Biihr, however,  seesin  these3x4 
vessels  of  water  a  symbolical  act.  The  sig- 
nificance of  this  combination,  he  says,  ia 
unmistakable  (cf.  "  Sjmbolik  "  i  pp.  160, 
169,  193,  205),  though  we  cannot  be  certain 
as  to  the  precise  meaning  of  the  prophetic 
act.  His  only  suggestion  is  that  it  points 
to  abundance  of  rain  as  the  reward  of 
keeping  the  covenant  (Deut.  xxvui.  12,  23), 
But  all  this  is  extremely  precarious,  and 
the  more  so  as  the  pitchers  may  have  been 
filled  any  number  of  times  belore  the  trench 
was  full] 

Ver.  36. — And  It  came  to  pass  at  th« 
time  of  the  ofTering  of  the  evening  sacrifice 
[see  note  on  ver.  29]  ,that  Elijah  the  prophet 
[this  designation  of  Elijah  is  unusual.  Cf. 
Mai.  iv.  5.  Elsewhere  he  is  "  the  Tishbite," 
or  the  "  man  of  God  "]  came  near,  and  said. 
Lord  [Heb,  Jehovah.  Not  only  does  the 
sacred  name  stand  at  the  head  of  hi* 
prayer,  it  is  also  mentioned  thrice  (LXX, 
four  times)]  God  gt  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Israel  [Two  thmgs  are  to  be  noticed  here: 
first,  that  this  formula  had  only  once  before 
been  used,  and  that  by  God  Himself,  before 
the  giving  of  law,  at  the  burning  bush.  It 
was  when  God  revealed  Himself  in  flaming 
fire  that  He  had  pi'oclaimed  Himself  the 
God  of  Abraham,  &o.  Secondly,  that  the 
variation  "  Israel  "  is  made  des-ignedly  (oi 
ver.  31),  not  only  to  proclaim  the  Lord  as 
the  "  God  of  Israel "  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  1),  but 
also  to  suggest  that  the  name  and  privileges 
of  Israel  belonged  to  all  the  sons  of  Jacob, 
The  LXX.  adds,  "Hear  me,  0  Lord,  hear 
me  this  day  by  fire" — most  of  which  is 
clearly  borrowed  from  the  next  verse] ,  let 
It  be  known  this  day  that  thou  art  Ckid  la 


4S» 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  xvni.  1 — 10. 


Israel  [according  to  rer.  24,  "  the  God  that 
answeieth  by  fire,  &c.]>  and  that  I  am  thy 
servant,  and  that  I  Iiave  done  aU  these 
things  according  to  thy  word.  [LXX.  iui 
vi.  Not  only  the  earlier  proceedings  of  the 
day,  but  the  three  years'  drought,  &c.  Keil 
would  include  the  miracle  about  to  he  per- 
formed, but  the  people  cquld  hardly  doubt 
that  that,  when  done,  was  done  according 
to  the  Divine  word.  It  is  interesting  to 
compare  with  these  words  ch.  zvii.  2,  3,  8, 
16,  24,  and  ch.  xviii.  1,  all  of  which  mention 
the  "  word  of  the  Lord."] 

Ver.  87. — Hear  me,  0  Lord  [Jehovah], 
heat  me  [or  answer  me;  same  word  as  in 
vers.  24,  26,  and  29],  that  this  people 
may  know  tbat  then  art  the  Lord  God 

[Bather,  "  that  thou,  Jehovah,  art  the  God." 
Same  expression  as  in  ver.  24,  "  let  him  be 
the  God  "],  and  tliat  thou  hast  tnrned 
their  heart  back  again.  [Cf.  Mai.  iv.  6,  6 : 
"  He  ("  Elijah  the  prophet ")  shall  turn  the 
heart  of  the  fathers,"  &c.  He  speaks  as  if 
the  miracle  were  already  wrought  (cf.  John 
xi.  41),  and  the  people  already  repentant. 
His  prayer  is  that  they  may  understand 
that  the  prodigy  about  to  be  performed  was 
wrought  for  their  conversion.] 
Ver.  88. — Then   the    fire   of  the  Lord 

[Jehovah.  Mot  lightning,  but  supernatural 
Ught  and  heat  emanating  from  God  Him- 
self. Cf.  Levit.  ix.  24 ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  26  ; 
t  Chron.  vii.  1 ;  Heb.  xii.  29]  fell,  and  con- 
sumed [Heb.  ate  up,  devoured]  the  burnt 
sacrlflce,  and  the  wood,  and  the  stones  [tn 
caleem  redigit,  Cler.],  and  the  dust  [Bahr 
translates  die  Erde,  and  understands  this  to 
be  the  earth  with  which  the  altar  of  twelve 
stones  had  been  packed.  Similarly  Bawlin. 
son.  But  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  1S^ 
putvii,  could  be  used  in  this  sense.  It  may 
mean  dry  earth,  bnt  this  altar  had  been 

deluged  with  water] ,  and  UCked  up  p|ri^  ii 
elearly  onomatopoetic,  like  our  lick;  Germ, 
leetoi;  Gr,  X(ix<ii,  &o.  It  expresses  well 
the  action  of  tonpues  of  flame]  the  water 
that  was  in  the  trench. 

Yer.  39. — And  when  all  the  people  saw  It, 
they  feU  on  their  faces  [As  in  Levit.  ix.  24 ; 
2  Chron.  vii.  3  ;  cf.  Num.  xxii.  31 ;  Josh.  v. 
14 ;  Bev.  zi,  16.  They  recognized  in  the 
fire,  that  is  to  say,  the  token  of  the 
Divine  Presence] :  and  they  said.  The  Lord 
[Jehovah,  The  counexion  of  this  verse 
with  the  three  verses  preceding  is  obscured 
by  our  translation] ,  he  Is  the  God ;  the 
Lord,  he  is  the  God.  [The  echo  of  ver.  24. 
The  Hebrew  words  are  the  same.  Stanley 
remarks  that  it  is  as  if  (by  a  slight  inversion) 
they  turned  "  the  name  of  the  prophet  him- 
self into  a  war-ory,  'EU-Jah.liu.'  "J 

Tor.  40.— And  EUJah  said  unto  thwn. 


Take  the  prophets  of  Baal ;  let  not  one  ol 
them  escape.  [Elijah's  promptitude  is  ex- 
tremely striking.  The  people  had  hardly 
recovered  from  their  terror  and  awe  before 
he  proceeds  to  judgment.  The  narrative 
has  the  air  of  truth,  and  was  doubtless 
reduced  to  writing  by  an  eye-witness.]  And 
they  took  them :  and  Elijah  brought  them 
down  [Heb.  caused  them  to  go  down,  i.e., 
had  them  brought  down.  He  could  but 
lead  the  way,  as  they  numbered  450]  to  the 
brook  [Wddy.  "  Like  most  of  the  so-called 
'  rivers  of  Palestine,'  the  perennial  stream 
forms  bnt  a  small  part  of  the  Klsbon" 
(Grove)]  Elshon  ["Tortuous,"  now  called 
Nahr  el  Mukatta,  the  "  river  of  slaughter." 
See  Thomson,  L.  and  B.  ii.  pp.  140,  141 ; 
Porter,pp.383— 4;  Diet.  Bib.ii.p.45.  It  flows 
directly  under  Carmel] ,  and  slewthem  there. 
[Obviously,  he  merely  superintended  the 
slaughter.  That  he  slew  them  all  ^th  his 
own  hand  is  altogether  out  of  the  question. 
Nor  is  it  clear  that  "  sword  in  hand  he  stood 
over  them  "  (Stanley).  Josephus  rightly  ex- 
plains :  "  they  slew  the  prophets  at  Elijah's 
instigation."  It  is  almost  ceitam,  from 
their  resorting  to  the  Kishon  for  this  pur- 
pose,  that  it  was  not  quite  dry  at  the  time. 
Their  blood  would  mingle  with  its  waters, 
and  the  flood  which  the  "  great  rain  "  would 
presently  produce  (cf.  Jndg.  v.  21)  would 
carry  their  corpses  down  to  the  sea.  It  has 
often  been  supposed  that  the  mound  near 
the  Eishon,  known  as  Tell  el  Cassis,  "  the 
mound  of  the  priests,"  derives  its  name 
from  this  slaughter  of  the  prophets  of 
Baal.  Bnt  Conder  (p.  90)  remarks  that 
"  Eass!s  is  the  word  applied  to  a  Christian 
priest,  and  the  word  Kohen  or  Kamir  would 
more  naturally  be  expected  if  there  was  any 
real  connexion  with  the  idolatrous  priesU 
of  Baal."] 

This  action  of  the  prophet  Elijah  in  insti- 
tuting this  wholesale  slaughter  in  the  hour 
of  his  triumph  has  been  repeatedly  arraigned 
and  denounced,  but  most  unjustly.  Accord- 
ing to  some,  it  was  an  act  of  gross  fana- 
ticism and  cruelty  ;  others  have  seen  it  in  a 
wild  and  terrible  vendetta  for  the  murder 
of  the  Lord's  prophets.  By  some,  indeed, 
it  has  been  justified  on  the  principles  of  the 
lex  talionis  (Exod.  xxi.  24,  ice.) ;  on  the 
ground,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  men  who 
had  instigated  Jezebel  in  her  attempted  ex- 
termination of  the  prophetic  schools  had 
merited  extermination  in  their  turn.  But 
it  is  a  fatal  objection  to  their  view,  first, 
that  we  not  only  have  no  proof,  but  no 
reason  for  thinking,  that  it  was  at  theii 


ca.  xvm.  1 — 16.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINOS. 


417 


inatigation  that  the  queen  "ont  oS  the 
prophets  of  the  Lord ;  "  and,  secondly,  that 
it  is  not  clear  that  she  sncceeded  in  her 
sangninary  purpose,  or  that  many  Uvea 
were  saorifioed  to  her  fuiy.  And  Elijah's 
action  needs  no  such  lame  apologies.  As 
the  Lord's  prophet,  as  the  yindicator  and 
restorer  of  the  law,  there  was  no  other 
eourse  open  to  him.  If  the  Mosaic  law 
was  then  written,  and  this  very  incident  is 
one  of  the  proofs  that  it  leat  then  written ; 
if,  however  it  bad  fallen  into  contempt  or 
desuetude,  it  was  still  binding  upon  Israel ; 
and  if  Elijah  was  justified  in  executing  its 
provisions,  and  was  required  to  execute 
them,  however  repugnant  they  might  be  to 
his  inclinations  (Dent,  zxvii.  26;  Oal.  iii.  10), 
then  he  could  not  have  done  otherwise  than 
he  did.  For  it  was  an  essential  part  of  that 
law,  it  was  an  obligation  that  was  laid,  not 
once  or  twice,  but  on  three  separate  occa- 
sions (Ezod.  zzii.  20 ;  Deut.  xiii. ;  xvii. 
S— 7),  on  the  Jewish  people,  it  was  a  duty 
they  were  to  perform,  however  distressing 
•ud  harrowing  it  might  be  (Deut.  xiii.  6 — ^9), 
to  provide  that  the  worshipper  of  false 
gods,  and  especially  the  teacher  of  such 
worship,  should  be  put  to  death.  It  wai 
primarily,  of  course,  the  duty  of  the 
authorities,  of  the  theocratic  king  and  his 
subordinates,  to  execute  these  injunctions. 
But  the  king  of  that  age  was  corrupt  and 
powerless — nay,  was  himself  idolatrous.  So 
great  was  the  depravity  of  the  time  that  the 
false  prophet  enjoyed  the  favour  and  protec- 
tion of  the  court,  and  the  true  prophet  was 
everywhere  being  hunted  to  death.  The 
execution  of  this  law,  consequently,  could 
not  be  expected  from  the  king.  It  must  be 
executed,  if  at  all,  in  spite  of  him,  and  in 
disregard  of  his  protests.  It  was  only 
EUjah,  therefore,  could  put  it  into  force, 
and  Elijah  only  in  the  hour  of  his  triumph. 
And  the  jus  lelotyparum,  the  right  claimed  by 
every  faithful  Jew  to  execute  vengeance,  after 
the  example  of  Fhinehas  (Num.  xxv.  11), 
upon  any  gross  breach  of  the  Divine  law 
committed  in  his  presence,  was  not  his  only 
warranty;  he  held  a  commission,  higher 
than  the  king's,  as  the  prophet  of  the  Moat 
High.  He  had  just  proved  that  the  Lord 
He  was  God.  It  was  now  for  him  to  prove 
that,  fund's  law  waa  do  dead  letter.    It  was 


for  him  to  cut  oS  the  men — some  of  them 
renegades  from  the  faith  of  Israel,  some  of 
them  foreign  emissaries  introduced  into  the 
land — ^who  had  corrupted  his  countrymen, 
ani  threatened  the  very  existence  of  the 
true  religion.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  for 
those  who  challenge  his  conduct  in  this 
respect,  who  call  him  sanguinary,  vindictive, 
ice.,  to  settle  their  account  with  the  law 
which  he  obeyed,  and,  indeed,  with  Him 
who  has  approved  this  deed,  and  has  fore- 
warned us  that  He  too  will  act  in  like  man- 
ner (Luke  six.  27).  For  this  terrible  retri- 
bution is  by  no  means  an  exceptional  or 
isolated  act,  in  contrast  to  the  general  spirit 
of  that  dispensation ;  on  the  contrary,  it 
is  in  thorough  accord  with  the  system  ont 
of  which  it  sprung.  We  gain  nothing, 
therefore,  by  repudiating  this  one  trans- 
action. For  clearly,  in  the  first  place,  it 
was  allowed  and  approved  of  Ood,  who 
otherwise  would  hardly  have  answered  the 
prayer  which  Elijah  presently  offered,  and 
(2)  other  similar  acts  have  distinctly  re- 
ceived Divine  commendation  (Exod.  xxxii. 
25—28 ;  Num.  xxv.  7—13 ;  9  Kings  i.  9 
sqq.)  It  is  true  that  the  spirit  of  Elias 
was  not  the  spirit  of  Christianity  (Luke 
!  ix.  S6),  but  it  is  forgotten  how  different  was 
thedispensation  of  Elijah  from  that  of  the 
New  Covenant.  In  that  age  idolaters  must 
receive  their  just  recompense  of  reward, 
because  the  judgment  to  come  had  not  then 
been  revealed ;  because  justice  must  be 
measured  out  to  men  in  this  life.  We  do 
not  avenge  idolatry  or  irreligion  now  with 
fire  and  sword,  not  because  the  thing  is  any 
the  less  sinful,  but  because  the  duty  has 
been  taken  out  of  our  hands ;  because  onr 
religion  instructs  us  to  leave  it  to  Him  who 
has  said,  "  Vengeance  is  Mine,"  &o.  It  is 
perhaps  worth  remarking  here  that  there  is 
nothing  in  this  history  half  so  dreadful  as 
might  be  seen  on  a  thousand  battle-fields — 
and  those  not  battle-flelda  for  truth  and 
right  —  on  which,  nevertheless,  Elijah's 
critics  have  learned  to  look  with  complacency. 
It  may,  however,  be  objected  to  this  view 
that  the  punishment  denounced  by  the  law 
was  stoning  (Deut.  xiii.  10;  xvii.  6).  But 
surely  It  is  easy  to  see  why,  in  this  particu- 
lar, the  law  was  not  kept.  It  was  simply 
that  the  exigency  of  the  ocraaiun  did  not 


428 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xvni.  1 — 16. 


permit  of  its  being  kept.  It  was  beoanse 
the  450  traitors  to  God  and  their  coun- 
try could  not  be  stoned  vrithin  the 
few  hours  that  remained  before  the  night 
dosed  in  and  the  multitude  dispersed, 
that  a  more  speedy  punishment,  that 
of  the  Bwoid,  was  adopted.  And  it  would 
have  been  a  sacrifice  of  the  spirit  of  the 
law  to  the  letter  had  some  few  false 
prophets  been  stoned  and  the  rest  thereby 
been  afforded  the  opportunity  to  escape,  and, 
under  Jezebel's  protection,  to  renew  their 
efforts  against  truth  and  morality  and 
religion. 

Yer.  41. — And  Elljali  said  unto  Ahab,  Get 
thee  up  [It  is  clear  from  the  word  njj!  that 
the  king  had  gone  down  with  the  crowd  to 
the  Kishon.  Curiosity  had  perhaps  im- 
pelled him  to  witness  the  slaughter  which 
he  was  powerless  to  prevent.  And  no  doubt 
he  had  been  profoundly  awed  by  the  portent 
he  had  just  witnessed],  eat  and  drink  [It 
is  hardly  likely  that  there  was  aught  of 
derision  in  these  words.  It  is  extremely 
probable  that  the  excitement  of  the  ordeal 
was  so  intense  that  the  king  had  barely 
tasted  food  all  day  long.  Elijah  now  bids 
him  eat  if  he  can,  after  what  he  has  wit- 
nessed. There  is  now,  he  suggests,  no 
further  cause  for  anxiety  or  alarm.  The 
people  being  repentant  (vers.  39,  40),  and 
the  men  who  have  brought  a  curse  on  the 
land  being  cut  off,  the  drought  can  now  be 
abated  (of.  2  Sam.  xxi.  1,  6, 14).  The  next 
words  assign  the  reason  why  he  should  eat 
and  drink.  It  is  a  mistake,  however  (Ewald, 
Bawliuson),  to  suppose  that  he  was  bidden 
to  ' '  eat  of  the  feast  which  always  followed 
a  sacrifice,"  for  this  was  a  whole  burnt 
offering  and  had  been  entirely  consumed 
(ver.  38).  It  is  probable  that  the  attendants 
of  the  king  had  spread  a  tent  for  him  upon 
the  plateau,  and  had  brought  food  for  the 
day  along  with  them]  j  for  there  Is  a  sound 
Of  abundance  of  rain  [Heb.  for  a  voice  of  a 
twiie — )1Dn;  of.  Aum,  anonomatopoetic  word 
— of  rain.  Gesenius  and  Keil  think  that  the 
prophet  could  already  hear  the  sound  of  the 
drops  of  rain,  but  if  so,  it  was  only  in  spirit 
(of.  ver.  45).  The  words  may  refer  to  the 
rise  of  the  wind  which  so  often  precedes  a 
storm,  but  it  is  more  probable  that  Elijah 
speaks  of  signs  and  intimations  understood 
only  by  himself.  This  was  the  "  word  "  of 
oh.  xvii.  1.] 

Ver.  42.— So  Ahab  went  up  to  eat  and  to 
tfrlnic  And  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top 
[Heb.  head]  of  Carmel  [It  is  clear  from 
»ar.  43  that  this  was  not  the  actual  summit. 


nor  can  it  have  been,  as  Bahr  supposes, 
the  outermost  promontory  towards  the  sea, 
unless  he  means  the  foot  or  slope  of  that 
ridge  or  promontory,  for  from  this  CS'KT  the 
sea  was  not  visible.    It  also  appears  from 

the  TuS.  of  yer.  44  that  this  point  must 
have  been  at  a  lower  elevation  than  the 
plateau  where  the  altar  had  stood  and  where 
Ahab's  tent  was] ;  and  he  cast  himself  down 
upon  the  earth  [Same  word  2  Kings  iv.  34, 
35,  of  Elisha's  prostration  upon  the  dead 
child.  But  if  Elijah  "stretched  himself 
full  length  "  upon  the  earth,  as  the  Easterns 
constantly  do  in  prayer  (see  Thomson,  i. 
26,  27)  it  was  but  for  a  moment,  as  we 
presently  find  him  kneeling],  and  put  his 
face  between  his  knees.  [' '  The  Oriental 
attitude  of  entire  abstraction"  (Stanley). 
The  posture  witnessed  to  the  intensity  of 
his  supplication.] 

Ver.  43. — ^And  said  to  his  servant  [of 
whom  we  now  hear  for  the  first  time.  It  is 
an  old  tradition  that  this  was  none  other 
thin  the  son  of  the  Sareptan,  who  was 
afterwards  known  as  the  prophet  Jonah 
(Jerome,  Praef.  in  Jonam).  See  note  on  ch. 
xvii.  24] ,  Go  up  now,  look  toward  [Heb. 
the  way  of]  the  sea.  [It  is  a  striking  con- 
firmation of  the  theory  which  identifies 
El  Murahkah  with  the  scene  of  Elijah's 
sacrifice  that  the  sea,  though  not  visible 
from  the  plateau  itself,  is  from  the  crest  of 
the  hill,  a  few  feet  higher.  Van  de  Velde 
writes,  "  On  its  west  and  north-west  sides 
the  view  of  the  sea  is.  quite  intercepted  by 
an  adjacent  height.  That  height  may  be 
ascended,  however,  in  a  few  minutes  and  a 
full  view  of  the  sea  obtained  from  the  top." 
Similarly  the  latest  authority,  Mr.  Conder : 
"  The  peak  is  a  semi-isolated  knoll  with  a 
cliff  some  forty  feet  high,  looking  south- 
east. .  .  .  The  sea  is  invisible,  except  from 
the  summit,  and  thus  it  was  only  by 
climbing  to  the  top  of  Carmel,  from  the 
plateau  where  the  altar  may  have  stood, 
that  the  prophet's  servant  could  have  seen 
the  little  cloud,"  &c.]  And  he  went  up, 
and  looked,  and  said,  There  Is  nothing. 
And  he  said.  Go  again  seven  times,  [Of. 
Josh.  vi.  15—20;  2  Kings  v.  14;  Matt. 
xviiL  21;  Psa.  cxix.  164.  The  idea  here 
is  that  of  sufficiency,  of  completion,  rather 
than,  as  elsewhere,  of  covenant.  And  yet 
it  must  be  remembered  that  Elijah  was 
only  praying  for  what  God  had  already 
promised  to  grant  (ver.  1).  This  earnest 
prayer  for  rain  under  these  circumstances 
suggests  that  the  former  prayer  "  that  it 
might  not  rain  "  (James  v.  17)  had  also  been 
inspired  of  God.  But  it  is  worth  consider- 
ing whether  EUjah's  attitude  was  not  one 
of    rpvprpnt    and    assured   expectation,   as 


OB.  XTm.  1—46.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


429 


much  as  of  prayer.  When  Eawlineon  Bays 
that  "  the  faithfulness  and  patience  shown 
[by  thf  servant]  in  executing  this  order 
without  a  murmur,  imply  devoteduess  of 
no  common  kind,"  he  surely  forgets  that 
the  drought  had  lasted  for  three  years  and 
a  half,  and  that  the  servant  had  that  day 
seen  the  fires  of  God  descend  at  Elijah's 
prayer.  It  is  inconceivable,  under  snch 
oircnmstanoes,  that  any  man  oonld  mur- 
mur.] 

Yer.  44. — ^And  It  came  to  pass  at  the 
seventh  time,  that  he  said.  Behold,  there 
axiseth  a  little  cloud  out  of  the  sea,  like 
a  man's  band.  [^IS  lit.,  palm,  hollow  of 
hand.  Of.  Luke  xir.  54,  "  When  ye  see  the 
cloud  (Gr.  Tvv  ve(pi\iiv)  arise  out  of  the 
west,  straightway  ye  say,  There  oometh  a 
shower;  and  so  it  is."  "  StiU  in  autumn 
the  little  cloud  comes  up  like  a  man's  hand 
and  swells  till  huge  thunder  pillars  are 
piled  black  and  high  above  the  mountains  " 
(Conder).  But  it  is  not  in  Palestine  alone 
that  a  little  cloud  on  the  horizon  is  fre- 
quently the  harbinger  of  rain].  And  be 
said.  Go  np  [see  note  on  yer.  42] ,  say  unto 
Ahab,  Prepare  thy  chariot  [Heb.  hind], 
and  get  thee  down  [Eeil,  Stanley,  and 
others  assume  that  Ahab's  chariot  wag 
waiting  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  But 
it  is  to  be  noticed  thai  the  command  to 
harness  the  horses  precedes  that  to  "go 
down."  The  writer  rode  down  from  Ml 
Murahkah  to  the  plain,  and  it  ie  quito 
conceivable  that  tiie  royal  chariot  may 
have  conveyed  Ahab  to  the  plateau  of 
sacrifloe  and  have  waited  for  mm  there], 
that  the.rals  stop  thee  not.  [After  heavy 
rain  (D^^  the  Eishon,  which  "collects  the 
whole  drainage  of  this  large  basin"  (Con- 
der), the  Great  Plain,  soon  becomes  an  im- 
passable swamp  (Judg.  t.  21),  "  I  can  tell 
you  from  experience  that  in  wet  seasons 
it  (theWfidy)  is  extremely  muddy,  and  then 
the  Eishon  causes  great  tribulation  to  the 
muleteers.  Barely  indeed  do  they  get 
over  it  without  some  of  their  animals 
sticking  fast  in  its  oozy  bottom"  (Thom- 
son, L.  and  B.  ii.  p.  218).] 

Yer.  45. — And  it  came  to  pass  In  the 
meanwhile  [Heb.  unto  thus  and  unto  thus, 
i.e.,  till-  now  and  then  (of.  Exod.  vii.  16 ; 
Josh.  xvii.  14).  Gesen.,  Bahr,  al.  support  the 
rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  Ewald,  EeU,  al. 
understand  "  while  the  hand  is  being  moved 
hither  and  thither,"  t'.e.,  very  speedily. 
The  practical  difference  is  not  great] ,  that 
the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds  and 
wind,  and  there  was  a  great  rain.  ["  The 
«iy  of  the  boy  from  his  mountain  watch 
bad  hardly  been  uttered  when  the  storm 
tank*  npon  the  plain "  (Stanley).    "  The 


storm"  [over  "  the  dark  slate-coloured  ridge 
of  Carmel,"  witnessed  by  Conder  in  1872] 
"  burst  suddenly,  the  rain  descending  with 
violence,  hissing  on  the  ground,  as  if  not 
able  to  come  down  fast  enough,  and  accom- 
panied with  gusts  of  wind,  thunder,  and 
lightning."]  And  Ahab  rode^  and  went  ta 
JezreeL 

Yer.  46.— And  the  hand  of  the  tord  was 
on  Elijah  [Same  expression  2  Kings  iii.  15 ; 
Ezek.  i.  3 ;  iii,  14 ;  viii.  1 ;  xxxiii.  22  ;  cf. 
also  Exod.  iz.  3 ;  Judg.  iL  16  ;  Buth  i.  13 ; 
Acts  xi.  21 ;  xiii.  11.  Some  of  the  com- 
mentators understand  the  words  of  Divine 
guidance,  some  of  a  supernatural  strengthen- 
ing. There  is  no  need  to  exclude  either  is* 
terpretation.  An  impulse  from  on  high 
impelled  him  to  "gird  np  his  loins"  and 
go  with  the  king ;  a  strength  not  his  own 
sustained  him  whilst  "he  ran,"  &a.  The 
distance  across  the  plain  to  Jezreel  is  about 
fourteen  mUes;  the  royal  chariot  would 
drive  furiously,  and  whatever  fleetness  and 
endurance  the  prophet  had  acquired  in  the 
wilds  of  Gilead,  it  seems  hardly  Ukely  that, 
after  the  fatigues  and  excitement  of  that 
day,  he  would  have  been  able,  without  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  npon  him,  to  keep  ahead 
of  the  chariot  horses] ,  and  he  girded  np 
his  loins  {i.e.,  gathered  round  his  waiat  the 
alia,  or  "mantle"— the  H^JS  (of.  oh.  xix. 
13,  19 ;  2  Kings  iL  13,  14)  was  to-called 
from  its  ample  size — which  would  otherwise 
have  impeded  his  movements.  Probably 
this,  apart  from  the  girdle,  was  his  sole  gar- 
ment. (See  Diet.  Bib.  voL  ii.  p.  232)] ,  and 
ran  before  Ahab  [Thomson  (vol.  ii  p.  227) 
mentions  an  interesting  illustration  of  this 
incident  which  he  witnessed.  The  fore- 
runners of  Mohammed  Ali  Pasha  "  kept 
just  ahead  of  the  horses,  no  matter  how 
furiously  they  were  ridden,  and  in  order  to 
run  with  the  greatest  ease  they  not  only 
girded  their  loins  very  tightly,  but  also 
tucked  up  their  loose  garments  under  the 
girdle."  But  such  a  spectacle  is  of  common 
occurrence  in  the  East.  Eitto  remarks  that 
the  Shatiri  of  Persia  keep  pace  with  ease 
with  their  masters'  horses.  They  also  are 
tightly  girded.  His  object  was  apparently 
twofold.  First,  to  honour  the  sovereign 
whom  he  had  that  day  humbled  in  the 
presence  of  his  subjects.  The  great  pro- 
phet, by  assuming  the  lowly  office  of  a 
foot-man,  or  forerunner  (see  note  on  oh.  i. 
6),  would  give  due  reverence  to  the  Lord's 
anointed,  like  Samuel  on  a  somewhat  similar 
occasion  (1  Sam.  xv.  80,  31).  Secondly,  he 
may  have  hoped  by  his  presence  near  the 
king  and  court  to  strengthen  any  good 
resolves  which  the  former  might  have 
made,  and  to  farther  the  work  of  tefomw- 


iSO 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[oh,  xvni.  1 — 46. 


tion  ^vhich  ho  could  not  but  hope  the  pro- 
ceedings of  that  day  would  inaugurate. 
That  this  tribute  of  respect  would  be  grateful 
to  Ahab,  who  hitherto  had  only  regarded 
Blijah  as  an  adversary,  it  is  impossible  to 
doubt.  And  that  Elijah  believed  he  had 
struck  a  death-blow  to  the  foreign  super- 
stitions fostered  by  the  court,  and  especially 
by  the  queen,  is  equally  certain.  It  is  not 
clear,  as  Bahr  assumes,  that  his  servant 
accompanied  him  on  the  road.  He  may 
have  rejoined  him  later  on  in  the  day  or 
night]  to  the  entrance  [Heb.  until  tfiou 
earnest  to.  The  Arab  aversion,  which  Elijah 
is  supposed  to  have  shared,  to  entering 
cities,  has  often  been  remarked.  But  there 
were  other  and  deeper  reasons  why  he  should 
not  adventure  himself  within  the  city. 
Probably  the  same  guiding  hand  which  led 
him  to  Jezieel  impelled  him  to  lodge  out- 


side the  walls.  It  was  impossible  to  as.') 
what  JezebeJ,  in  her  transports  of  rage, 
might  do.  After  such  a  day,  too,  any  pro- 
phet would  shrink  from  familiar  contact 
with  men  and  from  the  strife  of  tongues] 
Of  Jezreel.  [Ahab  had  a  palace  here  (ch. 
sxi.  1).  But  Samaria  was  stiU  the  capital, 
and  so  remained  till  the  captivity  (ch.  xxii. 
37 ;  2  Kmgs  xv.  13,  14 ;  xvii.  5,  6).  The 
selection  of  Jezreel  as  a  royal  residence  is 
easily  accounted  for.  It  stands  on  "  a  knoll 
500  feet  high"  (Conder),  overlooking  both 
the  plain  of  Esdraelon  and  the  valley  of 
Jezreel.  In  fact,  it  is  the  finest  situation 
in  the  "Great  Plain."  Hence  perhaps  its 
name  "the  sowing-place  of  God."  See 
Stanley,  S.  and  P.  pp.  336  sijq. ;  Porter,  p. 
353 ;  Diet.  Bib.  voL  ip.  1080 ;  Yande  Velde, 
vol.  ii.  p.  S70.J 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  8,  4. — TTie  Governor  of  AhaVs  Bouse.  There  are  few  things  in  tbese 
books  of  Scripture  more  surprising  and  suggestive  than  the  position  of  Obadiah  in 
the  palace  of  Ahab.     Consider — . 

I.  The  age.  We  have  seen  that  duricg  this  reign  (ch.  xvi.  30,  83  ;  xxi.  25),  and 
especially  in  the  capital  city  of  Samaria  (ch.  xvi.  32),  the  wickedness  of  Israel  had 
reached  its  zenith.  From  the  accession  of  Jeroboam,  and  the  schism  v^hich  followed 
it,  the  northern  kingdom  had  steadily  gone  from  bad  to  worse,  tUl  its  apostasy  and 
impiety  culminated  under  the  malign  influences  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel.  Their  joint 
reign  marks  a  new  departure  in  the  religious  history  of  the  ten  tribes.  Hitherto 
men  had  worshipped  the  God  of  their  fathers,  though  in  an  irregular  and  un- 
authorized way,  and  idolatry,  though  not  unknown,  had  not  been  open  and  un- 
blushing. Now,  however,  the  whole  nation,  with  but  few  exceptions,  abandoned 
itself  to  the  licentious  worship  of  Phoenician  gods,  and  the  ancestral  religion  was 
proscribed,  its  altars  were  overthrown,  and  a  determined  effort  was  made  to  stamp 
out  its  prophets  and  professors. 

II.  The  place.  We  should  expect,  consequently — what  Elijah  really  believed  to 
be  the  case  (ch.  xix.  10) — that  to  find  a  pious  man  we  must  search  the  land  as  with 
»  lantern.  "We  should  expect  to  iind  some  Abdiels,  "  faithful  among  the  faithless 
found,"  but  we  should  look  for  them  away  from  the  haunts  of  men,  in  "  oaves  and 
dens  of  the  earth,"  in  the  brook  Cherith,  or  the  cottage  of  Zarephath,  or 
wandering  about  "  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins,"  &c.  (Heb.  xi.  37,  38).  But  we 
should  hardly  hope  to  find  them  in  the  cities  of  Israel,  in  the  broad  light  of  day,  in 
conspicuous  positions,  and  least  of  all  should  we  look  for  them  in  Samaria,  where 
Satan's  seat  was,  the  fortress  and  citadel  of  Baal. 

Or  if  we  were  so  sanguine,  notwithstanding  the  godlessness  of  the  times  and  the 
genius  of  the  place,  as  to  count  on  some  saints  in  Samaria,  we  should  never'betake 
ourselves  to  the  great  men  (Jer.  v.  5 ) ;  we  should  go  in  search  of  piety  in  the  cottages 
of  the  poor.  We  should  never  dream  of  finding  any  followers  of  the  Lord  occupying 
an  exalted  station,  living  under  the  shadow  of  the  palace,  or  in  close  contact  with  the 
determined  and  unscrupulous  queen. 

III.  His  position.  Butif  we  were  assured  that  even  in  Ahab's  palace,  under  the 
same  roof  with  Jezebel,  a  devout  and  steadfast  servant  of  Jehovah  was  to  be  found, 
we  should  certainly  have  expected  to  find  him  in  some  insignificant  servitor,  some 
poor  retainer  of  the  place.  That  any  high  oflSoia,!,  that  a  minister  of  state  could  re- 
tain his  piety  in  that  cesspool  of  corruption,  that  hotbed  of  idolatry  and  immorality, 
and  ftt  the  very  time  that  Jezebel  was  outting  off  the  Lord's  prophets,  would  seem 


OH.  xvm.  1—46.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  481 

to  ns  altogether  out  of  the  question.  "  What  commtinion,"  we  should  ask,  "hath  light 
with  darkness  ?  or  what  part  hath  he  that  heheveth  with  an  infidel  ?  " 

IV.  His  piety.  Yet  we  find  that  Obadiah,  the  intendant  of  the  palace  of  Samaria, 
the  trusted  and  faithful  minister  of  Ahab,  the  "  third  ruler  in  the  kingdom,"  "  feared 
the  Lord  greatly"  (ver.  8),  and,  though  surrounded  by  Baal-worshippers,  never 
bowed  the  knee  to  Baal;  though  risking  his  life  by  his  devotion  to  Jehovah,  yet 
served  Hun  truly,  and  succoured  His  prophets. 

We  have  a  parallel  to  this,  and  a  stUl  more  striking  instance  of  piety  under  the 
most  adverse  and  discouraging  oircumstanoes  in  the  New  Testament.  We  have 
something  like  it,  indeed,  m  flie  case  of  Daniel  and  the  three  Hebrew  children ; 
something  approaching  it  in  the  case  of  Joanna,  thewrife  of  Chuza,  Herod's  steward 
(Luke  viii.  3) ;  but  we  find  a  Btill  closer  analogue  in  the  sainta  of  Ctesar's  household 
(Phil.  iv.  22). 

When  we  remember  that  the  saints  of  Borne  were  the  talk,  the  admiration,  the 
patterns  of  the  early  Christian  Churches  "  throughout  the  whole  world  "  (Eom.  i.  8) ; 
that  among  the  saints  of  Bome,  those  of  the  palace  or  of  the  barracks  (Phil.  i.  13) 
attached  to  Csesar's  palace  on  the  Palatine,  were  conspicuous,  at  least  (ch.  iv.  22)  for 
their  charity,  for  the  crowning  Christian  grace  of  0iXa&\0ia,  the  stamp  and  seal  royal 
of  the  saints  (John  xiii.  85 ;  1  John  iv.  20)^  when  we  remember,  too,  that  this  was  in 
Bome,  at  that  period  the  very  worst  city  in  the  world,  the  resort — their  own  writers 
being  witness — of  all  the  knaves  and  charlatans  and  libertines  of  the  empire  ;  that 
this  was  in  the  year  A.D.  68,  when  the  palace  of  the  Caesars  was  occupied  by  Nero, 
of  all  those  bom  of  women  perhaps  the  meanest,  basest,  most  infamous,  most  prof- 
ligate ;  that  this  Nero  was  murderer  of  brother,  murderer  of  mother,  of  wife,  of 
paramour ;  persecutor  and  butcher  of  the  Christians,  sworn  foe  of  goodness  and 
purity  in  every  shape,  pati'on  and  abettor  of  every  kind  of  abomination,  according  to 
some  the  "  Beast "  of  the  Apocalypse ;  when  we  consider  that  under  his  roof,  in  the 
pandemonium  which  he  had  createdaround  him,  saints  were  found,  meek  followers 
of  the  unspotted  Christ,  we  cannot  but  be  impressed  with  the  fact  that  the  wisdom 
of  God  has  preserved  for  our  encouragement  two  conspicuous  ins'^ances — one  under 
the  Old  Dispensation,  one  under  the  New — of  fervent  piety  living  and  thriving  in 
a  palace  under  the  most  adverse  circumstances,  amid  the  overflowings  of  ungodliness. 
And  these  facts  may  suggest  the  following  lessons  : 

1.  "Let  every  mam,  wherein  he  is  called,  there  abide  with  God"  (I  Cor.  vii.  20, 
24).  The  temptation  to  desert  our  post,  because  of  the  difficulties,  seductions,  perse- 
cutions it  affords,  is  peculiarly  strong,  because  it  presents  itself  under  the  garb  of 
a  religious  duty.  We  think  we  shall  "  one  day  fall  by  the  hand  of  Saul "  (1  Sam. 
xxvii.  1).  We  fear  the  temptation  may  he  too  strong  for  us,  and  we  consult,  as  we 
fancy,  only  for  our  safety,  in  flight.  But  we  forget  that  "  every  man's  Ufe  is  a  plan 
of  God;"  that  we  have  been  placed  where  we  are  by  Him,  and  placed  there  to  do 
His  work.  We  forget  also  that  His  "  grace  is  sufficient "  for  us  ;  that  with  every 
temptation  He  can  make  a  way  to  escape  (1  Cor.  x.  13)  ;  that  He  wUl  not  suffer  us 
to  be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able  to  bear ;  and  that  flight  under  such  circum- 
Btances  must  be  mere  cowardice  and  faithlessness.  It  was  a  great  mistake  of  the 
hermits  and  the  religious  of  a  past  age  to  leave  the  world  because  it  was  so 
wicked,  for  this  was  to  take  the  salt  out  of  the  earth,  and  to  leave  it  to  corruption. 
If  the  men  who  alone  can  leaven  society  shut  themselves  up  in  a  cloister  or  a  study, 
it  is  simply  leaving  it  to  the  devil  to  do  his  worst.  This  is  not  to  fight,  but  to  flee. 
Except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  how  can  it  be  saved  ?  (Acts  xxvii.  81.)  It  is  egregious 
selfishness  to  hide  our  candle  under  a  bushel,  lest  perchance  the  blasts  of  temptation 
should  extinguish  it.  Obadiah  was  called  by  the  providence  of  God  to  be  governor 
of  Ahab's  house.  The  post  must  have  been  one  of  extreme  difficulty,  of  constant 
trial  and  imminent  peril.  We  see  from  vers.  10,  14  the  kind  of  man  he  had  to 
deal  with,  and  how,  from  day  to  day,  he  carried  his  life  in  his  hand.  But  he  did  not 
desert  the  state  of  life  into  which  it  had  pleased  God  to  call  him.  He  considered 
that  he  was  there  for  some  good  purpose ;  that  he  had  a  work  to  do  which  only  he 
could  do,  and  he  resolved  to  stop  and  do  his  duty.  Perhaps  he  remembered  the 
mler  of  Pharaoh's  house,  and  the  deliverance  he  wrought  for  Israel  (Gen.  xlv.  7, 8)< 


181  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvin.  1— !& 

Anyhow,  he  waited  and  endured,  and  at  length  the  opportunity  came.  When 
Jezebel  would  exterminate  the  Lord's  prophets,  then  the  steward  of  the  palace 
understood  why  he  had  been  placed  in  that  perilous  and  responsible  position.  It 
was  that  he  might  save  much  people  alive  (Gen.  1.  20).  Then  he  did  what,  perhaps, 
only  he  could  have  done — took  a  hundred  of  the  Lord's  prophets,  hid  them  in  two 
oaves,  and  fed  them  with  bread  and  water. 

2.  The  sadnts  make  the  best  servants.  It  is  scarcely  less  strange  to  find  Ahab 
employing  Obadiah  than  to  find  Obadiah  serving  under  Ahab.  Some  have  seen 
herein  a  proof  of  the  king's  tolerance,  but  it  is  much  more  like  a  proof  of  his  saga- 
city. "Whether  he  knew  of  Obadiah's  faith  may  be  uncertain,  but  we  may  be  sure 
that  he  had  proved  his  fidelity.  ,  It  was  because  Obadiah  was  "  faithful  in  aU  his 
house  "  that  he  was  retained  in  this  positiou.  It  was  not  to  Ahab's  interest  to  have 
a  Baal-worshipper  at  the  head  of  his  retainers.  Bad  men  do  not  care  to  be  served 
by  their  kind.  They  pay  piety  and  probity  the  compUment — such  as  it  is — of  en- 
oouraging  it  in  their  dependants  and  children.  They  find,  as  Fotiphar  did,  as 
Darius  did,  that  the  God-fearing  bring  a  blessing  with  them  (Gen.  xxxiz.  6).  For 
if  there  is  no  special  benediction  of  their  basket  and  store,  of  their  fruit  and  fold 
(Dent,  xxviii.  4,  6),  yet  they  are  guarded  against  peculation  and  waste  (Luke  zvi.  1). 
How  many,  like  Ahab,  have  found  that  &ose  who  share  their  sins  or  pleasures 
oaimot  be  entrusted  with  their  goods  ;  that  if  they  would  have  &.ithful  servants, 
they  must  have  God-fearing  ones.     (See  Krummacher,  i.  sees.  145 — 149.) 

3.  It  is  only  the  power  of  God  could  Tteep  men  holy  im  Ahab's  or  Nero's  palace. 
Coleridge  has  somewhere  said  that  there  are  two  classes  of  Christian  evidences — 
Christianity  and  Christendom  ;  the  system  in  itself,  its  pure  moraUty,  its  bene- 
ficent teachings,  and  its  results,  its  conquests,  and  achievements  in  the  world.  For 
it  is  altogether  beyond  the  power  of  human  nature  to  work  the  moral  changes  which 
Christianity  has  wrought  either  to  convert  men  or  to  preserve  them  from  faUing. 
That  a  man  who  is  notorious  in  his  neighbourhood,  the  talk  and  terror  of  the 
country  side,  a  chartered  hbsrtine,  an  dm.e  damnee,  or  even  like  St.  Paul,  a  per- 
secutor and  injurious ;  or  like  Augustine,  or  John  Newton ;  that  such  an  one  should 
be  suddenly  stopped,  transformed,  ermobled,  should  preach  the  faith  which  he  once 
persecuted — this  is  very  difficult  to  account  for  on  human  grounds.  And  that  men 
with  every  temptation  to  sin,  everything  to  lose  and  nothing  to  gain  by  godliness, 
worldly  interest,  pride,  passion,  shame,  everything  combiniug  against  rehgion — 
that  these  should,  nevertheless,  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  live  soberly, 
righteously,  and  godly  (Titus  ii.  12)  in  the  Sodom  around  them — this  is  no  less  a 
miracle  of  Divine  grace.  The  influences  that  preserved  an  Obadiah,  a  St.  Paul,  a 
Fudeus,  and  Linus,  and  Claudia  (2  Tim.  iv.  21)  must  have  been  firom  above.  "We 
know  only  too  weU  what  human  nature,  unassisted  by  grace,  is  capable  o£  We 
know  it  tends  inevitably,  not  to  bear  a  rich  crop  of  virtues,  but,  like  the  cereals,  to 
degenerate,  to  run  to  seed.  In  Socrates  and  Seneca — "  halt-inspired  heathens  " — 
we  see  it  at  its  best,  and  yet  ho  w  wide  the  gulf  between  Nero's  preceptor  and  the  saints 
of  Nero's  household.  When  we  see  our  nature,  planted  in  a  hotbed  of  grossness 
and  profligacy,  nevertheless  yield  the  "  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness,"  then  we 
know  that  the  hand  of  the  great  Husbandman  must,  if  silently  and  unseen,  yet 
assuredly,  have  been  at  work. 

4.  If  religion  held  its  own  in  Ahab's  or  in  Nero's  court,  it  will  hold  its  own  and 
win  its  way  anywhere.  How  can  we  ever  despair  of  our  rehgion  so  long  as  we 
have  such  proofs  that  it  is  the  "power  of  God  unto  salvation"  ?  Society,  both  in 
England  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  may  be  very  godless  ;  it  may  be  chang' 
ing  for  the  worse ;  we  may  be  preparing  for  an  outbreak  of  Communism,  Nihihsm, 
Materialism,  Atheism ;  the  masses  in  our  large  towns  may  be  very  brutal  and 
besotted  and  animal,  may  be  utterly  estranged  from  religion  in  every  shape ;  but, 
whatever  England  is  like,  and  whatever  Europe  is  like,  its  state  is  nothing  hke  so 
desperate  as  was  that  of  Bome  under  Nero.  The  savages  to  whom  we  send  our 
missionaries,  again,  no  doubt  they  are  debased,  sensual,  apathetic,  or  even  hostil* 
to  our  rehgion  ;  but  are  they  really  worse;  is  their  case  more  hopeless,  than  that  ol 
Ahab's  or  Nero's  subjects  ?    And  if  the  days  of  persecution  are  not  ended ;  if  in 


«H.  xvm.  1—46.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  488 

China,  and  Melanesia,  and  Turkey  the  sword  is  still  whetted  against  the  Christian, 
can  we  find  among  them  aU  a  more  truculent  persecutor  than  Jezebel,  a  more 
eavage  and  unprincipled  inquisitor  than  Tigellinus.  But  we  cannot  pretend  that 
our  sufferings  are  anything  like  theirs.  No  longer  are  the  prophets  hunted  like  par- 
tridges ;  no  longer  are  they  clad  in  the  skins  of  wild  beasts,  or  dipped  into  cauldrons 
of  pitch ;  no  longer  do  we  hear  the  sanguinary  cry,  ChrisUcmoa  ad  leonet.  And 
yet,  despite  those  terrible  mockings  and  scourgings,  those  agonies  in  the  amphi- 
theatre, those  privationB  in  the  caves,  rehgion,  in  Samaria  and  in  Bome  alike,  held 
its  ground.  In  Israel,  seven  thousand  true-hearted  confessors  would  neither  be 
tempted  nor  terrified  into  bowing  the  knee  to  Baal.  In  Italy,  the  blood  of  the 
martyrs  was  the  seed  of  the  Church ;  neither  Nero,  nor  Decius,  nor  Diocletian 
-could  hinder  the  onward  march  of  Christ's  baptized  host,  and  now  it  is  matter  of 
liistory  how  one  day  the  empire  woke  up  to  find  itself  Christian. 

6.  If  men  could  be  scdnts  in  Ahab't  and  Nero's  palace,  they  may  h»  taintt  any- 
loTiere.  How  constantly  do  men  plead  the  adverse  circumstances  in  which  they 
are  placed  as  a  reason  why  they  cannot  serve  God.  Sometimes  it  is  a  godless  street 
or  wicked  hamlet ;  sometimes  it  is  an  irreligious  household  or  infidel  workshop ;  or 
their  trade  is  such,  their  employers  or  associates  are  such,  that  they  cannot  live  a 
godly  life.  But  the  example  of  Obadiah,  the  example  of  those  saints  of  the  Fraeto- 
rium,  convicts  them  of  imtruth  and  of  cowardice.  They  cannot  have  greater 
temptations  or  fiercer  persecutions  than  befell  those  Boman  Christians.  If  they 
proved  steadfast,  and  lived  in  sweetness  and  purity,  which  of  us  cannot  do  the 
same  wherever  we  may  be  placed  ? 

6.  The  saints  of  Ahab's  and  Nero's  courts  shall  rise  up  in  judgment  with  this 
generation,  and  shall  condemn  it.  In  a  vncked  city,  in  an  impure  court,  through 
fire  and  blood,  they  kept  the  faith.  Christianity  is  now  established  in  the  land. 
Kings  are  its  nursing  fathers.  Its  holy  rites  are  celebrated  freely  and  openly.  Yet 
how  many  dishonour  or  deny  it  I  how  many  are  ashamed  of  their  rehgion  I  With 
what  shame  will  they  meet  the  brave  confessors  of  the  past  I  They  will  need  no 
-condemnation  &om  their  Judge  (Matt.  xii.  41 ;  John  v.  45). 

Vers.  17 — 20. — The  King  and  hi*  Master.  For  three  and  a  half  years  king  and 
prophet  have  not  met  (Luke  iv.  26).  For  three  and  a  half  years,  forty  and  two 
months,  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  days  (Eev.  xi.  2,  8 ;  xii.  6 ;  xiii.  6 ;  Dan.  vii  25),  the 
mystical  period  of  persecution  and  blasphemy,  the  plague  of  drought  has  afflicted 
the  land.  But  now  the  time — God's  "  fulness  of  time  " — has  arrived  for  its  removal. 
The  time  to  favour  Israel  is  come,  and  king  and  prophet  meet  again.  It  was  an 
Anxious  moment  for  each  of  them.  It  was  a  critical  moment  in  tiie  history  of  the 
Church.  Let  us  mark  their  words ;  let  us  observe  how  they  bear  themselves ;  we 
shall  surely  learn  something  from  their  carriage  and  discourse. 

I.  The  king  goes  to  meet  the  prophet.  Elijah  would  seem  to  have  waited  in 
4ihe  place  where  Obadiah  left  him  until  Ahab  appeared.  He  is  not  going  to  take 
•the  place  of  a  suppUant.  Subject  though  he  is,  he  is  Ahab's  superior.  He  has  a 
commission  higher  and  nobler  than  the  king's.  It  is  his  task  to  reprove  the  king ; 
hence,  in  a  manner,  he  summons  him  before  him.  The  proud  monarch  who  has 
scoured  all  lands  in  search  of  him  must  now  humble  himself  to  go  before  the 
prophet.    »  Behold  EUjah." 

II.  Ahab  fears  to  meet  Elijah.  It  is  true  he  is  the  first  to  speak,  and  accnsea 
the  prophet  of  troubling  the  land ;  but  we  may  well  beUeve  that,  despite  his  brave 
words  when  Jezebel  was  at  his  side,  and  the  cheap  courage  he  manifested  when  he 
had  the  court  and  the  priests  of  Baal  at  his  back,  he  must  have  looked  forward  to 
this  meeting  with  something  like  dismay.  He  had  good  cause  for  misgivings  and 
fears.  First,  he  was  to  encounter  a  true  prophet,  and  one  vested  with  supernatural 
powers.  Of  one  thinghe  could  have  no  doubt,  as  to  the  "  sure  word  of  prophecy"  in 
Ehjah's  lips.  No  less  than  the  Sareptan,  he  had  proved  that  the  word  of  the  Lord 
in  Elijah's  Ups  was  truth  (oh.  xvii.  24).  "  He  spake  and  it  was  done."  He  had 
denounced  a  drought,  and  it  had  come  to  pass,  a  drought  beycud  all  precedent,  • 
drought  which  still  cursed  the  country,  and  was  at  that  moment  taxing  its  resootcei 

1  KINGS.  2  F 


434  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xtiii.  1—46. 

(ver.  6).  And  of  another  thing  ALab  must  have  been  equally  certain,  that  this  drought 
was  no  chance  which  had  happened  him.  The  coincidence  between  the  word  and 
the  event  negatived  that  idea.  He  must  see  in  it  the  finger  of  God ;  he  must 
recognize  in  the  prophet  the  power  of  God.  But  (2)  the  man  for  whom  he  had 
been  searching  over  hill  and  dale,  in  town  and  hamlet,  in  his  own  and  in  adjoining 
land^,  now  proposes  a  meeting.  Clearly,  then,  he  ie  not  afraid.  He  almost  compelB 
an  interview — "  I  will  sIk  w  myself  unto  him  to-day."  (8)  Even  if  Ahab  ascribed 
Ms  power  to  magic  or  witchcraft,  stiU  men  tremble  in  the  presence  of  a  sorcerer. 
We  cannot  wonder,  therefore,  if  his  courage  almost  failed  him,  and  if  he  looked 
forward  to  the  meeting  with  something  hke  dread.  But  he  remembers  his  imperious 
consort ;  he  thinks  how  full  of  threatening  and  fury  he  himself  has  been,  and  he 
feels  he  must  put  on  a  bold  front ;  he  must  carry  himself  proudly ;  he  must  tax  the 
prophet  with  wrong-doing.  And  so,  when  at  last  they  meet,  the  king  is  the  first 
to  speak.  "Art  thou  here?"  he  cries,  almost  frightened  at  the  sonnd  of  his  own 
voice.  "  Art  thou  here,  thou  troubler  of  Israel  ?  "  Words  have  often  served  to  con- 
ceal men's  thoughts,  often  been  a  veil  to  hide  their  abject  fears. 

Now,  we  have  heard  words  hke  these,  we  have  read  of  them  in  other  mouths 
than  Ahab's.  It  is  a  common  charge  against  the  prophets  and  people  of  God. 
The  saints  are  always  in  the  wrong.  It  is  always  they  who  "  turn  the  world  up- 
side down  "  (Acts  xvii.  6,  8)  ;  always  they  who  "  do  exceedingly  trouble  our  city" 
({&.,  xvi.  20).  Our  Lord  was  accused  of  sedition.  The  first  Christians  were  called 
"enemies  of  the  human  race."  All  manner  of  evil  is  said  against  them  falsely. 
Ahab  only  speaks  "after  his  kind."  He  saw  that  Elijah  had  been  instrumental 
in  bringing  down  the  drought  and  the  terrible  famine  which  accompanied  it.  He 
never  pauses  to  ask  what  moved  Elijah  to  call  for  a  drought ;  what  caused  EUjab's 
God  to  send  it.  The  herald  is  accused  as  the  cause  of  the  war.  "  There  is  notliing 
new  under  the  stm."  The  same  charge  is  made,  and  with  the  same  unreason  and 
perversity  at  the  present  day.  The  lamb  must  have  fouled  the  stream,  whichever 
way  it  flows.  If  the  Baptist  comes  neither  eating  nor  drinking,  they  say,  "  He 
hath  a  devil."  If  the  Son  of  man  comes  eating  and  drinking,  they  fay,  "  Behold 
a  gluttonous  man  and  a  winebibber."  If  we  pipe,  they  will  not  dance :  if  v% 
mourn,  they  will  not  lament  (Matt.  xL  16  sqq.) 

III.  Elijah  denounces  the  Tcimg  to  hia  face.  "  I  have  not  troubled  Israel,  bui 
thou,"  &c.  "  The  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion."  There  is  no  trace  of  fear  in  these 
words.  The  truth  has  nothing  to  fear.  And  the  truth  it  was  then,  and  is  now, 
that  the  trouble  and  suffering  of  the  world  spring  out  of  sin,  out  of  forgetting  and 
forsaking  God.  If  men  will  leave  Him  out  of  their  thoughts  and  lives,  their 
sorrows  cannot  but  be  multiplied  (Psa.  xvi.  4).  It  is  like  leaving  the  sun  out  of 
our  solar  sytem — the  world  would  revert  to  primseval  chaos.  The  French  revolu- 
tion shows  the  result  of  the  negation  of  God.  Communism  and'  Nihilism  do 
the  same.  "  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  But  not  only  do  they  "  pierce 
themselves  through  with  many  sorrows,"  but  they  trouble  Israel  (Eph.  vL  16), 
the  peaceful  people  of  God.  But  for  them  this  world  would  be  a  Paradise.  It 
is  they  who  make  wretched  homes  and  broken  hearts.  It  is  they  who  neces- 
sitate our  armies,  our  police,  our  gaols,  our  poor  rates.  It  is  they  who  some- 
times make  us  wonder,  with  some  of  the  ancients,  whether  this  earth  is  not 
really  a  place  of  punishment  But  for  them,  and  the  confusion  and  misery 
they  cause,  men  would  never  ask  "  whether  life  is  worth  living ; "  stiU  less  con- 
clude that  "  the  greatest  good  is  never  to  have  been  bom  into  the  world,  and  the 
next  to  die  out  of  it  as  soon  as  possible."  We  are  entitled,  therefore,  like  EKjah, 
to  denounce  the  godless  and  the  vicious  as  the  enemies  of  society,  as  conspirators 
against  the  world's  peace  and  prosperity.  "  The  only  common  disturlier  of  men, 
farpilies,  cities,  kingdoms,  worlds,  is  sin."  It  is  one  of  the  arguments  for  our  holy 
rehgion  that,  sincerely  practised,  it  ensures  "  the  greatest  possible  happiness  of  the 
greatest  possible  number."  It  is  the  brand  of  Atheism  that  it  brings  trouble, 
uncleannesB,  selfishness,  suffering,  at  its  heels. 

IV.  The  icing  endm/tet  the  upbraiding  of  the  prophet.  To  Ehjah's  "Thon  art 
the  man,"  he  makes  no  reply.    He  is  taxed  with  the  ruin  of  his  country,  and  is 


OB.  XTm.  1—46.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  EINGa  4M 

speeohleBEL  His  courage  has  soon  evaporated.  He  who  would  aoonse  Blijah  oatinot 
defend  himself.  Though  anointed  king,  ha  is  weak  and  helpless  (2  Sam.  iii.  39), 
and  owns  his  subject  his  superior.  Sow  soon  have  they  changed  places  1  Ahab 
has  been  hunting  for  the  prophet's  life,  has  been  vowing  vengeance  upon  him  if 
found.  Now  he  has  found  him,  and  he  trembles  before  him.  And  this  because 
conscience  has  made  him  a  coward.  He  knows  in  his  inmost  heart  that  Elijah 
has  spoken  the  truth ;  that  God  is  on  his  side ;  and  he  is  afraid  of  him,  just  as  Saul, 
giant  and  king  though  he  was,  was  afraid  of  the  stripling  David.  And  men  are 
BtUl  afraid  of  a  true  saint  of  God.  They  regard  him  with  almost  a  superstitious 
dread.  Sometimes  it  is  fanaticism  they  fear;  but  sometimes  it  i»  the  holiness 
which  condemns  their  siufolness  (Luke  v.  8). 

V.  The  Tdng  eibeyt  the  prophet's  comma/nds.  Elijah  might  be  king  from  the 
commands  he  issues.  "  Send  and  gather  to  me  " — observe  "  to  me  " — "  all 
Israel  unto  Mount  Carmel,  and  the  prophets  of  Baal,"  &c.  Did  Ahab  know  why 
they  were  wanted  ?  Did  EUjah  then  tell  him  of  the  ordeal  by  fire  ?  It  is  extremely 
improbable.  It  is  probable  that,  though  Ahab  hoped  for  rain,  still  he  anticipated 
no  good  to  his  or  Jezebel's  prophets  from  this  meeting.  He  would  have  disobeyed 
this  command  if  he  dared.  But  he  has  found  his  master,  and  it  is  in  the  uncouth, 
untutored  Crileadite.  We  ore  reminded  of  Herod  and  John,  of  Ambrose  and 
Theodosius,  of  Savonarola  and  Lorenzo  de'  Medicis,  of  Mary  of  Scots  and  John 
Knox.  At  Elijah's  bidding,  his  posts  go  throughout  the  land.  The  prophet  has 
had  a  triumph  already.  Truth  and  the  consciousness  of  right,  and  the  power  of 
God's  presence,  have  proved  greater  than  sceptre  and  orowu. 

Vers.  21 — 40.— IsraeVa  Conversion.  It  has  been  remarked  elsewhere  that  in 
the  history  of  the  Israelitish  people  we  may  see  pourtrayed  the  trials  and  expe- 
riences of  a  Christian  soul. 

And  not  only  is  that  true  of  this  history  as  a  whole,  but  it  also  holds  good  of 
various  periods  of  that  history,  of  various  crises  in  the  nation's  hfe.  It  holds  gooA 
of  that  great  crisis  recorded  in  this  chapter.  For  from  the  conversion  of  Israel  on 
the  day  of  Carmel,  we  may  gather  some  lessons  as  to  the  true  doctrine  of  conver- 
sion, the  conversion  of  a  man  from  sin  to  righteousness,  from  the  power  of  Satan 
unto  God.  From  the  turning  of  thei/r  heart  back  again  (ver.  87),  we  may  learn 
something  as  to  the  change  to  be  wrought  in  our  own.  Let  us  consider,  therelore — 
1.  What  it  was.    2.  How  it  was  accomplished.    8. 'What  were  its  results. 

I.  What  it  was.    It  was — 

1.  A  change  of  mind.  It  was  a  luravoia,  a  change^  of  thought  and  view.  Of 
course  it  was  more  than  this,  but  this  it  was  pre-eminently  and  primarily.  On 
that  day  of  the  Lord's  power  (Psa.  ex.  8)  the  views  of  king  and  people  were  altered. 
The  Mng  and  court — and  Ahab  was  not  without  his  ministers  and  courtiers  to 
witness  tiie  ordeal — had  many  of  them  believed  in  Baal,  and  served  him.  It  is  true 
some  had  wavered  (ver.  21)  between  Baal  and  Jehovah ;  but  the  people  as  a  whole 
had  held  Baal  to  be  Lord  and  God,  prince  of  nature,  source  of  Ufe,  not  to  the 
exclusion  of  Jehovah,  but  along  with  Him.  The  first  thing  for  them  to  learn, 
consequently,  was  that  an  "  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world ; "  that  Baal  was  no  more 
than  a  log  (ch.  xv.  12),  a  senseless  stock,  powerless  for  good  or  evil.  It  is  clear 
that  Elijt^'s  first  object  was  to  demonstrate  before  this  great  convocation  on 
Carmel  the  absolute  impotence  and  nothingness  of  their  idol  deities.  He  had 
been  proving  for  three  years  past  and  more  that  Baal  had  no  dominion  over  the 
clouds ;  that  he  could  not  discharge  that  primary  function  of  a  God,  viz.,  to  control 
the  course  of  nature,  and  give  his  votaries  rain  from  heaven  and  finiitfal  seasons 
(Levit.  xxvi.  4 ;  Deut.  xi.  17  ;  1  Sam.  xii.  17  ;  1  Kings  viii.  36 ;  Psa.  liviii.  9  ;  Jer. 
V.  24 ;  Joel  ii.  23 ;  Amos  iv.  7 ;  Acts  xiv.  17).  And  now  he  offers  to  prove  that 
Baal  has  as  httle  power  over  the  fire,  that  recognized  emblem  and  property  of  God 
(Gen.  iii.  24;  Exod.  xix.  18;  Levit.  ix.  24;  Deut.  iv.  86);  only  known  to  men, 
according  to  on  ancient  tradition,  because  it  had  been  stolen  firom  heaven.  He 
will  also  prove  that  the  Lord  whom  he  servos  can  give  both  fire  and  rain  ;  and  by 
these  facts  he  will  gain  their  understandings,  the  assent  of  their  minds  to  the 


4?8  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xviii.  1—46. 

eonolnsion  that  the  Lord  alone  is  God.  This  was  his  first  task,  his  main  object. 
And  this  is  the  first  step  towards  the  conversion  of  a  soul — that  it  should  "Jcnow 
the  only  true  God  and  Jesus  Christ,"  &e.  At  the  basis  of  conversion  lies  the  know- 
ledge of  God  and  of  self.  There  is  a  knowledge  which  "bloweth  up;  "  while 
*'  charity  buildeth  lip"  (1  Cor.  viii.  1).  There  is  also  a  yvSiaig  which  is  life  eternal. 
He  is  the  converted  man  who  can  say,  "We  have  Tcnown  and  believed  the  love 
that  God  hath  to  us  "  (1  John  iv.  16).  It  was  a  favourite  saying  of  St.  Theresa 
that  if  men  really  knew  God,  they  could  not  help  loving  and  serving  Him. 
By  nature  they  do  not  know  Him ;  they  have  false  and  unworthy  ideas  of  Him ; 
they  think  Him  to  be  altogether  such  an  one  as  themselves  (Psa.  L  21),  because  the 
devil,  the  "slanderer"  {piA^oKos),  who  is  not  only  the  "accuser  of  the  brethren" 
before  God  (Rev.  xii.  10 ;  Job  i.  9),  but  also  the  accuser  of  God  before  the  brethren 
(Gen.  iii.  6),  poisons  their  minds  against  God,  traduces  and  misrepresents  Him,  so 
that  the  opening  of  the  eyes  (Acts  ix.  18  ;  xvi.  14;  xzvL  18  ;  Luke  xxiv.  45 ;  Eph. 
L  18),  the  enlightening  of  the  mind,  the  shining  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ 
in  the  darkened  heart  (2  Cor.  iv.  4,  6) — this  is  the  beginning  of  our  conversion. 
A  conversion  which  rests,  not  on  knowledge,  but  emotion,  cannot  be  real  and 
lasting. 

2.  A.  ehange  of  affecHon.  Believing  Baal  to  be  God,  they  had  yielded  him  their 
homage,  their  service.  The  heart,  for  the  most  part  (Bom.  yii.  passim),  goes  with 
the  understanding.  If  the  latter  be  firmly  persuaded,  the  former  is  enUsted.  "  As 
he  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he  "  (Prov.  xxiii.  7).  Those  who  regarded  Baal  as 
their  helper  and  benefactor  could  not  help  reverencing  and  loving  him  (ch.  xix.  18 ; 
of.  Job  xxxi.  27).  But  when  they  learnt  his  impotence ;  when  they  saw  that  they 
had  been  deceived  (Acts  viii.  9) ;  when  it  was  forced  upon  them  that  these  things 
were  dumb  idols,  lying  vanities,  and  that  the  Lord  alone  bad  made  them,  sustained 
them,  blessed  them,  then  there  was  a  strong  revulsion  of  feeUng ;  their  heart  was 
turned  back  again ;  their  affections  went  forth  to  Him  whom  they  had  shghted 
and  wronged.  And  so  it  is  in  our  conversion.  It  is  not  a  purely  intellectual 
process ;  it  stirs  the  lowest  depths  of  the  heart.  When  a  man  reaUzes  that  God 
is  not  hate,  but  love ;  that  he  is  a  Father,  not  a  hard  master ;  that  the  devil  hat 
deceived  him  and  enslaved  him,  while  promising  him  liberty ;  that  the  world  has 
cheated  him,  and  its  pleasures  have  mocked  him,  it  would  be  strange  indeed  if  this 
apocalypse  did  not  affect  the  whole  man ;  if  the  knowledge  did  not  lead  at  once  to 
loathing  and  love;  loathing  for  the  enemy  who  has  played  us  so  false  and  slandered 
our  gracious  Father ;  love  for  Him  who  first  loved  us,  and  sealed  His  love  by  pain 
and  sacrifice.  And  with  the  new-born  love  there  will  be  compunction ;  grief  that 
we  have  grieved  the  Eternal  Love.  Tins  is  what  we  call  repentance.  It  is  a  part 
of  the  fisT&voia, 

8.  A  change  of  eonduet.  If  the  head  does  not  always  carry  the  heart  with  it, 
the  heart  always  controls  and  governs  the  man.  It  is  the  mainspring  of  our 
nature.  The  heart  is  the  helm  that  turns  the  ship  "  whithersoever  the  governor 
listeth  "  (James  iii,  4).  We  have  no  record,  indeed,  of  any  permanent  change  in  the 
religious  life  of  Israel,  and  it  has  been  too  readily  assumed  that  all  the  congregation 
that  witnessed  the  descent  of  the  fire,  and  confessed  their  beUef  in  Jehovah, 
straightway  lapsed  into  paganism.  But  it  is  clear  that,  for  a  time  at  least,  there 
was  a  change  in  their  conduct.  The  readiness  witli  which  they  slew  the  priests  of 
Baal  shows  it.  Indeed,  without  this  there  would  have  been  no  conversion  at  alL 
For  that  word,  though  constantly  used  in  a  purely  conventional  and  non-natural 
sense — ^to  express,  in  fact,  a  mystical  change  in  the  man,  a  peculiar  conscious  tran- 
sition which  the  heart  is  supposed  to  experience — ^reaUy  describes  a  change  in  the 
life  and  conduct  (Acts  xv.  8 ;  Luke  xxii.  82 ;  Matt,  xviii.  8 ;  James  v.  19).  The 
secret  inner  change  the  Scripture  always  calls  "repentance"  (Matt.  ix.  18;  Luke 
XV.  7 ;  Acts  XX.  21 ;  Bom.  ii.  4  ;  Heb.  vi.  6,  &c.)  Conversion  is  the  outward  and 
visible  change  resulting  from  the  former,  and  corresponding  with  it.  Hence 
St.  Peter's  words,  "Repent  and  be  converted"  (Acts  iii.  19).  This  conversion 
of  Israel  was  not  an  emotion,  an  experience,  an  ecstasy,  but  a  change  from  Baal- 
worship  to  Jehovah-worshxp  ;  from  impurity  and  devilry  (Deut.  xxxii.  17 ;  1  Cor, 


OH.  XTiu.  1—46.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  487 

X.  20)  to  righteousness ;  it  was  a  turning  "  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  tm* 
Goa"(lThess.  19). 

II.  How  WAS  THIS  OONVEESION  BBOUOHT  ABOUT  ? 

1.  By  the  ministry  of  a  prophet.  The  appeal  of  Elijah  (ver.  21)  had  some 
influence ;  the  works  he  wrought — ^he  was  a  prophet  of  deed — ^had  much  more. 
He  was  God's  messenger  to  turn  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just 
(Luke  i.  17).  We  are  reminded  here  of  the  place  which  the  ministry  of  the 
word  occupies  in  the  New  Dispensation.  "  How  shall  they  hear  without  a 
preacher?"  "We  preach  imto  you  that  ye  should  turn  from  these  vanities," 
&c.  (Acts  ziv.  15).  No  one  says  that  a  preacher  is  indispensable,  but  no  one 
can  deny  that  he  is  God's  ordinary  instrument  for  the  conversion  of  men 
(1  Cor.  i.  18,  21). 

2.  By  the  chastening  of  God,  The  drought  and  the  famine  prepared  their 
stubborn  hearts  for  Elijah's  appeal,  and  disposed  them  to  decision.  At  another 
time  he  might  have  addressed  Israel  in  vain.  And  sorrow  and  pain,  privation 
and  bereavement  are  still  not  unfrequently  found  to  dispose  the  rebellious  mind 
to  hear  the  message  of  God.  "  When  thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness"  (Isa.  xxvi.  9 ;  ot  ver.  16). 

8.  By  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  It  is  the  "  still  small  voice  "  wins  most  for  God ; 
but  the  wind  and  earthquake  and  fire  have  their  preparation  work  to  do.  The  law 
preceded  the  gospel,  and  even  the  gospel  has  its  stern  threatenings.  Apostolio 
preaching  did  not  overlook  the  terror  of  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  v.  11).  We  can  hardly 
doubt  that  fear  played  some  part  in  the  conversion.  As  on  a  former  occasion,  the 
giving  of  the  law  (Exod.  xx.  18),  so  at  this  solemn  vindication  of  the  law,  "  the 
people  were  a&aid  by  reason  of  the  fire  "  (Deut.  v.  5).  Why,  then,  should  we  call 
that  common  which  God  hath  cleansed  ?  Why  discard  an  instrument  which  God 
has  sanctioned  ? 

4.  By  a  supematwral  toJcen.  For  the  fire  was  the  turning-point  in  this  conver- 
sion. It  was  at  the  awful  "  sign  from  heaven,"  this  evidence  of  a  Divine  Presence, 
that  the  great  cry  arose,  "  The  Lord,  He  is  the  God. "  The  bones  were  dry  until  the 
breath  came  into  them.  And  may  not  this  remind  ns  that  there  is  a  supernatural 
element  in  our  conversion  too  ?  Man  cannot  change  himself.  Only  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Spirit  which  descended  in  fire  (Acts  ii.  8  ;  Matt.  iii.  11),  can 
the  eyes  be  opened,  the  heart  softened,  repentance  wrought,  or  true  and  lasting 
conversion  to  God  be  accomplished.  This  is  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  It  is 
His  to  convince  of  sin  (John  xvi.  8),  to  testify  of  Christ  (John  xv.  26),  to  renew  the 
heart  (Titus  iii.  6),  to  give  peace  and  joy  (Gal.  v.  22). 

5.  After  prayer  to  God.  Not  only  the  prayer  of  vers.  86,  87,  offered  before  the 
restored  altar  of  God  (ver.  30) ;  Elijah  had  prayed  for  many  years.  The  discipline 
of  drought  was  an  answer  to  his  prayer.  Nor  can  we  think  that  he  was  alone  in 
his  petitions.  The  seven  thousand  would  assuredly  pray  for  the  regeneration  of  their 
country.  The  triumph  of  Carmel  is  the  answer  to  those  cries  of  God's  elect  (Luke 
xviii.  7).  And  prayer  is  BtUl  one  of  the  instruments  of  our  conversion.  It  is  signifi- 
cant how  prayer  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  example  of  Elias,  and  with 
conversion  in  James  v.  17 — 20.  Nor  is  the  mention  of  prayer  in  connection  with 
St.  Paul's  conversion  less  instructive  (Acts  ix.  11).  It  is  one  step  the  soul  takes 
towards  God ;  and  by  persevering  in  prayer  the  goal  is  reached,  for  "  Every  one 
that  asketh,  receiveth  "  (Matt.  viL  8).  Whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  saved  (Acts  ii  21),  A  prayer  of  half  a  dozen  words  once  sufficed  for 
justification  (Luke  xviii.  14). 

6.  It  was  the  result  of  a  sudden  decision.  "  How  long  halt  ye?"  &o.  He  will 
have  them  make  up  their  minds  one  way  or  the  other.  It  is  better  to  be  cold  than 
lukewarm  (Rev,  iii,  16).  We  cannot  serve  two  masters.  How  many  conversions 
are  deferred  because  men  will  not  look  facts  in  the  face  1  That  is  all  the  preacher 
asks  of  them.  "If  there  is  a  God,  then  serve  Him.  If  there  is  a  judgment,  then 
prepare  for  it."  Decision  of  character  is  necessary  to  the  great  change.  When  the 
prodigal  says,  "  I  wiU  arise,"  the  first  step  has  been  taken.  And  "  it  iB  only  tba 
first  step  that  costs." 


488  THE  FIBSX  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ca.  xviii.  1—46. 

III.  What  were  its  results?  It  is  well  to  ask  this  question,  for  some  forget 
that  conversion  is  not  the  end,  but  the  begtuning.  It  is  the  entrance  on  the  life  of 
reconciliation  and  obedience  ;  it  is  the  door  to  sanotification  and  perfection.  This 
conversion  was  (1)  evidenced  by — 

1.  Ohedienoe.  The  law  enjoined  that  the  false  prophet  should  be  put  to  death 
(Dent.  xii.  1 — 11).  The  sin  of  seducing  the  Lord's  people  was  so  heinous  that  it 
merited  a  capital  punishment.  It  has  been  objected  against  Elijah  that,  in  the 
massacre  of  these  400  men,  he  displayed  a  sanguinary  and  revengeful  spirit.  But 
it  would  have  been  strange  if  he,  the  restorer  of  the  law,  had  ignored  one  of  its 
provisions.  We  should  have  suspected  this  conversion  had  the  false  prophets  been 
spared.  "  This  sacrifice  was  no  less  pleasing  to  God  than  that  other."  For  the  true 
convert  sets  himself  to  do  God's  will.  Whatever  grace  and  favour  God  may  have 
showed  him  cannot  release  him  from  the  discharge  of  duty.  He  must  still  "keep 
the  commandments  "  if  he  would  enter  into  life  (Matt.  six.  17)«  Obedience  is  the 
touchstone  of  conversion  (Luke  vi.  46 ;  John  xiv.  21). 

S.  Watchfulness.  No  doubt  one  reason  why  the  false  prophets  were  put  out  of 
the  way  was  that  they  might  no  longer  be  able  to  tempt  God's  people.  The  convert 
will  be  careful  to  avoid  all  occasions  of  sin ;  he  wUl  cut  off  the  right  hand  that 
causes  him  to  offend.  He  wUl  keep  himseljf  that  the  wicked  one  touch  him  not 
(1  John  V.  18).  If  strong  drink  has  been  his  snare,  he  will  abstain ;  whatever  his 
besetting  sin,  he  wiU  put  it  away.    But  (2)  it  was  followed  by — 

8.  Blessing.  After  the  conversion  came  the  rain,  and  a  renewal  of  prosperity 
and  plenty  (James  v.  18).  Not  untU  the  people  had  turned  to  Him  with  all  their 
hearts,  could  He  "  be  jealous  for  his  land,  and  pity  his  people  "  (Joel  ii.  12, 18). 
The  drought,  the  punishment  of  apostasy,  was  removed  on  their  repentance.  Once 
more  the  thirsty  land  drank  in  the  grateful  showers ;  once  more  a  plentiful  rain 
refreshed  God's  inheritance,  and  the  land  brought  forth  its  increase  (James  v.  18) — 
a  picture  this  of  the  blessings  which  attend  the  reconciled  soul.  "  Bivers  of  hving 
waters."  "  The  water  of  life  freely."  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit."  "  The  peaceable 
fruits  of  righteousness." 

Vers.  41 — 45. — Effectual  Fervent  Prayer.  It  is  pre-eminently  in  the  matter  of 
■prayer  that  Elijah  is  proposed  to  us  as  an  example  in  the  New  "Testament.  From 
the  long  list  of  Hebrew  saints  and  worthies  he  has  been  selected  by  St.  James  (t, 
17,  18)  to  prove  and  Ulustrate  the  proposition  that  "  the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man 
availeth  much  in  its  working"  (ver.  16,  Eevised  Version).  His  prayers  for  drought 
are  not  mentioned  by  our  historian,  but  his  prayer  for  rain  may  not  unreasonably 
be  supposed  to  be  referred  to  in  the  account  of  vers.  42—45.  Let  us  notice  its  more 
prominent  features. 

1.  It  was  the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man.  The  prayers  of  unrighteous  men  are 
sometimes  heard  (Luke  iviiL  14  ;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  19),  but  only  their  prayers  for 
grace  and  pardon.  The  intercessions  of  the  wicked  for  others  are  of  no  avail,  any 
more  than  the  prayers  of  the  impenitent  for  themselves.  "  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my 
heart,  the  Lord  wUl  not  hear  me  "  (Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  Common  sense  teaches  that  God  is 
not  likely  to  grant  the  requests  of  impenitent  rebels.  "  To  the  wicked  God  saith, 
What  hast  thou  to  do  "  with  intercession  ?  "  Get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  father," 
&o.  (2  Kings  iii.  13).  "  Go  and  cry  unto  the  gods  which  ye  haVe  chosen  "  (Judg.  Z. 
14).     But  "  he  will  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  him"  (Psa.  oxlv.  19). 

2.  It  was  the  prayer  of  a  man  of  like  passions  with  US.  We  are  not  to  think  that 
Elias  stood  on  a  pedestal  apart  from  the  rest  of  his  kind.  He  is  not  pictured  to  us, 
as  are  the  heroes  of  so  many  biographies,  as  perfect.  We  are  not  sure  that  that 
great  "  day  of  Carmel"  passed  without  sin.  We  are  quite  sure  that  he  betrayed 
fear  and  unbeUef  in  his  flight,  impatience  and  discontent  in  the  desert.  Yet  his 
prayers  availed  much.  Let  us,  therefore,  though  compassed  about  with  infirmity, 
and  stained  with  many  sins  of  ignorance  and  imperfection,  come  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  grace. 

3.  It  was  fervent.  "  He  prayed  with  prayer"  iwpoaevxj  wpomtbiivn),  says  St.  Jamei. 
His  attitude  reveals  its  fervency — it  was  that  of  complete  self-abstraction,  of  intense 


CH.  xvin.  1—46.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  480 


inward  entreaty.  We  must  seek  "witli  all  the  heart"  (Psa.  cxix.  2;  Jer.  xxiv.  7). 
Seeking  early  (Prov.  i.  28 ;  viii.  17 ;  Psa.  Ixiii.  1 ;  Ixxviii.  34 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  9)  does  not 
mean  seeking  in  youth,  but  seeking  eagerly,  intently.  Compare  the  expression, 
"rising  up  early,"  &c.  (Jer.  viL  18  ;  xxv.  8,  4;  xxvi.  6  ;  xxxv.  15,  &o.)  Some  one 
has  said  that  there  are  not  many  persons  who  really  and  truly  pray  half  a  dozen 
times  in  their  lives.  We  offer  up  formal  or  lukewarm  petitions,  and  then  marvel 
that  we  receive  no  answers.  Prayer  must  he  krei^j  (Luke  xxii.  44).  It  is  not  that 
God  is  hard  to  persuade  ;  it  is  that  He  will  have  us  mean  what  we  say.  There  is 
no  difficulty  with  Him.    We  are  straitened  in  ourselves. 

4.  It  was  persevering.  He  was  not  daunted  by  the  lacionio  "  nothing "  (Heb. 
fiot  cmght)  of  his  servant.  "Go  again  seven  times."  It  is  not  enough  to  pray;  we 
must  "pray  and  not  faint"  (Luke  xviii.  1;  Eph.  vi.  18;  Col.  iv.  2).  We  must 
"  diligently  seek  him  "  (Heb.  xi.  6).  St.  Paul  besought  the  Lord  thrice  (2  Cor.  xii. 
6),  after  the  example,  it  is  probable,  of  our  Blessed  Lord  (Matt.  xxvi.  44).  Compare 
the  example  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  28  sqq.)  Daniel  prayed  three  times  a  day 
(Dan.  vi.  10).  The  "  seven  times  "  of  Elijah  means  that  he  will  pray  until  the 
■covenant  God  hears  his  petitions  (ef.  Levit.  iv.  6, 17 ;  viii.  11 ;  xiv.  16). 

6.  It  was  touching  God's  hingdom.  This  is  the  proper  subject  for  oat  prayers 
(Matt.  vi.  83).  We  may  have  doubts  whether  some  of  the  blessings  we  would  fain 
ijrave  are  good  for  us,  but  we  always  ask  "  according  to  his  wiU  "  when  we  pray, 
"Thy  kingdom  come."  Our  prayers  for  rain  or  fine  weather  are  often  seliish. 
EUjah  only  desired  the  drought,  only  supplicated  for  rain,  as  a  means  of  influencing 
Israel  and  advancing  God's  work.  It  is  partly  the  selfishness  of  our  prayers  which  has 
led  men  to  question  the  eflSeacy  of  all  prayer.  If  men  want  to  have  their  own  way 
-with  the  elements,  or  to  make  God's  power  further  their  private  ends,  is  it  strange 
if  He  declines  to  hear  them  ?  If  we  are  to  "  obtain  our  petitiousi"  we  mnst  "  ask 
those  things  that  please  him.'' 

6.  It  was  believing.  He  never  doubts  the  promise  of  ch.  xviii.  1.  He  has  already 
announced  the  rain  to  Ahab,  before  he  prays  for  it.  Similarly  our  Lord  gave 
thanks  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus :  "  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me  "  (John  xi. 
-41),  just  as  if  the  dead  man  had  already  come  to  life  again.  We  must  ask  in  faith 
(James  L  6, 7 ;  Matt.  xxi.  21,  22  ;  Mark  ix.  23).  No  wonder  if  God  does  not  hear 
the  petitions  of  the  man  who  doubts  whether  God  is,  or  is  the  rewarder  of  those 
who  seek  Him.  Before  we  pray  we  should  at  least  be  clear  that  there  is  One  who 
hears  and  can  help  us.     Unbelief  makes  God  a  liar. 

7.  It  was  hv/mhle.  "  Cast  himself  down  upon  the  earth.*  What  self-abasement 
before  God  I  And  he  was  heard  in  that  he  feared  (Heb.  v.  7).  God  has  respect  unto 
the  lowly,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble  (James  iv.  6 ;  1  Peter  v.  6 ;  Psa.  ix.  12 ; 
X.  17). 

8.  It  was  in  the  Holy  Ghost  (Jude  20).  This  prayer  was  first  inspired.  Elijah 
would  never  presume  to  ask  either  for  drought  or  rain,  unless  the  prayer  had  been 
put  into  his  heart.  As  he  mused  in  the  wilds  of  Gilead  over  the  apostasy  of  Israel, 
iind  vexed  his  righteous  soul  with  the  news  of  the  Baal-worship,  he  felt  constrained 
to  cry  to  God,  as  we  find  His  saints  constantly  doing,  to  awake,  to  make  bare  His 
arm,  to  vindicate  His  outraged  honour.  And  what  could  he  pray  for,  except  that 
■GroA  would  enforce  the  penalties  He  had  Himself  denounced?  His  prayer  for  drought 
is  the  outcome  of  his  zeal  for  God's  law,  with  which  God  had  HimselJf  inspired  him. 
And  we,  too,  are  promised  supernatural  help  and  guidance  in  our  prayers  (Bom.  viii. 
26,27;  Jude  20). 

9.  It  availed  much.  It  opened  the  windows  of  heaven.  "  There  was  a  great 
rain  "  It  gave  hfe  to  those  who  were  sitting  in  the  shadow  of  death.  "  The  earth 
brought  forth  her  fruit."  The  desolate  land  became  as  Eden.  Man  and  beast 
drank  and  Hved. 

10.  It  availed  immediately.  While  he  was  yet  speaking,  God  heard  (Isa.  Ixv. 
^4).  If  that  word  is  ever  true,  Bis  dat  qui  cito  dat,  it  was  true  of  this  occasion. 
Indeed,  the  answer  almost  anticipated  the  prayer  (ch.  xviii.  1,  41).  God  is  more 
ready  to  give  than  we  to  pray. 


MA  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xvul  1— ti 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORa 

Yen.  1 — 6. — The  Cry  for  Life.  For  three  years  and  six  months  the  heavens 
were  as  brass.  Throughout  the  summers  the  sun  glared  and  flamed  in  a  cloudless 
sky,  and  the  temperature,  even  at  night,  never  sank  to  the  dew-point. 
Throughout  the  winters,  if  the  temperature  reached  that  point,  the  elements 
were  so  boisterous  that  no  dew  could  settle  upon  the  herbage,  and  the  winds 
carried  the  aqueous  vapour  away  to  other  lands.  In  the  absence  of  dew  and 
rain,  vegetation,  excepting  only  that  near  rivers  or  fringing  streams  fed  from 
the  deepest  springs,  was  scorched  and  blasted.  The  mortality,  therefore,  amongst 
animals  was  frightful,  and  men  suffered  incredible  things.  The  agony  of  distress 
had  now  risen  to  suob  a  pitch  that  throughout  the  land  there  wag  one  earnest, 
plaintive  cry  for  life. 

I.  Some  cried  for  life  to  nature.  1.  Such  was  the  cate  with  Ahab.  (1)  He 
had  worshipped  Baal,  the  fire  of  nature.  But  Baal  was  now  punishing  his  votaries. 
Such  is  the  manner  in  which  the  "  god  of  this  world  "  repays  his  dupes.  (2)  Yet 
did  not  Ahab  repent  of  his  folly.  For,  instead  of  seeking  the  Uving  God,  who  was 
proving  Himself  the  superior  of  Baal,  he  divides  the  land  between  himself  and  the 
governor  of  his  house,  to  search  for  herbage.  (3)  Note  also  the  heartlessness  of  the 
idolater.  He  is  more  concerned  for  his  stud  than  for  hia  people.  "  Feradventnre 
we  may  find  grass  to  save  the  hortei  and  mules  alive,  that  we  lose  not  all  the 
beasts.'  2.  He  was  a  specimen  of  a  class  (1)  His  queen  was  of  the  same  way  of 
thinking.  She  had  been  brought  up  to  worship  Baal.  She  had  a  masculine  temper 
and  swayed  the  mind  of  her  husband.  (2)  The  courtiers  and  the  majority  of  the 
nation,  who  thought  more  of  court  fashion  than  of  the  holy  service  of  Jehovah, 
bowed  the  knee  to  Baal. 

II.  Others  cried  for  life  to  God.  1.  Of  this  number  was  Elijah,  (1)  He 
recognized  God  as  above  nature,  when  he  announced  that  there  would  be  a  depar- 
ture from  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  in  the  withholding  of  dew  and  rain  for  snc- 
cessive  years.  StUl  he  recognizes  this  when  he  shows  himself  to  Ahab,  believing 
that  God  would  now  give  rain  (ch.  xvii  1 ;  xviii.  1,  2).  (2)  He  recognized  God  as 
above  nature  before  these  assurances,  for  he  received  them  in  answer  to  faithful 
prayer  (see  James  v.  17,  18).  This  is  not  mentioned  in  the  history,  but  imphed  in 
his  character  as  a  man  of  God.  Note  :  A  man  of  God  is  a  man  of  prayer.  2.  Obadiah 
also  was  of  this  number.  (1)  He  "  feared  the  Lord  greatly."  This  arose  from  the 
strength  of  his  faith.  We  cannot  fear  that  in  which  we  do  not  beUeve.  (2)  His 
faith  was  fruitful  in  good  works.  He  screened  one  hundred  of  the  Lord's  prophets 
from  the  violence  of  Jezebel,  and  sustained  them.  "  Bread  and  water,"  like  "  daily 
bread  "  in  the  Lord's  prayer,  is  an  expression  for  things  needful  for  the  body.  And 
in  thus  sheltering  and  nourishing  the  servants  of  God,  Obadiah  hazarded  not  only 
the  loss  of  his  situation,  but  also  of  his  head.  (8)  One  who  feared  the  Lord  greatly 
after  this  fashion  would  pray  to  Him.  Piety  would  move  him  to  it.  Patriotism 
also  would  move  him  at  this  juncture.  8.  There  were  ma/ny  more  who  cried  to 
God.  (1)  There  were  the  "prophets  of  the  Lord "  preserved  by  Obadiah,  and 
doubtless  others  also  who  escaped  the  vigilance  of  Jezebel.  These  would  cry  to 
God  for  life.  (2)  And  if  there  were  so  many  prophets,  or  sons  of  the  prophets, 
there  would  be  a  considerable  number  of  devout  persons  in  Israel  notwithstanding 
the  abounding  apostasy  (see  oh.  xix.  18).  There  is  a  great  deal  of  goodness  where 
men  little  expect  to  find  it. 

God  is  the  source  of  hfe,  not  only  to  the  body,  but  also  to  the  souL  Let  ns  seek  tu 
Him  for  life.— J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  7 — 16. — The  Servant  of  the  Lord.  Such  is  the  meaning  of  Obadiah's 
name ;  and  so  truly  descriptive  of  his  character  is  it  that  we  may  take  him  as  a 
typical  servant  of  God. 

I.  He  feared  the  Lord  from  his  youth.  1.  Piety  is  not  natural.  (1)  On  the 
contrary,  we  inherit  a  depraved  heart  (Gen.  v.  8;    Psa.  li.  5;    Bom.  v.  12;  Eph. 


OH.  XYin.  1—46.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  441 

ii.  8).  (2)  And  this  depravity  is  complete  (Gen.  vi.  5 ;  Isa.  i,  6,  6 ;  Bom.  iii.  9 — 19). 
(3)  Life  is  only  tolerable  through  the  meliorating  influences  of  the  "  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God. '  To  these  must  be  attributed  whatever  seems  good  in  unconverted 
men  (Bom.  i.  28 — 32).  2.  Orace  i»  free.  (1)  All  are  directly  the  subjects  of  its 
illuminations,  restraints,  and  encouragements  (John  i.  9  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  7).  (2)  Soma 
are  indirectly  specially  favoured.  Being  surrounded  by  Christian  influences. 
Being  children  of  godly  parents.  (8)  These  opportunities,  if  duly  improved,  will 
infallibly  lead  to  salvation  (Titus  ii.  11 — 14).  3.  Those  who  fewr  Ood  from  their 
youth  htwe  great  ad/vantaget.  (1)  They  have  not  given  evil  habits  time  to  consoli- 
date into  rigidity.  Time  la  necessary  to  this,  for  habits  are  strengthened  by 
repetition.  The  hard  crystallization  of  bad  habits  renders  the  conversion  of  old 
sinners  very  difficult.  Therefore,  how  few  are  such  conversions,  comparatively  I 
(2)  They  have  a  splendid  opportunity  of  founding  a  strong  character  of  goodness. 
When  the  habit  of  resisting  temptation  is  formed,  it  becomes  more  and  more 
natural  and  easy  to  resist.  Hence,  like  Obadiah,  who  "  feared  the  Lord  from  his 
youth,"  they  will  come  to  fear  Him  "jpreatly." 

II.  He  feabed  ihb  Lord  obeatlt.  See  the  manifestation  of  this  in  his — 1. 
Beapect  for  the  ambaaaador  of  Ood.  (1)  He  "knew  Elijah."  Probably  he  had 
been  present  when  the  prophet  warned  the  king  that  his  fire-god  would  be  made 
to  punish  his  votaries  in  the  absence  of  dew  and  rain  (ch.  xvii.  1).  The  godly, 
having  sympathy  with  the  ministers  of  God,  are  quick  to  recognize  them.  (2)  He 
"  fell  on  his  face  before  him."  This  was  the  form  of  a  most  respectful  salutation. 
He  hononred  in  him  that  God  whose  ambassador  he  was.  Obadiah  feared  the 
Lord  too  greatly  to  give  to  any  creature  the  homage  due  to  God  alone.  (8)  He 
addressed  him  reverently,  "  My  lord  EUjah."  And  he  spoke  of  himself  as  "  thy 
servant."  This  was  proper  on  his  part ;  but  we  note  how  Elijah  transferred  the 
style  to  Ahab — "  Go  tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  Elijah  is  here."  2.  Kindneaa  to  the 
servants  of  God.  (1)  Through  the  sin  of  Jeroboam  the  priests  and  Levites  went 
into  Judah  (see  2  Cliron.  xi.  13,  14).  To  supply  their  lack  in  Ephraim,  prophets' 
colleges  were  established.  The  students  in  these  colleges  were  called  "  sons  of  the 
prophets"  (see  2  Kings  ii.  8,  6,  7).  (2)  These,  together  with  their  masters,  or 
"  fathers,"  were  probably  the  objects  of  Jezebel's  resentment  when  Elijah  could 
not  be  foimd.  They  are  called  "  prophets  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  13  ;  compare  ch. 
xidi.  85,  38,  41).  (3)  At  the  time  of  that  persecution  Obadiah  sheltered  and  fed 
one  hundred  of  these.  This  he  did  at  the  hazard  of  his  Ufe.  Because  he  feared 
the  Lord  greatly,  he  feared  not  the  wrath  of  the  king  (compare  Heb.  xi.  28,  27). 
8.  Faith  in  the  power  of  God.  (1)  He  believed  that  Jehovali  might  raise  a  wind 
that  could  carry  Elijah  away  from  the  power  of  Ahab.  He  doubtless  knew  that 
Enoch  had  been  translated  into  the  heavens,  and  may  have  known  of  examples  of 
translations  from  one  locaUty  to  another,  not  recorded  in  the  earlier  Scriptures 
(compare  2  Kings  ii.  11 — 16  ;  Ezek.  iii.  14;  Acts  viii.  39).  (2)  A  being  who  could 
do  such  wonders,  and  whose  power  was  now  terribly  manifest  in  the  drought,  was 
greatly  to  be  feared  (see  Matt.  x.  28 ;  Luke  xii.  S).  (3)  But  while  God  is  of  all 
enemies  the  most  formidable.  He  is  an  Almighty  Friend. 

III.  He  FAITHFULLY  SEEVED  HIS  KINO.  1.  Ood-f earing  men  mahe  goodcitissena. 
(1)  Wicked  as  Ahab  was,  he  preferred  Obadiah  to  the  courtiers  of  Jezebel  in  tb© 
high  office  of  chamberlain.  (2)  This  is  not  asohtary  case.  Joseph  over  the  house 
of  Pharaoh.  Daniel  m  the  house  of  the  kings  of  Babylon.  Christians  were  in  the 
household  even  of  Nero.  (3)  The  qualities  of  a  servant  of  the  Lord — truth, 
honour,  diligence — are  those  sought  after  for  places  of  trust.  "  Godliness  is  profit- 
able unto  all  things  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  Isa.  Iviii.  14).  2.  God  preserves  them  in  their 
fadthfulness.  (1)  Service  in  a  licentious  court  Obadiah  would  not  have  chosen. 
But  he  is  in  it  and  maintains  his  integrity.  They,  that  fear  the  Lord  need  not  go 
out  of  the  world.  (2)  They  have  a  testimony  for  God.  (3)  They  have  opportunities 
of  serving  the  servants  of  the  Lord. 

Let  us  not  murmur  at  our  providential  lot.  God  can  change  it  if  He  see  fit. 
If  He  does  not  change  it,  then  He  has  a  purpose  in  it  which  we  should  endeavour 
tofulfil.— J.  A.  M. 


M»  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xviii.  X— 46. 

Vers.  17, 18. — The  Troubler.  Elijah,  who  during  the  terrible  drought  was  con- 
eealed,  now,  at  the  word  of  the  Lord,  came  forth  to  Bhow  himself  to  Ahab,  as  God 
was  about  to  give  rain.  What  a  meeting  I  One  of  the  worst  of  kings  with  one 
of  the  noblest  of  prophets.  What  confrontings  will  there  be  in  the  great  day  of 
judgment  I  Here  each  charges  the  other  with  being  the  troubler  of  Israel. 
Observe,  then — 

I.  That  the  wicked  seek  to  malion  the  good.  1.  Ahab  aeeused  Elijah.  (1) 
He  assumed  that  all  the  horrors  of  the  famine  were  the  work  of  the  prophet,  and 
therefore  soupht  to  slay  him.  How  many  precious  lives,  in  all  ages,  have  been 
sacrificed  to  the  theories  of  tyrants.  (2)  This  persecutor  was  terribly  -in  earnest. 
He  sought  the  prophet  in  IsraeL  Then  in  neighbouring  kingdoms.  He  even  took 
an  oath  of  the  kingdoms  that  they  did  not  shelter  him.  It  were  well  for  the  world 
if  men  were  as  earnest  in  good  as  they  are  in  evil.  (3)  But  God  can  hide  His 
servants  from  the  fury  of  their  adversaries.  In  the  solitudes  of  Cherith.  In  the 
stir  of  Zarephath.  (4)  Now  Aliab  accuses  the  prophet  to  his  face.  But  see  how 
his  courage  cools  in  the  presence  of  the  mai^  of  God.  He  frames  his  accusation 
mildly  in  the  form  of  a  question,  "  Art  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel  ?  "  Conscience 
makes  tyrants  tremble.  2.  He  found  a  pretext.  (1)  Theorists  can  easily  find  pre- 
texts for  tyranny.  Ahab  seized  upon  Elijah's  words  (ch.  xvii.  1),  and  drew  his 
own  inference.  (2)  As  these  words  were  verified  to  the  letter,  the  tyrant  saw,  or 
afi'ected  to  see,  his  theory  confirmed.  This  kind  of  reasoning  is  very  common. 
(3)  Why  did  he  not  accuse  God  ?  Elijah  acted  as  the  servant  of  God.  He  feared 
to  do  this  in  form,  though  he  did  it  in  fact  (see  Prov.  xiv.  81 ;  Matt.  x.  40 — 42  ; 
XXV.  40,  &c. ;  Acts  v.  39  ;  ix.  1 — 15 ;  Heb.  vi.  10).  8.  He  had  a  motive.  (1)  Why 
did  not  Ahab  accuse  himself?  His  conscience  no  doubt  did  this  for  him.  (2)  But 
he  could  not  afford  publicly  to  bear  the  odium  of  having  brought  the  miseries  of 
the  famine  upon  his  people.  (3)  Therefore  he  shifts  the  responsibility  on  to  the 
shoulders  of  the  prophet  Eow  essentially  do^s  the  spirit  of  the  he  enter  into 
all  sin  I 

II.  Truth  comes  home  in  due  time.  1.  Goodness  will  be  vindicated.  (I)  It 
may  suffer  long  under  the  reproaches  of  liars.  This  is  permitted  because  God  is 
long- suffering.  He  makes  the  trial  a  blessing  to  "  those  who  are  exercised  thereby." 
(2)  But  God  is  jealous  for  His  servants.  Therefore  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked 
is  but  for  a  season.  If  the  -vindication  takes  not  place  in  this  world  it  certainly 
win  in  the  next.  (8)  Elijah  had  his  opportunity.  He  repudiated  the  imputation  of 
Ahab.  Good  men  are  true  patriots.  The  trial  on  Carmel  settled  the  question.  2. 
Sin  will  be  sJia/med.  (1)  Let  it  only  be  brought  home,  and  it  will  cover  the  sinner 
with  confusion.  (2)  "  Thou  and  thy  father's  house  "  have  troubled  Israel  "  in  that 
ye  have  forsaken  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."  Complicity  in  the  sin  of 
Jeroboam  is  specified  here.  This  sin  was  a  breach  of  the  first  and  second  com- 
mandments of  the  decalogue.  It  was  also  a  forsaking  of  the  Levitieal  law,  which 
prescribed  ceremonies  that  were  but  parodied  in  Ephraim.  This  offence  was  carried 
to  its  height  in  the  statutes  of  the  house  of  Ahab  which  were  those  of  Omri  (see 
Mienh  vi.  16).  (8)  "  And  thou  hast  followed  Baahm."  This  was  a  sin  introduced 
by  Ahab  himself,  no  doubt  prompted  by  Jezebel  The  way  of  error  is  from  bad  to 
worse. 

Sin  is  the  troubler  of  humanity.  It  invaded  the  tranquillity  of  Eden  and  broke 
it  up.  It  brought  down  judgments  of  God  upon  individuals  and  communities. 
Upon  Cain.  Upon  the  antediluvians.  Upon  the  cities  of  the  plain.  Upon  Israel. 
It  has  provoked  wars,  in  whose  wake  came  pestilences  and  famines.  It  troubles 
the  abyss  of  hell. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  19—21. — Christ  or  Belial  f  Here  is  a  curious  phenomenon.  A  monarch, 
who  had  searched  all  kingdoms  for  a  prophet  that  he  might  reek  anger  upon 
his  life,  now  sought  out  and  confronted  by  that  prophet,  and  submitting  to  his 
orders  to  call  an  assembly  of  the  nation  !  How  God  can  turn  about  the  hearts  ol 
princes  I  Conspicuous  in  this  vast  concourse  are  the  idolatrous  priests  with  gnash- 
ing teeth.     Elijah  stands  alone  undaunted,  a  witness  for  Jehovah,  and,  appealing 


OH.  XTOi.  1—46.1  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  448 

to  the  mnltitade,  he  acouses  them  of  unworthy  hesitation  between  irreconoilabla 
Berricea. 

I.  Wht  hesitate  in  SEEKiNa  HAPPINESS  ?  1.  No  joj/s  coti  compare  with  the 
hewvenly,  (1)  There  are,  indeed,  sad  professors  of  the  true  religion,  (a)  Some  are 
constitutionally  melancholy.  This  is  a  disease  which  certainly  is  not  aggravated 
by  the  sense  of  the  favour  of  God.  (6)  Some  have  false  views  of  religion.  They 
caricature  it  into  a  sepulchral  thing.  They  do  it  injustice,  (o)  But  the  case  most 
common  is  that  sad  professors  do  not  experience  what  they  profess.  They  halt 
between  Jehovah  and  Baal — between  Christ  and  Belial.  In  fashion.  In  Mend- 
ships.  In  pursuits.  So  conscience  stings  them  sore.  (2)  When  rehgion  is  true 
there  is  the  best  reason  for  joy.  (a)  It  brings  emancipation  from  the  slavery  of 
sin.  (6)  Deliverance  from  the  tyranny  of  Satan,  (c)  Adoption  into  the  family  of 
God.  {d)  Heirship  to  everlasting  Ufe.  The  true  heu:  has  the  title-deeds  of  his  .in- 
heritance in  his  heart  (Fph.  i.  13,  14 ;  2  Cor.  t.  4,  6).  Thus  does  he  antedate 
the  very  bliss  of  heaven  (Luke  xvii  21 ;  Eph.  L  S).  2.  1/  sirmers  be  not  sad, 
the  more  thiume,  (1)  For  sin  degrades  the  man  below  the  brute.  As  far  below 
as  the  powers  of  a  man  are  superior.  The  degradation  of  a  devil  would  be  im- 
possible to  a  brute.  If  a  man  can  be  transformed  into  a  compound  of  swine  and 
devil  and  not  be  sad,  this  is  the  climax  of  depravity.  (2)  Sin  is  perfidy  to  infinite 
love.  Such  ingratitude  can  only  be  reconciled  with  the  absence  of  sadness  upon 
the  ground  of  the  most  shameful  perversity.  (3)  The  sinner  is  befooled  by 
Satan.  In  his  reflective  moods  he  must  loathe  himself;  but  Satan  whirls  him 
away  from  his  reflections  into  some  mad  dance,  and  drowns  the  voice  of  his  con- 
science in  some  boisterous  laugh.  So  the  fool  still  befooled  exults  in  his  folly. 
O  shame  I 

II.  Why  hkbitatb  in  seekino  salvation  ?  1.  Life  is  the  determirdng  period. 
(1)  It  is  the  seed-time  for  the  reaping  in  eternity.  The  yield  then  wfll  be  accord- 
ing to  the  sowing  now.  In  quahty:  "After  its  kind."  Also  in  quantity.  (2) 
Therefore  the  young  have  a  splendid  opportunity.  They  have  time  in  their 
favour.      "  How   long    shall  ye  1 "     2.    Procrastination  is  precaHoue   work. 

(1)  "  How  long  (DDa)  hop  ye  ?" — this  word  denotes  the  passing  over  from  one 
place  to  another — "  between  two  opinions."  It  is  used  scornfully  of  the  awkward 
leaping  of  the  priests  of  Baal,  in  ver.  26.  As  the  squirrel  hopping  from  branch 
to  branch  may  miss  its  footing  and  fall,  so  may  the  halting  sinner  hop  into  ruin. 

(2)  Consider  the  uncertainty  of  life.  Bead  the  gravestones.  How  enormous  is 
the  mortality  amongst  the  young  I  Unroof  hell  1  (3)  Consider  th?  solemnities 
of  eternity.  The  freshness  and  vividness  of  memory  in  the  disembodied  state. 
What  a  preparation  for  the  day  of  judgment  I 

III.  Fob  indecision  these  is  no  defence.  "  The  people  answered  him  not  • 
word,"  .  But  there  are  motives  to  evil  when  there  are  no  good  reasons.  Such  are — 
1.  Conjugal  influence,  (1)  Ahab's  heart  was  estranged  from  God  by  the  influence 
of  JezebeL  His  predecessors  suffered  from  the  same  cause.  Notably  so  Solomon. 
(2)  Beware  of  contracting  ungodly  matrimonial  alliances.  Bemember  the  famine 
in  Samaria,  The  same  God  still  "  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men."  2.  The  smile 
of  favour,  (1)  Idolatry  was  favoured  at  court.  The  priests  of  Ashere  feasted  "  at 
Jezebel's  table."  Mean-spirited  Israelites  sought  coiurt  favour  at  the  expense  of 
the  favour  of  God.  (3)  True  worshippers  were  persecuted.  Elijah  had  to  hide 
himself  at  Cherith  and  Zarephath,  °  The  sons  of  the  prophets  had  to  hide  in  the 
caves  of  Obadiah.  To  keep  a  whole  skin  many  hesitated.  Will  you  encounter  the 
frown  of  God  to  escape  the  sneer  of  an  old  companion  ?  8.  The  force  of  example. 
(1)  EUjah  stood  alone  as  the  prophet  of  the  Lord.  He  had  with  him  a  handful  of 
laymen.  Obadiah  was  conspicuous  amongst  them.  If  the  prophets  fed  by 
Obadiah  had  issued  from  their  caves,  they  did  not  stand  forth  on  Carmel  in  their 
official  character.  (2)  The  pronounced  idolaters  were  a  larger  company.  There 
were  the  prophets  of  Baal  four  hundred,  and  the  prophets  of  Ashere  four  hundred 
and  fifty,  with  a  proportionate  following.  (3)  Still  "the  people"  were  vaoillators. 
These  were  the  majority.  The  power  and  influence  of  numbers  were  with  the 
moderate  people  who  would  fain  keep  good  terms  with  God  and  the  devil.     The 


444  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xvin.  1— 4& 

halters  are  still  the  majority.  How  few  amongst  the  multitude  of  the  wicked 
have  resolved  in  heart  and  soul  that  they  will  go  to  the  devil  I  It  is  time  you  made 
ap  your  mind  one  way  or  the  other.    How  long  halt  ye  ? — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  22— 24.— TAe  Test  of  Fire,  Elijah  had  appealed  to  the  people  on  their 
inconsistency  in  hesitating  between  services  so  widely  different  and  so  utterly 
irreconcilable  as  those  of  Jehovah  and  BaaL  He  got  no  response.  "  The  people" 
answered  him  not  a  word."  Then  he  proposed  the  test  of  fire  to  determine  which 
was  worthy.  The  conclusiveness  of  such  an  appeal  could  not  be  challenged ;  sa 
the  people  with  one  voice  answered,  "  It  is  well  spoken." 

I.  The  test  was  nNEXcEFxiONABLE.    1.  For  Baal  wa$  the  fire-god.    (1)  Hja 

name  designates  him  as  the  lord  or  ruler.  It  comes  from  the  verb  (7J?3)  to  own 
or  possess,  to  be  master  of.  But  the  sun,  from  its  splendour  and  central  position, 
accounted  the  visible  lord  in  the  material  heavens,  was  their  Baal.  Sanchoniathon 
says  the  Phoenicians  thought  the  sun  to  be  the  only  lord  of  heaven,  calling  him 
Beelsamen,  which  in  their  language  is  lord  of  heaven.  In  "  Beelsamen  "  we  at 
once  recognize  the  Hebrew  D'0t5'  hv2.    (2)  Baal  was  the  fire  or  body  of  the  Bon, 

rather  than  its  light.  So  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  6  we  find  Baal  fpVi)  distinguished  firom 
(B'DB')  the  solwr  light.  (See  Parkhurst  under  B'DB'.)  Parkhurst  points  out  that 
the  Bunio  or  Islandic  Baal  signifies  Jir«,  the  Saxon  Bael,  and  Bakl-fyr,  a,  burning 
pile,  a  pyre,  a  bonfire.  Probably  our  bonfire  is  simply  a  corruption  of  Bael-fyr. 
(3)  The  image  of  this  idol  was  a  bull.  This  animal  was  by  the  ancients  regarded 
as  the  emblem  oifire.  The  similitude  seems  to  have  been  in  its  red  colour,  in  the 
curled  hair  upon  its  forehead  giving  the  idea  of  flame,  in  the  horns  budding  from 
its  head  suggesting  the  darting  of  rays  of  light  from  the  sun.  In  Tobit  (L  6)  we 
read  of  "  the  heifer  called  Baal."  We  have  the  name  of  this  god  stiU  preserved  in 
ovur  English  bull.  2.  The  controversy  was  whether  Baal  was  independent  of 
Jehovah.  (1)  His  worshippers  claimed  this  for  him.  (2)  Elijah  maintained  the 
opposite.  And  with  cogent  reason,  for  during  three  years  and  six  months  Jehovah 
made  Baal  punish  his  votaries.  (3)  Now  the  prophet  proposes  the  further  test  of 
a  sudden  miracle.  If  Baal  be  god,  if  he  be  independent  of  Jehovah,  let  him  come 
down  and  consume  the  sacrifice  ofifered  to  him.  If  he  cannot,  then  why  should  he 
be  worsliipped?  If  Jehovah  can  send  fire  on  bis  sacrifice,  then  is  He  manifestly 
Lord  of  Baal,  and  should  be  so  acknowledged.  (4)  That  suitable  acknowledgment 
of  God  which  such  a  miracle  demands,  implies — (a)  Becognition  of  His  almighty 
providence  and  lordship  over  the  material  and  moral  universe.  (6)  The  engage- 
ment of  all  our  powers  in  His  worship  and  service. 

II.  So  WAS  THE  MANNER  OF  THE  TEST.    1.  The  prophets  of  Bdal  hod precedence. 

(1)  Not  because  Baal  was  entitled  to  it,  for  that  would  be  a  concession  of  the 
argument,  but  because  they  were  many.  EUjah  stood  alone  the  prophet  of  the 
Lor  J,  while  the  idolatrous  prophets  were  850  men.  (2)  They  were  to  provide  the 
sacrifices.  They  were  wealthy.  Elijah  was  poor.  They  could  not  object  to  the 
test  when  the  sacrifices  were  of  their  own  selection.  2.  The  experiment  was  to  be 
fair.  (1)  Not  only  might  the  priests  of  Baal  choose  their  bullock,  cut  it  in  pieces 
after  their  approved  method,  lay  it  on  the  wood  of  the  altar ;  but  they  must  "  put 
no  fire  under."  Else  where  would  be  the  proof  of  the  ability  of  Baal  ?  Under 
some  heathen  altars  holes  were  dug  in  which  fire  was  concealed,  which  communi- 
cating with  the  altar  set  the  wood  on  fire  to  make  the  simple  people  believe  that  the 
sacrifice    was   consumed  by  miraculous  fire.    This    Ehjah    would    not  permit. 

(2)  Ordinarily  the  sacrifices  offered  to  Baal  were  offered  in  fire  ;  and  sometimes 
human  sacrifices  were  so  offered.  "  They  buUt  the  high  places  of  Baal  to  burn 
their  sons  with  fire,  for  burnt  offerings  "  (Jer.  xix.  6).  The  Phoenician  Baal  seems 
to  have  been  identical  with  the  Ammonite  Molech.  "  They  buUt  the  high  places 
of  Baal  which  are  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom,  to  cause  their  sons  and  their 
daughters  to  pass  through  the  fire  to  Molech  "  (Jer.  xxxii.  35).  (3)  Ashtaroth  also 
were  virtually  the  same  as  "Baalim,"  under  which  plural  term  are  included 
diversified  Baals,  as  Baal  Peor,  &c. ;   and  so  in  ver.  25  the  prophets  of  Baal  are 


CH.  xvra.  1— 46.J  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINQa  44S 

said  to  hare  (D*n7N)  "  gods,"  in  the  pluraL  (4)  These  had  their  various  images, 
in  some  of  which  the  man  and  buU  oame  into  union.  The  Assyrian  man-bull  so 
conspicuous  in  the  Nineveh  marbles,  is  probably  one  of  these. 

Let  us  bless  God  for  our  Christianity.  It  is  pure  light.  Compared  with  it  other 
systema  are  dark  with  ignorance,  superstition,  and  error.  .  It  is  supreme  beneyo- 
lenoe.    Happy  is  its  contrast  to  the  charaoteristio  cruelties  of  idolatry. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  25 — 29, — TJie  Failure,  When  the  appeal  of  Elijah  to  the  people  had 
gained  their  applause,  he  had  the  prophets  of  Baal  at  his  command.  The  test 
he  had  proposed  was  so  fair  that  they  could  not  reasonably  object  to  it,  and  the  voice 
of  the  people  rendered  it  impossible  for  them  to  evade  the  triaL  The  prophet  of 
the  Lord  accordingly  pressed  the  matter  home  upon  his  adversaries  in  the  words 
of  the  text.  They  were  obliged  to  proceed  to  the  trial  which  ended  in  their 
discomfiture. 

I,  Theib  pbater  was  eabnest,  L  They  began  early.  (1)  Everything  seems  to 
have  been  in  readiness  soon  after  daybreak ;  so  that  almost  as  soon  as  their  ApoUo 
looked  out  of  the  eyelids  of  the  morning  the  cry  arose,  "  0  Baal,  hear  us  I "  (2) 
AYorshippers  of  Jehovah  should  not  be  less  zealous.  The  early  morning  was 
chosen  by  His  devoted  servants  (see  Gen.  six.  27 ;  xxii.  8 ;  Exod.  xxiv,  4 ;  Job  i.  6 ; 
Fsa.  V,  8;  lix,  16;  Ixxxviii,  18;  Mark  i.  85).  Such  exercises  will  be  a  noble 
preparation  for  the  day.  2.  They  persisted.  (1)  They  continued  their  supplica- 
tions until  noon.  As  the  sun  rolled  upwards  in  the  heavens  their  hopes  rose.  As 
it  neared  the  zenith  they  felt  it  was  now  or  never,  and  850  voices  in  fall  chorus 
cried,  "0  Baal,  hear  us  1"  (2)  Even  when  the  noon  point  was  turned  and  their  god 
was  sinking  in  the  west,  BtUl  they  urged  their  suit,  adding  to  their  entreaties 
frantic  gestures  and  mingling  their  own  blood  with  their  sacrifice.  (8)  Idolatry 
is  essentially  cruel,  and  in  this  contrasts  strongly  with  the  service  of  Jehovah  (see 
Levit.  zix.  28 ;  Deut.  xiv.  1).  The  cruel  penances  of  Bome  are  kindred  to  those 
of  Baal's  servants.  "  The  devil  is  a  murderer."  Of  bodies.  Of  souls.  (4)  Fer- 
sistenoy  should  mark  the  servants  of  God.  Jacob  wrestled  all  night  with  the 
angel  at  Fennel,  and  at  daybreak  prevailed.  The  parable  of  the  importunate 
widow  was  given  to  impress  this  lesson.  We  should  ask  tmtil  we  receive.  (6) 
How  blessedly  has  persistency  been  rewarded  I  Ministers  have  seen  this;  parents; 
Sunday-school  teachers ;  tract  distributors. 

II.  But  it  was  misdirected.  1.  Their  god  wot  eontemptihle.  (1)  He  was 
destitute  of  the  attributes  they  ascribed  to  him.  The  sun,  though  a  glorious  body, 
is  but  matter.  It  has  no  more  intelligence  than  a  flint.  How  the  intellects  as 
well  as  the  eyes  of  men  are  dazzled  with  splendoiu- 1  (2)  How  different  is  the  true 
God  I  He  is  a  Spirit — ^invisible — omniscient — omnipresent — omnipotent — ^holy — 
just — good.  He  claims,  and  should  receive,  the  homage  of  all  our  faculties.  2, 
Their  worship,  therefore,  wo*  ridiculout.    (1)  So  Elijah  thought,  when  he  stung 

them  with  mockery.  "He  is  a  god  I "  (K^n  D^n7M  )3)  he  is  a  supreme  god  I 
Here  is  a  fine  stroke  of  irony.  This  weapon  of  rhetoric  was- used  by  our  Lord — 
"  Art  thou  a  master  in  Israel  and  knowest  not  these  things  ?  "  (2)  "  He  is  talkvng." 
He  is  so  stunned  with  the  thunder  of  his  own  voice  and  wiUi  the  voices  of  his 
associates  in  the  pantheon  that  he  cannot  hear  the  ordinary  voices  of  mortals. 
Therefore  "  cry  aloud."  Or  "he  is  (n'B')  meditating  "  (margin) — in  a  brown  study, 
in  a  reverie — and  must  be  roused.  (3)  "  Or  he  is  pursuing,"  or  "  hath  a  pursuit." 
He  is  BO  engaged  with  some  other  matter  that  he  cannot  hear  your  feeble  voice. 
What  sort  of  god  is  yours  ?  (4)  "  Or  he  is  in  a  journey  " — so  far  away  that  your 
prayer  will  ha  useless  unless  you  can  cry  aloud.  (5)  "  Or  peradventure  he  sleepeth 
and  must  be  awaked."  You  must  first  raise  a  clamour  about  his  ears  to  arouse 
him,  or  you  pray  in  vain.  How  doubtful  must  be  the  success  of  any  worship  paid 
to  such  a  godi  8.  Bidioule  was  righteously  applied.  (1)  It  should  never  be 
substituted  for  reason,  as  too  often  it  is.  It  is  a  fiivourite  weapon  with  sceptics 
who  ate  at  a  loss  for  an  argument.  (2)  But  where  reason  is  wasted  upon  stupidity 
then  it  is  fitting.  Elijah  was  silent  from  sunrise  tiU  noon,  when  the  experiment 
had  a  fair  trial  and  failed.     Then  he  rallied  the  idolaters  with  a  ridicule  that  wai 


446  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvui.  1—48. 


full  of  argument.  (3)  When  evening  set  in  they  gave  up  the  contest  in  despair. 
There  is  an  evening  coming  in  which  all  contests  with  Jehovah  shall  bo  terminate. 
—J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  80 — 85. — TTte  Preparation.  As  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice  approached, 
Elijah  left  the  priests  of  Baal  prophesying  in  despair.  Satan,  if  permitted,  oonld 
have  brought  fire  down  (see  Job  i.  12,  16 ;  Bev.  xiii.  13,  14) ;  but  God  restrained 
him.  The  people  were  now  convinced  that  Baal  was  not  able  to  hear  his  priests ; 
BO  they  drew  round  Elijah,  and  observed  the  order  in  which  he  proceeded  with  his 
preparation. 

I.  Hb  repaired  the  altab  or  the  Lobo.  1.  TTien  there  had  been  a/n  altar  of 
the  Lord  on  Carmel.  (1)  Some  great  man,  as  Abraham  or  Samuel,  had  built  an 
altar  there.  Its  rehcs  remained  a  memorial  of  the  piety  of  earlier  times.  Influence 
for  good  or  evil  is  posthumous.  (2)  This  mount  was,  in  consequence,  reputed  as 
holy.  Perhaps  this  determined  Elijah  in  his  choice.  Solj  places  were  formerly 
more  important  than  they  are  under  this  spiritual  dispensation  (see  MaL  i.  11; 
John  iv.  20 — 24 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  8).  2.  But  this  altar  had  been  "  broken  down."  (1) 
Not  only  had  it  fallen  into  decay,  but  it  had  suffered  from  the  hand  of  violence. 
Probably  this  was  one  of  the  sad  evidences  of  the  wicked  zeal  of  JezebeL  It  was 
significant  of  the  apostasy  of  the  times  (see  ch.  xix.  14 ;  Bom.  li.  2,  8).  Idolatry 
was  in  favour  at  court;  courtiers  therefore  favoured  it;  so  did  the  multitude  who 
followed  the  fashions.  (2)  Such  influences  still  are  potent.  Idolatrous  fashions 
in  dress.  In  furniture.  Even  in  religion.  8.  Elijah  would  not  use  th^  altar  used 
by  the  priests  of  Baal,  (1)  The  service  of  Jehovah  must  be  pure.  It  must  not  be 
contaminated  by  the  remotest  connection  with  idolatrous  abominations.  Let  ns 
search  our  hearts  (see  2  Cor.  vL  16 — 18).  (2)  In  repairing  the  disused  altar  of 
Jehovah,  Elijah  showed  that  his  was  no  new  rehgion,  but  that  of  the  fathers  of  the 
nation.  So  he  significantly  rebuked  the  apostasy.  4  Twelve  stones  were  employed 
in  the  repairs.  (1)  This  was  "  according  to  the  number  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  unto 
whom  the  word  of  the  Lord  oame,  saying,  Israel  shall  be  thy  name."  This  was 
done  to  show  that,  though  ten  of  the  tribes  had  separated  from  the  house  of  David, 
Btm,  in  worship  there  should  be  no  division  (see  Gen.  zxzii.  23 ;  Exod.  xsiv.  4 ; 
Josh.  iv.  6,  20).  (2)  "The  twelve  stones  being  for  the  twelve  tribes' were  the 
mystical  body  of  Him  who  was  their  sacrifice  and  altar  both,  or  who  offered  His 
own  body,  and  suffered  in  it,  and  who  was  promised  to  be  accepted  in  the  name 

(7N1t5'*)  Israel,  i.e.  pt5")  pleasing  to,  right  with,  or  upright  before  (7S)  the  Lord" 
(see  Matt.  iii.  17).  But  (8)  It  was  also  prophetic  of  the  healing  of  all  schisms 
in  the  mystical  body  of  Christ  in  the  happy  time  to  come  (see  Ezek.  xxxvii  2U,  22). 
(4)  All  this  the  prophet  did  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  32).  By  His  direction ; 
therefore  with  notable  significance.  For  His  glory.  And  since  God  so  expressly 
authorized  such  a  deviation  from  the  Levitical  law,  does  it  not  indicate  that  that 
law  had  its  principal  value  in  its  typical  teaching,  and  that  when  the  antitypes 
oame  it  should  pass 'away  ?     (See  Col.  IL  22 ;  Heb.  viii.  13.) 

IL  He  prepared  the  sacrifice.  1.  "fle  put  the  wood  in  order."  (1)  Why 
did  he  not  dispense  with  the  wood  ?  The  celestial  fire  certainly  did  not  need  it, 
for  it  fell  upon  the  sacrifice  before  it  touched  the  wood,  and  was  so  fervent  that 
nothing  could  stand  before  it.  Stones  and  dust  could  no  more  resist  it  than  wood. 
Had  the  wood  been  intended  for  fuel,  would  the  prophet  have  overfiowed  it  with  water  ? 
(2)  The  order  was  usual  in  sacrifices.  It  was  observed  for  typical  purposes.  The 
holocaust  was  a  type  of  Christ,  our  Sacrifice,  who,  when  consumed  in  the  holy  fires 
of  the  Godhead  on  the  altar  of  Calvary,  was  laid  on  the  wood  of  the  Cross.  2.  Se 
pov/red  water  upon  the  sacrifice.  (1)  He  poured  it  in  great  quantity  and  with 
much  deliberation,  for  in  preparing  the  altar  he  dug  a  trench  to  receive  the  over- 
flow (vers.  32 — 85).  The  water  probably  came  from  a  deep  well-spring  in  the 
mountain  side  rather  than  from  the  Kishon.  The  Mediterranean  seems  out  of 
the  question.  Josephus  states  the  well  to  have  been  the  source  (Ant.  viii.  13). 
(2)  It  was  conveyed  in  four  barrels,  and  these  were  filled  and  emptied  three  timea, 
thiu  makini'  twelve.     Here  again  we  meet  with  the  number  of  the  tribes  of  IsraeL 


i!H.  x\in.  1—46.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  447 


The  order,  viz.,  in  Bets  of  four  three  times  repeated,  was  that  of  the  stoneg  in  the 
high  priest's  hreastplate,  upon  which  were  engraven  the  names  of  the  tribes.  (8) 
Could  this  sign  be  intended  to  show  that  a  plentiful  rain  would  shortly  come  npon 
all  Israel  ?  And  further,  that  it  should  come  through  the  repentance  of  the  people 
for  whose  sin  it  had  been  withholden  ?  That  it  should  conae  through  the  return 
of  the  people  from  the  altar  of  Baal  to  that  of  Jehovah  ?  If  so,  then  in  this  sign 
the  gospel  also  is  preached  to  us.  We  too  must  be  saved  from  spiritual  drought 
and  death  through  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  Christ. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  8&— 40. — The  Triumph.  WhUe  Elijah  completed  his  preparations  for 
offering  up  l^is  sacrifice,  the  prophets  of  Baal,  who  had  failed  to  vindicate  their 
religion,  were  hoping  that  the  servant  of  Jehovah  likewise  might  faiL  It  was 
matter  of  histoid  that  Jehovah  had  answered  by  fire.  (See  Gen.  iv.  6 ;  Levit.  iz.  24; 
Judg.  vi.  21 ;  1  Chron.  xzi.  26.)  About  a  century  before  this  that  fire  came  from 
heaven  which  was  still  kept  burning  upon  the  altar  at  Jemsalem  (2  Chron.  vii  1). 
But  Carmel  is  not  Jerusalem ;  and  Jehovah  has  not  promised  to  record  His  name 
here.  And,  should  Elijah  fail,  then  would  they  faU  upon  him  and  destroy  him. 
Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  an  extraordinary  servant  of  Jehovah ;  his  word  con- 
cerning the  rain  and  dew  has  come  true ;  so  may  his  confidence  respecting  this 
answer  of  fire  be  honoured.  Such  thoughts  flashed  through  their  minds ;  but  the 
moment  has  arrived;  the  preparations  are  complete.    Now  observe — 

I.  The  pbayee.  1.  It  is  offered  at  the  time  of  the  evemi/ng  aacrifiee.  i(l)  The 
stated  evening  sacrifice  is  now  on  the  temple  altar.  Elijah  holds  communion  with 
that  altar.  He,  too,  though  on  Carmel,  is  a  true  worshipper  of  the  God  of  David. 
There  are  differences  in  religious  worship  sanctioned  by  God  which  must  not  be 
accounted  schism.  Protestant  Nonconformists  are  not  necessarily  schismatics. 
(2)  It  is  the  "  hour  of  prayer."  Prayer  should  ascend  with  the  sacrifice ;  Christ 
shoidd  be  in  all  our  supplications.  The  hour  of  prayer  was  the  "ninth  hour" 
(Acts  iiL  1),  that  hour  in  which  Jesus  "  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  yielded  up  his 
spirit "  (Matt,  xxvii.  60).  So  in  submission  must  we  jdeld  up  our  spirits  with  his 
in  prayer  to  God.  2.  It  pleads  for  the  honour  of  Qod.  (1)  It  reminds  Him  of 
His  covenant.  "Jehovah  Blohim  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  of  Israel."  With  these 
patriarchs  He  had  established  His  covenant.  They  knew  nothing  of  Baal's  cove- 
nants. (2)  "  Let  it  be  known  this  day  that  thou  art  God  in  Israel."  Let  those 
who  will  not  acknowledge  Thee  be  confounded.  (See  Josh.  iL  11.)  Let  those  who 
repent  be  reconciled  to  Thy  favour.  (3)  "Let  it  be  known  this  day  in  Israel  that 
I  am  thy  servant,  and  that  I  have  done  all  these  things  at  thy  word."  Else  to 
have  so  acted  would  have  been  the  height  of  presumption.  But  with  the  authority 
of  God  mistrust  would  have  been  presumption.  We  are  bound  to  believe  the 
promises  of  God.  8.  It  sues  for  mercy  to  the  penitent.  (1)  "Hear  me,  0  Jehovah, 
bear  me,  that  this  people  may  know  that  thou  art  Jehovah  Elohim ; "  that  Thou 
art  the  self-existent,  covenant-keeping  God.  (2)  "  And  that  thou  hast  turned  their 
heart  back  agaLo."  The  blessings  of  the  covenant  are  conditioned  upon  faith. 
Without  repentance  there  is  no  true  faith.  (3)  How  few  are  the  words  of  this 
prayer !  No  vain  repetitions.  How  wide  the  contrast  with  the  clamour  of  Baal's 
priests  I 

II.  The  besponse.  1.  Then  the  fire  of  the  Lori  fell.  (1)  There  was  no  mis- 
take about  it.  It  was  indeed  the  "fire  of  Jehovah" — miraculous  fire  ;  for  it  worked 
downwards,  contrary  to  tlie  ordinary  operation  of  fire,  which  works  upwards.  The 
sacriiice  was  soon  consumed.  Then  the  wood.  The  water  was  licked  up.  The 
very  stones  and  dust  were  vitrified  and  volatilized.  (2)  The  destruction  of  tho 
altar  pointed  to  the  pleasure  of  God  that  patriarchal  high  places  should  be  removed, 
and  that  all  Israel  should  henceforth  worship  at  the  Levitical  altar  of  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem.  This  is  the  last  instance  on  record  in  which  God  accepted  a  sacrifice 
offered  on  a  patriarchal  altar.  (8)  But  where  now  is  Baal  1  Is  not  that  celestial 
fire  which  was  worsliipped  as  a  god  completely  in  the  hands  of  Jehovah  ?  2.  The 
demonstration  was  irresistible.  (1)  "When  all  the  people  saw  it  they  fell  upon 
their  faces."    Here  was  an  act  of  reverence  towards  God.     It  was  the  sign  also  oi 


148  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xnn.  1— 4& 

their  renunciation  of  Baal.  (2)  This  confession  in  symbol  was  accompanied  by  a 
corresponding  confession  in  words.  "  And  they  said,  Jehovah,  he  is  the  Elohim ; 
Jehovah,  he  is  the  Elohim."  Words  are  signs  of  a  fuller  expression.  (3)  But 
•words  must  be  followed  up  by  deeds.  The  prophets  of  Baal  have  now  to  be 
sacrificed.  The  law  required  this.  (See  Deut.  xiii.  1 — 11.)  They  were  accordingly 
slaughtered  by  the  brook  Kishon.  Thus  was  returned  upon  their  heads  the 
daughter  of  the  prophets  of  the  Lord.  (See  vers.  4, 18.)  (4)  The  retribution  was 
complete.  Some  are  of  opinion,  because  the  "prophets  of  Baal"  only  are  men- 
tioned, that  the  400  prophets  of  Ashere  were  absent  and  escaped.  But  this  does  not 
follow,  for  the  prophets  of  Ashere  might  be  included  under  the  designation  "  prophets 
of  Baal,"  as  Saul's  sons  are  included  in  his  name.  (See  1  Sam.  %xxL  8 — 13 ; 
2  Sam.  xri.  18.)  The  prophets  of  Ashere  certainly  were  present.  (See  vers.  19,  20 ; 
also  ch.  xix.  1.)  Let  us  confess  the  Lord.  In  signs  :  observing  His  sacraments 
and  ordinances  of  worship  public  and  private.  In  words  :  confessing  Him  before 
men  upon  all  fitting  occasions.  In  deeds :  bringing  forth  the  firuits  of  good  living, 
&nd  sacrificing  the  idolatries  that  would  lead  us  astray. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  41—46.  The  Sound  of  Bain,  The  fire  has  fallen  upon  the  Bacrifloe  of 
EUjah.  The  people  are  convinced,  renounce  Baal,  confess  Jehovah  supreme,  and 
evince  their  sincerity  by  slaying  the  idolatrous  priests.  Now  there  is  "  a  sound  of 
abundance  of  rain." 

I.  This  was  the  soims  of  salvation.    1.  Eain  was  salvation  to  the  natvm, 

(1)  Three  years  and  six  months  of  drought  brought  it  to  the  point  of  extinction. 
The  heavens  were  brazen ;  the  earth  was  scorched.  The  people  were  blackened 
with  excessive  heat,  and  worn  with  want.  Their  numbers  were  thinned  by  death ; 
snrvivors  moved  like  skeletons  on  the  edges  of  their  graves.  (2)  To  such  the  sound 
of  rain  is  tidings  of  life.  Let  it  come,  and  soon,  in  such  a  climate  as  Palestine, 
vegetation  will  burst  into  verdure.  There  wiU  be  "  seed  for  the  sower  and  bread 
for  the  eater."  2.  It  was  a  sign  of  spiritual  blessings.  (1)  The  kingdom  of  nature 
was  constituted  to  furnish  apt  similes  of  the  kingdom  of  grace,  llie  blooming  of 
the  desert  after  rain  is  a  familiar  figure  of  spiritual  revivaL  (See  Isa.  zxzv. ;  It. 
10 — 18.)  (2)  The  descent  of  rain  is  a  figure  of  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon 
the  receptive  soul  (Isa.  xxxii.  16).  Water,  a  purifier,  refiresher,  vitalizer,  fittingly 
sets  fortti  His  energies ;  and  as  these  are  active,  so  in  baptism  the  element  should 
come  vpon  the  person  as  rain  upon  the  passive  earth.  (See  Acts  ii.  8, 4, 17,  82 ; 
X.  44 — 48.)  8.  Bevivals  have  their  premonitions.  (1)  The  sound  comes  before 
the  rain.  It  is  heard  in  the  branches  of  trees,  and  in  the  waves  of  seas  and  lakes. 
So  is  a  coming  revival  discerned  in  the  Church  by  emotion  under  the  word, 
interest  in  religious  services  public  and  private,  and  increased  evangelistic  activity. 

(2)  This  is  first  heard  by  the  spiritual.  Elijah  was  the  first  to  bear  the  sound  of 
the  coming  rain.  It  begins  in  the  higher  heavens  before  it  reaches  the  earth. 
Those  who  are  muohin  prayer  have  the  sensitive  ear  to  hear  "  afar  off."  (Compare 
2  Peter  L  9.) 

II.  The  conditions  has  been  pulfilled.  1.  Sin  was  repented.  (1)  The 
people  saw  the  impotence  of  BaaL  He  could  not  answer  for  himsell  They  were 
now  convinced  of  their  folly  in  submitting  to  such  a  delusion.  So  it  must  be  with 
every  sinner  whose  eyes  are  opened.  (2)  They  destroyed  the  authors  of  their 
delusion.  They  slew  the  prophets  of  BaaL  Not  one  escaped.  So  in  the  most 
complete  manner  must  our  evil  lusts  be  slain.  No  power  must  be,  left  to  them  to 
lure  us  from  the  truth  again.  2.  Christ  was  accepted.  (1)  Elijah  must  show 
himself  to  Ahab  as  a  condition  of  rain  (ver.  1).  Ahab  so  far  accepted  him  as  to 
submit  to  his  directions.  But  Elijah  was  a  type  of  Christ,  without  whose  revelation 
of  Himself  to  ns  we  can  have  no  spiritual  grace.    (See  oh.  xvii  1.)    (2)  Elijah 

was  a  type  of  Christ  in  his  person.  His  name  (n^M  and  in^7K)  is  "  My  God 
Jehovah,"  or,  "  Whose  God  is  ne,"  expresses  Hiie  union  of  God  and  man  in  Christ. 
(tt)  He  was  a  type  of  Christ  also  in  his  office.  All  prophets  were  types  of  the  On* 
Great  Prophet.  Elijah,  who  was  remarkable  amongst  the  number,  eminently  so. 
(4)  He,  too,  united  with  his  office  of  prophet  the  functions  of  the  priest.    He 


OH.  xviu.  1—46.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  449 

offered  up  the  sacrifice  on  Carmel.  In  this  sacrifice  the  people  accepted  Jehovah 
as  their  covenant  God.  So  must  we  likewise  accept  God  in  Christ.  In  token  of 
their  communion  with  Jehovah  they  appear  to  have  feasted  on  the  sacrifices. 
"With  the  hurnt  offering  there  were  doubtless  peace  offerings,  for  these  were  usual 
accompaniments,  upon  which  the  worshippers  feasted.  This  was  the  eating  and 
drinking  to  which  Elijah  moved  Ahab  (ver.  42).  (5)  Elijah  also  was  a  type  of 
Christ  in  his  character  of  Intercessor.  While  Ahab  and  his  people  were  partaking 
of  the  peace-offerings,  "  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel,  and  cast  himself  down 
upon  the  earth,  and  put  his  face  between  his  knees."  He  bowed  reverently  in 
prayer  with  his  head  towards  the  ground— an  attitude  BtiU  observed  in  the  East. 
So  Christ,  in  the  heights,  makes  intercession  for  us.  8.  The  blessing  came. 
(1)  While  Elijah  interceded  he  sent  his  servant  to  look  for  the  signs  of  the  coming 
blessing.  In  this  parable,  in  which  the  prophet  is  still  the  type  of  Christ,  his 
servant  stands  for  the  Chv/rch,  whose  duty  it  is  to  look  for  the  fi:Tuts  of  the 
Eedeemer's  pleadings.  Are  we  thus  looking?  (2)  The  servant  went,  and  went 
again  and  again  before  he  witnessed  any  sign,  in  which  the  lesson  to  us  is  that 
while  Christ  pleads  we  must  never  be  discouraged,  but  "  hope  to  the  end."  (8) 
At  the  seventh  time  the  promise  appeared  in  a  cloud  as  of  a  man's  hand  rising  out 
of  the  sea,  which  was  to  be  followed  by  others  in  rapid  succession  until  the  heavens 
were  "  black  with  clouds  and  wind,"  and  the  thirsty  earth  was  visited  with  copious 
showers  of  refreshing  rain.  This  was  prophetic  of  that  seventh  time,  or  "  fulness  of 
time,"  when  the  hand  of  God  shall  act  in  the  sea,  or  among  all  nations,  and  raise 
that  "plentiful  shower  "which  shall  refresh  His  wea/ry  inheritance  (Psa.  Ixviii.  9). 
Meanwhile  Elijah  sent  his  servant  to  Ahab,  saying,  "  Harness  the  horses,  and  get 
thee  down,  that  the  rain  stop  thee  not."  (4)  Now  the  parable  is  changed.  Ahab, 
the  king  of  Israel,  after  the  destruction  of  the  prophets  of  Baal,  riding  as  in 
triumph,  and  attended  by  the  blessings  of  heaven,  la  the  type  of  Christ.  So  Elijah 
runs  before  him  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  God.  The  Baptist^  accordingly  came 
"in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias,"  as  the  forerunner  of  Christ,  in  His  first  advent, 
to  establish  His  spiritual  kingdom.  But  Elias,  in  person,  will  be  His  harbinger 
when  He  comes  again,  in  the  fulness  of  His  blessing,  to  establish  »  visible  and 
everlasting  kingdom  (MaL  iv.  6), — J.  A.  M. 

Vera.  7 — IB.—Ohadiah.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  extremity  of  distress  to  which  the 
land  had  been  reduced  by  famine  that  the  king  himself  with  one  of  his  highest 
officers,  the  governor  of  his  household,  should  have  gone  forth  on  this  expedition  in 
search  of  water  and  pasturage.  "Siie  reverence  the  person  of  Elijah  inspu-ed  is  seen 
in  the  behaviour  of  Obadiah  towards  him  when  they  met.  The  brief  notice  we  have 
of  this  man  is  highly  instructive. 

L  His  fidelity.  His  name,  Obadiah,  "  servant  of  Jehovah,*  is  suggestive  of 
the  strength  of  his  religious  character.  And  it  was  probably  no  vain  boast  that  he 
had  always  sustained  it  (ver.  12).  It  may  seem  strange  that  so  good  a  man  should 
have  been  willing  to  remain  in  the  service  of  such  a  king,  and  of  a  state  so 
demoralized  and  disorganized  by  the  spirit  of  idolatry.  But  note — 1.  Beligioui 
fidelity  wins  respect  even  from  those  whose  own  Ufe  is  most  at  variance  with  it. 
Ahab  must  have  known  that  his  servant  remained  true  to  the  God  of  his  fathers, 
and  his  being  continued  in  such  a  post  was  a  testimony  to  his  moral  and  practical 
worth.  Like  Joseph  in  the  court  of  Pharaoh,  and  Daniel  in  Babylon,  "  the  Spirit 
of  God  was  in  him,"  and  the  king  could  find  none  more  worthy  of  his  trust.  The 
fear  of  God  is  after  all  one  of  the  highest  qualifications  for  the  secular  businesses 
and  responsibilities  of  Ufe,  and  "  when  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord  he  maketh 
even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him  "  (Prov.  xvi  7).  2.  It  is  often  a  noble 
thing  to  sta/nd  at  the  post  of  duty,  however  wncongenial  the  moral  atmosphere  may 
be.  We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  Obadiah  retained  his  position  by  any  kind 
of  moral  laxity.  He  did  not  violate  his  conscience  in  maintaining  his  seoiilar 
allegiance.  Naaman  the  Syrian,  in  the  zeal  of  his  new  devotion  to  the  God  of 
Israel,  asked  a  dispensation  of  forgiveness  if  he  should  bow  with  his  master  in  the 
house  of  Bimmon  (2  Kings  ▼.  18),  but  we  have  no  evidence  even  of  such  a  com- 

1  KINGS.  2  a 


450  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvm.  1— ij. 

promise  as  this  in  the  case  of  Obadiah.  There  are  times  when  religious  principle 
itself  dictates  that  men  should  refuse  to  relinquish  positions  of  peculiar  danger  and 
difficulty;  but  when  fidehty  to  an  earthly  master  is  absolutely  incompatible  with 
fidelity  to  God,  an  upright  spirit  wiU  not  long  hesitate.  8.  6od  may  ha/oe  some 
great  pwrpose  for  Eis  servamt  m  such  a  case  to  fulfil,  Obadiah's  mission  may 
have  been  to  mitigate  as  far  as  possible  the  horrors  of  the  famine,  to  save  as  he  did 
the  lives  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  (ver.  13) ;  to  exert,  perhaps,  some  kind  of 
lestraining  influence  over  the  conduct  of  the  king.  At  all  events  the  presence  of 
such  a  man  in  one  of  the  high  places  of  the  land  would  be  a  standing  proof  that 
God  had  not  utterly  abandoned  His  people.  Every  situation  in  life  has  its  grand 
opportunities ;  when  there  is  no  possible  way  of  turning  it  to  good  account  we 
may  well  forsake  it. 

n.  His  fear.  "  What  have  I  sinned  f "  &o.  Faithful  as  Obadiah  was,  there 
was  an  element  of  timidity  in  his  nature.  He  shrank  &om  the  risk  the  commission 
of  the  prophet  imposed  on  him.  His  timidity  has  two  aspects.  1.  So  far  as  it 
meant  disgust  of  Ahab  it  was  natural.  He  knew  only  too  well  his  capricious  and 
despotic  temper,  and  could  not  rely  either  on  his  justice  or  his  clemency.  "The 
tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel"  (Prov.  xii  10).  "Let  me  not  fall  into  the 
hands  of  man,"  &o.  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14).  2.  So  far  as  it  meant  distrust  of  Elijah 
or  of  tht  protective  providence  of  Ood  it  was  wrong.  Could  he  think  that  the 
prophet  would  abuse  his  confluence,  or  that  God  would  be  unmindful  of  him,  and 
after  allowing  him,  for  no  fault  of  his  own,  to  be  involved  in  danger,  would  leave 
him  to  his  fate?  This  shows  weakness,  and  was  unworthy  of  the  character  he 
bore.  The  best  of  men  have  their  seasons  of  weakness,  and  fail  sometimes  under 
the  pressure  of  unwonted  circumstances  to  maintain  the  very  virtues  for  which  they 
are  most  distinguished.  The  meek-spirited  Moses  is  impetuous ;  the  saintly  David 
faUs  a  prey  to  grovelling  passion ;  the  brave  Peter  proves  a  coward. 

IIL  The  triumph  of  his  fidelity  oveb  his  feab.  The  solemn  asseveration  of 
Elyah  (ver.  15)  rouses  the  braver  spirit  in  him,  and  he  responds  to  the  call  and 
goes  to  meet  Ahab.  When  there  is  true  noliility  of  character  in  a  man,  a  word,  a 
Sash  of  light  upon  the  realities  of  the  situation,  will  often  be  enough  to  move  him 
to  put  forth  all  his  strength  and  shake  off  the  spell  of  meaner  feeling  that  may  for  • 
while  have  fallen  upon  him. — W. 

Ver.  21. — A  solemn  alternative.  It  must  have  been  by  special  Divine  direction 
that  Elijah  was  moved  thus  to  put  the  relative  claims  of  God  and  of  Baal  to  a 
public  test.  The  command  to  gather  the  priests  and  people  together  on  Carmel 
was  one  that  Ahab,  deflant  as  he  was,  dared  not  resist.  We  may  suppose  these 
words  to  have  been  uttered  just  before  the  crisis  of  the  tragedy,  when  the  people 
were  waiting  in  breathless  silence  and  suspense  upon  the  issue.  Nothing  is  more 
impressive  than  a  pause  like  this  before  some  expected  catastrophe.  The  prophet 
improves  it  by  making  one  brief  pointed  appeal  to  the  judgment  and  conscience  of 
the  people.  "  How  long  ?  "  &o.  His  voice  of  stem,  yet  sorrowful,  rebuke  must  have 
struck  deep  into  many  hearts ;  but "  they  answered  him  not  a  word."  "  Halting  be- 
tween two  opinions  "  was  probably  a  true  description  of  the  mental  condition  of  the 
great  mass  of  the  people.  Some,  no  doubt,  were  bhnd  devotees  of  the  reigning 
idolatry  ;  others  consented  to  its  rites,  and  practised  them  through  fear  of  the  penalty 
of  resistance,  or  in  hope  of  some  form  of  secular  reward.  But  the  greater  part  of 
them  were  just  in  this  state  of  moral  hesitancy,  leaning  sometimes  to  one  side  and 
sometimes  to  the  other,  swayed  by  the  influences  that  happened  to  be  strongest 
upon  them  at  the  time.  It  was  the  fatal  defect  of  their  national  character,  the  sad 
heritage  of  earlier  days — the  "  forty  years'  provocation  in  the  wUderness."  What 
have  we  here  but  a  true  picture  of  rehgious  indecision  ?  Learn  from  the  prophet's 
remonstrance — 

I.  The  eesfonsibilitt  of  evert  man  as  BEOAVtDS  his  own  eeligioits  OFDnoNt. 
That  the  people  are  rebuked  for  "  halting  betwean  two  "  implies  their  power  and 
obligation  to  decide.  "  Opinions,"  mental  judgments,  convictions  (marg.  "iioughts"), 
thes«  are  the  root  from  which  the  fruits  of  aU  rehgious  feelmg  and  action  grow.  Hers 


flB.  XTm.  1—46.]  TE£1  FIBST  BOOE  OF  KINGS.  461 

lies  flie  secret  g:nidmg  and  formative  power  of  a  man's  life.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in 
his  heart,  so  is  he."  It  is  thought  that  inspires  affection,  moulds  character,  guides  the 
will,  determines  conduct,  rules  the  man.  We  cannot  well  exaggerate  the  importance 
of  the  relation  thought  hears  to  the  highest  interests  of  our  being.  Bat  how  are 
thesB  "  thoughts  "  of  ours  determined  ?  Every  man's  religious  ideas  and  beliefi, 
say  some,  are  determined  for  him  by  a  thousand  iofluences  over  which  he  has  no 
control — by  early  education,  by  the  books  that  fall  in  his  way,  by  human  associa- 
tions, native  temperament,  conformation  of  brain,  &o.  There  is  a  measure  of  troth 
in  this  that  we  dare  not  ignore.  These  things  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  matter, 
and  the  fact  should  modify  our  judgment  of  the  mental  position  of  others  in  relation 
to  religious  truth,  and  teach  ns  to  watch  carefully  the  bearing  on  ourselves  of  such 
influences.  Many  of  us  owe  our  Christian  beliefs  far  more  than  we  imagine  to  the 
force  of  fovouring  circumstances.  We  may  well  thank  God  that  it  is  so ;  for  as  we 
mourn  to  think  how  many  things  there  are  that  tend  to  distort  the  truth  and  hide 
it  from  man's  eyes,  so  we  rejoice  that  there  should  be  so  many  channels  through 
which  the  Light  of  Life  may  find  its  way  into  the  sou].  But  however  this  may  be, 
God  holds  every  one  of  ns  under  obligation  to  think  for  himeelf,  judge  for  himself, 
beUeve  for  himself;  to  use  with  uprightness  of  spirit  all  the  means  within  his  reach 
for  the  formation  of  right  opinions,  to  welcome  and  follow  the  light  that  shines  from 
heaven  upon  his  way. 

II.  The  duit  of  a  pbactioai.  oabbtino  odt  or  one's  own  honest  ootrviaTiONS. 
*•  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  him."  The  startling  "  sign  "  that  was  about  to  be 
given  them  was  intended  to  decide  this  grave  alternative.  "  The  God  that  answereth 
by  fire,  let  him  be  God."  It  was  great  condescension  in  Jehovah  to  suffer  His 
claims  to  be  thus  put  in  seeming  competition  with  those  of  Baal.  But  the  prophet 
would  have  the  decision  of  the  people  to  spring  from  real  conviction,  and  that  con- 
viction to  be  based  on  sufSoient  proof  And  then  let  it  be  a  practical  decision — 
final,  conclnsive,  manifest.  Let  there  be  an  end  to  all  this  miserable  vacUlation, 
this  shameful  subserviency  to  the  leading  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  and  the  Baal  priest- 
hood, this  dark  dishonour  done  to  the  God  of  Israel  by  the  multiplication  aU  over 
the  land  of  heathen  groves  and  altars.  AU  true  religious  thoughts  and  opinions  have 
reference  to  a  true  life.  They  are  hollow  and  worthless  unless  consummated  ia 
this.  "  Faith  without  works  is  dead  being  alone  "  (James  ii.  17).  A  heavy  con- 
demnation rests  on  those  who  "  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  deny  him  " 
(Titus  i.  16) .  It  is  a  fatal  inconsistency  to  believe  in  a  God  and  yet  not "  follow  Him." 
Have  you  true  rehgious  ideas  and  convictions  ?  Translate  your  thinking  into 
life. 

in.  The  UBaENOT  of  the  need  fob  this  pbaotioal decision.  "How long?" 
ice.  We  may  suppose  that  the  prophet  was  not  only  impressed  with  the  tardiness 
of  that  generation  in  declaring  once  for  all  for  the  service  of  Jehovah,  but  with  the 
memory  of  the  weary  provocation  of  the  past,  When  will  Israel  be  true  and  stead- 
&st  in  her  allegiance  to  her  God  and  King  ?  It  is  in  every  respect  unreasonable,  un- 
manly, and  infinitely  perilous  to  allow  the  question  of  yonr  religious  position  to 
remom  unsettled. — W. 

Ver.  Sl,—Beligious  Indecision,  Describe  the  gathering  of  the  people  upon  Mount 
Oarmel:  the  suffering  they  had  endured  from  the  long  continued  drought;  the 
eager  expectancy  of  the  secret  worshippers  of  Jehovah,  and  the  reappearance  of 
Ehjah  the  prophet ;  the  general  readiness  to  obey  the  summons  to  witness  a  decisive 
contest,  &c.  The  descent  into  national  idolatry  had  been  gradual.  One  step  had 
made  the  next  easy,  and  sometimes  inevitable,  tiU  now  the  chosen  nation  was  in 
the  deepest  degradation.  Of  this  many  of  them  were  scarcely  conscious.  They  had 
followed  the  example  set  by  the  court  without  remonstrance  and  without  reflection. 
The  opporttimty  for  consideration  had  come  at  last.  Ehjah  abruptly  threw  him- 
self into  the  current  of  national  life — ^like  a  gigantic  rock  in  the  stream,  which  cannot 
itself  be  stirred,  but  whose  presence  must  make  itself  felt,  and  may  divert  the  stream 
Into  another  channel.  The  test  he  proposed  to  the  people  was  obviously  fair  ;  in- 
deed, it  appeared  to  give  every  advantage  to  the  worshippers  of  Baal.    It  was  not 


at  TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  XTin.  1-48. 


t  rain  that  the  thirsty  land  required ;  but  had  he  said, "  The  God  that  ans  wereth 
n,,  let  him  be  God,"  Baal's  pnests  might  argue  that.it  was  not  water  but  fire 


fire  but  ] 
by  rain, 

that  their  God  could  rule.  Elijah  would  fight  the  idol  on  his  own  chosen  ground. 
Show  how  often  advantage  seems  to  be  given  to  God's  adversaries,  as  if  they  were 
allowed  to  make  out  the  best  cause  they  could,  yet  all  to  no  effect.  The  wisdom  ol 
the  world  was  left  to  the  Church's  foes.  The  people  were  not  asked  to  do  what  was 
rrational,  but  were  to  have  evidence,  and  this  evidence  was  to  be  adapted  to  their 
ensuous  character.  Beligion  appeals  to  a  man  as  to  a  rational  being.  The  sin 
with  which  Elijah  oharged  the  people  on  Carmel  Yia&reUgioua  mdeeition,  which  we 
now  consider. 

I.  The  CONDITION  of  indecision.  1.  ItimpKeagome  enUghtemrnentonreUgiout 
luhjects.  Many  heathen  exist  even  in  a  Christian  laud.  Living  under  the  shadow 
of  our  sanctuaries,  they  are  profoundly  ignorant  of  God,  of  His  claims,  and  of  His 
gospel.  They  are  not  halting  "  between  two  opinions,"  for  they  have  no  opinion 
•bout  a  religions  life,  but  are  decided  la  their  godlessness.  Such  was  not  the 
condition  of  Israel,  nor  of  their  modem  representatives.  There  is  no  want  of  in- 
tellectual knowledge  of  scriptural  truth  complained  of  here.  2.  It  im^liea  contrct- 
diction  between  theory  <md  practice.  The  IsraeUtes  would  not  have  denied  the 
Divine  interpositions  of  the  past,  and  many  would  have  admitted  that  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem  was  originally  the  true  place  for  worship,  &c.  Like  some  in  Crete,.in  FaxQ's 
days,  "  they  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  him."  8.  It  impUei 
dissatisfaction  with  present  condition.  They  were  like  men  longing  for  something- 
whioh  they  have  not  yet  resolved  to  seek.  So  at  Athens,  some  who  heard  Paul  felt 
that  his  words  were  so  wise  and  weighty  that  they  exclaimed,  "  We  will  hear  thee 
again  of  this  matter."  They  were  moved  by  transient  feeling,  like  Felix  (Acts- 
xziv.  25)  and  Agrippa  (Acts  xxvi  28).  To  all  suoh  oomes  iius  protest  against 
vacUlation. 

II.  The  causes  of  indecision.  1.  Want  of  thoughtful  consideration.  Many 
speculate  about  rehgion  who  have  never  yet  cried,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 
A  busy  life  diverts  them  from  earnest  thought,  their  powers  being  absorbed  in 
worldly  affairs.  Or  a  fiivolous  habit  of  mind  may  prove  their  bane.  2.  Deficiency^ 
of  personal  courage.  It  would  require  courage  under  Jezebel's  rule  to  become 
worshippers  of  Jehovah.  Give  instances  of  the  difficulties  which  beset  earnest  men 
in  modern  life,  the  necessity  sometimes  arising  for  true  heroism  on  the  part  ol 
those  who  would-foUow  Christ.  3.  Tendency  to  procrastination.  To-day  is  devoted. 
to  that  which  is  evident  to  the  senses,  to-morrow  to  that  which  concerns  the  soul. 
Examples : 

III.  The  consequences  of  indecision.  1.  Itierease  of  difficulties.  Evil  habits 
grow  in  strength.  The  simple  spray  of  ivy  can  be  gathered  by  a  child's  hand,  but 
after  the  growth  of  years,  though  it  is  kilUng  the  tree,  you  cannot  tear  it  off.  A 
worldly  man  who  is  now  impervious  to  good  never  meant  to  be  what  he  is,  but  he 
expected  that  when  the  stress  of  making  his  position  was  over  he  would  have  time 
and  inclination  to  attend  to  affairs  of  the  soul.  Imperceptibly  God  seems  to  have 
"given  him  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,  because  he  did  not  choose  to  retain  God  in 
his  knowledge."  2.  Loss  of  opportunity.  Even  if  it  were  easier  to  decide  for  God 
next  year,  it  would  be  madness  to  delay.  "  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow,"  &c. 
Bead  the  parable  of  the  Eich  Fool — Luke  xii.  8.  Irreparable  rum.  If  God's  op- 
portunity is  lost,  it  will  not  be  re-created  after  death.  See  how  Christ  spoke  of 
Capernaum,  of  Chorazin,  and  of  Jerusalem.  "  But  now  they  are  hid  firom  thine 
eyes."  "  He  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still."  In  face  of  such  penalties  press 
home  the  question  on  the  nndeoided,  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  f" 
— A.  B. 

Ver.  44. — Elijah's  Prayer  for  Bain.  The  wonders  which  accompanied  the  ministry 
of  Elijah  were  not  meaningless  prodigies.  Those  who  question  the  wisdom  of 
miracles  should  remember  that  the  condition  of  those  for  whom  they  were  intended- 
rendered  them  necessary.  Sensuous  men  must  learn  through  their  senses,  and- 
worshippers  of  material  force  niust  be  met  by  physical  displays  of  power.    We  do 


*»H.  xvm.  1—46.1  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  468 

not  iirj  to  instruct  a  child  by  an  essay,  or  to  conyinoe  a  saTage  by  a  syllogism. 
Ood  could  speak  directly  to  the  devout  patriarchs ;  but  when  the  worshippers  of 
Baal  were  to  know  that  there  was  a  living  God,  they  saw  the  fire  from  heaven,  and 
heard  the  bursting  of  a  storm  after  years  of  drought.  Idolatry  had  just  been  swept 
away  by  a  whirlwind  of  popular  execration.  The  time  had  therefore  come  for  the 
curse  to  be  removed.  Ehjah  with  a  premonition  of  the  distant  raia  bade  king  and 
people  eat  of  the  sacrificial  feast,  while  he  went  up  the  mountain  to  pray.  Six 
times  his  servant  ascended  the  loftiest  peak  of  Carmel,  and  came  back  to  say  that 
there  was  no  sign  of  change  ;  but  the  seventh  time,  gazing  over  the  blue  expanse 
of  the  Mediterranean,  he  saw  a  cloud  tiny  as  a  man's  hand,  which  was  the  pledge 
of  answered  prayer,  for  soon  the  heavens  were  "  black  with  clouds,"  and  over  the 
thirsty  land  there  was  "  a  great  rain."  In  dealing  with  events  of  Old  Testament 
history,  we  must  guard  ourselves  against  giving  a  fanciful  interpretation  which  can 
not  be  reasonably  justified ;  but  we  must  not  forget,  on  the  otiier  hand,  that  such 
incidents  reveal  great  principles  which  run  through  the  whole  economy  of  God,  in 
the  moral  as  weU  as  in  the  physical  world. 

I.  The  SPiBiruAL  sioniticanob  of  the  sLSSSiNa  sonaHT.  The  New  Testament 
justifies  us  in  regarding  the  rain  which  Elijah  prayed  for  as  a  type  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  without  whom  our  hearts  are  barren,  and  the  moral  world  is  dead.  See,  for 
instance,  how  boldly  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  evolves  from  the 
tabeniaole  what  those  who  constructed  it  little  imagined.  Take  as  another  example 
the  allusion  which  Paul  makes  to  the  rock  in  the  wUdemess,  in  which  he  says  em- 
phatically, "  That  rock  was  Christ."  BecaU  passages  in  which  the  descent  of  the  Spirit 
IS  likened  to  the  falling  of  rain  and  the  distiUing  of  dew.  Points  of  analogy :  the 
grounds  on  which  the  heavenly  blessing  is  withheld ;  the  misery  that  follows  itg 
absence ;  the  preparation  and  prayer  for  its  coming ;  tiie  subsequent  fertihty  of  the 
barren  land,  £0.  The  sins  of  our  age  are  not  anhke  those  of  Elijah's  time,  though 
they  are  less  gross  in  form.  The  enervating  luxuries  of  civilization,  the  indiffer- 
ence of  many  to  the  decline  of  religion,  the  deification  of  force  and  of  lust,  are 
examples.  There  has  been  a  forsaking  of  the  Lord  on  the  part  of  His  people,  and 
hence  this  barrenness  of  good,  in  spite  of  aU  our  toil ;  because  there  is  a  withhold- 
ing of  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  May  He  "  come  down  as  raJa 
upon  the  mown  grass,  and  as  showers  that  water  the  eartL" 

IL  The  spiBiinAL  fbepaiution  fob  the  BLEssnia  PBomsES.  1.  Self-forget- 
fulneat,  Elijah  was  personally  provided  for,  and  would  lack  nothing.  His  heart 
bled,  however,  for  the  suffering  people.  For  them  he  prayed.  We  want  more  of 
Buch  soul-burdening  on  the  part  of  parents  and  pastors.  2.  Be/ormation.  By  the 
execution  of  the  false  prophets,  Elijah  had  done  all  that  in  mm  lay  to  put  away 
eviL  Sins  are  obstacles  in  the  way  of  descending  blessings.  We  cannot  win  the 
Holy  Spirit  by  good  conduct,  but  we  may  hinder  His  work  by  our  sin.  Sin  is  a  bar 
across  the  sluice-gates  of  benediction,  and  must  be  removed  or  broken  before  the 
dry  channel  can  be  flooded.  3.  Prayer.  It  is  in  the  Epistle  of  James  that  we  are 
told  that  Elijah's  prayers  brought  both  the  drought  and  the  rain£9,ll.  The  fact 
that  the  prophet  heard  the  sound  of  abundance  of  rain  stimulated  his  supplication, 
and  did  not  prevent  it.  He  did  not  argue  that  God  would  send  the  storm  whether 
he  prayed  or  not,  but  believed  that  the  reception  of  blessing  was  inseparably  con- 
nected with  the  offering  of  prayer.  Similarly  the  Holy  Spirit  was  promised  to  the 
disciples,  but  they  met  to  pray  till  He  came.  "  Ask,  and  you  shall  receive."  4. 
Watchfulnegs.  Elijah  was  so  sure  of  God's  fidehty  and  goodness  that  he  sent  his 
servant  seven  times  to  look  for  the  faintest  sign  of  raia.  We  need  watchfulness  for 
the  following  reasons :  (1)  The  amswer  to  prayer  does  not  always  come  when  amd 
how  we  expect  it.  E.g.,  we  ask  for  holiness,  and  God  sends  an  illness,  in  which 
our  murmuring  closes  our  heart  against  the  very  blessing  that  is  then  nearing  us. 
Or  we  pray  for  spirituality,  and  have  the  possibility  of  it  presented  to  us  in  some 
unexpected  joy,  which  too  often  makes  us  more  worldly  than  grateful.  Or  wo  en- 
treat God  for  the  salvation  of  our  child ;  and  because  we  do  not  watch,  we  feil  to 
recognize  the  sign  and  pledge  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  in  the  child's  eager  ques- 
tioning and  simple  prayer.    (2)  The  answer  to  prayer  may  be  long  delayed,   £li|jah 


454  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xvui.  1— 46w 

was  not  discouraged  even  by  the  sixth  repetition  of  the  despairing  phrase,  "  There  is 
nothing."  Yet  on  that  very  day  his  one  earnest  cry  had  instantaneously  brought 
down  fire  from  heaven.  How  often  Kke  the  Psahnist  we  say,"  Hath  God  forgotten 
to  be  gracious  ?  "  "  Wait  on  the  Lord,  wait  patiently  for  him."  (8)  The  answer 
to  prayer  may  begin  in  what  teems  irifiing.  A  cloud  the  size  of  a  man's  band, 
hardly  describable  on  the  horizon,  was  enough  to  transfer  Elijah's  prayer  into  praise. 
Little  in  itself,  it  was  the  beginning  of  a  glorious  blessing.  The  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  will  not  suddenly  fill  the  world  with  worshippers  ;  but  it  will  be  seen, 
perhaps,  in  the  turning  to  God  of  one  lad,  who  shall  prove  the  Elijah  of  his  age ;  or 
in  the  new  light  given  to  one  who  has  long  been  under  the  shadow  of  doubt ;  or  in 
some  holy  resolve,  some  noble  thought  that  shall  presage  blessing  to  the  world. 
Slight  and  insignificant  as  it  may  seem,  gratefully  welcome  it,  and  still  hope,  and 
wait,  and  pray,  tiU  He  "  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  us." — A.  II. 

Vers.  21 — 40. — The  Qod  that  amwereth  by  fire.    I.  Israel's  bin  (ver.  21). 

1.  Its  naiv/re :  indecision,  a  want  of  whole-hearted  devotion ;  "  How  long  halt 
ye  ?  "  &c.  They  tried  to  combine  both  worships,  bowing  before  Jehovah  in  secret, 
and  publicly  before  Baal  in  the  assemblies  commanded  by  the  court.  There  are 
two  who  contend  to-day  for  our  devotion  and  service — the  world  and  God  (1  John 
ii.  15).  The  world  has  its  rewards  and  demands;  God  has  His.  2.  Its  folly. 
Both  cannot  be  served.  What  we  build  in  obedience  to  one  we  cast  down  in 
obedience  to  the  other.  "  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  him,"  &c.  3.  The  necessity 
for  its  abandonment.  The  messenger  sent  to  announce  blessing  (ver.  1)  must 
first  convince  of  sin  and  secure  its  removal.  The  blessings  of  God  stand  at  th» 
door,  but  they  can  enter  only  as  our  sins  are  cast  out. 

II.  The  ohallengk  (vers.  22—24).  1,  A  false  test  rejected.  Baal  seemed 
triumphant.  Elijah  stood  alone,  the  prophets  of  Baal  were  many,  and  yet  the  cause 
had  still  to  be  decided.  The  pretensions  of  a  faith  are  not  established  by  numbering 
its  adherents  and  weighing  their  influence.  Truth  has  often  stood  alone,  and  may 
stand  alone  again.  2.  The  true  test  proposed.  Baal's  claims  and  Jehovah's  are 
put  to  the  proof.  There  is  wrath  against  the  land ;  which  wiU  remove  the  cause  of 
it  ?  By  which  will  the  sin  offering  laid  upon  the  altar  be  accepted  and  the  iniquity 
be  removed  ?  That  test  which  alone  met  Israel's  need  could  alone  prove  Israel's 
God.  8.  The  true  test  accepted.  "  And  all  the  people  answered  and  said.  It  is  well 
spoljen."  Israel's  answer  wiU  yet  be  the  cry  of  all  nations.  The  heart  of  the  world 
will  yet  acknowledge  the  true  God's  work. 

III.  The  decision  (vers.  25 — 89).  1.  Baal  tried  and  found  wanting,  (1)  The 
first  choice  was  given  to  the  priests  of  Baal.  The  world  has  had  time  enough  to 
prove  the  truth  of  its  pretensions,  and  to  show  whether  it  can  meet  man's  need. 
The  sacrifice  has  long  lain  upon  its  altar.  (2)  The  earnestness  of  the  false  prophets. 
The  failure  is  not  due  to  lack  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  world's  votaries.  There 
is  no  path  which  has  not  been  trod  to  find  whether  the  world  has  aught  to  satisfy 
the  cry  of  man's  soul ;  there  is  no  sacrifice  it  has  called  for  that  has  been  withheld. 
(8)  Their  perseverance.  Midday,  the  hour  of  the  sun's  might,  was  past,  yet  still 
they  cried  and  cut  themselves,  &o.  The  boundless  faith  and  unwearied  efforts  of 
the  world's  worshippers.  (4)  The  failure.  The  sacrifice  lay  unconsumed  upon  the 
altar,  lay  still  there  hastening  to  corruption,  when  the  darkness  fell  and  the  priests 
lay  weltering  in  their  blood.  2.  Ood  tried  and  proved.  (1)  God's  altar  built  in 
the  face  of  the  world's  discomfiture  (vers.  29,  80).  It  was  reared  about  the  time  of 
the  evening  sacrifice.  "In  the  fulness  of  the  times."  "  After  that  in  the  wisdom 
of  God  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased,"  &o.  (1  Cor.  i.  21).  The 
vanity  of  the  world's  way  was  proved  ere  Christ  was  manifested.  (2)  The  altar 
was  one  on  which  God  had  been  served  before  ("  He  repaired  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
which  was  broken  down  ").  What  was  lost  in  the  first  is  restored  in  the  second 
Adam.  The  accepted  saonfice  must  be  offered  upon  a  perfect  manhood.  (3)  God 
proved  to  the  uttermost  (88 — 85).  There  is  nothing  where  that  sacrifice  is  set  which 
the  fire  of  God  will  not  kindle  and  change  into  the  glory  into  which  that  sacrifice 
itself  is  lifted.    (4)  The  answer.    The  fiire  fell ;  the  accepted  sacrifice  went  up  is 


CH.  xvm.  1— 46.J  THE  FIEST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS.  456 


living  flame  which  kindled  all  things  round  it — wood,  Btones,  dust,  water.  We 
cannot  test  God  in  His  own  way  without  receiving  an  answer  which  wUl  lift  from 
the  heart's  depths  the  cry,  "The  Lord,  he  is  God." 

IV.  The  judgment  of  the  falbb  pbophetb.  The  manifestatioii  of  God's  glory 
is  the  hour  of  sin's  overthrow. — J.  U. 

Vers.  41—46. — The  return  of  blessing.  I.  Elijah's  assurance  or  God's  mbecy. 
"There  is  a  sound  of  abundance  of  rain,"  but  it  was  only  as  yet  a  sound  in  the 
prophet's  ear.  1.  The  ground  of  the  assurance.  (1)  God  had  promised  (ver.  1), 
He  would  therefore  fiilfil  His  word.  (2)  The  preliminary  work  which  He  had 
sent  him  to  do  was  accomplished.  The  people's  heart  was  turned.  Their  sin 
was  washed  away.  The  curse  would  surely,  then,  be  also  removed.  We  build  a 
still  mightier  trust  on  God's  consistency.  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  son," 
&o.  2.  The  use  he  made  of  it.  "  He  said  unto  Ahab,"  and  through  him  to  all 
Israel,  "  Get  thee  up,"  &o.  The  work  of  the  believer  is  to  comfort  God's  people, 
and  strengthen  their  expectation  of  good. 

II.  His  PEEVAiLiNG  WITH  God.  1.  The  assurance  of  Ood's  mercy  does  not 
exclude  prayer.  "  Ahab  went  up  to  eat  and  drink,"  but  "  Elijah  went  up  to  the 
top  of  Carmel."  The  worldling  may  expect  good  and  know  nothing  of  supplication ; 
not  so  with  the  man  of  God.  Expectation  is  but  encouragement  to  prayer.  The 
desire  that  the  blessing  might  come  at  once  and  cause  the  seed  of  faith  to  spring  up 
in  the  people's  hearts,  made  earnest  prayer  more  necessary  to  Elijah  than  the  re- 
freshment which  his  body  craved.  2.  The  utter  lowliness  of  the  true  worshipper. 
''He  oast  himself  down  upon  the  earth."  His  face  was  hid.  The  man  who  stands 
nearest  God  is  the  lowliest  of  all  God's  worshippers.  8.  His  importunity.  He  did 
not  cease  tni  his  prayer  was  granted.  Again  and  again  was  the  servant  sent  tiU.  the 
small  cloud  was  seen. 

III.  His  ATTEMPT  TO  PKEVAiii  WITH  MAN.  1.  His  message  to  Ahab  ("  Prepare," 
&e.)  showed  his  care  for  the  king.  He  was  a  foe  to  the  sin,  but  not  to  the  man. 
2.  He  honoured  him.  He  "  ran  before  Ahab  to  the  entrance  of  Jezreel."  The 
mighty  prophet  became  the  erring  king's  servant.  The  ministers  of  God  must  seek 
to  win  the  sinful  as  well  as  to  smite  their  sin.  Hatred  and  contempt  will  neither 
advance  God's  cause  uor  man's  well-being. — J.  U. 

Vers.  1^46. — Elijah  wnd  the  Prophets  of  Baal.  Elijah  is  now  prepared  for  his 
work.  He  who  had  sent  him  into  the  desert  now  commands  him  to  enter  into 
open  conflict  with  idolatry.     God  makes  His  will  known  to  him  in  two  ways. 

I.  By  AN  INWARD  IMPULSE. 

II.  Through  His  meetino  with  the  todno  Obadiar,  the  protector  of  the 
prophets,  and  the  faithful  servant  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the  impure  court  of  Ahab. 
Let  it  be  ours  to  seek  such  a  twofold  assurance  of  the  will  of  God.  Let  us  not  rest 
satisfied  with  an  inward  impulse,  lest  we  be  led  astray  by  an  illusive  mysticism ;  let 
us  watch  also  the  indications  of  Providence.  The  wisdom  that  cometh  down  from 
above  is  not  a  bUnd  leading ;  it  can  give  a  reasonable  explanation  of  its  motives. 
It  learns  to  read  the  will  of  God  at  once  in  the  book  of  the  heart  and  in  that  of 
Providence.  In  his  decisive  interview  vrith  Ahab,  Elijah  shows  us  how  we  are  to 
contend  with  the  idolatry  which  is  always  at  the  root  of  every  doctrine  hostile  to 
God.  1.  The  &:Bt  element  otBtrengtliiB  his  manly  amd  indomitable  courage.  To 
the  king's  insolent  question,  "Art  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel  ?  "  he  rephes,  "  I 
have  not  troubled  Israel,  but  thou  and  thy  father's  house,  in  that  ye  have  forsaken  the 
commandments  of  the  Lord,  and  thou  hast  followed  BaaUm"  (ver.  18).  He  only  will  be 
victorious  in  the  battle  for  the  right  who  does  not  fear  to  denounce,  without  flinching, 
the  sin  of  his  people,  and  to  say,  like  John  the  Baptist  to  the  mighty  ones,  whether 
in  the  realm  of  society  or  of  science,  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  "  (Matt,  xiv.) 
Wherever  sin  is,  the  witness  for  truth  and  righteousness  must  first  strike  home  to 
the  conscience  before  attempting  to  convince  the  mind.  2.  Everything  in  the 
language  of  Elijah  breathes  a  full  assurance  of  victory.  He  knows  that  he  has  on 
bis  side  that  strength  of  God  which  he  has  proved.    To  believe  that  we  shall  ba 


166 


THE  FIEST  BOOK.  OF  KINGS. 


[cij.  XIX.  1 — i!i. 


viotoriouB  is  already  to  have  half  won  the  battle.  8.  Elijah's  irresistible  weapon  is 
prwyer.  "  Hear  me,  0  Lord,  hear  me  ;  that  this  people  may;  know  that  thou  art 
the  Lord  God,  and  that  thou  hast  turned  their  heart  back  again  "  (ver.  37).  If  we 
now  look  away  from  Elijah  himself  to  the  plan  he  proposed  to  pursue  in  his  warfare 
against  idolatry,  we  shall  see  that  no  better  is  possible  for  us  to-day.  He  does  not 
multiply  arguments  in  dealing  with  his  adversaries ;  he  meets  them  on  the  common 
ijroiuid  of  experience.  He  gives  practical  rather  than  theoretical  demonstration  of 
the  power  of  God.  Here  are  the  priests  of  Baal  assembled  on  Mount  Carmel.  On 
their  side  are  the  people,  the  favour  of  the  king,  the  confidence  of  the  public. 
Elijah  stands  alone,  and  yet  he  feels  he  is  not  alone,  for  God  is  with  him.  The 
heaven,  closed  for  long  months  against  the  fertilizing  rain,  in  punishment  of  the 
perverseness  of  Israel,  seems  a  vault  of  iron  and  brass.  Will  it  ever  m.elt  again, 
and  spread  life  in  soft  reviving  showers  over  the  land  1  In  vain  Ahab  has  sent  his 
servants  up  and  down  throughout  the  country  ;  the  water  springs  have  all  failed. 
The  one  question  in  all  hearts  is,  What  intercession  may  avail  to  draw  down  the  rain 
once  more  from  heaven  ?  Elijah  offers  a  challenge  full  of  bitter  irony  to  the  priests 
of  Baal.  May  he  not  lawfully  do  so,  as  the  messenger  of  Him  of  whom  it  is  said 
that  "He  shall  laugh  at  the  mighty  ones  who  exalt  themselves  against  him"? 
(Psa.  ii.  4.)  In  vain  the  priests  cry,  and  leap,  and  cut  themselves  with  stones,  in 
their  savage  rites  ;  there  comes  no  answering  voice  from  their  deaf  and  dumb  idoL 
But  at  the  prayer  of  Elijah  the  heavens  re-open,  and  his  God  reveals  Himself  in  the 
glory  of  His  power.  Champions  of  the  true  God,  the  God  of  the  gospel,  defend  it, 
as  Elijah  did,  against  the  insolent  idolatry  of  materialism,  or  of  the  pantheism 
which' sets  up  an  idol  as  monstrous  as  the  Baal  of  old.  Be  bold,  hke  Ehjah,  in 
showing  the  idolaters  how  deeply  they  have  fallen.  BeUeve  in  the  victory  of  your 
cause ;  use  the  invincible  weapon  of  prayer;  and  to  those  who  have  vainly  sought 
the  living  water  in  the  broken  cisterns  of  earth  {Jer.  ii.  13),  show  the  heavens 
opened  and  the  gracious  rain  descending  upon  all  broken  hearts,  and  bringing  the 
blessings  of  a  foil  redemption.  Give  to  our  generation  this  conclusive  practical 
evidence.  Meet  the  positivism  of  the  infidel  with  the  positivism  of  the  Christian. 
This  is  the  surest  means  of  casting  down  the  idol  into  the  dust,  without  having 
recourse  to  that  exterminating  sword  which  the  prophet  of  the  old  covenant  waa 
commanded  to  draw  upon  the  idolatrous  priests.  We  live  under  another  dispenBI^ 
tion,  and  ours  is  that  sword  of  the  Spirit  which  only  wounds  to  heaL — E.  de  ?• 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XIX.  1—21. 


Eluab's  flight.  The  iHEOFHAm  ov 
HoBBB  A2n>  THE  OAiiLiNo  ov  Elisha. — ^We 
Jan  readily  understand  with  what  a  sense 
}f  humiliation  and  shame  the  weak  and 
Bxoited  king,  who  must  have  been  awed  and 
impressed  by  the  strange  portent  he  had 
witnessed,  would  recount  the  day's  proceed- 
ings to  his  imperious  and  headstrong  con- 
sort, and  with  what  intense  mortification 
and  rage  she  must  have  heard  of  the  triumph 
of  the  proscribed  reKgion  and  of  the  defeat 
and  death  of  the  priests  of  Baal.  One  might 
almost  have  expected  that  the  testimony  of 
an  eye--witness,  and  that  her  husband,  to 
the  greatness  and  completeness  of  Elijah's 
Victory ;  that  his  unprejudiced,  and  indeed 


unwilling,  account  of  the  sacriflces,  of  tin 
descent  of  the  heavenly  fircj  of  the  cries  it 
wrung  from  the  people,  <fco.,  would  have 
brought  conviction  to  her  mind  and  taught 
her  how  useless  it  was  to  kick  against  the 
pricks.  But  there  are  eyes  so  blinded  (2 
Cor.  iv.  4)  and  hearts  so  steeled  against  the 
truth  that  no  evidence  can  reach  them,  and 
this  fierce  persecutor  of  the  prophets  had 
long  been  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind. 
She  listens  to  his  story,  but  her  one  thought 
is  of  revenge. 

Ver.  1.— And  Ahab  told  JezeDel  all  that 
Elijai  had  done,  and  withal  how  he  had 
slain    [Heb.  and  all  which  he   had  slain. 

The  construction,  it  it  were  not  for  the  79 
would  be  usual  enough.  As  that  word  il 
omitted  in  some  MSS.  and  versions,  It  ii 


OB.  XIX.  1 — 21.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


467 


poEBible  it  hsM  been  inserted  by  a  tran- 
■diber,  mechanically,  from  the  H^S"?^  HJJ 
preceding]  all  tlie  prophets,  [sc,  of  Baal, 
all  ■who  were  present]  with  the  Bword. 

Yer.  2. — Then  Jezebel  sent  a  messenger 
tmto  Elijah  [The  prophet,  wrapped  in  his 
abba,  was  seemingly  abont  to  spend  the 
night  in  the  open  air,  possibly  at  the  gate, 
or  in  the  plain.  There,  in  the  darkness, 
the  messenger  foimd  Mm,  Bahr  assumes 
that  this  message  had  Ahab's  sanction ;  i.e., 
that  he  must  have  known  of  it  and  was  too 
weak  to  prevent  it.  But  it  is  just  as  likely 
that  it  was  sent  without  his  piivity.  On 
the  evening  of  that  day  he  would  be  afraid 
to  threaten  one  vested  with  such,  tremendous 
powers  as  Elijah  had  just  proved  himself  to 
possess],  saying  [Here  the  LXX.  inserts 
"If  thou  art  Ehou  and  I  Jezebel"],  So  let 

tbe  goia  [As  O^n?^.  is  here  found  with  a 
plural  verb,  it  is  rightly  assumed  that  the 
reference  is  to  the  cUviuities  of  Phoenicia  or 
of  paganism  generally.  Besides,  Jezebel 
woiid  hardly  swear  by  the  one  God  of 
EUjah  and  of  Israel.  The  hXS..,  however, 
has  o  Bebt] ,  do  to  me,  and  more  also  [Heb. 
and  so  let  them  add.  See  on  oh.  ii.  23. 
Stanley  appositely  recalls  to  our  minds 
"  the  tremendous  vows  which  mark  the 
history  of  the  Semitic  race,  both  within  and 
without  the  Jewish  pale,  the  vow  of  Jeph- 
thah,  the  vow  of  Saul,  the  vow  of  Hanni- 
bal." Bawlinson  remarks  that  this  oath 
was  "  familiar  in  the  mouths  of  kings  about 
this  time  "  (1  Engs  xx.  10 ;  2  Kings  vi.  31). 
But  it  was  a  standing  formula  in  Israel  at 
all  times.  Bee  Buth  i.  17 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  17 ; 
&c.] ,  If  I  make  not  thy  life  as  the  Ufe  of 
one  of  them  by  to-morrow  about  this  time. 
["That  queen  consort,  it  seems,  was,  in 
effect,  queen  regent"  (Henry).  What  in. 
duced  the  queen  to  send  this  message  f  For 
it  is  obvious  that  if  she  really  meant  to  slay 
EUjah,  she  took  the  very  means  to  defeat 
her  purpose  by  thus  forewarning  him  of 
her  intentions.  Some  of  the  older  exposi- 
toiB  (see,  e.g.,  HaU,  vol.  it.  p.  896)  have 
seen  in  the  act  a  proof  of  her  blind  infatua- 
tion, of  that  infatuation  which  God  often 
employs  to  defeat  the  machinationB  of 
wicked  men,  and  this  view  is  not  to  be 
lightly  rejected.  That  she  fully  meant  what 
she  said  is  hardly  to  be  doubted.  But  later 
writers,  including  Keil,  Bahr,  and  Words- 
worth, see  in  the  threat  nothing  more  than 
a  scheme  for  ridding  herself  of  the  presence 
of  Elijah.  They  argue  that,  finding  herself 
unable  to  put  him  to  death,  partly  because 
of  the  impression  he  had  made  upon  the 
people,  and  partly,  too,  because  of  the 
ascendancy  he  had  just  gained  over  the 
king,  she  resolved,  by  threatening  him  with 


instant  death,  to  give  him  an  opportunity 
for  flight.  But  this  view  hardly  takes  suffi- 
ciently into  account  the  exasperation,  the 
blind  unreasoning  hate,  or  the  reckless  and 
desperate  character  of  the  queen.  It  must 
be  remembered  that  this  message  was 
despatched,  not  after  she  had  had  time  for 
thought  and  calculation,  but  on  the  spur  of 
the  moment,  as  soon  as  she  had  heard  of 
the  massacre  of  the  priests  of  Baal.  That 
night  she  could  do  nothing,  nor  perhaps 
could  she  see  her  way  clearly  to  compass 
his  death  on  the  morrow.  But  she  will 
have  him  know  that  he  is  not  going  to 
escape  her,  and  that,  whatever  the  effect  on 
her  husband,  she  is  uncouquered  and  un- 
relenting. She  does  not  stop  to  argue  that 
he  may  take  the  alarm  and  flee.  But  she 
most  gratify  her  impotent  rage  forthwith 
by  threatening  him  with  death  tbe  next 
day.] 

Ver.  8.— And  when  be  saw  that  |.Heb. 
and  he  saw  and  arose,  &a.  But  tbe  LXX. 
has  cai  Itpo^iiSti,  and  the  Vulgate  timmt, 
and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  this  meaning, 
"and  he  feared,"  can  be  extracted  from  this 
word  KT1  without  any  change  of  radicals,  for 
the  full  form  K'l**  is  occasionally  abbreviated 
into  Kp? ;  see  1  Sam.  zviii.  12 ;  zxi.  13 ;  2 
Kings  zvli.  28.  A  few  MSS.  have  here 
Kl^^l  and  it  certainly  suits  the  context 
better.  Bahr,  who  interprets,  "  he  saw  how 
matters  stood,"  i.e.,  that  she  meant  him  to 
flee,  is  not  justified  in  asserting  that  this 
expression  would  require  an  accusative  of 
the  person  feared.  (See,  e.g..  Gen.  iii.  10; 
zv.  1 ;  xviii.16.)  Both  he  and  Keil  further- 
more object  to  this  interpretation  that  it  is 
contrary  to  actual  fact,  neither  of  them 
being  willing  to  allow  that  Elijah  was 
afraid.  Bahr  says  it  is  inconceivable  that 
the  man  who  had  that  day  faced  alone  king 
and  priests  and  the  entire  people  should  have 
become  all  at  once  afraid  of  a  bad  woman, 
and  he  explains  Elijah's  flight  as  caused  by 
the  discovery  that  he  could  not  carry  on  his 
work  of  reformation,  and  by  the  absence  of 
any  intimation  (like  that  of  ch,  xviii.  1)  that 
he  was  to  stay  and  hazard  his  life.  But 
apart  from  the  fact  that  we  are  distinctly 
told  that  he  "went /or  hU  life"  (of.  vers. 
4,  10),  and  that  his  flight  seems  to  have 
been  instant  and  hurried,  history  teUa  of 
many  great  souls,  hardly  less  brave  than 
Elijah's^  which  have  succumbed  to  a  sudden 
panic.  Anyhow,  it  is  evident  that  for  the 
moment  EUjah  had  lost  faith  in  God, 
otherwise  he  would  certainly  have  waited 
for  the  "word  of  the  Lord,"  which  had 
hitherto  invariably  guided  his  movements 
(oh.  xvii.  2,  8 ;  xviu.  1).  No  doubt  other 
,  emotions  besides  that  of  fear  were  struggUn'; 


1S8 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XDL  1—21. 


in  his  breast,  and  prominent  among  these 
was  the  feeling  of  profound  disappointment 
and  mortification.  It  is  clear  that  he  had 
hoped  that  the  "  day  of  Carmel "  wonld 
turn  the  heart  of  the  entire  nation  hack 
again  (oh.  xviii.  37),  and  the  great  shout  of 
ver.  39,  and  the  subsequent  execution,  at  his 
command,  of  the  men  who  had  deceived  and 
depraved  the  people,  might  well  justify  the 
most  sangnine  expectations.  We  can  readily 
imagine,  consequently,  how,  especially  aftOT 
the  excitement  and  fatigues  of  that  day,  the 
threatening  and  defiant  message  of  the 
queen  would  seem  the  death-blow  of  his 
hopes,  and  how,  utterly  dispirited  and 
broken  down,  he  lost  aU  tmst,  all  faith, 
and,  while  fleeing  for  his  life,  "requested 
for  himself  that  he  might  die"  (ver.  4)], 
be  arose,  and  went  for  his  life  [KeQ  ia 
compelled,  by  his  refusal  to  allow  that  Elijah 
was  actuated  by  fear,  to  render  these  words, 
"went  to  commit  his  soul  to  God  in  the 
solitude  of  the  desert."  But  the  meaning 
is  settled  for  us  by  the  like  expression  in 
2  Kings  vii.  7 ;  nor  does  Jer.  xliv.  7  lend 
any  support  to  KeU's  view.  Gesenius  com- 
pares Tfifxeiv  jrtpi  ^vxns-  Od.  ix.  423.  The 
A.  V.  exactly  represents  the  meaning] ,  and 
came  to  Beer-sheba  [Gen.  xxi.  31 ;  xxvi. 
33.  The  southern  boundary  of  Palestine 
(Josh.  XV.  28 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  7  ;  Judg.  xx.  1 ; 
1  Chron.  xxi.  2,  &o.),  allotted  to  the  tribe 
of  Simeon  (Josh.  xix.  2),  which  tribe,  we 
gather  from  this  passage  (see  also  2  Chron. 
xix.  4),  was  now  absorbed  in  the  southern 
kingdom.  (See  note  on  oh.  xi.  31.)  Words- 
worth suggests  that  "perhaps  he  resorted 
to  Beer-sheba  in  order  to  strengthen  his 
faith  with  the  recollection  of  the  patriarchs 
who  had  dwelt  there,"  &o.  But  if  that  had 
been  his  object,  a  journey  to  the  place  was 
hardly  necessary,  and  it  is  clear  that  he 
only  passed  through  it  on  his  way  to  Mount 
Sinai.  "Beer-sheba  was  about  9S  miles 
from  Jezreel" — Bawlinson,  who  adds  that 
Elijah  cannot  have  reached  it  till  the  close 
of  the  second  day.  But  we  must  remember 
that  his  pace  would  be  regulated  by  the 
powers  of  his  servant,  probably  a  mere  lad 
(LXX.  TratSdpiov),  so  that  it  is  hardly  likely 
he  could  travel  day  and  night  without 
stopping  to  rest],  which belongeth  to  Judab 
[It  is  part  of  Keil's  argument  in  proof  that 
Elijah  did  not  flee  from  fear  of  Jezebel, 
that,  had  such  been  the  case,  he  would  have 
remained  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  where 
he  would  have  enjoyed  the  protection  of 
Jehoshaphat.  But  it  is  by  no  means  certain 
that  this  prince,  considering  his  close  alliance 
with  Ahab  (ch.  xxii.  4 ;  cf .  zviii.  10 ;  2  Kings 
viii.  18;  2  Chron.  xviii.  1),  would  have 
sheltered  the  prophet.  Indeed,  it  is  remark- 
able, as  Blunt  has  well  pointed  out  (Coincid. 


pp.  183, 184),  that  the  prophet  n«««r  took  re- 
fuge  in  the  southern  kmgdom.  At  one  tima 
he  found  a  sanctuary  beyond  the  Jordau  at 
another  in  the  kingdom  of  Tyre,  but  never 
in  the  realm  of  Jehoshaphat.  When  he 
does  come  in  haste  to  Beer-sheba,  "it  is 
after  a  manner  which  bespeaks  his  reluc- 
tance to  set  foot  within  that  territory,  even 
more  than  if  he  had  evaded  it  altogether." 
The  reason  partly  was,  no  donbt,  as  Words- 
worth says,  that  his  mission  was  to  idola- 
trons  Israel.  Jndab  had  both  priests  and 
prophets  of  its  own] ,  and  left  his  servant 
[There  is  no  warrant  for  the  assertion 
(Stanley)  that  "one  only  of  that  vast 
assembly  remained  faithful  to  him,  the 
Zidonian  boy  of  Zarephath."  The  identity 
of  this  boy  with  the  servant  is  by  no  means 
certain ;  nor  is  the  defection  of  the  people 
at  all  proven]  there.  [Probably  because 
he  wished  to  be  alone  with  God ;  possibly 
because  the  boy  was  then  too  exhausted  to 
go  further,  and  there  was  no  reason  why 
he  should  be  subjected  to  the  uncertaintieB 
and  privations  of  desert  life;  hardly  for  the 
security  of  both  (Blunt).  It  is  perhaps 
implied,  however,  that  the  kingdom  of 
Judah,  though  not  a  safe  abode  for  him, 
would  be  for  his  servant.  When  we  re- 
member that  this  servant  never  rejoined 
him,  but  that  presently  Elisha  took  his 
place,  we  can  scarcely  help  wondering 
whether  he  was  afraid  to  accompany  Elijah 
any  longer  (cf.  Acts  zv.  38).] 

Ver.  4. — But  he  himself  went  a  dasr"* 
Journey  tuto  the  wUdemess  [Cf.  Gen.  xxi. 
14,  21 ;  Jer.  iz.  2  ;  Bev.  xii.  6.  Beer-sheba 
stands  on  the  fringe  of  the  desert  of  Et-Tih. 
It  was  not  for  the  sake  of  security  alone 
that  the  prophet  plunged  into  the  "great 
and  terrible  wilderness."  It  is  probablf 
that  from  the  first,  "  Horeb,  the  mount  of 
God,"  was  in  his  thoughts.  He  may  well 
have  seen  that  he  was  destined  to  be  a 
second  Moses;  that  he  was  raised  up  to 
assert  and  enforce  the  covenant  of  which 
Moses  was  the  mediator.  Wt  have  seen 
already  that  he  cites  the  words  spoken  to 
Moses  at  the  bush  (oh.  xviii.  36) ;  that  to 
him  as  to  Moses  there  was  granted  an 
apparition  of  firs ;  we  now  find  him  re- 
jected as  Moses  Lad  been  before  him  (Acts 
vii.  26,  35).  How  natural  that,  Uke  Moses, 
he  should  flee  into  the  land  of  Midian,  to 
the  place  where  God  had  spoken  with  Mosea 
face  to  face.  Wordsworth  reminds  us  that 
the  Jevrish  Church,  by  its  cycle  of  lessons, 
suggests  a  comparison  between  the  Law 
Giver  and  the  Law  Bestorer] ,  and  cams 
and  sat  down  under  a  [Heb.  one;  see  note  on 
ch.  ziii.  11]  Juniper  tree  [The  UTip,  hers 
found    with    a    feminine    numeral    (Keri; 


OH.  xu.  1  — 21.J 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


469 


mascniine),  in  ver.  6  with  a  masonline,  is 
not  the  juniper,  but  the  plant  now  known 
to  the  Arabs  as  retem,  i.e.,  the  broom  (genista 
monosperma,  or  G.  raetam),  "  the  most 
longed-for  and  most  welcome  bush  of  the 
desert,  abundant  in  beds  of  streams  and 
valleys,  where  spots  for  camping  are 
selected,  and  men  sit  down  and  sleep  in 
order  to  be  protected  against  wind  and 
sun  "  (Bobinson,  Pal.  vol.  i.  p.  203).  It  does 
not,  however,  afford  a  complete  protection 
(Thomson,  L.  and  B.  vol.  ii.  pp.  436,  437). 
Every  traveller  remarks  on  its  abundance  in 
the  desert ;  it  gave  a  name,  Rithmah,  to  one 
of  the  stations  of  the  Israelites  (Num.  xxxiii. 
18.  Cf.  Stanley,  S.  and  P.  pp.  20,  79).  Its 
roots  are  still  used  by  the  Bedouin,  for  the 
manufacture  of  charcoal  (cf.  Fsa.  cxz.  4, 
"coals  of  rethem"),  which  they  carry  to 
Cairo]  :  and  lie  requested  for  himself  [Heb. 
asked  as  to  his  life,  accusative  of  reference] 
tbat  he  migrht  die  [Again  like  Hoses,  Num. 
si.  15 ;  Exod.  xzxii.  32]  ;  and  said,  It  la 
enough  [or.  Let  it  be  enough.  LXX.  ixavov- 
aSat.  See  note  on  eh.  xii.  28]  ;  now,  0  Lord, 
take  away  my  life  ["  Strange  contradiction  I 
Here  the  man  who  was  destined  not  to  taste 
of  death,  flees  from  death  on  the  one  hand 
and  seeks  it  on  the  other."  Eitto]  ;  for  I 
am  not  better  than  my  fathers.  [These 
words  clear^  reveal  the  great  hopes  BUjah 
had  formea  as  to  the  result  of  his  mission, 
and  the  terrible  disappointment  his  banish- 
ment had  occasioned  him.  Time  was  when 
he  had  thought  himself  a  most  special 
messenger  of  Heaven,  raised  up  to  effect 
the  regeneration  of  his  country.  He  now 
thinks  his  work  is  fruitless,  and  he  has 
nothing  to  live  for  longer.  Keil  concludes 
from  these  words  that  Elijah  was  already 
of  a  great  age,  bat  this  is  extremely 
doubtful.] 

Ver.  5. — ^And  as  he  lay  and  slept  ["While 
death  was  called  for,  the  cousin  of  death 
comes  unbidden"  (Hall)]  under  a  [Heb. 
ime'\  Juniper  tree,  behold,  tlien  [Heb.  Ht 
this;  "behold  here,"  siehe  da,  Gesen.],  an 
angel  [Heb.messen^^r;  the  same  word  as  in 
ver.  2,  but  explained  in  ver.  7  to  be  a 
messenger  of  God.  Cf.  Gen.  xvi.  9 ;  xxi. 
17]  touched  [Heb.  touching']  him,  and  said 
unto  him,  Arise  and  eat.  [Probably  he  had 
eaten  little  or  nothing  since  leaving  Jezreel. 
Food  was  now  what  he  most  needed.  This 
circumstance  suggests  that  the  profound 
depression  betrayed  in  his  prayer  (ver.  4) 
was  largely  the  result  of  physical  weakness.] 

Ver.  6. — And  he  looked,  and,  behold,  there 
was  a  cake  [same  word  as  in  _ch.  xvii.  13] 
baken  on  the  coals  [Heb.  a  cake  of  stones,  or 
coals.  LXX.  iyKpvi^iaQ.  The  thin,  flat  bread 
of  the  East,  especially  among  the  nomadic 
desert  tribes,  is  constantly  baked  in  a  rude 


oven,  constructed  in  the  sand  or  soil,  h 
little  hollow  is  made  ;  sometimes  it  is  Uned 
with  stones  to  retain  the  heat ;  fuel,  often 
the  root  of  the  genista,  is  placed  upon  it 
and  kindled,  and  when  the  sand  or  stones 
are  sufficiently  hot,  the  embers  are  raked 
to  one  side,  and  the  dough  is  placed  in  the 
oven,  where  it  is  sometimes  covered  with 
the  ashes.  Hence  the  Vulgate  calls  it  sub- 
einericius  panis] ,  and  a  cruse  of  water  at 
his  head  [i.e.,  the  place  of  his  head.  Marg. 
bolster.  The  word  is  almost  used  as  a 
preposition.  Cf.  1  Sam.  xix.  13  ;  xxvi.  7] . 
And  he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  laid  him 
down  again.  [Heb.  returned  and  laid  down  ] 

Ver.  7. — And  the  angel  of  tbe  Lord  came 
again  the  second  time,  and  toucbed  Um 
[i.e.,  to  awaken  him.  It  was  the  food  was 
to  strengthen  him] ,  and  said,  Arise  and  eat 
[Probably  he  had  eaten  but  Kttle  the  first 
time,  for  sorrow  and  weariness]  ;  because 
the  journey  is  too  great  for  thee.  [The 
LXX.  'on  n-oXX^  dn'6  cov  ti  i56s  and  the 
Vulgate  grandis  enim  tibi  restat  via,  which 
Bahr  follows,  seem  hardly  so  true  to  the 
Hebrew  idiom  as  the  A.  V.  rendering.  Keil 
cites  Vatablus,  iter  est  majus  quampro  viribus 
tuis.  It  is  very  improbable  that  (Bawlinson 
al.)  the  journey  to  Horeb  was  now  suggested 
to  him  for  the  first  time  by  the  angel.] 

Ver.  8. — And  he  arose,  and  did  eat  and 
drink,  and  went  In  the  strength  of  that 
meat  forty  days  and  forty  nights  [Cf. 
Exod.  xxiv.  18 ;  xxxiv.  28 ;  Deut.  ix.  9,  25  ; 
Jonah  iii.  4 ;  Matt.  iv.  2 ;  Acts  i.  8.  But 
the  primary  reference  is  perhaps  to  the 
"forty  days  and  forty  nights"  which  Moses 
spent  in  Horeb,  during  which  he  "  neiSier 
did  eat  bread,  nor  drink  water  "  (Deut.  ix.  9), 
or  to  the  forty  years  during  which  Israel 
was  sustained  in  this  same  desert  with 
"angels'  food"  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  25).  It  is 
noteworthy  how  both  Moses  and  EUas 
were  precursors  of  our  Lord  in  a  forty 
days'  fast.  "The  three  great  tasters  met 
gloriously  on  Tabor"  (Hall).  It  is  not 
implied  that  it  took  the  prophet  the  whole 
of  this  time  to  reach  Horeb,  which  is  only 
distant  from  Beersheba  some  130  miles. 
"  There  are  eleven  days'  journey  from 
Horeb,  by  the  way  of  Mount  Seir  to  Kadesh 
Bamea"  (Deut.  i.  2).  It  is  of  course 
possible  that  he  wandered  aimlessly  hither 
and  thither  during  this  period,  but  it  seems 
better  to  understand  the  words  of  the  whole 
of  his  desert  sojourn]  unto  Horeb  the  mount 
of  God.  [See  note  on  ch.  viii.  9.  It  is  just 
possible  that  Horeb  was  already  known  as 
"  the  mount  of  God  "  at  the  time  God  ap- 
peared to  Moses  there — the  whole  of  the 
Sinaitic  peninsula  was  sacred  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Egyptians ;  but  it  is  more  prohabla 
tbat  this  designation  is  used  in  Exod,  iii.  1 


460 


TILE  Final  BOOK  OF  KINOa 


[oh.  XIX.  1— 2L 


proleptically,  and  that  it  was  bestowed  on 
the  Mount  of  the  Law  because  of  the 
special  revelation  of  the  Godhead  there 
(Exod.  iu.  6 ;  xix.  3,  11,  18 ;  Deut.  i.  6  ; 
iv.  10 ;  V.  2,  &c.)] 

Ver.  9. — And  be  came  thither  nnto  i  cava 
[Heb.  the  cave.  LXX.  to  <rnri\aiov.  Vany 
commentators  identify  this  with  "the  clift 
of  the  rook"  where  Moses  was  concealed 
while  the  Lord  "  passed  by  "  (Bxod.  xxxiii. 
22),  and  the  nse  ol  the  same  word,  13V 
in  ver.  11  certainly  favours  this  view.  But 
is  it  clear  that  the  clift  (H^j??  ^««ur«)  was  • 
eave  t  Ewald  understands  "  the  cave  in 
which  at  that  time  travellers  to  Sinai 
commonly  rested."  It  is  perhaps  worth 
remembering  that  a  part  of  the  desert, 
though  at  some  distance  from  Horeb,  bears 
kt  this  day  the  name  of  Maghdrah,  or  cava. 
But  there  is  a  "narrow  grot "  pointed  out 
t>y  tradition  as  the  abode  of  Elijah,  on  the 
Bide  of  Jebel  Musa.  "  There  is  nothing  to 
confirm,  bat  there  is  nothing  to  contradict, 
the  belief  that  it  may  have  been  in  that 
■eoluded  basin,  which  has  long  been  pointed 
ont  as  the  spot.  ...  No  scene  could  be 
more  suitable  for  the  vision  which  follows" 
(Stanley).  There  is,  however,  one  formidable 
difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  identification, 
viz.,  that  the  cave  is  only  just  large  enough 
for  a  man's  body,  which  does  not  agree  with 

Ter.  IS] ,  and  lodged  [{47  means  strictly  to 
pass  the  night.  It  is  possibly  connected 
radically  with  il?  v]  there ;  and,  behold,  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  tiltn  [Not  "  in 
viSion  as  he  slept "  (Kawlinson).  He  could 
not  "  go  forth"  in  his  sleep.  -  That  he  was 
to  go  forth  "on  the. morrow"  is  equally 
unlikely  see  ver.  11,  note],  and  be  said 
onto  him.  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  f 
[Many  writers,  Bahr  and  KeU  among  them, 
will  not  allow  that  there  is  aught  of  reproof 
in  this  question,  or  that  Elijah  had  in  any 
way  erred  in  his  hasty  flight.  The  former 
asks  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  angel, 
instead  of  reproving  him,  succoured  and 
strengthened  him  (vers.  6,  7),  if  he  was 
acting  in  faithlessness  or  disobedience.  But 
surely  it  does  not  follow  that  God  denies  all 
grace  and  sustenance  to  His  elect  servants 
even  it  they  do,  in  a  moment  of  despair, 
forget  or  distrust  Him.  Elijah  may  have 
been  strengthened  for  this  very  journey, 
because  God  would  meet  with  him  and 
teach  him  the  lessons  of  patience  and  trust 
he  needed  to  learn,  at  the  "  mount  of  God  " 
itself.  And  his  answer,  especially  when 
contrasted  with  that  of  ver.  14  (where  see 
note),  certainly  betrays,  not  only  irritation 
and  despair,  but  a  "carnal  zeal  which 
would  gladly  have  called  down  the   ven- 


geance of  the  Almighty  upon  all  idolaters" 
(KeU).  The  question  iu  itself,  it  is  true, 
does  not  necessarily  impart  censure — it 
might  merely  mean,  "  What  wouldst  thou 
learn  of  me  7  "  But  when  it  is  remembered 
tiiat  the  prophet  had  been  tent  to  every 
other  destination  by  the  "word  of  the 
Lord,"  and  that  he  had  left  Jezreel  without 
any  such  word — left  it  in  terror  and  bitter 
disappointment  and  sheer  distrust  of  God — 
it  does  look  as  if  the  words  conveyed  a 
gentle  reminder  that  he  had  deserted  the 
post  of  duty,  and  had  no  right  to  be  there. 
So  Clericus,  "  Quasi  Beiu  dieeret  nihil  eue 
Eliae  negotii  in  solitudine,  sed  potius  in  loeit 
hahitatii,  ut  illie  homines  ad  veri  Dei  culttm 
addtLceret."] 

Ver.  10. — ^And  be  said,  I  have  been  Teiy 
Jealous  [Cf.  Num.  xxv.  11,  wliich  the  pro- 
phot  may  have  had  in  his  mind.  But  the 
jealousy  of  Phinehas  was  in  harmony  with 
that  of  God  (ver.  13)]  for  the  Lord  God  of 
hosts  ["  The  title  of  Lord  God  of  hosts  is  first 
heard  in  the  mouth  of  Elijah  the  prophet, 
who  had  been  very  jealous  for  Jehovah  in 
opposition  to  Baal  and  Ashtarotb  [Ash- 
torethn  the  Phoenician  deities;  cf.  2  Kings 
xxiii.  6,  'Baal,  the  sun,  and  moon,  and 
planets,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven'" 
(Wordsworth)] :  for  the  children  of  Israel 
have  forsaken  thy  corenant  [h6  had  memo- 
ries of  the  covenant  aU  around  him], 
thrown  down  tblne  altars  [cf.  ch.  xviii.  30, 
note.  It  is  dear  that  many  altars,  similar 
to  that  on  Carmel,  had  been  built,  and  had 
been  overturned] ,  and  slain  thy  prophets 
with  the  sword  [If  the  "  hundred  prophets  " 
of  ch.  xviii.  18  escaped,  of  which  we  can- 
not be  certain,  others  did  not] ;  and  1^  even 
t  only,  am  left  [See  note  on  oh.  xviii.  22.  It 
must  be  confessed  that  the  prima  facie 
view  is  that  the  prophets  had  been  well- 
nigh  exterminated.  But  we  must  take  into 
account  the  deep  despondency  with  which 
Elijah  spoke,  and  remember  the  correction 
which  his  words  received  (ver.  18)];  and 
they  seek  my  life,  to  take  It  away.  [The 
commentators  are  hopelessly  divided  as  to 
the  spirit  and  temper  witti  which  these 
words  were  spoken.  Biihr,  as  before,  is  veiy 
positive  that  there  is  no  complaint  or  mur- 
muring against  God  on  Elijah's  part.  He 
contends  that  the  prophet  has  been  led  to 
Sinai  simply  by  the  earnest  longing  for  a 
disclosure  concerning  the  dealings  of  God, 
and  for  instructions  as  to  his  future  conduct ; 
and  this  view  has  the  support  of  other 
weighty  authorities.  But  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  wt 
have  here  at  the  least  a  "  tacit  reproof  that 
God  had  looked  on  so  qnietly  for  such  a 
length  of  time,  and  had  suffered  things  to 
come  to  such  an  extremity "  (Keil).    St. 


CH.   XIX.   1—21.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


461 


Fatil  Bipeaka  of  him  aa  pleading  mth  God 
against  Israel  ({vrwyxavo  rtfi  de<?  xari  tov 
lapariX.  Bom.  zi.  2),  and  certainly  repre- 
■ents  tha  xioq^anff^af  he  received  as  a  cor- 
rection. And'  the  idea  which  this  verse, 
taken  iu  connexion  with  the  prophet's  flight 
(ver.  3)  and  his  prayer  (ver.  4),  leaves  on 
the  unbiassed  mind  certainly  is  that  iu  his 
zeal  for  God  he  resented  not  only  the  grow- 
ing corruption  of  the  age,  but  (tbove  all  the 
frustration  of  his  efforts  to  stay  it.  What 
hardened  and  vexed  his  righteous  soul  was 
that  in  the  very  hour  of  victory,  when  the 
people  had  confessed  that  Jehovah  alone 
was  God,  he,  the  one  solitary  witness  for 
the  trath,  should  be  driven  from  his  post 
to  escape  as  best  he  might,  and  to  leave  the 
covenant  people  to  the  baneful  influence  of 
Jezebel  and  her  army  of  false  prophets.  It 
is  the  cry  which  we  hear  over  and  over 
•gain  in  the  Old  Testament,  the  complaint 
of  the  silence  and  apparent  indifference  of 
God,  of  the  persecution  of  the  righteous, 
•nd  the  impunity  of  evU-doers.] 

Ver.  11 — ^And  be  Bald,  Go  fortb  [The 
LXX.  inserts  avpiav,  which,  however,  is 
destitute  of  authority,  and  was  probably 
inserted  from  Exod.  xxziv.  2,  to  explain  the 
difficulty  which  the  prophet's  apparent  dis- 
regard of  this  command  creates] ,  and  stand 
npon  tbe  mount  before  the  Lord.  And, 
kehold,  tlie  Lord  passed  by  [Heb.  passeth 
by.  Only  used  here  and  in  Exod.  xxxiii. 
22;  xxxiv.  6  of  the  Divine  Being.  The 
beatiflc  vision  must  be  transient.  An  abid- 
ing presence,  a  {pb*,  was  more  than  man 
eonldbear.  So  Bahr.  As  Elijah  does  not 
seem  to  have  gone  forth  from  the  cave  until 
he  heard  the  still  small  voice  (ver.  13),  some 
would  take  the  participle  IDV  which  is  prob- 
ably employed  as  more  graphic,  as  a  future, 
i.e.,  "  the  Lord  wUl  pass  by,"  and  this  is  the 
interpretation  of  the  LXX. ;  iSoi  wapeKcv- 
Cfrat  Kvpioe"  cai  tSov  irvvojia  iiiya.  cr.X.  The 
effect  of  this  re-arrangement  of  the  text 
would  be  that  the  words,  '*  And  behold  the 
Lord  passing  by,"  must  be  taken  aa  a  part 
of  the  message,  "  Go  forth,"  &o.,  and  not  as 
•  statement  of  what  happened.  That  state- 
ment would  then  begin  with  the  next  words, 
"And  a  great  and  strong  wind,"  Ac.  But 
in  that  case  we  might  have  expected  "  For 
behold,"  &e.,  or  the  "  And  behold  "  would 
have  come  before  "  a  great  and  strong 
wind,"  (fee.  It  is  also  to  be  considered — and 
this  seems  to  me  decisive — that  the  words 
"rent,"  "break,"  Ac,  are  also  participles, 
which  it  would  be  mmatnral  to  divorce  from 
fhe  participle  preceding] ,  and  a  great  and 
strong  wind  [Snoh  as  was  not  uncommon 
In  that  region.  The  approach  to  Sinai  from 
ibe  west  is  known  as  NuJcbSdwy,  "the 


pass  of  the  toindt."  Elsewhere  we  find  the 
Wddy-el-Burk,  or  "valley  of  lightning." 
These  phenomena — the  tempest,  fire,  Ac- 
would  be  all  the  more  awful  and  impressive 
because  of  the  surrounding  desolation  and 
the  utter  solitude]  rent  the  mountains, 
and  brake  In  pieces  the  rocks  before  t'he 
Lord;  but  the  Lord  was  not  In  the  wind 
[Heb.  not  in  the  wind  Jehovah] :  and  after 
the  wind  an  earthqiuake  [Once  before 
(Exod.  xix.  18)  an  earthquake  accompanied 
the  descent  of  God  upon  the  same  moun- 
tain. The  desert  of  Sinai,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  Hammam  Pharoun  and  other 
hot  springs,  affords  no  traces  of  volcanio 
action.  "  Everywhere  there  are  signs  of  the 
action  of  water,  nowhere  of  fire  "  (Stanley). 
But  tt'^T  properly  means  (compare  rauscften, 
rath)  a  crashing  noise  (Job  xxxiz,  24 ;  Isa. 
ix.  4),  and  the  mysterious  sounds  of  Jebel 
Musa  have  often  been  remarked  (see  Stan- 
ley, S.  and  P.  pp.  13,  14)];  bat  tha  Lord 
was  not  in  the  earthquake : 

Yer.  12. — And  after  the  earthquake  » 
lire  [For  the  association  of  tempest,  earth- 
quake, fire,  &o.,  as  punishments  of  God,  see 
Isa.  xxix.  6,  and  Psa.  xviii.  7,  8.  "  Fire  " 
may  well  signify  lightning  (Job  i.  16;  Exod. 
ix.  23).  For  a  vivid  description  of  a 
thunderstorm  at  Sinai,  see  Stewart's  "  Tent 
and  Khan,"  pp.  139, 140 ;  op.  Stanley,  "Jew. 
Oh.,"  vol.  i.  p.  149]  :  but  the  Lord  was  not 
In  the  fire  :  and  after  the  fire  a  still  small 
voice.  [Heb.  a  voice  of  gentle  silence, 
■IDD'yi  an  onomatopoetic  word,  is  aUied  to  onx 
word  dumb.  Very  similar  expression  Job 
iy.  16.  What  was  the  object  and  meaning 
of  this  succession  of  signs  f  First,  let  us 
remember  that  Elijah  was  the  prophet  of 
deeds.  He  taught  his  contemporaries  not 
by  word  but  by  act.  He  ia  here  taught  in 
turn  by  signs.  There  passes  before  him  in 
the  mountain  hollow,  in  the  black  and  dark 
night,  a  procession  of  natural  terrors — of 
storm,  and  earthquake,  and  fire.  But  none 
of  these  things  move  him ;  none  speak  to 
his  soul  and  tell  of  a  present  God.  It  is  the 
hushed  voice,  the  awful  stillness,  over- 
powers and  enchains  him.  He  is  to  learn 
hence,  first,  that  the  Lord  is  a  God  "  mer- 
ciful and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abun- 
dant in  goodness  and  truth  "  (Exod.  xxxiv, 
6) ;  and  secondly,  that  as  it  has  been  with 
himself,  so  it  will  be  with  others ;  the  name 
of  the  Lord  will  be  proclaimed  in  a  voice  of 
gentle  silence  (ih.,  ver.  5).  The  weapons  of 
His  warfare,  the  instruments  of  religious 
progress,  must  be  spiritual,  not  carnal.  Not 
in  fire  and  sword  and  slaughter,  but  by  a 
secret  voice  speaking  to  the  conscience,  will 
God  regain  His  sway  over  the  hearts  ol 
Israel.  (See  Homiletlcs.)  Ths  strildng  simi- 


46S 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINOa 


[oh.  XIX.  1—21. 


larity  between  this  theophany  and  that 
which  Mosea  saw  in  the  same  place,  or  at 
no  great  distance  from  it,  must  not  he  over- 
looked, for  this  constitutes  another  link 
between  law-giver  and  law-restorer.  _  The 
proclamation  of  Exod.  xxxiv.  3,  7  is  the 
best  exponent  of  the  parable  of  vers.  11,  12. 
To  each  was  the  vision  of  God  granted  after 
a  faithful  witness  against  idolatry,  and  after 
a  slaughter  of  idolaters;  each  was  in  a  clift 
of  the  rook ;  in  either  case  the  Lord  passed 
by ;  the  one  was  taught  by  words,  the  other 
rather  by  sigQS,  but  the  message  in  each 
case  was  the  same — that  judgment  is  God's 
strange  wort,  but  that  He  will  by  no  means 
clear  the  guilty  (of.  ver.  17).] 

Ver.  13.— And  It  was  so,  when  Elljab 
heard  It,  that  he  wrapped  lila  face  in  Ills 
mantle  [Like  Moses,  Exod.  iii.  6 ;  cf. 
xxxiii.  20;  xxxiv.  33;  2  Cor.  iii.  13;  Isa. 
vi.  1,  2.  This  mantle  (see  note  on  ch. 
xviii.  46)  was  probably  a  sheepskin.  The 
LXX.  calls  it  itnXiaTti  (of.  Heb.  xi.  37).  In 
Zech.  xiii.  4  we  find  that  the  prophets  wore 
a  mantle  of  hair],  and  went  out,  and  stood 
[Same  words  as  in  ver.  11.  It  was  the  still 
small  voice,  apparently,  that  first  brought 
him  to  obey  the  command  there  given.  He 
would  perhaps  be  afraid  to  issue  from  the 
shelter  of  his  cave  during  the  tempest  and 
the  earthquake,  which  may  have  followed 
directly  after  the  instruction  to  go  forth 
was  given.  Possibly  there  was  a  lesson  for 
him  here  also,  viz.,  that  amid  the  din  and 
excitement  and  torture  of  drought  and 
famine  and  fire  and  blood  the  commands 
of  God  are  less  likely  to  be  heard  in  the  soul 
and  obeyed,  than  in  the  hour  of  peace  and 
stillness.  The  drought  and  famine  and 
sword  have  their  work  to  do,  even  as  the  tem- 
pest and  the  earthquake  have  theirs  ;  but  it 
is  by  the  voice  of  mercy  and  love  that  the 
hearts  of  men  are  turned  back  again.  "  Not 
in  the  strong  east  wind  that  parted  the  Bed 
Sea,  or  the  fire  that  swept  the  top  of  Sinai, 
or  the  earthquake  that  shook  down  the 
walls  of  Jericho  would  God  be  brought  so 
near  to  man  as  in  the  still  small  voice  of  the 
child  of  Bethlehem"  (Stanley)]  In  the 
entering  In  of  the  cave.  [He  hardly  obeyed 
the  letter  of  the  command  of  ver.  11  even 
then.  Does  not  this  point  to  a  rebellious 
and  unsubdued  heart  t  Is  it  not  a  confirma- 
tion of  the  view  taken  above,  that  he  fled  to 
Horeb,  full  of  bitter  disappointment  and 
murmuring  against  God ;  and  that  the  pur- 
pose of  this  revelation  was  not  only  to  teach 
him  as  to  God's  dealings  with  men,  but  also 
to  school  and  subdue  his  own  rebellious 
heart?]  And,  behold,  there  came  a  Tolceunto 
blm  ['The  expression  is  different  from  that 
of  ver.  9.  There  we  read  of  the  "  word  of 
the  Lord,"  here  of  a  "voice."    But  this  is 


not  to  be  identified  with  the  "  still  small 
voice"  of  ver.  12],  and  said,  What  doest 
thou  here,  Elijah  7  [As  in  ver.  9.] 

Ver.  14.— And  he  said,  I  have  been  very 
Jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hdsts  :  because 
the  children  of  Israel  have  forsaken  thy 
covenant,  thrown  down  thine  altars,  and 
slain  thy  prophets  with  the  sword ;  and  I, 
even  I  only,  am  left;  and  they  seek  my 
life,  to  take  it  away.  [Verbatim  as  in  ver. 
10.  What  are  we  to  understand  from  this 
repetition  of  the  former  answer  J  Has  the 
lesson  of  this  theophany  been  lost  upon 
himP  Has  he  failed  to  grasp  its  signi- 
ficance? It  is  probable  that  he  only  par- 
tially understood  its  meaning,  and  it  cer- 
tainly  looks  as  if  he  stiU  felt  himself  an 
injured  and  disappointed  man;  as_  if  the 
recollection  of  the  way  in  which  his  work 
had  been  frustrated  stiU  rankled  in  his  soul. 
But  though  the  words  are  the  same,  it  is 
possible,  and  indeed  probable,  that  the  tmu 
was  entirely  different ;  that  instead  of  speak- 
ing, as  he  had  spoken  before,  querulously  and 
almost  defiantly,  he  now,  catching  his  inspi- 
ration from  the  still  small  voice,  speaks  with 
bated  breath  and  profound  self-humiliation. 
The  facts  are  the  same.  He  repeats  them, 
because  they  and  they  alone  explain  why  he 
is  there,  and  because  he  cannot  see  as  yet 
how  they  are  to  be  remedied.  But  he  ii 
now  conscious  of  a  misgiving  as  to  the 
wisdom  and  piety  of  his  course.  He  feels 
he  has  acted  hastily  and  faithlessly,  and 
has  wanted  to  do  God's  work  in  his  own 
rough  way.  He  will  go  back,  if  it  be  God'« 
will ;  he  wiU  be  content  to  wait  God's  time, 
and  to  follow  His  leading.  The  commitsion 
which  is  straightway  given  him  almost 
proves  that  he  had  experienced  a  change. 
It  implies  that  he  is  now  fitted  for  his  high 
ministry.] 

Ver.  15. — ^And  the  Lord  said  unto  blni. 
Go,  return  on  thy  way  [Hcb.  to  thy  way, 
as  in  Gen.  xix.  2 ;  xxxii.  2 ;  Num.  xxiv.  25, 
&a.]  to  the  wilderness  of  Damascus  [The 
construct  case  with  n  local.  Keil  refers  to 
Deut.  iv.  41;  Josh.  xii.  1 ;  and  Ewald  216  6. 
This  cannot  mean  "  through  the  desert  to 
Damascus,"  for  he  could  not  possibly  go 
any  other  way,  nor  yet  "  to   the  desert 

ghrough  which  he  had  jnst  come)  to 
amascuB,"  for  he  was  then  in  the  heart 
of  the  desert.  He  was  to  find  a  hiding-place 
— we  find  the  king  of  Damascus  at  war  with 
Ahab,  oh.  xx.— or  possibly  a  sphere  for  work, 
— ^he  would  be  near  Hazael — ^in  the  rugged 
desert  which  stretches  south  and  east  of  the 
Syrian  capital.  (See  Stanley,  "  Sinai  and 
Palestine,"  p.  410 ;  Porter's  "  Five  Years  in 
Damascus,"  vol.ii.  p.  254  sqq.)  Here,  too,  tha 
prophet  would  be  at  no  great  distance  from 
his  own  country.     See  on  on.  xvii.  3]:  k&d 


OH.  XIX.  1—21.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


461 


when  thou  oomeat,  anoint  [Heb.  and  thou 
shall  come  and  anoint.  LXX.  Kai  ijS,eis  Kal 
ypifffij.  The  A.  V.  increases  the  difficulty. 
In  the  Hebiew  the  time  of  the  anointing  is 
indefinite.  This  commission  has  long  been 
a  crux  interpretum.  For  neither  Hazael, 
'  nor  Jehu,  nor  Elisha,  so  far  as  we  have 
^any  record,  was  ever  anointed  by  Elijah. 
J  Elisha  was  called  by  him  to  the  prophetic 
office.  Hazael,  it  is  barely  possible,  may 
have  been  anointed  secretly,  like  David 
(1  Sam.  xvi.  2,  13),  but  all  that  we  gather 
from  Scripture  is,  that  he  was  called  in  an 
indirect  way,  and  certainly  not  anointed,  by 
Elisha  (2  Kings  viii.  12—15).  Jehu  was 
certainly  anointed,  but  it  was  neither  by 
Elisha  nor  Elijah  (2  Kings  ix.  1,  6),  but  by 
one  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets.  All  we 
can  say,  consequently,  is  that  the  command 
was  obeyed  in  the  spirit,  and  no  doubt  in 
the  best  possible  time  and  way.  There  may 
have  been  good  reasons,  of  which  we  know 
nothing,  why  Elijai  should  devolve  the 
•ppointment  of  the  two  Mngs  upon  his 
gnccessor,  and  we  can  readily  understand 
that  the  word  "  anoint "  was,  as  in  Judg.  ix. 
6,  Isa.  Ixi.  1,  never  meant  to  be  construed 
Uterally.  For  in  the  first  place,  we  have 
no  record  elsewhere  of  the  anointing  of  any 
prophet;  and  secondly,  it  is  remarkable  that 
when  Elijah  might  so  easily  have  anointed 
Elisha,  he  did  nothing  of  the  kind.  It  is 
dear,  therefore,  that  he  understood  the  word 
to  mean  "appoint."  And  the  root  idea  of 
•nointing,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  the 
setting  apart  for  the  service  of  God  (Exod. 
xxix.  6).  Hence  it  was  (Bahr)  that  vessels 
(Exod.  XXX.  26  sgq.),  and  even  stones  (Gen. 
xxviii.  18),  were  anointed.  And  when  we 
find  that  these  three  persons  were  set  apart 
sooner  or  later,  and  in  different  ways,  to 
fulfil  the  high  purposes  of  God,  that  ought 
to  suffice  us.  The  author  of  this  history 
dearly  found  no  difficulty  in  reoonoiliDg 
this  account  and  that  of  2  Kings  viii.,  ix.  It 
has  also  been  objected  to  this  charge  (Baw- 
linson)  that  it  is  no  "  explanation  or  appli- 
cation of  the  preceding  parable."  But  this 
is  precisely  what  it  appears  to  have  been 
intended  to  be.  The  prophet  is  here  taught 
by  word  much  the  same  lesson  that  had 
been  conveyed  by  signs,  in  the  preceding 
vision.  No  doubt  there  are  additional  par- 
ticulars— the  vision  dealt  only  with  prin- 
ciples, the  charge  descends  to  details  and 
prescribes  duties — but  still  the  great  lesson 
that  souls  are  to  be  won,  that  God's  kingdom 
is  to  be  advanced,  not  by  wrath  and  ven- 
geance, by  fire  and  sword,  but  by  meekness 
and  gentleness,  through  the  reason  and  the 
concience,  is  proclaimed.  Hazael  and  Jehu, 
each  was  God's  instrument  to  punish  ;  each 
Was  like  the  sweeping  storm  or  the  devour- 


ing fire,  each  was  an  engine  of  destruction ; 
but  by  neither  of  these  were  the  hearts  ol 
men  turned  to  the  Lord.  It  was  the  sword 
of  Elisha,  the  sword  of  his  mouth  (of.  Isa. 
xi.  4;  xlix.  2;  Bev.  i.  16;  ii.  16),  should 
constrain  men  to  hide  their  faces  and 
humble  themselves  before  God]  Hazael  [the 
seer  of  Qod.  This  name,  viewed  in  con- 
nection with  Elijah's  vision  of  God,  is 
noticeable]  to  be  Mng  over  Syria; 

Ver.  16.— And  Jehu  [Jehovah  is  he.  The 
name  was  as  appropriate  as  Elijah's]  the 
son  [i.e.,  descendant,  probably  grandson 
(2  Kings  ix.  2,  14).  Nimshi  may  have  been 
a  person  of  more  importance  than  Jehosha- 
phat]  of  Nimshi  shajt  thou  anoint  to  be 
king  over  Israel  [The  prophet  thus  learns 
that  the  house  of  Omri  is  to  share  the  fate 
of  the  dynasties  winch  had  preceded  it. 
Jezebel's  triumph  is  not  to  endure]  :  and 
Elisha  [My  Qod  is  salvation.  This  name, 
borne  by  the  successor  of  Elijah,  "  My  God 
is  the  Lord,"  looks  like  »  fresh  revelation 
of  God's  nature  and  purpose  of  grace]  the 
son  of  Shaphat  [Judge]  of  Abel-meholab 
[The  mention  of  his  abode,  Abel-meholah, 
"the  meadow  of  the  dance"  (of.  ch.  iv.  12; 
Judg.  vii.  22),  a  town  in  the  Jordan  valley, 
at  no  great  distance  from  Beth-shean, 
almost  implies  that  he  was  hitherto  un- 
known to  Elijah.  It  is  to  be  observed 
that  no  snoh  addition  follows  the  mention 
of  Hazael  or  Jehu]  shalt  then  anoint  to 
be  prophet  In  thy  room.  [So  far  from 
Elijah's  work  being  fruitless,  or  from  the 
prophetic  order  being  extinguished,  provi- 
sion is  now  made  for  his  successor.] 

Ver.  17. — And  It  shaU  come  to  pass,  tbat 
him  that  escapeth  the  sword  of  Hazael 
[See  2  Kings  viii.  12,  28;  x.  32;  xiii.  3,  22] 
shall  Jehu  slay  [2  Kings  ix.  24—38 ;  z. 
passim.  Of.  Isa.  Ixvi.  16]  :  and  Mm  that 
escapeth  from  the  sword  of  Jehu  shall 
Elisha  slay.  [Elijah  might  reasonably  in- 
terpret  the  commission  to  "anoint "  Hazael, 
&D.,  as  a  figure,  seeing  there  is  an  undoubted 
figure  of  speech  here.  Elisha  was  a  man 
of  peace.  His  sword  was  the  "sword  of 
the  Spirit,  the  word  of  God."  It  was  by 
"  the  breath  of  his  lips  he  slew  the  wicked  " 
(Isa.  ii.  4;  2  These,  ii.  8;  Hosea  vi.  5). 
Not  only  are  vers.  16,  17  an  interpretation, 
in  some  sort,  of  the  vision,  but  they  are  an 
answer  to  Elijah's  complaint  (vers.  10,  14). 
The  "  children  of  Israel "  who  nad  forsaken 
the  covenant  should  be  punished  by  Hazael 
(cf.  2  Kings  viii.  12,  "I  know  what  thou 
wilt  do  unto  the  children  of  Israel,"  and 
cf  ch.  X.  32) ;  the  king  and  queen  who  had 
thrown  down  the  altars  and  slain  the 
prophets  should  be  slain,  one  by  the  sword 
of  Syria,  the  other  at  the  command  of  Jehu ; 
while  to  his  allegation  that  the  prophets 


464 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH.  XIX.  1 — 21. 


were  extinct  and  he  was  left  alone  is  opposed 
the  ordination  of  a  successor,  and  the  men- 
^n  of  the  "  seven  thousand  "  in  ver.  18.] 

Ver.  18.— Yet  I  have  left  me  [So  St.  Paul, 
Bom.  xi.  4,  KarsXtirov ;  but  the  LXX 
(xaToXflipiis)  aii^  8'11  t^B  versions  translate 
the  ■word  as  future,  as  in  the  margin,  I  will 
leavn,  and  so  the  1  eonversive  seems  to  re- 
3[nive.  See  Gesen.,  Gram.  §  124 — 26]  seven 
tiyjusand  [not  so  much  a  round  as  a  sym- 
b'Jical  number — "the  lAoyi]  of  the  godly  " 
/fieil).  "  The  remnant  according  to  the 
election  of  grace  "  (Rom.  xi.  5).  It  is  hke 
the  144,000  and  the  12,000  of  Eev.  vii.  4—8. 
The  prominent  idea  is  perhaps  this :  Though 
the  children  of  Israel  have  forsaken  My 
covenant,  yet  I  have  kept  and  will  keep  it. 
It  also  BUggestshow  the  still  small  voice  had 
been  speaking  in  the  silence]  In  Israel,  all 
the  Imees  which  have  not  bowed  unto  Baal, 
and  every  mouth  wUcIi  hath  not  kissed 
Mm.  [We  gather  from  Job  xxxi.  26,  27 
that  it  was  customary  to  kiss  the  hand  to 
the  idol,  or  object  of  worship,  and  from 
Eosea  ziii.  2  to  kiss  the  image  itself.  Most 
of  the  commentators  adduce  Cicero  in  Ver- 
rem  iv.  43,  where  he  speaks  of  the  statue  of 
Hercules  at  Agrigentum,  the  lips  and  chin  of 
which  were  a  little  worn  by  the  kisses  of 
devotees.] 

Ver.  19. — 8o  be  departed  fhenee,  and 
found  [Nothing  can  be  concluded  from  this 
word  as  to  previous  acquaintance]  Ellsha 
the  son  of  Shaphat,  who  was  ploughing 
[It  was  in  the  winter,  consequently  (Prov. 
rx.  4.  See  Conder,  p.  328).  "  Ehsha  is  found 
not  in  his  study,  but  in  the  field  :  not  with 
•  hook  in  his  hand,  but  the  plough  "  (Hall) 
With  twelve  yoke  of  oxen  [Heb.  ploughing 
twelve  yoke,  from  which  Ewald  gathers  that 
he  was  ploughing  twelve  yoke  of  land — 
ip)j  like  jugum,  is  used  as  b  measure  of 
land  in  1  Sam.  ziv.  14,  Isa.  ▼.  10 — and  was 
then  at  work  on  the  twelfth  and  last.  But 
the  meaning  of  the  "  twelve  yoke  "  here  is 
surely  settled  by  the"  yoke  of  oxen  ;  "  cf.  ver. 
21  and  see  below]  before  him  [This  word 
also  points  to  animals,  not  land.  The  twelve 
pair  of  oxen,  it  is  generally  thought,  are 
mentioned  to  show  that  Elisha  was  a  man 
of  snbstance.  It  is  not  certain,  however, 
fhat  all  the  twelve  belonged  to  him.  See 
next  note], and  he  vlth  the  twelfth  ["I 
have  seen  more  than  a  dozen  ploughs  thus  at 
work.  To  understand  the  reason  of  this, 
several  things  must  be  token  into  account. 
First,  that  the  arable  land  of  nearly  all  vil- 
lages is  cultivated  in  common ;  then  that 
Arab  farmers  delight  to  work  together, 
psurtly  for  mutual  protection,  and  partly 
from  their  love  of  gossip,"  &c.  Thomson, 
Ii.  and  B.  i.  208] :  and  Elljab  passed  by 


Viim  [Heb.  to  Mm.  The  idea  that  he  may 
have  "  crossed  the  stream  of  the  Jordan  " 
(Eawlinson)  is  extremely  improbable.  The 
current  is  strong,  and  it  is  not  everywhere 
fordable,  especially  in  winter],  and  cast  his 

mantle  upon  Mm.  [Heb.  to  him  VJJJ.  But 
LXX.  Ijr'  aiiTov.  Already,  it  would  seem,  the 
rough  hairy  mantle  had  come  to  be  ree  ig- 
nized  as  the  garb  of  a  prophet  (cf.  Zech. 
xiii.  4).  "  The  prophet's  cloak  was  a  sign  of 
the  prophet's  vocation"  (Keil).  To  cast  t^e 
cloak  to  or  upon  Elisha  was  therefore  an 
appropriate  and  significant  way  of  desig- 
nating him  to  the  prophetic  office.  "  When 
Elijah  went  to  heaven  Elisha  had  the  mantle 
entire  "  2  Kings  ii.  13  (Henry).  The  Ger- 
mans use  the  word  mantel-kind  of  an  adopted 
ohUd.] 

Yer.  20.— And  be  left  the  oxen  [As,  being 
{he  last  in  the  line,  he  could  do,  without  stop- 
ping the  others.  It  is  probable  too  that, 
Elisha  being  the  last,  Elijah's  action  would 
not  have  been  observed  by  the  rest],  and 
ran  after  Elijah  [It  is  clear  that  Elisha  both 
understood  the  act,  and  made  up  his  mind 
at  once.  No  doubt  he  too  had  long  sighed  and 
prayed  over  the  demoralization  of  his  coun- 
try and  the  dishonour  done  to  his  Qod. 
Elijah,  after  casting  the  mantle,  strode  on, 
leaving  it  for  Elisha  to  take  or  reject  it. 
The  latter  soon  showed  his  choice  by  run- 
ning after  him] ,  and  said,  Let  me,  I  pray 
thee,  kiss  my  father  and  my  mother,  and 
then  I  will  follow  thee.  And  he  said  unto 
blm,  Go  back  again  [Heb.  go,  return]  :  for 
what  have  I  done  to  thee  ?  [There  is  not 
a  word  of  reproof  here,  as  Wordsworth  and 
Eawlinson  imagine.  Indeed,  it  would  have 
been  strange  if  there  had  been.  A  greater 
readiness  to  obey  the  prophetic  snmmons, 
Elisha  could  not  well  have  showed.  Forth- 
with, as  soon  as  he  realized  his  call,  "he left 
the  oxen  and  ran  after  "  bis  newmaster.  True, 
he  asks  permission — and  why  should  he  not  f 
for  "  grace  is  no  enemy  to  good  nature  " — 
to  give  a  parting  embrace  to  the  father  and 
mother  to  whom  he  owed  his  Ufe,  and  whom 
he  had  been  required  by  God  to  honour. 
But  there  is  no  proof  of  "  a  divided  heart " 
here.  If  he  had  begged  to  be  allowed  to 
stay  and  bury  his  mother  and  father  (St. 
Luke  ix.  59 — 61)  it  might  have  been  other- 
wise. But  he  suggests  nothing  of  the  kind. 
He  says :  "  One  kiss,  one  farewell,  and  then 
I  will  follow  thee."  It  is  a  complete  mis- 
take, consequently,  to  interpret  EUjah'a 
words  to  mean,  "  Go,  return  to  thy  plough- 
ing, for  why  shouldst  thou  quit  it  ?  .  .  . 
Thou  canst  remain  as  thou  ait "  (Eawlin- 
son). Their  true  meaning,  as  evidenced  by 
the  sequel  (ver.  21),  clearly  was,  "  Go  back 
and  kiss  them ;  why  shouldst  thou  not  1  For 


OB.  ZIX.  1—21.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KIKGS. 


<G6 


what  have  I  done  to  thee  7  I  have  summoned 
thee  to  follow  me.  But  I  have  not  required 
thee  to  repudiate  thine  own  flesh  and 
blood."] 

Ver.  21. — And  he  returned  hack  from  blm 
[Wordsworth  is  not -warranted  in  affirming 
that  Blisha  "  did  not  go  back  and  kiss,"  &o. 
The  text  rather  implies  that  he  did] ,  and 
took  a  yoke  [Heb.  the  yoke.  Cf.  yer.  19] 
of  oxen,  and  slew  them  [Heb.  sacrificed; 
liXX.  I9vae.  But  the  word,  though  gene- 
rally restricted  to  sacrificial  acts,  primarily 
means  "  to  slay  "  simply,  as  here,  and  in 
Gen.  xxzL  51 ;  1  Sam.  xxviii.  24 ;  2  Ghron. 
xviii.  2 ;  Ezek.  zzziz.  17.  There  was  no 
altax  there,  and  the  flesh  of  a  sacrifice  was 
never  boiled] ,  and  boiled  their  flesli  [Heb. 
boiled  them,  the  fleshy  with  the  instruments 
of  the  oxen  [the  plough,  yoke,  <Sec.  The 
plough  of  the  East  is  extremely  rude  and 
slender,  bat  the  yoke,  shaft,  &o.,  would 
afford  a  fair  supply  of  wood.    The  scarcity 


of  timber  may  have  had  something  to  do 
with  this  application  of  the  "  instruments 
of  the  oxen  ;  "  but  it  is  much  more  import- 
ant to  see  it  in  a  symbolical  act,  expressive 
of  Elisha's  entire  renunciation  of  his  secular 
calling.  He  would  henceforth  need  them 
no  longer.  Cf.  1  Sam.  vi.  14 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv. 
22] ,  and  gave  unto  the  people  [Not  only  the 
servants  or  peasants  who  had  been  plough- 
ing with  him,  but  possibly  his  neighbours 
and  friends.  This  was  a  farewell,  not  a 
leligiouB  feast.  Cf.  Luke  v.  29,  where  Levi 
makes  a  "  great  feast "  on  the  occasion  of 
his  call] ,  and  they  did  eat.  Tlien  he  arose, 
and  went  after  Elijah,  and  ministered  unto 
Tilm.  [i.e.,  became  bis  attendant,  as  Joshua 
had  been  the  minister  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxiv. 
13  ;  Josh.  i.  1),  and  as  0ehazi  subsequently 
became  servant  to  him.  See  2  Kings  iii.  11 : 
"  Elisha  .  .  .  which  poured  water  on  the 
hands  of  Elijah;  "  and  cf.  Acts  ziii.  S.j 


HOMILETICS. 

God  anS  th»  Man  of  Goct,  This  chapter  lends  itself  more  readily  to  textual  than 
to  topical  treatment. 

Ver,  1. — "  And  Ahab  told  Jexehel  all  that  EUjah  had  done."  Was  there  no  word, 
then,  of  what  Qod  had  done  ?  Did  he  think  that  Elijah,  by  his  own  power  or  holi- 
ness, had  brought  down  fire  from  heaven  ?  Or  if  Elijah  brought  it,  was  there  no 
thought  of  Him  who  sent  it  ?  But  it  is  an  every-day  experience  that  men  will 
think  of  anything,  talk  of  anything  but  their  Maker.  They  do  not  "  like  to  retain 
God  in  their  thoughts  "  (Rom.  i.  28).  Perhaps  Ahab  was  afraid  in  the  presence  of 
Jezebel  to  connect  the  awful  portent  with  the  name  of  the  Lord.  That  would  be 
tantamount  to  confessing  before  her  that  the  Lord  He  was  God  (ch.  xviii.  24). 
Jezebel,  therefore,  may  think  it  was  magic  if  she  wUL  Men  are  not  unseldom 
cowards  in  religion,  even  before  their  own  wives  and  children.  How  blessed  it  is 
when  husband  and  wife  rehearse  to  each  other  the  righteous  acts  of  the  Lord ;  how 
doubly  blessed  when  the  believing  husband  wins  and  saves  the  unbelieving  wife 
(1  Cor.  vii.  14,  16).    Then  marriage  is  a  sacrament  indeed. 

"And  .  .  .  how  he  had  slain  all  the  'prophets,"  &c.  There  was  no  need  to  tell 
her  that,  at  least  that  night.  This  communication  shows  that  Ahab's  heart  was 
unchanged,  otherwise  he  would  have  practised  a  discreet  reserve.  He  must  have 
known  full  well  what  the  effect  of  those  dark  tidings  would  be.  Had  he  wished  for 
her  conversion,  he  would  surely  have  waited  tiU  the  morning  light.  That  would  have 
given  the  other  tidings  he  had  brought  a  chance  to  work  repentance.  To  speak 
of  the  death  of  the  prophets  would  be  to  fill  her  with  ungovernable  rage.  It  was 
charity  to  hold  his  peace.    That  was  "  a  time  to  keep  sUenoe." 

Ver.  2. — "  Then  Jezebel  sent  a  messenger."  Not,  as  we  might  have  expected,  to 
sue  for  forgiveness,  but  to  threaten  reprisals.  "  She  swears  and  stamps  at  that 
whereat  she  should  have  trembled  "  (Hall).  There  is  no  hate  like  a  woman's,  no 
wickedness  like  hers.    They  never  do  things  by  halves. 

"  Men  differ  at  most  as  heaven  and  earth, 
tBut  women,  best  and  worst,  as  heaven  and  hell." 

This  woman  will  not  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead  (Lake  xvi.  1). 
The  fiery  sign  was  lost  upon  her  ("  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  not  by  apparitions  "). 
Ahab  witnessed  the  execution  of  the  priests  and  was  too  much  awed  to  prevent  it. 
Jezebel  only  hears  of  it,  and  straightway  vows  vengeance  against  its  author.    "  Adam 

1  KINGS.  2  H 


460  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [on.  xa.  1—21, 

was  not  deceived,  bnt  the  woman  being  deoeived  was  in  the  transgression  "  (1  Tim. 
ii.  14). 

"  The  gods  do  so,"  &o.  This  is  like  nnuoh  of  the  profane  swearing  that  we  hear, 
"  full  of  sound  and  fury,  signifying  nothing."  It  costs  very  little  to  invoke  factitious 
deities.  "  The  gods  she  sware  by  could  do  her  no  harm."  They  had  not  been  able 
to  save  their  own  prophets.     C£  Judg.  vi.  31. 

"  If  I  make  not  thy  life,"  &o.  The  enemies  of  God's  Church  and  prophets  are 
always  chained,  and  sometimes  are  infatuate  too.  They  cannot  "  go  beyond  the 
word  of  the  Lord  to  do  less  or  more  "  (Num.  xxiL  18).  "  The  king's  heart  is  in  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  ...  he  turneth  it  whithersoever  he  will"  (Prov.  zxi.  1).  "  He 
tal^eth  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness"  (1  Cor.  iii.  19),  and  turns  the  coimsel  of  an 
Ahithophel  into  foolishness  (2  Sam.  xv.  81).  The  wrath  of  man  is  made  to  praise 
Him  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10).  "  Her  threat  preserved  him  whom  she  meant  to  kilL"  "  It 
were  no  living  for  godly  men  if  the  hands  of  tyrants  were  allowed  to  be  as  bloody  as 
their  hearts"  (Hall). 

Ver.  8. — "  He  arose  and  went  for  his  life."  Elijah,  the  intrepid  apostle  of  Carmel,' 
who  had  met  the  king  without  fear  and  faced  the  four  hundred  Baai  prophets,  and 
stood  alone  contra  mundiMn,  is  seized  with  panic  fear.  The  champion  of  the  morn- 
ing becomes  the  coward  of  the  evening.  We  may  well  exclaim  here,  Quamtiim 
mutatus  ah  illo  t  well  ask,  "  Lord,  what  is  nian  ?  "  Some  have  called  man  a  demi- 
god ;  have  seen  in  him  "  the  peer  of  the  angels."  "  What  a  piece  of  work,"  says 
Hamlpt,  "  is  man  I  how  noble  in  reason  1  how  infinite  in  faculties  1  in  form  and 
moving  how  express  and  admirable  I  in  action  how  like  an  angel  I  in  apprehension 
how  like  a  god  1  "  In  Elijah  we  see  man  at  his  best.  He  was  one  of  the  "  first 
three."  He  is  distinguished  even  from  his  brother  prophets  by  the  work  he  was 
called  to  do,  by  the  powers  vrith  which  he  was  entrusted,  by  the  grace  given  to  him, 
the  care  taken  of  him,  the  triumphant  end  granted  to  hun.  But  how  weak  and 
unworthy  does  this  elect  messenger  of  God  now  appear.  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I 
am  flee  1 "  (Neh.  vi.  11.)  "  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  1 "  How  completely  he  is  the 
sport  of  circumstances ;  how  fiiU  of  contradictions  his  conduct.  At  one  moment  he 
flees  for  his  life;  at  the  next  he  requests  for  himself  that  he  may  die.  "  Doth  he 
wish  to  be  rid  of  his  life  because  he  feared  to  lose  it  ?  "  (HaU.)  Yesterday  strong 
in  faith,  fearing  neither  man  nor  devU ;  to-day  trembling  before  a  woman,  wretched 
and  despairing.  But  more  than  that,  we  find  him  impatient,  petulant,  proud, 
arraigning  the  providence  and  wisdom  of  God.  "  Take  away  my  Ufe,"  this  is  the 
cry  of  a  mortified  ambition ;  of  one  who  cannot  trust  himself  in  God's  hands  any 
longer.  "  I  am  not  better  than  my  fathers."  What  do  these  words  reveal,  but  that 
he  had  thought  himself  better  than  they ;  that  he  had  been  "  exalted  above  measure 
through  the  abundance  of  revelations  "  ?  (2  Cor.  xiL  7.)  And  this  is  Ehjah,  the  re- 
°  storer  of  the  law,  the  express  ambassador  of  heaven.  It  is  well  said  that  he  was 
"  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we  are  "  (James  v.  18).  "  I  have  seen  an  end  of 
ell  perfection."  Here  is  humanity  at  its  best,  and  how  poor  and  weak  it  is.  If 
man  is  "the  glory  "  he  is  also  "  the  scandal  of  the  universe." 

"  Chaos  of  passions,  passions  all  confused, 
Still  by  himself  abused  or  disabused. 
Created  half  to  rise  and  half  to  fall. 
Great  lord  of  all  things,  yet  a  prey  to  all : 
Sole  judge  of  truth,  in  endless  error  hurled. 
The  glory,  jest,  and  riddle  of  the  world." 

Ver.  5. — "  Behold,  an  angel  touched  him."  So  that  he  was  watched  and  gaarded, 
even  while  he  slept.  His  impatience  and  faithlessness  have  not  diminished  the  loving 
care  and  tenderness  of  God.  "He  knoweth  our  frame."  His  very  sleep  was  or- 
dained in  mercy.  Observe  the  contrast  between  the  pity  and  love  of  God  and  the 
childish  repining  and  discontent  of  the  man  of  God  I  Observe,  too,  how  God  uses 
the  ministry  of  angels  I  Compare  Matt.  iv.  11 ;  Luke  xxii.  48 ;  Acta  xxvii.  23 ;  v. 
19 ;  xii.  8.  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits  ?  "  (Heb.  i.  14.)  "  No  wilderness  is 
too  solitary  for  the  attendance  of  those  blessed  spirits."  "  While  he  slept,  his  break- 
fast is  made  ready  for  him  by  those  spiritual  hands." 


«R.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS,  467 


"  How  oft  do  they  their  silver  bowers  leave 

To  come  to  succour  us  that  succour  want  I 
How  oft  do  they  with  golden  pinions  cleave 

The  flitting  skyea,  like  flying  pursuivant, 
Against  fowle  fiendes  to  ayd  us  militant  I 

They  for  us  fight,  they  watch,  and  dewly  ward. 
And  their  bright  squadrons  round  about  us  plant ; 

And  all  for  love  and  nothing  for  reward. 
O  why  should  heavenly  God  to  men  have  snoh  legard  ?  " 

Ver.  6. — "  A  cake  haken  on  the  coals,"  &o.  Not  only  was  the  prophet  proteeteJ, 
he  was  provided  for  by  the  angel.  "What  a  commentary  on  that  verse,  "  He  giveth 
it  to  his  beloved  while  they  sleep  "  (Psa.  cxxvii.  2,  Heb.)  And  does  not  God  give  us 
all  food  in  like  manner  ?  While  the  farmer  sleeps,  the  seed  springs  and  grows 
np,  he  knoweth  not  how  (Mark  iv.  27).  Our  Keeper  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps 
(Psa.  cxxi.  4).  Observe  also  how  God  prepares  a  table  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  not 
the  first  time  He  has  given  angels'  food  in  the  desert  (Fsa.  Ixxviii.  2S ;  Neh.  ix.  21 ; 
Deut.  viii.  16). 

Ver.  7. — "  Arise  and  eat."  Though  this  was  enpematural  food,  so  far  as  we 
can  see  miraculously  provided,  and  in  any  case  of  preternatural  efficacy,  yet  it 
must  be  taken  and  eaten  in  the  ordinary  way.  Elijah  might  have  been  endued 
with  strength  for  his  desert  journey  without  the  aid  of  any  material  elements.  The 
angel's  touch  or  even  the  word  of  tiie  Lord  would  surely  have  sufficed  (Judg.  vi.  21 ; 
Ezek.  ii.  2;  iii.  24 ;  Luke  Tii.  7).  Instead  of  which  a  cake  is  baken  on  the  coals, 
and  he  must  rise  and  eat  thereof,  eat  thereof  twice.  God  works  by  means,  and  it  is 
for  man  to  use  them.  It  ia  presumption  to  expect  God  to  dispense  with  them 
because  He  can  do  so. 

Ver.  8. — "  Went  in  the  strength  of  that  meat,"  &o.  It  is  very  noticeable  how  many 
miraculous  feedings  we  have  in  Holy  Scripture.  Not  only  does  the  New  Testament 
record  a  feeding,  now  of  five  thousand  with  five  loaves,  now  of  four  thousand  with 
seven  loaves  (Matt.  zv.  9, 10) ;  not  only  is  one  or  other  of  these  mentioned  by  all 
four  evangelists  (Matt.  xiv.  17 ;  Mark  vi.  88 ;  Luke  ix.  13 ;  John  vi  9 ;  Matt.  xy.  86 ; 
Mark  vui.  6) ;  but  the  Old  Testament,  in  addition  to  such  narratives  as  those  of 
1  Kings  xvii.  14  sqq. ;  2  Kings  iv.  1 — 6,  42  sqq.,  tells  of  a  miraculous  supply  of  food 
which  extended  over  forty  years  (Exod.  xvi.  14—35  ;  Deut.  viii.  3, 4, 16).  Is  not  all 
this  to  teach  ns  that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone  ?  (Dent.  viii.  3.)  Are  they  not 
rehearsals,  adumbrations  of  the  great  mystery  of  our  religion,  of  the  true  "  bread 
from  heaven  which  giveth  life  unto  the  world  "  ?  (John  vi.  32  sqq.)  We  too  are 
journeying  to  Horeb,  the  mount  of  God.  The  home  of  our  souls  is  the  "  mountain  of 
myrrh  and  the  MU  of  frankincense  "  (Cant.  iv.  6).  And  the  journey  is  too  great 
for  us.  Without  Divine  aid,  without  soul  food,  we  shall  "  faint  by  the  way."  But 
God  has  provided  for  us  a  gracious  viaticum,  a  meat  which  the  world  knows  not  of, 
flesh  which  is  meat  indeed,  blood  which  is  drink  indeed  (John  vi.  55). 

Ver.  9. — "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,."  Though  he  had  not  merited  such 
a  favour,  for  he  had  acted  without  that  word  when  he  fled.  True,  he  fled  to  the 
desert,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  that  he  might  hear  what  God  would  say  concerning 
him,  but  he  had  no  right  to  presume  that  He  who  had  not  spoken  at  Jezreel  would 
speak  at  Sinai.  But  God  never  deals  with  us  as  we  deserve,  or  as  we  deal  with  one 
another.  "  If  thou.  Lord,  shouldest  mark  iniquities,  0  Lord,  who  shaU  stand  ?  "  (Psa. 
cxxx.  8.)  **  If  they  break  my  statues  .  .  .  then  will  I  visit  their  transgression 
with  the  rod  .  .  .  nevertheless,  my  loving-kindness  will  I  not  utterly  take  from 
him,"  &e.  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  31 — 88).  "  Thou  hast  played  the  harlot  with  many  lovers; 
yet  return  again  to  me,  saith  the  Lord"  (Jer.  iii.  1).  If  the  word  did  not  come  to 
ns  when  we  stray,  how  could  we  be  reclaimed  ?  God  must  take  the  first  step 
(John  vi.  44). 

"  What  doeit  thou  here,  Elijah .'"  It  is  more  than  doubtfol  whether  there  wai 
any  audible  voice  (see  ver.  12).  God  spoke  through  the  conscience.  And  this  is 
itiU  the  organ  used  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Have  we  never  heard  this  question  in  our 
secret  sonli  ?  perhaps  when  we  stood  in  the  way  of  sinners,  or  sat  in  the  seftt  of  the 


468  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xix.  1—21, 

Rcomfol.  We  should  do  well  to  put  it  repeatedly  to  onr  own  hearts.  "  Bemanrde,  ad 
quid  venisti  ?  " — it  was  thus  that  the  greatest  saint  of  the  Middle  Ages  often  tried 
his  motives  and  conduct. 

Ver.  10. — "  I  have  been  very  jealous."  We  often  confound  zeal  for  our  own  ends 
and  purposes  with  zeal  for  God ;  often  misread  our  ownmotives.  Jehu  cried,  "  Come 
and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord  "  (2  Kings  x.  16) ;  "  but  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  in 
the  law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,"  &o.  (vers.  29,  31).  Saul's  "  zeal  for  the  childreu 
of  Israel  and  Judah"  (2  Sam.  xxi.  2)  procured  the  impalemant  of  seven  of  his  sons. 
■  St.  Paul  bears  witness  of  the  Jews,  that "  they  have  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  according 
to  knowledge,"  and  testifies  of  himself,  "  concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the  Church" 
(Phil.  iii.  6 ;  cf.  Acts  xxvi  9, 11).  We  can  understand  the  cynical  warning.  Swtout, 
point  de  eele,  when  we  remember  what  crimes  have  been  committed  in  its  name.. 
The  spirit  of  Elias,  the  spirit  of  fire  and  sword  (2  Kings  i.  10  ;  1  Kings  xix.  1),  is 
not  the  spirit  of  our  Lord  or  His  Church  (Luke  ix.  55,"  66).  There  was  not  im- 
probably in  this  complaint  Bomethiug  of  the  resentment  which  James  and 
John  felt  when  the  Samaritans  did  not  receive  them.  Was  it  not  in  part  pique  at 
his  rejection  by  Israel  led  to  Ehjali's  intercession  against  them  ?  (Eom.  xi.  2.)  It 
is  true,  he  begins,  "They  have  rejected  thee,"  but  he  ends,  "They  have  rejected 
me  "  (1  Sam.  viii.  7).  And  our  lamentations  over  the  non-success  of  our  ministry,, 
are  they  inspired  by  the  dishonour  done  to  God,  or  the  indifference  manifested 
towards  ourselves  ?  There  may  be  both  pride  and  temper  in  the  complaint,  "  He 
followeth  not  us  "  (Mark  ix.  38). 

Ver  11. — "Stand  .  .  ,  before  the  Lord."  Only  thus  can  we  know  ourselves,  and 
Belf- knowledge  must  be  our  first  aim.  "  H  caelo  descendit,  yvUdt  aeauTov."  "  In  thy 
Ught  shall  we  see  light."  We  compare  ourselves  vidth  pigmies  when  we  compare 
ourselves  with  others  (2  Cor.  x.  12).  It  is  only  in  the  presence  of  our  Maker  that 
we  learn  our  nothingness  and  sinfulness.  "  Now  mine  eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore 
I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes  "  (Job  xlii.  5, 6).  "  Beholding  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image"  (2  Cor.  ui.  18). 

Ver.  12. — "  A  still  small  voice."  The  terrors  of  the  Lord  awe  the  soul ;  His  love 
melts  and  wins  it.  What  the  law  could  not  do,  the  gospel  has  done  (Eom.  viii.  3). 
Christ  draws  men  nnto  ffim  by  the  sweet  attraction  of  His  cross  (John  xii.  32). 
The  lightnings  and  thunders,  the  trumpet  and  the  voices  of  Sinai,  do  not  move  the 
world  as  do  the  seven  last  words  of  the  Crucified.  "  Not  in  the  wind  that  parted 
the  Eed  Sea,  or  the  fire  that  swept  the  top  of  Sinai,"  was  God  brought  so  near  to 
man,  "  as  in  the  ministrations  of  Him  whose  cry  was  not  heard  in  the  streets,  as  in 
the  still  small  voice  of  the  child  at  BetMehem  "  (Stanley).  This  parable  may  be  com- 
pared with  the  familiar  fable  which  tcUs  how  storm  and  sun  strove  together  for  the 
mastery.  The  former  made  the  traveller  wrap  his  garments  more  closely  about 
bim ;  the  latter  made  him  cast  them  aside.  Love  is  more  powerful  than  fear,  and 
that  because  "  love  is  of  God."  Judgment  is  His  strange  work.  "  God  loves  to 
make  a  way  for  Himself  by  terror,  but  He  conveys  Himself  to  us  in  sweetness  " 
(Bp.  Hall) — a  truth  well  brought  out  in  Theodore  Monod's  exquisite  hymn — 

"  Tet  He  found  me :  I  beheld  Him 
Bleeding  on  the  curs6d  tree ; 
Heard  Him  pray,  '  Forgive  them,  FaOier ; ' 
And  my  wistful  heart  said  faintly, 

*  Some  of  self,  and  some  of  Ihee.' 

•*  Day  by  day  His  tender  mercy 
Healing,  helping,  full  and  free ; 
Sweet  and  strong,  and,  ah  I  so  patient, 
Brought  me  lower,  whilst  I  whispered 

*  Less  of  self,  and  more  of  Thee,' 

''.Higher  than  the  highest  heavens. 
Deeper  than  the  deepest  sea, 
Iiord,  Thy  love  at  last  hath  conquered  | 
Grant  me  now  my  spirit's  longing, 
'  None  of  self,  and  all  of  Thee.'  " 


OH.  XEL  1—21.1  THE  PIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  «69 

Ver.  13. — "  Wrapped,  hit  face  in  his  mantle."  He  was  afraid  to  look  npon  God 
(Exod.  iii.  6;  of.  Gen.  iii.  10,  "I  hid  myself  ").  "  Conscience  makes  cowards  of  us 
♦U."  Besides,  no  man  can  see  His  face  and  live  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20).  The  beatific 
vision  is  too  much  for  our  poor  mortality,  too  much  for  the  angelio  powers  (Isa. 
-vi  2).  It  is  in  mercy  that  God  is  veiled  from  our  view.  The  seeing  God  as  He 
is  belongs  to  the  times  of  restitution  (Matt  v.  8 ;  Heb.  xlL  14 ;  Bev.  i.  7 ;  xziL  4 ; 
1  Cor.  xiii.  12). 

Ver.  14. — "  Ihwoe  been  very  jealous,"  fto.  The  same  question,  and  precisely  the 
same  words  in  reply.  But  everything  was  not  the  same.  The  man  and  the  manner 
were  alike  changed  (cf.  1  Sam.  z.  6).  He  has  heard  the  "  BtUl  small  voice,"  and 
it  has  hushed  his  own.  How  true  it  is,  "  It  is  not  the  words  we  say,  but  the  manner 
«ud  spirit  in  which  we  say  them,  gives  them  theu-  force  and  significance." 

Ver.  16. — "  Oo,  retv/m."  This  is  God's  answer  to  the  question,  •'  What  doest  thou 
here?"  "  Thou  hast  now  no  business  here.  Thou  hast  a  work  to  do  elsewhere. 
Thou  art  not  left  alone,  nor  has  God  ceased  to  watch  over  and  care  for  His  Church. 
His  ministers  of  wrath  are  already  nominated ;  it  is  for  thee  to  call  them  to  their 
work.".  Which  of  God's  servants  has  not  desponded  like  Elijah  ?  Who  has  not 
been  tempted  to  think  his  work  a  Uilure  ?  Who  has  not  had  to  complain  of  a  gain- 
saying and  disobedient  people  ?  How  many  have  been  induced  to  desert  their  posts  ? 
But  no  man's  work  cam  be  a  failure  unless  he  is  a  failure  himself.  Our  work  is  to 
witness,  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  wiU  forbear.  If  they  torbear,  who 
shall  say  that  that  work  is  not  successful  ?  And  it  may  be  suggested  here  that 
work  is  often  the  very  best  remedy  for  despondency  and  doubt.  The  diligent  soul 
has  no  time  for  self-toiture.  Its  eye  is  fixed  on  others.  There  is  a  quaint  legend 
which  tells  how,  some  years  after  the  event,  St.  Thomas  was  again  troubled 
with  agonizing  ^oubts  as  to  our  Lord's  resurrection.  He  sought  the  apostles,  and 
began  to  pour  his  soul's  troubles  into  their  ears.  But  first  one,  then  the  other, 
looked  at  him  in  astonishment,  and  told  the  unhappy  doubter  that  he  was  sorry 
for  him,  but  really  he  had  so  much  to  do  he  had  no  time  to  listen  to  his  tale.  Then 
he  was  fain  to  impart  his  woes  to  some  devout  women.  But  they,  as  busy  as 
Dorcas  and  in  like  employment,  soon  made  him  understand  that  they  had  no 
leisure  for  such  thoughts  as  these.  At  last  it  dawned  upon  him  that  perhaps  it  was 
fcecause  they  were  so  busy  that  they  were  firee  from  the  doubts  by  which  he  was 
tortured.  He  took  the  hint ;  he  went  to  Parthia ;  occupied  himself  in  preaching 
■Christ's  gospel,  and  was  never  troubled  with  doubts  any  more. 

Ver.  18. — "  Yet  hwve  I  left  me  seven  thousand."  There  is  always  a  remnant 
(Bom.  xi.  4,  5).  The  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  the  Church.  God  has  His 
secret  ones,  vmknown  to  men.  The  number  of  the  elect  must  be  accompUshed. 
(Bev.  viL  4).  The  prophets  have  been  too  much  given  to  pessimist  viewb  "  Qod's 
faithful  ones  are  often  his  hidden  ones  "  (Fsa.  Izxxiii.  8). 

**  Tet  in  fall'n  Israel  are  there  hearts  and  eyes, 
That  day  by  day  in  prayer  like  thine  arise, 
Thou  know'st  them  not,  but  their  Creator  knowft" 

Archbishop  Ussher  used  to  say  to  say  that  in  the  great  Assize,  if  the  King  should 
set  him  on  His  right  hand,  three  things  would  surprise  him.  First,  to  find  himself 
iliere  ;  secondly,  to  find  that  numbers  of  whose  salvation  he  had  always  been  confi- 
dent were  not  there  ;  thirdly,  to  find  that  thousands  of  whose  salvation  be  had 
always  despaired  were  there  after  all. 

Ver.  19. — "  Found  Elisha  .  .  .  ploughing."  God  never  calls  an  idle  man.  "  If 
ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon,  who  will  commit  to  your 
trust  the  true  riches  ?  "  (Luke  xvi.  11.)  The  man  who  will  not  plough  by  reason  of 
the  cold  (Prov.  xx.  4),  if  he  put  his  hand  to  the  gospel  plough,  will  presently  look 
back  (Luke  ix.  62),  and  go  not  to  the  work  (Acts  xv.  38).  The  apostles  were  called 
from  their  ships,  their  nets,  the  receipt  of  custom,  &c.,  none  from  the  market-place  o» 
the  street  corners.  They  only  exchanged  one  department  of  God's  work  for  another, 
for  "  the  man  who  makes  two  blades  of  grass  grow  where  only  one  grew  before  is 


470  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGa  [oh.  xk.  1—21. 

%  fellow-worker  with  God."  Ldborare  eat  ora/re.  "  An  honest  calling  in  the  world 
does  not  at  all  put  us  out  of  the  way  of  our  heavenly  calling."  "  In  aU  labour  ig 
profit." 

Ver.  20. — "He  left  the  oxen."  No  service  without  sacrifice.  Sometimes  it  is  only 
ships  and  nets  (Mark  i  20),  sometimes  it  is  houses  and  lands,  father  and  mother, 
wife  and  child  (Matt.  xix.  29). 

"  Oo  back  again.''  Why  should  he  not  kiss  his  father  and  mother  ?  "  For  God 
commanded,  saying,  Honour  thy  father  and  mother,"  and  it  is  not  for  the  gi'eatest  of 
the  i)rophets  to  make  the  commandment  of  God  of  none  effect  (Matt.  xv.  4 — 6). 
Beligiou  developes  and  intensifies  the  domestic  affections.  Ties  of  flesh  become 
stronger  and  closer  when  cemented  and  consecrated  by  grace.  It  would  be  strange 
if  the  religion  of  love  made  husband  or  wife,  parent  or  cbUd,  love  each  other 
less. 

Ver.  21. — "  TooJc  a  yoke  of  oxen  and  tleto  them."  He  has  done  with  earthly 
pursuits.  He  burns  his  ships  behind  him.  It  would  be  well  for  the  Church  of 
Christ  if  her  ministers  acted  in  like  manner.  The  temptation  to  eke  out  a  scaoty 
income  by  trade,  especially  among  missionaries,  must  be  great ;  biit  a  man  cannot 
be  half  a  clergyman,  and  must  not  be  entangled  with  the  affairs  of  this  life.  Some  of 
the  Swiss  pastors  have  become  hotel-keepers,  but  if  they  have  been  the  gainers, 
religion  has  not.  Of  all  masters,  religion  oud  business  are  the  two  trbich  can 
least  be  served  together. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Elijah's  Prayer  for  Death.  How  erratic  have  been  the  movementi 
of  this  prophet  I  Our  first  introduction  to  him  is  at  the  court  of  Ahab,  whence,  as 
soon  as  he  utters  his  prophecy,  he  is  away  to  Cherith  in  the  east,  among  the  wilds 
of  GUead.  Next  we  find  him  in  the  north,  at  Zarephath  of  Zidon.  Then  he  meets 
Obadiah,  probably  in  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  whence  he  passes  over  to  Carmel  in 
the  west.  From  Carmel  he  runs  before  Ahab's  horses  to  the  entrance  of  Jezreel. 
The  next  day  finds  him  on  his  way  to  Beersheba  in  the  extreme  south  of  Judah. 
The  day  following  he  is  pushing  his  way  into  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  where  we 
now  find  him  under  a  shrub,  requesting  for  himself  that  he  may  die.  Let  ue 
consider —     ' 

I.  The  occasion  or  this  PBAVEa  1.  Jezebel  had  threatened  his  life.  (1)  Ahab 
had  reported  to  his  queen  what  Elijah  ha'd  done  at  Carmel,  and  in  particular 
recounted  how  he  had  slain  all  the  prophets.  In  this  statement  we  notice  two 
capital  faults.  He  did  not  recount  what  Jehovah  had  done ;  he  did  not  properly 
distinguish  the  "  prophets "  slain  as  idolatrous  and  false.  The  gospel  may  be 
variously  preached.  (2)  Instead  of  reflecting  and  repenting,  Jezebel  was  filled  with 
resentment,  and  resolved  upon  the  destruction  of  Elijah.  Miracles  will  not  do  more 
than  reason  with  a  corrupt  and  prejudiced  heart.  (See  Luke  xvi.  31 ;  John  xii.  10, 
11.)  (3)  She  accordingly  sent  messengers  to  Elijah  with  an  oath,  declaring  that 
within  twenty-four  hours  she  would  revenge  upon  his  life  the  slaughter  of  her 
priests.  Wickedness  is  not  always  politic :  by  giving  him  this  notice  she  gave  him 
an  opportunity  to  escape.  2.  To  save  his  life  he  fled.  (1)  Was  this  wrong?  Some 
have  blamed  him  for  it  because  he  did  not  first  ascertain  the  will  of  God.  Had  he 
no  voice  of  God  in  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  ?  Had  he  no  voice  of  God  in 
the  providence  which  apprised  him  of  his  peril  ?  Would  he  not  have  tempted  the 
Lord  his  God  to  have  waited  for  another  voice  ?  Had  he  remained  and  forfeited 
his  life,  would  he  not  have  been  to  blame  ?  God  gives  us  our  reason,  and  if  we 
follow  its  hght,  together  with  that  of  an  upright  conscience,  we  shall  do  well.  (2) 
But  who  can  say  that  Elijah  had  no  direction  from  the  word  of  the  Lord? 
Certainly  there  was  a  plan  for  his  journey  recognized  by  the  angel  with  which  he 
was  familiar  (see  ver.  7).  The  distance  from  Beersheba  to  Horeb  was  about  150 
miles.  (8)  In  his  fiight  he  came  first  to  Beersheba,  where  he  was  under  the  pro- 
tection of  Jehoshaphat,  king  of  Judah,  who  feared  the  Lord.    There  he  left  hia 


CH.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  471 

Berrant  in  safety,  and  might  have  abode  himself  in  eafety  had  he  not  acted  nnder 
the  promptings  of  inspiration  to  proceed  alone  into  the  wilderness.  (8)  Alone  with 
Ood  he  asks  to  die,  (1)  The  Hebrew  phrase  is,  "  He  requested /or  hit  Ufe  that  he 
might  die."  There  is  life  in  death  to  the  righteous.  (2)  "  It  is  enaugh."  This  is 
the  language  of  disappointment.  He  looked  for  better  fruit  of  bis  ministry  than  he 
found.  He  thought,  Surely  this  demonstration  on  Oarmel  will  extinguish  idolatry; 
but  he  finds  Jezebel  swearing  against  his  life,  and  apparently  in  a  position  to  carry 
out  her  purpose.  "  Now,  0  Lord,  take  away  my  life ;  for  I  am  not  better  than  my 
fathers."  I  am  no  more  useful  here  than  they  have  been  who  are  gone  heuce.  Let 
me  join  them. 

II.  The  answers  given  to  it.  1.  They  come  in  (he  form  of  physical  refresh- 
ment. (1)  Elijah's  prayer  was  evidently  uttered  under  the  influence  of  physical 
exhaustion  and  discomfort.  His  sitting  under  the  "juniper"  is  mentioned,  not  to 
suggest  that  he  derived  comfort  from  an  ample  shade,  but  rather  to  show  how  little 
shelter  he  could  find.  The  word  (DDI)  is  construed  as  in  the  text  by  the  Hebrews, 
by  Jerome,  and  the  Vulgate;  yet  it  is  rather  the  genista  {broom),  a  shrub  with 
yellow  flowers  which  grows  in  the  desert,  and  which  has  its  name  (from  Dm  to 
bind)  from  the  toughness  or  tenacity  of  its  twigs,  which  were  used  for  withes.  Not 
only  was  he  wayworn  with  his  journey  and  exposure  to  the  sun,  but  faint  also  for 
want  of  food  and  drink.  (2)  The  answer  came  to  his  prayer,  therefore,  in  the  bless- 
ing of  refreshing  sleep.  Out  of  this  also  he  was  seasonably  aroused  by  an  Angel  to 
find  a  cake  on  the  coals  (as  bread  is  sometimes  baked  in  the  East)  and  a  cruse 
of  water  at  his  bolster.  God  knows  our  frame,  pities  us,  and  makes  due  aUowanoe 
for  our  frailties.  When  we  find  our  spirits  in  a  morbid  state  let  us  look  to  our 
health.  Hygiene  may  come,  even  to  the  soul,  as  an  angel  of  God.  2.  They  ca/m« 
to  him  in  spiritual  blessing.  (1)  The  reiresliment  which  Elijah  received  was 
twpernatural  in  its  »ov/rce.    The  bread  and  water  came  to  him  with  the  word  and 

touch  of  the  Angel-Jehovah  (flin*  ^^<?^^).  This  was  no  conunon  angel,  but  one  of 
the  Persons  of  the  Godhead.  (2)  It  was  supernatural  also  in  its  effects  (ver.  8). 
In  these  he  is  brought  intimately  into  association  with  Moses  and  Jesus.  (Compare 
Exod.  xxxiv.  28 ;  Deut.  ix.  9, 18 ;  Matt.  iv.  2.)  It  is  also  noteworthy  how  i^ese 
three  appear  in  glory  together  on  the  holy  mount.  (See  Luke  iz.  80,  81.)  The 
spiritual  hfe  we  derive  from  God's  word  is  set  forth  in  the  mystery  of  the  manna 
which  iai  forty  years  nourished  the  people  of  God  in  this  wilderness.  It  is  also  set 
forth  in  that  new  life  of  Jesus  la  which  after  His  resurrection  He  appeared  (o  Hia 
^ciples  Avxmg  forty  days.    (See  Bom.  vi  11 ;  Gal.  ii.  20.) — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  9 — 18. — BUjdh  at  Eoreh.  Elijah  went  in  the  strength  of  the  refreshment 
he  had  received  from  the  Angel-Jehovah  a  forty  days'  journey  to  Horeb.  He  was 
now  on  holy  ground.  It  was  the  "  mount  of  God  "  on  which  Moses  had  seen  the 
Angel- Jehovah  in  the  bush,  and  was  within  sight  of  Sinai,  memorable  for  the  giving 
of  the  law.  On  Horeb  he  lodges  in  a  cave,  perhaps  the  very  recess  from  which 
Moses  witnessed  the  Shechinah  (see  Exod.  xxxii.  22),  and  here  becomes  the  subject 
of  Divine  communications  and  revelations.    Consider  now — 

L  His  inteecession  against  Israel.  1.  Observe  the  occasion.  (1)  The  question 
eame  to  >iiTin  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  "What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  "  In  answer 
to  this  he  urged  what  Paul  calls  his  "intercession  against  Israel"  (Bom.  xi.  2,  8). 
Wherever  we  are  it  behoves  us  to  ask  ourselves  what  business  we  have  here. 
Everywhere  our  first  business  is  to  glorify  God.  (2)  This  question  is  thought  to 
suggest  that  Elijah  might  have  been  more  profitably  employed  elsewhere.  But  did 
he  not  come  here  after  receiving  supernatural  strength  from  God  Himself  expressly 
for  tliis  journey  ?  (See  vers.  7,  8.)  (8)  Bather  must  we  not  look  upon  his  journey 
in  the  light  of  a  parable,  showing  how  God  abandons  those  who  refuse  to  be 
reformed  ?  (Compare  Jer.  ix.  2.)  In  this  view  we  can  see  how  Elijah  acted  in 
"faith"  in  this  journey;  for  Paul  seems  to  aUude  to  him  in  Hebrews  zL  38. 
3.  TTie  matter  of  the  accusation.  (1)  The  view  now  given  harmonizes  vrith  this, 
the  substance  of  which  is  the  prophet's  great  jealousy  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts, 
whose  honour  had  been  outraged  by  the  apostasy  of  the  children  of  laraeL    Here 


47S  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  six.  1— 2L 

is  no  confession  of  that  nn worthy  timiclity  with  which  Elijah  has  heen,  we  think, 
too  hastily  charged.  Nor  had  lie  any  rebuke  ft'om  God  for^such  supposed  dastardli- 
ness,  which  doubtless  he  would  have  received  had  he  deserved  it.  He  is  here 
br  cause  he  cannot  abide  in  the  land  of  Israel,  where  Jehovah  was  commonly 
insulted.  (2)  He  recounts  the  particulars  of  his  grie£  "  For  the  children  of  Israel 
have  forsaken  thy  covenant" — have  substituted  false  Elohim  for  Thee;  "thrown 
down  thine  altars  " — attempted  to  abolish  Thy  worship ;  "  slain  thy  prophets  with 
the  sword  " — to  provide  against  any  revival  of  the  pure  religion  of  their  fathers  ( 
"  and  I,  even  I  only,  am  left ;  and  they  seek  my  life  to  take  it  away."  Of  what 
use,  til  en,  could  he  be  to  such  a  people  ?  (See  Hosea  iv.  17.)  (3)  The  motive  of  this 
intercession  to  God  against  Israel  is  not  personal  revenge,  but  zeal  for  Jehovah. 
And  though  we  are  bound,  as  Christians,  to  love  our  enemies,  that  does  not  say 
that  we  are  to  love  the  enemies  of  God.  There  is  a  spurious  charity  in  high  favour 
which  the  Scriptures  do  not  sanction.  (See  2  Chron.  xix.  2  ;  Psa.  cxix.  19 ;  cxxxix. 
21 ;  Luke  xiv.  26.)  Beware  of  that  charity  which  has  complicity  with  sin.  (4)  The 
repetition  of  the  answer  when  a  second  time  the  question  was  put  evinces  the  deep 
sincerity  of  the  prophet's  souL 

II.  The  answee  op  God  unto  him.  1.  This  wag  firat  given  in  symbol.  (1)  To 
witness  the  vision  he  was  caused  to  stand  on  the  mount  before  the  Lord.  Probably 
this  was  the  place  where  Moses  stood  on  a  similar  occasion  (see  Exod.  xix.  9,  16). 
We  should  have  the  Bock  of  Ages  for  our  foundation  when  we  witness  visions  of 
God.  AU  shall  witness  them  in  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  (2)  Terrible  signs 
immediately  followed  upon  the  passing  by  of  Jehovah,  (a)  First,  "  a  great  and 
strong  wind  rent  the  mountains,  and  brake  in  pieces  the  rocks  before  the  Lord." 
Here  was  a  sign  of  wrath  upon  the  rulers  and  people,  through  invasion,  (Compars 
Jer,  iv.  11 — 13 ;  Ezek.  vi.  2 ;  Amos  iv.  1).  (6)  "  And  after  the  wind  an  earthquake." 
This  is  a  sign  of  revolution,  whetherin  tilings  oivU,  ecclesiastical,  or  both.  (Compare 
Psa.  Ixviii.  8 ;  Eev.  vi  12 ;  xvi.  18).  (c)  "  And  after  the  earthquake  a  fire."  This 
is  the  symbol  of  judgments  more  immediately  from  God  (see  Deut.  iv.  24 ;  Psa. 
xviii.  12 — 14;  Isvi.  12;  Jer.  zlviii.  46).  (8)  But  the  Lord  was  in  none  of  these. 
Judgments  are  a  strange  work  to  Him.  They  are  necessary  to  the  order  of  His 
government,  but  not  congenial  to  His  nature.  "  He  delighteth  in  mercy."  So  the 
Lord  was  in  the  "  still  small  voice  "  which  followed.  The  gentle  voice  of  the  gospel 
follows  the  law  which  came  with  the  uproar  of  the  elements,  and  Ood  is  in  U.  So 
Elijah  wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle.  (Compare  Exod.  iii.  6 ;  Isa.  vi.  2.)  2.  It 
was  afterwards  expounded  in  words.  (1)  Elijah,  the  intercessor  against  Israel, 
and  therefore  the  impersonation  of  anger  against  sin,  was  to  return  to  Israel  by  way 
of  Damascus,  where  he  was  to  "  anoint  Hazael  to  be  king  over  Syria."  In  Hazael 
now  we  must  look  for  the  "  strong  wind  "  that  was  to  come  up  and  make  havoc 
upon  the  mountains  and  rocks  of  Israel.  (Compare  2  Kings  viii.  12, 13 ;  x.  32,  83; 
siii.  8.)  (2)  "Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi"  was  Elijah  to  "  anoint  to  be  king  over 
IsraeL"  Here  was  the  instrument  of  the  "earthquake"  of  revolution.  (See  2 
Kings  ix.  1 — 3.)  Not  only  did  Jehu  bring  a  signal  destruction  upon  the  whole 
house  of  Ahab ;  he  brought  down  judgment  also  upon  the  worshippers  of  Baal 
(2  Kings  X.  28).  (3)  "  Elisha  the  son  of  Shapliat "  was  this  impersonation  of 
righteous  anger  to  "  anoint  to  be  prophet"  in  his  room.  Here  is  God's  instrument 
of  "fire."  His  words  are  to  be  swords  of  flame.  So  "it  shall  come  to  pass  that 
him  that  escapeth  from  the  sword  of  Hazael  shall  Jehu  slay;  and  him  that  escapeth 
from  the  sword  of  Jehu  shall  Elisha  slay."  No  siuner  can  escape  the  fire  of  God's 
word.  (4)  But  the  "  still  small  voice  "  of  the  gospel  of  mercy  has  its  triumphs. 
"  Yet  I  have  left  me  seven  thousand  in  Israel,"  &c.  God  has  His  faithful  "  hidden 
ones  "  (Psa.  Ixxxiii.  8).  No  wonder  Elijah  should  cover  his  face  with  reverent 
gratitude  at  the  discovery  of  that  sealed  company  in  whose  midst  was  Jshovab- 
Shauuah  I    (Ezek.  xlviii.  86 ;  Bey.  vii  13— 17.)— J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  19—21. — The  Call  of  Elisha.  After  the  visions  of  Horeb,  and  in  pnr. 
Buance  of  the  commission  there  received,  Elijah  returned  from  the  wilderness  and 
re-entered  the  land  of  Israel.    Whether  he  went  round  by  Damascus,  and  in  hii 


CB.  XIX.  l^al.J  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  473 

course  anointerl  Hazael  to  be  king  over  Syria,  as  Samuel  had  anointed  David  long 
before  he  ascended  the  throne  of  Israel,  we  are  not  informed.  It  is  not  necessary 
for  the  fulfilment  of  his  instructions  (ver.  15)  to  suppose  that  he  did  so ;  for  prophets 
are  said  to  do  things  which  they  predict.  (See  Jer.  i.  10 ;  Ezek.  xliii.  3 ;  Bom.  iv. 
17.)  The  reason  is  that  their  predictions  are  sure  to  be  accomplished;  and  upon 
the  same  principle  a  true  faith  in  the  promises  of  God  is  said  to  be  the  "  substance" 
or  subsistence  of  "  things  hoped  for  "  (Heb.  xi.  1).  It  is  certain  that  EUsha  made 
provision  for  the  anointing  of  Jehu ;  Elisha  also  informed  Hazael  that  he  should 
be  king  over  Syria  (see  2  Kings  viii.  18 ;  ix.  1 — 3).  The  call  of  Elisha  was  by  the 
hand  oi  Elijah, 

I.  The  call  of  Elisha  was  from  God.  1.  Elijah  threw  his  mantle  over  Elisha. 
(1)  The  prophet's  mantle  was  the  symbol  of  liis  office.  It  seems  to  have  been  the 
slan  of  an  animal,  or  composed  of  some  hairy  material  (see  2  Kings  i.  8 ;  Zech. 
xiii.  6 ;  Isa.  xx.  2 ;  Matt.  iii.  4).  In  allusion  to  this,  perhaps,  the  popes  invest  their 
cardinals  with  the  pallium — a  cloak  or  pall  made  of  wool.  (2)  The  mantle  of 
Elijah  thrown  upon  Elisha  was  the  sign  that  he  was  to  "follow  him,"  to  be  his 
servant  first,  and  eventually  to  be  his  successor.  The  mantle,  accordingly,  came 
fully  into  the  possession  of  Elisha  when  his  ''  master  "  was  "  taktn  from  his  head  " 
(2  Kings  ii.  8,  13).  (8)  The  "  spirit  of  Elijah  "  then  "  came  upon  Elisha."  So 
esEentiid  to  a  prophet  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  prophets  themselves  are  called 
"spirits."  False  prophets  also  are  called  "spirits,"  but  for  an  opposite  reason 
(see  ch.  xxii.  22, 23 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  82 ;  1  John  iv.  1,  2).  2.  Elijah  acted  under  Divine 
direction.  (1)  After  he  had  asked  for  himself  that  he  might  die,  God  expressly 
commissioned  him  to  anoint  "Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat  of  Abel-Meholah "  to  be 
"prophet  in  his  room"  (ver,  16).  The  true  minister  is  God's  gift.  (2)  God  knew 
the  qualities  of  Elisha.  The  manner  in  which  he  received  the  call  proved  him  to 
be  a  true  man.  God's  order  is,  first  "  grace,"  tben  "  apostleship  "  (see  Horn.  i.  6). 
Those  persons  deceive  themselves  who,  being  destitute  of  godliness,  affect  apostle- 
ship (see  Psa.  1.  16).  Nor  can  apostleship  abide  where  grace  is  forfeited  (Acts 
i.  26).  (8)  Elijah  found  Elisha,  not  in  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  but  ploughing 
in  the  field.  The  spirit  of  prophecy  will  not  be  bed  down  to  human  institutions, 
however  venerable  and  respectable. 

II.  The  response  of  Elisha  was  to  God  1.  He  aeeordinghf  renounced  the 
world.  (1)  He  had  something  to  sacrifice.  The  "twelve  yoke  of  oxen"  indicate 
prosperity.  The  glimpse  we  get  of  his  home  is  sufficient  to  discover  comfort  and 
happiness.  Everybody  has  something  to  give  up  for  God.  (2)  At  the  caU  of  God 
he  gave  up  all.  Instantly  he  "  left  the  oxen  and  ran  after  Elijah."  There  should 
be  no  hesitation  in  entering  upon  the  service  of  God.  EUsha  did  not  go  home  to 
ask  but  to  take  leave  of  his  parents.  For  the  authority  of  God  is  above  that  of 
parents.  His  proposal  to  return  to  his  home  was  not  a  pretext  for  delay,  else  he 
would  have  merited  the  censure  of  our  Lord  (see  Luke  v.  29 ;  ix.  61,  62)  The 
completeness  of  his  renunciation  of  the  world  was  expressed  in  his  sacrificing  the 
oxen  together  with  the  gear.  Ministers,  in  particular,  should  be  free  from  the 
entanglem'ents  of  this  hfe  (see  Matt.  x.  9,  10 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  14 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4).  2.  He 
followed  Elijah.  (1)  He  had  something  to  encounte^The  life  of  a  prophet  was 
not  without  its  privations  and  discomforts.  And  in  folUlPhg  Elijah,  whose  life  was 
threatened  with  an  oath  by  Jezebel,  he  would  expose  himself  to  her  mahgnity.  The 
offence  of  the  cross  has  not  ceased.  (2)  He  encountered  all  cheerfully._  Elijah 
responded  tc  his  request  to  let  him  kiss  his  father  and  mother  before  following  him, 
saying,  "  Go,  return-;  for  what  have  I  done  to  thee  ?  "  This  answer  was  intended 
to  throw  npon  Ehsha  the  consideration  of  all  that  was  involved  in  his  call,  so  that 
his  choice  might  be  intelligent  and  free.  He  was  not  long  in  counting  the  cost. 
God  had  predisposed  his  heart  (see  Psa.  ex.  8).  Soon  we  find  him  pouring  water 
npon  the  hands  of  Elijah — lovingly  serving  the  servant  of  his  Lord  (2  Kings  iii.  11). 

Observe:  1.  Elisha,  though  evidently  a  great  man  at  Abel-Meholah,  could 
handle  the  plough.  There  is  no  disgrace 'in  honest  labour.  It  is  even  honourable. 
8.  While  in  pursuit  of  his  business  he  was  called  of  God.  Business  will  not  be 
honest  if  it  prevent  us  from  hearing  God's  voice.    8.  He  returned  to  kiss  his  father 


474  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xix.  1—21 

and  mother  and  make  a  farewell  feast  with  his  household  before  following  Elijah. 
Natural  affection  and  social  endearments,  within  proper  limits,  are  respected  by 
religion.  4.  Elisha's  parents  do  not  seem  to  have  hindered  him.  Those  parents 
incur  fearful  responsibilities  who,  under  worldly  influences,  hinder  their  eons  from 
responding  to  a  call  of  God  to  enter  His  ministry. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — The  DesponcUng  Prophet.    A  marvellous  change  has  come  over 

Ehjah.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  more  complete  contrast  than  is  presented  by  his 
moral  attitude  in  this  and  the  previous  chapters.  He  who  just  before  has  so  boldly 
confronted  the  proud  king,  and  defied  the  priests  of  Baal,  standing  without  fear 
before  his  flaming  altar,  and  sternly  carrying  out  the  judgment  of  God  on  the  cor- 
rupters of  His  people,  is  now  filled  with  dismay,  and  flies  from  the  post  of  duty  and 
of  danger.  So  unstable  are  the  grandest  forms  of  human  virtue,  and  so  weak  are  the 
noblest  of  naen  when  God  is  pleased  for  a  while  to  leave  them  to  themselves.  Con- 
sider (1)  The  prophet's  state  of  mind.  (2)  The  way  in  which  God  deals  with  him, 
I.  The  prophet's  state  of  mind.  It  is  one  of  deep  despondency.  Fear  of  the 
queen's  revenge  is  not  enough  of  itself  to  explain  it.  There  is  disappointment  at 
the  apparent  result  of  the  events  of  the  previous  day,  weariness  of  life,  disgust  at 
the  condition  of  the  land,  a  sense  of  powerlessness  before  the  difficulties  of  his 
position,  perhaps  doubt  as  to  the  wisdom  of  what  he  has  done.  He  speaks  and 
acts  as  a  dispirited,  broken-hearted  man.  Note  some  of  the  manifest  causes  of  this 
despoudency.  We  can  never  thoroughly  understand  the  feelings  of  a  man  unless 
we  take  into  account  the  sources  and  occasions  of  them,  and  try  to  put  ourselves  in 
his  place.  1.  Physical  exliaustion.  His  bodily  frame  was  worn  and  weary.  His 
animal  spirits  had  bad  a  great  strain  upon  them,  and  now  suffered  a  oorresponrling 
relapse.  Unwonted  exertion  of  strength  was  followed  by  unwonted  weakness.  The 
relation  that  exists  between  the  state  of  the  body  and  the  state  of  the  mind  is  very 
mysterious,  but  very  real.  The  elation  or  depression  of  our  religions  feeling  depends 
far  more  on  mere  physical  conditions  than  we  often  imagine.  A  diseased  body  will 
often  cause  a  dark  cloud  to  come  over  the  spirit's  firmament ;  much  that  is  morbid 
in  the  religious  thoughts  and  emotions  of  good  men  needs  to  be  dealt  with  by  the 
physician  of  the  body  rather  than  of  the  soul.  2.  Loneliness.  He  was  without 
the  companionship  and  sjmpathy  of  those  who  would  share  his  labours  and  perils. 
"  I,  even  I  only,  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life  to  destroy  it."  It  is  a  single-handed 
conflict  in  which  he  is  involved.  There  are  none  to  stand  by  him,  none  whom  he 
can  trust.  Such  isolation  is  the  severest  possible  test  of  fidelity.  As  the  rock  never 
appears  more  majestic  than  when  seen  standing  alone,  with  the  ocean  billows 
rolling  round  it,  so  with  one  who  is  "  faithful  found  among  the  faithless,'"  out  off 
from  all  natural  and  human  supports,  isolated  in  a  surrounding  sea  of  indifference 
or  iniquity.  (Think  of  Pcml :  "  At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  with  me,  but  all 
forsook  me,"  2  Tim.  iv.  16;  above  all  the  Christ.  "  I  have  trodden  the  winepress 
alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me,"  Isaiah  Ixiii.  B.)  Supernatural 
help  will  often  come  for  special  emergencies,  and  will  make  the  soul  sublimely  inde- 
pendent of  external  aid  ;  but  it  is  hard  to  carry  on  a  long,  patient  conflict"with  diffi- 
culties alone.  8.  Wwnt  of  success.  His  ministry  seems  all  in  vain.  His  words 
are  but  as  the  dreams  of  tl^pb^lse  prophets.  The  solemn  testimony  given  on  Carmel 
has  passed  away  without  effecting  any  real  change  in  the  condition  of  things.  The 
fire  that  consumed  his  sacrifice  has  gone  out.  Righteous  vengeance  has  been  in- 
flicted on  the  idolatrous  prophets,  and  the  Kishon  has  swept  away  their  blood.  The 
drought  has  done  its  work,  and  the  rain  has  returned  upon  the.land.  And  now  all 
seems  to  be  ?oing  on  just  as  it  was  before.  Ahab  and  Jezebel  are  as  hostile  and 
treacherous  and  full  of  cruel  hate  as  ever ;  and  as  for  the  people,  there  is  no  kind  of 
security  for  their  constancy  to  their  recent  vows.  Surely  he  is  living  his  sad  life  in 
vain  I  That  dreariest  of  all  thoughts  to  a  man  of  high  and  holy  purpose — that  his 
labour  is  utterly  fruitless — sweeps  like  a  withering  wind  through  his  soul,  and  he 
wishes  he  were  dead.  "  0  Lord,  take  away  my  hfe,  for  I  am  no  better  than  my 
fathers."  4.  The  sense  of  having  forsahen  the  post  of  responsibility.  It  may 
have  been  a  natural  impulse  that  moved  him  to  "  fly  for  his  life,"  but  no  wonder 


CH.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  4T6 

his  despondency  deepened  as  he  lost  himself  in  the  solitudes  of  the  wilderness.  Hii 
was  the  inward  disquietude  which  will  always  be  the  penalty  of  a  man's  having 
weakly  or  wilfully  deserted  the  path  of  duty.  When  good  men  place  themselves  in 
B  false  position,  they  must  expect  the  shadow  of  some  morbid  condition  of  feeling  to 
fall  upon  their  spirits.  When  the  hands  of  those  who  ought  to  be  busy  about  some 
work  for  God  are  idle,  their  hearts  are  left  a  prey  to  all  sorts  of  evil  influences. 
Beligious  activity  is  one  of  the  main  secrets  of  religious  health.  What  is  our  grand 
business  in  this  world  but  just  to  battle  against  the  weaknesses  of  our  own  nature, 
and  the  force  of  adverse  circumstances  ?  And  when  the  difflculties  of  our  position 
gather  thickest  about  us,  then  is  the  time  to  cast  ourselves  most  fearlessly  on  the 
Divine  power  that  will  enable  us  to  overcome  them  and  listen  to  the  voice  that  says, 
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life." 

II.  God's  way  of  dealing  with  him.  Taking  a  general  view  of  the  Divine  method, 
we  see  that  each  successive  step  is  wisely  adapted  to  the  prophet's  need.  1. 
Physical  refreshment.  An  angel  is  sent  with  food  for  the  nourishment  of  his  ex- 
hausted frame  ;  not  to  talk  with  him,  not  by  remonstrance  or  persuasion  to  chase 
away  his  morbid  feelings,  but  to  feed  him.  The  disease  of  the  mind  is  to  be  cured 
by  first  removing  the  weakness  of  the  body,  which  was  one  of  its  causes.  It  is  a 
suggestive  incident  Our  physical  nature  is  as  truly  an  object  of  Divine  thought  and 
care  as  the  spiritual.  God  will  not  fail  to  supply  the  meaner  wants  of  His  children. 
The  beneficent  ministries  of  His  providence  are  ever  auxiliary  to  the  higher  purposes 
of  His  grace.  2.  A  significant  revelation  of  the  Divine  presence  a/nd  power.  Th» 
remarkable  phenomena  described  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  verses  on  doubt  had 
A  symbolic  meaning.  The  wind,  the  earthquake,  and  the  fire  were  emblems  of  the 
flonspicuous  and  extraordinary  manner  in  which  Elijah  probably  expected  the  work 
of  God  to  be  carried  on.  The  "  stiU  small  voice  "  that  followed  taught  him  that 
God's  chosen  way  of  working  was  rather  one  that  is  calm  and  noiseless.  The 
stirring  events  that  had  recently  taken  place  were  only  preparatory  to  the  silent  but 
mightier  energy  of  His. spirit  working  through  the  voice  of  the  prophet.  We  are 
apt  to  over-estimate  the  power  of  that  which  "  cometh  with  observation.'"  Why 
should  the  wind,  and  the  fire,  and  the  earthquake  be  God's  only  instruments  ?  Is 
He  not  equally  in  the  gently-dawning  light,  the  soft-whispering  breeze,  the  silent, 
secret  forces  of  nature  ?  Your  path  of  usefulaess  may  be  obscure,  your  influence 
nnobserved,  its  issues  slowly  developed.  But  be  not  disheartened.  Bemember  the 
"  stiU  small  voice  "  breathing  in  the  ear  of  the  prophet  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave 
when  the  tumult  was  over,  and  learn  that  it  is  by  a  feeble  instrument  and  a  quiet, 
patient  process  that  God  will  accomplish  His  grandest  work  in  the  moral  sphere; 
This  is  the  method  of  the  world's  Bedeemer.  "  He  shall  not  cry  nor  lift  up,  nor 
cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets,  &c.  (Isa.  xlii.  2,  8, 4).  8.  Words  of  rebuke 
and  encowragement,  "  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  "  "  Go,  return  on  thy  way." 
"  Yet  have  I  left  me  seven  thousand  in  Israel,"  &e.  Thus  does  God  reprove  him 
for  the  faithlessness  that  lay  at  the  root  of  his  despondency.  If  the  veil  that  hid 
the  secret  hfe  of  Israel  could  at  that  hour  have  been  uplifted,  he  would  have  seen 
how  little  real  reason  there  was  for  it.  Seven  thousand  living  witnesses  might  have 
come  forth  from  their  obscurity  to  show  that  his  work  was  not  in  vain.  We  little 
know  what  God  is  doing  beneath  the  surface,  at  the  secret  heart  of  society,  when 
appearances  seem  most  unfavourable.  Let  us  be  true  to  ourselves  and  to  Him, 
doing  faithfully  the  work  He  has  given  us  to  do  in  storm  or  in  calm,  and  leave  it  to 
Him  to  bring  about  the  glorious  issue.  "  Be  ye  therefore  steadfast,  inunovable," 
*o.  (1  Cor.  XV.  58).— W. 

Ver.  19 — 21. — The  Call  of  EUtha.  It  was  by  an  express  Divine  command  that 
EUjah  summoned  Elisha  to  the  prophetic  of&ce  (ver.  16).  And  yet  we  may  discern 
%  purely  human  element  in  this.  He  did  it  by  the  impulse  of  natural  feeling. 
Stem,  rugged,  self-reliant  as  he  was,  he  needed  sympathy  and  companionship.  He 
yearned  for  the  society  of  a  kindred  spirit.  He  could  not  bear  to  hve  alone.  Whethei 
he  had  any  previous  personal  knowledge  of  Elisha  we  know  not ;  but  it  is  certain 
that,  totally  different  as  the  two  men  were,  he  found  in  him  a  faithful  Mend  and 


476  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  kx.  1— 2L 

serrant.  And  scanty  as  the  materials  of  the  narrative  may  be,  there  ifl  enough  to 
show  how  deep  and  tender  an  affection  existed  between  them.  Note  in  reference 
to  this  call  — 

I.  The  sovereignty  of  the  Divine  choick.  No  indication  is  given  as  to  why 
Elisha  particularly  should  have  been  called  to  this  office.  So  it  has  generally  been 
in  the  case  of  those  who,  in  the  olden  times,  were  raised  up  to  occupy  distinguished 
positions  in  the  development  of  the  Divine  plan.  (Abraham,  Moses,  Saul,  David, 
&o.)  So  was  it  in  Christ's  choice  of  the  inner  circle  of  His  disciples ;  as  when  to  the 
sons  of  Zebedee  mending  their  nets,  and  to  Matthew  at  the  receipt  of  custom.  He 
said,  "Follow  me."  But  the  elections  of  God  are  never  arbitrary  and  capricious. 
He  chooses  whom  He  wlE  to  be  the  instruments  of  His  purpose,  "  taking  one  of  s 
city  and  two  of  a  family  "  as  it  pleases  Him  (Jer.  iii.  14).  But  there  is  always  some 
deep  and  sufficient  reason  for  this,  though  we  may  not  be  able  to  trace  it  Every 
man  who  has  done  any  great  work  for  God  in  the  world  has  been  more  or  less 
deeply  impressed  with  this  sense  of  a  special  Divine  call  and  commission.  And  it 
has  given  a  dignity  to  his  bearing  and  strength  and  courage  to  his  spirit  that 
nothing  else  could  give.  Every  true  Christian  finds  highest  inspiration  in  the 
thought  that  God  has  singled  him  out  from  the  crowd  and  summoned  him  to  the 
eervice  of  a  consecrated  life.  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,  and 
ordained  you,"&c.  (John  xv.  16). 

II.  The  sacred  personal  relation  it  established  between  the  prophet  ano 
HIS  servant.  Elijah's  throwing  his  "mantle"  upon  him  as  he  passed  by  was  k 
symbolic  act  indicative  of  this.  It  was  the  sign  of  their  common  prophetic  voca- 
tion, the  seal  and  bond  of  the  new  relation  existing  between  them.     It  betokened— 

(1)  some  kind  of  adoption  to  sonship.     "  My  Father,  my  Father"  (2  Kings  ii.  12), 

(2)  A  transference  of  the  responsibility  of  the  prophetic  work.  (3)  The  imparta- 
tion  of  the  same  spirit,  even  the  "  double  portion  "  of  the  first-bom  (2  Kings  iii. 
9,  10).  We  see  here  something  dimly  typical  of  the  relation  Christ  sustained 
towards  His  chosen  apostles.  "  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  also 
have  I  sent  them,"  &c.  (John  xvii.  18,  19).  Some  such  relation  subsisted  between 
Paul  and  his  "  dearly  beloved  son'  Timothy.  "  As  a  son  with  the  father  he  hath 
served  with  me  in  the  gospel "  (Phil.  ii.  22).  "  Wherefore  I  put  thee  in  remem> 
branee,"  &c.  "  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,"  &c.  (2  Tim.  i.  6,  13).  The 
thought  becomes  proverbial  when  we  speak  of  the  "  mantle "  of  a  great  leader 
fialling  upon  his  successors.  One  of  the  chief  ends  of  a  noble  life  is  answered  when 
others  take  up  the  work  that  it  left  imfinished,  and  catch  the  spirit  of  its  example; 
nothing  more  sacred  than  the  spiritual  bond  thus  established. 

III.  Tee  completeness  of  Elisha'b  self-surrender.  Natural  feeling  for  a 
moment  throws  an  obstacle  in  the  way.  "  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  kiss  my  fatherand 
my  mother."  It  was  a  hard  task  for  him  at  once  to  loosen  himself  from  family 
ties,  and  relinquish  the  comforts  of  what  was  probably  a  prosperous  pastoral  life, 
and  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  wandering  prophet.  Elijah's  answer  seems  to  disown 
the  exercise  of  any  undue  constraint  upon  him,  and  simply  leaves  him  free  to  choose. 
But  the  loyalty  of  his  spirit  to  the  Divine  authority  soon  settles  the  alternative, 
and  after  an  act  expressive  of  his  entire  abandonment  of  the  associations  of  bis 
former  life,  "  he  arose  and  went  after  Elijah  and  ministered  unto  him."  We  are 
reminded  of  the  way  in  which  Christ  called  on  men  to  surrender  their  all  and 
follow  Him  (Luke  ix.  57 — 62).  Fidelity  to  Him  demands  complete  self-sacrifice. 
The  strongest  fascinations,  and  even  the  dearest  ties  of  earth,  will  give  way  to  the 
realized  sovereignty  of  His  claims.  "  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than 
me  is  not  worthy  of  me  "  (Matt.  x.  87).— W. 

Ver.  4. — The  Causes  of  Despondency.  Human  character  is  more  complex  than 
many  imagine.  Its  elements  are  so  diverse,  and  sometimes  so  contradictory,  that 
only  God  can  fairly  judge  it.  The  biographies  of  Scripture  and  the  subtleties  of  oni 
own  hearts  combine  to  enforce  the  lesson,  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged." 
We  should  have  placed  in  the  foremost  rank  the  disciple  who  first  acknowledged 
the  divinity  of  our  Lord,  and  we  should  have  oast  him  out  of  the  Church  who  denied 


CH.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  477 

his  Lord  with  oaths  and  curses ;  yet  both  the  one  and  the  other  were  the  outcome 
of  the  same  character.  Never  was  contradiction  more  complete  thaa  in  Elijah. 
One  day  he  leads  a  whole  nation  in  penitence,  the  next  he  flees  to  save  his  hfe,  as 
one  who  has  thrown  up  all  hope  of  Jehovah's  cause.  None  but  the  pitiful  and 
patient  Father-God  would  have  judged  him  aright ;  nor  was  Elijah  the  last  to  say, 
"  Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great."  We  are  reminded  that  it  is  difficult  to 
judge  ourselves  as  well  as  others.  On  Carmel,  Elijah  might  have  thought  himself 
invincible,  and  in  Horeb  an  unmitigated  coward,  but  he  was  neither.  Varieties  of 
mood  must  not  be  too  much  considered.  They  do  not  afford  a  fair  index  to 
character.  We  are  not  infidels  because  we  pass  through  a  phase  of  doubt,  we  are 
not  reprobates  because  we  are  deeply  conscious  of  sin,  nor  are  we  Christians  because 
we  enjoy  a  religious  service.  A  sad  and  frequent  experience  of  religious  hfe,  that 
of  despondency,  is  set  before  us  here,  and  we  will  seek  to  discover  its  causes. 

I.  Eeaction  apiek  excitement.  Great  natures  are  peculiarly  subject  to  this. 
The  impulse  which  impels  to  a  noble  act  has  a  rebound  proportioned  to  its  intensity. 
Peter  and  John  the  Baptist  stand  beside  Elijah  as  exemplars  of  this  fact.  From  it 
arises  the  special  peril  of  revivalistic  services.  Excitement  has  its  place  and  power 
in  the  advance  of  Christ's  kingdom,  but  we  mast  not  substitute  spasmodio  feeling 
for  steady  growth. 

II.  Exhaustion  op  phtsical  and  hebvous  SKEsaT.  Even  the  gigantio  strength 
of  Elijah  underwent  a  terrible  strain  on  CarmeL  Anxiety,  enthusiasm,  burning 
zeal,  exultation  combined  to  agitate  him,  and  these  were  doubtless  preceded  by 
many  days  and  nights  of  passionate,  agonizing  prayer.  God's  provision  for  the 
prophet— the  sleep  that  came  over  him,  as  over  a  tired  child,  the  food  prepared  by 
angel  hands — prove  that  this  was  recognized. 

Show  the  mutual  dependence  of  body  and  mind.  Neither  the  equable  tempera- 
ment of  some  Christians  nor  the  excitability  of  others  is  due  always  to  the 
presence  or  absence  of  Divine  grace.  Good  food,  fresh  air,  and  change  of  scene 
would  do  more  than  religious  exercises  to  restore  tone  to  some  who  are  despondent. 
The  neglect  of  sanitary  laws  is  a  sin.  There  was  far-reaching  wisdom  in  Paul's 
declaration,  "  I  keep  the  body  under." 

III.  Absence  of  stmpatht.  "  I  am  left  alone."  "  I  only  am  left."  Such  was 
the  burden  of  Elijah's  cry.  This  is  a  special  source  of  despondency  to  missionaries 
surrounded  by  the  heathen.  It  affects  also  multitudes  who  are  not  so  literally  alone. 
They  may  have  many  Christians  around  them,  but  in  their  special  work,  in  their 
peculiar  difficulty,  they  can  find  none  to  help,  or  even  to  understand  them.  "Alone 
in  a  crowd  "  is  a  true  description  of  many  a  disciple  of  Christ,  who  is  thinking  his 
own  thoughts  and  fighting  his  own  foes.  Show  fi:om  this  the  wisdom  of  the  provision 
God  has  made  in  Church  fellowship.  Point  out  the  causes  which  tend  to  make  such 
communion  unreal  or  unhelpful.  Urge  the  cultivation  of  sympathy  with  young 
disciples,  with  obscure  workers,  &o. 

IV.  Influence  of  doubt.  The  confidence  of  the  prophet  on  Carmel  had  broken 
down.  Jezebel  had  not  been  cowed  by  the  sudden  revulsion  of  popular  feeling. 
She  doubted  its  permanence,  and  at  all  events  resolved  that  she  would  not  lose  heart, 
so  Ahab  and  his  courtiers  were  reassured  when  she  swore  to  have  revenge  on  Elijah. 
The  prophet  thought  now  that  he  had  been  too  sanguine — ^that  the  one  chance  had 
come  and  gone  without  effect.  Doubt  paralyzed  him.  Doubt  of  God's  willingness  to 
forgive  plunges  the  penitent  into  despondency.  He  would  scarcely  venture  secretly 
into  a  crowd  to  touch  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment.  Doubt  of  God's  readiness  to 
bear  and  answer  prayer  keeps  the  Christian  from  the  light  of  His  coimtenance,  &o. 

V.  Invisibilitt  of  antagonists.  Elijah  could  face  his  visible  foes  on  Carmal 
without  quailing — ^indeed,  he  dared  to  taunt  them  at  the  risk  of  being  torn  to  pieces — 
but  against  this  vague  feeling  of  despair  he  could  not  hold  his  own.  Moral  battles 
are  the  hardest  to  fight.  He  who  can  grapple  with  what  is  tangible  sometimes 
fails  when  called  on  to  "  wrestle  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with  principahties, 
and  powers,  and  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world."  Some  would  rather  run 
the  risk  of  being  condemned  hereafter,  as  vricked  and  slothful  servants,  than  hav« 
the  certainty  of  being  sneered  at  now  as  those  who  are  "  righteous  overmuch.* 


478  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xix.  1—21. 

VI.  Enforced  inactivitt.  Elijah's  opportunity  for  vigorous  action  seemed  over. 
He  was  cast  in  upon  his  own  thoughts.  Few  could  hear  it  less  patiently  than  he. 
The  man  who  can  dare  and  do  anything  finds  it  specially  hard  to  wait  and  to 
suffer.  Similar  temptation  to  despondency  comes  to  those  who  are  laid  aside  by 
illnes!!,  or  removed  from  a  happy  sphere  of  service.  But  that  is  the  time  to  wait  on 
the  Lord,  and  so  "  renew  our  strength," 

Conclusion.  In  all  hours  of  despondency  remember  (hat.  He  who  Tcnew  the 
agony  of  Gethsemane  a/nd  Calva/ry  pities  us,  and  feels  for  us.  "We  have  not  a 
High  Priest  who  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  &o. — A.  R, 

Ver.  9. — A  Question  from  God  for  the  consideration  of  Man.  Ehjah  was  fleeing 
from  peril  and  from  work,  but  he  could  not  flee  from  God.  The  Father  seeth  in 
secret.  No  man  is  out  of  His  sight,  no  feehng  eludes  His  vigilance  (Psalm  cxzxix.) 
Christ  knew  the  plans  of  His  foes  (Matt.  xii.  25).  He  understood  the  unexpressed 
wants  of  the  sinful  (Matt.  ix.  2).  He  heard  the  secret  conversations  of  His  followers 
(Mark  ix.  33),  and  lovingly  answered  their  unspoken  questions  (John  xvi.  19). 
In  this  story  God's  pity  is  as  conspicuous  as  His  knowledge.  Refreshed  by  the 
provision  given  by  unseen  hands,  Elijah  went  to  Hqreb,  a  place  sacred  in  its  asso- 
ciations and  lonely  in  its  grandeur.  There,  hidden  in  a  cave  from  the  wrath  of 
Jezebel,  the  voice  of  Jehovah  reached  him,  saying,  "  What  doest  thou  here, 
Elijah?"  . 

I.  The  question  came  to  a  prophet  in  his  houb  of  despaib.  This  Divine  inter- 
position on  his  behalf  teaches  us  the  means  God  uses  to  bring  us  out  from  our 
despondency.  The  prophet  was  deUvered  from  his  depression  by  learning  the 
following  lessons :  1.  That  God  was  near.  Whatever  the  sin  that  needs  pardon, 
the  weakness  that  wants  conquering,  the  doubt  that  wants  unravelling,  there  is  no 
fear  of  the  issue  if  we  can  consciously  bring  it  to  God.  Elijah  was  saved  because 
he  dared  tell  Jehovah  all  that  was  in  his  heart.  Moses  sometimes  was  compelled 
to  leave  his  work  to  the  elders,  that  he  might  speak  to  God  face  to  face.  The 
disciples  "went  and  told  Jesus"  their  grief  and  their  triumph.  Aye,  and  the 
Master  Himself  nerved  Himself  for  work  and  for  suflering  by  prayer — on  the 
mountain  or  in  the  garden.  Satan  says.  Give  up  prayer  till  your  dLfficulties  are 
removed.  Christ  says,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are  heavy  laden,  and 
I  wiU  giwe  yourest."  2.  That  success  was  assured,  Elijah  thought  he  stood  alone, 
but  the  Lord  ssid,  "  Tet  I  have  left  me  seven  thousand  in  Israel,"  &o.  Success  was 
not  where  the  prophet  had  looked  for  it.  The  crowds  on  Carmel  had  not  been  radically 
changed,  but  the  secret  worshippers  of  God  had  been  strengthened  by  his  heroism. 
So  in  the  Lord's  ministry,  the  nucleus  of  the  Church  was  not  found  in  the  ap- 
plauding m^lltitudes  on  Olivet,  but  in  the  few  faithful  ones  in  the  garden  of  Geth- 
semane. Our  work  may  be  greater  than  we  think.  No  word  or  work  for  Christ 
fails  of  its  reward.  "  For  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  enow  from  heaven,  and 
returneth  not  thither,  but  watereth  the  earth,  and  maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud, 
that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower  and  bread  to  the  eater :  so  shall  my  word  be  that 
goeth  forth  out  of  my  mouth :  it  shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but  it  shall  accom- 
plish that  which  I  please,  and  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."  3. 
That  worTcwas  waiting  (ver.  15).  Elijah  was  not  to  remainin  the  cave,  any  more 
than  the  disciples  were  to  dwell  on  the  mount  of  transfiguration.  For  his  own 
sake  and  for  the  good  of  others  he  was  to  be  up  and  doing.  If  you  would  be  saved 
from  brooding,  despondency,  and  doubt,  throw  yourselves  into  the  work  of  God. 
Do  with  all  your  might  what  your  hands  find  to  do :  and  your  service  will  restore 
tone  to  your  mind,  and  bring  hope  to  your  heart,  and  prepare  you  to  hear  the  "  Well 
done,  good  and  faithful  servant." 

II.  This  question  came  to  a  man  in  a  false  position.  "  What  doest  thou  here, 
Elijah  ?  "  The  inquiry  should  pursue  others  who  have  fled  to  caves  in  which  they 
would  fain  hide  themselves  from  responsibility.  1.  It  comes  to  the  impenitent,  in 
the  cave  of  concealment.  They  say,  "  Doth  God  know  ?  "  He  sees  the  secret  siu; 
He  knows  the  iniquity  of  that  which  society  applauds,  and  the  day  is  coming  when 
excuses  shall  be  stripped  off,  and  wickedness  discovered     Before  that  terrible  day, 


OH.  xn.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  47» 

when  "  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  disclosed,"  come  to  the  feet  of  a  pardoning 
Ood.  2,  It  cornea  to  the  penitent  in  the  cave  of  despondency.  To  all  such  God 
says,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together."  8.  It  comes  to  the  indolent  in  the 
cave  of  sloth.  Years  of  profession  unrelieved  by  a  single  act  of  service  or  sacri- 
fice call  for  repentance.  4.  It  comes  to  the  sorrowful  in  the  cave  of  murmuri/ng 
*'  Lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,"  &o.  Suffer  your  Redeemer  to  bring  you  out 
of  the  horrible  pit,  and  "  put  a  new  Bong  into  your  mouth,  even  praise  unto  our 
God." 

Conclusion.  The  Lord  speaks  to  all.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  Toiov, 
harden  not  your  hearts." — ^A.  B. 

Vers.  12. — The  still  small  Voice.  Describe  the  stupendous  scenes  amidst  which 
Elijah  stood.  A  wind  came  shrieking  up  the  mountain  ravines,  unseen  yet  instinct 
with  secret  force  ;  an  earthquake  made  the  solid  ground  heave  and  reel;  fire  glared 
from  heaven,  like  that  which  had  fallen  on  the  sacrifice  at  Carmel,  or  on  a  subse- 
quent occasion  consumed  the  captains  and  soldiers  of  Ahaziah.  Amidst  this  war 
of  the  elements  the  prophet  was  unmoved  by  fear ;  indeed,  probably  a  vTild  exultation 
filled  his  heart  as  he  saw  this  stormy  reflection  in  nature  of  the  conflict  within  him. 
(Compare  Shakespeare's  splendid  description  of  King  Lear  in  the  storm.)  The 
uproar  in  nature  was  succeeded  by  a  solenm  cahn ;  and  as  Elijah  waited  for  the 
next  marvellous  display  of  Divine  power,  "  a  stiU  small  voice  "  broke  the  silence, 
and  the  prophet  knew  that  it  was  the  voice  of  God.  He  who  till  now  had  been 
undaunted  and  unmoved,  now  reverently  covered  his  face  with  his  mantle,  and 
bowed  in  humble  worship  in  the  felt  presence  of  Him  before  whom  angels  veil  their 
fikces.  This  strange  and  weird  experience  evidently  had  reference  to  the  work 
which  Elijah  had  attempted,  and  over  which  he  was  now  so  despondent.  When 
he  learnt  that  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  wind,  the  earthquake,  or  the  fire,  he  re- 
flected that  permanent  religious  reformation  might  not  result  from  the  material 
signs  of  Divine  power,  displayed  in  the  withholding  of  the  rain,  the  raising  of  the 
dead,  or  the  fall  of  fire  on  Carmel,  but  from  the  more  quiet  testimony  of  his  own 
devout  life,  and  from  the  fidehty  of  the  "  seven  thousand  who  had  not  bowed  the 
knee  to  Baal."  In  effect,  the  message  to  him  and  to  us  was  this  r  "  Not  by  might, 
nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."   We  are  taught,  in  the  first  place — 

I.  The  sfibitual  weakness  of  what  seems  mighty.  "  The  Lord  was  not  in 
the  wind,  ....  in  the  earthquake,  ....  in  the  fire.'"  Let  us  exemphfy  this 
truth — 1.  By  the  experience  of  Elijah.  He  had  done  many  mighty  works,  but 
the  people  were  startled  rather  than  reformetl.  No  radical  and  abiding  change 
had  been  effected.  "  The  wind  "  may  represent  the  drought,  both  in  its  coming  and 
in  its  ceasing ;  "  the  earthquake,"  the  raising  of  the  child  from  the  dead  ;  and  "  the 
fire,"  the  answer  to  prayer  on  Carmel.  It  was  not  these  wonders  which  could 
change  the  heart  of  the  people,  but  "  the  stiU  small  voice  "  speaking  within  for 
God.  2.  By  the  miracles  of  judgment.  Take  the  plagues  of  Egypt  as  specimens. 
Marvellous  enough  they  were,  but  in  the  result  "  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened." 
3.  By  the  penalties  of  the  law.  Show  from  the  history  of  Israel,  and  from  the 
comments  made  on  it  in  the  Epistles,  the  powerlessness  of  the  law  to  put  away  sin. 
The  fear  of  punishment  may  check  the  outward  manifestation  of  sin,  but  in  itself 
does  not  conquer  innate  sinfulness.  If  a  child  does  not  love  his  father,  no  orders, 
however  stringently  enforced,  will  make  him  happy.  It  was  not  John  the  Baptist, 
but  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  the  world's  Redeemer.  4.  By  the  events  of  Providence. 
Illness,  the  dread  of  death,  a  startling  bereavement,  a  national  calamity,  &c.,  do 
not  convert  men,  unless  through  them  or  after  them  "  the  still  small  voice  "  is  heard. 
Men  may  be  driven  to  alarm,  to  murmuring,  to  despair,  perhaps  to  suicide ;  but 
their  hearts  are  still  rebellious  under  the  influence  of  trouble.  It  is  not  the  storm, 
but  the  voice  of  Jesus  in  the  storm,  saying,  "  It  is  I,"  that  brings  rest  to  those  who 
welcome  Him.  . 

II.  The  spiritual  strength  of  what  seems  feeble.  The  still  smaU  voice,  which 
only'a  listening  man  could  hear,  was  more  Divine  and  more  mighty  than  all  Elijah 
baA  witnessed  before.    There  was  all  the  difference  between  God's  power  and  God's 


480  THE  FIBSX  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  |.cii.  ux.  1—21, 

presence.  "  The  Lord  was  not  in  the  fire,"  but  His  was  the  still  small  voice ;  con. 
oerning  which  we  observe — 1.  It  follows  on  preparation.  Elijah  had  heard  so 
much,  had  been  so  startled  into  keen  listening  for  the  wonderful,  that  he  did  not 
fail  to  hear  this.  So  the  miracles  which  had  not  converted  the  people  had  made 
them  ready  for  Elisha  and  the  school  of  the  prophets.  Similarly  John  preceded 
JesuB.  It  is  thus  in  personal  experience.  The  earthquake  did  not  convert  the 
jailer  at  Philippi,  but  it  aroused  him  to  ask,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 
Trouble  does  not  save  a  man,  but  it  may  make  him  ready  to  listen  to  the  words  of 
life.  Some  must  lose  all  before  they  find  all  in  God.  2.  It  reminds  of  secret  forces. 
The  most  mighty  are  silent  in  nature  and  in  grace ;  e.g.,  gravitation  is  far  more 
tremendous  than  volcanic  agency.  3.  It  typifies  the  influence  cff  the  Eoly  Spirit. 
"He  shall  convince  the  world  of  righteousness,"  &c.  How  secretly  He  melts  the 
heart  to  repentance,  faith,  and  obedience,  and  changes  (he  whole  current  of  affec- 
tion and  thought.  4.  It  whispers  of  the  love  of  Christ.  He  forced  none  into  His 
kingdom,  but  won  all  Eis  subjects  man  by  man.  Not  His  reproaches,  but  His  look 
of  love,  broke  the  heart  of  Peter  into  penitence,  after  the  denial.  Paul's  inspiration 
was  found  not  in  applause  or  success,  but  in  this — that  he  could  ever  say,  "  The  love 
of  Christ  constraineth  me." 

Conclusion.  Wait  for  no  resistless  influenees,  for  no  startling  events ;  but  listen 
to  the  "  still  small  voice  "  which  speaks  within,  testifying  of  your  deep  necessity 
and  Christ's  glorious  redemption. — ^A.  B. 

Vers.  1 — 9.— The  Prophet's  Despam.  I.  Elijah's  weakness.  1.  His  Snsa/ppoinU 
ment.  With  the  hand  of  the  Lord  upon  him  he  bad  come  to  Jezreel  (ch.  xviii.  46). 
Was  it  not  because  a  further  success  lor  God  awaited  him  there  ?  Could  Carmel's 
wonders  and  the  mercy  of  God  in  the  rain  now  flooding  the  earth  be  resisted  ? 
Jezebel's  message,  displaying  only  determined  and  increased  hostility,  rudely  dispels 
the  dream.  The  blighting  of  the  long-expected  firuit  of  prayer  and  waiting  and 
mightiest  effort  is  worse  to  bear  than  all  the  hardships  which  went  before.  Other 
trials  may  depress,  but  under  this  the  spirit  is  utterly  broken.  2.  His  flight.  He 
shows  no  trust  in  Him  who  was  mightier  than  JezebeL  He  flees  to  the  south  of 
Judah.  Even  there  it  does  not  seem  to  him  that  he  is  in  safety,  and  he  goes  a  day's 
journey  into  the  wilderness ;  but  neither  at  Jezreel  nor  at  Beersheba  does  he  seek 
direction  from  the  Lord.  The  overthrow  of  hope  is  also  the  overthrow  of  faith. 
Ceasing  to  hope  in  God  we  cease  to  wait  on  God.  8.  His  prayer.  (1)  Its  incon- 
sistency. He  had  fled  for  his  life,  and  now  he  prays  God  that  he  may  die.  We 
are  not  fittest  for  heaven  when  we  are  most  tired  of  earth.  We  must  "  enter  his 
gates  " — the  gates  of  the  city  that  hath  foundations — "  with  praise,"  not  vrith  com- 
plaints  and  accusations.  (2)  Its  unbelief.  God's  work  is  abandoned  as  impossible ; 
nothing  remains  for  Him  but  to  take  back  the  life  of  His  defeated  servant  I  Many 
a  noble  heart  besides  has  lifted  up  the  same  cry  of  despair.  The  noblest  of  man- 
kind are  nothing  when  once  the  fire  of  trust  is  quenched  in  the  soul.  "  The  just 
shall  live  by  faith;"  when  faith  dies,  every  good  and  noble  tiling  dies  with  it. 

II.  How  God  binds  up  the  broken-hearted.  1.  He  gives  rest.  "  He  lay  and 
slept."  Even  in  the  desert  to  which  we  flee  unbidden,  God  gives  shelter  and  rest. 
■'  For  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep."  2.  He  imparts  strength  for  the  onward 
way  to  where  light  will  hreak  upon  the  darhness  a/nd  a  new  mission  will  he  given. 
Elijah  is  fed  once  and  again  with  angel  food,  and  in  the  strength  of  it  goes  "  forty 
days  and  forty  nights  unto  Horeb,  the  mount  of  God."  We  are  revived  with  tender 
heavenly  ministrations :  we  see  His  goodness  in  the  land  of  the  Uving,  and  pass 
onward  to  the  place  where  we  shall  meet  with  Him  and  hear  His  voice.— J.  U 

Vers.  9 — 18. — Elijah  at  Horeb.    I.  How  God  deals  with  the  despairino.    L 

Elyah's  mistahe.  Because  Jezebel's  emnity  remained  unsubdued  the  struggle  was 
at  once  given  over  as  hopeless ;  "  and  he  came  thither  unto  a  cave,  and  lodged 
there."  The  same  mistake  is  made  by  those  who  labour  on  with  unexpectant 
toil,  whose  wrestUng  with  God  is  given  np,  whose  feeble  thought  and  listless  toiics 
proclaim  their  hopelessness :  by  those  who  have  laid  down  the  work  to  i^(>b 


CB.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  481 

God  OE^led  them — ^preachers  in  retirement  or  in  other  spheres,  teachers,  &o.— 
and  those  ■who  have  ceased  to  strive  against  their  own  sin.  2.  QoWs  remedy,  (1) 
The  heart  is  searched.  "  What  doest  thou  here,  EUjah?  "  A  prophet  in  the  desert  ? 
A  living  man  illnmined  with  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  a  companion  of 
rocks  and  stones  and  soUtude ;  and  death  and  sin  crying  to  be  visited  with  the 
rebuke  of  God,  and  hearts  fainting  for  lack  of  His  Hght  and  consolations  ?  Was  it 
for  this  God  endowed  and  called  thee  ?  A  word  for  those  who  have  left  the  vine- 
yard ;  for  those  who  have  not  yet  entered ;  for  the  worldly  and  the  sinful.  To  hear 
this  voice  is  preparation  for  entering  the  path  of  life  and  of  service.  TiU  it  be 
heard  there  is  no  possibility  of  either.  (2)  Unbelief  is  unveiled.  When  God's  voice 
b  heard,  and  the  reasons  for  the  wUdemess  flight  are  named,  it  is  seen  that  He  has 
been  shut  out  of  sight.  He  mentions  his  own  zeal,  and  Israel's  sin,  bat  of  God 
there  is  nothing  said.  It  is  nnbelief  alone  which  can  kill  prayer  and  earnest, 
hopeful  toil.  It  was  only  when  Peter  ceased  to  gaze  on  Jesus  that  the  stormy 
waves  engulfed  him.  If  we  are  in  the  wUderuess,  forgetfulness  of  God  has  set  us 
{here. 

II.  The  PATH  OP  DELIVERANCE  FOE  THE  HOPELESS.  1,  The  Vision  of  Ood,  Elijah's 
thoughts  of  God's  way  were  corrected.  (1)  God  was  not  in  the  whirlwind,  or  the 
earthquake,  or  the  fire.  What  had  failed  to  turn  Israel  and  subdue  Jezebel  was  not 
what  was  really  God's  power  imto  salvation,  but  what  Elijah  erroneously  conceived 
to  be  this.  We  despair  because  oertaia  methods,  influences,  arguments  fail ;  but 
thoy  can  only  fail  because  God  is  not  in  them.  (2)  God  was  in  the  still  small  voice 
that  awoke  within  the  heart.  The  power  which  now  held  and  searched  the  prophet's 
own  soul  was  the  manifestation  of  what  was  power  for  the  souls  of  others.  2.  The 
recognition  of  ourselves  as  only  part  of  the  mamfold  agency  of  Ood.  Other  hands 
as  well  as  his  were  to  carry  on  the  work  of  judgment  and  of  mercy  (vers.  15 — 17). 
To  feel  our  brotherhood  with  the  servants  of  God  fiUs  us  with  joy  and  power.  8. 
The  assu/rance  that  Ood  never  works  in  vain  (ver.  18).  The  results  may  be  hid 
horn  OS,  but  they  are  known  to  Him. — J.  U. 

Vers.  19 — 21. — The  Prophet's  Call.  I.  The  call  to  service.  1.  Where  it  formd 
him — ^in  the  field  engaged  in  laborious,  careful  toil.  The  Master  chooses  servants 
for  higher  trusts  who  have  been  faithful  in  lower.  2.  How  it  came.  The  mantle  oast 
npon  him  was  a  sign  of  adoption.  It  was  a  call  to  share  the  prophet's  home  and 
love.  Elijah  was  to  find  a  son  in  the  newly-caUed  servant  of  God,  and  EUsha  a 
father  m  the  great  prophet  of  Israel  We  pass  into  God's  service  through  union 
with  His  people. 

II.  Indecision  rebuked  (ver.  20).  1.  The  request.  He  "  ran  after  Elijah,"  yet 
with  entreaty  for  permission  to  go  back  and  kiss  father  and  mother.  The  new  ties 
•nd  the  old  were  both  binding  him,  and  the  vain  attempt  was  made  to  comply 
with  both.  God's  call  must  from  the  first  have  the  mastery.  The  seeming  severity 
which  we  are  called  upon  to  exercise  will  yield  firuits  of  joy.  God,  fully  chosen, 
will  be  fully  known ;  and  the  breaking  of  lower  ties  may  preach  the  claims  of  God 
to  those  we  love  best.  2.  The  answer.  "  Go  back  again,  for  what  have  I  done  to 
thee  ?  "  The  gift  neglected  is  taken  away.  As  we  value  it  and  sacrifice  for  it,  in 
that  measure  is  it  given  to  us.  Treat  God's  grace  as  nothing,  and  to  you  it  becomes 
nothing. 

III.  The  choice  hade.  1.  The  past  was  hrolcen  with.  His  own  yoke  of  oxen 
were  slain,  the  instruments  of  his  toil  consumed.  2.  It  was  done  with  glad- 
ness. He  made  a  feast  for  the  people.  8.  He  took  the  place  which  Ood  meanwhile 
assigned  him.  "  Then  he  arose,  and  went  after  Ehjah,  and  ministered  imto  him." 
Humble,  loving  companionship  with  God's  people  is  preparation  for  taking  up  their 
work. — J.  U. 

Vers.  4—21.  BetiM-n  of  EUjah  to  the  Desert.  It  is  well  for  us  to  recognize  that 
the  great  servants  of  God  are  men  like  ourselves,  that  they  were  formed  of  the  same 
clay,  and  that  they  share  our  infirmities.  Elijah  had  no  time  to  magnify  himself 
after  his  triumph  on  Mount  Carmel.    It  was  at  this  very  moment  God  allowed  him 

1  EiNas.  *  * 


139 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH.  XX.  1 — &, 


to  pass  throngb  the  most  terrible  mental  conflict.  Led  into  the  bare  and  arid 
solitudes  of  Horeb,  he  fell  into  a  state  of  depression  bordering  on  despair,  and, 
throwing  himself  down  under  a  juniper  tree  in  the  wilderness,  he  cried,  "  0  Lord, 
now  take  away  my  life! "  (Ver.  4.)  A  spiritual  crisis  like  this  comes  in  the  Ufa  of 
most  men  of  God,  and  may  be  explained  by  two  reasons.  1.  There  is  a  spiritual 
necessity  for  it>  The  man  of  God  who  has  gained  Ibe  first  great  victory  is  apt  to 
think  that  it  is  decisive  and  final,  and  that  he  may  now  cease  to  fight.  And  behold, 
the  evil  that  was  vanquished  yesterday  lifts  up  its  head  again,  and  the  conflict 
has  to  be  begun  anew.  "  I  have  been  ^ery  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts ;  for 
the  children  of  Israel  have  forsaken  thy  covenant "  (^'er.  10).  2.  This  painful  crisis 
is  permitted  by  God,  who  will  not  have  His  servants  uplifted  in  their  own  eyes,  even 
by  the  most  splendid  triumphs  of  the  cause  which  it  is  their  honour  to  maintain. 
This  is  the  explanation  of  the  mysterious  thorn  in  the  flesh  with  which  St.  Paul 
was  buffeted  (2  Cor.  xii.  7).  This  is  the  cause  of  the  momentary  despondency  of 
John  the  Baptist,  which  prompted  that  utterance  of  a  faltering  faith,  "  Art  thou 
he  that  should  come  ? "  (Matt,  xi  3.)  To  the  same  source  we  may  trace  the 
anguish  of  Luther  in  the  Wartburg.  He  who  is  pleased  thus  to  exercise  the  soul  of 
His  children  is  Himself  their  only  efficient  Comforter.  God  raises  His  downcast 
servant  Elijah  by  means  of  a  glorious  vision.  The  Lord  is  not  in  the  wind,  not  in 
the  earthquake ;  these  are  but  the  symbols  of  His  awful  majesty.  He  is  in  the  still 
small  voice,  which  whispers  the  name  afterwards  to  be  proclaimed  to  the  whole 
world  by  the  beloved  disciple,  and  written  in  letters  of  blood  upon  the  cross :  "  God 
is  love  "  (1  John  iv.  16).  Let  us  not  forget,  however,  that  if  God  is  not  in  the  stormy 
wind  and  earthquake,  these  manifestations  of  His  severity  necessarily  preceded 
the  manifestation  of  that  love  which  is  His  true  essence.  It  was  needful  that  the 
reed  which  had  presumed  to  lift  up  itself  against  God  should  be  bent,  that  the  hard 
heart,  like  the  stone,  should  be  broken  in  order  that  the  still  small  voice  might  gain 
an  entrance  to  it.  Eepentance  must  come  before  the  deliverance  and  joy  of  pardon. 
It  is  by  this  path  through  the  desert  that  God  leads  every  soul  of  man ;  it  was  thus 
that  He  led  His  servant  Elijah.  His  overwhelming  anguish  of  soul  was  like  the 
whirlwind  which  prepared  the  way  for  the  soft  whisper  of  heavenly  peace.  This 
desert  of  spiritual  desolation  is  to  be  made  to  blossom  like  the  rose  under  the  re- 
viving breath  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  xxxv.  1).  Elijah  comes  forth  firom  it  with  renewed 
strength  and  courage,  after  the  wholesome  discipline  of  humiliation,  a  witness  tons 
of  the  truth  of  the  Bivine  assurance  uttered  by  the  hps  of  Christ  Himself:  "Blessed 
are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  sbaJl  be  comforted"  (Matt.  t.  4). — E.  de  P. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XX.  1-48, 


Thx  invasions  of  Isbabl  by  IBB  Sybians 
AND  THEiB  BESTTLTS. — The  insertion  of  this 
chapter,  which  contains  an  account  of  two 
invasions  of  Israel  by  the  hosts  of  Syria, 
and  of  the  utter  defeat  of  the  latter,  and 
which  therefore  constitutes  a  break  in  the 
history  of  Elijah,  which  has  oconpied  the 
historian  up  to  the  end  of  oh.  six.,  and 
which  is  resumed  with  oh.  zzi, — the  inser- 
tion of  this  twentieth  chapter  in  this  place 
is  apparently  due  to  the  compiler  of  these 
reoords,  who  seems  to  have  adopted  this 
arrangement  as  the  more  ohronological.  It 
is  not  absolutely  certain,  however,  that  we 
owe  this  disposition  of  his  materials  to  the 


original  compiler,  aa  the  Vatican  LXX., 
which  sometimes  appears  to  represent  an 
older  and  purer  text,  places  oh.  xx.  after 
oh.  xxi.,  thereby  concluding  the  history  of 
Elijah — so  far  as  it  was  comprehended  iu 
the  reign  of  Ahab — before  entering  on  the 
subject  of  the  Syrian  wars.  It  is  not  mi' 
probable,  oonsequentlv.  that  this  latter  was 
the  original  order;  and  it  is  quite  certain 
that  the  account  of  Elijah's  ministry,  of 
which  oh.  xxi.  forms  a  part,  is  of  a  piece  with 
oh.  xix.,  and  by  the  same  hand,  and  is  by 
a  different  hand  from  the  author,  or  authors, 
of  chaps,  zx.  and  xxii.  Gh.  xxii.  1  also 
supphes  a  reason  why  that  chapter  should 
follow  oh.  zz.  There  seems,  moreover,  u 
be  a  close  connexion  between  oh.  xxii.  aiut 


CB.  XX.  1 — 13.] 


THE  PIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


488 


the  dennneiation  of  ch.  zx.  42.  But  the 
present  arrangement  evidently  dates  from 
very  early  times. 

Ver.  1. — And  Ben-hadad  [See  on  ohs.  zi. 
14  and  XV.  18.  The  LXX.  uniformly  apella 
the  name  Ader  {vidg'ASep).  The  form  T}^, 
is  found  in  ch.  xi.  17,  and  1  and  *1  are  fre- 
quently interchanged ;  of.  Gen.  xxv.  18, 
xxxvi.  39  with  1  Ohron.  i.  30,  46.  We  learn 
from  ver.  34  that  this  prince  was  the  son  of 
a  Syrian  king  who  had  conquered  some  of 
the  cities  of  Israel,  but  we  cannot  neverthe- 
less he  certain  that  he  was  the  son  of  that 
Ben-hadad  (ch.  xv.  18)  who  invaded  Israel 
in  the  reign  of  Baasha  (Ewald) ,  See  on 
Ter.  34.]  the  king  of  Syria  gathered  all  his 
boat  [See  note  on  ch  x.  2,  where  we  have 
same  word]  together ;  and  there  were  thirty 
and  two  kings  with  him  [Evidently  these 
were  vassals,  not  allied  powers.  The 
number  alone  proves  that  they  must  have 
been  petty  princes  or  chieftains  of  Hittite 
tribes,  ruling  over  very  limited  districts  and 
all  acknowledging  the  suzerainty  of  the  king 
of  Damascus,  all  paying  tribute  (oh.  x.  25), 
and  furnishing  a  contingent  in  time  of  war. 
"  The  Assyrian  inscriptions  show  that  this 
country  was,  about  the  period  in  question, 
parcelled  out  into  a  number  of  petty  king- 
doms," Ac.  (Bawlineon.  See  "  Beeords  of  the 
Past,"  vol.  xii.  p.  20)] ,  and  horses,  and  cha- 
riots [Heb.  horse  and  chariot;  cf.  ver.  21 
and  chs.  i.  5 ;  x.  26 ;  zvi.  9,  &o.  Both  are 
collective  nouns.  We  see  here  the  fruit  and 
retribution  of  Solomon's  irreligious  policy 
(ch.  X.  29  and  Homiletics,  p.  216).  "A.  king 
who  has  been  probably  identified  with  this 
Ben-hadad  brought  into  the  field  against 
Assyria  nearly  4000  chariots  "  (Rawlinson)] : 
and  he  went  up  and  besieged  Samaria,  and 
warred  against  It.  [The  object  of  this  ex- 
pedition was  clearly  to  humble  and  to  plunder 
the  kingdom  of  Samaria,  It  would  almost 
appear,  from  the  animus  of  the  Syrian  king 
and  the  studied  offensiveness  of  his  mes- 
sages, as  if  Ahab  or  Israel  must  have  given 
him  dire  ofience.  But  Ben-hadad  was 
clearly  a  vain  and  overbearing  and  tyran- 
nical prince,  and  the  only  crime  of  Israel 
may  have  been  that  it  was  independent  of 
him,  or  had  refused  to  do  him  homage.] 

Ver.  2. — And  he  sent  messengers  to  Ahab 
king  of  Israel  Into  [Heb.  to.  It  is  not  clear 
that  they  entered  the  city.  They  may  have 
delivered  their  mesdage  to  the  king,  or  to 
his  representatives  at  the  gates  or  to  the 
people  on  the  walls  (2  Kings  xviii.  18,  27)] 
the  city,  and  said  unto  him.  Thus  saitli 
Ben-hadad, 

Ver.  8.— Thy  silver  and  thy  goid  la  mine 
[Heb.  mine  it  is] ;  thy  wives  also  and  thy 
thUdren  [Nothing  reveals  Ben-hadad's  object 


more  clearly  than  the  mention  of  Ahab'a 
wives.  When  we  consider  how  jealously 
the  seraglio  of  an  Eastern  prince  is  guarded, 
and  how  the  surrender  of  the  harem  is  a 
virtual  surrender  of  the  throne  (2  Sam.  xvi. 
21,  22 ;  note  on  ch.  ii.  22),  and  certainly  a 
surrender  of  all  manhood  and  self-respect, 
we  see  that  his  aim  was  to  wound  Ahab  in 
his  tenderest  point,  to  humble  him  to  the 
lowest  depths  of  degradation,  and  possibly 
to  force  a  quarrel  upon  him] ,  even  the 
goodliest  [The  LXX.  omits  this.  Bahr  says 
the  word  can  only  apply  to  the  sons,  and 
that  it  must  mean  the  most  eminent  young 
men  of  the  city — not  Ahab's  children — 
whom  Ben-hadad  demanded  as  hostages. 
But  against  this  is  (1)  Ahab's  answer,  "All 
that  I  have,"  <Sc. ;  (2)  the  fact  that  Ben- 
hadad  obviously  meant  insult  and  plunder ; 
and  (3)  the  language  of  ver.  7,  where  see 
note],  are  mine,  llleb.  mine  are  they.  Raw- 
linson would  explain  this  excessive  demand 
of  the  Syrian  king  by  the  assumption  that 
when  it  was  made  the  siege  had  already 
lasted  a  long  time,  and  that  the  people  were 
now  reduced  to  the  greatest  straits,  circum- 
stances which  the  historian,  with  the  cha- 
racteristic brevity  of  the  sacred  writers, 
omits  to  mention.  But  really  no  such 
supposition  is  needed.  The  overwhelming 
force  which  Ben-hadad  had  at  his  I^ack 
would,  in  his  eyes,  justify  any  demands. 
And  the  prima  facie  view  of  ver.  2  is  that 
the  messengers  were  sent  on  the  first  ap- 
proach of  the  army,  or  rather  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  siege.] 

Ver.  4. — And  the  king  of.Israel  answered 
and  said,  My  lord,  0  king,  according  to  thy 
saying,  I  am  thine,  and  all  that  I  bave. 
[Much  has  been  written  about  Ahab's  pusil- 
lanimous acquiescence  in  these  disgraceful 
terms,  &o.  But  it  is  not  absolutely  clear 
that  he  ever  meant  to  surrender  either  wives 
or  Children  to  the  invader.  All  that  is  cer- 
tain is  that  he  judged  it  wise,  in  the  presence 
of  the  enormous  force  arrayed  against  him, 
to  make  every  possible  concession,  to  adopt 
the  most  subservient  tone,  and  to  cringe  at 
the  feet  dt  Ben-hadad.  But  aU  the  time  he 
may  have  hoped  that  his  soft  answer  would 
turn  away  wrath.  It  is  very  far  from  certain 
that  had  Ben-hadad  sent  to  demand  the 
wives  and  children  which  Ahab  here  seems 
willing  to  yield  to  liim  they  would  have  been 
sent.  When  Ben-hadad  threatens  (ver.  6) 
a  measure  which  involved  much  less  indig- 
nity  than  the  surrender  of  the  entire  seragUo 
to  his  lusts,  Ahab  stands  at  bay.  Allowance 
must  be  made  for  the  exaggerations  of 
Eastern  courtesy.  The  writer  was  enter- 
tained in  1861  by  Jacob  esh  Shellabi,  then 
sheykh  of  the  Samaritans,  who  repeatedly 
used  words  very  similar  to  these.    "Iliif 


484 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[oh.  XX.  1 — 48. 


honse  is  yours,"  he  wonld  say ;  never  mean- 
ing, ho-wever,  that  he  should  be  taken  at  his 
word.] 

Ver.  5. — ^And  the  messengers  came  again, 
and  said.  Thus  speaketh  Ben-hadad,  saying, 
Although  [Heb.  '3.  Aooording  to  some  of 
the  grammarians,  this  is  merely  the  Hebrew 
equivalent  of  the  in  redtantis.  But  the 
Dtjt  *3  of  the  next  verse  suggests  that  there 
must  be  a  connexion  between  the  two,  and 
that  the  seeond  emphasizes  the  first,  much 
as  in  the  A.  Y.]  I  have  sent  unto  thee,  say- 
ing. Thou  Shalt  deliver  me  thy  silver,  and 
thy  gold,  and  thy  wives,  and  thy  children. 
[Our  translators  have  often  sacrificed  force 
to  elegance  by  disregarding  the  order  of  the 
Hebrew,  which  here,  e.g.,  is  "  Thy  silver  and 
thy  gold  .  .  .  tome  thou  shalt  give  them."] 

Yer.  6. — ^Tet  I  Mil  send  my  servants  unto 
tbee  to-morrow  about  this  time  [This  pro* 
posal  was  definite  and  immediate,  the  first 
demand  was  vague  and  general.  "In  the 
first  Ahab  was  to  send  what  he  thought  fit 
to  give ;  in  the  second,  Ben-hadad's  servants 
were  to  take  into  their  own  hands  whatso- 
ever they  thought  fit  to  sieze"  (Words- 
worth)] ,  and  they  shall  search  thine  honsa^ 
and  the  bouses  of  thy  servants;  and  It 
shall  be,  that  whatsoever  is  pleasant  Is 
[Heb.  the  desire  of]  thine  eyes  [The  LXX. 
and  some  other  versions  have  a  plural 
snffiz — their  eyet.  But  the  Hebrew  text  is 
to  be  preferred.  The  object  of  Ben-hadad 
was  to  couch  his  message  in  the  most  offen- 
sive and  hnmiliating  terms,  and  "the  desire 
of  thine  eyes  "  would  be  likely  to  oat  deeper 
and  wound  more  than  "  the  desire  of  their 
eyes  "],  they  shall  put  It  In  their  hand,  and 
ta,ke  it  away.  [If  Ahab  ever  hoped  by  his 
abject  submission  to  conciliate  the  Syrian 
king,  he  now  finds  that  his  words  have  had 
just  the  opposite  effect.  For  all  that  the 
latter  concluded  from  it  was  that  Ahab  was 
one  upon  whom  he  might  trample  at  plea- 
sure, and  this  servility  encouraged  Ben- 
hadad  to  renew  his  demands  in  a  still  more 
galling  and  vexatious  form.  This  second 
message  discloses  to  us  stiU  more  plainly 
the  royal  buUy  and  braggart,  and  shows  us 
what  the  "comity  of  nations"  in  the  old 
world  was  often  like.] 

Ver.  7. — Then  the  king  of  Israel  called 
«U  the  elders  of  the  land  [Bahr  remarks 
that  this  expression,  compared  with  "  the 
elders  of  the  city  "  (oh.  zzi.  8,  &c.),  sug- 
gests either  that  these  nobles,  as  the  highest 
officials,  had  theii'  residences  at  the  court,  or 
upon  the  approach  of  Ben-hadad  had  be- 
taken themselves  thither  with  their  treasures. 
Bawlinson  builds  on  this  slender  basis  the 
eonclnsion  that  the  oonncil  of  elders  which, 
he  says,  belonged  to  the  undivided  kingaom. 


had  been  continued  among  the  ten  tribes, 
had  an  important  place  iu  the  government, 
and  held  regular  sittings  at  the  capital] 
and  said,  Mark,  I  pray  you,  and  see  hov 
this  man  [or  fellow.  The  nt  expresses 
either  hatred  or  contempt.  Gf.  ch.  xxii. 
27 ;  Luke  xxiii.  2,  18,  &c.]  seeketh  mis- 
chief [the  purport  of  Ahab's  address  is 
not,  "  Ben-hadad  is  not  satisfied  with 
my  treasures ;  he  wants  yours  also  "  (Bahr), 
for  there  is  no  reference  whatsoever  to  their 
property,  but,  "See  how  he  is  determined 
on  our  ruin.  Nothing  short  of  our  de- 
struction will  sufiice  him.  He  is  bent  on 
provoking  an  enoonnter,  that  he  may 
plunder  the  city  at  pleasure."  The  salient 
word  is  the  nv^ :  for  he  sent  unto  me  for 
my  wives,  and  for  my  children  [LXX.  vtpi 
tS)v  vXwv  juiv.  This  shows  clearly  that "  the 
most  eminent  yonng  men  "  cannot  be  meant 
in  ver.  3],  and  for  my  silver,  and  for  my 
gold :  and  I  denied  him  not  [What  these 
words  mean  depends  on  what  ver.  4  (where 
see  note)  means.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive 
that  any  monarch  could  gravely  proclaim 
his  own  shame  to  his  counsellors ;  could 
confess,  that  is,  that  he  had  consented  to 
surrender  his  children  and  couonbinea  with- 
out a  struggle.] 

Yer.  8.— And  all  the  olden  and  all  tho 
people  [not  only,  i.e.,  the  inhabitants  of 
Samaria  (Eeil),  but  also  those  who  had  fled 
thither  for  refuge.  It  is  not  implied  that 
they  were  formally  consulted,  but  at  such  a 
crisis,  when  nothing  could  be  done,  humanly 
speaking,  without  their  support,  it  was 
natural  that  they  should  express  their 
opinion]  said  unto  bim.  Hearken  not  unto 
tdm,  nor  consent.  [Lit.,  thou,  thalt  not  con- 
tent. 7K  is  the  equivalent  of  /i4,  ne,  and  M7 
of  o6,  non.  Cf.  Amos  y.  6,  andKwald  S50  a.] 

Yer.  9. — Wherefore  [Heb.  and]  he  said 
unto  the  messengers  of  Ben-hadad,  Tell 
my  lord  the  king  [He  still  employs  the 
same  obsequious  language  as  in  ver.  4] ,  All 
that  thou  didst  send  for  to  thy  servant  at 
the  first  I  will  do :  but  this  thing  I  may 
[Heb.  can]  not  do  [At  first  sight  it  appears 
as  if  Ahab  objected  to  the  search  (ver.  6), 
i.e.,  plunder,  of  his  house  and  capital  much 
more  than  to  the  surrender  of  his  wives  to 
shame  and  of  his  children  to  slavery.  But 
we  must  remember  that  a  man  is  ready  to 
promise  almost  anything  in  his  extremity, 
and  that  we  do  not  know  what  construction 
he  put,  or  would  have  claimed  to  put,  upon 
Ben-hadad's  first  demand,  had  that  monarch 
consented  to  revert  to  these  conditions,  or 
by  what  means  he  hoped  to  evade  it] .  And 
the  messengen  departed,  and  brought  hla 
[Ben-hadad,    not    Ahab,    as    BawlinsoB 


SB.  zx.  1 — 18.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


Imagines]  word  agaia.  [Not  the  "word  re- 
lated in  tiie  next  verse"  (Bawlingon),  but  the 
message  just  recorded.] 

Yer.  10. — And  Ben-hadad  sent  onto  Mm, 
and  Bald  [These  words  would  be  quite 
superfluous,  if  the  oaths  of  which  we  now 
hear  were  the  "  word  "  of  yer.  9],  The  gods 
do  so  nnto  me,  and  more  also  [see  notes  on 
ch.  ii.  23 ;  zix.  2] ,  tf  the  dust  of  Samaria 
■ball  suffice  for  handfols  [The  meaning  of 

Oh^  pugilU,  is  fixed  by  Isa.  zl.  12,  and 
Ezek.xiii.  19J  for  all  the  people  that  follow 
me,  [Heb.  that  are  in  my  feet.  Same  ex- 
pression Judg.  iy.  IC ;  V.  15 ;  1  Sam.  xxy, 
27 ;  2  Sam.  xy.  17,  &0i  This  thoroughly 
Oriental  piece  of  bluster  and  boasting,  which 
was  intended,  no  doubt,  to  strike  terror  into 
the  hearts  of  king  and  people,  has  been 
variously  interpreted,  but  the  meaning 
appears  to  be  sufficiently  clear.  Ben-hadad 
vows  that  be  will  make  Samaria  a  heap  of 
dust,  and  at  the  same  time  affirms  that  so 
oyerwhehning  is  his  host,  that  this  dust 
will  be  insufficient  to  fill  the  hands  of  his 
Boldiers.  Bawlinson  compares  with  it  the 
well-known  saying  of  the  Trachinian  to 
Dieneoes,  that  the  Median  arrows  would 
obscure  the  sun  (Herod,  vii.  226),  but  3  Sam. 
xvii.  13  is  still  more  apposite.] 

Ter.  11. — And  the  Idng  of  Israel  answered 
and  said,  Tell  him,  Let  not  him  that 
girdeth  on  hla  harness  hoast  himself  as  he 
that  putteth  It  off.  [This  proverb  consists 
of  four  words  in  the  Hebrew.  The  commen- 
tators cite  the  Latin,  Ne  triumphum  cartas 
ante  vietoriam,  but  proverbs  to  the  same 
eSeot  are  found  in  most  languages. 

Yer.  12. — And  It  came  to  pass,  when  Ben- 
hadad  [Heb.  he]  heard  this  message  [Heb. 
word],  as  he  was  drinking,  he  and  the 
Hags  in  the  payUlons  [Heb.  booths.  The 
word  shows  that,  in  lieu  of  tents,  kings  and 
generals  on  an  expedition  sometimes  used 
leafy  hnts,  like  those  of  Israel  (Levit.  xxiii. 
84,  42).  Such  booths,  it  is  said,  are  still 
erected  on  military  expeditions  in  the  East] , 
that  he  said  unto  his  servants,  Set  your- 
■elves  In  array  [Heb.  -ID^b  one  short,  de- 
cisive word.  His  indignation  and  astonish- 
ment were  too  great  for  mote.  We  might 
perhaps  render  "  Form."  CI.  1  Sam.  xi.  11 ; 
Josh.  yiii.  2, 13 ;  Job  i.  17 ;  Ezek.  xxiii.  24. 
It  cannot  mean  oiKoSo/iriiraTt  ^apaKa  (LXX.)] 
And  they  set  themselves  in  array  {or  formed. 
Again  one  word,  which  is  more  spirited  and 
graphic,  and  conveys  that  the  command  was 
instantly  obeyed]  against  the  city, 

Yer.  13. — ^And,  behold,  there  came  a  pro- 
phet [Heb.  one  prophet.  Of.  ch.  xiii.  11. 
According  to  Jewish  writers,  this  was 
Micaiah,  son  of  Imlah,  but  ch.  zxii.  8 
negatives  this  supposition.    This  is  anotner 


proof  that  all  the  prophets  had  not  been 
exterminated.  Where  Elijah  was  at  this 
time,  or  why  he  was  not  employed,  we  have 
no  means  of  determining.  Bahr  says  that 
he  was  "  least  of  all  suited  for  such  a 
message,"  but  not  if  he  had  learned  the 
lesson  of  ch.  xix.  12.  At  the  same  time,  it 
is  to  be  remembered  that  he  invariably 
appears  as  the  minister  of  wrath.  It  may 
also  be  reasonably  asked  why  this  gracious 
interposition  was  granted  to  the  kingdom  of 
Samaria  at  all.  Was  not  this  invasion,  and 
would  not  the  sack  of  the  city  have  been,  a 
just  recompense  for  the  gross  corruption  of  the 
age,  for  the  persecution  of  the  prophets,  &c.T 
But  to  this  it  may  be  replied  that  Ben-hadad 
was  not  then  the  instrument  which  God  had 
designed  for  the  correction  of  Israel  (see  ch. 
six.  17 ;  xxii.  31 ;  2  Eings  x.  82),  and  further- 
more that  by  his  brutal  tyraimy  and  des- 
potic demands,  he  had  himself  merited  a 
chastisement.  The  city,  too,  may  have  been 
delivered  for  the  sake  of  the  seven  thousand 
(ch.  xix.  18;  2  Kings  xix.  84.  Cf.  Gen. 
xviii.  26  sqq.)  But  this  gracious  help  in  the 
time  of  extremity  was  primarily  designed 
as  a  proof  of  Jehovah's  power  over  the  gods 
of  Syria  (of.  vers.  13,  28;  di.  xviii.  39; 
2  Kings  xix.  22  sqq.),  and  so  as  an  instru- 
ment for  the  conversion  of  Israel.  His 
supremacy  over  the  idols  of  Phoenicia  had 
already  been  established]  nnto  Ahah  Mng 
of  Israel,  saying.  Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
Hast  thou  seen  all  this  great  multitude  7 
[cf.  ver.  10.  "In  Ben-hadad's  wars  with 
the  Assyrians,  we  sometimes  find  him  at  the 
head  of  nearly  100,000  men  "  (Eawlinson).] 
Behold,  I  will  deliver  It  into  thine  band  this 
day ;  and  thou  shaJt  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord.  [This  explains  to  ns  the  motif  of 
this  great  deliverance.] 

Yer.  14. — ^And  Ahah  said.  By  whom  7  And 
be  said,  Thus  salth  the  Lord  [Observe  the 
repetition.  He  is  careful  to  give  special 
prominence  to  the  sacred  name,  as  the  only 
help  in  trouble  (Psa.  xx.  1,  6,  7,  &c.)] ,  Even 
by  the  young  men  [or  servants — 'lyj  has 
both  meanings,  corresponding  with  vaie 
(cf .  Gen.  xxxvii.  2 ;  2  Kings  v.  20 ;  viii.  4] 
of  the  princes  of  the  provinces.  [The  local 
governors  (of,  chs.  iv.  7 ;  x.  15),  on  the 
approach  of  Ben  hadad,  had  apparently  fied 
to  the  capital.  Whether  these  "young 
men"  were  their  "pages"  (Thenius),  or 
even  were  "  young  lads  "  (Ewald)  at  all,  or, 
on  the  contrary,  a  "select  body  of  strong 
young  men "  (Bahr),  the  body-guard  of  the 
various  governors  (2  Sam.  xviii.  15)  (Von 
Gerlach),  may  be  doubtful ;  but  when  Bahr 
says  that  Ahab  would  not  have  consented 
to  appoint  weak  boys  to  lead  the  van,  at 
least  without  remonstrance,  ho  must  have 
forgotten  that  <M  the  ordinary  means  at ' 


MS 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[ca.  XX.  1—43. 


Ahab'a  disposal  were  equally  insufficient, 
and  that  in  themselves  200  or  2000  tried 
veterans  would  have  been  just  as  inadequate 
a  force  as  200  pages.  The  agency  by  which 
the  victory  was  won  was  purposely  weak 
and  feeble  (per  turbam  imbellem),  in  order 
that  the  work  might  be  seen  to  be  of  God 
(cf.  Judg.  viL  2;  1  Cor.  i.  27,  29).  And 
this  consideration  makes  against  the  sup- 
position that  the  attacking  body  was  com- 
posed of  tried  and  skilful  warriors.]  Then 
he  said,  Who  shall  order  [Heb.  Mnd;  we 
speak  of  "joining  battle  "]  the  battle  7  [The 
meaning  is — not,  "  who  shall  command  this 
force,"  but,  "which  side  shall  begin  the 
fray?"]  And  he  answered.  Thou  [i.e.,  thy 
band  of  young  men  shall  make  the  attack.] 

Ver.  15. — Then  he  numbered  [or  reviewed 
(of.  Num.  i.  44  sqq. ;  iii.  39  —43)]  the  young 
men  of  the  princes  of  the  provinces,  and 
they  were  two  hundred  and  thirty -two  [cf. 
2  Ohron.  xiv.  11 ;  Psa.  xxxiii.  16 ;  Deut. 
xzzii.  30,  &0.  LXX.  SiaKoaia  rpiaKovra, 
Theodoret  remarks  that  by  this  band— 230, 
as  he  understood  it — Almighty  God_  would 
destroy  the  hosts  of  thirty  and  two  kings. 
The  numbers  may  have  been  recorded 
because  of  the  correspondency]:  and  after 
them  he  numbered  all  the  people,  even  all 
the  (dilldren  of  Israel,  being  seven  thousand. 
[Tliis  number  is  of  course  to  be  understood, 
unlike  that  of  ch.  zix.  18,  literally.  And 
the  context  (cf.  ver.  19)  shows  that  this 
wag  the  number  of  fighting  men.  But  this 
small  army  can  hardly  fail  to  create  sur- 
prise, especially  if  we  compare  it  with  the 
statistics  of  the  soldiery  of  an  earlier  age 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  9 ;  1  Chron.  zxi.  5 ;  2  Chron. 
xiii.  3;  xiv.  8).  It  is  true  this  was  not 
strictly  an  army,  but  a  garrison  for  the  de- 
fence of  the  capital.  But  it  looks  very  much 
as  if,  under  the  feeble  rule  of  Ahab,  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  had  become  thoroughly 
disorganized.  "The  position  of  Jarchi  is 
that  of  a  true  Babbi,  viz.,  that  the  7000 
were  those  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee 
unto  Baal  (ch.  xix.  18),"  Bahr.] 

Ver.  16. — ^And  they  went  out  at  noon. 
["At  the  time  when  Ben-hadad,  haughty 
and  confident,  had  given  himself  up  with 
his  vassals,  to  the  table,  news  of  which  had 
probably  been.received  in  the  city  "  (Biihr). 
But  it  seems  at  least  equally  probable  that 
the  noon  hoar  was  selected  either  in  obe- 
dience to  the  unrecorded  directions  of  the 
prophet,  or  as  being  a  time  for  rest  and 
sleep,  as  it  still  is  in  the  East.]  But  Ben- 
hadad  was  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the 
pavilions,  he  and  the  kings,  the  thirty  and 
two  kings  that  helped  him.  [Strong  drink 
would  seem  to  have  been  a  besetment  of 
the  monarcha  of  that  age  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  9; 
ProT.  xxxi.  4 ;  Dan.  v.  1  sqq. ;  Esther  j.  10; 


vii.  2;  Hab.  ii.  6),  It  can  hardly  have 
been  to  "mark  his  utter  contempt  of  the 
foe,"  Eawlinson,  who  compares  Belshazzar's 
feast  (Dan.  v.  1—4)  when  loesieged  by  Cyrus. 
But  Ben-hadad  was  the  besieger.  We  are 
rather  reminded  of  Alexandei's  carouse  at 
Babylon.] 

Yer.  17.— And  the  young  men  of  the 
princes  of  the  provinces  went  out  first; 
and  Ben-hadad  sent  out  [Or  had  sent 
out.  Possibly,  the  unusual  stir  in  the 
city,  the  mustering  of  the  troops,  &e.,  had 
led  to  his  sending  out  scouts  before  the 
young  men  issued  from  the  gates.  The 
LXX.,  however,  has  "And  they  send  and 
tell  the  king  of  Syria,"  which  Eawlinson 
thinks  represents  a  purer  text.  But  it 
looks  like  an  emendation  to  avoid  the  diffi- 
culty, which    is    removed   by    translating 

n^?'^!  as  pluperfect] ,  and  they  told  Mm,  say- 
ing, There  are  men  come  out  of  Samaila. 
[Heb.  men  went  forth,  &o.] 

Ver.  18. — And  he  said,  Whether  they  be 
come  out  for  peace  [i.e.,  to  negociate  or  to 
submit] ,  take  them  alive ;  or  whether  they 
be  come  out  for  war,  take  them  alive. 
[We  may  trace  in  these  words,,  possibly 
the  influence  of  wine,  bnt  certainly  the 
exasperation  which  Ahab'g  last  message  had 
occasioned  the  king.  So  incensed  is  he 
that  he  will  not  respect  the  rights  of  am- 
bassadors, and  he  is  afraid  lest  belligerent! 
should  be  slain  before  he  can  arraign  them 
before  him.  Possibly  he  meant  that  they 
should  be  tortured  or  slain  before  his  face.] 

Ver.  19. — So  these  young  men  of  the 
princes  of  the  provinces  came  ont  of  the 
dty,  and  the  army  which  followed  them, 
[i.e.,  the  7000.  They  "came  out"  after 
the  young  men.] 

Ver.  20. — ^And  they  slew  every  one  Ms 
man  [The  LXX.,  which  differs  here  con- 
siderably from  the  Hebrew,  inserts  at  this 
point  Kal  iSevripmaev  eKaarog  rov  irap' 
auTov.  Ewald  thinks  the  Hebrew  text 
ought  to  be  made  to  correspond,  and  would 
read  '^(^*M  K'^K  »^>\  i.e.,  each  repeatedly 
killed  his  man  as  in  1  Sam.  xiv.  16]:  and 
the  Syrians  fled  [When  a  few  had  fallen, 
utter  panic  seized  the  rest.  The  separata 
kings,  with  their  divided  interests,  thought 
only  of  their  own  safety.  It  was  a  sauve 
qui  peat.  "  The  hasty  and  disordered  flight 
of  a  vast  Oriental  army  before  an  enemy 
contemptible  in  numbers  is  no  uncommon 
occurrence.  Above  1,000,000  of  Persian* 
fled  before  47,000  Greeks  at  Arbela  "  (Baw> 
linson).  The  very  size  of  such  hosts, 
especially  where  the  command  is  divided 
and  where  the  generals  are  drunk  or  in- 
capable, contributes  to  their  defeat].;  and 
Israel  pursued  them;  and  Ben-hadad  thi 


1—43.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


487 


Idng  of  Syria  escaped  on  an  borse  [Thecius 
suggests  that  this  was  a  chariot  horse,  the 
first  that  presented]  with  the  horsemen. 
[Heb.  and  horsetnen;  sc,  escaped  with  him 
(Eeil).  He  had  an  escort  in  some  of  his 
fugitive  cavaby.] 

Yer.  21. — And  the  king  of  Israel  vent  out 
[It  looks  as  if  Ahab  had  remained  within 
the  city  until  the  defeat  of  the  Syrians  was 
assured],  and  smote  [LXX.  xai  i\ape,and 
eaptured]  tbe  horses  and  charlotB  [i.e.,  the 
cavity  and  charlotry ;  of.  ver.  1] ,  and  slew 
the  Syrians  with  a  great  slaughter.  [Heb. 
in  Syria  a  great,  &c.] 

Ver.  22. — ^And  the  prophet  [obviously  the 
same  prophet]  came  to  the  Idng  of  Israel, 
and  said  unto  him,  Go,  strengthen  thyself 
[both  as  to  army  and  to  city],  and  mark, 
and  see  vhat  thou  doest  ["  Take  every 
precaution.  Don't  think  that  the  danger 
is  past "]  :  for  at  the  return  of  the  year  [in 
the  following  spring.  There  was  a  favourite 
time  for  campaigns  (2  Sam.  xi.  1),  viz., 
when  the  rainy  season  was  past.  Several 
late  wars,  notably  those  of  our  own  armies 
in  Africa  and  Afghanistan,  have  been  con- 
siderably influenced  by  the  seasons.  And 
the  wars  of  ancient  times  were  almost 
oniversally  summer  raids.  "  Sustained  in- 
Tasions,  lasting  over  the  winter,  are  not 
found  until  the  time  of  Shalmaneser" 
(2  Kings  xvii.  6 ;  zviii.  9.  10,  Eawliuaon)] 
the  king  of  Syria  will  come  [Heb.  coiaeth] 
np  against  thee. 

Ver.  23. — ^And  the  serrantB  of  the  king 
of  Syria,  said  unto  him  [naturally  anxious 
to  retrieve  their  character  and  obliterate 
their  disgrace] ,  Their  gods  are  gods  of  the 
hUlB  [AU  pagan  nations  have  believed  in 
local  deities,  Dii  montium,  dii  nemorum,  &c. 
(see  2  Kings  xviii.  33—35 ;  xix.  12,  13). 
Keil  accounts  for  this  belief — that  the  gods 
of  Israel  were  mountain  divinities,  by  the 
consideration  that  the  temple  was  built  on 
Mount  Moriah,  and  that  worship  was  always 
offered  on  "  high  places."  Kitto  reminds  us 
that  the  law  was  given  from  Mount  Sinai, 
and  that  fire  had  recently  descended  on 
Mount  Carmel,  "In  Syrophoenicia,  even 
mountains  themselves  had  Divine  honours 
paid  to  them  "  (Movers,  Phoen.  i.  667  sqq.) 
But  it  is  enough  to  remember  that  Samaria 
was  a  hilly  district,  and  that  the  courtiers 
must  find  some  excuse  for  the  defeat] ;  there- 
fore theywere  stronger  than  we;  but  [Heb. 

(D>1K1  often  well  rendered  but  not  in  this 
instance)  by  the  LXX.  o4  /j^"  ^*  A\ka]  let 
ns  fight  against  them  In  the  plain,  and 
surely  we  shall  be  stronger  than  they. 
[This  counsel,  which  apparently  rests  on 
religious  grounds  alone,  was,  it  is  probable, 
■BaUy  dictated  by  the  practical  consideration 


that  in  the  plain  the  Syrians  would  be  able 
to  deploy  their  chariots — a  most  important 
arm  of  their  service — in  a  way  which  they 
could  not  do  in  the  valleys  round  Samaria. 
See  ch.  zvi.  24,  note.  Moreover,  the 
Israelites  would  lose  the  advantage  of  a 
strong  position  and  the  cover  of  tbeir  forti- 
fications if  they  could  be  induced  to  meet 
them  in  the  "great  plain,"  ox  on  any 
similar  battle-field.] 

Ver.  24.— And  do  this  thing.  Take  the 
kings  away,  every  man  out  of  his  place, 
and  put  captains  [Same  word  as  in  ch,  z. 
15,  where  see  note]  In  their  rooms.  [Not  so 
much  because  (Bahr)  the  kings  only  fought 
through  compulsion,  for  they  appear  to 
have  been  in  complete  accord  with  Ben- 
hadad  (vers.  1,  12, 16),  as  because  of  their 
incapacity  and  divided  interests  and  plans. 
The  captains  would  presumably  be  selected 
because  of  their  valour,  military  skill,  &o. ; 
the  kings  would  owe  their  command  to  the 
accident  of  birth,  .&6.  Moreover,  an  army 
with  thirty-three  leaders  could  not  have 
the  necessary  solidarity.  Bahr  assumes 
that  the  removal  of  the  kings  would  involve 
the  withdrawal  of  the  auxiliaries  which  they 
contributed.  But  this  does  not  appear  to 
have  occurred  to  Ben-hadad's  advisers  when 
they  said,  "  put  captains  in  their  rooms." 
If  the  auxiliaries  were  withdrawn,  what  were 
the  thirty-two  captains  to  command  7] 

Ver.  25. — ^And  number  thee  an  army,  like 
the  army  that  thou  hast  lost  [Heb.  that  is 
fallen  from  thie,  not  as  marg.,  thatwas  fallen. 
For  the  form  '■iriisp  BeeEwald,2646)],horse 
for  [Heb.  as\  horse,  and  chariot  for  chariot : 
and  we  wUl  fight  against  them  In  the  plain, 
and  surely  we  shall  be  stronger  than  they. 
And  he  hearkened  unto  their  voice,  and  did 

80. 

Ver.  26.— And  It  came  to  pass  at  the 

return  of  the  year,  that  Ben-hadad  num- 
bered the  Syrians  [Heb.  Syria'\ ,  and  went 
up  to  Aphek  [As  the  word  signifies  "for- 
tress," it  is  only  natural  that  several 
different  places  should  bear  this  name,  and 
the  commentators  are  not  agreed  as  to 
which  of  them  is  here  intended.  Keil  and 
Bahr  identify  it  with  the  Aphek  hard  by 
Shunem  (1  Sam.  zxiz.  1 ;  cf.  xxviii.  4),  and 
therefore  in  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  while 
Gesenius  and  Grove — the  latter  because  of 
its  connection  with  IIE'^Bl!  the  plain,  a 
word  applied,  imt  i^o-xfiy,  to  the  plain  in  the 
tribe  of  Beuben  (Deut.  iii.  10 ;  iv.  43  ;  Josh, 
xiii.  9,  16,  17,  21,  &o.)— would  see  in  it  the 
Aphek  east  of  the  Jordan,  the  Apheca  of 
Eusebius,  and  perhaps  the  place  mentioned 
2  Kings  xiii.  17  (where,  however,  see  note). 
This  trans-Jordanic  Aphek  is  now  repre- 
sented by  the  village  of  Fik,  six  miles  east 


488 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xz.  1 — 18. 


of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  and  standing,  as  Apbek 
must  have  then  stood,  on  the  high  road 
between  Damascus  and  Jerusalem.  On  the 
whole,  the  balance  of  probability  inclines 
to  the  latter.  It  would  follow  hence  that 
the  Israelites,  emboldened  by  their  victory 
of  the  preceding  year,  had  crossed  the  river 
to  meet  the  enemy],  to  fight  against  Israel. 
[Heb.  to  the  war  with  Israel.'] 

Ver.  27.— And  the  children  of  Israel  were 
numbsred  [lit.,  numbered  themselves.  Hith- 
paelj,  and  were  all  present  [Bather,  and 

were  provided  with  food,  7-13  =to  nonrish. 
The  Alex.  LXX.  inserts  cai  Stoudi9riaav. 
Vulgate  acceptis  cibariis.  Marg.  were  vic- 
tualled. This  word  of  itself  suggests  that 
they  were  at  a  distance  from  their  capital 
or  other  city] ,  and  went  against  them  [Heb. 
to  meet  them]  :  and  the  children  of  Israel 
pitched  before  them  like  two  little  flocks 

W^n  strictly  means  separated.  It  is  rightly 
translated  "little  flocks"  (not  "flocks," 
Eawlinson),  because  the  idea  is  that  of  two 
bands  of  stragglers  separated  from  the  main 
body  of  the  flock.  So  the  Vulgate,  duo 
parvi  greges  caprarum;  butLXX.,  Svo  iroi/ivia 
atyuv.     Ewald  thinks  the  "  two  flocks  " 

Soints  to  an  auxiliary  force  furnished  by 
ehoshaphat,  fighting  with  Israel.  He 
also  thinks  goats  are  mentioned  to  convey 
the  exalted  position  of  the  camp  upon  the 
hills.  Flocks  of  goats  as  a  rule  are  smaller 
than  those  of  sheep,  the  former  being  more 
given  to  straying]  of  Mds  [lit.,  she-goats. 
"  These  flocks  pasture  mostly  on  the  cliffs, 
and  are  smaller  than  the  flocks  of  sheep  " 
(Bahr)]  ;  but  the  Syrians  filled  the  country. 
[The  whole  plain  swarmed  with  their  legions 
in  striking  contrast  to  the  two  insigniflcant 
bodies  of  Israelites.] 

Ver.  28. — And  there  came  a  man  of  God 
[Whether  this  is  the  same  person  as  the 
"  prophet "  of  vers.  13,  22,  is  not  quite  clear. 
The  differehee  in  the  designation  (see  on 
ch.  xiii.  1  and  p.  303)  would  lead  us  to  sup- 
pose that  a  different  messenger  was  meant. 
It  is  true  the  Hebrew  has  the  article 
"the  man  of  Ood"  (LXZ.d  avBpuiToe  rot) 

9«oS),  but  D»r6^n  ty'S  (see  Jndg.  xiii.  6; 

Deut.  xxxiii.  1)  is  often  hardly  distinguish- 
able from  the  same  words  without  the 
article],  and  spake  [Heb.  said,  same  word 
as  below]  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  and  said. 
Thus  salth  the  Lord,  Because  the  Syrians 
[Heb.  Syria,  but  with  a  plural  verb]  bave 
■aid,  The  Lord  is  God  of  the  bUls,  but  he  Is 
not  God  of  the  valleys,  therefore  will  I 
deliver  all  this  great  multitude  Into  thlna 
hand,  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord.  [It  was  partly  for  the  instruction  of 
Israel,  and  to  confirm  their  wavering  faith 


in  Jehovah  (see  ver.  13),  that  this  deliverance 
was  wrought.  But  it  was  also  that  neigh- 
bouring nations  might  learn  His  power,  and 
that  His  name  might  be  magnified  among 
the  heathen.] 

Ver.  29. — And  they  pitched  one  over 
against  the  other  [Heb.  these  opposite  these] 
seven  days.  [The  Syrians,  despite  their 
overwhelming  numbers,  appear  to  have  been 
afraid  to  attack,  and  the  Israelites  were 
naturally  reluctant,  despite  the  promise 
they  had  received,  to  join  battle  with  so 
great  a  host] .  And  so  It  was,  that  In  the 
seventh  day  the  battle  was  Joined  [Heb. 
tha  war  drew  near.  It  may  have  been  by 
the  direction  of  the  man  of  God  that  the 
Israelites  attacked  on  the  seventh  day,  or 
the  precedent  of  Jericho  (Josh.  vi.  15)  may 
have  infiuenced  their  leaders ;  or  the  num- 
ber seven,  properly  the  mark  and  signature 
of  the  covenant,  may  have  come  to  bo 
regarded  superstitiously — ^in  fact,  as  a  lucky 
number  (cl.  Isa.  Ixv.  11 ;  Esther  iii.  7] : 
and  the  children  of  Israel  slew  of  the 
Syrians  an  hundred  thousand  footmen  In 
one  day.  [This  prodigious  slaughter  may 
well  create  surprise.  That  two  compara- 
tively small  companies  should  be  able, 
physically,  to  slay,  with  the  rude  weapons 
of  that  age,  100,000  warriors,  fighting  fop 
their  lives,  seems  hardly  credible.  It  is 
probable,  therefore,  that  the  numbers  here, 
as  elsewhere,  have  been  exaggerated  in  the 
course  of  transcription.  Another  explana- 
tion of  the  dif&culty  has,  indeed,  been  sug- 
gested by  Bahr,  viz.,  that  13»1  may  signi^ 
here,  as  it  undoubtedly  does  elsewhere, 
"  defeated,"  "put  to  flight"  (see  Gen.  xiv. 
6;  1  Sam.  xiii.  4,  &a.)  And  the  Hebrew 
at  first  sight  seems  to  favour  this  idea,  for 
it  may  be  rendered  literally,  they  smote 
Syria,  a  hundred  thousand,  &o.  The  100,600 
would  then  represent  the  entire  strength 
of  the  Syrian  infantry.  But  the  mention 
of  the  "  footmen  "  and  of  "one  day  "  alike 
suggests  that  it  is  of  slaughter,  not  diaper- 
sion,  that  the  historian  speaks.] 

Ver.  30.— But  the  rest  [Plainly  those  not 
slain.  It  cannot  mean  those  not  defeated] 
fled  to  Aphek  [It  is  clear  that  this  fortress 
was  then  in  the  possession  of  the  Syrians, 
as  they  took  refuge  within  its  walls] ,  Into 
the  city;  and  there  a  wall  [Heb.  the  wall, 
i.e.,  the  city  wajl]  fell  upon  twenty  and 
seven  thousand  of  the  men  that  were  left. 
[The  Hebrew  implies  that  these  were  prac- 
tically all  who  survived  the  battle.  DnniSlil 
is  the  word  translated  above,  "  the  rest." 
We  have  here  surely  an  exaggeration,  even 
more  obvious  than  that  of  ver.  39.  For  even 
if  we  suppose  an  earthquake,  it  is  difScult 
to  believe  that  the  walls  of  a  place  liiu 


OB.  XX.  1—48.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


489 


Apbek  oonld  bniy  lo  large  a  nnmber  in 
their  ruins.  Bawlinsoh  suggests  that  the 
Syrians  at  the  time  were  "manning  the 
defences  in  full  force,"  and  that  the  earth- 
quake "  threw  down  the  wall  where  they 
were  most  thickly  crowded  upon  it ; "  but 
the  question  arises  whether  it  is  possible  to 
mass  27,000  men  upon  any  part  of  a  wall,  or 
all  the  walls,  especially  of  an  ancient  vil- 
lage fortress.  Thenius  hints  that  the  fall 
of  the  wall  may  have  been  occasioned  by  the 
Israelites  undermining  it  during  the  night, 
but  it  seems  hardly  Ukely  that  so  small  a 
force  oonld  undertake  operations  of  that 
kind  against  so  formidable  a  body  o{ 
troops.  Eeil  objects  to  this  view  on  another 
ground,  viz.,  that  its  object  is  to  negative 
the  idea  of  a  Divine  interposition.  But  the 
text  does  not  ascribe  the  fall  of  the  wall  to 
any  such  interposition,  and  we  know  that 
the  sacred  writers  are  not  slow  to  recognize 
the  finger  of  Q-od  whenever  it  is  exerted.] 
And  Ben-hadad  fled,  and  came  Into  [Heb. 
to]  the  city  [t.e.,  Aphek.  Bawlinson  in- 
terprets this  statement  to  mean  that  he 
■'fled  from  the  wall,  where  ho  had  been  at 
the  time  of  the  disaster,  into  the  inner  parts 
of  the  city,"  but  this  is  extremely  doubtful. 
Observe  the  words,  "  fled  and  came  to  the 
city" — ^words  almost  identical  with  thoas 
used  of  the  fugitives  above] ,  Into  an  Inner 
Chamber.  [Heb.  into  a  chamber  within  a 
chamber,  as  in  ch.  xzii.  25.  This  cannot 
mean  "from   chamber  to   chamber,"    as 

uarg.  It  is  to  be  obi erved  that  "i;jn  alone 
Bgnifies  properly  an  inner  chamber.  See 
Gen.  xliii.  30;  Judg.  xvi.  9,  12.  Bawlinson 
thinks  that  a  secret  chamber  may  be  meant 
"a  chamber  in  the  wall,  or  one  beneath 
the  floor  of  another."] 

Ver.  31.— And  Us  servants  [Possibly  the 
very  same  men  who  (ver.  23)  had  counselled 
this  second  expedition]  said  unto  him,  Behold 
now,  we  have  heard  that  the  kings  of  the 
house  of  Israel  are  merciful  Isings  [As  no 
doubt  they  were  when  compared  with  con- 
temporary pagan  sovereigns] :  let  us,  I 
pray  thee,  put  sackcloth  on  our  loins  [in 
token  of  humiliation  and  contrition,    pb 

ii  identical,  radically,  with  acaacoe,  saceus, 
and  our  sack],  and  ropes  upon  our  heads 
[i.e.,  round  our  necks.  To  show  how  com- 
pletely they  were  at  Ahab's  mercy.  Babr 
shows  that  this  custom  still  exists  in  China, 
but  the  well-known  story  of  the  citizens  of 
Calais,  after  its  siege  by  Edward  III.,  sup- 
plies a  closer  illustration] ,  and  go  out  [Heb. 
go']  to  the  king  of  Israel  [It  would  appear 
from  the  language  of  ver.  33  as  if  Ahab's 
army  was  now  besieging  the  place.  He 
himself  may  have  kept  at  a  safe  distance 


from  it]:  peradventnre  be  will  save  thy 
Ufe.    [LXX.  owr  Uvea,  tAq  i^x«e  i^iuw".] 

Ver.  32.— So  they  girded  sackcloth  on 
their  loins,  and  put  ropes  on  thetr  heads, 
and  came  to  the  king  of  Israel,  and  said. 
Thy  servant  Ben-hadad  saith,  I  pray  thee, 
let  me  live.  [Compare  with  this  abject 
petition  for  life  the  arrogant  insolence  of 
vers.  6,  10.  The  tables  are  indeed  turned.] 
And  he  said,  la  he  yet  alive  T  lie  Is  my 
brother. 

Ver.  33.— Now  the  men  did  diligently 
observe  whether  anything  would  come 
ftorn  him,  and  did  hastily  catch  it  [Heb. 
and  the  men  augvrcd — tJ'05  divinavit.  Of. 
Gen.  xliv.  16  ;  Levit.  xix.  2b ;  2  Kings  xvii. 
17.  LXX.  oliaviaavTO.  Vulgate  acceperunt 
pro  amine — and  hasted  and  made  him  declare 
whether  from  him,  the  meaning  of  which  ii 
BufSoiently  clear,  viz.,  that  the  men  took 
Ahab's  words,  "He  is  my  brother,"  as  a  speech 
of  good  omen,  and  immediately  laid  hold  of 
it,  and  contrived  that  the  king  should  be 
held  to  it  and  made  to  confirm  it.  The  only 
difficulty  is  in  the  word  -ID^nJl  which  is  Siral 
\iy.  The  Talmud,  however,  interprets  it  to 
mean,  declare,  confirm  ;  in  the  Kal  conjuga- 
tion and  the  Hiphil  would  therefore  mean, 
made  him  declare.  The  LXX.  and  Vulgate, 
however,    have    understood    it    otherwise, 

taking  t3?p  as  the  equivalent  of  )*jn  rapuit. 
The  former  has  ivtXe^avro  riv  \6yov  he  row 
arSfiaTog  airrov,  and  the  latter  rapuerunt 
verbwm  ex  ore  ejus.  They  would  seem  also 
to  have  read  instead  of  .1313011  'O  "ISiri 
(Ewald).  The  law  of  daJcheel  (see  Layard, 
N.  and  B.  pp.  317—319),  by  which  BawUn- 
eon  would  explain  this  incident,  seems  to 
be  rather  an  usage  of  the  Bedouin  than  of 
any  civilized  nations]  :  and  they  said,  Tb.y 
brother  Ben-hadad.  Then  said  he.  Go  ye, 
bring  him.  Then  Ben-hadad  cams  forth 
to  him  [out  of  his  hiding-place  and  out  of 
the  uity] :  and  he  caused  him  to  come  np 
Into  the  chariot  [A  mark  of  great  favour 
(compare  Gen.  xli.  43),  and  of  reconcilia- 
tion and  concord  (of.  2  Kings  x.  15).] 

Ver.  34 — And  Ben-hadad  said  unto  blm, 
The  cities,  which  my  father  took  tbrom 
thy  father,  I  will  restore  [We  can  hardly 
see  in  these  words  "  the  terms  of  peace 
which  be  is  willing  to  offer  as  the  price  of 
his  freedom  "  (Bawlinson),  because  he  was 
absolutely  at  Abab's  mercy,  and  was  not  in 
a  position  to  make  any  stipulations ;  but 
they  express  Ben-hadad's  idea  of  the  results 
which  must  follow  the  conquest.  His  uttei 
defeat  would  necessitate  this  resonstruction 
of  their  respective  territories,  &o.  We  can- 
not be  quite  certain  that  the  cities  here  re- 
ferred to  are  those  enumerated  in  oh.  xt. 


190 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[CH.  XX.  1- 


20,  as  taten  by  Ben-hadad'e  armies  from 
Baasha. .  For  Baasba  was  not  the  father, 
nor  even  was  he  the  "  ancestor  "  (as  Eeil, 
later  edition)  of  Ahab,  but  belonged  to  a 
different  dynasty.  At  the  same  time  it  ia 
qnite  conceivable  that  a  prince  in  Ben- 
hadad'B  position,  in  his  ignorance  or  forget- 
fulness  of  the  history  of  Israel,  might  use 
the  word  "father"  improperly,  or  even  in 
the  sense  of  "  predecessor."  We  know  that 
3^  had  a  veiy  extended  signification.  EeU 
and  Bahr,  however,  think  that  we  have  a 
reference  to  some  war  in  the  reign  of  Omri 
(cf.  ch.  xvi.  27),  which  is  not  recorded  in 
Scripture.  And  the  words  which  follow 
make  this  extremely  probable,  inasmuch  as 
in  Baasha's  days  Samaria  had  no  exist- 
ence] ;  and  thon  shalt  ma&e  streets  [Divn 
lit.,  vhatever  u  withmtt ;  hence  streets, 
spaces,  quarters]  for  thee  In  Damascus,  as 
my  father  made  In  Samaria.  [The  com- 
mentators are  agreed  that  a  permission  to 
establish  bazaars  or  quarters,  in  which  the 
Hebrews  might  live  and  trade,  is  here  con- 
ceded] .  Then  said  Ahab  [These  words  are 
rightly  supplied  by  our  translators.  The 
meaning  would  have  been  quite  clear  had 
the  Hebrews  been  familiar  with  the  use  of 
quotation  marks.  For  lack  of  these,  all 
the  versions  ascribe  the  words  to  Ben- 
hadad],  I  will  send  thee  away  with  this 
covenant  Sc  he  made  a  covenant  witli 
him,  and  sent  him  away. 

Ver.  35. — And  a  certain  man  [Heb.  one 
man ;  cf.  ch.  xiii.  11,  note]  of  the  sons  of 
the  prophets  [Here  mentioned  for  the  first 
time,  though  the  prophetic  schools  prob- 
ably owed  their  existence,  certainly  their 
development,  to  Samuel.  The  'ilil  ''JB  are 
of  course  not  the  children,  but  the  pupils  of 
the  prophets.  For  this  use  of  "  son,"  cf. 
1  Sam. XX.  31  ("a  son  of  death ") ;  2  Sam. 
xii.  6;  Deut.  xxv.  2;  Matt,  xxiii.  15; 
1  Kings  iv.  30 ;  Ezra  ii.  1 ;  John  xyii. 
12,  and  Amos  vii.  14.  Gesenius  refers 
to  the  Greek  larpiav  v'toi,  pTjTopiov  v'loi,  &o., 
and  says  that  among  the  Persians  "the 
disciples  of  the  Magi  are  called,  "  Sons  of 
Magi."  The  word,  again,  does  not  neees- 
sarUy  imply  youth.  That  they  were  some- 
times married  men  appears  from  2  Kings 
vi.  1,  though  this  was  probably  after  their 
collegiate  life  was  ended.  As  they  were 
called  "sons,"  so  their  instructor,  or  head, 
was  called  "  father "  (1  Sam.  x.  12)]  said 
unto  his  neighbour  [or  companion.  Another 
prophet  is  implied.  It  was  because  this 
"  neighbour  "  was  a  prophet  that  his  dis- 
regard of  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  so  sinful, 
and  received  such  severe  punishment] ,  in 
the  word  of  the  Lord  [see  on  ch.  xiii.  1] , 
Smlt*  in*,  I  pray  thee.    [Why  the  prophet, 


in  order  to  the  accomplishment  of  hia 
mission — which  was  to  obtain  from  AhaVa 
own  lips  a  confession  of  his  deserts  —why 
he  should  have  been  smitten,  i.e.,  bruised 
and  wounded,  is  not  quite  clear.  For  it  is 
obvious  that  he  might  have  sustained  his 
part,  told  his  story,  and  obtained  a  judg- 
ment from  the  king,  without  proceeding  to 
such  painful  extremities.  It  is  qnite  true 
that  a  person  thus  wounded  would  perhaps 
sustain  the  part  of  one  who  had  been  in 
battle  better,  but  the  wounds  were  in  no 
way  necessary  to  his  disguise,  and  men  do 
not  court  pain  without  imperious  reasons. 
Besides,  it  was  "  in  the  word  of  the  Lord  " 
that  these  wounds  were  sought  and  received. 
It  is  quite  clear,  therefore,  that  it  cannot 
have  been  merely  to  give  him  a  claim  to  an 
audience  with  the  king  (Ewald) — he  could 
easily  have  simulated  wounds  oy  means  of 
bandages,  which  would  at  the  same  time 
have  helped  to  disguise  him — or  that  he 
might  foreshadow  in  his  own  person  the 
wounding  which  Ahab  would  receive  (oh. 
xxii.  11),  for  of  that  he  says  nothing,  or 
for  any  similar  reason.  The  wounding,  we 
may  he  quite  sure,  and  the  tragical  circum- 
stances connected  therewith,  are  essential 
parts  of  the  parable  this  prophet  had  to  act, 
of  the  lesson  he  had  to  teach.  Now  the 
great  lesson  he  had  to  convey,  not  to  the 
king  alone,  but  to  the  prophetic  order  and 
to  the  whole  country,  the  lesson  most 
necessary  in  that  lawless  age,  was  that  of 
impUcit  nnquestioning  obedience  to  the 
Divine  law.  Ahab  had  jnst  transgressed 
that  law.  He  had  "let  go  a  man  whom  God 
had  appointed  to  ntter  destruction ; "  he  had 
heaped  honours  on  the  oppressor  of  his 
country,  and  in  gratifying  benevolent  im- 
pulses had  ignored  the  will  and  counsel  of 
God  (see  on  ver.  42).  No  doubt  it  seemed 
to  him,  as  it  has  seemed  to  others  since, 
that  he  had  acted  with  rare  magnanimity, 
and  that  his  generosity  in  that  age,  an  age 
which  showed  no  mercy  to  the  fallen,  was 
unexampled.  But  he  must  be  taught  that 
he  has  no  right  to  be  generous  at  the  ex- 
pense of  others ;  that  God's  will  must  be 
done  even  when  it  goes  against  the  grain, 
when  it  contradicts  impulses  of  kindness, 
and  demands  painful  sacrifices.  He  ia 
taught  this  by  the  prophetic  word  (ver.  42), 
but  much  more  effectively  by  the  actions 
which  preceded  it.  A  prophet  required  to 
smite  a  brother  prophet,  and  that  for  no 
apparent  reason,  would  no  doubt  find  it  re- 
pugnant to  his  feelings  to  do  so ;  it  would 
seem  to  him  hard  and  cruel  and  shameful 
to  smite  a  companion.  But  the  prophet 
who  refused  to  do  this,  who  followed  hia 
benevolent  impulses  in  preference  to  thb 
word  of  the  Lord,  died  for  hii  gin— died 


at,  XX.  1—48.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


491 


forthmth  by  the  -visitation  of  God.  What 
a  lesson  was  this  to  king  and  oountiy — for 
no  doubt  the  incident  would  be  bruited 
abroad,  and  the  very  strangeness  of  the 
whole  proceeding  would  heighten  the  im. 
pression  it  made. .  Indeed,  it  is  hardly 
possible  to  conceive  a  way  in  which  the  duty 
of  unquestioning  obedience  could  be  more 
emphaticalV  taught.  When  this  prophet 
appeared  before  the  king,  a  man  had 
smitten  and  wounded  him,  disagreeable  and 
painful  aa  the  task  must  have  been,  because 
of  the  word  of  the  Lord ;  whilst  a  brother 
prophet,  who  declined  the  office  because  it 
was  painful,  had  been  slain  by  a  wild  beast. 
It  is  easy  to  see  that  there  was  here  a 
solemn  lesson  for  the  king,  and  that  the 
wounding  gave  it  its  edge.]  And  the  man 
refused  to  smite  him. 

Ter.  36.— Then  said  he  unto  lilm,  Becanss 
thou  hast  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord, 
Iwhold,  as  soon  aa  thou  art  departed  from 
me,  a  lion  [Heb.  the  lion,  perhaps  the  lion 
appointed  already  to  this  office,  or  one  that 
had  lately  been  seen  in  the  neighbourhood] 
shall  slay  thee.  And  as  soon  as  he  was  de- 
parted from  ''<'",  a  [Heb.  the]  lion  found 
him  [same  word  as  in  oh.  ziii.  24,  where  see 
note],  and  slew  ^^^  [For  the  same  sin 
as  that  of  "  the  man  of  God  (ch.  ziii.  21, 26), 
viz.,  disobedience  (Deut.  xxxii.  24 ;  Jer.  v.  6), 
and  disobedience,  too,  under  circumstances 
remarkably  similar  to  those.  In  fact,  the 
two  histories  run  on  almost  parallel  lines. 
In  each  case  it  is  a  prophet  who  disobeys, 
and  disobeys  the  "  word  of  the  Lord ; "  in 
each  case  the  disobedience  appears  almost 
excusable ;  in  each  case  the  prophet  appears 
to  be  hardly  dealt  with,  and  suffers  instant 
punishment,  whilst  the  king  escapes;  in 
each  case  the  punishment  is  foretold  by  a 
prophet ;  in  each  case  it  is  effected  by  the 
instrumentality  of  a  lion.  And  in  each 
case  the  lesson  is  the  same — that  God's 
commands  must  be  kept,  whatever  the  cost, 
or  that  stem  retribution  will  inevitably 
follow.] 

Ver.  37.— Then  he  found  another  man, 
and  said,  Smite  me,  I  pray  thee.  And  the 
man  smote  him,  so  that  In  smiting  he 
wounded  ''<"'  [Heb.  smiting  and  wounding. 
This  last  particular  is  apparently  recorded 
to  show  how  promptly  and  thoroughly  this 
"  other  man,"  who  is  not  said  to  have  been 
a  prophet,  obeyed  the  charge.  Probably  he 
had  the  fate  of  the  other  before  his  eyes.] 

Yer.  38. — So  the  prophet  departed,  and 
waited  for  the  king  by  the  way,  and  dis- 
guised taimself  with  ashes  upon  his  face. 
[Bather,  a  bandage  upon  his  eyes.  ISH, 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  denotes  some  sort  of 
tovering  (LXX.  nXaiiiiv),  and  is  probably  the 


equivalent  of  1^^.  Ashes  cannot  be  pnt 
on  the  eyes,  and  even  on  the  head  would  be 
but  ~  poor  disguise.  This  bandage  was  at 
the  same  time  in  keeping  with  the  prophet's 
rSle  as  a  wounded  man,  and  an  effective 
means  of  concealment.  It  would  almost 
seem  as  if  this  prophet  was  personally 
known  to  the  king.] 

Ver.  39.— And  as  the  king  passed  by,  he 
erled  unto  the  king  [in  his  capacity  of 
supreme  judge ;  see  on  ch.  iii,  9]  :  and  he 
said.  Thy  servant  went  out  into  the  midst 
of  the  battle  [i.e.,  the  recent  battle]  ;  and, 
behold,  a  man  turned  aside  [1|p;  cf.  ch.  xxU. 
43 ;  Exod.  iii.  3  ;  xxxii.  8.  But  Ewald,  al. 
would  read,  ip  prince  or  captain  (properly 
"V^),  a  change  which  certainly  lends  force 
to  the  apologue,  and  makes  the  analogy 
more  complete.  Only  such  an  officer  was 
entitled  to  give  such  an  order.  Moreover, 
just  as  a  common  soldier  ought  to  obey  his 
captain,  so  should  Ahab  have  obeyed  God. 
But  as  our  present  text  yields  a  good  and 
sufficient  meaning,  we  are  hardly  wairanted 
in  making  any  change] ,  and  brought  a  man 
unto  me,  and  said.  Keep  this  man :  If  by 
any  means  he  be  missing,  then  shall  tliy 
life  be  for  his  life,  or  else  thou  glialt  pay 
[Heb.  weigh.  There  was  then  no  coinage. 
Payments  were  made  by  means  of  bars  of 
silver  or  gold]  a  talent  of  silver.  [A  con- 
siderable sum — about  £400.  "  The  prisoner 
is  thus  represented  to  be  a  very  important 
personage  "  (Tbenius).  There  is  a  hint  at 
Ben-hadad.  Ewald  holds  that  the  wounds 
represented  the  penalty  inflicted  instead  of 
the  talent  which  a  common  soldier  naturally 
could  not  pay.] 

Yer.  40.— And  as  thy  servant  was  busy 
[Heb.  doing.  The  LXX.  ircpiejSH^I/aro  u 
SouXos  aov,  and  the  Vulgate  dum  ego  turbatus 
hue  illucque  me  verterem,  have  led  some 
critics  to  urge  the  substitution  of  PI^S  turn- 
ing, or  nrb'  looking,  for  TiWi)  doing,  in  the 
test.  But  no  alteration  is  needed]  here  and 
there  [or  hither  and  thither — the  n  ie 
generally  local — as  in  Josh.  viii.  20.  But 
sometimes  it  is  merely  demonstrative,  "  here 
and  there,"  as  in  Gen.  xxi.  29,  Dan.  xii.  5. 
and  so  it  may  be  understood  here  (Ge- 
senius)] ,  be  was  gone  [Heb.  he  is  not].  And 
the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  him.  So  shall 
thy  judgment  be ;  thyself  hast  decided  it. 
[Cf.  2  Sam.  xii.  6 — 7,  Ahab  has  himseli 
pronounced  that  his  judgment  is  just,  and 
what  it  shall  be.] 

Ver.  41.— And  he  basted,  and  took  th« 
ashes  away  from  his  face  [Heb.  removed  thi 
covering  from  upon  his  eyes']  ;  and  the  king 
of  Israel  discerned  him  that  he  was  of  the 
prophets.     [Inat  ia,    he  was  one  of  th« 


492 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  Oi?  KINGS. 


[CH.  XX..  1—13. 


prophets  who  were  known  to  him.  The 
face  alone  would  hardly  have  proclaimed 
him  a  prophet.  And  the  prophet's  dresa 
would  of  course  have  been  laid  aside  when 
the  disguise  was  assumed.] 

Yer.  42. — And  he  said  unto  blm,  Thua 
saith  the  Lord,  Because  thou  hast  lev  go 
[Heb.  sent  away  ;  same  word  as  in  ver.  34. 
This  is  an  indirect  proof  that  those  were 
the  words  of  Ahab]  out  of  thy  hand  [Heb. 
out  of  hand — same  idiom  in  1  Sam.  xxvi. 
23 — i.e.,  power,  possession.    Cf.  Gen.  xzxii. 
12  ;  Exod.  xviii.  9  ;  Num.  xxxv.  25]  a  man 
whom    I   appointed  to  utter  destruction 
[Heb.  a  vian  of  my  devoting.  Cf.  Isa.  xxxiv. 
6 ;  Zech.  xiv.  11.    It  is  the  word  used  of  the 
Canaauites  and  their  cities,  Deut.  ii.  34 ;  vii. 
2  ;  Josh.  viii.  26  ;  x.  28  ;  and  it  gave  a  name 
to  the  city  Hormah,  Num.  xxi.  3  ;  xiv.  45. 
Een-hadad,  therefore,  was  doomed  of  God], 
therefore  thy  life  shall  go  for  [Heb.  be  in- 
stead of]  his  life,  and  thy  people  for  hla 
people.      [By  the  lex  talionis.    It  was  prob- 
ably because  of  this  denunciation  (cf.  ch, 
xxii.  8)  that  Josephus  identifies  this  prophet 
with  Mioaiah,  the  son  of  Imlah,  "  whom 
Ahab  appears  to  have  imprisoned  on  account 
of  some  threatening  prophecy  "  (RawUnson). 
See  ch.  xxii.  9,  26.    For  the  fulfilment  of 
this  prediction  see  ch.  xxii.     It  has  seemed 
to  some  writers  as  if  Ahab  were  here  very 
hardly  dealt  with  for  merely  gratifying  a 
generous  impulse,  and    dealing    magnani- 
mously with    a    conquered    foe.      Indeed, 
there  are  commentators  who  see    in    his 
release  of  the  cruel  and  insolent  tyrant  a 
"  trait  which  does  honour  to  the  heart  of 
Ahab."    But  it  is  to  be  remembered,  first, 
that  Ahab  was  not  free  to  do  as  he  liked  in 
this  matter.     His  victories  had  been  won, 
not  by  his  prowess,  by    the  skill  of  his 
generals,  or  the  valour  of  his  soldiers,  but 
by  the  power  of  God  alone.     The  war,  that 
is  to  say,  was  God's  war :  it  was  begun  and 
continued,  and  should  therefore  have  been 
ended,  in  Him.    When  even  the  details  of 
the  attack  had  been  ordered  of  God  (ver.  14), 
surely  He  should  have  been  consulted  as  to 
the  disposal  of  the  prisoners.    The  prophet 


who  promised  Divine  aid  might  at  any  rate 
have  been  asked — as    prophets  constantly 
were  in  that  age  (oh.  xxii.  5,  8) — what  was 
the  "  word  of  the  Lord  "  concerning  Israel's 
overbearing    and    inveterate  enemy.     But 
Ahab,  who  had  himself  played  so  craven  a 
part  (vers.  21,  31),  and  who  had  contributed 
nothing   to    these  great  and   unhoped-for 
victories,  nevertheless  arrogated  to  himself 
their  fruits,  and  thereby  ignored  and  dis- 
honoured God.      Secondly,   if  he  had  bo 
little  regard  for  his  own  private  interests  as 
to  liberate  such  a  man  as  Ben-hadad,  he 
ought,  as  trustee  for  the  peace  and  welfare 
of  Israel,  to   have  acted  differently.     The 
demand  of  ver.  6  should  have  revealed  to 
him  the  character  of  the  man  he  had  to 
deal  with.     And   lastly,  he  was   acting  in 
defiance  of  all  the  principles  and  precedents 
of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.     For 
one    great  principle  of  that  dispensation 
was  the  lex  talionis.    The  king  was  the 
authorized  dispenser  of  rewards  and  punish- 
ments, not  only  to  wicked  subjects  but  to 
aggressive  nations.    It   was    his    duty  to 
mete  out  to  them  the  measure  they  had 
served  to  Israel.    And  the  precedents  were 
all  in  favour  of  putting  such  wretches  as 
this  Ben-hadad  to  the  sword  (Josh.  x.  26  ; 
Judg.  vii.  25 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  38).     If  he  had 
been  the  first  oppressor  who  fell  into  the 
hands    of    Israel,    Ahab    might  have  had 
some  excuse.    But  with  the  fate  of  Agag,  of 
Adoni-bezek,    of    Oreb    and  Zeeb,  in  his 
memory,  he  ought  at  any  rate  to    have 
paused  and  asked  counsel  of  God  before 
taking   Ben-hadad   into    his    chariot    and 
sending  him  away  with  a  covenant  of  peace, 
to  reappear  at  no  distant  period  on  the 
scene  as  the  scourge  of  the  Lord's  people.] 

Yer.  43. — And  the  king  of  Israel  went  to 
bis  bouse  heavy  and  displeased  [Heb. 
sullen  and  angry  ;  same  words  ch.  xxi.  4] , 
and  came  to  Samaria.  [The  order  of  this 
verse  suggests  that  the  house  was  one  in  or 
near  Aphek,  in  which  the  king  was  lodged 
after  the  battle— on  which  this  interview, 
therefore,  followed  closely — and  that  shortly 
afterwards  he  left  it  for  his  capital.] 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — iB.— The  Pwrgatory  of  Nations  wnd  Kingt.  The  two  invasions  of  Israel 
by  the  armies  of  Syria,  and  their  defeat  by  the  finger  of  God,  may  suggest  some 
lessons  as  to  God's  dealings  with  nation),  and  with  oppreBsive  and  tyrannical  kings. 

Two  considerations  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  here.  First,  that  the  pre- 
sent age,  unlike  the  Mosaic,  is  not  a  dispensation  of  temporal  rewards  and  punish- 
ments. It  is  true  that  even  now  men  do  receive  a  rough  sort  of  retribution, 
according  to  their  deserts,  from  the  operation  of  natural  laws ;  but  that  retribution 
is  uncertain  and  indirect.  Sometimes  vengeance  overtakes  the  wrong-doer,  but  M 
often  as  not  be  escapes  scatliless.    The  Jewish  economy,  however,  bad  absolutely 


OT.  XX.  l-'43.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


none  but  temporal  sanctions.  A  "judgment  to  come  "  formed  no  part  of  its  system. 
It  dealt  with  m.en  as  if  there  were  no  hereafter.  It  taught  them  to  expect  an  exact 
and  proportionate  and  immediate  recompense  ;  an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a 
tooth.  It  preached  an  ever-present  Deity,  the  true  King  of  the  country,  Tisiting 
every  transgression  and  disobedience  with  its  just  recompense  of  reward  (Heb.  ii.  2). 
And  so  long  as  that  economy  was  practised  in  its  integrity,  so  long,  either  through 
the  immediate  dispensations  of  God,  or  the  mediate  action  of  the  authorities  who 
represented  Him,  did  vice  and  crime,  extortion  and  oppression,  infidelity  and 
apostasy,  receive  their  just  deserts.  But  with  the  advent  of  our  Lord,  and  His 
apocalypse  of  life  and  immortality,  all  this  was  changed.  We  no  longer  look  for 
temporal  judgments  because  we  are  taught  to  wait  for  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ. 
It  is  only  within  very  narrow  limits  that  we  expect  to  see  vice  punished  or  virtue 
rewarded.  It  causes  us  no  surprise,  consequently,  to  find  even  l^e  tyrant  and  op- 
pressor escaping  aU  the  whips  and  stings  of  vengeance.  We  know  that  he  will  not 
always  escape  ;  that  though  "  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  ex- 
ceeding small,"  and  that  he  and  all  suoh  as  be  will  surely  satisfy  the  inexorable 
claims  of  Justice  hereafter. 

But  there  is  apparently  one  exception — and  this  is  the  second  consideration — to 
this  general  rule.  If  the  individual  is  not  judged  here,  the  nation  is.  For  nations, 
as  suoh,  have  no  existence  apart  from  this  hfe  present.  In  the  kingdom  of  the 
future,  nationalities  have  no  place  (Col.  ui.  11).  "  Mortals  have  many  tongues, 
immortals  have  but  one."  If,  then,  men  are  ever  to  be  dealt  with  in  their  corporate 
capacity,  they  must,  and  as  a  matter  of  &ot  they  do,  receive  their  reckoning  here. 
It  surely  is  not  difficult  to  trace  the  finger  of  God  in  the  history  of  Europe  as  well 
•B  of  Israel,  of  modern  as  of  ancient  times.  In  our  own  generation  have  not  both 
Austria  and  Prussia  paid  in  blood  for  the  spoliation  of  Denmark?  Have  not  the 
United  States  suffered  for  their  overweening  pride  and  greed  and  reckless  specula- 
tion ?  Has  not  France  paid  a  heavy  forfeit  for  the  corruption,  the  profligacy,  the 
'fiecularily  which  marked  the  latter  years  of  the  Empire  ?  Has  not  England,  too, 
had  to  lament  her  intermeddling  ?  have  not  her  late  reverses  suggested  to  many 
minds  the  painful  thought  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone  out  against  her  ?  Is 
ehe  not  suffering  at  this  moment  for  her  past  ndisgovernment  of  Ireland  ?  Is  not 
Turkey,  by  the  agonies  of  dissolution,  expiating  the  uucleanness  and  injustice  of  the 
last  four  centuries  ?  Yes,  it  should  be  clear  that  whatever  arraignment  awaits  the 
individual  hereafter,  the  commimity,  the  nation,  receives  its  requital  and  acquittance 
here. 

And  if  this  be  so,  it  is  obvious  that  the  Mng,  the  representative  of  the  country,  or 
the  sovereign  power,  who  is  responsible  primarily  for  the  action  of  the  communily, 
will  have  a  share,  and  by  far  the  largest  share,  in  whatever  good  or  evil  be&lls  it. 
On  him  primarily  does  the  disgrace  and  blow  of  a  disaster  fall.  It  is  not  always 
true  that  "  the  kings  make  war  and  their  subjects  have  to  pay  for  it,"  for  the  king, 
in  case  of  defeat,  pays  the  heaviest  toU  of  all,  And  though  there  is  no  one  to  call 
him  to  an  account  for  internal  misgovemment,  yet  even  that  does  not  go  onreoom- 
pensed,  as  the  history  of  Eome,  of  Eussia,  of  Turkey,  of  England  shows.  _  We  are 
warranted  in  looking,  consequently,  for  the  punishment  of  aggressive  nations  and 
liyrannical  kings  in  t£is  present  age. 

Now  this  chapter  describes  two  invasionB  of  the  territory  of  Israel,  and  two  buc- 
eessive  defeats  of  the  invaders.  In  the  invasions  we  see  me  punishment  of  Israel 
and  of  Aliab ;  in  the  defeats  the  punishment  of  Syria  and  Ben-hadad.  Let  us 
inquire,  in  the  first  place,  what  each  had  done  to  provoke  and  deserve  his  respective 
chastisement. 

1.  The  INVASI0N8.  That  these  were  punishments  hardly  needs  proof.  For  ean 
•ny  land  be  overrun  with  a  horde  of  barbarians,  such  as  the  Syrians  and  their  con- 
federates, the  Hittite  chieftains,  were,  without  widespread  and  profound  suffering  f 
We  know  what  invasion  means  in  modem  times,  when  warfare  is  conducted  with 
some  approach  to  humanity,  but  what  it  meant  in  the  Old  World  and  the  Orient,  we 
are  quite  unable  to  realize.  It  is  idle  to  say  that  the  Syrians  were  defeated  in  the 
end.    Who  shall  picture  to  us  what  the  thousands  of  Israel  suffered  during  the 


494  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xx.  1—41 

advance,  possibly  during  the  retreat,  of  that  unwieldy  and  rapacious  host,  certainly 
during  the  occupation  of  the  country?.  "Before  them  the  garden  of  Eden,  behind 
them  a  desolate  wilderness"  (Joel  ii.  8).  Fire,  rapine,  famine,  these  three  fell 
sisters  marched  in  their  train.  The  invasions,  then,  though  repelled,  would  entail 
prodigious  loss  and  suffering  on  the  people.  It  would  not  compensate  the  Jewish 
farmer  for  the  loss  of  his  corn  and  oil  and  wine,  still  less  the  Jewish  father  for  the 
dishonour  of  his  daughters,  to  know  that  the  siege  was  raised,  that  the  king  had 
fled  to  an  inner  chamber,  that  thousands  of  their  enemies  lay  buried  under  the 
walls  of  Aphek.  No,  each  invasion  was  nothing  short  of  a  national  calamity,  and 
we  do  well  to  ask  what  it  was  had  provoked  this  chastisement.     It  was — 

1.  The  sin  of  the  people  at  large.  The  sin  of  Israel  at  this  epoch  was  idolatry. 
The  sin  of  Jeroboam  had  already  received,  in  part  at  least,  its  recompense.  A 
Sjrrian  invasion  in  a  preceding  generation  (ch.  xv.  20)  had  wasted  the  territory  of 
Dan.  But  the  calf- worship  was  continued,  and  vile  idolatry  was  now  associated 
with  it.  It  is  true  this  had  been  fostered,  if  not  introduced,  by  Jezebel,  butitisim- 
possible  to  acquit  the  people  of  blame.  The  pleasant  vices  of  the  Phoenician  ritual 
were  sweet  to  their  taste.  They  loved  to  have  it  bo.  Justice  demanded,  conse- 
quently, that  they  should  share  in  the  punishment.  Idolatry  had  already  procured 
the  investment  and  spoliation  of  Jerusalem  ;  it  now  accounts  for  the  march  of  the 
Syrians  and  the  siege  of  Samaria,  the  centre  of  the  Baal- worship.  This  is  the  third 
time  that  a  foreign  army  has  appeared  before  a  polluted  shrine.  •'  How  can  they 
expect  peace  from  the  earth  who  do  wilfully  fight  against  heaven  ?  " 

2.  The  sin  of  its  rulers.  We  have  just  seen  that  Ahab  and  Jezebel  were 
primarily  responsible  for  this  last  great  apostasy.  It  was  Jezebel  really  who 
"reared  up  an  altar  for  Baal,"  &c.  (ch.  xvi.  32),  though  Ahab  was  a  facile  instrument 
in  her  hands.  We  find,  consequently,  that  king  and  queen  were  the  first  to  suffer, 
and  suffered  most.  It  is  easy  to  picture  the  abject  wretchedness  and  despair  to 
which  Ahab  was  reduced  by  the  insolent  messages  of  the  northern  barbarian. 
Those  were  indeed  days  of  trouble  and  rebuke  and  blasphemy.  The  iron  must  have 
entered  into  his  soul  as  he  foimd  himself  utterly  without  resources,  at  the  mercy 
of  one  who  showed  no  mercy,  but  absolutely  gloated  over  his  misery.  Nor  did 
Jezebel  escape  her  share  of  torture.  She  had  to  face  the  prospect  of  being  handed 
over,  with  the  other  ladies  of  the  harem,  to  the  wUl  of  the  brutal,  sensual,  drunken 
despot  who  was  thundering  at  their  gates.  Had  her  hair  turned  white,  like  that 
of  another  queen,  in  one  night,  we  could  not  have  wondered  at  it.  Strong-willed, 
desperate  woman  that  she  was  (2  Kings  ix.  31),  she  must  have  known  too  well  how 
cruel  are  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  not  to  have  trembled.  It  is  clear, 
therefore,  that  that  pnnce  and  princess  reaped  some  fruit  of  their  doings  in  this 
life. 

But  it  may  be  said  that  this  reign  of  terror  did  not  last  long,  and  that  despair  was 
speedily  succeeded  oy  the  joy  and  triumph  of  victory.  But  the  victory  was  not  one 
which  could  afford  unmixed  satisfaction,  either  to  king  or  people.  It  was  not  wou 
by  their  prowess.  It  was  of  such  a  kind  that  all  boasting  was  excluded.  In  the 
first  place,  they  owed  it  to  a  prophet  of  the  Lord — one  of  the  order  whom  Jezebel 
had  persecuted.  It  would  therefore  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  Ahab's  head.  Secondly, 
it  was  achieved  by  a  handful  of  boys.  His  trained  veterans  had  to  follow  their  lead 
and  enter  into  their  labours.  It  was  therefore  more  of  a  humiliation  than  a  glory 
for  his  arms.  It  left  him,  in  the  presence  of  his  people,  a  helpless  debtor  to  that 
God  whose  altars  he  had  overthrown ;  to  that  prophet  whose  companions  he  bad 
slain. 

Such  were  the  immediate  causes  of  the  invasion.  Two  others,  which  were  more 
remote,  must  be  briefly  indicated. 

3.  The  unwisdom  amd  unlelief  of  Asa.  He  it  was  who  first  taught  the  Syrians 
that  the  way  to  Samaria  lay  open  to  them,  and  that  the  spoils  of  the  country  repaid 
the  cost  and  trouble  of  invasion  (ch.  xv.  18,  19). 

4.  The  impiety  of  Solomon.  The  horses  and  chariots  furnished  by  that  great 
prince  to  the  "  kings  of  the  Hittites  and  the  kings  of  Syria  "  (ch.  x.  29)  now  over- 
run the  great  plain  and  stream  into  the  valleys  of  Samaria     The  Syrians  owed  th« 


OB.  XX.  1—43.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  49S 

most  important  arm  of  their  service  (vers.  1,  25)  to  the  disohedience  of  the  Lord's 
anointed.  The  two-and-thirty  subject  princes  had  once  been  the  vassals  of  Solo- 
mon (oh.  iv,  21).    We  now  turn  to — 

II.  The  defeats.  If  this  prodigious  host  was  really  oaUed  together  to  chastise 
the  idolatries  of  Israel,  it  seems  strange  that  it  was  not  allowed  to  effect  its  purpose  ; 
that  in  the  very  hour  of  victory  it  was  utterly  and  in-etrievably  defeated.  But  the 
explanation  is  not  far  to  seek.  Its  advance  was  the  punishment  of  Ahab's  sin  ;  its 
dispersion  the  punishment  of  Ben-hadad's.  "  Well  may  God  plague  each  witii 
other  who  means  vengeance  to  them  both."     And  Ben-hadad's  sin  consisted  in — 

1.  Defiance  of  God.  The  battles  of  the  Old  World,  as  this  chapter  shows,  were 
regarded  as  the  contests  of  national  deities.  The  defeat  of  Pharaoh  was  a  judg- 
ment upon  the  gods  of  Egypt  (Exod.  xii.  12).  It  was  to  altars,  hecatombs,  in- 
cantations that  Balak  looked  for  help  (Nimi.  xxii.,  xxiii.)  It  was  the  mighty  gods 
of  Israel  that  the  Philistines  feared  (1  Sam.  iv.  7,  8).  And  we  know  how  Goliath 
(ih.,  oh.  xvii.  45)  and  Sennacherib  alike  (Isa.  xxxvii.  23)  defied  the  living  God. 
And  when  we  see  Ben-hadad  swearing  by  his  gods  (ver.  10),  when  we  find  his 
courtiers  accounting  for  their  first  defeat  by  the  belief  that  the  gods  of  their  adver- 
saries were  gods  of  the  hiUs  only,  we  perceive  at  once  that  this  war  was  regarded 
on  Syria's  and  Israel's  part  alike  (ver.  28)  as  a  trial  of  strength  between  the  deities 
whom  they  respectively  worshipped.  The  defeat,  consequently,  was  primarily 
4he  punishment  of  Ben-hadad's  blasphemy  (Isa.  xxxvii.  29). 

2.  Wanton  insolence  and  cruelty.  We  constantly  find  the  instniments  used  of 
God  for  the  punishment  of  Israel,  punished  in  their  turn  for  their  oppression  of 
Israel.  We  have  instances  in  Judg.  iii. ;  iv.  3,  22 ;  vi.  1 ;  of.  vii.  25 ;  2  Chron.  xxxii. 
21 ;  Isa.  X.  6 — 12,  24  sqq. ;  xiv.  4  sqq. ;  Obad.  z.  28.  When  king  or  army 
exceeded  their  commission,  when  they  trampled  on  the  foe,  they  straightway  pro- 
voked the  vengeance  which  they  were  employed  to  minister.  It  would  have  been 
strange  if  such  overbearing  brutality  as  Ben-hadad's  (vers.  8,  6, 10)  had  gone  un- 
reproved. 

3.  Overweening  pride.  He  was  so  intoxicated  with  the  greatness  of  his  army, 
with  the  praises  of  his  courtiers  and  allies,  that  he  thinks,  Nebuchadnezzar-like,  that 
neither  God  nor  man  can  withstand  him.  His  haughtiness  comes  out  very  clearly 
in  his  messages  (vers.  3,  6),  in  his  scorn  of  his  adversaries  (vers.  16 — 18),  in  the 
passionate  outburst  with  which  he  receives  Ahab's  reply  (ver.  10).  "  The  proud 
Syrian  would  have  taken  it  in  foul  scorn  to  be  denied,  diough  he  had  sent  for  aU 
the  heads  of  Israel."  And  pride  provokes  a  fall  (Prov.  xvi.  18 ;  xxix.  28 ;  cf.  2  Chron. 
xxxii.  26 ;  Isa.  xvi.  6,  7  ;  Obad.  iv.)  The  highest  mountain-tops  draw  down  on 
themselves  the  artillery  of  the  skies.  Pride  stands  first  on  the  list  of  the  "  seven 
deadly  sins,"  because  self-worship  is  the  most  hateful  form  of  idolatry,  the  most 
obnoxious  to  the  Majesty  of  Heaven. 

4.  Drunkenness.  Like  another  invader,  he  transgressed  by  wine  (Hah.  ii.  6 ;  cf. 
Dan  V.  2,  28).  His  revels  in  the  thick  of  the  siege  reveal  to  us  the  man.  It  would 
nave  been,  in  Jewish  eyes  especially;  a  glaring  injustice  if  such  a  man,  while  em- 
ployed to  chastise  the  sins  of  others,  had  escaped  all  chastisement  himself  And 
his  two-and-thirty  confederates  were  like  him.  They  had  aided  and  encouraged 
him ;  they  drank  with  him  (ver.  16),  and  they  fell  with  him  (ver.  24). 

It  only  remains  for  us  now  to  observe  how  exact  and  exemplary  was  the  punish- 
ment which  overtook  king  and  princes  and  the  entire  army — ^for  the  army,  no 
doubt,  had  shared  the  views  and  vices  of  its  commanders.  The  defeat  of  the  entire 
host  was  not  occasioned  by  the  sin  of  its  leader  alone,  any  more  than  the  invasion 
was  provoked  by  the  sin  of  Ahab  alone.  In  the  day  that  God  visited  the  sin  of 
Ben-hadad,  He  visited  also  the  sin  of  Syria.  In  the  first  place,  the  drunkenness  of 
the  leaders  brought  its  own  retribution.  It  involved  the  demoralization  of  the 
soldiery.  With  such  besotted  and  incapable  heads,  they  were  unprepared  for 
•ttack,  and  fell  an  easy  prey  to  the  vigorous  onslaught  of  the  282  youths.  The 
size  of  the  host,  again,  contributed  to  make  the  disaster  all  the  greater.  And  what 
but  pride  and  cruelty  had  dictated  the  assembling  of  such  an  enormous  array, 
merely  to  crush  a  neighbour  kingdom  ?     And  their  pride  was  further  humbled  by 


i96  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xx.  1-43. 

the  circumstances  of  their  defeat.  It  was  to  their  eternal  disgrace  that  a  handful 
of  men,  of  boys  rather,  unnsed  to  war,  foemen  quite  unworthy  of  their  steel,  had 
routed  and  dispersed  them ;  that  their  innumerable  army  had  melted  away  before 
"  two  little  flocks  of  kids."  What  a  contrast  to  the  proud  boasting  of  ver.  101  Even 
the  manner  of  Ben-hadad's  escape,  his  hurried,  ignominious  flight  on  the  first  horse 
that  offered  ;  his  cowering  abjectly  in  a  corner  of  an  inner  chamber,  this  helped  to 
sink  him  to  a  lower  pitch  of  shame.  The  cavalry  that  was  to  accomplish  such  great 
things ;  he  is  thankful  for  one  of  its  stray  horses  to  bear  him  away  from  the  field 
of  slaughter.  The  walls  of  Aphek,  again,  avenged  his  threats  against  the  walls  of 
Samaria.  And  the  kings  who  had  flattered  him  and  encouraged  his  cruel  projects, 
they  too  received  a  meet  recompense,  not  only  in  the  defeat,  but  in  their  summary 
degradation  from  their  commands ;  while  the  courtiers  who  suggested  the  second 
expedition  expiated  their  folly  by  the  miseries  and  indignities  which  they  suffered. 
It  was  a  pitiful  end  of  a  campaign  begun  with  so  much  of  bluster  and  fury,  and 
threatening ;  that  procession  of  wretched  and  terrified  men,  with  "  sackcloth  on 
their  loins,  and  ropes  on  their  heads."  Nor  did  the  losses  of  Syria  end  with  the 
battle  or  the  earthquake  ;  the  king  voluntarily  cedes  a  part  of  the  territory  which 
his  father  had  won  by  his  valour  from  Israel,  and  returns  to  his  capital  with  a  deci- 
mated army,  a  tarnished  fame,  and  a  restricted  realm.  His  gluttonous  desire  for 
pillage,  his  forcing  a  quarrel  upon  Israel,  his  defiance  of  the  Almighty,  have  been 
punished  by  the  forfeiture  of  all  he  holds  most  dear. 

It  has  more  than  once  been  remarked  that  the  history  of  Israel  has  its  lessons  for 
the  individual  soul.  But  it  also  speaks  to  nations  and  kings.  This  chapter  pro- 
claims that  neither  any  people  nor  its  rulers  can  forget  God  with  impunity ;  that 
disregard  of  His  laws  is  sure  to  bring  down  His  judgments  ;  that  the  purgatory  of 
nations  is  in  this  life  present ;  that,  while  the  individual  awaits  a  judgment  to  come, 
the  community  is  judged  now,  by  sword,  and  famine,  and  pestilence  ;  by  invasion 
and  defeat;  by  loss  of  fame  and  territory;  by  bad  harvests  and  crippled  trade. 
Corporate  bodies  and  communities  may  "  have  no  conscience,"  but  they  will  prove 
sooner  or  later,  as  Assyria  and  Babylon,  as  Medes  and  Persians,  as  Greeks  and 
Eomans,  as  Eussia  and  Turkey,  as  France  and  Germany  have  proved,  that  "  verily 
there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous;  verily  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  tha  earth'' 
(Fsa.  Iviii.  11). 

But  this  history  has  other  lessons  than  those  which  concern  nations  and  kings. 
Some  of  these  we  may  glean  as  we  pass  along. 

Yer.  1. — "  All  his  host  .  .  .  thirty  cmd  two  kinga  .  .  .  horses  and  chariots."  It 
has  been  remarked  that  it  is  not  easy  to  account  for  this  expedition.  Was  it  that 
Ahab  had  refused  to  do  fealty?  or  had  he  offered  some  personal  affront  to  the  Syrian 
king  ?  Nay,  may  we  not  find  explanation  enough  in  the  fact  that  Ben-hadad, 
having  an  enormous  host  at  his  command,  must  find  something  for  it  to  do  ?  Large 
standing  armies  are  constantly  the  cause  of  war.  Preparations  for  war  in  the 
interest  of  peace  {si  vis  pacem,  &o.)  are  so  manifestly  paradoxical  that  who  can 
wonder  if  war,  and  not  peace,  is  the  result  ?  Let  Europe  beware  of  its  bloated 
armaments.  It  is  natural  for  statesmen  to  wish  to  have  something  to  show  for  the 
cost  of  their  maintenance. 

Ver.  8. — "  Thy  silver  ...  if  mine."  A  conspicuous  instance  this  of  that  law  of 
aid  tims''^ 

"  the  simple  plan 
That  they  should  take  who  have  the  power. 
And  they  should  keep  who  can." 

Bat  is  our  modem  warfare  so  very  different  in  principle  ?  Why  may  kings  remove 
landmarks  any  more  than  peasants  ?  Why  may  a  Ben-hadad,  an  Alexander,  a 
Napoleon  cry,  "  Your  lands  or  your  life,"  without  reproach,  and  yet  the  footpad  who 
plays  at  the  same  game  on  the  highway  is  hanged  for  it  ?  Why  should  what  is 
plain  "  stealing  "  in  private  life  be  called  "  conveying  "  or  "  annexing  "  when 
practised  on  a  larger  scale? 
Ver.  4. — "I am  thine,"    "Wisely  doth  Ahab,  as  a  reed  in  a  tempest,  stoop  te 


SB.  XX.  1—48.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  497 

this  violent  charge."  "  It  is  not  for  the  overpowered  to  capitulate."  Besidest 
who  knew  what  the  "soft  answer"  might  efleot?  If  smooth  words  could  do  no 
good,  rough  ones  would  certainly  do  much  harm.  The  meek  always  have  the  best 
■A  it,  and  so  inherit  the  earth. 

Ver.  9. — "  This  thing  I  may  not  do."  "  Better  die  than  live  in  disgrace,"  says 
the  Greek  proverb.  The  king  of  Samaria  was  in  a  similar  strait  to  those  four 
logical  lepers  who,  a  few  years  later,  in  another  siege,  lay  at  the  gate  of  the  city 
(2  Kings  vii.  4).  He  could  but  die  in  any  case,  and  he  might  perchance  live  if  he 
«tood  on  his  defence.  Even  a  worm  wiU  turn  when  trod  upon.  We  should  think 
scorn  of  Ahab,  had  he  not  made  a  stand  for  his  Kfe  and  wife  and  children. 

Ver.  10.—"  The  gods  do  so  to  me,"  &o.  How  often  has  the  swearer  to  eat  hiB 
words.  The  hero  does;  he  never  talks  of  what  he  will  do.  "Victory  is  to  be 
-achieved,  not  to  be  sworn."  This  vulgar  fashion  of  calling  upon  God  to  do  oneself 
some  hurt  thus  appears  to  be  of  great  antiquity.  But  it  always  proceeds  from  those 
who  have  very  little  beUef  in  God  at  all.  The  profane  swearer  is  practically  an 
infidel,  so  far  as  the  gods  he  invokes  are  concerned.  An  Italian  workman  was 
once  reproved  in  a  Roman  studio  for  the  oaths  which  he  swore  by  the  sacred  name 
■of  Gesvii  "  Oh,"  said  he  boldly,  "  I'm  not  afraid  of  Him  at  all."  Then,  lowering  Ms 
voice  to  a  whisper,  he  added,  "I'll  tell  you  what  I'm  afraid  of:  it  is  His  blessed 
-mother."    He  never  swore  by  the  Deity  he  believed  in, 

Ver.  12.—"  Set  yowrselves  in  wrray"  (Heb.  •ID'^f).  The  command  was  prompt 
and  decided  enough.  But  observe,  he  himself  went  on  drinking  (ver.  16).  This 
helps  to  explain  his  defeat.  He  was  a  man  of  words  only.  The  successful  generak 
— it  is  a  trite  saying— are  those  who  say  "  Come,"  not  "  Go." 

Ver.  18. — "  There  came  a  prophet."  0  altitudot  For  years  past  the  prophets 
have  been  proscribed,  hunted,  harried  to  death.  Tet  in  his  darkest  hour,  when 
other  refuge  fails  him,  Ahab  finds  a  prophet  at  his  side.  God  bears  no  grudges. 
It  is  sufficient  to  give  us  a  claim  upon  His  help  that  we  are  helpless  (Fsa.  Ixviii.  5 ; 
Hosea  xiv.  8).  He  "  comforteth "  (i.e.,  stren^theneth,  eon  fortia)  "  those  that 
«re  oast  down  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  6).  "  Who  can  wonder  enough  at  this  tmweariable 
jnercy  of  God  ?  After  the  fire  and  rain,  fetched  miraoulouBly  from  heaven,  Ahab 
had  promised  much,  performed  nothing,  yet  God  will  again  bless  and  solicit  him 
with  victory ;  one  of  those  prophets  whom  he  persecuted  shall  comfort  his  dejection 
with  the  news  of  deliverance  and  triumph."  This  act  of  grace  should  have  proved 
that  the  Lord  was  God,  and  that  the  prophet  was  His  messenger.  It  is  not  in  mam 
to  act  thus. 

"  Thou  shalt  Mow  that  I  am  the  Lord."  "  Not  for  thy  righteousness  or  the 
ttprightness  of  thine  heart  dost  thou  go  in  to  possess  their  land,  but  for  the  wicked- 
ness of  these  nations,"  Seo,  (Deut.  ix.  4,  6).  The  drought,  the  fire,  the  great  rain, 
none  of  these  had  convinced  the  king  and  queen.  WiU  deliverance  from  the  jaws 
-of  death  move  them  ?  Will  they  behave  in  a  God  of  battles?  WiU  they  recognize 
His  finger  in  a  superhuman  victory  ? 

Ver.  15. — *'  The  young  men  .  .  .  were  two  hwndred  and  thirty-two"  "  Not  by 
jnight  nor  by  power  "  (Zech.  iv.  6).  God's  host  is  ever  a  little  flock  (cf.  Judg.  vii 
a— 7 ;  2  Ohron.  xx.  12  ;  1  Cor.  i.  27—29).  The  "  weak  things  "  were  chosen  then, 
M  subsequently,  "  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence."  God  never  departs 
^om  that  rule.  The  "  carpenter's  son,"  the  "  fishermen,"  the  "  unlearned  and 
ignorant  men"  — it  is  the  same  principle  underhes  His  choice  in  every  case. 

Ver  16. — "  Drinking  himself  drunk  ,  .  ,  he  and  the  kings."  Of  strong  drink  U 
may  justly  be  said,  "  Many  strong  men  have  been  slain  by  her  "  (Prov.  vii.  20). 
"  It  is  not  for  kings  to  drink  wine  "  (ib.,  xxxi.  4).  Nor  is  it  for  warriors.  Alexander, 
-conqueror  of  the'  world,  was  conquered  by  wuie.  Our  great  generals  of  modern 
times  have  been  abstaiaers.  The  march  to  Coomassie,  to  Candahar  was  effected 
without  the  aid  of  intoxicants.  The  Eussian  soldiers  in  the  Crimea  were  drugged 
with  vodka,  but  it  did  not  prevent  their  defeat. 

Ver.  18.—"  Take  them  alme."  "  Security  is  the  certain  usher  of  destruction. 
■We  have  never  so  much  cause  to  fear  as  when  we  fear  nothing  "  (cf.  Dan.  ▼.  1, 80; 
inke  xvii.  27 ;  1  Thess.  v.  iB). 

1    KINOS  '    • 


198  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  \pB.  xx.  1—43. 

Ver.  20. — "  They  slew  every  one  Tiis  man."  It  is  thus  the  world  most  be  won 
for  Christ.  Mohammed  had  two  fixed  ideas :  first,  to  make  converts  ;  second,  to 
make  his  converts  soldiers.  And  every  Christian  is  a  soldier  of  the  Cross,  enlisted 
at  his  baptism  into  the  Church  miUtcmt.  By  personal,  individual  effort  are 
Churches  built  up  and  believers  added  to  the  Lord.  So  it  was  in  the  first  days, 
"  Andrew  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon."  "  Philip  findeth  Nathanael "  (John  u 
41—45). 

Ver.  23. — "  TTieir  gods  a/re  gods  of  the  Mils."  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  find 
men  laying  the  blame  of  their  misfortune  on  God.  We  smile  at  those  poor  pagans 
who  beat  tiieir  wooden  gods  with  sticks,  or  those  Italian  villagers  who,  a  few  weeks 
ago  (Sept.,  1881),  threw  the  image  of  their  patron  saint  into  a  well,  and  set  upon  their 
parish  priest,  because  their  prayers  for  rain  remained  unanswered ;  but  the  same 
thing,  slightly  varied  in  shape,  is  often  done  amongst  ourselves.  "Bad  luck"  is 
held  responsible  for  many  of  the  failures  for  which  we  have  only  ourselves  to 
thank.  That  "  everybody  is  against  him  "  is  often  the  cry  of  the  man  who  has  no 
enemy  but  himself.  The  idle  scoundrel  who  has  wife  and  children  generally 
accuses  them  of  being  the  causes  of  his  misfortunes ;  if  he  has  no  such  scapegoats, 
he  will  lay  ijie  blame  on  God's  providence.  He  never  remembers  that  he  taunseli 
was  "  drinking  himself  drunk  "  at  the  hour  for  action. 

Ver.  22. — "  Go  strengthen  thyself."  Though  God  had  delivered  him  once  and 
would  deliver  him  again  (ver.  28),  yet  Ahab  must  consult  for  his  own  safety.  While 
trusting  in  God,  he  must  keep  his  powder  dry.  The  same  prophet  who  has  an- 
nounced deliverance  by  a  band  of  youths,  wholly  inadequate  to  cope  with  the 
Syrians,  now  bids  him  look  well  to  the  defences  of  the  country.  Aide-toi  et  Dieu 
t'aidera;  this  is  the  purport  of  his  message. 

Ver.  29. — "  Seven  days."  Compare  the  "  seven  thousand  "  of  ver.  15,  and  Josh. 
vi.  4, 16, 16.  He  hath  commanded  His  covencmt  for  ever  (Psa.  iii.  9 ;  cf.  1  Chron. 
rri,  16 ;  Psa.  Ixxxix.  28,  34).  By  this  act,  Israel  (1)  showed  that  they  remembered 
the  works  of  the  Lord,  His  wonders  of  old  time ;  and  (2)  they  reminded  Him  of  His 
holy  coveoant  (Luke  i.  72 — 74). 

Ver.  80.—"  A  wall  fell,"  &c.  (Cf.  Acts  xxviii.  4 ;  Hab.  ii.  11).  "  A  dead  wall  in 
Aphek  shall  revenge  God  on  the  rest  that  remained."  Where  they  sought  shelter 
and  thought  themselves  secure,  they  found  death  (of.  Amos  v.  19 ;  ix.  8 ;  Psa. 
cxxxLx.  7 — 10 ;  Luke  xix.  40). 

Ver.  81. — "  The  Icings  of  Israel  are  merciful  kings."  How  true  is  that  of  the 
true  King  of  Israel.  He  is  the  very  fount  of  mercy  (Exod.  xxxiv.  7;  Num.  xiv.  18 ; 
Pss.  XXV.  10 ;  0.  6 ;  ciii.  17 ;  cxxx.  7).  We  often  picture  Him  as  "  less  mercifdl  than 
His  image  in  a  man."  But  let  us  do  Him  this  dishonour  no  more.  It  is  "  His 
property  always  to  have  marcy."  Is  He  less  clement  than  an  Ahab  ?  Is  His  heart 
less  tender  to  penitent  rebels  ?  "  Behold  now,  we  know  that  the  King  of  Heaven,  - 
the  God  of  Israel,  is  a  merciful  God  ;  let  us  put  sackcloth  upon  our  loins,  and  strew 
ashes  upon  our  heads,  and  go  meet  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  that  he  may  save  our 
souls." 

Ver.  84. — "  J  will  send  thee  away,"  &o.  On  another  occasion  such  conduct  as 
this  was  commanded  (2  Kings  vi.  22,  23).  Why,  then,  wasit  sinftdnow?  Precisely 
because  it  was  not  commanded;  because  God  intended  the  opposite  (ver.  42).  It 
was  not  clemency,  it  was  culpable  weakness  to  send  this  overbearing  despot,  who 
had  already  cost  Israel  so  dear,  to  send  him  to  his  home,  there  to  renew  his  plots 
against  the  people  of  God.  As  well  might  the  magistrate  compassionate  the  burglar, 
or  the  garotter,  and  instead  of  shutting  him  up  in  prison,  send  him  into  the  streets, 
to  be  the  plague  of  society.  The  king,  like  the  magistrate,  is  trustee  for  the  com- 
monwealth. He  has  no  right  to  gratify  his  benevolent  instincts  at  the  expense  oi 
the  community.  Still  less  right  had  the  theocratic  king,  the  representative  of 
Heaven,  to  liberate,  ex  mero  arhHrio,  a  tyrant  whom  God  had  manifestly  given 
into  his  hands.  "  Charity  cannot  excuse  disobedience."  He  had  proved  Ben-hadad 
twice,  yet  he  asks  for  no  material  guarantees.  He  neither  consmts  nor  remembers 
his  deUverer. 

Yet.  40.— "  Thyself  hast  decided  it."    So  shall  oi«r  judgment  be.    "Cat  of  thin* 


OH.  XX.  1— 4S.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGa  499 


own  mouth,"  &o.  (Lnke  xix.  22).  How  many  will  stand  seK-condemned,  condemned 
by  their  own  precepts,  condemned  by  the  sentences  they  have  passed  upofi  others, 
by  the  measure  they  have  exacted  from  others,  &c. 

Ver.  48. — "Mea/uy  and  displeased."  Of.  Pss.  xvi.  4;  xxxiL  10.  "  Uneasy  lies 
the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  Life  out  of  God  brings  only  disappointment.  The 
most  magnificent  of  kings  found  it  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  The  things  of 
earth  cannot  satisfy  the  poul  of  man,  the  soul  made  for  God.  History  has  preserved 
for  US  a  striking  testimony  to  this  truth  in  tiie  confession  of  Abdabahman, 
caliph  of  Spain.  "  I  have  now  reigned,"  he  wrote,  "  fifty  years  in  victory  or  peace ; 
beloved  by  my  subjects,  dreaded  by  my  enemies,  and  respected  by  my  allies. 
Biches  and  honours,  power  and  pleasures,  have  waited  on  my  call,  nor  does  any 
earthly  blessing  appear  to  have  been  wanting  to  my  felicity.  In  this  situation  I 
have  numbered  the  days  of  pure  and  genuine  happiness  which  have  fallen  to  my 
lot:  they  amoimt  iofowteeni  O  man,  place  not  thy  confidence  in  this  present 
world." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — II. — TJie  Spirit  of  Wa/r.    In  human  histories  so  much  fa  made  of 

brilUant  uniforms,  scientific  discipline,  skUfol  manceuvres,  exploits,  surprises,  and 
successes,  that  readers  are  carried  away  with  "  the  pomp  and  circumstance  "  of  so- 
called  "glorious  war."  In  the  text  we  have  the  other  side;  and  we  are  reminded 
of  the  appeal  of  James :  "  From  whence  come  wars  and  fightings  among  you  ? 
Come  they  not  hence,  even  of  your  own  lusts  that  war  in  your  members  ?  "  (James 
iv.  1.)    Conspicuous  amongst  these  is — 

L  The  spibit  of  war.  We  see  this — 1.  In  Ben-hadad's  message  (ver,  8).  (1) 
We  do  not  understand  this  to  be  a  demand  from  Abab  for  the  actual  surrender  to 
Ben-hadad  of  his  "  silver  "  and  "  gold,"  "  wives  "  and  "  children."  Else  it  would 
be  difficult  to  see  any  material  difference  between  this  first  message  and  that  which 
followed  (ver.  6).  (2)  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  Ben-hadad  would  hold  Ahab 
as  his  vassal,  so  that  Ahab  should  retain  his  wealth,  wives,  and  children  only  by  the 
sufferance  and  generosity  of  his  superior.  He  would  have  the  king  of  Israel 
reduced  to  the  condition  of  the  "  tlurty  and  two  kings  "  who,  with  their  subjects 
and  fortunes,  appear  to  have  been  at  his  service  (compare  ver.  12  with  ver.  24).  2. 
In  his  confident  boasting.  (1)  He  boasts  of  the  vastness  of  his  army,  "  All  the 
people  that  follow  me."  The  Hebrew  is  given  in  the  margin,  "  at  my  feet,"  sug- 
gesting subjection  and  submission.  (2)  Of  the  certainty  and  ease  with  which  such 
an  army  may  carry  victory.  "  The  gods  do  so  to  me  and  more  also  if  the  dust  of 
Samaria  shall  suffice  for  handfuls  for  aU  the  people  that  follow  me."  They  need 
not  be  content  with  handfuls  of  dust  when  they  can  fill  their  hands  with  the  most 
valuable  things  in  Samaria.  (3)  This  was  the  boasting  which  Ahab  rebuked  by  the 
use  of  what  had  probably  been  a  proverbial  expression  :  "  Let  not  him  that  girdeth 
on  his  harness  boast  himself  as  he  that  putteth  it  off."  This  caution  might  be 
profitably  considered  by  those  who  are  engaged  in  spiritual  conflicts:  "Be  not 
high-minded,  but  fear." 

II.  The  SPIRIT  OF  INJTJSTIOB.  Thiswesee— 1.  In  Ben-hadad's  requisitions.  (1) 
In  those  of  his  first  message  right  is  outraged.  "  Thy  silver  and  gold  are  mine." 
Taking  this  demand  in  the  sense  of  Ahab's  coming  under  villenage  to  Ben-hadad, 
the  claim  was  iniquitous.  Man  has  rights  of  property  and  freedom,  which,  unless 
they  are  forfeited  to  law  by  crime,  should  ever  be  held  most  sacred.  The  injustice 
of  slavery  is  horrible.  (2)  The  second  message  went  even  farther.  It  threatened 
open  robbery.  Bobbery  not  only  of  the  monarch,  but  of  his  subjects  also.  A 
starving  wretch  who  steals  a  loaf  of  bread  may  be  convicted  as  a  felon ;  but  a 
warrior  who  plunders  kingdoms — a  Napoleon — is  glorified  as  a  hero  I  But  how  wUl 
these  weigh  together  in  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary?  2.  In  his  principles  oj 
wppeal.     (1)  Justice  is  not  named.    How  often  is  justice  named  in  warfare  whsre 


600  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xx.  1— 4a 

It  has  no  place  I  The  Syrian  king  was  more  outspoken  than  many  modem  war- 
makers.  ■  (2)  Mercy  is  quite  out  of  the  question.  Yet  in  modern  times  wars 
against  savages  have  been  trumpeted  as  benignities,  because  of  the  civilization 
which,  it  is  presumed,  will  follow  in  their  wake  I  (3)  Ben-hadad  did  not  live  in 
these  lavoured  times,  so  the  one  principle  to  which  he  appeals  is  might.  ''  He  has 
the  men,"  and  he  will  ha/ve  "  the  money  too  I "  In  this  he  has  had  too  many 
saooessors  in  the  kingdoms  of  civilization.  (4)  Not  oaly  must  the  oovetousness 
of  the  king  be  gratified ;  so  also  must  the  host  "  at  his  feef ; "  and  since  the  "  dust 
of  Samaria  "  will  not  satisfy  them,  Samaria  must  be  sacJeed  and  pillaged.  One 
Injustice  begets  another. 

III.  The  spirit  op  cruelty.  This  appears — 1.  In  the  provocations.  (1)  Observe 
the  "  putting  "  of  Ben-hadad's  requisitions.  No  attempt  is  made  to  spare  the 
feelings  of  Ahab,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  language  is  studiously  framed  to  lacerate. 
"Whatsoever  is  pleasant  in  thine  eyes" — note,  not  what  is  pleasant  in  the 
eyes  of  the  spoilers — "  they  shall  put  it  in  their  hand  and  take  it  away."  (2) 
Witness  also  the  peremptoriness.  "  To-morrow  about  this  time."  2.  In  the 
struggles.  (1)  Men  are  in  conflict.  This  is  not  a  strife  of  elements  without 
feeling,  which  is  terrible  enough,  but  of  flesh  and  blood  and  nerves  with  exquisite 
sensibilities,  with  susceptibilities  of  acute  pain  and  suffering.  (2)  The  combatants 
are  ourmed.  That  they  may  put  each  other  to  torture  they  are  provided  with 
swords,  spears,  arrows  ;  and  in  these  days  of  civilization,  with  fire-arms  of  various 
kinds.  Elephants,  camels,  horses,  and  other  animals  are  pressed  into  the  dreadful 
service.  (3)  Survey  the  battle-field  after  the  strife.  Men  and  animals  dead  and 
dying,  mingled ;  gaping  wounds ;  mangled  limbs,  sickening  horrors  I  What 
pictures  of  cruelty  are  here  I  (4)  Reflect  upon  the  homes  plunged  into  grief 
and  poverty  entailed  through  the  loss  of  bread-winners;  and  add  the  sequel  of 
pestilences  and  famines.  Surely  we  should  pray  for  the  advent  of  that  peace- 
i'ul  reign  of  righteousness  which  is  promised  in  ^e  Scriptures  oi  prophecy.— 
J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  12 — 21. — The  hcmd  of  God.  The  notable  answer  of  the  king  of  Israel  ts 
the  insolent  king  of  Syria,  "  Let  not  him  that  girdeth  on  the  harness  boast  himself 
as  he  that  putteth  it  off,"  came  to  Ben-hadad  when  he  was  drinking  wine  with  the 
thirty  and  two  kings  that  followed  him.  He  at  once  gave  orders  to  his  servants 
to  set  themselves  in  battle  array.  WhEe  the  enormous  host  which  "  filled  the 
country"  (see  vers.  25,  27)  disposed  itself  to  attack  the  city,  the  men  of  Israel, 
who  were  but  a  handful,  naturally  trembled  for  the  issue.  At  this  juncture  God 
interposed  in  the  manner  related  here,  and  thereby  asserted  the  general  truths, 
viz. — 

.1.  That  God  bulks  in  the  destinies  of  men.  1.  Here  He  showed  His  Tiand. 
(1)  He  sent  a  prophet.  Jarchi  says  it  was  Micaiah,  the  son  of  Imlah,  whUe  others 
think  it  was  Elijah  in  disguise  ;  but  it  is  useless  to  speculate  on  this  point.  We 
are  more  concerned  with  the  purport  of  His  message,  which  was  to  promise  victory 
to  Israel,  and  to  indicate  how  that  victory  should  be  organized,  so  that  in  the  issue 
Jehovah  might  be  acknowledged.  (2)  The  hand  of  God  was  seen  not  only  in  the 
Xjrophet's  foreknowledge  of  events,  but  also  in  the  wisdom  of  the  adjustments  by 
which  they  were  to  be  brought  about.  For  the  victory  was  organized  according  to 
instructions  of  the  prophet,  pm-porting  also  to  be  fro.m  the  Lord.  Who  but  the 
Lord  could  have  foreseen  that  at  noon  Ben-hadad  and  his  kings  would  be  so  drunken 
as  to  be  unfit  and  indisposed  to  take  their  posts  of  command  ?  Who  else  could 
have  foreseen  that  Ben-hadad  would  have  been  so  foolish  as  to  order  the  sortie  to 
be  talcen  alive  f  For  thereby  the  Syrians  were  put  to  a  disadvantage,  which 
enabled  the  "  young  men  of  the  princes  of  the  provmoes  "  and  those  who  followed 
them  to  slay  "  every  one  his  man,"  and  throw  the  invading  host  into  confusion. 
(3)  The  power  of  God  also  was  evident  when  the  disparity  of  numbers  is  considered 
An  army  of  seven  thousand  Israehtes  could  never,  without  supernatural  aid,  have 
demoralized  and  routed  the  formidable  hosts  of  Syria.  (4)  And  that  God  was  in 
this  victory  could  not  be  reasonably  doubted,  since  this  was  not  an  extraordinary 


SH.  XX.  1— «».J  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  fiOl 


event  by  itself,  but  one  of  a  series  of  such  events  ;  therefore  it  could  not  have  been  an 
accident.  It  was  preceded  by  three  years  of  drought  which  began  and  ended 
according  to  the  "word"  of  Elijah,  with  the  miracle  on  Oarmel,  2.  By  to 
xhoioing  Hia  hand  He  evinced  that  He  is  ever  working.  (1)  "When  events  are 
ordinary,  men  are  disposed  to  see  in  them  natwral  causes  only ;  but  extra- 
ordinary events  force  upon  their  consideration  the  fact  of  a  superior  agency 
behind  these  causes.  (2)  This  truth  is  the  more  evident  when  the  ordinary  are 
recognized  'in_  the  extraordinary.  Thus  God  ordered  the  battle.  He  appointed 
the  general,  disposed  the  attack  which  was  to  assure  the  victory,  and  timed  every- 
thing BO  to  tit  in  with  circumstances  as  to  bring  about  the  promised  result.  (3) 
With  God  there  is  no  essential  difference  between  things  ordinary  and  extra- 
ordinary. It  is  simply  a  question  of  proportions.  For  natural  causes  are  all 
•econd  causes,  and  would  have  no  existence  but  for  the  First  CoMse.  A  miracle  is 
but  ttie  unusual  action  of  the  First  Cause  upon  the  second  causes ;  but  in  the  usuai 
action,  God  is  none  the  less  present  and  necessary  to  the  result. 

II.  That  He  bules  in  righteousness  and  mebot.  1.  He  humbles  the  proud 
in  righteousness.  (1)  Defeat  in  any  case  is  humiliation.  To  Ben-hadad  after  his 
confident  boasting  it  was  eminently  so.  He  would  remember  the  lesson,  "  Let 
not  him  that  girdeth  on  his  harness  boast  himself  as  he  that  putteth  it  off,"  Let 
OS  observe  it  (2)  The  manner  was  an  aggravation  of  the  defeat.  It  was 
accomplished  by  two  hundred  and  thirty-two  "  young  men  of  the  princes  of  the 
provinces,"  who  are  by  some  thought  to  have  been  a  militia  raised  by  provincial 
magistrates,  and  by  others,  with  perhaps  better  reason — for  the  number  seems  too 
small  to  answer  the  former  description — the  attendants  of  such  of  those  princes  as 
were  then  in  Samaria.  It  was  intensely  humiliating  that  a  company  of  such 
combatants  should  rout  a  formidable  army.  God  makes  the  weak  confound  the 
mighty.  (3)  Ben-hadad  would  be  mortified  to  think  how  his  overweening  confi- 
dence, together  with  his  drunkenness,  had  directly  contributed  to  his  humiliation. 
3e  was  too  drunk  to  appear  at  the  head  of  his  army,  but  not  too  drunk  to  find  his 
way  to  the  cavalry  to  facilitate  his  flight.  "  There  is  but  one  step  from  the  subhme 
to  the  ludicrous !  "  2.  He  shows  long-suffering  in  mercy.  (1)  The  judgment  upon 
Ben-hadad  was  mercy  to  Ahab.  It  delivered  him  from  the  hand  of  a  cruel 
.oppressor.  It  gave  him  another  warning  and  space  for  repentance.  (2)  Did  Ahab 
deserve  this  ?  Certainly  not,  while  he  submitted  to  be  led  by  Jezebel,  and  that 
notwithstanding  his  experience  of  the  drought  and  the  miracle  on  Carmel.  God 
is  long-Buffering  in  mercy.  (3)  But  there  were  "  seven  thousand  in  Israel,  all  the 
knees  which  had  not  bowed  unto  Baal,  and  every  mouth  which  hath  not  kissed 
him."  Jarchi  would  identify  these  with  the  "  seven  thousand  "  mentioned  in  verse 
16.  Probably  some  of  that  seven  thousand  went  to  compose  this,  and  for  their 
sakes  it  may  have  been  that  God  had  so  signally  interposed.  Let  us  never  lose 
sight  of  God.  Let  us  discern  His  band  in  nature,  providence,  grace.  Let  us 
never  provoke  His  justice  by  pride,  by  rebellion.  Let  us  respect  His  long-suffer- 
ing by  repentance.  Let  us  throw  ourselves  upon  His  mercy  for  salvation,  for  help. 
—J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  22 — 80. — Wisdom  in  Oormsel.    No  man  is  so  wise  that  it  may  not  be  to 

his  advantage  to  consider  advice  ;  but  in  listening  to  advice  we  may  be  led  astray. 
There  are  two  classes  of  advisers,  viz.,  those  who  are  inflaenoed  by  the  "  wisdom 
of  this  world,"  and  those  who  are  influenced  by  the  "  wisdom  from  above."  Of 
both  wo  have  examples  in  the  text. 

I.  The  wisdom  of  this  world  is  a  wisdom  of  expedienoy.  1.  It  i*  not 
destitute  of  sagacity.  (1)  It  has  its  maxims  of  prudence,  (fl)  Ben-hadad's 
oounseUora  would  not  have  him  underrate  his  enemy.  The  army  they  advise  him 
to  raise  for  the  invasion  of  Israel  must  not  be  inferior  to  that  which  had  been 
lately  vanquished  (ver.  25).  Let  us  not  underrate  our  spiritual  foes.  (6)  Neither 
would  they  have  him  underrate  the  quality  of  his  soldiers.  They  do  not  admit 
that  his  army  was  fairly  beaten,  but  speak  of  "  the  army  that  thou  hast  lost,"  or 
"  that  fell  from  thee."    In  this  also  they  were  right,  for  if  God  had  not  helped 


603  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS,  [oh.  xx.  1-^3 

Israel  the  Syrians  would  not  have  been  routed.  In  all  our  epiritoal  conflicts  let  ni 
fight  under  the  banner  of  Jehovah.  (2)  It  has  its  lesions  of  experience,  (a)  Beu- 
hadad's  counsellors  lay  emphasis  here — "  And  do  this  thing,  Take  the  kings  away, 
every  man  out  of  his  place."  Why  remove  the  kings  ?  Because  in  the  last  war 
they  were  "  drinking  themselves  drunk "  when  they  should  have  been  at  theii 
posts,  and  the  army,  without  officers,  became  confused  and  demoralized.  Trust 
not  the  kings  again  (see  Pss.  cxvui.  9 ;  cxlvi.  3).  (6)  "  Put  captains  in  their 
rooms."  Let  the  army  be  commanded  by  men  of  ability  and  experience.  Pageants 
are  of  no  use  in  times  of  exigency.  2.  But  its  sugacity  is  mingled  with  fully. 
(1)  Because  the  motives  of  the  wicked  are  vicious,  (a)  In  his  former  war  Ben- 
hadad's  impulse  was  pride.  The  insolence  of  his  demands  evidenced  this  (vers. 
8,  6).  But  what  wisdom  is  there  in  pride  ?  (6)  Though  mortified  by  defeat,  that 
pride  remained,  and  was  now  moved  by  the  spirit  of  revenge :  "  Surely  we  shall  be 
s^row^er  than  they."  But  what  wisdom  is  there  in  resentment  ?  (c)  Beyond  these 
base  feehngs  the  desire  for  plunder  seems  to  have  iuoved  the  Syrian.  But  where 
is  the  wisdom  in  a  king  becoming  a  common  robber  ?  (2)  Because  they  put  them- 
selves into  conflict  with  the  Almighty,  (a)  The  Syrians  formed  an  unworthy 
idea  of  the  Elohim  of  Israel  when  they  localized  and  limited  Him  to  the  hills. 
Palestine  is  a  hilly  country,  and  its  cities  and  high  places  were  generally  on  hUls  ; 
and  probably  in  the  hill  country  of  Samaria  the  cavalry  and  chariots  of  Syria  were 
of  little  service.  (See  Psa.  xv.  1 ;  xxiv.  3 ;  Ixxxvii.  1 ;  cxxi.  1.)  (6)  In  the  proposal 
to  give  Israel  battle  in  the  plains  the  Syrians  now  set  Jehovah  at  defiance. 

II.  The  wisdom  from  above  is  the  wisdom  of  truth.  1.  It  ie  far-reaching, 
(1)  God  sees  the  end  fi-om  the  beginning.  We  should  therefore  seek  His  counsel' 
and  guidance.  (2)  He  forewarns  His  people.  He  sent  His  prophet  to  the  king  of 
Israel  to  inform  him  that  the  king  of  Syria  would  come  up  against  him  at  the 
return  of  the  year.  He  forewarns  us  of  the  things  of  eternity.  2.  It  is  prudent. 
(1)  The  prophet  advised  Ahab  to  prepare  for  the  event.  "  Go,  strengthen  thyself, 
and  mark,  and  see  what  thou  doest."  We  should  ever  deport  ourselves  as  in  the 
presence  of  spiritual  foes.  (2)  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves.  8.  It  is  itn- 
erring.  (1)  Events  foreshown  by  God  will  surely  come  to  pass.  (2)  According  to 
the  advice  of  the  prophet,  "  at  the  return  of  the  year,"  viz.,  "  at  the  time  when 
kings  go  forth  to  battle  "  (see  2  Sam.  xi.  1 ;  1  Chron.  xx.  1),  probably  answering  to 
our  March,  which  has  its  name  fi^om  Mwrs,  the  god  of  war,  Ben-hadad  "  went  up 
to  Aphek  to  fight  against  Israel."  There  were  several  cities  of  tliis  name :  one  in 
the  tribe  of  Asher  (Josh.  xix.  30) ;  another  in  Judah  (1  Sam.  iv.  1) ;  a  third  in 
Syria  (2  Kings  xiii,  17).  The  last  is  probably  that  referred  to  here.  4.  It  is 
profitable.-  (1)  This  follows  from  its  other  qualities.  The  guidance  which  ia 
"  prudent,"  "  far-reaching,"  and  "  unerring "  must  be  "  profitable."  (2)  But 
further,  those  who  foUow  that  guidance  so  commend  themselves  to  God  that  He 
directly  interposes  in  their  behalf.  There  was  a  faithful  "  seven  thousand "  in 
Israel  (ch.  xix.  18).  (3)  If  in  conflict  with  those  who  prefer  a  worldly  pohoy,  they 
not  only  have  God  on  their  side,  but  they  have  Him  with  them  against  their 
enemy.  (4)  God  helped  Ahab  against  Ben-hadad,  not  that  Ahab  deserved  it,  but 
that  Ben-hadad  had  to  be  punished  (ver.  28.  See  also  Ezek.  xxxvi.  22).  The 
"  two  httle  flocks  of  kids  "  could  not  have  slain  in  one  day  "  one  hundred  thousand 
men  "  unless  God  had  helped  them.  The  hand  of  God  also  was  in  the  falling  of 
that  wall  by  which  "  seven  and  twenty  thousand  "  perished. 

Let  us  faithfully  pursue  the  policy  of  right.    Let  us  never  permit  the  expediency 
of  a  moment  to  swerve  ns  from  this.    Truth  abides. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  30 — 43. — False  Mercy.    The  first  army  with  which  Ben-hadad  invaded 

Israel  was  defeated  with  "  great  slaughter,"  and  the  king  saved  himself  by  flight. 
The  defeat  of  the  second  was  even  more  complete,  when  127,000  men  were  de- 
stroyed and  the  king  had  to  surrender  at  discretion.  But  Ahab,  for  his  false  mercy 
in  sparing  the  life  of  Ben-hadad,  brought  judgment  upon  himself  and  upon  his 
people. 

I.  MeROT   U   rALSB    WHEN  IT   OPPOSES    THE    BIOHTEOnSNESB    OF    GOD.       1.    That 


«■.  XX.  1—48.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  608 

righteousness  dooms  the  incorrigible  to  death.  (1)  "  The  wages  of  sin."  The 
incorrigible  will  certainly  find  this  in  the  "  damnation  of  hell "  (Psa.  ix.  17).  (2) 
Their  time  also  in  this  life  is  shortened  either  by  the  sword  of  the  magistrate  or  by 
the  judgment  of  God.  They  get  sufficient  space  for  repentance ;  but  the  space  so 
given,  2  misimproved,  aggravates  the.  terror  of  their  death.  Protracted  probationary 
e:xistenoe  under  such  conditions,  therefore,  becomes  a  doubtful  mercy.  (8)  It  is  also 
the  reverse  of  mercy  to  their  contemporaries,  because  the  influence  of  the  wicked  is 
mischievous.  It  is,  therefore,  a  considerate  judgment  that  they  do  "  not  live  out 
haU  their  days  "  (Psa.  Iv.  28).  (4)  The  difference  between  good  and  evil  cannot  be 
too  strongly  marked.  The  good  must  have  no  fellowship  with  the  wicked.  In 
eternity  their  separation  is  complete  (Matt  xxv.  46;  Luke  xvi.  26).  The  more 
perfect  the  separation  here,  the  more  of  heaven  upon  earth  wUl  the  good  enjoy ; 
and  the  more  of  hell  upon  earth,  the  wicked.  2.  Ben-hadad  was  obnoxious  to  that 
doom.  (1)  He  was  guilty  of  the  highest  crimes  against  humanity.  In  his  offensive 
wars  he  was  not  only  a  public  robber,  but  also  a  wholesale  murderer  But  murder 
at  least  is  held  to  be  a  capital  crime  (see  Gen.  ix.  6  ;  Exod,  xxi.  12,  l4 ;  Levit,  xxiv. 
17.  See  also  Matt.  xxvi.  52 ;  Eev.  xiii  10).  (2)  He  was  guilty  likewise  of  the  highest 
crimes  against  God.  He  was  not  only  a  gross  idolater,  but  also  a  blasphemer  of 
Jehovah.  He  localized  and  limited  Hirn  as  "  Elohim  of  the  hiUs"  and  defied  Him 
in  the  plains.  But  such  blasphemy  also  was  punishable  with  death  (Levit.  xxiv 
11 — 16).  (8)  He  committed  all  these  offences  in  the  land  of  Israel,  where  they  were 
capital  crimes,  and  the  God  of  Israel  delivered  him  into  the  hand  of  Ahab  tiiat  he 
might  suffer  the  penalty.  8.  But  Ahab  opposed  hit  mere^  to  the  righteousness  of 
God,  (1)  But  is  there  no  mercy  for  the  penitent  ?  Certainly  there  is.  In  repent- 
ance there  is  no  encouragement  to  evil ;  on  the  contrary,  in  it  evil  is  condemned. 
Faith  in  Christ  is  the  perfection  of  repentance  since  therein  only  can  we  be  effec- 
tually delivered  from  sin.  Bepentance  must  be  genuine.  (2)  Ben-hadad's  repent- 
ance was  not  genuine.  His  servants  "  girded  sackcloth  on  their  loins,  and  put 
ropes  on  their  heads,  and  came  to  the  king  of  Israel,  and  said,  Thy  servant  Ben- 
hadad  saith,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  live."  (Sir  John  Froissart  relates  that  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Calais  acted  in  a  similar  manner  when  they  surrendered  thoir  city  to 
Edward  III.  in  1346).  AH  this  was  intensely  mortifying  to  Ben-hadad,  whose  tone 
was  so  different  when  he  thought  himself  in  the  position  of  a  dictator  (see  vers.  8 — 6). 
The  haughtiest  in  prosperity  are  often  the  meanest  in  adversity.  (3)  But  here  is 
no  show  of  repentance  towards  God.  He  confesses  that  he  deserves  to  be  hanged 
for  invading  the  land,  but  not  a  word  about  his  blasphemy  against  the  Elohim  of 
Israel.    Yet  Ahab  granted  him  his  life. 

II.  Those  who  show  such  mercy  enoodntbe  the  judgment  op  God.  1.  Because 
thereby  they  encourage  evil.  (1)  If  sin  be  committed  with  impunity  it  wpl  soon 
lose  its  character.  Men  are  naturally  inclined  to  sin,  and  are  restrained  chiefly  by 
fear  of  its  penalties.  If  these  are  remitted,  offences  against  the  law  of  God  will 
«ome  to  be  justified.  (2)  The  estimate  of  goodness  would  consequently  be  lowered, 
for  we  judge  of  qualities  by  contrasts.  Heaven  is  seen  in  its  strongest  light  as  the 
antithesis  of  hell.  Eemove  from  sin  its  sinfulness,  and  goodness  wiU  be  distorted 
into  weakness  or  foUy.  (8)  Such  confounding  of  right  and  wrong  must  be  fatal 
to  all  law  and  order,  and  tend  to  inaugurate  the  wildest  confusion  and  the  deepest 
misery.  All  this  flows  firom  the  principle  of  false  or  indisoruninate  mercy.  2.  Hence 
Ahab  was  held  to  be  an  accomplice  with'  Ben-hadad.  (1)  He  had  an  unworthy 
sympathy  with  this  blasphemmg  monarch.  "  Is  he  yet  alive  ?  He  is  my  brother." 
"  Brother  king,  though  not  brother  Israelite.  Ahab  valued  hunself  more  on  his 
r&yalty  than  on  hisreligion  "  (Henry).  Would  Ben-hadad  have  called  Ahab  his  brother 
had  he  been  victorious  ?  (2)  "  He  caused  him  to  come  up  into  the  chariot."  This 
was  a  sign  of  cordial  friendship  (see  2  Kings  x.  15,  16).  "  The  friendship  of  the 
world  is  enmity  against  God."  So  instead  of  imposing  terms,  he  accepted  those 
proposed  by  Ben-hadad  (ver.  84).  (3)  "  So  he  made  a  covenant  with  him  and  sent 
him  away."  The  form  of  these  covenants  was  to  cut  a  sacrifice  in  twain,  and  the 
persons  entering  .into  the  compact  walked  between  the  pieces  and  were  sprinkled, 
together  with  the  articles  of  agreement,  with  the  blood,  to  express  that  if  they 


604  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xx.  1—48 

failed  to  fulfil  their  pledge  God  might  treat  them  as  the  sacrifice  had  heen  treated. 
8.  Ahab  in  consequence  was  doomed  to  die.  (1)  This  was  signified  to  him  by 
another  prophet.  He  is  by  the  Jews  supposed  to  have  been  Micaiah,  and  with 
some  reason  perhaps  (compare  oh.  zxiL  8).  (2)  This  prophet,  after  the  example 
of  Nathan  (2  Sam.  xiL),  made  Ahab  pronounce  his  own  sentence  (vers.  37 — 42).  In 
the  doom  of  the  prophet  who,  for  disobedience  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  not  smit- 
ing his  fellow,  was  destroyed  by  the  lion,  Ahab  could  also  read  his  doom  for  not 
obeying  the  word  of  the  Lord  when  he  should  have  smitten  Ben-badad  to  death  (vers. 
35,  36).  (3)  The  prophecy  came  true.  Ahab  was  slain  fighting  against  the  Syrians 
to  recover  Eamoth  in  Gilead  (oh.  xxii.  35).  And  by  the  hands  of  the  Syrians,  under 
Hazael,  the  children  of  Israel  suffered  severely  (see  2  Kings  viii  12  ;  x.  32,  38).  (4)^ 
In  anticipation  of  these  things  Ahab  "  went  to  his  house  heavy  and  displeased." 
Bea/vy  at  the  tidings  and  displeased  with  the  prophet.  It  would  have  been  mor» 
to  bis  advantage  had  he  gone  to  the  house  of  God  in  contrition  for  the  sins  of  his 
wicked  life.— J.  A.  M. 

Vers,  1 — ^21. — Veiled  Mercies.  I.  Ahab's  exteemitt  (vers.  1 — 11).  God's  goodness 
to  the  froward  is  shown  by  His  bringing  them  into  circumstances  where  they  may 
prove  and  know  Him.  The  clouds  they  "  so  much  dread  are  big  with  mercy."  1. 
The  land  is  overrun  a/nd  the  capital  besieged.  The  fruit  of  sin  is  difficulty  and  dig- 
aeter.  The  land  and  the  life  which  will  hot  acknowledge  God  will  know  at  last  what 
it  is  to  be  bereft  of  His  protecting  care  and  the  ministrations  of  His  goodness.  These 
are  the  eternal  portion  only  of  those  whom  they  raise  and  bless.  2.  His  degrada- 
tion (vers.  2 — 4).  In  his  own  city  he  has  to  listen  and  assent  to  the  terms  that  rob 
him  at  one  stroke  of  all  that  is  dearest  and  best.  The  foe  has  no  mercy,  and  Ahab 
neither  strength  nor  dignity.  Those  who  forsake  God,  and  shut  themselves  out 
from  the  experience  of  His  truth  and  mercy,  will  prove  the  vanity  of  every  other 
trust.  8.  His  helplessness  (vers.  6 — 11).  (1)  CompUance  with  Ben-hadad's  first 
demands  does  not  save  bim  from  further  degradation.  Those  who  rely  only  on  the 
world's  compassion  lean  on  a  reed  which  wUl  break  and  pierce  them.  (2)  Ahab'i 
defiance  (ver.  11)  was  an  appeal  to  chance.  He  had  no.  clear  confidence  that 
Ben-hadad's  threatenings  would  come  to  nothing.  Forgetfulness  of  God  is  weakness 
for  the  battle  of  life,  and  darkness  amid  its  dangers.  Are  we  remembering  Him  f 
Are  we  stirring  ourselves  up  to  lay  hold  on  God  ? 

II.  God's  help  (vers.  12 — 21).  1.  Its  compassionateness.  The  help  came  nn- 
songht,  and  when,  indeed,  there  was  no  thought  of  seeking  it.  How  often  has  He 
thus  prevented  us  with  the  blessings  of  His  goodness  I  2.  Its  timeliness.  The 
final  attack  was  about  to  be  made  (ver.  12),  -  The  progress  of  the  siege  had  no 
doubt  alarmed  Ahab,  and  led  to  negotiation.  Now  it  needed  but  one  more  effort 
and  the  Syrian  hosts  would  be  surging  through  the  streets  of  Samaria.  Within  the 
city  there  was  only  a  terrible  fear,  or  dull,  defiant  despair.  But  now,  as  the  blow 
is  about  to  fall,  the  shield  of  God  sweeps  in  between.  The  Lord  knows  His  time 
to  help,  and,  by  helping,  to  reveal  Himself  and  bind  us  to  Him.  8.  Its  fulness. 
(1)  Israel  is  glorified.  The  weakest  part  of  the  army  achieves  the  victory.  {2} 
Ahab  is  honoured  (ver  14).  The  victory  is  gained  under  the  leadership  of  the  man 
whom  God  might  have  righteously  destroyed.  (3)  The  triumph  is  complete 
(vers.  20,  21),  Ben-hadad  a  fugitive,  and  his  army  a  prey.  The  glory  of  God  is 
manifested  most  of  all  in  His  mercy.  We  cannot  contemplate  our  deliverance  from 
danger  and  the  fulness  of  our  triumph  in  Christ  without  feeling  upon  our  soul  the 
recreative  touch  of  the  hand  of  God.— J.  U. 

Vers.  22—48. — Resisted  Mercy,  I.  God  multiplies  His  benefits  to  the  sinfitl^ 
(vers.  22 — 80).  Ahab  makes  no  public  acknowledgment  of  God's  mercy,  nor,  so  far 
as  appears,  has  it  been  suffered  to  change  m  any  way  his  attitude  towards  Jehovah ; 
yet  God  crowns  him  with  loving-kindnesses.  1.  Delivered  from  one  danger,  he  i» 
warned  of  another.  "  Go,  strengthen  thyseK,  and  see  what  tiiou  dost,"  &o.  The 
enemy,  baffled  for  the  time,  wiU  return  agam.  The  intimation  was  a  caU  not  only  to 
prepare  his  hnsta  Btid  strengthen  his  cities,  but,  beyond  all  else,  to  seeK  His  face  wh» 


600 


OH.  XX.  1—43.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 

had  delivered  him  already,  and  was  able  to  deliver  him  again.  We  are  warned  of 
dangers  that  we  may  strengthen  ourselves  in  God.  There  is  love  in  the  warning,  and 
vaster  love  in  the  offered  strength.  2.  When  the  dinger  comes  he  is  assv/red  of  success 
(ver.  28).  The  most  needful  preparation  had  been  neglected  ;  Ahab  had  not  sought 
God.     But  God  again  seeks  him.     Mark  the  unwearied,  all-forgiving  love  of  God. 

3.  The  Lord  fights  for  him.  In  vain  did  the  Syrians  change  their  ground  and 
remodel  their  army.  In  vain  did  they  surround  with  their  myriads  the  two  small 
bands  of  Israel.  _  They  are  given  as  stubble  to  the  swords  of  Israel,  and  the  very 
walls  of  the  city  into  which  they  flee  for  safety  become  their  destruction.  God's 
hand  is  so  marked  in  His  deliverances,  that  the  sinful  cannot  fail  to  see  the  wondrous 
love  that  is  behind  them.  They  bring  us  face  to  face  with  "  the  depths  of  the 
riches  "  of  His  mercy.  4.  The  purpose  of  the  mercy.  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord."  It  is  the  revelation  of  God,  and  is  meant  to  be  the  birth-hour  of  the 
soul.  The  goodness  of  God  may  be  mentioned  with  seeming  gratitude,  but  it  has 
been  barren  of  result  unless  it  has  brought  us  into  the  presence  of  the  King.  The 
Divine  Love  has  blessed  us  in  vain  unless  it  has  become  the  light  of  the  Lord's 
face. 

II.  How  THE  MERCY  WAS  MADE  OF  NO  EFFECT.  To  Ahab  the  meroy  brought  only 
fleeper  condemnation.  It  wiU  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  in  the  day  of 
judgment  than  for  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida,  which  saw  the  goodness  of  God  in 
Christ,  and  yet  repented  not.  1.  The  m,ercy  was  frustrated  by  prayerlessness. 
Though  warned  of  the  danger,  he  does  not  with  lowly  confession  of  sin  and  un- 
worthiness  implore  God's  direction  and  help.  There  is  no  breaking  up  of  the  fallow 
ground  that  it  may  receive  the  blessing  as  the  seed  of  joy  and  life  in  God.  2.  By 
thanjclessnesa.  "Wlien  the  blessing  came  it  might  still  have  saved  bim.  The 
benefits  with  which  God  had  loaded  him  might  have  bowed  him  in  lowly  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  jnultiplied  iniquities  and  long  impious  rebellion.  The  goodness  of 
God  leads  us  to  repentance  only  as  we  pass  in  before  the  Lord  through  the  gates  of 
praise.  8.  By  blindness  to  the  indications  of  Ood's  will.  The  multitude  slain  in 
the  battle,  the  falling  of  the  wall  upon  those  who  escaped,  the  overthrowing  of 
every  defence  tUl  the  king,  the  head  and  centre  of  the  whole  evil,  was  reached, 
might  have  shown  that  God  purposed  to  make  an  end  for  the  time  of  the  Syrian 
power,  and  give  a  full  deUverance  to  Israel.  The  fi:uit  of  the  victoi'y  was  blighted 
by  Ahab's  blindness  and  folly.  To  co-operate  with  God  in  working  out  our  own 
salvation,  we  must  read  and  faithfully  fulfil  His  purpose.  4.  By  vanity  and  worldly 
policy.  He  enjoys  for  a  brief  moment  the  power  which  God  has  given,  becomes 
the  benefactor  and  brother  of  the  man  whom  the  Lord  had  doomed,  and  makes  a 
covenant  with  him.  The  trust  which  God  had  desired  should  wholly  rest  upon 
Himself  he  reposes  in  his  foe.  The  hour  of  prosperity,  which  should  be  our 
covenant-time  with  God,  is  too  often  made  the  occasion  for  worldly  alliances, 
which  lead  us  to  forget  Him  and  all  we  owe  to  Him. 

III.  Mercy  fedstrated  bears  fruit  in  judsment  (vers.  85 — 43).  1.  The 
message  came  through  swift  cmd  stern  judgment.  Disobedience  meant  death 
(vers.  35,  36).  The  Divine  threatenings  come  to  us  through  terrible  judgments. 
2.  Ahab  was  self-condemned.  The  voice  of  conscience  is  on  God's  side.  "If  our 
heart  condemn  us,"  &o.  8.  His  own  life  should  answer  for  the  life  he  spa/red. 
Letting  go  God's  enemy,  and  keeping  back  his  hand  from  God's  righteous  though 
terrible  work,  he  destroyed  himself.  No  cross,  no  crown.  The  awful  price  which 
a  soul  must  pay  for  present  ease  and  pleasure :  "He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it." 

4.  The  shadow  of  God's  wrath  swallows  up  the  worldling's  peace  (ver.  43) ;  and  it 
falls  ever  deeper  till  the  end  come. — U. 

Ver.  40. — The  Neglected  Opportunity.  Ben-hadad  II.  was  seeking  his  revenge  for 
k  defeat  inflicted  on  him  the  preceding  year  by  the  Israelitish  army,  led  by  a  band 
of  232  young  noblemen.  He  had  disciplined  his  army,  and  re-oflaoered  it,  no 
longer  allowing  money  or  family  influence  to  supersede  military  skilL  Every- 
thing that  organization  could  accomplish  or  superstition  dictate  (ver.  28)  had  been 
done,  but  all  proved  in  vain ;  for  the  contest  was  not  simply  between  Ben-hadad  and 


6M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xx.  1—48. 

Ahab,  but  between  the  heathen  and  the  living  God  who  had  been  blasphemonsly 
challenged.  Describe  Ben-hadad's  successful  appeal  td  Ahab  after  the  defeat.  Whj 
was  it  not  conunendable  (as  it  was,  for  example,  after  the  sie°;e  of  Calais)  to  spare 
the  vanquished?  Because  the  motive  was"  not  pity  but  policy;  and  the  criminal 
allowed  to  escape  had  avowedly  fought  as  Jehovah's  foe.  It  is  sometimes  "  expe- 
dient that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people."  Ben-hadad's  death  would  have 
been  the  salvation  of  Ahab,  who  in  the  next  war  fell  mortally  wounded  ;  it  would 
have  ensured  a  lasting  peace,  as  this  was  the  campaign  of  the  Syrian  king,  rather 
than  of  the  Syrian  people ;  and  it  would  have  seriously  shaken  the  confidence  of 
the  heathen  in  their  gods.  The  king  let  his  prisoner  go  to  his  own  midoing.  It 
was  this  sin  which  was  now  rebuked.  Picture  Ahab  returning  from  the  field 
flushed  with  victory.  He  is  accosted  by  a  man  who  has  been  sitting  wounded  and 
dusty  beside  the  road.  He  is  a  disguised  prophet,  probably  Micaiah,  acting  a 
parable.  Says  he,  in  effect:  "I  have  come  from  the  battle.  In  the  hour  of 
victory,  the  captain,  whom  I  acknowledge  I  was  bound  to  obey,  gave  me  in  charge 
a  prisoner  of  note,  saying  that  if  he  escaped  my  life  should  answer  for  it.  I  admit 
that  I  failed,  though  not  designedly ;  but  while  thy  servant  was  busy  here  and 
there  he  was  gone.  Ought  I  to  suffer  for  that  slight  negligence  ? "  And  when 
Ahab  answered,  "  Yes,"  the  disguise  wasfiung  off,  and  the  daring  prophet^  appeared^ 
saying,  "  In  pronouncing  my  doom,  thou  hast  pronounced  thine  own."  [Bead 
vers.  42  and  48.]  The  prophet  set  before  the  king  a  pictote  of  his  neglect  of 
opportunity  which  is  worthy  of  our  study.    We  observe — 

I.  That  oppobtunity  is  given  op  God.  "  There  is  ft  time  for  every  purpose 
under  heaven."  Examples :  (1)  In  the  operations  of  nature.  There  is  a  suit- 
able time  for  the  gathering  of  fruit.  It  may  not  come  when  you  vrish  it  or  expect 
it ;  but  neglected  then,  the  fruit  is  spoiled.  A  farmer  may  in  the  spring  be  "  busy 
here  and  there  "  with  other  things,  and  so  neglect  to  sow  his  seed.  The  oppor- 
tunity does  not  recur.  (2)  Inthe  cultivation  of  mind.  The  indolent  schoolboy 
never  gets  again  the  leisure  and  opportunity  for  study ;  and  if- he  did,  his  capacity 
for  acquiring  knowledge  has  decreased.  Contrast  the  flexibility  of  mind  of  the  lad 
with  that  of  the  man  in  middle  life.  (3)  In  the  acquisition  of  material  good. 
Energy,  promptitude,  and  diligence  displayed  at  a  critical  moment  make  a  man 
a  millionaire.  "  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men  which,  taken  at  the  flood, 
leads  on  to  fortune,"  &o.  (4)  In  the  consecration  of  life.  No  father  is  content 
with  the  physical  beauty  of  his  child  if  mentally  he  is  dead — an  idiot ;  nor  is  our 
heavenly  Father  satisfied  to  see  mental  vigour  accompanied  by  spiritual  death. 
He  looks  for  a  change,  which  is  a  passing  from  death  unto  life,  and  for  this  He  gives 
opportunity.     Observe,  secondly — 

II.  That  opportunity  is  granted  to  Ati^  If  you  would  discover  this,  (1) 
Consider  your  outward  circumstances.  The  helpfulness  of  a  Christian  home; 
inherited  tendencies ;  direct  religious  teaching ;  exemplars  of  holy  life ;  recog- 
nition of  God  at  the  family  altar ;  services  frequented  from  childhood.  If  these 
leave  you  unblessed,  they  leave  you  under  heavier  condemnation.  Soon  the  home 
may  be  broken  up,  and  the  encouragements  to  good  may  vanish,  and  with 
unavailing  regret  you  wUl  say,  "As  thy  servant  was  busy  here  and  there,  they 
were  gone."  (2)  Consider  your  inward  condition.  There  are  seasons  when  it  ig 
easier  to  avaU  ourselves  of  religious  advantages.  Youth  is  such  a  season,  for  then 
impulses  are  generous,  susceptibilities  are  tender,  affections  free.  Under  the 
influence  of  bereavement  or  personal  illness  religious  convictions  are  experienced. 
In  and  through  these  the  Holy  Spirit  works.  Such  a  time  may  be  hke  the 
morning  twilight  which  brightens  into  day,  or  like  the  evening  twilight  that 
deepens  into  night.     Beware  of  letting  convictions  slip  I 

III.  That  oppoetunity  is  neglected  by  many.  Two  causes  of  this  may  be 
suggested :  (1)  The  pressure  of  business.  The  man  on  the  battle-field  was  busy 
enough,  but  he  failed  to  remember  his  special  charge.  Nothing  he  did  was  wrong 
in  itself,  but  it  became  a  wrong  when  it  led  to  the  neglect  of  obvious  duty :  and  it 
his  hfe  was  sacrificed  because  of  that  neglect,  the  advantage  gained  by  other 
activity  was  of  no  value.     Apply  this,  and  show  the   difiBsnlty  in  the  way  of 


GH.  XXI.  1—29.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINOa 


607 


meditation  and  prayer,  created  by  the  multitudinous  claims  upon  our  activity. 
(2)  The  effect  of  frivolity.  Some  people  are  "busy  here  and  there"  in  another 
sense.  -  You  never  know  where  to  find  them.  Their  character  is  indeterminate  ; 
their  information  is  incomplete ;  their  work  is  wanting  in  persistence  and 
thoroughness;  and  their  whole  life  is  frittered  away,  they  scarcely  know  how. 
£aoh  day  comes  to  such  an  one,  saying,  "  Here  is  something  for  you  to  do  for  God, 
something  for  you  to  think  of  for  your  spiritual  good ;"  and,  having  dehvered  its 
message,  the  day  falls  back  into  the  darkness  of  night.  Again  and  again  the 
message  comes  in  vain,  until  the  last  day  approaches,  then  vanishes,  and  eternity 
is  at  hand  I  The  work  is  left  undone;  and  over  the  lost  opportunity  he  can  only 
■ay,  "  While  thy  servant  was  busy  here  and  there,  it  was  gone." 

OoKCLnsiON. — 1.  Apply  to  Ohristiwna  who  aire  negleoting  work  for  Ood,    2. 
Apply  to  the  eareleit  who  are  neglecting  deeiaionfor  Qod. — A.  B. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XXI.— 1—29. 


Thb  btobt  of  Naboth.  The  doom  ov 
Ahab's  hocsb.  His  penitbnoe. — Ver.  1. — 
And  It  came  to  pass  after  these  tUngs 
[These  words  are  omitted  in  the  Vat.  LXX., 
which,  as  before  remarked,  transposes  chs. 
zx.  andxzi.  See  introductory  note.ch.  xz.], 
that  Natoth  ["  Fruit,"  "  produce  "  (Gesen). 
Wordsworth  sees  in  him  a  type  of  Christ, 
east  ont  of  the  vineyard  (Matt.  zxi.  39)  and 
slain]  the  Jezreelite  [The  Alex.  LXX.  here, 
and  throughout  the  chapter,  reads  o  lapa- 
qXirijc-  Josephns  (Ant.  viii.  13.  8)  says 
that  Kaboth  was  of  illustrious  family] 
had  a  vineyard,  which  was  In  Jezreel 
[See  note  on  oh.  xviii.  46],  hard  by  the 
palace  [LXX.  threshing-floor.  Stanley 
(Diet.  Bib.  voL  ii.  p.  454),  arguing  from  this 
word,  would  reject  the  Hebrew  text  of  this 
narrative,  which  places  both  the  vineyard 
and  the  plot  of  ground  (2  Kings  ix.  25,  26) 
in  Jezreel,  and  would  locate  the  vineyard 
on  the  hill  of  Samaria,  in  the  "  void  place  " 
of  ch.  xxii.  10]  of  Abab  king  of  Samaria. 
[It  is  clear  from  these  last  words  that  Jezreel 
had  not  replaced  Samaria  as  the  capital.  It 
was  a  "  palace  "  only  that  Ahab  had  there. 
No  doubt  the  beauty  of  the  situation  had 
led  to  its  purchase  or  erection.  As  Jezreel 
is  only  twenty- five  miles  distant  from 
Samaria,  it  is  obvious  that  it  might  be 
readily  visited  by  the  court.] 

Ver.  2. — AndAbab  spake  unto  Naboth,  say- 
ing, Give  me  thy  vineyard  [The  prediction 
of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  viii.  14)  is  being  reahzed] , 
that  I  may  have  It  for  a  garden  of  herbs  [as 
in  Deut.  xi.  10;  Prov.  xv.  17],  because  It 
iB  near  unto  [Heb.  heside\  my  house :  and 
I  wUl  give  thee  for  It  a  better  vineyard 
than  It :  or  [Heb.  omits  or] ,  If  It  seem  good 
to  thee  [Heb.  if  good  in  thine  eyes] ,  1  will 
give. thee  the  worth  of  It  In  money.  [Heb. 
I  will  give  to  thee  silver,  the  price  of  it.  See 
note  on  oh.  xx.  39.    Whatever  Ahab's  moral 


weakness,  he  was  certainly  a  prince  of  some 
enterprize.  Ch.  xxu.  39  speaks  of  the 
"  cities  "  which  he  built.  And  the  palace  of 
Jezreel  would  seem  to  have  been  erected  by 
him.  This  vineyard  was  to  be  one  of  his 
improvements.] 

.  Ver.  3. — And  Naboth  said  to  Ahab,  The 
Lord  forbid  It  me  [Heb.  Far  be  it  to  me 
from  Jehovah,  These  words  reveal  to  us,  first, 
that  Naboth  was  a  worshipper  of  the  Lord 
otherwise  he  would  hardly  have  used  the 
sacred  name,  and  that  to  Ahab,  with  whom 
the  servants  of  the  tr&e  God  had  found  but 
scant  favour ;  and,  secondly,  that  he  looked 
upon  the  aUeuation  of  his  patrimony  as  an 
act  displeasing  to  the  Lord,  and  as  violatuig 
the  law  of  Moses  (Levit.  xxv.  23  sqq. ; 
Num.  xxxvi.  7  sqq.)  We  have  instances  of 
the  sale  of  land  to  the  king  in  2  Sam.  xxiv. 
24 — ^but  that  was  by  a  Jebusite — and  in  ch. 
xvi.  24],  that  I  should  give  the  Inherit- 
ance of  my  fathers  unto  thee.      ["  The 

preservation  of  the  njnj  was  for  every 
covenant-keeping  IsraeUte  a  matter  not 
merely  of  piety  towards  his  family  and  his 
tribe,  ...  but  a  reUgious  duty"  (Bahr). 
It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  restraints  of  the 
old  Mosaic  law  began  to  be  irksome  in  that 
latitudinarian  age.  Many  of  its  provisions 
were  already  regarded  as  obsolete.] 

Ver.  4. — And  Ahab  came  Into  his  house 
[At  Samaria,  as  we  gather  from  vers.  18,  14, 
16,  &o.]  heavy  and  displeased  [Heb.  sullen 
and  angry ;  same  words  as  in  ch.  xx.  43. 
Bwald  thinks  that  we  have  here  a  clear  re- 
ference to  that  passage]  because  of  the 
word  which  Naboth  the  Jezreelite  had 
spoken  to  him :  for  [Heb.  and]  he  had 
said,  I  will  not  give  thee  the  inheritance  of 
my  fathers.  And  he  laid  him  down 
upon  his  bed  [Bawhnson  understands  this 
to  mean  the  couch  on  which  the  Orientali 
recline  at  meals.  And  ntSD  is  used  with 
this  meaning  in  Esther  i.  6    Ezek.  xxiii. 


608 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  XXI.  1—29. 


41,  and  elsewhere.  But  "  his  bed  "  seems 
rather  to  point  to  his  private  chamber ;  see 
uu  ver.  5] ,  and  turned  away  Ills  face  [The 
Vulgate  adds  adparieUm.  CI.  2  Kings  xx.  2 ; 
from  which  place  it  may  have  been  uncon- 
sciously introduced  here],  and  would  eat  no 
bread.  [KeU  contends  that  "  this  chillish 
mode  of  giving  expression  to  his  displeasure 
shows  very  clearly  that  Ahab  was  a  man 
Bold  under  sin  (ver.  20),  who  only  wanted  the 
requisite  energy  to  display  the  wickedness 
of  his  heart  in  Tigoroua  action;"  but 
whether  this  is  a  just  inference  from  these 
words  may  well  be  questioned.  It  rather 
shows  that  so  little  did  he  meditate  evil  that 
he  accepted  the  refusal  of  Nahoth  as  con- 
clusive, and  gave  way  to  childish  grief. 

Yer.  5. — But  Jezebel  Ms  wife  came  to 
Urn,  and  said  unto  him,  Why  is  thy  spirit 
so  sad  [same  word  as  in  ver.  4],  that  thou 
eatest  no  bread  1  [It  would  seem  that  the 
queen  missed  him  from  the  banqueting 
hall — ^be  can  hardly,  therefore,  have  lain 
down  on  one  of  the  divans  or  couches 
therein — and  went  to  bis  bedroom  to  in- 
qnire  the  reason.] 

Ver.  6. — And  he  said  unto  ber.  Because  I 
■pake  unto  Nabotb  the  Jezreelite,  and  said 
unto  him,  Give  me  thy  vineyard  for  money 
[Eeb.  siloer];  or  else,  if  it  please  [Heb. 
delight]  thee,  I  Will  give  thee  another  vine- 
yard for  it :  and  he  answered  [Heb.  said] , 
I  will  not  give  thee  my  vineyard.  [Ahab 
does  not  mention  the  reason  which  Nabotb 
assigned  for  his  refusal.  But  Naboth's  reasons 
were  nothing  to  him,  and  he  had  hardly 
given  them  a  second  thought.] 

Ver.  7.— And  Jezebel  Ms  wile  said  unto 
him.  Dost  thou  now  govern  [Heb.  make; 
LXX,  iroteTf  /SatriXIa]  the  kingdom  of 
Israel  7  [There  is  no  question  expressed  in 
the  Hebrew  which  stands,  "  Thou  now 
makest  the  kingdom  over  Israel."  The  com- 
mentators generally,  however,  understand 
the  words — as  the  LXX.  and  the  A.  V. — as 
an  ironical  question,  "  Art  thou  ruler  in 
aught  but  name  t "  though  some  take  it  as 
an  imperative  :  "Do  thou  how  exert 
authority  over  the  kingdom  of  Israel." 
And  on  the  whole,  this  latter  interpre- 
tation appears  to  be  preferable.  "  Do  thou 
now  play  the  king.  Make  thy  power 
felt.  Give  me  the  requisite  authority.  I 
will,"  &a.]  Arise,  and  eat  bread  [oifood], 
and  let  thine  heart  be  merry  [Heb.  good ; 
same  words  1  Sam.  xxv.  36]  :  I  [This  word 
is  emphatic.  "If  thou  wilt  do  thy  part,  I 
win  do  mine."]  will  give  thee  [no  need  to 
buy  it]  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  the 
Jezreelite. 

Ver.  8.— So  she  wrote  letters  [Heb.  writ- 
ings] in  Ahab's  name,  and  sealed  them  with 
Ms  seal  [The  use  of  the  seal,  for  the  pur- 


pose  of  authentication,  is  of  great  antiquity. 
Some  of  the  Egyptian  signets  are  more  than 
4\000  years  old.  Their  use  in  the  age  of  the 
patriarchs  is  attested  by  Gen.  xxzviii.  13 
and  xli.  42 ;  their  importance  is  proved  by 
the  text,  by  Esther  iii.  10 ;  viii.  2,  8,  10 
(of.  "Herod,"  iu.  128);  Dan.  vL  17;  Jer. 
xxxii.  10,  54;  Hag.  ii.  23,  &o.  Whether 
this  seal — which  does  not  necessarily  prove 
that  those  who  used  it  could  not  write — 
was  impressed  upon  the  vmtings  themselves 
according  to  the  modern  practice  of  the 
East,  or  upon  a  piece  of  clay  (Job  zxxviii. 
14),  which  was  then  attached  to  the  letter 
by  strings,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing. 
•  The  use  of  Ahab's  seal  affords  a  strong  pre- 
sumption that  he  was  privy  to  her  designs 
(Biibr),  but  of  this  we  cannot  be  absolutely 
certain],  and  sent  the  letters  unto  the 
elders  [see  Deut.  xvi.  18]  and  to  the  nobles 
[same  word  Neh.  ii.  16 ;  iv.  13 ;  Eccles. 
X.  17]  that  were  ta  his  dty,  dwelling  [or 
inhabitants,  as  in  ver.  11]  with  Nabotb, 

Yer.  9. — And  she  wrote  In  the  letters, 
saying,  Proclaim  a  fast  [The  object  of  tMs 
ordinance  was  to  give  the  impression  that 
the  city  was  labouring  under,  or  threatened 
with,  a  curse,  because  of  some  nndiscovered 
sin  (2  Sam.  xxi.  1  ;  Josh.  iz.  11 ;  Deut. 
x^.  9),  which  must  be  removed  or  averted 
by  public  humiliation.  Of.  Joel  i.  14;  ii. 
12 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  6 ;  2  Ohron.  xx.  3)],  and  set 
Naboth  on  Mgh  among  the  people.  [Heb. 
at  the  head  of  the  people,  Keil,  al.  interpret, 
"  bring  him  into  the  court  of  justice,  as 
defendant  before  all  the  people."  And  cer- 
tainly 43*^in  here,  and  in  the  next  verse — 
where  it  is  used  of  the  witnesses  (cf,  ver. 
13) — means,  make  to  sit ;  which  looks  as  if 
judicial  procedure  were  intended.  But  "at 
the  head  of  the  people  "  rather  suggests  that 
in  the  public  assembly,  which  murked  the 
fast  (Joel  ii.  15),  Naboth  was  assigned  the 
most  distinguished  place.  The  reason  for 
this  is  obvious,  viz.,  to  give  a  colour  of  im- 
partiality to  the  proceedings.  As  Grotins, 
Ne  qdio  damnasse  crederentur,  quern  ipsi 
honoraverunt.  It  would  also  accord  with 
the  popular  idea  of  retributive  justice  that 
Naboth  should  be  denounced  in  the  very 
hour  of  his  triumph  and  exaltation. 
JosephuB,  however,  says  that  it  was  be- 
cause of  his  high  birth  that  this  position 
was  assigned  him.] 

Ver.  10. — And  set  two  men  [according  to 
the  provisions  of  the  law  (Deut.  xvii.  6,  7 ; 
xix.  6 ;  Num.  xxxv.  30).  "Even  Jezebel  bears 
witness  to  the  Pentateuch"  (Wordsworth). 
Josephus  speaks  of  three  witnesses],  sons  of 
Belial  [i.e.,  worthless  men.  This  use  of 
the  word  "  son  "  (cf .  Psa.  Ixxxix.  22,  "  eon 
of  wickedness"),  which  is  one  of  the  com- 


CH.  XXL  1— S!9.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


609 


monest  Mioms  of  the  East,  throws  some  light 
on  the  expression  "  sons  of  the  prophets  " 
(see  ch .  xx.  86,  note ;  cf .  Deut.  xiii.  13  ;  Matt, 
xxvi.  60)],  before  Mm  [confronting  him], 
to  hear  witness  against  him,  saying,  Thou 
didst  blaspheme  [Heb.  bless ;  cf .  Job  i.  6, 
11;  ii.  6;  LXX,  evXoytiae.  The  Lexico- 
graphers are  not  agreed  as  to  how  this 
word,  the  primary  meaning  of  which  is  to 
^neel,  hence  to  pray,  to  bless,  came  to 
signify  curse  or  blaspheme.  According  to 
some,  it  is  an  euphemism,  the  idea  of 
cursing  God  heing  altogether  too  horrihle 
for  the  Jew  to  express  in  words;  whilst 
others  derive  this  signification  from  the 
fact  that  a  curse  is  really  a  prayer  addressed 
to  God;  and  others,  again,  account  for  it  by 
the  consideration  that  a  person  who  bids 
farewell  to  another  sometimes  does  so  in 
the  sense  of  dismissing  and  cursing  him. 
Anyhow,  it  is  noticeable  that  the  word 
"  blessing"  is  sometimes  used  with  a  similar 
meaning  amongst  ourselves]  God  and  the 
king  [God  and  the  representative  of  God 
in  Israel  are  here  coupled  together,  as  in 
Exod.  xxii.  28.  To  curse  the  king  was 
practically  to  onrsfi  Him  whose  vicegerent 
he  was  (of.  Matt,  xxiii.  18 — ^22).  Hence 
such  cursing  is  called  blasphemy  and  was 
punishable  with  death  (Deut.  xiii.  11 ;  xviL 
S;  2  Sam.  xvi.  9;  xix.  21;  and  see  on 
oh.  ii.  43,  44)] .  And  then  cany  bim  oat 
[i.e.,  out  of  tiie  oit^  («f.  Levit.  xxiv.  14; 
Acts  vii.  S8 ;  Luke  iv.  29 ;  Heb.  xiii.  12), 
"  Locus  lapidationit  erat  extra  urbem,  omnes 
enimcivitates  muris  cinctae paritatem  habent 
ad  castra  Israelis"  (Babyl.  Sanh.)],  and 
stone  blm  [the  legal  punishment  for  blas- 
phemy (Levit.  xxiv.  16)],  that  he  may  dlei 
[The  terrible  power  accorded  to  "two  or 
three  witnesses,"  of  denouncing  a  man  to 
death,  accounts  for  the  prominence  given 
to  the  sin  of  bearing  false  witness  (Exod. 
XX.  16 ;  xxiii.  1 ;  Dent  xix.  16).  It  found 
a  mention  in  the  Decalogue.] 

Yer.  11 — ^And  the  men  of  his  olty,  even 
the  elders  and  the  nobles  who  were  the 
Inhabitants  In  bis  city,  did  as  Jezebel  had 
sent  unto  them  [Their  ready  compliance 
shows  not  merely  the  "  deep  moral  degrada- 
tion of  the  IsraeUtes"  at  that  period,  but 
also  the  terror  which  the  name  of  Jezebel 
inspired],  and  as  It  was  written  In  the 
letters  which  she  bad  sent  unto  them. 
[That  she  did  not  hesitate  to  put  her  ia- 
&mous  command  into  writing  shows  the 
character  of  the  woman.] 

Yer.  12. — They  proclaimed  a  last,  and 
Mt  Naboth  on  high  among  the  people. 

Yer.  13. — ^And  there  came  in  [Heb.  came. 
The  assembly  was  probably  held  al  fresco. 
From  the  word  K'D^,  A.  Y.  yesterday,  but 


strictly,  yesternight,  Stanley  suggests  thai 
the  trial  took  place  by  night.  But  the  word  is 
often  used  in  the  wider  sense  of  "yesterday  " 
(Gesenius)]  two  men,  children  of  EeUal, 
and  sat  before  him :  and  the  men  of  Belial 
witnessed  against  him,  even  against  Naboth, 
In  the  presence  of  the  people  [The  whole 
congregation  was  interested  in  a  charge  of 
blasphemy.  If  unpunished,  the  guilt  rested 
on  the  congregation.  Hence  the  provision 
of  Deut.  xxiv.  14.  By  the  imposition  of 
hands  they  testified  that  the  gcult  of  the 
blasphemer  thenceforth  rested  upon  his  own 
head] ,  saying,  Kaboth  did  blaspheme  God 
and  the  king.  Then  they  carried  him 
forth  [Heb.  made  him  to  go  forth]  out  of 
the  city,  and  stoned  him  with  stones,  that 
be  died.  [It  appears  from  2  Kings  iz.  26 
that  the  childien  of  Naboth,  who  other- 
wise might  have  laid  claim  to  their  patri- 
mony, were  put  to  death  at  the  same  time, 
and  probably  in  the  same  way;  of.  Josh. 
vii.  24,  25 ;  Num.  xvL  27.  This  wa&  the 
role  of  the  East  (Dan.  vi.  24).  The  prin- 
ciple of  visiting  the  sins  of  the  parents 
npon  the  children  seems  to  have  been 
carried  to  an  excess,  as  we  find  Joash 
(2  Kings  xiv.  6)  instituting  a  more  mercifol 
mle.] 

Yer.  14. — ^Then  they  sent  to  Jezebel 
[clearly  she  was  not  at  Jezreel],  saying, 
Naboth  is  stoned,  and  is  dead.  [Stanley 
observes  that  it  is  significant  that  this 
announcement  was  made  to  her  and  not 
to  Ahab.  It  appears  from  ver.  19  that  the 
corpses  both  of  Naboth  and  his  children 
were  left  to  be  devoured  of  dogs.] 

Yer.  15. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when 
Jezebel  heard  that  Naboth  was  stoned,  and 
was  dead,  that  Jezebel  said  to  Ahab,  Arise, 
take  possession  [or  inherit,  succeed  to  ;  same 
word  Gen.  xzi.  10;  Deut.  ii.  24;  Jer.  xUx.  1. 
The  possessions  of  a  person  executed  for 
treason  were  ipso  facto  forfeited  to  the 
crown.  There  was  no  law  prescribing  this, 
but  it  followed  the  principles  of  the  Mosaio 
code.  Just  as  the  goods  of  the  idolater 
were  devoted  as  eherem  to  the  Lord  (Deut. 
xiii.  16),  so  those  of  the  traitor  reverted  to 
the  king.  So  Eeil]  of  the  vineyard  of  Nabotli 
the  Jezreelite,  which  he  refused  to  give  to 
thee  for  money  [there  is  a  proud  malicious 
triumph  in  these  words.  "He  refused, 
simple  fool,  to  sell  it.  Now  thou  canst 
have  it  for  nothing.  I  have  discovered  a 
better  plan  than  buying  it"]  :  for  Nabotli 
is  not  alive,  but  dead. 

Yer.  16. — ^And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Ahall 
heard  that  Naboth  was  dead,  that  Ahab 
arose  np  [According  to  the  LXX.,  his  first 
act  was  to  rend  his  clothes  and  put  on 
sackcloth.  Afterwards  "  he  rose  up,"  &o.l 
to  ffo  down    [The  "Great  Plain,  on  th« 


ilO 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[CH.  xxt  1—29 


margin  of  whioh  Jezreel  itandg,  is  at  a  much 
lower  level  than  Samaria,  which  is  in  the 
mountain  district  of  Ephraim"]  to  the 
vineyard  of  Nabotb  the  Jezreellte^  to  take 
possession  of  It  ["  Behind  him — ^probably 
in  the  back  part  of  his  chariot — ride  his 
two  pages,  Jehn  and  Bidkar  (2  Kings  iz. 
26),"  Stanley.  But  the  expression  "  riding 
in  pairs  after  Ahab  "  (A.V.  "  rode  together 
after  ")  does  not  make  it  certain  that  they 
were  in  the  same  chariot.  Indeed,  they 
may  have  been  on  horseback.  This  was 
apparently  (2  Kings  iz.  26)  on  the  day  after 
the  m  order.] 

Yer.  17— And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
to  ElJJab  the  Tishbite,  sajlng  [Ag  in  oh. 
zvii.  1,  8 ;  zviii.  1], 

Yer.  18.— Arise,  go  down  [Bahr  henoe 
concludes  that  Elijah  was  at  this  time  in  a 
mountain  district.  But  wherever  he  might 
be,  this  word  would  probably  be  used  of  a 
journey  to  the  plain  of  Esdraelon]  to  meet 
["  The  word  used  1  Sam.  xvii.  48  of  David 
going  out  to  meet  Goliath  "  (Stanley).  But 
the  same  word  is  used  (ib.,  ch.  zviii.  6)  of  the 
women  going  out  to  meet  Saul,  and  indeed 
it  is  the  usual  word  for  all  meetings.  We 
cannot  hence  infer,  consequently,  that  EUjah 
went  forth  as  if  to  encounter  a  foe]  A&ab 
king  of  Israel,  wMcIi  is  in  Samaria  [i.e., 
whose  seat  is  in  Samaria ;  who'  rules  there. 
There  is  no  need  to  understand  the  word  of 
the  territory  of  Samaria] :  behold,  he  Is  In 
tbe  Ttneyard  of  Nabotb,  wMther  he  Is  gone 
down  to  possess  It.  [The  words  imply  that 
Elijah  found  Ahab — strode  into  his  presence 
— ^in  the  vineyard;  not  that  he  was  there 
already  when  the  loyal  chariot  entered  it 
(Stanley).] 

Ver.  19. — And  thou  shalt  speak  unto  him, 
■aylng.  Thus  salth  the  Lord,  Hast  thou 
UUed  [RriS'l'li  a  rare  and  expressive  word. 
We  might  render,  slaughtered] ,  and  also  [this 
word  suggests  ijiat  Jezebel's  programme, 
which  he  had  accepted,  was  fast  beuig 
•ocomphshed.  But  in  the  very  hour  of  its 
completion  it  should  be  interrupted]  taken 
possession  T  And  thou  shalt  speak  mito 
him,  saying.  Thus  salth  the  Lord  [For  the 
repetition,  see  on  ch.  zx.  13,  14],  In  the 
place  where  dogs  [LXX.  ai  itQ  koI  o!  leivee] 
licked  the  blood  of  Naboth  shall  dogs  Uck 
thy  blood  [according  to  the  lex  talionis,  as 
in  ch.  XX.  42] ,  even  thine.  [Heb.  even  thou. 
The  LXX.  adds,  "And  the  harlots  shall 
bathe  in  thy  blood."  For  the  construction 
lee  Gesen.,  Gram.  §  119.  3;  and  cf.  Gen. 
zxvii.  34;  Prov.  zxiii.  16;  Psa.  iz.  7. 
Thenius  contends  that  there  is  a  contra- 
diction between  this  ver.  and  ch.  zxii.  38 
(together  with  2  Kings  iz.  25)  which  is 
•bsolutely  insuperable.    But  as  Bahr  ob- 


serves, "  How  thoughtless  our  author  mnsl 
have  been  if  in  two  consecutive  chapters— 
i.e.,  on  the  same  leaf,  as  it  were — he  had 
inadvertently  inserted  direct  contradictions." 
And  the  following  considerations  will  show 
that  the  discrepancy  is  only  apparent.  (1) 
The  sentence  here  pronounced  against  Ahab 
was,  on  his  repentance,  stayed  in  its  execu- 
tion. God  said  distinctly,  "  I  will  not  bring 
the  evil  in  his  days,"  and  as  distinctly 
added  that  He  would  "  bring  the  evil  in  his 
son's  days,  upon  his  home  "  (ver.  29).  And 
(2)  with  the  prophecy,  as  thus  modified,  Ihe 
facts  exactly  record.  The  body  of  Jehoram 
was  "cast  into  the  portion  of  the  field  of 
Naboth  the  Jezreelite  "  (2  Kings  l.e,).  And 
if  it  be  objected  (3)  that  our  historian  sees 
in  the  death  of  Ahab  in  Samaria  (dix.  zz. 
Ix.)  a  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  the  answer 
is  that  that  death  was  a  partial  fulfilment 
of  Elijah's  words.  The  repentance  of  Ahab, 
having  secured  him  immunity  from  this 
sentence,  his  subsequent  folly  and  sin  (cf. 
ch.  zxii.  27)  nevertheless  bronght  down 
npon  bim  a  judgment  of  God  strikingly 
similar,  as  we  might  ezpect  it  would  be,  to 
that  originally  denounced  against  him, 
which  was  now  reserved  for  his  son.  In 
other  words,  the  prophecy  wa»  fulfilled  to 
the  letter  in  the  person  of  his  son,  but  it 
had  a  secondary  fulfilment  in  its  spirit  on 
himself] . 

Yer.  20. — ^And  Ahab  said  to  Elijah,  Hast 
thou  found  me  [Not  merely,  "  Hast  thoa 
found  me  out  ?  hast  thou  surprised  me  in 
the  very  act  ?  "  though  this  meaning  is  not  to 
be  excluded,  but  also,  "  Has  thy  vengeance 
overtaken  me  7  "  Vi<D  is  nsed  in  this  sens* 

T   T 

1  Sam.  zxiii.  17 ;  Isa.  z.  10 ;  Fsa.  zzi.  9. 
Ahab  is  so  conscience-stricken  by  the  sudden 
apparition  of  Elijah,  whom  in  all  probability 
he  had  not  seen  or  heard  of  since  "  the  day 
of  Garmel,"  and  by  his  appearance  on  the 
scene  at  the  very  moment  when  he  was 
entering  on  the  fruit  of  his  misdoing, "  in  the 
very  blossom  of  his  sin,"  that  he  feels  that 
judgment  is  already  begun] ,  0  mine  enemy  7 

[No  doubt  the  thought  was  present  in 
Ahab's  mind  that  Elijah  had  ever  been 
opposed  to  him  and  thwarting  him,  but  he 
does  not  dream  (Yon  Gerlaoh,  in  Bahr)  of 
justifying  himself  by  ascribing  Elijah's  in- 
tervention to  personal  hatred  towards  him- 
self. The  sequel  shows  that  he  was 
thoroughly  conscious  of  vrrong-doing.]  And 
be  answered,  I  have  found  thee:  because 

[not  because  T  am  thine  enemy,  but  because] 
thon  has  sold  thyself  [or  sellest  thyself,  i.e., 
Burrenderest  thyself  wholly.  The  idea  is 
clearly  derived  from  the  institutions  oi 
slavery,  according  to  which  the  bondservant 
was  wholly  at  his  master's  disposal  and  wsl 


OH.  XXL  1 — ^29.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


Sll 


bonnd  to  accomplish  his  will.  Whether 
"the  practice  of  men  selling  themselves 
into  slavery  "  (Bawlinson)  existed  in  that 
age  may  perhaps  be  doubted.  We  have  the 
same  thought  in  2  Eings  zvii.  17,  and  Bom. 
yii.  14]  to  worls  evil  In  the  sight  of  the 
Lord.  [We  can  readily  gather  from  these 
words  why  the  doom  was  denomiced  against 
Ahab,  who  had  bnt  a  secondary  share  in 
the  crime,  rather  than  against  Jezebel,  its 
real  perpetrator.  It  was  because  Ahab  was 
the  representative  of  God,  God's  minister  of 
justice,  &o.  If  he  had  not  himself  devised 
the  death  of  Naboth  ;  If  he  had,  which  is 
possible,  remained  in  ignorance  of  the  means 
by  which  Jezebel  proposed  to  procure  him 
the  vineyard,  he  had  nevertheless  readily 
and  gladly  acquiesced  in  her  infamous 
eiime  after  its  accomplishment,  and  was 
then  reaping  its  fruits.  And  because  he 
was  the  king,  the  judge,  who,  instead  of 
punishing  the  evil-doer,  sanctioned  and 
approved  the  deed,  and  who  crowned  a  reign 
of  idolatries  and  abominations  with  this 
shameful  murder,  the  prophetic  sentence  is 
directed  primarily  against  him.] 

Ver.  21.— Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  npon 
thee,  and  wUl  taie  away  thy  posterity 
[Heb.  exterminate  after  thee.  See  note  on 
ab.  xiv.  10.  Ahab  knew  well  the  meaning 
of  these  words.  He  had  before  him  the 
examples  of  Baasha  and  Zimri],  and  will 
cut  off  from  Ahab  [Heb.  to  Ahab]  him  that 
plsseth  against  the  wall,  and  Mm  that  Is 
■hut  up  and  left  in  Israel  [see  on  ch.  xiv.  10] . 

Ver.  22.  — ^And  will  make  thine  house  like 
the  house  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nehat 
[ef.  ch.  XV.  29],  and  Uke  the  house  of 
Baasha  the  son  of  AhJJah  [ch.  xvi.  3, 11], 

for  pa  used  in  the  sense  of  71^,  as  else- 
where] the  provocation  wherewith  thou 
hast  provoked  me  to  anger  [ch.  xiv.  9 ; 
xvi.  7,  &c.] ,  and  made  Israel  to  sin. 

Ver.  23. — And  of  Jezebel  [Heb.fo  Jezelel. 
LXX.  ry  'l£?ri/3t\.  But  we  cannot  be  sure 
that  she  also  received  a  message  of  doom 

from  Elijah,  as  ?  like  7K  after  verbs  of 
speaking  sometimes  has  the  meaning  of, 
emuieming.  Cf.  Gen.  xx.  13;  Psa.  iii.  3; 
Judg.  ix.  54 ;  2  Kings  xix.  32.  Moreover, 
if  the  denunciation  had  been  direct,  it 
would  have  run,  "  The  dogs  shall  eat  thee," 
&o.  See  also  ver.  27]  also  spake  the  Lord 
[Probably  at  the  same  time.  Certainly  by 
the  same  prophet  (2  Kings  ix.  36).  Elijah's 
words  to  Ahab  appear  to  be  only  partially 
recorded  (i6.,  ver.  26)],  saying,  The  dogs 
shall  eat  Jezebel  [see  on  ch.  xiv.  11]  by  the 

wall  [^n  same  word  as  pin,  is  used  of  the 
itrength  and  defences  of  a  town,  sc.  its  forti- 


fications, and  especially  of  the  ditch  or 
moat  before  them.  Cf.  2  Sam.  xx.  15.  The 
LXX.  render  by  wporcixiaiia  or  irepirEi^^oj, 
the  Vulgate  by  antemurale.  "  There  is  always 
in  Oriental  towns  a  space  outside  the  walls 
which  lies  uncultivated  and  which  is  natu- 
rally used  for  the  deposit  of  refuse  of  every 
kind.  Here  the  dogs  prowl,  and  the  kites 
and  vultures  find  many  a  feast "  (Bawlin- 
son). In  2  Sam.  xxi.  12  we  find  the  bodies 
of  Saul  and  Jonathan  impaled  in  the  open 
space  (A.  V.  "  street ")  of  Bethshean.  This 
heap  of  refuse — for  such  the  place  soon  be- 
comes— is  called  in  the  Arabian  Nights  "  the 
mounds  "  (Stanley)]  of  Jezreel.  [Eetribution 
should  overtake  her  near  the  scene  of  her 
latest  crime  (2  Kings  ix.  86).  By  this  the 
just  judgment  of  God  would  be  made  the 
more  conspicuous. 

Ver.  24.— Him  that  dleth  of  Ahab  In  the 
city  the  dogs  shall  eat ;  and  him  that  dieth 
In  the  fields  shall  the  fowls  of  the  air  eat. 
[See  on  oh.  xiv.  11 ;  xvi.  4.  Stanley,  for- 
getting that  the  phrase  is  almost  a  formula, 
thinks  that  "the  large  vultures  which  in 
Eastern  cUmes  are  always  wheeling  aloft 
under  the  dear  blue  sky  doubtless  suggested 
the  expression  to  the  prophet."  "  The  hori- 
zon was  darkened  with  the  visions  of 
vultures  glutting  on  the  carcases  of  the 
dead,  and  the  packs  of  savage  dogs  feeding 
on  their  remains,  or  lapping  up  their  blood. "] 

Ver.  25. — But  [Heb.  Only]  there  was  none 
Uke  unto  Ahab,  which  did  sell  himself  to 
work  wickedness  In  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
[as  in  ver.  20],  whom  Jezebel  his  wife 
stirred  up  [or  as  Marg.,  incited,  instigated 
and  urged"  to  sin.  Cf.  Deut.  ziii.  7  Heb. ; 
Job  xxxvi.  18], 

Ver.  26.— And  be  did  very  abominably  in 
following  Idols  [Heb.  to  go  after  the  idols. 
For  the  last  word  see  on  ch.  xv.  12] ,  accord- 
ing to  all  things  as  did  the  Amonteb.  [Heb. 
the  Amorite— the  word  is  always  singular — 
here  put  as  a  nomen  generate  for  the  seven 
nations  of  Canaan.  Cf.  Gen.  xv.  16;  2 
Kings  xxi.  11 ;  Bxek.  xvi.  3 ;  Amos  ii.  9, 10. 
Strictly  the  term  Amorite,  i.«.,  Highlander, 
is  in  contrast  with  Canaanite,  i.e.,  dwellers 
in  the  lowlands  ;  see  Num.  xiii.  29 ;  Josh. 
V.  1.  But  the  word  is  used  interchangeably 
with  Canaanite  (cf.  Deut.  i.  44  with  Num. 
xiv.  45,  and  Judg.  i.  10  with  Gen.  xiii.  8), 
Hittites  (Judg.  i.  10  with  Gen.  xxiii.  2,  3, 
10),  Hivites  (Gen.  xlviii.  22  with  Gen.  xxxiv. 
2),  and  Jebusites  (Josh.  x.  6,  6,  with  Josh. 
xvii.  63,  &c.)  The  ethnical  and  geographi- 
cal ideas  of  the  Jews  were  never  very  pre- 
cise. The  idolatries  of  the  seven  nations 
had  lingered,  as  we  might  expect,  amongst 
the  Zidonians,  whence  they  were  re-intro. 
duced  into  the  kingdom  of  Samaria — one 
fruit  of  disobedience  to  the  command  ol 


eia 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oB.  XXI.  1—29. 


Dent.  vii.  1 — 5,  Ac],  whom  the  lord  cast 
out  before  the  children  of  Israel  [Deut.  ii. 
81 ;  iii.  8,  ifcc] 

Yer.  27.— And  It  came  to  pass,  when 
Alial)  heard  those  [Heb.  these]  words  [vers. 
21 — 24,  and  others  not  recorded],  that  he 
rent  his  clothes  [of.  2  Sam.  ziii.  19 ;  Job  i. 
20 ;  ii.  12 ;  Jer.  zxzvi.  24,  Ac] ,  and  pat 
sackcloth  upon  his  flesh  [ch.  xx.  31;  2 
Kings  vi.  SO ;  Joel  i  8 ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  10, 
Heb.],  and  fasted,  and  lay  [i.e.,  slept]  In 
■ack^oth,  and  went  softly.  [All  these  were 
signs  of  contrition  and  humiliation  (ver.  29). 
The  "  going  softly  "—Josephus  says  he  went 
barefoot — is  especially  characteristio  of  the 
vabdned  and  chastened  mind.] 

Yer.  28.— And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
to  EUjali  the  Tlshhlte,  saying,  [It  is  not 
dear  that  this  mitigation  of  the  sentence 
was  announced  to  Ahab] , 

Ver.  29.— Seest  thou  how  Ahab  hnmbleth 
Umself  before  me  ?  [The  repentance,  if  it  was 
sot  piofonnd,  or  enduring,  was  neTertbeless, 


while  ii  lasted,  mnoere.  The  Searcher  of 
hearts  saw  in  it  a  genuine  self-abasement. 
And  "  He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed 
nor  quench  the  smoking  flax ;  "  Isa.  xlii.  S ; 
Matt.  zii.  20.]  Because  he  humbleth  him- 
self before  me,  I  will  not  bring  the  evil 
[There  is  a  manifest  reference  to  ver.  21, 
where  the  same  words  are  used]  In  his  days ; 
but  in  his  son's  days  [There  is  no  injustio* 
here — no  threat  of  punishment  against  th* 
innocent  instead  of  the  guilty — as  might  at 
first  sight  appear.  For  in  the  first  place, 
Ood  knew  well  what  the  son  would  be,  and 
in  the  second  place,  if  the  son  had  departed 
from  his  father's  sins  he  would  have  beee 
spared  (Ezek  xviii.  14  sqq.) ;  the  sentenoe 
would  have  been  revoked.  Judgment  wai 
deferred  to  give  the  house  of  Ahab  another 
chance.  'When  Ahab  lapsed  into  sin,  he 
suffered  in  his  own  person :  when  his  sons 
persisted  in  sin,  excision  befell  the  family] 
will  I  bring  the  ovtt  [var.  19]  vpoa  Us 
house  [vet.  22]. 


HOMILETIOS. 

_VerB.  1—15. — The  Martyrdom  of  NahotJi.  History  tefig  of  few  crimes  of  iti 
kind  more  flagitious,  more  cruel  and  cold-blooded  than  this.  Here  we  see  that 
epectacle  which  one  of  the  ancients  said  was  dear  to  the  gods — a  just  man  suffering 
shameful  wrongs  with  dignity  and  patience  :  we  see  a  man  because  of  his  fidelity 
to  God  and  His  law  judicially  done  to  death  by  the  representative  of  God,  by  the 
authority  appointed  to  execute  the  law. 

And  just  as  the  crime  has  few  parallels,  so  has  the  history  few  equals  in  point  of 
graphic  force  and  quiet  pathos.  It  is  like  one  of  those  sketches  by  the  hand  of  a 
master,  which  set  us  wondering  to  see  how  much  effect  can  he  produced,  and  how 
much  meaning  conveyed,  by  a  few  broad  lines  and  touches.  We  see  in  the  first  place 
the  king,  from  his  palace  lattices,  or  from  his  garden  slopes,  casting  hungry,  envious 
eyes  on  the  rich  vineyard  of  his  neighbour.  He  must  have  it  at  any  cost.  The 
residence  is  incomplete  without  it.  We  then  hear  Vn'm  making  overtures  to  the 
sturdy  owner.  There  is  a  smile  upon  his  face.  His  words  are  sinoother  than  butter. 
Nothing  could  be  fEiirer,  as  it  seems  at  first,  than  his  proposals.  Surely  Naboth 
win  do  well  to  sell  or  exchange  on  such  liberal  terms  as  these.  But  we  find  bim 
straightway  shrinking  in  pious  horror  fi:om  the  idea.  There  is  nothing  to  soften 
or  modify  his  blunt  and  abrupt  refusal.  He  cannot,  he  will  not,  do  this  thing  and 
Bin  against  God.  We  see  a  cloud  of  vexation  gather  on  the  king's  brow.  He 
is  foiled.  The  project  on  which  he  has  set  his  heart  he  cannot  realize.  Witb  • 
mortified  scowl,  a  look  in  which  suppressed  rage  and  bitter  disappointment  are 
equally  blended,  he  terminates  the  interview  and  hurries  to  his  palace,  while 
Naboth,  strong  in  the  consciousness  of  right,  but  not  without  misgivings  as  to  the 
issue,  goes  to  tell  his  story  to  his  wife  and  children  at  home. 

And  now  the  scene  changes.  We  are  admitted  to  a  room,  a  bedroom  of  the 
palace  of  Samaria.  We  see  on  an  ivory  couch,  in  an  ivory  house  (ch.  xxii.  29), 
or  in  a  chamber  ceiled  with  cedar,  and  painted  with  vermilion  (Jer.  xxii.  14), 
a  man  whose  soul  is  so  vexed  and  troubled  that  he  can  eat  no  bread,  tiliat  he  has 
a  word  for  no  one,  but  turns  his  face  suUenly  to  the  wall.  Can  this  be  the  king  of 
Israel?  can  this  be  Ahab,  whose  recent  victories  over  the  Syrians  have  rung 
through  many  lands  ?  It  is  Ahab  indeed.  The  great  conqueror  is  a  slave  te 
himself.    By  his  side  there  stands  his  dark,  malignant,  Phoenician  consort.    W« 


CH.  XXI.  1—29.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  513 

ar  Ms  pitiful,  almost  childish,  complaint,  that  he  cannot  have  the  vineyard  he 
much  covets,  and  we  straightway  see  a  look  of  something  like  scorn  upon  her 
e.    We  hear  her  almost  contemptuous  rejoinder,  "  Art  thou,  then,  so  helpless, 

utterly  without  resources,  as  to  lie  here  and  grieve  like  a  spoilt  child  ?  Is  it  for 
nothing  that  thou  art  a  king,  or  art  thou  king  in  name  only  ?  If  thou  art  baffled, 
I  am  not.  Arise,  and  eat  bread.  Banish  dull  care  and  give  thyself  up  to  feasting. 
I  will  give  thee  the  vineyard  of  this  wretched  peasant." 

The  next  tableau  introduces  us  to  another  chamber  of  this  same  royal  residence. 
The  king  may  keep  his  bed  if  he  will,  but  the  queen  is  up  and  doing.  The  scribes 
are  now  writing  at  her  command.  She  it  is  who  dictates  the  words,  who  stamps 
the  writings  with  the  king's- seal.  The  scribe's  hand  may  well  tremble  as  he  pens 
the  infamous  decree,  for  the  letter  consigns  Naboth  to  death ;  but  she  knows  no 
fear,  has  no  scruples.  The  letters  are  despatched,  the  royal  posts  carry  their 
sealed  orders  to  Jezreel,  and  the  murderess  sits  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rises 
up  to  play. 

Again  the  scene  changes.  We  find  ourselves  in  a  village  convocation.  The 
elders  of  Jezreel,  the  officers  of  the  royal  borough,  have  proclaimed  a  fast  Their 
town  has  incurred  the  wrath  of  God,  and  they  must  find  out  and  expiate  the  sin. 
Naboth  is  there.  He  fears  this  meeting  bodes  him  no  good,  but  he  is  compelled  to 
attend.  He  finds  himself,  to  his  great  surprise,  set  "  at  the  head  of  the  people;" 
But  who  shall  picture  the  astonishment  and  pain  in  this  man's  face,  when  thertf 
rise  up  in  that  assembly,  two  miserable  varlets  who  swear  that  he,  Naboth,  the 
humble  servant  of  the  Lord,  the  man  who  has  honestly  striven  to  keep  the  law, 
even  against  his  king,  has  committed  a  horrible  breach  of  law,  has  blasphemed 
God  and  the  anointed  of  God.  He  thinks,  perchance,  at  the  first,  that  the  charge 
is  BO  utterly  reckless  and  improbable,  that  none  of  these  his  neighbours,  who  know 
him  so  well,  and  have  known  him  firom  his  youth  up,  will  entertain  it  for  a 
moment.  But  he  is  speedily  undeceived.  He  finds  that  he  has  not  a  chance  with 
them,  that  all  steel  their  faces  and  hearts  against  him.  He  perceives  that  there  is 
a  conspiracy  against  him.  In  vain  he  protests  his  innocence ;  in  vain  he  appeals 
to  his  blameless  life.  His  cries  and  those  of  his  wife  and  children  are  alike 
unheeded.    In  a  trice  he  is  condemned  to  die  the  death  of  the  blasphemer. 

And  now  we  find  ourselves  hurried  along  by  a  tumultuous  crowd.  We  pass 
through  the  city  gate,  we  reach  the  open  space  outside  the  walls.  So  far,  Naboth 
has  hardly  realized  that  they  are  in  earnest,  so  suddenly  has  the  thing  come  upon 
him.  Surely  it  is  some  grim  jest  that  his  neighbours  play  upon  him.  It  can- 
not be  that  he  is  to  die,  to  look  for  the  last  time  on  the  faces  of  those  he  loves, 
on  his  native  fields,  on  the  blessed  light  of  the  sun.  But  if  he  has  any  lingering 
hopes  of  deliverance  they  are  rapidly  dispelled.  He  sees  them  making  prepa- 
rations for  his  execution.  They  are  going  to  stone  him  on  the  spot.  "  O  God  in 
heaven  I "  he  thinks,  "  is  it  for  this  I  have  kept  Thy  law  ?  Is  this  agony  and  death 
the  reward  of  mine  integrity  ?  Must  I  then  die,  when  life  is  so  sweet  1  Is  there  no 
power  to  rescue  me  out  of  the  jaws  of  the  lion  ?  Has  God  forgotten  me  ?  or  will 
He  look  on  it  and  require  it?"  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  22.)  It  is  true  the  history  says 
nothing  of  any  such  thoughts,  of  any  prayers,  appeals,  entreaties,  threatenings ; 
but  the  history,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  but  an  outline,  and  that  outline  ft  is 
left  for  us  to  fill  up.  And  we  cannot  doubt  that  Naboth  had  some  such  thoughts 
as  these.  But  whatever  they  were,  they  were  speedily  brought  to  a  close.  "  Tlie 
king's  business  required  haste."  Time  for  reflection  would  mean  time  for  repent- 
ance. The  witnesses  speedily  divest  themselves  of  their  dbhas;  they  lay  them 
down  at  the  feet  of  the  elders ;  they  take  up  stones  and  rush  upon  him.  At  the 
first  blow  he  quivers  fi-om  head  to  foot  with  a  great  throb  of  pain,  but  blow  follows 
fast  upon  blow ;  he  sinks  senseless ;  the  blood  streams  from  his  wounds ;  the  dear 
life  is  crushed  out  of  him,  and  Naboth's  name  and  the  names  of  his  sous  are 
added  to  those  on  the  glory  roU  of  the  noble  army  of  martyrs. 

But  it  is  now  for  us  to  ask  what  led  to  this  shameful  deed.  There  were  five 
parties  to  this  tragedy — Naboth,  the  king,  the  queen,  the  elders,  the  witnesses.  Let 
US  see  how  each  of  these  contributed,  though  in  veiy  different  ways,  to  this 

1  xmas.  3  ^ 


514  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xxi.  1—29. 

diabolical  result.    We  shall  thus  see  how  Naboth,  who  was  murdered  in  the  name 
of  law  and  religion,  was  a  martyr  to  law  and  religion.     And  let  us  consider — 

1.  The  piety  of  Naboth.  For  it  was  his  religion  brought  this  doom  upon  his 
liead.  He  had  but  to  comply  with  the  request  of  the  king — and  what  loyal 
subject  would  not  wish  to  gratify  the  Lord's  anointed? — and  all  would  ha-ve  gone 
well.  So  far  from  being  stoned,  he  would  have  been  honoured  and  rewarded. 
And  that  request  seemed  so  reasonable.  There  was  no  attempt  at  robbery  or 
confiscation.  The  king  offered  an  ample  equivalent ;  a  better  vineyard  than  it,  or 
bars  of  silver  which  could  buy  a  better.  "Was  he  not  perverse  and  wrong-headed  to 
let  a  scruple  stand  in  the  way  ?  We  should  not  have  done  so.  No ;  but  is  not  that 
precisely  because  we  have  not  the  steadfast  piety  of  Naboth?  There  is  no  reason 
to  think  that  he  was  not  loyal.  Doubtless  he  would  have  been  glad  to  oblige  his 
king.  But  there  were  two  considerations  stood  in  the  way.  First,  his  duty  to 
God ;  secondly,  his  duty  to  his  forefathers  and  to  his  posterity.  His  duty  to  God. 
For  God's  law  said,  "  The  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  ever"  (Levit.  xxv.  23) ;  it  laid 
down  that  every  child  of  Israel  should  "  cleave  to  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  his 
fathers"  (Num.  xxxvi.  7).  And  Naboth  knew  this,  and  Ahab  knew  it.  But  to 
the  latter  the  law  was  a  dead  letter;  to  the  former  it  was  a  living  reality.  To  him 
there  was  no  God  but  one,  no  will  to  be  considered  in  comparison  with  His.  If 
Naboth  could  but  have  consented  to  do  as  others  had  done  (ch.  xvi.  24),  he  would 
have  kept  his  Hfe.  But  he  could  not.  He  "  did  not  fear  loss,  but  sin."  It  was  a 
crime  against  Jehovah,  and  he  would  not  consent.  Moreover  it  was — though 
perhaps  this  thought  had  comparatively  little  influence  with  him — a  wrong  to  his 
ancestors  and  to  his  posterity.  For  generations  past,  ever  since  it  was  allotted  to 
his  first  father,  had  that  vineyard  been  in  his  family.  It  had  been  transmitted 
through  a  long  line  to  him.  It  was  his  duty  to  transmit  it  intact  to  those  who 
came  after  him,  and  he  would  do  it.  It  was  for  these  reasons — sentimental 
reasons  some  would  call  them — that  Naboth  died,  because  of  his  beUef  in  a  living 
God,  and  because  he  kept  His  law,  and  especially  the  first  and  fifth  commandments 
of  the  Decalogue. 

2.  The  impiety  of  Ahab.  Just  as  the  action  of  Naboth  arose  out  of  his  behe:^  bo 
did  that  of  Ahab  spring  out  of  his  practical  unbelief — an  apt  illustration  of  the  close 
connexion  between  our  faith  and  our  practice.  This  crime  had  its  beginning,  its 
fona  et  origo,  in  idolatry.  It  was  because  Ahab  worshipped  gods  many  and  lords 
many  that  his  allegiance  to  the  Divine  law  was  shaken.  The  law  of  Baal,  he 
argued,  did  not  forbid  the  alienation  of  land — why  should  the  law  of  Jehovah  ? 
The  root  of  this  sin,  therefore,  like  the  root  of  all  sin,  was  unbelief.  And  its  blossom 
was  a  direct  violation  of  the  Decalogue.  Out  of  the  breach  of  the  first  command- 
ment sprang  violations  of  the  sixth,  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth.  Just  as  Naboth,  the 
beUever  in  the  one  true  God,  stands  out  conspicuously  as  a  keeper  of  the  ten  words, 
80  do  all  the  other  parties  in  the  tragedy  stand  convicted  of  violating  them.  It  was 
primarily  the  tenth  commandment  that  Ahab  set  at  nought.  He  had  no  right  to 
set  his  heart  upon  that  vineyard,  which  the  great  King  had  given  to  another.  And 
a  breach  of  law  was  the  less  excusable  in  his  case,  insonauch  as  he  was  the  guardian 
of  law  and  was  acquainted  with  its  provisions  (Deut.  xvii.  18).  Of  all  men,  he 
should  have  been  the  last  to  defy  or  disregard  it.  But  it  is  only  when  we  consider  that 
when  his  subject,  to  whom  he  should  have  been  an  example,  set  him  an  example, 
and  refused  to  participate  in  his  sin,  that  then,  so  far  from  repenting  and  praying 
that  the  thought  of  his  heart  might  be  forgiven  him,  he  mourns  and  repines  that  he 
was  not  allowed  to  consummate  it — it  is  only  when  we  consider  this  that  we  realize 
its  true  character.  His  was  a  sin  against  fight  and  knowledge ;  a  sin  against  his 
helper  and  benefactor  (ch.  xx.  13,  28)  ;  a  sin  in  spite  of  man&old  warnings ;  a  sin 
which  led  to  blacker  sin  still.  He  coveted  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house.  That 
"  love  of  money  "  was  a  root  of  false  witness,  of  foul  murder.  And  in  this  estimate 
of  Ahab's  sin  it  is  assumed  that  he  neither  knew  nor  sanctioned  Jezebel's  designs. 
If  he  gave  her  the  royal  seal  with  the  least  idea  of  the  malignant  purpose  to  which 
she  would  apply  it,  he  was  virtually  an  accessory  before  the  fact,  and  so  was  guilty 
of  murder  and  robbery.    And  even  if  he  was  ignorant  of  her  intentions,  still  the 


«H.  XXI.  1—29.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINQ8.  fill 

readiness  with  which  he  reaped  the  fruits  of  her  crime  makes  him  a  partaker  in  her 
fiin.  It  is  a  common  saying  that  the  "receiver  is  as  bad  as  the  thief."  And  he 
must  have  known  that  "  Jezebel  could  not  give  this  vineyard  with  dry  hands." 

8.  The  depramty  of  Jezebel.  Great  as  Ahab's  guUt  was,  it  was  altogether 
eclipsed  by  that  of  his  wife.  At  her  door  lies  the  real  sin  of  the  murder.  The 
hands  that  accomplished  it  were  not  so  guilty  as  the  heart  that  suggested  it  and  the 
mind  that  planned- it.  Ahab  broke  the  tenth,  Jezebel  the  sixth,  eighth,  ninth,  and 
tenth  commandments.  Oovetousness,  false  witness,  murder,  confiscation,  she 
stands  convicted  of  them  all.  But  what  lends  its  most  hideous  feature  to  her  sin 
is  the  consideration  that  she,  the  sworn  foe  of  the  law  of  Jehovah,  availed  herself  of 
its  forms  to  compass  Nahoth's  death.  Was  ever  such  black-hearted  ingenuity  as 
hers  ?  We  can  fancy  her  laughing  in  her  sleeve  at  the  crafty  use  she  made  of  the 
hated  system  of  the  Jews,  We  can  see  her  shaking  her  finger  at  Naboth  and  say- 
ing "  Simple  fool  I  thou  hast  stood  out  for  the  law ;  thou  shalt  have  a  surfeit  of  it  this 
time."  It  is  possible  that  she  rejoiced  at  the  base  part  to  which  she  commits  the 
elders  of  Jezreel,  If  they  will  cling  to  their  austere  and  gloomy  creed,  she  will 
make  them  carry  out  its  provisions.  To  this  shamefiil  murderess  it  added  zest  to 
her  sin  that  she  scored  a  triumph  against  the  followers  and  the  law  of  the  God  of 
Israel.  We  must  also  observe  the  evident  satisfaction,  the  malicious  triumph,  with 
which  she  hears  of  Nahoth's  death.  So  far  from  feeling  the  least  compunction,  she 
hurries  with  the  good  news  to  her  husband.  Her  part,  so  far  as  we  know,  is 
absolutely  without  a  parallel  of  all  the  daughters  of  our  first  mother.  What  name  is 
there  so  deservedly  infamous  as  hers  ? 

4.  The  corruption  of  the  elders.  We  may  readily  acquit  them  of  liking  the  task 
entailed  upon  them.  They  could  not  embark  on  that  course  of  crime  without 
many  qnahns  of  conscience  and  secret  self-upbraidings.  But  the  name  of  Jezebel 
inspired  so  much  terror  that  they  dared  not  resist  her  wUl.  Their  sin  was,  first, 
that  they  feared  man  more  than  God.  It  was  unbelief  at  bottom ;  they  had  more 
faith  in  the  finger  of  the  queen  than  in  the  arm  of  the  Almighty.  They  argued,  as 
the  Turkish  peasant  does,  that  the  queen  was  near  and  God  was  a  long  way  off. 
It  was,  secondly,  that  they  abused  their  office.  In  defiance  of  law  (Bxod.  xxui.  2, 
6;  Deut.  xvi.  19),  they  wrested  judgment  and  condemned  the  innocent  (Deut.  xxvii. 
19,  25),  and  so  they  share  with  Jezebel  the  guilt  of  the  murder.  It  is  idle  to  plead 
the  constraint  put  upon  them,  to  say  that  they  would  have  died  had  they  resisted 
her ;  they  should  have  died  rather  than  slay  the  innocent.  But  for  their  com- 
plaisance, the  queen  might  have  been  baffled.  One  might  reasonably  expect  elders 
— the  "judges  and  officers  "  of  the  land  (Deut.  xvi.  18)— to  answer,  "  We  ought  to 
obey  God  rather  than  man."  History  tells  of  many  judges  who  have  withstood 
the  corrupt  commands  of  their  sovereign.  During  the  Mohammedan  rule  in  Spain 
one  of  the  caliphs  took  forcible  possession  of  a  field  belonging  to  one  of  his  subjects. 
This  man,  as  a  forlorn  hope,  stated  his  grievance  before  the  kadi,  a  man  renowned 
for  his  integrity,  and  the  kadi  promised  to  bring  his  case  before  the  king.  Load- 
ing his  mule  with  a  sack  of  earth  which  he  had  taken  from  the  stolen  field,  he 
•strode  into  the  presence  of  the  prince,  and  asked  him  to  be  so  good  as  to  lift  the 
sack  of  earth  to  his  shoulders.  The  caUph  tried  to  comply  with  his  request,  but 
the  burden  proved  too  heavy  for  him;  he  could  not  move,  still  less  carry,  it. 
"Wretched  man  I"  cried  the  judge,  "  see  what  thou  hast  done.  Thou  canst  not  carry 
one  mule's  burden  of  the  earth  of  this  field  of  which  thou  hast  deprived  thy  subject. 
How,  then,  canst  thou  hope  to  sustain  the  whole  field  on  thy  shoulders  inthe  dread- 
ful day  of  judgment  ?  "  The  appeal  was  successful ;  the  prince  made  immediate 
restitution  and  rewarded  the  judge.  But  nothing  of  this  kind  did  the  elders  of 
Jezreel.  They  only  feared  for  theur  skms.  They  argued  that  one  or  the  other 
must  die,  and  if  so  it  must  be  Naboth.  And  so  he  died,  and  they  bore  the  stain  of 
blood  upon  their  souls.  .,.,.• 

6.  The  perjwry  of  the  witnesses.  It  is  hardly  correct  to  describe  their  sm  aa 
perjury.  It  was  much  more  than  that.  It  was  actual  murder  also.  As  witnesses, 
they  had  to  cast  the  first  stone— to  take  the  prmcipal  part  in  the  execution.  Even 
Without  this  they  were   guilty  of  murder,  for  it  was  upon  their  testimony  that 


RIO  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xxi.  1—29. 

Naboth  was  condemned  to  die.  They  ehare  with  the  elders,  consequently,  the  guilt 
of  violating  the  sixth  and  ninth  commandments.  But  they  were  "  sons  of  Belial  " 
to  begin  with.  They  were  not  ministers  of  God ;  still  less  were  they  the  "  Lord's 
anointed."  And  they  were  but  instruments  in  the  hand  of  others.  The  elders  were 
the  hand";  the  queen  was  the  head. 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  Naboth's  death  was  a  tme  martyrdom.  He  died  a  victim  to- 
his  faith  in  God  and  his  obedience  to  law.  He  was  a  witness  (iiapTvi;),  consequently, 
for  God  no  less  than  Elijah  or  Elisha.  Like  EUjah,  he  was  a  public  vindicator  of 
the  law,  and  he  sealed  his  witness  with  his  blood.  He  died  because  he  would  not 
deny  it ;  because  others,  its  guardians  and  executors,  violated  and  abused  it. 

But  if  any  deny  his  right  to  be  enrolled  in  the  army  of  martyrs,  it  only  needs  to 
compare  his  end  with  that  of  the  protomartyr  Stephen,  and  indeed  with  that  of  our 
blessed  Lord.  The  analogy  could  not  well  be  closer.  1.  The  same  passions  and 
influences  were  at  work  in  each  case.  It  was  unbelief  and  pride  and  covetousness 
occasioned  the  death  of  Naboth.  These  were  the  forces  arrayed  against  our  Lord 
and  against  Stephen.  Was  there  a  coveted  vineyard  in  one  case  ?  so  there  was  in 
the  other  (Luke  xx.  14, 15).  2.  The  tribunals  were  equally  corrupt.  The  Sanhe- 
drim was  the  counterpart  of  the  elders ;  the  council  of  Jerusalem  of  that  of  Jezreel 
(Matt.  xxvi.  59  ;  Acts  vi.  12).  8.  The  princes  of  this  world  occasioned  the  death  of 
Naboth ;  the  princes  of  this  world  took  counsel  against  the  Christ  (Acts  iv.  26,  27), 
and  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory  (1  Cor.  ii.  8).  4.  The  charge  was  the  same  in  every 
case,  viz.,  blasphemy  (Matt.  xxvL  65 ;  Acts  vi.  13).  The  variation  is  extremely 
slight:  "God  and  the  king"  in  one  case;  "against  Moses  and  God"  in  another 
(Acts  vi.  11).  6.  The  charge  was  made  in  each  instance  by  men  who  were  con- 
spicuously law-breakers  (John  xvii.  19  ;  Acts  viL  68),  and  it  was  made  in  the  name 
of  law  (John  xix.  7 ;  Acts.  vi.  14).  6.  The  means  used  to  compass  the  death  wer* 
alike  in  every  case,  viz.,  false  witness  (Matt.  xxvL  69,  60;  Acts  vi.  11, 13).  7. 
Each  of  these  three  martyrs  suffered  without  the  gate  (Acts  vii.  58  :  Heb.  xiii.  12). 
Like  Naboth,  Stephen  was  stoned  ;  like  Naboth,  our  Lord  would  have  been  stoned 
if  the  Jews  had  had  the  power  (John  xviiL  81),  and  if  the  counsel  of  God  had  not 
willed  otherwise  (Acts  iv.  28).  8.  There  is  indeed  one  difference,  and  that  is  sug- 
gestive. The  martyrs  of  our  religion  prayed  for  their'murderers  (Lukexxiii.  84; 
Acts  vii.  60) ;  the  martyrs  of  Judaism  comd  only  cry,  "  The  Lord  look  on  it  and 
require  it "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  22).  The  blood  of  the  eoveuant  speaks  better  things 
than  the  blood  of  Naboth. 

Vers.  17—24. — Divine  BetaUation.  We  have  just  seen  Naboth  martyred 
because  of  his  fidelity  to  law ;  we  have  seen  him  murdered  by  men  who  in  the 
name  of  law  violated  all  the  laws  of  God  and  man. 

Now  the  dispensation  under  which  these  men  lived  promised  a  present  recom- 
pense, a  temporal  reward,  to  obedience,  and  it  denounced  temporal  punishment 
against"  every  transgression  and  disobedience."  We  may  imagine,  consequently, 
how  this  tragedy  would  strike  the  men  of  that  age.  They  would  see  in  it  a  direct 
failure  of  justice.  They  would  ask  whether  there  was  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the 
earth.  They  would  look,  and  especially  the  God-fearing  amongst  them,  in  utter 
perplexity  and  distress  on  this  conspicuous  instance  of  the  triumph  of  force  and 
wrong.  "  What  is  the  Almighty,"  they  would  be  tempted  to  ask,"  that  we  should 
serve  him  ?  and  what  profit  should  we  have  if  we  pray  unto  him  ?  "  (Job  xxi.  15.> 
They  would  be  tempted  to  think  that  "  in  keeping  of  his  commandments  there 
was  no  reward ;  yes,  even  tempted  to  say  in  tibeir  hearts,  "  There  is  no  God " 
(Psa.  liii.  1). 

It  would  have  been  strange,  therefore,  if  such  a  red-handed,  cold-blooded  murder 
had  passed  unnoticed  and  imavenged  ;  if  the  dogs  had  been  left  to  feast  on  the 
remains  of  Naboth,  and  Ahab  had  been  suffered  to  enter  on  his  vineyard  without 
protest.  But  this  was  not  to  be.  The  men  of  Jezreel  had  not  seen  the  last  act  in 
the  tragedy.  They  must  learn  that  "  no  reckoning  is  brought  in  the  midst  of  the 
meal ;  the  end  pays  for  all ; "  they  must  be  taught  to  count  no  man  happy  before 
his  death.    They  must  be  reminded  that  there  is  a  prophet  in  Israel,  and  a  God  ot 


«H.  XXL  1—29.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  C17 

Israel  who  will  by  no  means  dear  the  guilty.  And  so  Elijah,  the  great  restorer  of 
the  law,  stands  forth  to  avenge  the  death  of  Naboth,  the  law-keeper,  at  the  hands 
of  law-brealcers. 

"  Arise,  take  possession  of  the  vineyard  of  Naboth,  which  he  refused  to  give  fheA 
for  money,  for  Naboth  is  not  aJive,  but  dead."  Did  the  king  stop  to  ask  how  this 
death  had  been  brought  about  ?  Did  he  know  the  shameful  crime  that  had  been 
committed  in  his  name,  and  under  his  palace  walls  ?  He  must  have  known  some- 
thing of  it,  if  not  all.  Even  if  he  thought  it  prudent  to  ask  no  questions,  still  he 
would  remember  the  significant  promise  of  ver.  7 ;  he  would  have  some  suspicions 
of  the  purpose  for  which  the  royal  seal  was  required ;  and  it  would  be  clear  to  him, 
«ven  if  he  did  not  know  the  exact  circumstances,  that  somehow  Jezebel  had  com- 
passed Naboth's  death.  It  was  clear  to  him  that  this  vineyard  was  bought  at  the 
price  of  blood. 

But  he  vrill  not  let  such  considerationB  as  these  hinder  his  enjoyment  of  it.  All 
lie  thinks  of  or  cares  for  is  this,  that  the  vineyard  is  his  and  he  can  enter  upon  it 
at  once.  He  will  enter  upon  it  at  once.  His  chariot  shall  bear  him  to  the  spot. 
He  will  view  his  new  property  that  day ;  he  will  begin  his  garden  of  herbs  forth wiUi. 

The  citizens  of  Jezreel,  the  "  elders,"  and  "  children  of  Belial "  amongst  them, 
«ee  the  royal  chariot  crossing  the  plain,  breasting  the  hill,  entering  the  city.  They 
know  full  well  what  is  its  destination.  There  is  hardly  a  child  in  the  city  bii 
guesses  the  king's  errand.  It  causes  them  no  surprise  when  the  chariot  and  ita 
escort  pass  on  to  the  vineyard  of  Naboth.  But  they  shall  learn,  and  through  them 
all  Israel  shall  learn,  that  there  is  a  just  God  in  heaven,  and  that  even  the  kin^g 
is  responsible  to  a  Higher  Power;  and  they  shall  know  that  God  Himself  if 
against  the  evildoer,  and  shall  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works  (Prov. 
xxiv.  12  ;  Matt.  xvi.  27  ;  2  Tun.  iv.  14). 

For  who  is  this  that  strides  up  to  the  king  as  he  stands  in  the  coveted  vineyard, 
»nd  shapes  his  projects  concerning  it  ?  It  is  a  prophet — the  dress  proves  that ; 
a  glance  shows  that  it  is  the  dreaded,  mysterious  prophet  Elijah.  "  Behold  Elijah  " 
(ch.  xviii.  8, 11)  is  on  their  lips.  Whence  has  he  come  ?  Since  the  day  of  Carmel 
he  has  been  hidden  from  their  view.  They  had  often  wondered  why  he  had  so 
suddenly  disappeared ;  whether  be  was  still  alive  ;  whether  the  Spirit  had  cast 
fiJTti  upon  some  mountain  or  into  some  valley  (2  Kings  ii.  16) ;  whether  he  was 
hiding  among  foreigners  as  he  had  done  before.  And  now  he  is  amongst  them  again. 
And  Jehu  and  Bidkar  at  least  (2  Kings  ix.  25),  and  probably  others  with  them, 
presently  understand  the  reason  of  his  sudden  reappearance.  "  Hast  thou  killed," 
be  thunders  forth,  "  and  also  taken  possession  ?  "  They  see  the  guilty  look  on  Ahab's 
face  ;  they  note  his  ashy  paleness  ;  they  observe  how  he  trembles  helplessly  from 
head  to  foot.  Then  they  hear  the  terrible  doom— and  their  ears  tingle,  as  Elijah'a 
impassioned  words  fall  upon  them—"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  In  the  place  whera 
dogs  licked  the  blood  of  Jezebel  shall  dogshck  thy  blood,  even  thine."  They  hear, 
and  Ahab  hears,  that  for  hiin  a  death  as  cruel  and  shameful  as  Naboth's  is  re- 
served ;  that,  king  though  he  is,  he  shall  come  to  the  dogs  at  the  last.  But  more  : 
they  presently  learn  that  for  his  children,  born  in  the  purple  and  deUcately 
murtured,  there  remains  a  reckoning ;  that  their  blood  must  be  shed,  their  bodies 
torn  of  beasts,  like  those  of  Naboth's  sons.  Nor  shall  proud  Jezebel,  the  prime 
mover  in  this  murder,  escape.  In  the  open  space  before  the  city  wall  the  dogs 
which  devoured  the  flesh  of  Naboth  shall  feast  upon  her  dead  body.  All  this  was 
Bpoken  in  the  broad  day,  before  king  and  retinue,  by  a  prophet  whose  words  had 
never  fallen  to  the  ground.  The  king  is  fotmd  out ;  he  is  taken  red-handed  m  the 
Uossoms  of  his  sm.  Yesterday  the  ci-ime,  to-day  the  sentence.  We  may  compare 
the  feelings  of  that  group  standing  in  the  vineyard  with  those  of  that  surgmg  crowd 
Who  saw  Eobespierre  standing  under  the  guiUotme  to  which  he  had  consigned  so 
many  hundreds  of  Frenchmen.  "Aye,  Eobespierre,  there  is  a  God.  We  may 
Smamne  how  they  stood  for  a  whUe  transfixed  to  the  spot ;  how,  when  Elijah  had 
hurled  hifl  words  at  the  king,  he  strode  away  and  left  them  to  rankle  m  his  mind. 
But  the  thing  was  not  done  in  a  corner,  and  it  could  not  be  kept  secret.  As  tha 
«hariot  returns  to  Samaria  the  townsman  m  the  street,  the  peasant  m  the  held, 


518  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xxi.  1— 2ft 

i— ^^■.^■^■^^^^■™^™^^^-^^— ^^^^^^^^^^^-^.^^^^^— ^-^— ^^^^^^— ^^™"— ^™""*— ■••^■^■-^— ^— -^-^— ^^-^— * 

perceive  that  eomething  untoward  has  happened.  The  news  of  Elijah's  reappear- 
ance spreads  like  wildfire ;  his  scathing  words  are  passed  from  Up  to  lip ;  every 
town  and  hamlet  soon  knows  that  Naboth  is  avenged ;  it  knows  that  with  what 
measure  king  and  queen  meted  to  him  it  shall  be  measured  to  them  again. 

The  lessons  which  this  public  manifestation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God 
had  for  the  men  of  that  age,  and  some  of  which  it  has  still,  may  be  briefly  stated  in 
the  woids  of  Scripture.     Among  them  are  these : 

1.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good" 
(Prov.  XV.  8)  ;  God  doth  know,  and  there  is  knowledge  in  the  Most  High 
(Psa.  Ixxiii.  H ;  cf.  Psa.  xi.  4). 

2.  "  Verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous ;  verily  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth 
in  the  earth"  (Psa.  Iviii.  11).  "  Thou  beholdest  mischief  and  spite,  to  requite  it 
with  thy  hand  "  (Psa.  x.  14). 

8.  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out "  (Num.  xxxii.  23). 

4.  "  Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished  "  (Prov. 
xi.21). 

6.  "  I  will  come  near  to  you  in  judgment,  and  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against 
the  sorcerers,  and  against  the  adulterers,  and  against  false  swearers,  and  against 
those  that  oppress  the  hireling  in  his  wages,  the  widow  and  the  fatherless,  and 
that  turn  aside  the  stranger  from  his  right,  and  fear  not  me,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Mai. 
iii  6). 

6.  "  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  "  (Gen.  ix.  6). 

7.  "  Life  for  hfe,  eye  for  eye,  tooth,  for  tooth,  hand  or  hand,  foot  for  foot,  burn- 
ing for  burning,  wound  for  wound,  stripe  for  stripe  "  (Exod.  xxi  23—26).  "  God 
loves  to  ptmish  by  retaliation  "  (Hall). 

Vers.  28,  29.—Divime  Belentings. — If  we  were  to  seek  the  Scriptures  through  for 
a  proof  that  God's  "  property  is  always  to  have  mercy,"  and  that  judgment  is  His 
strange  work,  where  should  we  find  a  more  striking  and  eminent  one  than  in  this 
relenting  towards  Ahab  ?    Consider — 

1.  Ahab's  sin.  In  this  respect  "  there  was  none  like  him."  He  "sold  himself  to 
work  vyickedness."  It  was  not  because  of  Naboth's  murder  alone  that  the  sen- 
tence of  vers.  19 — 22  was  pronounced  against  him;  it  was  for  the  varied  and 
accumulated  sins  of  a  reign  of  twenty  years.    Among  these  were — 

•1.  The  sin  of  schism.  He  continued  the  calf-worship  (ch.  xvi.  31).  He  kept 
"  the  statutes  of  Omri."  Despite  the  warnings  of  prophets  and  of  history,  he 
maintained  the  shrines,  sacrifices,  priests,  of  Bethel  and  Dan. 

2.  The  sin  of  his  marriage.  "  Was  it  a  light  thing  to  walk  in  the  way  of  Jero- 
boam that  he  must  take  to  wife  Jezebel "  (ch.  xv.  81  Heb.),  in  direct  violation  of 
the  law  (Dent.  vii.  1 — 8),  in  disregard  of  the  example  of  Solomon  ?  To  place  such 
a  woman,  daughter  of  such  a  house,  on  the  throne  of  Israel  was  to  insult  the  true 
religion,  and  to  court  its  overthrow. 

8.  The  sin  of  idolatry.  (Ch.  xvi.  32.)  Samaria  had  its  house  of  Baal,  its  altar 
for  Baal.     He  did  very  abominably  in  following  idols  (ch.  xxL  26). 

4.  The  sin  of  imptmty.  This  was  involved,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  in 
the  idolatry  of  that  age.  "Ahab  made  an  Asberah"  (ch.  xvi.  32).  Indeed,  it  is 
to  the  impurities  of  Canaanitish  worship  that  the  words  just  cited  (ver.  26)  refer. 
The  abominations  of  the  Amorites  are  not  to  be  named  amongst  Christians. 

6.  The  sin  of  persecuting  the  prophets.  It  is  very  possible  that  Ahab  himself 
was  no  persecutor,  but  Jezebel  was,  and  he  should  have  restrained  her  (1  Sam.  iii. 
13).  He  was  directly  responsible  for  her  deeds.  She  owed  her  power,  place,  and 
influence  to  him. 

6.  The  sin  of  releasing  the  persecutor  of  God's  people.  The  pardon  and  favour 
he  accorded  to  Ben-hadad  are  mentioned  as  a  part  of  the  provocation  wherewith  he 
provoked  the  Lord  (ch.  xx.  42).  It  sprang  out  of  his  forgetting  God.  He  ignored 
altogether  God's  will  and  pleasure  in  the  matter.     See  p.  492. 

7.  Tlie  sin  of  slaying  Naboth  and  his  sons.  For  with  this  crime  Ahab  is  charged. 
"  Hast  thou  killed  ?  "    "I  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of  Naboth  .  .  .  and  I  will 


OH.  XXI.  1—29.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  519 


requite  thee  "  (2  Kings  ix.  26).    Perhaps  he  flattered  himself  that  that  sin  lay  it 
Jezebel's  door.     If  so,  he  is  soon  undeceived. 
Such  was  Ahab's  sevenfold  sin.     Consider — 

II.  Its  aggravations.    It  enhanced  his  guilt  that — 

1.  He  was  the  Lord's  anointed.  He  was  the  head  of  the  Jewish  Church.  Fidei 
Defensor — this  was  the  liighest  function  of  a  true  king  of  Israel.  His  very- 
position  reminded  him  of  the  gracious  and  marvellous  history  of  his  fathers.  To 
him  it  was  granted  to  be  the  representative  of  heaven  to  the  chosen  people.  HoW 
great  the  sin  when  the  champion  of  the  faith  became  its  oppressor,  when  the 
"  nursing  father"  of  the  Church  depraved  and  prostituted  it. 

2.  He  had  witnessed  miracles.  The  drought,  the  fire,  the  rain,  aU  these 
signs  and  tokens  had  been  wrought  in  his  presence.  Unto  him  they  were  showed 
that  he  might  know  that  the  Lord  He  was  God  (Deut.  iv.  35,  36 ;  of.  1  Kings  ivui. 
39).    Did  ever  king  hear  the  voice  of  God  as  he  had  done  ? 

3.  He  had  been  miraculously  helped  and  delivered.  Cf.  2  Ohron.  xxvi.  15.  If 
he  gave  no  heed  to  the  signs,  he  should  have  been  moved  by  the  victories  God  had 
granted  him.  These  were  plain  proofs  tliat  the  Lord  alone  was  God  (oh.  xx.  18,  28). 

But  neither  plagues,  nor  signs,  nor  victories  moved  that  rebellious  heart.  He  is 
scarce  home  &om  his  Syrian  compaigns,  to  enjoy  the  fruit  of  his  success,  than  he 
lends  himself  to  fresh  sin,  to  murder  and  oppression.  He,  the  executor  and 
guardian  of  law,  connives  at  the  murder  of  a  law-abiding  subject.  Let  na  now 
consider — 

III.  His  bepentanoe.  Now  that  he  is  found  out  and  denounced,  like  Felix,  he 
trembles.  As  Elijah  stands  over  him,  and  announces  the  doom  of  his  house,  ha 
sees  a  horrible  vision  of  blood  and  slaughter.  The  garden  of  herbs  he  has  pictured 
dies  away  from  his  view.  He  sees  in  its  stead  his  own  mangled  body  cast  into  the 
plot  of  ground  where  he  was  then  standing.  He  tees  his  hands,  his  feet,  his  face 
gnawed  by  the  curs  of  the  adjoining  city.  He  sees  his  proud  consort  stripped  of 
her  silk  attire,  suffering  a  like  indignity  in  the  neighbouring  ditch.  He  sees  his 
children,  the  fruit  of  his  body,  stretched  in  the  streets  of  the  town,  or  in  the  open 
champaign,  a  feast  for  the  jackal  and  the  carrion  crow.  "  Like  the  house  of  Jero- 
boam," "  like  the  house  of  Baasha,"  he  knew  the  horrors  involved  in  these  words. 
A  horrible  dread  overwhelms  him.  He  is  smitten  by  sudden  compunction.  He  must 
get  away  from  this  cursed  spot  at  once.  He  might  then  have  justly  said  to  his 
charioteer,  "  Turn  thine  hand  and  carry  me  away,  for  I  am  wounded  "  (oh.  xxii.  84). 
An  arrow  from  Elijah's  lips  has  pierced  his  harness  through.  He  mounts  his 
ohaiiot,  it  bears  him  through  the  plain,  bears  him  to  his  palace — ^no  longer  "  heavy 
and  displeased,"  but  utterly  crushed  and  terrified.  Again  he  steals  to  his  bed- 
chamber, and  turns  his  face  to  the  wall  and  eats  no  brea,d.  In  vain  the  queen 
assays  to  laugh  him  out  of  his  fears.  No  instruments  of  music  can  charm  his 
melancholy,  no  physicians  can  minister  to  that  mind  diseased.  He  cannot  banish 
that  vision  from  his  thoughts.  It  haunts  him  like  a  nightmare.  Can  he  not  avert  the 
doom  ?  Can  he  not  make  his  peace  vrith  Heaven  ?  He  has  but  lately  forgiven  a 
eruel  and  persistent  enemy ;  is  there  no  forgiveness  for  him  ?  He  will  make  the 
effort.  He  too  will  "  gird  sackcloth  on  his  loins,  and  put  a  rope  on  his  head,"  and 
go  to  the  great  king  of  Israel.  He  rises  from  his  couch  a  sadder  and  a  wiser  man. 
He  rends  his  kingly  robes  and  casts  them  from  him  ;  he  assumes  the  garment  of 
humiliation,  he  fasts,  he  prays,  he  goes  softly.  It  is  true  his  penitence  was 
neither  profound  nor  enduring  (ch.  xxii.  8,  26),  but  it  was  undoubtedly— 

1.  Sincere  while  it  lasted.  It  is  a  mistake  to  call  it  the  "  shadow  of  a  repentance.'' 
There  was  real  contrition— not  only  fear  of  pimishment,  but  also  sorrow  for  his  sin. 
We  may  be  sure  that,  like  a  former  king  of  Israel,  his  cry  was,  "  I  have  sinned 
against  the  Lord"  (2  Sam.  xii.  13). 

2.  Open  amd  pubUe,  His  queen,  his  courtiers,  saw  the  sackcloth,  marked  the 
hushed  voice,  the  downcast  eye,  and  knew  what  it  meant  (ver.  29).  "  Seest  thou 
how  Ahab  ?  "  &c.,  imphes  that  it  was  notorious.  The  crime  was  known  of  all  men ; 
the  sorrow  and  humiliation  must  be  the  same. 

8.  Ma/rlied  by  restitution.    The  Scripture  does  not  say  so,  but  it  does  not  need 


B20  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xxi.  1—29. 


to  say  BO.  There  could  be  no  real  repentance,  certainly  no  relenting,  on  God's  par* 
so  long  as  Ahab  kept  the  vineyard.  His  prayers  would  have  been  unheeded  so  long 
as  there  was  a  lie  in  his  right  hand.  A  "  penitent  thief"  has  always  restored  the 
theft.  Ahab  could  not  recall  Naboth  to  life.  But  he  could  surrender  the  vineyard 
to  the  widow,  and  we  may  be  sure  he  did  so. 

But  this  repentance,  this  self-abasement  was  observed,  was  carefully  watched 
outside  the  palace.  As  day  by  day,  with  contrite  heart  and  bowed  head  and  soft 
footstep,  the  miserable  king  moved  among  his  retainers,  the  merciful  God  and 
Father  of  the  spirits  of  alt  flesh  beheld  his  returning  prodigal,  yearned  over  hun, 
ran  to  meet  him.  He  who  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed  nor  quench  the  smoking 
wick  welcomed  the  first  faint  tokens  of  contrition.  The  sentence  of  doom  shall  be 
deferred.  The  same  voice  which  just  now  thundered,  "  Hast  thou  killed  ? ''  &o.,  is 
now  hushed  into  tenderness.  "  Sees*  thou,"  it  says,  "  seest  thou  how  Ahab 
humbleth  himself  before  me  ?    Because,"  &c.  (ver.  29).    Ahab  receives— 

IV.  Pardon.    And  this  pardon,  it  is  to  be  observed,  was — 

1.  Instant  The  rebellion  had  lasted  for  years.  The  forgiveness  follows  on  the 
heels  of  repentance.    WhUe  he  was  speaking  God  heard.     Of.  Dan.  x.  12. 

2.  Free  cmd  full.  If  Ahab's  repentance,  that  is  to  say,  had  been  lasting,  tlie 
sentence  would  have  been  reversed  so  far  as  he  was  concerned.  It  was  not  finally 
reversed  because  of  his  subsequent  sin  and  that  of  his  sons.  The  guilt  of  innocent 
blood,  no  doubt,  could  only  be  purged  by  the  blood  of  him  that  shed  it  (Num.  xxxv. 
83),  and  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  Jezebel  was  neverincluded  in  the  pardon.  But 
it  is  probable  that  God,  to  "  show  forth  all  long-suffering,"  would  have  spared  the 
king  and  his  sons,  if  they  had  turned  from  their  evil  way. 

8.  Conditional.  "  Bum  8e  here  getaerit."  This  provision  is  always  understood,  ii 
not  expressed. 

4.  Fo-./eited.  When  Ahab  turned  like  a  do^  to  his  Vomit,  then  the  sword 
which  had  been  sheathed  awhile  leapt  again  from  its  scabbard,  and  he  was  suddenly 
destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0E3. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Covetousness.  Amongst  the  arguments  used  by  Samuel  to  dll- 
courage  the  people  of  Israel  from  desiring  a  king,  he  said, "  He  wiU  take  your 
fields,  and  your  vineyards,  and  your  olive-yards,  even  the  best  of  them."  We  have 
in  the  verses  before  us  a  notable  example  of  the  truth  of  this  forecast,  understanding 
covetousness  in  a  bad  sense. 

I.  Desire,  in  the  abstract,  is  not  covetousness.  1.  It  is  the  principle  of 
exchcmgea.  (1)  If  persons  had  no  desire  to  possess  anything  beyond  what  they  have 
acquired,  there  would  be  no  motive  to  trade.  Of  the  virtuous  woman  it  is  said, 
"  She  considereth  a  field  and  buyeth  it :  with  the  finiit  of  her  hands  she  planteth  a 
vineyard  "  (Prov.  xxxi.  16).  (2)  All  commerce  is  founded  upon  the  desire  to  make 
exchanges.  2.  But  cormnerce  is  fruitful  in  blessings.  (1)  There  are  evils  con- 
nected with  trading,  viz.,  where  dishonest  practices  come  into  it.  But  these  are  in- 
trusions ;  and  they  are  denounced  as  "  illegitimate  "  and  "  uncommerciaL"  (2) 
Genuine  commerce  gives  profitable  employment  to  thought  and  labour.  (3)  It 
brings  the  countries  and  peoples  of  the  wide  world  into  correspondence.  Thereby 
It  enlarges  our  knowledge  of  those  countries,  their  peoples  and  products,  and  other- 
wise stimulates  science.  (4)  It  encourages  philanthropy.  Belief  is  afforded  fof 
distresses  through  famines,  floods,  fires,  earthquakes ;  and  religious  missions  are 
organized.  8.  Desire,  well  directed,  should  be  encouraged,  (l)  To  be  absolutely 
without  desire  for  things  evil  would  be  a  happy  state.  Therefore  this  state  should 
be  earnestly  desired.  (2)  There  is  also  the  positive  desire  to  be  Ohrist-hke.  This 
ean  scarcely  be  too  vehement.  (3)  Ahab  does  not  seem  to  have  signalized  himseU 
in  either  of  these  directions. 

II.  Illicit  desire  is  covetousness.  1.  We  should  not  desire  what  Qod  hat 
forbidden.     (1)  Herein  Ahab  was  wrong  in  desiring  the  vineyard  of  Naboth.    It 


OH.  XXI.  1—29.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  621 

V7a8  the  "  inheritance  of  Ms  fathers,"  transmitted  in  the  family  of  Naboth,  from  the 
days  of  Joshua,  and  it  would  have  feeen  unlawful  for  him  to  part  with  it  (Levit.  xxv. 
23  ;  Num.  xxxvi.  7).  (2)  Ahab  was  wrong  in  tempting  Naboth  to  trangress  the 
commandment  of  the  Lord.  He  should  never  have  encouraged  a  desire,  the  grati- 
fication of  which  would  involve  such  a  consequence.  (3)  It  was  a  pious  act  in 
Naboth,  who,  doubtless  in  things  lawful  would  be  pleased  to  gratify  the  king,  to  have 
indignantly  refused  to  gratify  him  here.  "  The  Lord  forbid  it  me  that  I  should 
give  iihe  inheritance  of  my  fathers  unto  thee."  He  had  his  tenure  from  the  Lord. 
He  looked  upon  his  earthly  inheritance  as  a  pledge  of  a  heavenly.  2.  TMa  rule 
requires  the  study  of  Qod's  word.  (1)  It  is  of  the  utmost  moment  to  ns  to  be  ao- 
quainted  with  the  will  of  God.  This  he  has  revealed  in  the  Scriptures.  (2)  In 
oases  of  transgression  we  cannot  plead  ignorance  when  we  have  the  Bible  in  our 
hands.  Neither  can  we  shift  now  our  responsibility  on  to  our  teachers.  (3)  Do  we 
make  proper  use  of  our  Bibles  ?  Do  we  study  them  ?  Do  we  read  them  prayer- 
fully f  We  must  not  sell  the  moral  inheritance  we  have  received  from  the  past. 

III.  Inordinate  desire  is  covetousness.  Some  things  cure  Icuwful  without 
limii.  Such  are  the  direct  claims  of  God.  (1)  The  love  of  God.  We  may  love  Him 
with  all  our  heart.  We  cannot  love  Him  too  much,  or  too  much  desire  His  love. 
(2)  The  service  of  God.  This,  indeed,  ia  another  form  of  love  ;  for  love  expresses 
itself  in  service  (John  xiv.  15,  23 ;  Bom.  xiii.  10 ;  Gal.  v.  14 ;  1  John  v.  8).  (3)  The 
knowledge  of  God.  To  love  and  serve  God  perfectly  we  must  have  a  perfect  know- 
led  j'e  of  Him  according  to  our  capacity.  We  cannot  too  ardently  desire  this 
knowledge.  (4)  If  Ahab  had  loved,  served,  and  known  God  with  perfect  desire,  he 
would  have  found  such  satisfaction  as  to  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  have 
Bulked  as  he  did  because  he  could  not  obtain  Naboth's  vineyard.  When  God  is 
absent  there  is  a  restless  void ;  nothing  can  satisfy  an  unholy  spirit.  2.  Other  things 
are  lawful  in  measure.  (1)  Otherwise  they  would  interfere  with  the  direct  claims 
of  God.  The  creature  must  not  be  put  into  competition  with  the  Creator.  "  Thou 
shalt  have  none  other  gods  beside  me."  (2)  Desire  for  sensible  and  temporal  things 
must  not  displace  the  desire  for  things  spiritual  and  eternal.  To  love  the  inferior 
preferably  to  the  superior  is  to  deprave  the  affections.  (3)  It  would  have  been 
lawful  for  Ahab  to  have  purchased  a  lease  of  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  at  a  fair  price, 
leaving  it  in  the  power  of  Naboth  to  have  redeemed  it ;  and  for  it  to  revert  to 
Naboth  or  his  heirs  in  the  jubilee  (Levit.  xxv.  23—28).  But  this  desire  to  possess  it, 
even  under  these  conditions,  could  not  be  justified  if  a  refusal  should  lead  him  to  go 
home  "  heavy  and  displeased  "  and  sicken  with  chagrin.  Ahab's  discontent  brought 
its  own  punishment.  He  was  a  king,  yet  discontented.  Discontent  is  a  disease  of 
tiie  soul  rather  than  of  the  circumstances. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  5 14 — A  Sinful  Nation.  Time  was  when  the  Hebrew  nation  was  great  and 

.  respected,  "  a  praise  in  the  earth  "  for  kings  wise  and  honourable,  for  magisteates 
upright  and  noble,  and  for  a  people  faithful  and  true.  But  how  completely  is  all 
tliis  changed  I  A  more  pitiable  picture  of  national  depravity  could  scarcely  be  drawn 
than  that  presented  in  the  text.     Here  we  have — 

I.  An  iniquitous  palace.  1.  The  Mng  is  utterly  wrvprindpleA.^  (1)  Bee  him 
"heavy  and  displeased,"  sick  with  rage  and  chagrin,  lying  in  bed  in  a  sulk,  his 
face  turned  away,  refusing  to  eat.  And  what  for  ?  What  dreadful  calamity  has 
befallen  him  ?  Simply  that  he  could  not  have  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  for  a 
garden  of  herbs  1  (2)  But,  to  make  things  worse,  he  could  not  have  it  without  in- 
ducing Naboth  to  transgress  God's  law  (see  Levit  xxv.  28).  Naboth  had  too  much 
respect  for  the  law  to  yield.  Ahab  was  really  sulkmg  against  God  I  (8)  What  a 
model  king  is  this!  How  could  he  expect  his  subjects  to  be  law-abiding  when  he 
showed  them  this  example  ?  What  a  royal  soul  to  take  it  thus  to  heart  that  in  ad- 
dition to  his  kingdom  he  cannot  have  this  vineyard !  2.  His  queen  m  a  "  owrsed 
woman."  (1)  Such  is  the  style  in  which  she  is  described  by  Jehu  (2  Kings  ix.  84). 
She  seems  never  to  have  failed  in  any  incident  of  her  Ufe  to  justify  this  description. 
(2)  Now  she  promises  to  give  Ahab  the  vineyard  of  Naboth.  Thus  she  encouraged 
his  evil  humour,  instead  of  pointing  out  to  him,  as  she  should  have  done,  his  folly. 


522  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xxi.  1—29. 

(3)  She  will  accomplish  this  by  an  act  of  cruel  and  treacherous  despotism  scarcely  to 
be  paralleled  in  history  (vers.  8 — 10).  She  makes  her  pliant  husband  her  accom- 
plice, using,  with  his  consent,  his  seal  of  state,  as  probably  she  had  done  before  when 
she  destroyed  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  (ch.  xviii.  4),  to  give  authority  to  the  missive 
of  death.  She  engaged  in  this  business  all  the  more  readily  because  Naboth  appears 
to  have  been  one  of  the  "  seven  thousand  "  who  would  not  bend  to  Baal. 

II.  An  nNSCEUPULous  magistbaot.  1.  Their  servility  is  horrible.  (1)  Not  a 
voice  of  any  noble  or  elder  in  Jezreel  is  raised  in  protest  against  the  order  from  the 
palace  to  have  Naboth  murdered.  With  eyes  wide  open— for  the  sons  of  Belial  are  not 
found  for  them  ;  they  have  themselves  to  procure  these  wretches — they  proceed  to 
give  effect  to  the  dreadful  tragedy.  (2)  What  motive  can  influence  them?  They 
are  afraid  of  Jezebel.  They  knew  her  power  over  Ahab,  and  they  knew  the  cruelty 
and  vindictiveness  of  her  nature  was  nerved  by  more  than  masculine  resolution. 
(8)  But  where  was  their  fear  of  God  ?  2.  It  is  aggregated  by  treachery.  (1) 
Naboth  was  one  of  their  number.  Is  not  this  suggested  in  the  words,  "  the  elders 
and  nobles  that  were  in  the  city,  dwelling  with  Naboth  "  ?  Then  is  there  no  voice 
of  neighbourly  friendship  to  speak  for  Naboth  ?  Novoice  is  raised.  (2)  If  one  voice 
found  courage  surely  others  would  take  courage,  and  it  might  be  found  in  the 
sequel  that  the  sense  of  justice  would  be  represented  by  such  numbers  and  influence 
that  even  Jezebel  might  hesitate  to  reek  vengeance  upon  them.  But  not  a  voice 
was  raised.  3.  The  treachery  is  aggravated  by  hypocrisy.  (1)  The  tragedy 
opens  with  a  fast.  This  is  proclaimed  ostensibly  to  avert  from  the  nation  the 
judgments  of  God  supposed  to  have  been  provoked  by  the  crimes  of  Naboth.  How 
much  more  fitting  had  it  been  proclaimed  to  avert  the  judgment  provoked  by  the 
crimes  of  Naboth's  murderers  I  (2)  The  accusation  is,  "  Thou  didst  blaspheme  God 
and  the  King"  (PDI  D*n7N  11313),  which  by  some  is  rendered,  "  Thou  hast  blessed 
the  false  gods  and  Moleoh."  Parkhurst  says,  "  The  Lexicons  have  absurdly,  and 
contrary  to  the  authority  of  the  ancient  versions,  given  to  this  verb  (113)  the  sense 
of  cursing  in  the  six  following  passages :  1  Kings  xxi.  10,  13 ;  Job  i.  6,  11 ;  ii.  6,  9. 
As  to  the  two  first,  the  LXX.  render  "113  in  both  cases  by  evXoyito,  and  so  the  Vulgate 
by  bendico,  to  bless.  And  though  Jezebel  was  hersebf  an  abominable  idolatress, 
yet,  as  the  law  of  Moses  still  continued  in  lorce,  she  seems  to  have  been  wicked 
enough  to  have  destroyed  Naboth  upon  the  false  accusation  of  blessing  the  heathen 
Aleim  and  Molech,  which  sulijected  him  to  death  by  Deut.  xiii.  6 ;  xvii.  2 — 7."  (8) 
What  abominable  cruelties  have  been  perpetrated  under  the  name  of  religion ! 

III.  A  DEMORALIZED  PEOPLE.  1.  Sons  of  BcUol  o/rc  at  hand.  (1)  There  seems  to 
have  been  no  difficulty  in  procuring  men  so  lost  to  truth  and  mercy  that  they  will 
readily  swear  away  the  life  of  a  good  citizen.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at 
when  the  whole  nmgistracy  are  sons  of  Belial,  no  better  than  those  they  suborned. 
Jezebel  saw  no  difficulty  in  procuring  such.  The  nobles  and  elders  of  Jezreel 
found  none.  (2)  The  sons  of  Behal  no  doubt  were  paid  for  their  services.  The 
"  consideration  "  is  not  mentioned.  What  will  not  some  men  stoop  to  for  gain  t 
What  will  they  hazard  in  eternity !  And  for  what  a  trifle  I  2.  No  voice  is  raised 
for  justice.  (1)  Naboth  has  no  hearing  in  his  defence.  The  sentence  given,  h» 
is  hurried  away  to  be  stoned  to  death.  (2)  His  family  are  sacrificed  along  with 
him  (see  2  Kings  ix.  26).  This  was  on  the  principle  that  the  family  of  Achan  had 
to  suffer  with  him  (Josh.  vii.  24).  But  how  different  are  the  cases  I  (3)  Unless 
the  family  of  Naboth  had  perished  with  him,  the  vineyard  would  not  have  fallen 
to  the  crown.  This  would  be  an  objection  to  Jezebel  hiring  sons  of  Belial  to 
assassinate  Naboth,  for  Naboth's  heirs  would  still  have  to  be  disposed  of.  Melan- 
choly is  the  condition  of  the  nation  in  which  right  is  sacrificed  to  might.  "  Sin  is  a 
reproach  to  any  people." — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  15 — 24. — Divine  Inquisition.  Ahab  lost  no  time  in  reaping  the  fruit  of 
Jezebel's  wickedness.  The  next  day,  after  the  murder  of  Naboth  and  his  family, 
we  find  him  taking  possession  of  the  coveted  vineyard  (see  2  Kings  ix.  26).  But 
in  aU  this  dark  business  there  was  an  invisible  Spectator,  whose  presence  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  sxif&ciently  taken  into  the  account. 


CH.  XXI.  1—29.]  THE  FIBSI  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  523 

I.  God  is  an  omkisoibni  observer.  1.  He  inspects  all  huma/n  actions.  (1)  He 
was  present  in  the  palace  looking  upon  the  king  of  Israel  as  he  sulked  and  sickened 
upon  his  bed.  His  eye  also  was  full  upon  Jezebel  as  she  proposed  her  ready  cure 
for  the  monarch's  chagrin.  "  Thou  God  seest  me."  (2)  He  was  present  in  that 
court  of  justice  when  the  honest  Naboth  was  "  set  on  high  among  the  people."  He 
witnessed  the  sons  of  Belial  as  they  swore  away  the  lives  of  a  worthy  family.  He 
looked  into  the  faces  6f  the  "  nobles"  and  "  elders  "  of  Jezreel  who  suborned  these 
perjurers.  "  Thou  God  seest  me."  (8)  He  was  a  spectator  at  the  place  of  execu- 
tion. He  saw  the  steadiness  of  Naboth's  step,  and  noted  well  the  bearing  of  his 
sons  as  they  came  forth  to  suffer  for  righteousness.  And  the  swelling  of  every 
muscle  of  those  who  hurled  the  stones  was  measured  by  His  piercing  vision.  "  Thou 
God  seest  «ie."  2.  He  surveys  all  hum,an  motives.  (1)  He  clearly  discerned  the 
abominable  hypocrisy  of  Jezebel's  "fast."  It  was  proclaimed  ostensibly  to  avert  from 
the  nation  Divine  judgments  provoked  by  the  alleged  blasphemy  or  idolatry  of 
Naboth.  TUhe  vineya/rd  of  Naboth  had  more  to  do  with  it  than  his  crime.  It  is  "a  new 
thing  in  the  earth  "  to  see  Jezebel  jealous  for  the  honour  of  Jehovah  !  (2)  He  knew 
why  the  sons  of  Belial  pubHoly  perjured  themselves,  and  accurately  estimated  the 
price  for  which  they  sold  the  lives  of  honourable  citizens.  He  also  estimated  the 
cowardly  fear  of  Jezebel's  wrath,  rather  than  encounter  which  the  magistrates 
carried  out  her  wicked  instructions.  "Nobles"  and  "  elders"  they  were  accounted 
by  men ;  perjurers,  murderers,  and  dastards  they  were  accounted  by  God.  (3)  He 
nicely  weighed  the  motive  which  nerved  the  muscle  of  every  man  who  lifted  a 
stone  against  the  life  of  Naboth.  If  any  were  misled  by  the  hypocrisy  of  the 
authorities,  and  thought  they  "  did  God  service  "  when  they  cast  the  stones,  their 
sincerity  was  recognized ;  and  those  who  were  not  deceived  were  also  known.  3. 
Nothing  is  foryotten  before  Sim.  (1)  As  He  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning  so 
does  He  see  the  beginning  from  the  end.  (2)  Let  us  never  forget  that  God  never 
can  forget.  Every  action  of  our  lives  is  present  with  Him — so  every  word — so 
every  thought  and  intent  of  the  heart.    Therefore — 

II.  God  is  a  supreme  judge.  1.  He  maTces  sin  hitter  to  (he  sinner.  (1)  The 
•cquisition  of  the  vineyard,  the  mm-ders  notwithstanding,  was  at  firot  so  pleasing 
to  Ahab  that  it  cured  his  sickness,  and  he  "  rose  up  to  go  down  to  the  vineyard 
of  Naboth  the  JezreeUte,  to  take  possession  of  it."  And  this  is  often  the  first  effect 
of  the  gratification  of  covetousness.  (2)  But  how  transient  is  the  unworthy  satis- 
faction 1  It  is  soon  succeeded  by  a  season  of  reflection.  The  sudden  apparition  of 
Elijah  upon  the  scene  filled  Ahab  with  alarm.  His  conscience  now  brought  his 
guilt  home,  and  before  Elijah  uttered  a  word,  the  king  exclaimed,  "  Hast  thou 
found  me,  0  mine  enemy  ?  "  This  was  the  language  of  mingled  hatred  and  fear  (see 
Gal.  iv.  16).  The  presence  of  the  good  is  a  silent  and  efi'ective  rebuke  to  the  wicked. 
(3)  The  enormity  of  Ahab's  guUt  was  brought  home  to  him  by  the  questions,  "  Hast 
thou  killed,  and  also  taken  possession  ?  "  He  has  killed,  for  by  taking  possession 
he  sanctions  the  means  by  which  his  title  is  made  out  (see  Job  xxxi.  89 ;  Jer.  xxii. 
18, 14 ;  Hab.  ii.  12).  (4)  God's  Holy  Spirit  still,  by  means  of  the  word  of  prophecy, 
if  not  by  the  lips  of  Kvmg  prophets,  carries  gmlt  to  the  consciences  of  sinners,  and 
fills  them  with  remorseful  shame.  2.  He  conveys  judgments  in  His  providence.  We 
read  this  principle  in  the  denunciations  uttered  by  Elijah.  (1)  Upon  Aliab.  "  In 
the  place  where  dogs  licked  the  blood  of  Naboth  shall  dogs  lick  thy  blood,  even 
thine."  This  was  fulfilled  (see  oh.  xxii.  38).  But  how  "  in  the  place  ? '  for  Naboth 
suffered  near  Jezreel.  Jezreel  is,  generally,  called  Samaria,  being  Uke  Bethel,  one 
of  the  "  cities  of  Samaria  "  (see  ch.  xiii.  32).  So  in  verse  18,  the  vineyard  of  Naboth 
is  said  to  be  in  Samaria*  The  passage  is  more  clearly  thus  translated :  "  And  the 
word  of  Jehovah  came  to  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  saying,  Arise,  go  down  to  meet  Ahab 
the  king  of  Israel,  who  is  in  Samaria  ;  behold,  at  the  vmeyard  of  Naboth,  whither 
he  is  gone  down  to  take  possession  of  it."  (2)  Upon  the  family  of  Ahab  (vers,  21, 
22,  24).  This  was  a  reprisal  for  the  family  of  Naboth  sacrificed  with  him  (see 
2  Kings  ix.  26).  All  was  to  the  letter  accomplished  (see  2  Kings  ix.,  x.)  (3)  Upon 
Jezebel.  The  "  cursed  woman  "  is  signally  execrated  (ver.  23).  The  retribution 
was  as  signaUy  accomplished  (see  2  Kings  ix.  36).     (4)  This  law  of  retribution  in 


824  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh,  xxi.  1—29. 

the  judgments  of  ProTiilcnce  is  not  limited  to  sacred  history.  Orestes  recognized 
it  when  he  said  to  Jilgisthus — 

"  Go  where  thou  slew'st  my  father, 
That  in  the  selfsame  place  thon  too  nxaj'ei  die." 

It  may  be  read  in  every  full  and  aocurate  history.  8.  He  will  finally  judge  the 
world.  (1)  For  Naboth  and  his  family  have  yet  to  be  vindioated.  Providence  has 
vindicated  their  reputation ;  but  they  have  to  be  vindicated  in  person  also.  To  thlB 
end  all  parties  concerned  in  their  murder  will  have  to  stand  face  to  face,  with  their 
hearts  exposed  to  the  clear  light  and  sensible  presence  of  Omniscient  Justice.  What 
defence  can  the  sons  of  Belial  then  set  up  ?  The  magistrates  ?  Jezebel  ?  Ahab  ? 
(2)  What  a  day  of  vindications  will  that  be  to  all  the  righteous  !  What  a  day  of 
confusion  to  all  the  wicked  I  Everything  will  be  righteously  adjusted  in  that  final 
sentence  (Matt.  xxv.  84,  41,  46).— J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  26 — 29. — AhaVa  Bepentance.  After  the  terrible  sentence  pronounced  by 
Elijah  upon  Ahab  for  bis  enormities  follows  this  account  of  his  repentance.  This 
record  teaches — 

I.  That  there  is  bepentance  fob  the  vilest.  1,  Ahab  answered  this  descrip- 
tion, (1)  He  "  wrought  wickedness."  So  have  we  all.  But  his  was  evil  of  no 
common  order.  "He  did  very  abominably  in  following  idols,  according  to  all 
things  as  did  the  Amorites,  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  before  the  children  of  Israel." 
(See  Gen.  xv.  16  ;  2  Kings  xxi.  11.)  (2)  He  wrought  this  wickedness  "  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord,"  as  the  Amorites  did  not,  for  they  had  not  the  religious  privileges  of 
an  Israelite.  Ahab  in  particular  had  signal  proofs  of  the  presence  of  God.  The 
shutting  and  opening  of  the  heavens,  to  wit,  together  with  the  miracle  on  CarmeL 
Where  much  is  given  much  is  required.  (3)  He  had  "  sold  himself"  to  work  this 
wickedness.  (See  Bom.  vii.  14.)  He  was  slave  to  Jezebel — slave  to  Satan.  He 
drudged  hard  in  his  serfdom.  (4)  None  of  his  predecessors  had  gone  so  far  wrong. 
"  There  was  none  like  unto  Ahab  "  (see  ch.  xvi.  33).  Jeroboam  had  "  made  Israel 
to  sin,"  and  Omri,  at  the  instigation  of  Ahab,  made  "  statutes  "  to  confirm  that  sin. 
(See  lilicah  vi.  16.)  Ahab  went  farther,  and  established  the  worship  of  Baal,  with 
its  attendant  abominations  of  Ashere.  (See  ch.  xvi.  29 — 33.)  (6)  He  was  in  the 
worst  company.  He  had  married  a  "  cursed  woman,"  and  submitted  to  be  led  by 
her  into  the  extremes  of  wickedness.  "  Whom  Jezebel  his  wife  stirred  up."  Under 
her  instigation  he  consented  to  a  wholesale  massacre  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets; 
and  now  she  makes  him  her  accomplice  in  the  murder  of  Naboth,  with  its 
attendant  atrocities.  2.  Yet  Ahab  took  God's  message  to  heart.  (1)  He  believed 
the  terrible  sentence,  as  he  had  good  reason  to  do,  for  it  came  by  the  band  of 
Elijah.  In  all  his  former  experience  he  had  found  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in 
Elijah's  mouth  was  truth.  (2)  Now,  with  his  death  vividly  before  him,  and  the 
fearful  doom  of  his  house — all  the  fruit  of  his  crimes — these  crimes  live  up  again, 
and  pass  in  formidable  order  before  his  eyes.  (See  Fsa.  L  21.)  Conspicuous 
amongst  the  spectres  that  would  move  before  him  would  be  those  of  the  newly 
murdered  Naboth  with  his  children.  (8)  This  ghastly  phantasmagoria  would  be 
to  him  a  premonition  of  the  solemnities  of  the  final  judgment  in  which  the 
thousands  injured,  whether  in  body  or  soul,  by  his  bad  conduct  and  influence, 
would  cry  to  God's  justice  for  vengeance  upon  the  royal  culprit.  8.  He  hvm,blei 
himself  accordingly.  (1)  Before  Jehovah.  He  "rent  his  clothes"  in  token  of 
deep  grief.  (See  Gen.  xxxvii.  84 ;  Job  i.  20  ;  Ezra  ix.  8.)  "  He  put  sackcloth  upon 
his  flesh,  and  fia^sted,  and  lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went  softly."  Here  were  all  the 
signs  of  deep  contrition  before  God.  They  were  symbols  of  the  prayer  of  the  heart 
for  mercy.  (2)  Before  men.  To  put  on  sackcloth  he  laid  aside  those  robes  of 
state  in  which  he  had  prided  himself.  Instead  of  moving  with  his  former  kingly 
tramp  he  now  "went  softly."  (Compare  Isa.  xxxviii.  15.)  He  moved  with  the 
timid  step  of  a  culprit.  (8)  Who  will  say  his  repentance  was  not  genuine  ?  God 
did  not  say  so.  He  afterwards,  indeed,  professed  to  "  hate  "  a  faithful  servant  of 
God  (oh.  xxii.  8).     But  what  does  this  prove  ?     Simply  that  he  afterwards  relapsed 


«H.  XXI.  1—29.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  626 

into  sin.  And  it  admonishes  us  not  to  presume  npon  any  dogma  of  infallible  final 
perseverance,  but,  by  the  help  of  God,  to  "  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear 
and  trembling." 

II.  That  there  I8  mercy  fob  the  penitent.  1.  Qod  observed  the  repentance 
ofAhab.  (1)  He  observed  it  before  man  had.  He  saw  its  first  motions  in  the  depths 
of  his  heart.  He  saw  the  prodigal  "  while  yet  a  great  way  oft"  (Luke  xv.  20). 
(2)  Doubtless  He  graciously  encouraged  these  motions  so  that  they  ripened  into 
confession.  And  does  not  the  goodness  of  God  still  lead  men  to  repentance,  even 
the  vilest  ?  2.  He  called  the  attention  of  Elijah  to  it.  (1)  To  the  prophet  he 
said,  "  Seest  thou  how  Ahab  humbleth  himself  before  me."  This  was  an 
encoaragement  to  the  man  of  God.  His  labour  was  not  in  vain.  Ahab  required 
some  moral  courage  to  humble  himself  before  Jehovah  in  the  presence  of  Jezebel. 
(2)  God  in  His  goodness  directs  His  servants  to  those  who  are  penitent  that  they 
may  minister  words  of  encouragement  to  them.  Ananias  was  sent  to  Saul 
(Acts  ix.  11).  3.  He  extended  His  mercy  to  the  supplicmt.  (1)  "  Because  he 
humbleth  himself  before  me,  I  wiU  not  bring  the  evil  in  his  days :  but  in  his  son's 
days  wiU  I  bring  the  evil  upon  his  house."  The  mercy  is  not  a  reversal  of  the 
mischief,  neither  was  the  repentance.  The  mischief  is  done,  and  cannot  be  reversed. 
Early  piety  is  therefore  earnestly  to  be  desired  that  the  mischief  of  an  evil  life  may 
be  avoided.  (2)  It  was  a  substantial  benefit  nevertheless,  (a)  To  Ahab  personally. 
It  was  something  to  be  spared  the  pain  of  witnessing  the  judgments  of  God  upon 
his  wicked  house;  but,  what  is  still  more  considerable,  tiiis  mercy  contained  a 
promise  respecting  the  world  to  come ;  for,  and  especially  in  prophecy,  things 
visible  are  signs  or  portents  of  things  spiritual.  (&)  It  was  also  a  benefit  to  his 
nation.  For  after  this,  probably,  came  the  war  with  Ben-hadad,  in  which  God 
interposed  in  a  very  remarkable  manner  on  behalf  of  His  people.  In  the  Septua- 
gint,  which  translation  was  made  firom  much  older  copies  of  the  Hebrew  Bible  than 
any  now  extant,  this  chapter  and  that  here  before  it  change  places ;  and  the  order 
in  the  Septuagint  is  also  followed  by  Josephus.  (3)  This  fact  is  very  important, 
for  it  shows  also  where  the  backsliding  of  Ahab  commenced.  It  was  evidently  in 
the  false  mercy  which  he  showed  to  Ben-hadad.  After  this  relapse  God  forsook 
him  and  handed  him  over  to  evil  spirits  and  lying  prophets,  who  wrought  his  ruin. 
"  He  that  endureth  to  the  end  shaU  be  saved." — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  1 — 24. — The  Progress  of  Sin,  This  chapter  describes  one  of  the  blackest 
erimes  which  ever  blotted  the  page  of  history.  The  description  is  so  graphic  that 
we  seem  eye-witnesses  of  the  tragedy,  and  so  suggestive  that  we  can  understand  the 
motives  and  feelings  of  the  principal  actors.  Naboth  has  been  blamed  sometimes 
for  refusing  what  appeared  a  reasonable  request — that  he  would  sell  a  piece  of  land 
to  his  rightful  king  at  a  fair  price.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  he  was  not  only 
acting  within  his  right,  but  that  he  could  not  have  assented  to  the  proposal  without 
brealang  the  Divine  law  given  by  Moses.  The  paternal  inheritance  might  only  be 
Bold  in  extreme  poverty,  and  then  on  the  condition  that  it  might  be  redeemed  at  any 
time  ;  and,  if  not  previously  redeenaed  by  purchase,  it  reverted  to  the  original  owner 
at  the  year  of  jubUee  (Levit.  xxv.  IS — 28).  With  Naboth  it  was  not  the  dictate  of 
churlishness,  but  of  conscience,  to  refuse  the  proposal  of  the  king.  Nor  was  Ahab's 
gnilt  the  less  because  the  crime  was  suggested  by  Jezebel.  He  might  be  deficient 
in  nerve  and  inventiveness,  but  he  was  not  in  iniquity.  Let  us  trace  him  in  this 
his  hideous  downfall,  that  none  of  us  may  be  "  hardened  by  the  deoeitfulness  of 
•in."    Our  subject  is  the  Progress  of  Sin.    We  see  here — 

I.  Possessions  leading  to  covETonsNESS.  His  stately  palace  and  park  at 
Jezreel  did  not  content  him.  With  greedy  eye  he  looked  on  this  tiny  plot  of  free- 
hold, and  resolved  to  have  it.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  material  possessions  to 
satisfy  man.  The  rich  man  must  be  richer  still ;  the  large  kingdom  must  extend 
itself  yet  farther ;  the  great  business  must  crush  the  small  competitors,  &c.  How 
often  this  leads  to  wrongs  wrought  on  the  poorer  and  weaker  I  "  The  love  of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."  "  Take  heed  and  beware  of  covetousneas,  for  a 
man's  life  oonsisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  things  that  he  possesseth." 


CS6  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [cH.  xxi.  1—29. 


II.  CovETonsNESS  LEADING  TO  DISCONTENT!  "  He  laid  himBslf  down  upon  his 
bed,  and  turned  away  his  face,  and  would  eat  no  bread."  Disappointed  of  that 
which  he  coveted  he  could  find  no  pleasure  in  that  which  he  already  possessed. 
Show  how  easily  a  discontented  habit  of  mind  may  be  formed,  and  how  it  embitterg 
everything.  Thankfulness,  gladness,  and  hope  are  strangled  by  this  serpent  sin. 
The  necessity  of  watching  against  the  rise  of  this  in  our  children. 

III.  Discontent  leading  to  evil  counsel  (ver.  7).  Ahab  was  just  in  the 
right  condition  to  welcome  anything  bad.  On  an  ordinary  occasion  he  might 
have  repelled  this  hideous  suggestion.  Satan  watches  his  opportunity.  His 
temptations  are  adapted  to  our  age,  our  social  position,  our  mood  of  mind.  What 
would  fail  to-day  may  succeed  to-morrow.  What  the  youth  would  spurn  the  old 
man  may  welcome,  &o.  "  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation."  It  is 
an  evil  thing  to  have  a  bad  counsellor  always  near  you.  Let  that  thought  guard 
us  against  unholy  associates. 

IV.  Evil  counsel  leading  to  lies  (ver.  10).  The  fast  was  a  hypocritical  device 
to  prepare  the  minds  of  the  people  for  the  death  of  Naboth.  Its  appointment  pre- 
supposed that  there  was  a  grievous  offence  committed  by  some  one,  which  the 
community  was  to  mourn.  Their  suspicions  would  be  ready  to  fasten  on  any  man 
who  was  suddenly  and  boldly  accused  by  two  independent  vritnesses.  _  The  scheine 
was  as  subtle  as  it  was  sinfiil.  Give  examples  of  the  use  of  deceit  and  lies  in 
modern  life  for  the  purpose  of  making  money,  advancing  social  interests,  &o. 
Sliow  the  sinfulness  of  this. 

V.  Libs  leading  to  murdeb  (ver.  13).  Not  only  was  Naboth  killed,  but  his 
children  also  (2  Kings  ix.  26).  Hence  the  property  would  revert  to  the  king.  It 
was  a  cold-blooded  murder.  Few  worse  are  recorded  in  history.  Seldom  is  this 
most  heinous  crime  committed  until  the  way  has  been  paved  for  it,  as  he*e,  by 
lesser  sins.    Exemplify  this. 

VI.  Murder  leading  to  retribution.  Bead  Ehjah's  bold  and  terrible  denun- 
•ciation  of  the  crime  on  the  very  soil  of  the  coveted  vineyard  (vers.  20 — 24). 
Eetribution  may  linger  long,  but  it  comes  at  last.  In  the  light  of  many  a  startling 
discovery  we  read  the  words,  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out.'' 

Conclusion. — "  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults :  keep  back  thy  servant  also 
fi:om  presumptuous  sins,"  &c. — A.  B. 

Vers.  27 — 29. — Pwrtial  Penitence.  Such  was  the  effect  of  Elijah's  message 
delivered  in  the  vineyard  of  Naboth.  The  fearless  courage  of  the  prophet  had 
again  asserted  itself,  and  once  more  the  king  quailed  before  his  terrible  words  of 
denunciation.  The  subject  is  the  more  worthy  of  study  because  the  deceitfolnesa 
of  the  human  heart  is  here  laid  bare  by  "  the  searcher  of  hearts."  If  we  under- 
stand Aliab,  we  shall  better  understand  ourselves. 

I.  The  deceitful  nature  of  Ahab's  humiliation.  We  shall  show  that  there 
was  a  mixture  of  the  good  and  evU,  of  the  true  and  false.  1.  It  originated  in  a 
true  message.  No  phantom  of  his  own  brain,  no  utterance  of  a  false  prophet 
misled  Ahab ;  but  the  declaration  of  a  man  who,  as  he  knew  by  experience,  spoke 
truly,  and  spoke  for  God.  He  dared  not  refuse  credence  to  the  message,  but  that 
his  heart  was  unchanged  was  shown  in  his  continued  hatred  to  the  messenger 
(1  Kings  xviii.  17 ;  xxi.  20).  In  all  ages  the  word  of  God  has  been  "  as  a  fire,"  and 
as  a  "hammer"  (Jer.  xxiii.  29).  Give  examples.  The  Ninevites,  the  Jews  at 
Pentecost,  &c.  It  has  "  pleased  God,  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  to  save  them 
that  believe."  2.  It  asserted  itself  in  fasting  amd  tears.  These  would  be  natural 
fligns  of  distress.  In  themselves  they  were  no  evidence  of  sincerity.  It  is  easier 
to  put  on  the  outward  than  to  experience  the  inward.  There  is  always  danger  of 
letting  the  visible  supersede  the  invisible,  though  it  is  only  of  value  as  the  honest 
expression  of  conviction,  Leaves  and  blossoms  may  be  tlei  around  a  dead  branch, 
but  that  does  not  make  it  live.  (The  perils  of  Bitualiaca.)  Even  under  the  Old 
Dispensation  this  was  understood.  Samuel  said,  "  To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice," 
Ac.  David  exclaimed,  "  Thou  desirest  not  sacrifice,"  &c.  (Psa.  li.  16, 17 ;  see  also 
Micah  vi.  8 ;  Isa.  i.  11).    Compare  the  words  of  our  Lord,  "  Moreovea)  when  ye 


CH,  XXI.  1— ii9.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  627 


fast,  be  not  as  the  hypocrites,  of  a  sad  countenance ;  for  they  disfigure  their  faces, 
that  they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast."  3.  It  consisted  in  terror,  not  in  tv/ming. 
Abab  was  thoroughly  alanned,  but  imagination  rather  than  conscience  was  at  work 
within  him.  He  did  not  forsake  his  idols,  nor  give  up  Naboth's  vineyard,  nor 
abandon  his  self-confidence.  See  next  chapter,  which  narrates  his  deaHngs  with 
Mioaiah.  Evidently  there  was  no  change  of  heart  or  of  hfe ;  nor  had  his  present 
feeUng  any  abiding  influence.  He  was  like  those  who  are  alarmed  at  the  thought 
of  hell,  not  at  the  thought  of  sin.  They  shrink  from  punishment,  but  not  from 
guUt.  Examples.  The  drunkard  weeping  maudlin  tears  over  his  poverty;  the 
detected  wrong-doer  thrown  out  of  employment ;  the  sinner  who  beheves  himself 
to  be  at  the  point  of  death,  &o.  True  repentance  makes  us  feel  and  act  differently 
towards  sin  and  towards  God. 

II.  The  Divine  notice  of  Ahab's  humiliation.  1.  It  Aid  not  escape  the  Divine 
tea/rch.  God  looks  down  from  heaven  to  see  if  there  were  any  that  do  good.  He 
rejoices  to  find  not  the  evil  that  must  be  punished,  but  the  feeble  germs  of  good 
that  may  be  encouraged.  (Compare  Psa.  xiv.  2.)  Even  such  a  sinner  as  Ahab 
(ver.  25)  was  not  disregarded  when  he  showed  the  faintest  signs  of  repentance. 
God  would  foster  them  lovingly,  as  He  fosters  the  seed  sown  in  the  warm  earth. 
The  prodigal  is  seen  "  when  yet  a  great  way  off."  Even  the  first  beginnings  of 
righteousness  were  commended  by  our  Lord:  "Jesus,  beholding  him,  loved  him," 
&c.  2.  It  led  to  the  mitigation  of  the  Divine  jpunishment.  Ahab's  feeling  was 
real  as  far  as  it  went.  The  postponement  of  pimishment  was  to  give  opportunity 
for  more  genuine  repentance.  Had  that  revealed  itself,  the  judgment  would  have 
been  averted.  Compare  this  with  our  Lord's  washing  the  feet  of  Judas,  though  He 
knew  he  was  about  to  betray  Him.  "The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  to  repentance." 
See  how  ready  God  is  to  meet  those  who  may  return  to  Him  (Acts  ii.  38 ;  Joel  ii. 
12 — 14).  [Note. — We  ought  to  notice  and  encom-age  what  is  right  even  in  those 
who  are  not  what  they  should  be,  commending  it  whenever  it  is  possible.]  8.  It 
failed  to  win  a  reversal  of  the  Divine  judgment.  A  temporary  repentance  may 
be  followed  by  a  temporary  reprieve ;  but  final  salvation  must  be  preceded  by  true 
repentance.  If  the  heart  is  not  turned  from  sin,  it  cannot  be  turned  from  hell. 
"Godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salvation,  not  to  be  repented  of;  but  the 
sorrow  of  this  world  worketh  death."  Not  only  must  evil  be  expelled,  but  good 
must  enter;  for  if  the  heart  is  left  "  empty,  swept,  and  garnished"  by  self -reforma- 
tion, the  evil  spirits  wiU  return.  Good  must  supersede  evU ;  Christ  must  supplant 
sin ;  the  Holy  Spirit  must  conquer  the  evil  spirit.     (Compare  Acts  xi  17,  18.) 

A  pa/rtial  penitence  gained  reprieve,  and  much  more  will  a  thorough  repentance 
gain  justification.  As  Trapp  says,  "  If  the  leaves  of  repentance  be  so  medicinal, 
much  more  the  fruit." — A.  E. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — First  Steps  in  the  Path  of  Crime.  I.  Unbridlsd  desire.  1.  The 
spirit  in  which  Ahab  oamie.  He  came  down  to  Jezreel  not  to  present  a  thank- 
offering  to  God  for  recent  deliverance,  nor  to  inquire  what  might  be  done  to  meet  the 
wishes  or  improve  the  condition  of  the  people.  Had  he  come  thus,  paths  of  useful- 
ness would  have  opened  up  before  him,  and,  instead  of  the  dark  memory  of  guilt, 
he  would  have  left  behind  him  blessing  and  praise.  God  and  man  were  alike  shut 
out,  and  self  was  set  up  as  that  which  alone  was  to  be  regarded  and  served.  Such  a 
spirit  not  only  stands  open  to  temptation ;  it  invites  it.  Eight  aims  shut  out  is  half 
Satan's  victory.  2.  How  the  temptation  presented  itself.  He  was  about  to  make 
improvements  upon  the  palace,  and  his  eye  fell  on  Naboth's  vineyard.  This  made 
into  a  garden  of  herbs  would  secure  greater  privacy  and  allow  other  improvements 
to  be  carried  out.  As  he  looked  only  upon  his  own  things  the  advantages  of  the 
acquisition  were  magnified,  the  fire  of  desire  was  kindled  and  fanned  into  even 
fiercer  flame.  A  selfish  spirit  is  ready  to  be  set  on  fire  by  the  shghtest  spark  of 
evU  suggestion.  There  was  much  in  God's  recent  goodness,  much  also  in  the 
necessities  of  Israel,  to  raise  Ahab  above  so  small  a  care.  The  spirit  of  selfish  dis- 
«ontent,  which  "  never  is,  but  always  to  be,  blest,"  makes  thankfuhiess  and  service 
alike  impossible.     If  it  rule  us  we  are  already  set  in  the  way  of  sin.    From  the 


628  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh,  xxi.  1—29. 

epot  on  which  we  stand  a  hundred  dark  paths  branch  out — en-vies,  jealousies,  false- 
hood, dishonest  dealing,  mean  lying  artifices,  thefts,  murders.  When  tempted  to 
■et  the  heart  on  what  we  have  not,  let  us  come  back  into  the  midst  of  the  good 
which  God  has  given,  and  say  that  if  He  see  it  to  be  best  for  us,  that  will  be  given 
too.  3.  How  the  object  was  pursued.  All  restraints  were  cast  aside.  Ahab's  offer 
(ver.  2)  seems  at  first  sight  most  generous.  But  it  shut  out  of  sight  (1)  the  ties 
which  bound  Naboth  to  his  inheritance,  and  (2)  the  duty  he  owed  to  God.  The 
Israelite  could  not  alienate  his  lot  even  when  pressed  by  direst  necessity.  It  might 
be  parted  with  for  a  time,  but  it  returned  again  to  its  rightful  owners  at  the  year 
of  jubilee.  Ahab's  offer  was  a  temptation  to  Naboth  to  think  lightly  of  God's 
arrangements  and  to  despise  his  birthright. 

II.  Misdirected  angkk.  "  Ahab  came  into  his  house  heavy  and  displeased," 
not  with  himself,  but  with  Naboth.  His  anger  was  not  against  his  sin,  but  against 
the  man  who  had  rebuked  it.  He  might  have  stood  and  said,  "  I  have  sinned.  I 
have  abused  my  position.  I  have  been  caring  for  my  own  good,  and  not  for  theirs 
over  whom  God  has  set  me."  But  he  took  the  side  of  his  sin  against  the  truth. 
He  that  struck  at  that  struck  him.  When  God  meets  us  as  He  then  met  Ahab,  we 
must  either  return  humbled  and  penitent  into  the  right  way,  or  withstand  Him  and 
pass  into  deeper  darkness. — U. 

Vers.  5 — 14. — Sin's  friendships,  and  what  they  lead  to.  I,  The  sinful  find 
MANY  HELPERS.  Ahab  ssems  to  have  done  all  that  he  was  able  or  cared  to  do. 
He  had  tempted  Naboth  and  failed,  and  the  matter  seemed  to  have  come  to  an 
end.  But  where  Ahab  stops,  Satan's  servants  meet  him  and  carry  on  the  work, 
Jezebel  prevails  on  him  to  teU  the  story,  and  the  elders  of  Jezreel  and  its  sons 
of  Belial  are  ready  to  do  their  part  also,  to  give  him  his  desire  and  steep  his  soul  in 
crime.  The  man  who  is  easting  away  means  and  character  and  health  and 
eternal  life  will  find  friends  to  take  the  part  of  his  worse  against  his  better  self, 
and  agents  enough  to  aid  him  in  accomplishing  his  sinful  wUL  It  is  vain  to  think 
of  arresting  »  career  of  vice  merely  by  change  of  place.  Satan  has  his  servants 
•rerywhere. 

II.  The  misuse  op  influence.  There  is  much  that  may  be  admired  in  Jezebel's 
conduct.  However  false  she  was  to  others,  she  was  true  to  her  own.  With  tender- 
ness, which  lends  a  peculiar  grace  to  a  strong,  regal  nature  like  hers,  she  approaches 
the  moddy  monarch.  Under  the  warm  sunshine  of  loving  sympathy  the  bauds 
which  bind  the  burden  to  his  soul  melt  away.  It  is  laid  down  and  exposed  to  view. 
But  however  good  the  impulses  wliich  incite  the  wicked  to  action,  their  feet  take 
to  the  paths  of  sin.  1,  Her  sympathy  becomes  fierce  championship  of  wrong. 
There  is  love  for  Ahab,  but  no  consideration  for  Naboth,  and  no  regard  to  the  voice 
of  justice  and  of  God.  How  much  human  love  to-day  is  after  the  pattern  of 
Jezebel's— narrow,  selfish,  unjust  1  The  home  is  everything ;  the  world  outside 
has  no  claims,  sometimes  not  even  rights  1  Others  are  regarded  with  pleasure  as 
they  favour  those  we  love ;  with  aversion  and  hatred  so  soon  as  they  oppose  them, 
or  even  stand  in  their  way.  Homes  are  meant  to  be  training  schools  for  God's  sons 
and  daughters,  where  they  may  learn  to  be  patient,  forbearing,  less  exacting,  able 
to  make  allowances  for  difference  of  disposition  and  of  judgment,  and  so  pass  out 
able  to  do  a  brother's,  sister's  part  in  the  great  world  around  them.  But  Jezebel's 
affection  frustrates  God's  plan  and  arms  the  home  against  the  world  it  was  meant 
to  serve.  2.  She  goads  him  on  to  greater  sin.  She  blames  him  not  for  setting  his 
heart  so  upon  a  trifle,  but  for  letting  the  matter  rest  where  it  did.  She  reminds 
hkn  of  his  might  and  Naboth's  weakness:  "  Dost  thou  now  govern  ?"  &c.  How 
often  does  the  sympathy  of  the  wicked  daringly  recommend  what  the  heart  had 
feared  to  think,  and  this  too  with  reproaches  of  weakness,  of  wrongs  and  slights  left 
unavenged  1  Instead  of  quenching  the  fire  of  hate,  they  fan  it  into  fiercer  flame. 
3.  She  bears  him  onward  intc.  crime  (vers.  7—10).  Ahab's  very  weakness  would 
have  prevented  him  shedding  Niiboth's  blood,  but  her  subtle  brain  and  indomitable 
wiU  supplywhat  is  needful  to  steep  his  soul  in  guilt.  How  many  dark  stains  have 
been  m  this  very  way  fixed  upon  the  page  of  history  I  How  much  genius  and 
talent  have  thus  served,  and  are  serving  now,  the  devil's  purpose  I 


XH.  1—29.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


III.  The  evil  weocght  by  time-seevers  (vers.  11—15).  There  is  nothing  to 
relieve  the  baseness  of  the  elders  and  nobles  of  Jezreel.  They  were  not  impelled 
by  misguided  affection  to  avenge  a  fancied  -wrong.  They  could  not  even  plead 
ignorance.  They  were  behind  the  scenes  and  arranged  for  the  trial.  It  was  murder 
of  the  deepest  dye— murder  done  under  the  guise  of  zeal  for  the  offended  majesty 
of  God.  They  had  one  of  the  grandest  opportunities  of  shielding  innocence  and 
rebuking  wickedness  in  high  places.  They  had  only  to  say  they  could  not  lend 
themselves  to  such  a  deed.  But  these  do  not  stand  alone.  The  greatest  crimes  in 
history  have  been  wrought  in  this  very  way.  Is  there  no  place  to-day  over  which 
"  Jezreel "  might  well  be  written  ?  Are  there  no  men  and  no  causes  frowned  upon, 
not  because  that  in  themselves  they  deserve  such  treatment,  but  because  they  are 
not  in  favour,  and  it  will  not  pay  to  befriend  them  ?  Are  liiere  none  who  wiU  use 
their  influence  in  favour  of  a  good  cause  when  it  is  safe  to  do  so,  but  who  will  be 
looked  for  in  vain  when  it  sorely  needs  to  be  befriended  ?  There  may  be  no  crime 
wrought  now  in  this  land  such  as  was  then  done  in  Israel;  but  should  the  time  come, 
these  are  the  men  who  will  do  as  the  elders  and  nobles  did  then.  The  spirit  is  the 
same,  and  in  the  like  oircnmstanceB  it  will  bear  the  same  fruii — U. 

Vers.  16 — ^29. — Guilt  and  Mercy.  I.  To  enjov  the  peuits  ov  sin  is  to  take 
CTS  GUILT.  "  Hast  thou  killed  ?  "  &o.  It  is  not  said  that  Ahab  knew  of  the  plot.  The 
plain  inference  is  that  he  did  not  Jezebel  wrote  to  the  elders,  and  to  her  the  tidings 
were  sent  that  the  deed  was  done.  But  if  Ahab  did  not  know  before,  he  knew  after. 
Knowing  how  it  had  been  procured  he  nevertheless  received  it,  and  heard  as  he  stood 
t'aere  the  word  of  the  Lord :  "  Hast  thou  killed,  and  also  taken  possession  ?  "  There 
are  men,  for  example,  who  could  not  pass  their  days  in  the  vile  drink  traf&c.  They 
could  not  sleep  at  night  for  thought  of  the  wives  and  mothers  and  children  whose 
misery  had  pleaded  in  God's  sight  against  them  and  their  work.  The  thought  of  the 
souls  they  had  helped  to  lead  down  into  the  eternal  darkness  would  terrify  them. 
But  they  can  pocket  the  gains  of  that  very  trade ;  they  can  receive  the  higher  rent 
which  tiieir  property  secures  beci^use  it  is  let  to  the  sellers  of  drink,  and  live  in 
quietness,  and.  sit  at  the  Lord's  table,  and  die  in  good  esteem,  and  go  forth  to  meet — 
what  ?  the  same  judgment  as  the  publican  I  Your  reputable  merchant  may  not  he 
and  cheat ;  but  u  the  yonng  men  that  serve  behiad  hie  counters  do  so,  and  if  ha 
knowingly  pockets  the  gains  of  such  baseness,  he  is  equally  guilty  in  God's  sight. 
To  take  the  fiiiit  of  falsehood  and  oppression  and  wrong  is  to  stain  our  souls  with 
their  gmlt.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  In  the  place  where  dogs  licked  the  blood  of 
Naboth  shall  dogs  lick  thy  blood,  even  thine."  "  Behold  I  wiU  bring  evil  upon 
thee,"  &c.  (vers.  21—24). 

II.  What  it  means  week  a  man  finds  the  truth  hateful.  Ahab's  question, 
"  Hast  then  found  me  ?"  &c.,  was  a  self-revelation.  There  were  many  to  whom 
EUjah's  presence  would  have  been  like  that  of  an  angel  of  God ;  but  to  AJiab  it  is  as 
the  shadow  of  death.  And  the  explanation  was,  "  Because  thou  hast  sold  thyself  to 
work  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  It  is  only  to  death  that  the  tmth  is  a  savoui 
of  death.  He  was  sin's  bondman.  For  the  gratification  of  evil  desire  he  had  sold 
himself  to  work  Satan's  wiU,  and  now  in  his  attitude  to  God's  servant  he  was  own- 
ing Satan  stiU  as  master.  It  is  easy  to  listen  with  approval,  and  with  pleasure  even, 
when  other  men's  sins  are  dealt  vdth  ;  but  when  our  own  are  touched — when  we 
are  met  with  our  feet  standing  in  Naboth's  vineyard,  what  is  our  attitude  toward 
the  truth  ?  Is  it  anger  or  submission  ?  Whom  do  we  own  as  master,  Satan  or 
God? 

III.  The  eiches  of  God's  meecy  (vers.  25—29).  1.  The  greatness  of  Ahab't 
din.  He  had  outstripped  all  who  had  gone  before  him,  great  as  their  sins  had  been ; 
"  but  there  was  none  like  unto  .Ahab,"  &c.  2.  The  inadequacy  of  his  repentanee. 
It  was  no  doubt  sincere,  but  it  did  not  go  far  enough.  It  was  fear  of  judgment,  not 
loathing  of  sin.  8.  The  fulness  of  the  Divine  compassion.  Verses  25  and  26  might 
well  have  been  a  prelude  to  the  record  of  full  and  speedy  vengeance,  and  especially 
BO  in  view  of  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  his  sorrow.  But  it  is  the  mtroduction  to 
tibe  story  of  meroy.    All  that  sin— sin  of  deepest  dye— will  not  prevent  God  running 

1  Koras.  *  * 


B80  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oh.  xxl  1—89. 

fortli  to  meet  Ahab  so  soon  as  he  begins  to  turu  to  Him.  That  sorrow,  shallow 
though  it  was,  God  had  marked  and  accepted.  "  Seest  thou  how  Ahab  ?  "  &o.  God 
is  not  a  sterur  releutless  Judge.  Father's  heart  has  Aever  yearned  over  child  b8 
God's  over  us. — U. 

Ver.  20. — Nahoth's  Vineyard.  The  robbery  and  murder  of  Naboth  form  one  of 
the  darkest  episodes  in  the  story  of  Ahab's  life.  We  see  that  idolatry  and  perse- 
cution were  not  the  only  crimes  into  which  Jezebel  seduced  him.  Indeed,  such 
iniquities  never  stand  alone.  They  would  naturally  be  the  parents  of  many  more. 
He  was  probably  guilty  of  many  such  acts  of  cruel  wrong  during  his  wicked  career. 
This  is  related  to  show  how  completely  he  had  "  sold  himself  to  work  evil  in  the 
eight  of  the  Lord."    Let  us  think  of  (1)  his  sin,  (2)  his  punishment,  (3)  his  remorse. 

I.  His  sin.  It  had  many  elements  of  moral  wrong  in  it,  and  is  not  to  be 
characterized  by  any  one  particular  designation.  1.  Avarice.  Large  and  rich  as 
his  royal  domain  was,  he  envied  Naboth  the  possession  of  his  little  vineyard.  2. 
Oppression.  It  was  a  wicked  abuse  of  power.  "  Might "  to  him  was  "  right." 
8.  Impiety.  Ahab  must  have  known  that  he  was  tempting  Naboth  to  the  violation 
of  an  express  Divine  command  (Num.  xxxvi.  7).  4.  Abject  moral  weakness.  TMb 
is  seen  in  his  chUdish  petulance  (ver.  4)  and  in  his  mean  subserviency  to  the 
imperious  will  of  Jezebel.  6.  Base  hypocrisy,  in  subjecting  the  injmred  man  to  the 
decision  of  a  mock  tribunaL  Crimes  like  this  generally  present  various  phases  of 
evU  thought  and  feeUng;  and  when  they  attempt  to  cover  themselves  with  a-false 
veil  of  rectitude,  it  only  tends  to  deepen  immeasurably  our  sense  of  their  iniquity. 

II.  His  P0NISHMENT.  The  prophet  was  assuming  his  true  function  in  pronouncing 
this  swift  judgment  on  the  cruel  wrong  that  had  been  committed.  BUs  calling  was 
to  proclaim  and  enforce  the  laws  of  eternal  righteousness,  to  vindicate  the  oppressed, 
to  rebuke  injustice,  and  that  not  least,  but  rather  most  of  all,  when  it  sat  enthroned 
on  the  seats  of  authority  and  power.  Note  respecting  this  punishment.  L  It* 
certainty.  Ahab  could  not  really  be  surprised  that  his  "  enemy  had  found  "  him, 
for  that  "  enemy  "  was  but  the  instrument  of  a  God  to  whom  "  all  things  are  naked 
and  opened."  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evU  and  the 
good,"  and  the  transgressor  can  never  escape  His  righteous  judgment.  "  Be  sure 
your  sin  wUl  find  you  cut "  (Num.  xxxii.  23).  2.  Its  correspondence  with  the 
crime.  "  In  the  plttee  where  the  dogs  licked  the  blood  of  Naboth,"  &c.  (ver.  19). 
The  principle  involved  in  this  has  often  been  a  marked  feature  of  the  Divine  retri- 
butions. "  Wbatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  &c.  (Gal.  vi  7,  8).  "  They  have  sown  the 
wind,  and  they  shall  reap  the  whirlwind  "  (Hosea  viii.  7).  8.  Its  delay.  The  sen- 
tence was  fuUy  executed  only  in  the  person  of  his  son  Joram  (2  Kings  ix.  26,  26) ; 
but  this  in  no  way  alters  the  character  or  lessens  the  terribleness  of  it  as  a  punish- 
ment upon  himi.  Especially  when  we  remember  what  an  instalment  of  the  foil 
penalty  was  given  in  the  violence  of  his  own  death  (oh.  xxii,  34 — 37).  "  Because 
sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  theretore  the  heart  of  the 
sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil "  (Ecoles.  viii.  11).  But  when,  space 
being  thus  given  them  for  repentance,  they  abuse  it,  they  do  but  "  treasure  up 
wrath  for  themselves  against  the  day  of  wrath,"  and,  falling  under  the  righteous 
vengeance  of  God,  they  do  not  escape  "  till  they  have  paid  the  uttermost  farthing." 
Thus  did  Ahab  inherit  the  woe  pronounced  on  him  who  thinks  to  secure  any  good 
for  himself  by  iniquity  and  blood  (Hab.  ii  12).  Ill-gotten  gain  always  brings  with 
it  a  curse. 

III.  His  bemoesb  (ver.  27).  It  can  scarcely  be  called  repentance.  It  may  have 
been  sincere  enough  so  far  as  it  went,  and  for  this  reason  God  delayed  the  threatened 
punishment ;  but  it  was  wanting  in  the  elements  of  a  true  repentance.  It  was  the 
compunction  of  a  guilty  conscience,  but  not  the  sacred  agony  of  a  renewed  heart. 
It  sprang  from  sudden  alarm  at  the  inevitable  consequences  of  his  sin,  but  not  from 
a  true  hatred  of  the  sin  itself.  It  soon  passed  away,  and  left  him  stiU  more  a  slave 
to  the  evU  to  which  he  had  "  sold  himself"  than  he  was  before.  "  For  godly  sorrow 
worketh  repentance  to  salvation  not  to  be  repented  of:  but  the  sorrow  of  the  world 
worketh  death"  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).— W. 


OB.  XXII.  1 — 63.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


63] 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXn.    1—53. 
The  expedition  of  Ahab  and  Jehosha- 

THAT   AGAINST  EaMOTH-GiLEAD.      ThE  DEATH 

OP   Ahab.      The    beiqns  of  Jehoshaphat 
AND  Ahaziah, 

Ver.  1. — And  they  continued  [rather, 
rested.  Heb.  sate,  dwelt.' CI.  Judg.  v.  17. 
The  LXX.  has  lKa9i.ae,  sing.]  three  years 
without  wax  [The  Hebrew  explains  the 
"rested  " — there  was  notwar,  &e.  See  Ewald, 
286  g.  The  three  years  (not  full  years, 
as  the  next  verse  shows)  are  to  be 
counted  from  the  second  defeat  of  Ben- 
hadad ;  the  history,  that  is  to  say,  is  re- 
sumed from  oh.  xx.  84 — 43.  Eawlinson 
coDJectures  that  it  was  durifig  this  period 
that  the  Assyrian  invasion,  under  Shal- 
maneser  H.,  took  pladfe.  The  Black  Obe- 
lisk teUs  us  that  Ahab  of  Jezrcel  joined  a 
league  of  kings,  of  whom  Ben-hadad  was 
one,  against  the  Assyrians,  furnishing  a 
force  of  10,000  footmen  and  2000  chariots ; 
see  "  Hist.  lUust."  pp.  113,  114.  The  com- 
mon danger  might  well  compel  a  cessation 
of  hostilities]  between  Syria  and  Israel. 

Ver.  2. — And  It  came  to  pass  In  the  third 
year  [Of  the  peace  ;  not  after  the  death  of 
Naboth,  as  Stanley] ,  that  Jehoshaphat  the 
king  of  Judah  came  down  [The  journey  to 
Jerusalem  being  invariably  described  as  a 
"going  up,"  one  from  Jerusalem  to  the 
provinces  would  naturally  be  spoken  of  as  a 
"going  down  "]  to  the  Mng  of  Israel.  [For 
aught  that  appears,  this  was  the  first  time 
that  the  monarchs  of  the  sister  kingdoms 
had  met,  except  in  battle,  since  the  disrup- 
tion, though  the  marriage  of  Jehoram,  son 
of  Jehoshaphat,  with  Athaliah,  the  daughter 
of  Ahab  and'Jezebel,  had  taken  place  some 
years  before  this  date  (2  Chron.  xviii.  1,  2). 
It  is  probable  that  it  was  the  growing  power 
of  Syria  had  led  to  this  affinity  and  alliance.] 

Ver.  3. — And  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto 
Us  servants  [During  the  visit.  It  seems 
likely  that  Jehoshaphat  went  down  to 
Samaria  by  Ahab's  invitation,  and  that  the 
latter  then  had  this  campaign  in  view.  The 
chronicler  says  that  Aiab  "incited,"  or 
"stirred  him  up"  (same  word  as  in  eh. 
xxi.  25)  to  go  with  him  to  battle.  Ahab 
was  unable  to  contend  single-haniied,  and' 
without  Divine  assistance  — which  he  could 
not  now  look  for — against  Syria ;  and  saw 
no  means  of  compelling  the  execution  of 
the  treaty  which  Ben-hadad  had  made  with 
him  (oh.  XX.  34),  and  which  he  appears  to 
have  shamelessly  broken,  except  by  the  help 
of  Jehoshaphat,  whose  military  organiza- 


tion at  this  time  mnst  have  been  great,  and, 
indeed,  complete  (2  Chron.  xvii.  10 — 19). 
It  is  in  favour  of  this  view  that  Ahab  enter- 
tained him  and  his  large  retinue  with  such 
profuse  hospitahty.  The  chronicler,  who 
dwells  on  the  number  of  sheep  and  oxen 
slain  for  the  feast,  intimates  that  it  was 
this  generous  reception  "persuaded"  Je- 
hoshaphat to  join  in  the  war],  Know  ye 
that  Ramoth  In  Gllead  [Generally,  as 
below  (vers.  4,  6,  &o.),  "  Eamoth-Gilead," 
i.e.,  of  Gilead.  See  note  on  ch.  iv.  13. 
This  "  great  frontier  fortress  was,  in  the 
hands  of  Syria,  even  after  many  reverses, 
a  constant  menace  against  Israel ' '  ( Stanley)] 
is  ours  [i.e.,  it  was  one  of  the  cities  which 
Ben-hadad  had  promised  to  restore  (oh. 
XX.  84).  This  shows  that,  as  we  might 
expect  from  a  man  of  Ben-hadad's  over- 
bearing yet  pusillanimous  character,  he 
had  not  kept  good  faith.  Though  so  long  a 
time  had  elapsed,  it  was  still  in  his  bands] , 

and  we  be  still  [n^!1  is  onomatopoetic, 
like  our  *'  hush."  Marg.  rightly,  silent  from 
taking  it.  The  word  conveys  very  expres- 
sively that  they  had  been  afraid  of  making 
any  movement  to  assert  their  rights,  lest 
they  should  attract  the  attention  and  anger 
of  their  powerful  and  incensed  neighbour] , 
and  take  it  not  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Idng 
of  Syria?  [It  is  hardly  likely  that  Ahab 
could  have  forgotten  the  warning  of  oh. 
XX.  42.  It  is  probable  that  Ben-hadad's 
flagrant  disregard  of  his  treaty  engagements 
determined  him  to  run  all  risks,  especially 
if  he  could  secure  the  help  of  the  then 
powerful  king  of  Judah.] 

Ver.  4. — And  he  said  unto  Jehoshaphat, 
Wilt  thou  go  with  me  to  battle  to  Ramoth- 
GUead  7  [It  is  probable  this  question  was 
asked  with  some  misgivings.  Such  an 
alliance  was  altogether  new,  and  Ahab 
might  well  wonder  how  the  idea  would 
strike  a  pious  prince  like  Jehoshaphat. 
That  the  latter  ought  to  have  refused  his 
help,  we  know  from  2  Chron.  xix.  2.]  And 
Jehoshaphat  said  to  the  king  of  Israei  I  am 
as  thou  art  [Heb.  as  I  as  thou] ,'  my  people 
as  thy  people,  my  horses  as  thy  horses. 
[From  the  ready  and  unreserved  way  in 
which  he  at  once  engages  in  this  war,  we 
may  safely  conclude  that  he,  too,  had 
reason  to  fear  the  power  of  Syria.  Probably 
Ben-hadad,  when  he  besieged  Samaria  (ch. 
XX.  1),  had  formed  the  idea  of  reduoiug  tht 
whole  of  Palestine  to  subjection.  And 
Jehoshaphat  would  remember  that  Kamoth- 
Gilead,  where  the  Syrian  king  ^^aa  itili  eD- 


633 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  XXII.  1 — 53. 


trenched,  was  but  forty  miles  distant  from 
Jerusalem.  Bahr  holds  that  horses  are 
specially  mentioned  "  because  they  formed 
an  essential  part  of  the  military  power" 
(Psa.  xxxiii.  16,  17 ;  Prov.  xxi.  31).  It  is 
true  that  in  a  campaign  against  the  Syrians 
they  would  be  especially  useful  (see  on  ch. 
XX.  1.) ;  but  they  receive  no  mention  at  the 
hands  of  the  chronicler,  who  reads  instead 
of  this  last  clause,  "  And  we  (or  I)  will  be 
with  thee  in  the  war."] 

Ver.  6. — And  Jehoshaphat  said  unto  the 
king  of  Israel,  Inquire,  I  pray  thee,  at 
[This  word  is  redundant]  the  word  of  the 
Lord  to-day.  [Di*5  hardly  conveys  that 
"he  asks  to  have  the  prophets  called  in  at 
once,"  "  lest  Ahab  should  consent  in  word 
and  put  ofE  the  inquiry  in  act "  (RawUnson) ; 
but  rather  means,  "at  this  crisis,"  ''  under 
these  circomatances,"  This  reijuest  agrees 
well  with  what  we  learn  elsewhere  as  to 
Jehoshaphat's  piety  (2  Chron,  xvii.  4—9; 
xix.  5 — 7,  &o.)  And,  remembering  how 
Ahab's  late  victones  had  been  foretold  by  a 
prophet,  and  had  been  won  by  the  help  of 
Jehovah,  Jehoshaphat  might  well  suppose 
that  his  new  ally  would  be  eager  to  know 
the  word  of  the  Lord.] 

Yer.  6. — Then  the  king  of  Israel  gathered 
the  prophets  [Called  by  Mioaiah  "  his 
prophets"  (ver.  22),  and  "thy  prophets" 
(ver.  23)]  together,  about  four  hundred 
men  [From  the  number  (cf.  cb.  xviii.  19) 
it  has  been  concluded  that  these  were  "  the 
prophets  of  the  groves,"  i.e.,  of  Astarte, 
who  escaped  the  massacre  of  the  Baal 
prophets  (oh.  xviii.  40).  Others  have  sup- 
posed that  they  were  prophets  of  Baal.  Bat 
both  these  suppositions'  are  negatived  (1) 
by  the  fact  that  Jehoshaphat  asks  Ahab  to 
"  inquire  at  the  word  of  Jehovah,"  and  (2) 
that  these  prophets  profess  to  speak  in  the 
name  and  by  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  (vers. 
11,  12,  24).  Moreover  (3)  Ahab  would 
hardly  have  insulted  Jehoshaphat  by  bring- 
ing the  prophets  of  Baal  or  Astarte  before 
him  (Waterland  in  Wordsworth).  And  yet 
that  they  were  not  true  prophets  of  the  Lord, 
or  of  the  "  sons  of  the  prophets,"  appears  (1) 
from  ver.  7,  where  Jeho^aphat  asks  for  a 
"prophet  of  the  Lord;"  and  (2),  from  ver. 
20  sqq.,  where  Micaiah  disclaims  them,  and 
is  found  in  direct  opposition  to  them.  The 
only  oonclnsion  open  to  us,  consequently — 
and  it  is  now  generally  adopted— is  that  they 
were  the  priests  of  the  high  places  of  Bethel 
and  Dan,  the  successors  of  those  whom 
Jeroboam  had  introduced  into  the  priestly 
office.  It  need  cause  us  no  surprise  to  find 
these  priests  here  described  as  ' '  prophets  " 
(cf.  3ei.  xxii.  13;  Ezek.  xiii.  1),  and  as 
claiming  prophetic  gifts,  for  the  priests  of 


Baal  bore  the  same  name  (ch.  xviii.  19,  23, 
&o.),  and  apparently  pretended  to  similar 
powers.  "No  ancient  people  considered 
any  oultns  complete  without  a  class  of  men 
through  whom  the  god  might  be  ques- 
tioned "  (Bahr).  The  existence  of  so  large 
a  number  of  prophets  of  the  calves  proves 
that  the  inroads  of  idolatry  had  by  no 
means  destroyed  the  oalf-worship.  H  its 
priests  were  so  many,  its  worshippers  cannot 
have  been  few],  and  said  unto  them.  Shall 
I  go  against  Samoth-Gllead  to  battle,  or 
shall  I  forbear  7  And  they  said,  Go  up ;  for 
the  Lord  ['JIK  It  is  very  significant  that 
at  first  they  hesitate  to  use  the  ineffable 
name.  It  was  probably  this  circumstance 
excited  Jehoshaphat's  suspicions.  It  has 
been  said  that  the  reason  why  he  was  dis- 
satisfied with  this  answer  is  unexplained ; 
but  when  we  remember  -how  careful  the 
true  prophet  was  to  speak  in  the  name  of 
Jehovah  (ohs.  xiv.  7.;  xvii.  1, 14 ;  xx.  13, 14, 
28),  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  it  was  their 
mention  of  "  Adonai  "  occasioned  his  mis- 
givings. The  chronicler  gives  the  word  m 
Elohini]  shaU  deUver  It  [LXX.  diSo^g 
Siiau,  shall  surely  give  it]  into  the  band  of 
the  fctng. 

Ver.  7. — ^And  Jehoshaphat  said.  Is  there 
not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  [Heb. 
Jehovah'\  besides  [i.e.,  in  addition  to  thes* 
soi-disant  prophets.  He  hardly  likes  to  say 
bluntly  that  he  cannot  regard  them  as 
inspired,  but  at  the  same  time  hints  clearly 
that  he  cannot  be  satisfied  as  to  their 
mission  and  authority] ,  that  we  might  In- 
quire of  him  7 

Ver.  8.— And  the  Mag  of  Israel  said  unto 
Jehoshaphat,  There  Is  yet  one  man  [Cf.  ch, 
xviii.  22] ,  Micaiah  [The  name  (=Who  is 
like  Jehovah  ?)  is  as  appropriate  to  the  man 
who  bore  it  as  Elijah's  name  was  to  him 
(ch.  xvii.  1 ;  cf.  xviii.  39).  But  it  is  not  an 
uncommon  name  in  the  Old  Testament — it 
is  borne  by  eight  different  persons.  Compare 
Michael,  "  Who  is  like  God  ?  "]  the  son  of 
Imlah   [The    chronicler    writes  the  name 

Imla,  Sjaj] ,  by  whom  we  may  inquire  of 
the  Lord  [Ahab  evidently  had  wished  Je- 
hoshaphat to  understand  that  the  prophets 
already  consulted  were  prophets  of  Jeho- 
vah, as  no  doubt  they  claimed  to  be.  One 
of  them  bore  a  name  in  which  the  sacred 
Jah  formed  a  part] :  but  I  hate  ['riN.JB'  (of. 
odi),  have  learned  to  hate]  him  [Ahab  had 
good  reasons  for  not  caring  to  consult  ■ 
man  whom  he  had  put  into  prison  (see  ver> 
26,  and  compare  Matt.  xiv. 3), because  of  hij 
reproofs  or  unwelcome  predictions.  Jose* 
plius,  and  Jewish  writers  generally,  iden- 
tify Micaiah  with  the  nameless  prophet  of 


OH.  xxu.  1 — 63.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


631 


ell.  xzi,  42] ;  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  good 
joncemlng  me,  hut  evil    [The  ohronioler 

adds  Vp;"^^  ;  i.e.,  persiBtently,  through- 
ont  his  whole  career.  Ahab  insinuates  that 
Mioaiah  is  actuated  by  personal  dislike. 
The  commentators  refer  to  Homer.  II.  iv., 
106—108.]  And  Jehoshaphat  said,  Let  not 
the  king  say  so.  [He  does  not  mean 
that  the  prophet  cannot  say  just  what  he 
will,  but  suggests  that  Ahab  is  prejudiced 
against  him..  Perhaps  he  suspected  that 
there  might  be  a  very  different  reason  for 
Micajah's  sinister  predictions.] 

Ver.  9.— Then  the  king  of  Israel  called 
an  officer  [Heb.  one  eunuch.  So  the  LXX., 
tivovvov  iva.  So  that  Samuel's  forebodings 
have  Deen  realized  (1  Sam.  viii.  15,  marg.) 
Probably,  like  Bbed  Melech,  the  Ethiopian 
(Jer.  xxxviii.  7),  he  was  a  foreigner ;  possibly 
a  prisoner  of  war  (Herod,  iii.  49  ;  vi.  32). 
Deut.  xxiii.  1  suggests  that  even  such  a 
king  as  Ahab  would  hardly  inflict  this 
humiliation  upon  an  Israelite.  From  1 
Chron.  xxviii.  1,  Heb.,  we  gather  that  even 
David's  court  had  its  eunuchs,  and  we  may 
be  sure  that  Solomon's  enormous  harem 
could  not  be  maintained  without  them.  In 
later  days  we  find  them  prominent  in  the 
history,  and  occupying  important  positions 
under  the  king  {2  Kmgs  viii.  6;  ix.  32; 
xxiii.  11 ;  xxv.  19 ;  Jer.  xxix.  2 ;  xxxiv.  19 ; 
Iii.  25,  &e.  Of.  Gen.  xxxvii.  36)],  and 
■aid.  Hasten  hither  UUcalali  the  son  of 

Tmlfth 

Yer.  10.— And  the  king  of  Israel  and 
Jehoshaphat  the  king  of  Judah  sat  each 
on  Ms  throne  ["  Oriental  kings  had  port- 
able thrones,  which  they  took  with  them 
upon  their  journeys"  (Herod,  vii.  212. 
Layard,  "Nineveh  and  Babylon,"  p.  150) 
Eawlinson],  having  put  on  their  robes 
[As  a  council  of  state  was  to  be  held,  the 
kings  put  on  their  official  vestments.  D^^? 
simply  means  "coverings,"  "clothes,"  but 
that  the  special  royal  dress  is  here  intended 
is  clear,  as  Bahr  observes,  from  Levit. 
xxi.  10.  This  gathering  of  prophets  and 
counsellors  seems  to  have  followed  the 
banquet.  When  Jehoshaphat  expressed 
his  readiness  to  go  to  war,  Ahab  appears 
to  have  forthwith  convened  this  assembly, 
in  order  that  the  matter  might  be  put  in 
train  at  once.  Ewald  says  a  review  of  the 
troops  was  designed,  but  of  this  the  text 
knows  nothing]  In  a  void  place  [Heb.  a 
ikreshing-floor.  See  note  on  oh.  xxi.  1.  The 
"  floor  "  implies  not  only  a  vacant  space, 
but  an  exalted  position.  Ordinarily,  it 
would  not  be  enclosed  within  the  city 
walls,  nor  does  it  appear  that  this  floor  was] 
In  the  entrance  [The  Hebrew  has  no  prepo- 


sition ;  simply  n^^  which  would  be  mora 
correctly  rendered  "  at  the  entrance."  The 
town  gate  was  the  great  place  of  concourse 
(2  Kings  vii.  1).  Here,  too,  justice  was  dis- 
pensed. See  Euth  iv.  1;  2  Sam.  xv.  2; 
xix.  8 ;  Pss.  Ixix.  12 ;  oxxvii.  6  ;  Deut.  xxi. 
19  ;  Gen.  xix.  1 ;  zxiii.  10 ;  Amos  v.  12,  15, 
&c.]  of  the  gate  of  Samaria ;  and  all  the 
prophets  prophesied  before  them.  [They 
continued  their  prophesyings  even  whilst 
Mioah  was  being  summoned.  Or  the  refer- 
ence may  be  to  the  prophesyings  of  ver.  6. 

Ver.  11. — And  Zedekiali  [This  name  — 
"  Justice  of  Jehovah,"  is  one  of  the  proofs 
that  these  cannot  have  been  prophets  of 
Baal,  as  Stanley  and  others  suppose]  the 
son  of  Chenaanab  [=  "  Canaanitess."  But 
we  gather  from  1  Chron.  vii.  10  that  this, 
like  Shelomith,  was  a  man's  name.  The 
Benjamite  there  mentioned  may  be  identical 
with  the  father  (or  ancestor)  of  ZedeMah] 
made  him  [Bawlinson  would  translate  "  had 
made  him."  He  says  that  the  horns  must 
have  "  been  made  previously,  in  expectation 
of  some  such  occasion  as  that  now  afforded 
him."  But  it  is  quite  conceivable  that 
during  the  propheeyingSi  which  clearly 
lasted  some  time,  the  idea  occurred  to 
ZedeMah,  and  it  would  not  take  long  to 
put  it  into  execution]  horns  of  iron 
[Thenius  understands  that  these  were  iron 
spikes  held  on  the  forehead.  But  the 
reference  is  clearly  to  the  horns  of  a 
bullock,  and  the  appropriateness  of  the 
prophetic  act  is  only  manifest  when  we 
remember  that  Ephraim  is  compared  to  a 
bullock  (Deut.  xxxiii.  17),  and  more,  that 
Moses  spake  beforehand  of  the  strength  of 
his  horns,  and  predicted  that  with  them  he 
should  "push  the  people  together  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth."  Not  only,  that  is  to 
say,  was  the  horn  a  familiar  Oriental 
symbol  of  power  (1  Sam.  ii.  1, 10  ;  2  Sam. 
xxii.  3 ;  Pss.  Ixxxix.  24 ;  xcii.  10 ;  Dan. 
vii.  21 ;  viii.  8,  &c.),  but  it  was  identified 
in  a  peculiar  manner  with  the  powerful 
tribe  of  Ephraim  ;  in  other  words,  with  the 
kingdom  of  Israel.  This  symbolical  act 
was  not  necessarily  an  imitation  of  the 
action  of  Ahijah  (oh.  xi.  80).  Such  acted 
parables  were  not  nncommon  among  the 
prophets  (2  Kings  xiii.  15 ;  Isa.  xx.  2  ;  Jer. 
xiii.  1 ;  XIX.  10 ;  xixii.  9  sqq. ;  Ezek.  iv., 
v.  J  Acts  xxi.  11)]  :  and  he  said.  Thus  salth 
the  LCi*d  [Heb.  Jehovah.  He  now  uses  the 
sacred  name  ;  no  doubt  because  of  Jehosha- 
phat's  demand,  ver.  7] ,  With  these  Shalt 
thou  push  [the  word  of  Deut.  xxxiii.  17] 
the  Syrians,  until  thou  have  consumed 
them. 

Yer.  12.— And  aU  the  prophets  proph*. 
sled  (Heb.  were  prophesying]  bo,  saying; 


S84 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[oh.  xxn.  1— 5i 


Go  up  to  Eamoth-Gllead,  and  prosper  I 
[a  Bebiaism  for  "thou  wilt  prosper." 
Gesenius,  Gram.  §  127.  2,  cites  parallels 
in  Gen.  xlii.  18  ;  ProT.  xx.  13 ;  Pea.  xxxvii. 
27  ;  Job  xxii.  21 ;  Isa.  viii.  9  ;_xxix.  9,  and 
reminds  us  that  in  the  Latin  divide  et 
impera,  we  have  the  same  idiom] :  for  the 
lord  [all  speak  in  His  name  now,  hoping 
thus  to  satisfy  the  king  of  Judah]  shall 
deliver  it  Into  the  king's  hand. 

Ver.  13.— And  the  messenger  that  was 
gone  [or  went]  to  call  KUcalah,  spake  unto 
him,  saying,  Behold  now,  the  words  of  the 
prophets  declare  good  unto  the  king  with 
one  mouth  [Heb.  one  mouth  good  to  the  king. 
The  messenger  may  possibly  have  had  in- 
structions to  seek  to  conciliate  Micaiah.  In 
ony  case  he  thinks  it  well  to  tell  him  of 
the  unanimity  of  the  prophets.  His  testi- 
mony, he  suggests,  will  surely  agree  with 
theirs]  :  let  thy  word,  I  pray  thee,  he  like 
the  word  of  one  of  them,  and  speali  that 
which  is  good.     [Heb.  speak  good.] 

Ver.  14.— And  Micaiah  said.  As  the  Lord 
llveth,  what  the  Lord  salth  unto  me,  that 
will  I  speak.  [We  are  forcibly  reminded  of 
the  answer  of  Balaam,  Num.  xxii.  18,  38. 
And  we  may  see  not  only  in  the  suggestion 
of  this  messenger,  but  also  in  Ahab's  beUef 
(ver.  8),  that  Micaiah  could  prophesy  at 
pleasure,  a  striking  correspondence  with 
the  ideas  of  Balak  (ib.  v.  6, 17).  Instead  of 
regarding  the  prophet  as  being  merely  the 
mouthpiece  of  Deity,  he  was  believed  in 
that  age  to  have  a  supernatural  influence 
with  God,  and  to  be  entrusted  with  magical 
powers  to  shape  the  fature,,as  well  as  to 
foretell  it.] 

Ver.  15.— So  he  came  to  the  king.  And 
the  king  said  unto  him,  Micaiah,  shall  we 
go  against  Bamoth-Gilead  to  battle,  or 
ahall  we  forbear  7  [Same  words  as  in  ver. 
6.  There  is  an  apparent  studied  fairness 
in  this  repetition.  It  is  as  if  Ahab  said, 
"  Despite  his  prejudice  against  me,  I  will 
not  attempt  to  influence  Ms  mind.  I  only 
deal  with  him  as  with  the  rest. "]  And  he 
answered  him,  Cki,  and  prosper :  for  the 
Lord  shall  deliver  it  into  the  hand  of  the 
king.  [As  Ahab's  inquiry  is  the  echo  of  the 
question  of  ver.  6,  so  is  Micaiah's  response 
identical  with  the  answer  of  the  prophets; 
He  simply  echoes  their  words,  of  which, 
perhaps,  he  has  been  informed  by  the 
eunuch.  There  was  an  exquisite  propriety 
in  this.  The  question  was  insiucere  ;  the 
reply  was  ironical  {cf.  oh.  xviii.  27).  Ahab 
il  answered  "according  to  the  multitude 
of  his  idols"  (Ezek.  xiv.  4).  He  wishes  to 
be  deceived,  and  he  is  deceived.  No  doubt 
Micaiah's  mocking  tone  showed  that  his 
words  were  ironical ;  but  Ahab's  hollow 
tone  had  already  proved  to  Micaiah  that  he 


was  insincere ;  that  he  did  not  care  to  know 
the  will  of  the  Lord,  and  wanted  prophets 
who  would  speak  to  him  smooth  things  and 
prophesy  deceits  (Isa.  xxx.  10).] 

Ter.  16. — And  the  kiog  said  unto  hln^ 
How  many  times  shall  I  adjure  thee  that 
thou  tell  me  nothing  but  that  which  is 
true  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  7  [Bawlinson 
concludes  from  these  words  that  "  this 
mocking  manner  was  familiar  to  Micaiah, 
who  had  used  it  in  some  former  dealing 
with  the  Israelite  monarch."  But  we  must 
remember  that  Ahab's  words  were  really 
addressed  to  Jehoshaphat,  He  is  so  mani- 
festly playing  a  part,  that  we  need  not 
assume  that  he  is  strictly  truthful.  His 
great  desire  evidently  is  to  discredit  Micah's 
predictions,  which  he  clearly  perceives,  from 
the  bitter  and  ironical  tone  of  the  latter,  will 
be  adverse  to  him.] 

Ver.  17. — And  he  said  [We  may  imagine 
how  entire  was  the  change  of  tone.  He  now 
speaks  with  profound  seriousness.   Theniug 
sees  in  the  peculiarity  ard  originality  of  this 
vision  a  proof  of  the  historical  truth  of  this 
history.    "We  feel  that  we  are  gradually 
drawing  nearer  to  the  times  of  the  later 
prophets.     It   is   a  vision    which    might 
rank  amongst  those  of  Isaiah  or  Ezekiel " 
(Stanley)] ,  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  upon 
the  hills,  as  sheep  tlxat  have  not  a  shep- 
herd :  and  the  Lord  said.  These  have  no 
master :  let  them  return  every  man  to  his 
house  In  peace.   [The  last  words  are  illus- 
trated by  the  command  of  ver.  31 ;  compare 
ver.  36.    We  inay  also  picture  the  efleot 
these  words  woiild  have  on  the  assembly  at 
the  city  gate.    For,  however  much  they 
might  be  inclined  to  discredit  Micaiah's 
words,  and    however  much   the  reckless, 
unreasoning  war-spirit  might  possess  them, 
there  were  none  who  did  not  understand 
that  this  vision  portended  the  dispersion _ol 
the  Israelite  army  and  the  death  of  its 
leader.     King  and  people   had  been  con- 
stantly   represented    under  the  figure   of 
shepherd  and  sheep,  and  notably  by  Moses 
himself,  who  had  used   these  very  words, 
"  sheep  without  a  shepherd  "  (Num.  xxvii. 
17  ;  of.  Psa.lxxviii.  70, 71 ;  Isa.  xliv.  28;  Jer. 
xxiii.  1,  2  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  passim.    It  is  ob- 
servable that  Micaiah's  vision,  Uke  Zede- 
Mah's  parable,  borrows  the  language  of  the 
Pentateuch.     Coincidences  of  this  remote 
character  are  the  most  powerful  proofs  that 
the  Pentateuch  was  then  written.] 

Ver.  18.— And  the  king  of  Israel  said 
unto  Jehoshaphat,  Did  I  not  teU  thee  that 
he  would  [Heb.  say  to  thee,  He  will,  &o.] 
prophesy  no  good  concerning  me  but  evil  1 

[It  is  clear  that  Ahab  had  understood  per- 
fectly the  purport  of  Micaiah's  words.    Hi 


OB.  zxn.  1—68.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


686 


now  appeals  to  them  m  a  proof  ol  the 

lattei's  malice.] 

Ver.  19. — And  he  said,  Hear  thou  [in 
2  Chron.  xviii.  18,  Hear  ye\  therefore  [Tho 
LXX.has  ovx  ov7(u£,  whence  it  would  almost 

appear  that  they  had  the  text  {3  k'?  before 

them  (Bahr).  But  p?  is  every  way  to  be 
preferred.  It  is  emphatic  by  position,  and 
the  meaning  is,  "  Since  yon  will  have  it 
that  my  words  are  prompted  by  malice, 
hear  the  message  I  have  for  you,"  t&c]  the 
word  of  tlie  lord.  I  saw  the  Lord  [It  is 
not  impUed  (Wordsworth)  that  he  had  any 
direct  and  objective  vision  of  God,  such  as 
Moses  (Ezod.  zxziv.  S),  Elijah,  or  St.  Ste- 
phen. He  here  declares  what  he  may  have 
seen  in  dream  or  trance.  (Cf.  Bev.  i.  10 ; 
iv.  2 ;  Isa.  vi.  1 ;  Ezek.  i.  1.)  It  was  a  real 
but  inner  vision  (EeU).  In  its  interpreta- 
tion the  caution  of  Peter  Martyr  is  carefully 
to  be  borne  in  mind  ;  Omnia  haec  dicuntwr 
avdpuinoTraQiiQl  sitting  on  his  throne  [It 
was  natural  for  some  of  the  commeutators 
to  see  in  these  words  a  reference  to  the  two 
kings  then  sitting  in  their  royal  apparel, 
each  upon  his  throne.  But  it  is  very 
doubtful  whether  any  such  thought  was 
present  in  the  mind  of  the  speaker,  who 
simply  relates  a  vision  of  the  past] ,  and  all 
the  host  of  heaven  [The  celestial  powers, 
oherubim,  angels,  archangels,  who  surround 
the  Lord  of  glory.  That  there  can  be  no 
reference  to  ^e  son,  moon,  and  stars,  not- 
withstanding that  these  are  called  "  the 
host  of  heaven "  in  Deut.  iv.  19,  xvii.  3,  is 
ekai  from  the  next  words.  The  expression 
ia  to  be  explained  by  Oen.  xxxii.  1,  2] 

■tanning  by  him  [V^V ;  for  the  meaning,  see 
Oen.  zviii.  8]  on  his  right  hand  and  on 
Ills  lefb  [The  resemblance  of  this  vision 
to  that  of  baiah  (ch.  vi.  1 — 8)  must  not  be 
overlooked.] 

Yer.  20.— And  the  Lord  said.  Who  shall 
persuade  [Same  word  in  Exod.  xxii.  16, 
Heb. ;  Judg.  xiv.  15 ;  xvi.  S  j  Prov.  i.  10, 
Sm. ;  in  aU  of  which  instances  it  is  trans- 
lated "entice."  Compare  with  this  ques. 
tion  that  of  Isa.  vi.  8.]  Ahab,  that  he  may 
go  np  and  tall  at  Bamoth-Gilead  7  [The 
meaning  is  that  Ahab's  death  in  battle  had 
been  decreed  in  the  counsels  of  God,  and 
that  the  Divine  Wisdom  had  devised  means 
for  accomplishing  His  purpose.]  And  one 
said  on  this  manner,  and  another  said 
[Heb.  laying]  on  that  manner.  [Bahr  again 
quotes  firom  Peter  Martyr:  "Innuit  varios 
providentiae  Dei  modoa,  quibus  decreta  sua 
ad  exitum  pcrducit,  and  adds  that  in  this 
vision  "inner  and  spiritual  processes  are 
regarded  aa  real  phenomena,  nay,  even  as 
persons."] 


Ver.  21 — And  there  came  forth  a  spirit 
[Heb.  the  spirit.  By  some,  especially  of 
the  earlier  commentators,  understood  of 
the  evil  spirit.  But  the  view  now  gene- 
rally adopted  (Thenius,  Keil,  Bahr)  is  that 
"the  spirit  of  prophecy"  is  meant,  "the 
power  which,  going  forth  from  God  and 
taking  possession  of  .a  man,  makes  him  a 
prophet  (1  Sam.  x.  6,  10;  xix.  20,  23). 
The  N'33  is  the  Onn  bJ'.X  (Hosea  ix.  7) " 
Bahr.  This  power  is  here  personified],  and 
stood  before  the  Lord,  and  said,  I  [emphatic 
in  the  Hebrew]  wlU  persuade  [or  entice] 
him. 

Ver.  22.— And  the  Lord  said  onto  him, 
Wherewith?  [Heb.  By  whatf]  And  ha 
Bald,  I  will  go  forth,  and  I  will  be  a  lying 
spirit  [Heb.  a  spirit  of  a  lie.  Cf.  Zeoh. 
xiii.  2 ;  1  John  iv.  6]  in  the  mouth  of  aU 
his  prophets.  [His  prophets,  not  God's. 
Cf.  2  Kiugs  iii.  13.]  And  he  said,  Thou 
shalt  persuade  him,  and  prevail  also ;  go 
forth,  and  do  so. 

Ver.  23. — Now  therefore,  behold,  the 
lord  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  In  the  mouth 
of  all  these  thy  [Cf.  6  oiko;  v^uv,  Matt. 
xxiii.  38]  prophets  [This  statement,  espe- 
cially to  those  who  have  taken  the  narra- 
tive literally,  and  who  have  seen  in  "  the 
spirit"  either  one  of  the  angels  of  God,  or 
Satan  himself,  has  presented  almost  in- 
superable difficulties.  The  main  difficulty 
lies  in  the  fact  that  the  Almighty  and  All 
Holy  is  here  made  to  give  His  sanction 
to  deceit  and  lying,  for  the  purpose  of 
tempting  Ahab  to  his  death.  We  have 
precisely  the  same  difficulty,  though,  if  pos- 
sible, more  directly  expressed  in  Ezek.  xiv. 
9  :  '*  If  the  prophet  be  deceived  ...  I  the 
Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet."  Cf. 
Jer.  XX.  7 ;  1  Sam.  xvi.  16.  But  this  diffi. 
culty  vanishes  if  we  remember  that  this  is 
anthropopathic  language,  and  is  merely 
meant  to  convey  that  God  had  "  taken  the 
house  of  Israel  in  their  own  heart,"  because 
they  were  "estranged  from  Him  through 
their  idols"  (Ezek.  xiv.  5).  Ahab  wished 
to  be  guided  by  false  prophets,  and  the 
justice  of  God  decreed  that  he  should  be 
guided  by  them  to  his  ruin.  Sin  is  pun- 
ished by  sin.  "  God  proves  His  holiness 
most  of  all  by  this,  that  He  punishes  evil 
by  evil,  and  destroys  it  by  itself "  (Bahr). 
Ahab  had  chosen  lying  instead  of  truth : 
by  lying — according  to  the  lex  talionis — he 
should  be  destroyed.  The  difficulty,  in  fact, 
is  that  of  the  permission  of  evil  in  the 
world ;  of  the  use  of  existent  evU  by  God 
to  accomplish  His  purposes  of  good] ,  and 
the  Lord  [not  I  alone,  ver.  18]  hath 
spoken  [i.e.,  decreed]  evil  concerning  thea 

Ver.  24. — But  Zedeklah  the  son  of  Che. 


SM 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xxn.  1—6B, 


naanah  [Bawlinson  holds  that  he  was  a 
sort  of  coryphaeus  of  the  false  prophets.  It 
is  more  probable  that,  having  put  himself 
forward  on  a  former  occasion  (ver.  11),  he 
now  feels  specially  aggrieved  at  Micaiah's 
blunt  assertion,  that  he  and  the  rest  have 
been  possessed  by  a  spirit  of  Ues]  went 
near,  and  smcte  Micaiah  [A  thoroughly 
natural  touch.  But  the  whole  narrative 
has  every  mark  of  naturalness  and  veracity. 
It  is  easy  to  see  how  enraged  Zedekiah 
would  be  at  the  slight  cast  upon  his  pro- 
phetic powers.  Apparently  this  gross  in- 
dignity ehcited  no  protest  or  word  of  dis- 
pleasure from  either  of  the  kings.  Micaiah, 
like  Elijah,  was  left  alone] ,  on  the  cheeK 
[of.  Job  xvi.  10;  Lam.  iii.  30;  Luke  vi. 
29 ;  and  above  all  Matt.  zxvi.  67 ;  Luke 
xsii.  64 ;  Acts  xxiii.  2.  Herein  Micaiah 
had  "  the  fellowship  of  sufferings  "  (Phil. 
iii.  10)  with  our  blessed  Lord.  Baw- 
linson thinks  that  his  hands  would  be 
bound,  but  this  is  extremely  improbable. 
In  that  case  Ahab  could  hardly  have  asked 
him  to  prophesy  (ver.  15),  or  if  he  did, 
Jehoshaphat  would  know  beforehand  what 
to  expect],  and  said,  Which  way  [Heb. 
What,  or  where.  The  chronicler  supplies 
"way,"  thereby  bringing  the  expression 
into  unison  with  oh.  xiii.  12;  2  Kings  iii. 
8.;  Job  xxxviii.  24]  went  [Heb.  passed, 
crossed,  "121)]  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  [These 
words  are  important,  as  showing  that  the 
■  speaker  had  not  identified  "  the  spirit  "  of 
ver.  21  vrith  the  evil  spirit ;  Job.  i.  6  sqq.] 
from  me  to  speak  unto  thee  7  [It  is  pretty 
clear  from  these  words,  in  connexion  with 
ver.  23,  that  Zedeldah  had  been  conscious 
of  an  inspiration,  of  a  spirit  not  his  own, 
which  impelled  him  to  speak  and  act  as  he 
did.  We  must  not  attach  too  much  import- 
ance to  a  taunting  and  passionate  speech, 
but  its  meanmg  appears  to  be:  I  have 
spoken  in  the  name  and  by  the  sijirit  of 
Jehovah.  Thou  claimest  to  have  done  the 
same.  How  is  it  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
speaks  one  thing  by  me,  another  by  thee  ? 
Thou  hast  seen  (ver.  19)  the  secret  counsels 
of  Heaven.    Tell  us,  then,  which  way,  ifto. 

Ver.  25. — And  Micaiah  said,  Bel-Olcl,  thou 
Shalt  see  [Keil  understands,  "that  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  had  departed  from  thee."  But 
the  meaning  rather  appears  to  be,  "  Thou 
shalt  see  which  was  a  true  prophet."  He 
does  not  answer  the  insolent  question,  but 
says,  "  Thou  wilt  alter  thy  mind  in  the  day," 
ifcc.  With  this  may  be  compared  our  Lord's 
words.  Matt.  xxvi.  64.  He  also  manifests 
our  Lord's  spirit  (1  Peter  ii.  22  sqq.)  "  as  if 
the  Great  Example  had  already  appeared 
before  him  "  (Bahr)]  in  that  day  when  thuu 
Shalt  go  Into  an  inner  chamber  [see  note  ua 
ch.  XX.  30]  to  hide  thyself.     [When  was 


this  prediction  fulfilled?  Probably  when 
the  news  of  the  defeat  reached  Samaria,  oi 
on  the  day  after  Ahab's  death.  Jezebel 
would  almost  certainly  take  summaij 
vengeance  upon  the  false  prophets  who  were 
responsible  for  her  husband's  death  and  the 
reverses  of  the  army.  Or  if  she  did  not, 
the  prophets  had  good  reason  to  fear  that 
she  would,  and  would  hide  accordingly. 

Yer.  26. — And  the  king  of  Israel  said, 
Take  [Sing.  Take  thou.  This  command 
was  probably  addressed  to  the  eunuch  men- 
tioned in  ver.  9]  Micaiah,  and  caxry  him 
back  [Heb.  make  him  return.  This  shows 
clearly  that  he  had  come  from  prison^  unto 
Amon  the  governor  [lb'  chief;  same  word 
in  chs.  iv.  2 ;  xi.  24 ;  xvi.  9 ;  Gen.  xxxvii. 
36;  xl.  9,  22,  &o.  The  "chief  of  the  city" 
is  also  mentioned  2  Kings  zxiii.  8 ;  of. 
Neh.  xi.  9]  of  the  city  [who  would 
naturally  have  charge  of  the  town  prison. 
Probably  the  prison  was  in  his  house.  Cf. 
Gen.  xl.  3  ;  Jer.  xxxvii.  20],  and  to  Joash 
the  king's  son.  [Thenius  supposes  that 
this  prince  had  been  c:i  trusted  to  Amon  for 
his  mihtary  education,  and  refers  to  2  Kings 
X.  1.  But  in  that  case  he  would  hardly 
have  been  mentioned  as  associated  with  him 
in  the  charge  of  so  important  a  prisoner. 
Whoever  Joash  was,  he  was  a  man  in 
authority.  It  is  curious  that  we  find 
another  prophet,  Jeremiah,  put  into  the 
prison  of  Malchiah,  the  son  of  the  king 
(A.  V.  the  son  of  HamrMlech  ;  same  expres- 
sion as  here),  Jer.  xxxviii.  6 ;  cf.  xxxvi.  26. 
Some  have  seen  in  this  designation  a  name 
of  ofSce,  and  Bahr  thinks  that  "  Joash  was 
not  probably  a  son  of  Ahab,  but  a  prince 
of  the  blood."  But  when  we  remember 
what  a  nimiber  of  sons  Ahab  had  (2  Kings 
X.  1),  no  valid  reason  can  be  assigned  why 
Joash  should  not  have  been  one  of  them. 
He  may  have  been  billeted  upon  Amon,  and 
yet  associated  vrith  him  in  tiie  government 
of  the  city.] 

Ver.  27. — And  say  [Heb.  thou  shatt  say]. 
Thus  saith  the  king,  Put  this  fellow  tn  the 
prison  [Heb.  h<iuse  of  the  prison.  Bahr 
thinks  that  Micaiah  had  formerly  been  in 
arrest  under  Amon's  charge,  and  now  was  to 
be  committed  to  the  prison  proper.  But 
more  probably  the  words  mean,  "  put  bim  in 
the  prison  again."  His  superadded  punish- 
ment was  to  be  in  the  shape  of  prison  diet. 
It  is  probable  that  it  was  owing  to  the  pre- 
sence of  Jehoshaphat  that  Micaiah  escaped 
with  no  severer  sentence],  and  feed  him 

with  bread  of  affliction  [or  oppression,  yn? 
pressit ;  cf.  Exod.  iii.  9 ;  Num.  xxii.  25  ;  2 
Kings  vi.  32] ,  and  with  water  of  affliction 
[Josephus  (Ant.  viii.  IS.  4)  relates  that 
after  Micaiah's  prediction  the  king  wai  is 


OH.  XXIL  1 — 68.] 


THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


fST 


great  suspense  and  tear,  nntil  Zedekiah 
deliberately  smote  him,  in  order  to  show 
that  he  was  powerless  to  avenge  an  injury  as 
the  man  of  God  did  (ch.  ziii.  4),  and  therefore 
no  true  prophet.  This  may  be  an  "  empty 
Babbinical  tradition  "  (Balu'),  bnt  we  may 
be  sure  that  Ahab  did  not  near  Micaiah's 
words  unmoved.  He  had  had  such  con- 
vincing proofs  of  the  foresight  nnd  powers 
of  the  Lord's  prophets  that  he  may  well  have 
trembled,  even  as  he  pnt  on  a  bold  front, 
and  sent  Micaiah  back  to  the  prison  house] , 
until  I  come  in  peace.  [This  looks  like  an 
effort  to  encourage  himself  and  those  around 
him.  But  it  almost  betrays  his  misgiv- 
ings. He  would  have  them  think  he  had  no 
fears. 

Ver.  28. — And  micaiab  said,  If  thou  re- 
tom  at  all  In  peace,  the  Lord  hath  not 
spoken  by  me.  And  he  said,  Hearken,  O 
people  [Bather,  0  nations.  Audits,  populi 
omnes,  Vulgate.  He  appeals,  so  to  speak, 
to  the  world] ,  every  one  of  you.  [It  is  a 
curious  circumstance  that  these  same  words 
are  found  at  the  beginning  of  the  prophecy 
of  Micah  (ch.  i.  2).  The  coincidence  may 
be  purely  accidental,  or  the  words  may  have 
been  borrowed  by  the  prophet,  not,  indeed, 
from  our  historian,  but  from  some  record, 
the  substance  of  which  is  embodied  in  this 
history.  Micah  lived  about  a  century  and  a 
half  sSter. Micaiah  ;  about  a  century  before 
the  Book  of  Kings  was  given  to  the  world. 

Ver.  29. — So  the  king  of  Israel  and 
Je£o8hapat  the  king  of  Judah  went  up  to 
Eamoth-GUead  to  battle.  ["By  the  very 
network  of  evil  counsel  which  he  has 
woven  for  himself  is  the  king  of  Israel  led 
to  his  ruin "  (Stanley).  We  can  hardly 
doubt  that  Jehoshaphat  at  least  would  have 
been  well  content  to  abandon  the  expedition. 
After  the  solicitude  he  had  manifested  for 
the  sanction  of  one  of  the  prophets  of 
Jehovah,  and  after  that  the  one  who  had 
been  consulted  had  predicted  the  defeat  of 
the  army,  the  king  of  Judah  must  have  had 
many  misgivings.  But  it  is  not  difficult  to 
understand  why,  notwithstanding  his  fears, 
he  did  not  draw  back.  For,  in  the  first 
place,  he  had  committed  himself  to  the  war 
by  the  rash  and  positive  promise  of  ver.  4. 
In  the  next  place,  he  was  Ahab's  guest,  and 
had  been  sumptuously  entertained  by  him, 
and  it  would  therefore  require  some  moral 
courage  to  extricate  himself  from  the  toils 
in  which  he  was  entangled.  Moreover,  he 
woiild  have  subjected  himself  to  the  impu- 
tation of  cowardice  had  he  deserted  his  ally 
because  of  a  prophecy  which  tbreatened  the 
latter  with  death.  The  people  around  him, 
again,  including  perhaps  his  own  retinue, 
were  possessed  with  the  spirit  of  battle,  and 
treated  the  prophecy  of  Micaiah  with  con- 


tempt, and  it  would  be  difficult  for  him  to 
swim  alone  against  the  current.  It  is  prob- 
able, too,  that  he  discounted  the  portentous 
words  of  Micaiah  on  account  of  the  long- 
standing quarrel  between  him  and  Ahab. 
And,  finaliy,  we  must  remember  that  his 
own  interests  were  threatened  by  Syria,  and 
he  may  well  have  feared  trouble  from  that 
quarter  in  case  this  war  were  abandoned. 
Eawlinson  suggests  that  he  may  have  con- 
ceived a  personal  affection  for  Ahab ;  but 
2  Chron.  xix.  2  affords  but  slender  ground 
for  this  conclusion.] 

Ver.  30. — ^And  the  king  ol  Israel  said 
unto  Jehoshaphat  [At  Eamoth-Gilead,  on 
the  eve  of  the  battle],  I  will  disguise  myself 
[same  word  ch.  xx.  38]  and  enter  [The 
margin,"  when  he  was  to  disguise  himself," 
&c.,  is  quite  mistaken.  The  Hebrew  has 
two  infinitives;  lit.,  to  disguise  oneself  and 
enter  ;  a  construction  which  is  frequently 
employed  to  indicate  an  absolute  command. 
Of.  Gen.  xvii.  10;  Exod.  xx.  8;  Isa.  xiv. 
31 ;  and  see  Ewald,  328  c.  "  The  infini- 
tive absolute  is  the  plainest  and  sim- 
plest form  of  the  voluntative  for  excla- 
mations" (Bahr).  It  agrees  well  with 
the  excitement  under  which  Ahab  was 
doubtless  labouring]  Into  the  battle.  [It 
is  not  necessary  to  suppose  with  Ewald, 
Eawlinson,  al.,  that  he  had  heard  of  Ben- 
hadad's  command  to  his  captains  (ver.  31). 
It  is  hardly  likely  that  such  intelligence 
could  be  brought  by  spies,  and  there  would 
be  no  deserters  from  the  Syrian  ai-my  to 
that  of  the  Jews.  It  is  enough  to  remem- 
ber that  Micaiah's  words,  "these  have  no 
master,"  could  not  fail  to  awaken  some 
alarm  in  his  bosom,  especially  when  con- 
nected with  the  prophecy  of  ch.  xx.  42.  He 
will  not  betray  his  fear  by  keeping  out  of  the 
fray — which,  indeed,  he  could  not  do  without 
abdicating  one  of  the  principal  functions  of 
the  king  (1  Sam.  viii.  20),  and  without  ex- 
posing himself  to  the  charge  of  cowardice  ; 
but  under  the  circumstances  he  thinks  it 
imprudent  to  take  the  lead  of  the  army,  as 
kings  were  wont  to  do  (2  Sam.  i.  10),  in  his 
royal  robes.  He  hopes  by  his  disguise  to 
escape  all  danger] :  but  put  thou  on  thyrobes 
[LXX.  Tov  'ifiaTiaiiov  fiov.  "My  robes." 
"  We  can  neither  imagine  Ahab's  asking 
nor  Jehoshaphat's  consenting  to  such  a  pro- 
cedure. Jehoshaphat  had  bis  own  royal 
robes  with  him,  as  appears  from  ver.  10  " 
(Eawlinson).  If  this  LXX.  interpretation 
could  be  maintained  it  would  lend  some 
colomr  to  the  supposition,  otherwise  destitute 
of  basis,  that  Ahab  by  this  arrangement 
was  plotting  the  death  of  Jehoshaphat  in 
order  that  he  might  incorporate  Judah  into 
his  own  kingdom.  It  is  clear,  however,  that 
Ahab  then  had  other  work  on  bil  himdl, 


638 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[cH.  xxu.  1 — 53. 


•nd  it  U  doubtful  wbetber  even  he  was 
capable  of  such  a  pitch  of  villainy.  What 
he  means  is,  eithRi-  (1)  that  the  Syrians  have 
a  personal  enmity  against  himself  (ver.  31), 
whereas  they  could  have  none  against  the 
king  of  Judah ;  or  (2)  that  Jehosbaphat's 
life  liad  not  been  threatened  as  his  own 

hod.  "These  words  Ei'h^  n||IKl  are  not  to 
be  taken  as  a  command,  but  simply  in  this 
sense  :  Thou  canst  put  on  thy  royal  dress, 
since  there  is  no  necessity  for  thee  to  take 
any  such  precautions  as  I  have  to  take " 
(Keil).  Do  they  not  rather  mean  that 
Jehoshaphat  should  be  the  recognized  leader 
of  the  army  in  which  Ahab  would  serve  in 
a  more  private  capacity  7]  And  the  Wng  of 
Israel  disguised  blmseU;  and  went  Into  the 
tattle. 

Ver.  31. — ^Bnt  fbe  Mng  of  Syria  com- 
manded  [rather,  had  commanded.  These 
words  are  of  the  nature  of  a  parenthesis. 
"Now  the  king,"  &o.  il^^  is  so  rendered  in 
a  Chron.  xviii.  30]  bis  thirty  and  two 
captains  [mentioned  in  ch.  xz.  21.  It  does 
not  follow,  however  (Wordsworth),  that 
these  very  men  had  been  spared  by  Ahab] 
that  had  rule  over  his  chariots  [Heb. 
ehariotry.  Another  indication  that  the 
chariots  were  regarded  as  the  most  import- 
ant arm  of  the  Syrian  service] ,  saying, 
Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  save 
only  with  the  king  of  Israel.  [This 
Orientalism,  translated  into  Western  ideas, 
means,  "  Direct  your  weapons  against  the 
king."  What  Ahab  had  done  to  provoke 
such  resentment  is  not  quite  clear.  Baw- 
linson  supposes  that  £eu-hadad's  "  defeat 
and  captivity  were  BtUl  rankling  in  his 
mind,  and  he  vrished  to  retaliate  on  Ahab 
the  humiliation  which  he  considered  him- 
self to  have  suffered."  But  it  is  impossible 
to  see  in  Ahab's  generous  conduct  towards 
him  a  sufficient  reason  for  the  fierce  hatred 
which  these  words  disclose.  It  is  much 
more  probable  that  some  affront  had  subse- 
qnently  been  ofiered  to  the  Syrian  monarch, 
possibly  in  the  shape  of  the  reproaches 
which  Ahab  may  have  addressed  to  him  on 
account  of  his  retention  of  Eamotli-Grilead, 
and  the  gross  violation  of  the  treaty  of  ch .  zx. 
34.  It  is  also  possible  that  he  hoped  that 
the  death  of  Ahab  would  terminate  the  war 
(Bahr).] 

Ter.  32. — ^And  It  came  to  pass  when  the 
captains  of  the  chariots  saw  Jehoshaphat, 
that  they  said.  Surely  ["^ii,  not  only 
{Bahr,  Keil),  but  certainly ;  cf.  Gen. 
zliv.  28;  Judges  iii.  24;  2  Kings  zziv. 
3]  It  [Heb.  he']  Is  the  king  of  Israel. 
And  they  turned  aside  [Cf.  oh.  xz.  .39, 
•ame   word.      The    Hebrew  inserts  VTO, 


The  chronicler  reads  43b^  they  turrounded 
Mm,  instead  of  -lip^ ;  and  the  LXX.  has 
sKvicKtaaev  in  both  places.  But  the  Syrians 
can  hardly  have  actually  closed  round  the 
king,  and  the  alteration  might  easily  be 
made  in  the  course  of  transcription]  to 
fight  against  him  [according  to  their  in- 
structions] :  and  Jehoshaphat  cried  out. 
[This  cry  has  been  very  variously  inter- 
preted. According  to  some,  it  was  his  own 
name  that  he  ejaculated,  which  is  possible, 
if  the  command  of  ver.  31  was  known  in  the 
allied  army.  According  to  others,  it  was 
the  battle-cry  of  Judah,  which,  it  is  said, 
would  be  familiar  to  the  Syrians,  and  which 
would  rally  his  own  soldiers  round  him. 
The  Vulgate,  no  doubt  influenced  by  the 
words  of  2  Chron.  xviii.  31,  "  And  the  Lord 
helped  him,  and  God  moved  them  to  depart 
from  him,"  interprets,  ciamaj;j(odX)(iminum. 
That  it  was  a  cry  for  Divine  help  is  the  most 
probable,  because  it  is  almost  an  instinct, 
especially  with  a  pious  soul  like  Jehoshaphat, 
to  cry  to  God  in  the  moment  of  danger. 
That  he  had  doubts  as  to  whether  the  course 
he  was  pursuing  waspleasing'to  God,  would 
make  him  all  the  more  ready  to  cry  aloud 
for  mercy  the  moment  he  found  himself  in 
peril.  But  it  may  have  been  merely  a  ciy 
of  terror.  It  must  be  carefully  observed 
that  the  Scripture  does  not  say  that  it  was 
this  cry  led  to  his  being  recognized  and 
spared.] 

Ver.  33. — And  It  came  to  pass,  when  the 
captains  of  the  chariots  perceived  [in  what 
way  we  are  not  told.  But.  Ahab  would  be 
known  to  some  of  them,  ch.  zz.  31]  that  it 
was  not  the  king  of  Israel,  that  they  turned 
back  from  pursuing  him. 

Ver.  34. — And  a  certain  man  [Heb.  a 
man.  It  was  natural  for  some  of  the  Bab- 
bins  to  identify  this  archer  with  Naaman 
— the  tradition  is  found  in  Josephus.  But 
it  is  directly  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the 
narrative  to  attempt  to  identify  him.  As 
it  was  a  chance  arrow,  so  it  was  by  an 
unknown  archer]  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture 
[Heb.  in  his  simplicity,  i.e.,  with  no  inten- 
tion of  shooting  Abab :  not  knowing  what 
he  was  doing.  That  this  is  the  meaning  is 
clear  from  the  use  of  the  words  in  2  ^am. 
zv.  11] ,  and  smote  the  king  of  Israel  be- 
tween the  Joints  of  the  harness  [The 
marg.,  joints  and  the  breastplate,  comes 
nearer  the  Hebrew.  But  it  is  clear  that  the 
rendering  jotMts,  notwithstanding  that  it  ha» 
the  support  of  Gesenius  and  others,  is  a 
mistaken  one.  "  In  the  joints  "  we  can  un- 
derstand, but  "  between  the  joints  and  th« 
coat  of  mail,"  gives  no  sense.  It  is  obvioui 
that  D'iP^-^D  like  intflj  foUovring,  must 
signify  some  portion  of  the  armoui,  and  tb« 


OB.  zxn.  1 — 63.] 


I'HB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KENGS. 


639 


meanitig  of  the  vetb  p?l,  adhaesit,  leads 
ns  to  conclude  that  "  the  hanging  skirt  o{ 
parallel  metal  plates — hence  the  plural" — 
(Bahr)  is  intended.    The  coat  of  mail  only 
coyered    the   breast   and    ribs.     To  this 
a  fringe  of   moyable   platei  of  steel  was 
attached  or  fastened,  hence  called  D^i?^'^. 
So  Luther,  Zunsehen  den  Panzer  und  Hen- 
gel.    One  is  reminded  here  of  the  Parthian 
arrow  which  wrung  from  Julian  the  Apos- 
tate the  dying    confeidon,    "Thou  hast 
conquered,  0  Oalilean."    Of.  Fsa.  tU.  13, 
14] :  wherefore  he  said  nnto  the  driver  of 
hla  chariot,  Turn  thine  hand  [or,  accord- 
ing to  the  Chethib,  hands.    The  charioteers 
of  Palestine,  like  those  of  Egypt  and  Assyria, 
or  those  of  modem  Bussia,  held  a  rein  in 
each  hand.    Same  expression  2  Eings  iz. 
33.  The  meaning  is  "  turn  round  "]  and  carry 
me  out  of  the  host;  for  I  am  wounded. 
[Heh,  Tnade  sick.     The  king  probably  felt 
his  wound  to  he  mortal,  ag  a  wound  in  such 
a  part,  the  abdomen  (cf.  2  Sam.  ii.  23 ;  iii. 
27 ;  xs.  10),  would  be.    Vulgate,  graviter 
vulneratia  sum.    How  far  an  arrow  in  such 
a  place  eould  penetrate,  we  may  gather  from 
2  Kings  ix.  24 ;  of.  Job  xvi.  13.    And  he 
was  seemingly  anxious  that  the  army  should 
not  know  it,  lest  they  should  be  discouraged. 
They  would  soon  discover  it  if  he  remained 
with  the  host ;  he  can  fight  no  longer ;  his 
wound  needs  attention ;  hence  this  com- 
mand.   It  is  quite  possible  that  the  cha- 
rioteer, in  the  din  and  confusion  of  battle, 
may  not  have  observed  that  his  master  was 
wounded.    The  arrow  had  not.itruok  any 
part  of  the  armour.] 

▼•r.  86.— And  the  battle  Increased  [Heb. 
iNNt  up.  Marg.  ascended.  The  tide  of 
wufare  rose  higher  and  higher.  Both  Keil 
and  Bahr  think  that  the  image  is  taken 
from  a  swelling  river,  and  cite  Isa.  viii.  7. 
The  object  of  this  verse  is  to  explain  how  it 
wai  that  the  king's  req^nest  was  not  com- 
plied with]  that  day:  and  the  Ung  was 
stayed  up  In  his  chariot  [Heh.  made  to 
stand.  T.TlC,  ^]>  ioTtiKbie.  He  was  sup- 
ported in  his  chariot  by  some  of  his  ser- 
vants, and  maintained  in  an  erect  posture. 
Chariots  were  destitute  of  seats.  Accord- 
ing to  Thenins  and  Keil,  he  maintained 
himself  erect,  by  his  own  stj;ength.  But 
the  word  is  passive]  against  the  Syrians 
[Heh.  »n  the  face  of  the  Syrians,  njj, 
coram.  His  hack  wai  not  turned  to  them, 
•I  he  had  desired.  The  idea  that  he  was 
in  any  way  fighting  against  the  Syrians  ifl 
altogether  foreign  to  the  text.  It  is  at 
first  sight  somewhat  difficult  to  reconcile 
this  statement  with  the  direction  given  to 
the  charioteer  in  the  preceding  verse,  and 


some  have  been  led,  though  without  suffi- 
cient warrant,  to  conclude  that  Ahab  left 
the  field,  had  his  wound  bound  up,  and 
then  returned  to  take  his  part  in  the  battle. 
But  the  explanation  is  very  simple.  As  the 
battle  increased,  it  became  impossible  to 
comply  with  the  king's  desire.  So  thick 
was  the  fight  that  retreat  was  impossible. 
Hence  the  wounded  king,  who  would  other- 
wise have  sunk  down  to  the  bottom  of  the 
chariot,  had  to  be  "stayed  up  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Syrians."  This  circumstance 
may  also  account  for  the  fact  that  he  died 
at  even.  Had  it  been  possible  to  remove 
him  and  staunch  his  wounds,  he  might 
have  lingered  for  some  time.  As  it  was,  he 
bled  to  death.  It  is  not  clear,  therefore, 
that  "his  death  was  kingly"  (Kitto),  or 
that  we  must  concede  to  Ahab  ' '  the  credit 
of  right  princely  fortitude  on  this  occasion  " 
(Eawlinson).  He  would  have  left  the  host 
could  he  have  done  so.  It  was  his  ser- 
vants propped  up  the  dying  man  in  his 
chariot,  to  encourage  the  army.  What  a  pic- 
ture for  an  artist — the  king  with  the  pallor 
of  death  spreading  over  his  face,  the  anxious 
faces  of  the  attendants,  the  pool  of  blood, 
the  sun  sinking  to  the  horizon,  &o.] ,  and 
'  died  at  even :  and  the  blood  ran  out  of  the 
wound  fHeb.  the  blood  of  the  wound  poured] 
into  the  midst  [Heb.  bosom  ;  LXX.  koKwov, 
the  hollow  part,  or  "well."  The  same  word 
is  used  of  tiie  concave  part  of  the  altar]  of 
the  chariot. 

Ver.  36.— And  there  went  a  proclamation 
throughout  the  host  [Heb.  And  the  shout- 
ing passed  over  in  the  camp.  Gesenius  will 
have  it  that  n|1  must  mean  a  "  joyful 
cry,"  and  would  see  the  cause  of  joy  in  the 
cessation  of  hostilities  and  the  permission 
to  return  home]  about  the  going  down  of 
the  sun  [According  to  the  ohrouicler  (eh. 
xviii.  34),  it  was  at  sunset  that  the  king 
died.  It  seems  natural,  therefore,  to  con- 
nect this  shout  with  his  death.  But  the 
approach  of  night  would  of  itself  put  an 
end  to  the  battle.  It  does  not  appear  "that 
Israel  had  been  utterly  defeated,  or  had 
suffered  great  loss.  But  "they  had  no 
master"],  saying.  Every  man  to  his  city, 
and  every  man  to  his  own  country  [or 
land]. 

Ver.  37.— So  the  Idng  died  [The  LXX. 
makes  this  to  be  a  part  of  the  proclamation, 
tKOOToe  elg  r^*  .  .  •  W"  »"  rkUvrnv  o 
fiaaOiais,  which    involves   a   very   shght 

change  in  the  Hebrew  text,  "pon  nO  '3 
instead  ol  IpOn  DO^I  and  gives  a  better 
sense.  It  has  already  been  stated  that 
the  king  died.  Such  repetitions  however  are 
common  in  Hebrew,  and  this  reading  has 


uo 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS. 


[cH.  xxn.  1 — 5i 


»lmost  the  look  of  an  emendation]  and 
was  brouglit  [Heb.  came.  The  A.  V.  is 
against  the  grammar.  As  "  came"  woiJd 
be  a  Btrange  word  to  use  of  a  dead  man, 
it  is  highly  probable  that  instead  of  t<t3'i 
we  should  read  1S13*1  with  the  LXX.  Kai 
^\9ov]  to  Samaria,;  and  they  buried  the 
Bng  In  Samaria  ["with  his  father,"  oh. 
xvi28]. 
Ver.  38.— And  one  washed  the  chaxlot 

In  [or  at ;  Heb.  ?!?]  the  pool  of  Samaria. 
[Nearly  all  Eastern  cities  had  their  tanks 
or  pools,  often  outside  the  city  gate.  Jeru- 
salem  has  several  of  these,  and  we  read  of 
one  at  Hebron  (2  Sam.  xiv.  12)  and  Gibeon 
{ib.  ii.  13).  Cf.  Cant.  vii.  4.  The  Hebrew 
word  n3^3  is  preserved  in  the  modern  Ara- 
bic Sir /ceft];  and  the  dogs  [The  LXX.  has 
the  swine  and  the  dogs.  The  mention  of 
swine  is  hardly  likely  to  have  been  omitted, 
had  it  formed  part  of  the  original  text] 
Ucked  up  Ms  blood  [of.  oh.  xxi.  19,  note. 
According  to  Josephus,  the  chariot  was 
washed  "  in  the  fountain  of  Jezreel."  The 
alteration  would  appear  to  have  been  made 
to  avoid  the  difficulty  occasioned  by  the  dis- 
crepancy between  the  statement  of  the  text,  . 
and  that  of  ch.  xxi.  19] ,  and  they  washed 
his  armour  [So  the  Chaldaio  and  the 
Syriac.  But  this  translation  is  now  aban- 
doned, (1)  because  it  is  contrary  to  the 
csage  of  the  language  to  make  nillt  the 
object ;  and  (2)  because  that  word  occurs 
in  the  Old  Testament  only  in  the  sense  of 
harlots  (Bahr).  The  true  meaning  is  that 
given  by  the  LXX.,  Kal  ai  Tropvai  tXovTavTO. 
J'ni  does  not  require  any  object  such  as 
"  chariot,"  or  "  corpse,"  for  it  is  found  in 
the  sense  of  bathe  (intrans.)  in  Exod.  ii. 
6;  Num.  xix.  19;  Euth  iii.  21 ;  2  Kings 
V.  10.  Bahr  reminds  us  that  harlots  are 
elsewhere  associated  with  dogs  (Deut.  xxiii. 
19  ;  Eev.  xxii.  15).  This  fact  is  mentioned 
as  a  proof  of  the  just  judgment  of  God. 
Even  if  these  harlots  were  not  prostitutes 
devoted  to  the  service  of  the  Phoenician 
deities,  whose  cultus  Ahab  had  sought  to 
establish  in  Israel,  still  the  result  of  his 
religious  policy  had  been  the  spread  of 
prostitution.  It  is  a  fine  example  of  the 
Itx  to.lionis.  "  He  which  is  filthy,  let  him 
be  filtliy  still"];  according  unto  the  word 
of  the  Lord  wbich  he  spake  [the  reference 
is  to  ch.  xxi.  19]. 

Ver.  39. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acta  of 
Ahab,  and  all  that  he  did,  and  the  ivory 
house  which  he  made  [So  called  because 
it  was  adorned  with  ivory.  See  on  ch.  xi. ; 
and  ct.  Amos  iii.  15  ;  Psa.  xlv.  8 ;  Cant.  vii. 
fi,  Eawlinson  cites  several  passages  from 
Oreek  and   Latin   authors    to   prove  that 


ivory  was  anciently  applied,  not  only  to 
furniture,  but  to  the  doors  and  walls  of 
houses],  and  all  the  cities  that  he  built 
[Probably  Jezreel  was  one,  but  we  have  no 
information  eonoeming  them.  The  fact 
that  he  did  build  cities,  however,  is  ous 
proof  ol  Ahab'd  enterprize.  He  was  not 
weak  in  all  particnlats],  are  they  not  writ- 
ten in  the  booic  of  tbe  chronicles  of  the 
Mngs  of  Israel? 

Ver.  40.— So  Ahah  slept  wltn  his  fathers; 
and  Ahaziah  ["  Whom  .Tehovah  upholds." 
The  name  suggests  that,  iintwitlistandi'  g 
his  idolatries,  Ahab  cannot  have  completely 
abandoned  the  worship  of  the  Lord]  hi* 
son  reigned  In  Ms  stead. 

JtHgn  of  Jehoshaphal, 

Ver.  41. — And  Jehoshaphat  ["'Whoiii 
Jehovah  judges"]  the  son  of  Asa  began  to 
reign  over  Judah  In  the  fourth  year  of 
Aliab  Mng  of  Israel.  [The  historian  now 
resumes  for  a  moment  the  history  of  Judah, 
which  has  dropped  out  of  notice  since  ch. 
XV.  24,  where  the  accession  of  Jehoshaphat 
was  mentioned.  His  reigo,  which  is  here 
described  in  the  briefest  possible  way,  occu- 
pies four  chapters  (xvii. — xx.)  of  2  Ohron.l 

Ver.  42. — Jehoshaphat  was  thirty  ahi 
five  years  old  when  he  began  vO  reign; 
and  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  ia 
Jerusalem.  And  his  mother's  name  waa 
Azubab  the  daughter  of  Shllhl 

Ver..  43. — And  he  walked  in  all  the  way* 
of  Asa  his  father  [Apart  trom  nis  alLance 
with  the  nouse  of  Ahab,  and  the  troubles 
in  which  it  involved  him,  his  reign  wa; 
alike  pious  and  prosperous.  Like  Asa's,  il 
was  distinguished  by  internal  reforms,  and 
by  signal  deliverances  from  foreign  ene- 
mies] ;  he  turned  not  aside  from  it  [as  Asa 
was  tempted  to  do  in  his  old  age],  doing 
[Heb.  to  do]  that  which  was  right  in  the 
eyes  of  the  Lord ;  nevertheless  the  high 
places  were  not  taken  away  [Heb.  de- 
parted not,  as  in  ch.  xv.  14 ;  2  Chron.  xv. 
17  ;  2  Kings  xii.  4,  Heb. ;  xiv.  4,  Heb.  But 
see  2  Chron.  xviii.  6.  The  discrepancy  is 
the  exact  parallel  of  that  between  1  Kings, 
XV.  14  and  2  Chron.  xiv.  3;  or  between 
this  latter  passage  and  2  Chron.  xv.  17. 
And  the  explanation  is  the  same,  viz.,  that 
an  effort  was  made  to  remove  the  high 
places,  which  was  partially,  and  only  p^r- 
tially,  successful]  ;  for  the  people  offered 
and  burnt  incense  yet  in  the  hlgn  places 
[of.  oh.  iii.  2]. 

Ver.  44. — And  Jehoshaphat  made  peac* 
with  the  king  of  Israel  [One  great  feature 
of  his  reign  was  this  :  that  the  hostility 
which  had  lasted,  even  if  it  sometimes 
slumbered,  between  the  two  kinijdoms  for 


<]B.  xxn.  1 — 63.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


Ml 


seventy  years,  from  the  date  of  tteir  eepa- 
ration  to  the  time  of  Asa's  death,  gave  way 
to  peace  and  even  alliance.  Judah  now 
recognized  the  division  of  the  kingdom  as 
an  accomplished  fact,  and  no  longer  treated 
Israel,  even  theoretically,  as  in  rebelhon. 
It  is  probable  that  the  marriage  of  Jehoram 
and  Athaliah  was  at  once  the  fruit  of,  and 
was  intended  to  cement,  this  good  under- 
standing (2  Chron.  xviii.  1).  It  is  hardly 
likely  (Bahr)  that  the  peace  was  the  result 
of  the  union  of  the  two  families.  From  the 
analogy  of  ib.  xix.  2  j  xx.  37 ;  of .  1  Kings 
xvi.  31 ;  2  Kings  iii.  14,  we  should  conclude 
that  the  marriage  at  any  rate  was  ill-ad> 
yised  and  displeasing  to  God.  Bahr  sees 
in  it  a  step  on  the  part  of  Jehoshaphat 
towards  realizing  the  union  of  the  two 
kingdoms  under  the  supremacy  of  Judah. 
He  thinks  that  we  cannot  otherwise  account 
for  this  complete  change  of  front.] 

Ver.  45. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Jehoshaphat,  and  his  might  [as  in  oh. 
XT.  23,  xvi.  27,  &o.  It  is  noticeable  that  this 
■word  is  not  used  of  Ahab,  notwithstanding 
his  wars  and  victories]  that  he  showed  [see 
2  Kings  iii.  9  aqq. ;  2  Chron.  xvii.  12  sqq. 
His  judicial  reforms  are  hardly  referred  to 
here] ,  and  how  he  warred  [ib.  chs.  xviii., 
IX.] ,  are  they  not  written  in  the  hook  of 
he  chronicles  of  the  Mngs  of  Judah  7 

Ver.  46. — And  the  remnant  of  the  Sodom- 
ites, which  remained  In  the  days  of  his 
father  Asa  [It  appears  hence  that  Asa's 
removal  of  the  religious  prostitutes  (ch. 
zv.  12),  like  that  of  the  high  places,  had 
heen  but  partial] ,  he  took  [Heb.  extermi- 
nated] out  of  the  land. 

Yer.  47. — There  was  then  no  king  In 
£dom:  a  deputy  [1^3,  same  word  as  in  ch. 
iv.  7.  It  is  implied  that  this  officer  was  ap- 
pointed by  the  king  of  Judah  (Wordsworth)] 
was  king.  [This  fact  is  mentioned  to 
show  how  it  was  that  Jehoshaphat  was 
able  to  buUd  a  fleet  at  Ezion-Geber,  in 
the  territory  of  Edom  (oh.  ix.  26).  That 
■country  -yould  seem  to  have  regained  its 
independence  very  soon  after  Solomon'* 
death  (ch.  xi.  14),  but  would  also  appear 
from  the  text,  and  from  2  Kings  viii.  20, 
22,  to  have  been  again  made  subject  to 
Judah,  probably  by  Jehoshaphat  himself; 
flee  2  Chron.  xvii.  10, 11.] 

Ver.  48. — Jehoshaphat  made  [The  Chethib 
has  "ItJ'y  ten,  obviously  a  clerical  error  for 
n^I?  made]  ships  of  Tharshish  [see  note 
on  oh.  z.  22]  to  go  to  Ophlr  [In  2  Chron. 
XX.  36,  Tharshish  is  read  for  Ophir.  Words- 
worth holds  that  two  separate  fleets  are  in- 
tended, but  this  is  most  improbable]  for 
gold  [Evidently  the  great  prosperity  of 
his  reign  had  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of 
«mvLlatiug  Solomon's  naval  exploits,  and  oi 


reviving  the  commerce  of  his  people  with 
the  East] ;  but  they  went  not  [Heb.  it  went 
mot]  :  for  the  ships  were  broken  [Probably 
they  were  dashed  by  a  storm  agaiast  the 
rocks  which  "  he  in  jagged  ranges  on  each 
side,"  Stanley]  at  Ezlon-Geber. 

Ver.  49. — ^Then  said  Ahaziah  the  son  of 
Ahab  unto  Jehoshaphat,  Let  my  servants 
go  with  thy  servants  tai  the  ships.  But 
Jehoshaphat  would  not.  [But  we  are  told 
in  2  Chron.  xx.  37  that  the  ships  were 
broken,  according  to  a  prophecy  of  EUezer, 
the  sou  of  Dodavah,  because  Jehoshaphat 
had  joined  himself  with  Aiaziah.  The 
explanation  is  that  the  fleet  had  been  built 
by  the  two  kings  conjointly,  and  manned 
by  the  subjects  of  Jehoshaphat  exclusively; 
and  that,  after  the  disaster,  Ahaziah  pro- 
posed either  to  repair  the  injured  vessels, 
or  to  construct  a  second  fleet,  which  should 
then  be  partly  manned  by  sailors  of  the 
northern  kingdom,  "  men  probably  accus- 
tomed to  the  sea,  perhaps  trained  at  Tyre" 
(Bawlinson).  This  proposal  was  declined 
by  the  king  of  Jndiah,  not  so  much  on 
account  of  the  "  reflection  on  his  subjects' 
sMU  contained  in  it,"  as  because  of  the  pro- 
phecy of  Eliezer,  and  the  evidently  judicial 
disaster  which  had  befallen  the  fleet  already 
built.] 

Yer.  60. — And  Jehoshaphat  dept  with 
Ms  fathers,  and  was  buried  with  his 
fathers  la  the  city  of  David  his  father :  and 
Jehoram  his  son  reigned  tn  his  stead  [2 
Chron.  zzL] 

Beign  of  AhaziaK 

Yer.  61. — Ahaz1a.h  the  son  of  Ahab  began 
to  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria  the  seven- 
teenth year  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  Judah, 
and  reigned  two  years  over  IsraeL  [Parts 
of  two  years;  2  Kings  iii.  1;  and  cf.  i.  17 
and  viii.  16.  It  is  suggested  that  Jehoram 
was  associated  with  his  father  in  the 
government  of  Judah  from  the  date  of  the 
expedition  against  Bamoth-Gilead,  and  this 
is  not  improbable.  But  it  has  been  already 
remarked  that  these  chronological  notices 
appear  to  have  nndergone  a  revision  which 
has  sometimes  resulted  in  confusion.] 

Yer.  52.— And  he  did  evU  In  the  sight  of 
the  Lord,  and  walked  In  the  way  of  his 
father  [ch.  xvi.  30—33;  of.  2  Kings  iii. 
2]  and  In  the  way  of  his  mother  [The 
powerful  influence  of  Jezebel,  even  after 
Ahab's  death,  is  hinted  at  here.  It  was  to 
her  that  idolatry  owed  its  position  in  Israel] , 
and  In  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the  son 
of  Nebat  [the  calf-worship  and  idolatry 
existed  side  by  side] ,  who  made  Israel  to 
sin. 

Ver.  63.— For  he  served  Baal,  and  vor 


841 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


[oh.  xxil  1 — 69, 


shipped  him,  and  provoied  to  anger  [or 
vexedj  the  Lojrd  God  of  Israel,  according  to 
all  that  his  father  had  done.  [The  ter- 
mination of  this  book  at  this  point  could 
haidjy  be  more  arbitrary  if  it  bad  been 


made  by  accident.  These  verses  are  elosely 
connected  with  2  Kings  ch.  i.  The  division 
here  obscures  the  connexion  between  the 
sin  of  Ahaziah  and  the  judgments  whiob  it 
•provoked.] 


HOMILETTOS. 

Vers.  1 — 40. — TTie  Death  of  Ahah  and  the  Defeat  of  Itraet.  This  ebapfer  Is  almost 
entirely  occupied  with  an  account  of  the  death  of  Ahab,  and  of  the  circumstances 
which  preceded  and  attended  it.  The  earlier  portion  of  the  chapter,  which  con- 
tains tiie  prophesyings  of  the  false  prophets  and  the  vision  of  Micaiah,  is  only 
recorded  because  of  its  bearing  on  the  death  of  the  king,  and  the  dispersion  of  hia 
army. 

And  ihe  prominence  accorded  to  Ahab's  end  only  corresponds  with  the  space 
assigned  to  his  reign.  That  reign  was  so  full  of  evil  for  Israel  that  it  occupies  a 
fourth  part  of  this  entire  book.  It  was  meet,  therefore,  that  the  death  which 
avenged  it  should  be  recorded  with  proportionate  detail.-  For  the  battle  of  Ramoth- 
Gilead  was  the  final  payment — so  fax  as  this  world  is  concerned — for  the  sins  of  two 
and  twenty  years. 

Bat  it  is  to  be  observed  in  the  first  place  that  Ahab's  repentance  (ch.  xa,  29),  as 
the  penitence  begotten  of  fear  often  is,  was  but  shortlived.  Had  it  lasted,  we  had 
not  read  of  this  tragical  death.  How  soon  the  king  shook  off  his  impressions  we 
know  not,  but  we  do  know  that — thanks  to  the  natural  weakness  of  Ins  character, 
still  further  enfeebled  by  years  of  self-indulgence  and  submission  to  a  stronger  will 
than  his  own;  thanks  to  the  evU  genius  (ch.  xzi.  25)  ever  at  his' side  to  stifle  good 
resolves  and  to  steel  his  heart  against  the  true  religion ;  thanks  to  the  impious 
system  to  which  he  found  himself  committed,  and  the  toils  of  which  he  found 
it  impossible  to  break,  this  unhappy  king  steadily  lapsed  into  his  old  sins.  It 
"  happened  unto  him  according  to  the  true  proverb,  "  The  dog  is  turned  to  his  vomit 
5gain"(2Peterii.  22). 

And  it  is  also  to  be  considered  here  that  Israel  had  gone  hand  in  hand  with  him 
in  his  downward  course.  Had  the  king's  career  been  one  of  steadily  increasing 
demorahzation  ?  so  had  that  of  the  people.  The  death  of  Naboth  affords  sufiBcient 
proof  of  this.  The  ready  compliance  of  the  elders,  the  alacrity  with  which  they 
perpetrated  that  judicial  murder,  shows  to  what  a  moral  depth  the  example  of  the 
court  and  the  idolatry  around  them  had  plunged  the  holy  nation.  No ;  king  and 
queen  had  not  sinned  alone,  and  justice  required  they  should  not  suffer  alone. 
Nations  and  their  rulers,  as  we  have  already  seen,  receive  a  reckoning  in  this  life ; 
how  much  more  the  covenant  people  and  the  Lord's  anointed  ?  Placed  as  they 
were  under  a  direct  law  of  temporal  punishments  and  rewards,  it  would  have  been 
strange,  indeed,  if  such  a  reign  as  this  had  gone  tmrecompensed.  But  so  far  from 
that,  they  have  already  received  part  reckoning  for  their  sin.  The  three  years 
drought,  the  famine,  the  terrible  Syrian  invasions,  have  avenged  a  part  of  their 
idolatries  and  immoralities ;  but  there  stUL  remains  a  long  score  of  guUt  to  be 
expiated  in  shame  and  suffering  and  blood. 

And  here  it  may  be  well  to  remind  ourselves  what  were  the  sins  which  awaited 
a  settlement  under  the  walls  of  P.amotli-Gilead.  They  were  five  in  number.  (1) 
The  calf- worship — the  hereditary  sin  of  the  northern  kingdom,  the  sin  of  Jeroboam ; 
(2)_  the  worship  of  Baal  with  the  prostitution  which  accompanied  it — the  sin 
primarily  of  Jezebel  and  her  Phoenician  following,  but  shared  in  by  almost  the 
entire  nation ;  (3)  the  determined  persecution  of  the  prophets  and  the  virtual  pro- 
scription of  the  ancient  faith ;  (4)  the  release  of  the  Syrian  king  in  disregard  of  God's 
will — the  sin  of  Ahab  and  his  captains ;  and  (6)  the  murder  of  Naboth  in  defiance  of 
all  law — the  sin  of  the  rulers  and  elders.  It  may  be  thought  that  the  two  last  were 
peculiarly  Ahab's  or  Jezebel's  sins,  and  that  the  people  had  no  part  in  them ;  but 
this  is  a  mistaken  view.    No  doubt  he  and  his  infamous  consort  had  by  far  the 


OH.  xxn.  1—63.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  M8 


largest  share  in  aU  the  four,  and  therefore  they  received,  as  we  shall  see  presently 
by  far  the  severer  punishment.  But  just  as  the  people  worshipped  at  the  shrines 
which  the  king  supported,  just  as  they  practised  the  abominations  which  -he  had 
introduced,  so  had  they  approved  his  policy  towards  Ben-hadad— see  the  words  of 
ch.  xix.  42,  "thy  people  for  his  people"— and  the  guilt  of  innocent  blood,  as  we 
know  (Num.  xxxv.  33  ;  Deut.  xxi.  7 ;  2  Sam.  xxi.)  rested  on  the  community  until 
it  had  been  cleansed  in  blood.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  at  the  time  when  this  chapter 
opens,  king  and  people,  though  in  very  different  degrees,  were  chargeable  with  the 
eins  of  schism,  of  idolatry,  of  unfaithfulness  to  God,  of  murder.  It  is  now  for  as  to 
observe  how  these  things  were  expiated. 

Now  there  are  two  principles  which  underlie  all  God's  retributive  dealings  with 
l)is  ancient  people.  First,  that  sin  is  left,  or  made  to  bring  its  own  penalties.  Per 
quod  quia peccat, per  idem  quoque plectiiur  idem.  Secondly,  that  the  penalty  is  ever 
correspondent  with  the  sin.  This  latter  is  what  we  commonly  call  the  lex  talionis. 
We  have  had  instances  of  the  working  of  both  of  these  laws,  but  especially  of  the 
latter,  in  the  earlier  portions  of  this  history.  We  shall  find  the  same  laws  in 
operation  here. 

For  consider — I.  By  what  means  Ahab  was  led  to  death  and  Israel  to  defeat. 
II.  By  what  instruments  these  punishments  were  inflicted.  IIL  In  'what  way  they 
were  signalized  as  the  chastisements  of  sin. 

I.  In  considering  the  influences  which  moved  Abab  to  war,  and  which  led  to 
bis  destruction,  we  must  assign  the  first  place  to^ 

1.  The  perfidy  of  Ben-hadad.  No  doubt  it  rankled  in  Ahab's  breast  that,  after 
he  had  dealt  so  magnanimously  with  a  prostrate  foe,  after  he  had  treated  an  inso- 
lent invader  with  unexampled  generosity,  and  after  a  solemn  covenant  had  been 
made  betwixt  them,  it  rankled  in  his  soul  that  a  Syrian  garrison,  in  spite  of  all  em- 
bassies and  remonstrances,  should  hold  the  Jewish  fortress  of  Ramoth-Gilead  and 
thus  offer  a  standing  menace  to  Israel  and  Judah  alike.  But  did  it  never  occur  to 
him  that  the  conduct  of  Ben-hadad  was  but  the  counterpart  of  his  own?  He  too 
had  fbrgotten  his  benefactor  and  deliverer,  to  whom  be  was  bound  by  solemn 
covenant;  he  EtUl  maintained  a  garrison  of  idolatrous  priests  in  the  heart  of 
Immanuel's  land.  Ben-hadad's  breach  of  faith  was  no  greater  than  his  own. 
Probably,  he  never  thought  of  this  when  he  debated  whether  he  should  go  up  against 
Ramoth-Gilead.  He  would  remember,  however,  that  he  had  only  himself  to  blame 
for  this  act  of  perfidy,  and  he  would  devoutly  wish  he  had  dealt  with  the  oppressor 
as  he  had  deserved ;  he  would  perhaps  think  that  it  only  served  him  right  for  his 
weakness  and  sin.  We  see,  however,  that  he  is  paid  back  in  his  own  coin,  that  the 
measure  he  has  meted  to  God  is  measured  to  bun  again.  The  sin  of  three  years 
before  gave  the  first  impulse  to  war  and  death. 

2.  The  Ues  of  the  false  prophets.  It  is  hardly  likely  that  Ahab  would  have  engaged 
in  this  war  but  for  the  unanimous  verdict  of  the  four  hundred  prophets  in  its  favour. 
We  see  in  Micaiah's  vision  that  a  "  lying  spirit "  was  the  principal  means  employed 

"  to  procure  his  fall  (ver.  22).'  But  what  were  these  prophets,  and  how  came  they  to 
prophesy  thus  ?  One  thing  is  certain,  that  they  were  not  prophets  of  Jehovah,  and 
another  thing  is  also  clear,  that  whether  they  were  prophets  of  Baal,  or,  as  is  most 
probable,  prophets  of  the  calves,  the  false  system  which  Ahab  had  supported  be- 
came through  them  a  means  of  his  destruction.  The  schism  or  the  idolatry,  as  the 
case'  may  be,  is  bearing  its  bitter  fruit.  He  has  sown  to  lies,  he  reaps  to  delusions. 
It  is  a  conspicuous  instance  of  the  just  judgment  of  heaven  that  Ahab  is  lured  to 
his  death  by  the  impostors  he  had  cherished  and  patronized.  "  He  that  hates  trath 
shall  be  the  dupe  of  lies."    The  sin  of  the  calves  too  brings  its  own  retribution. 

But  how  was  it,  it  is  worth  asking,  that  these  four  hundred  sycophants  oame 
to  counsel  him  thus?  Was  it  not  that  they  took  their  cue  from  him,  and 
prophesied  what  they  knew  would  please  ?  They  saw  that  the  king  had  already 
made  up  his  mind — ^for  his  resolution  was  taken  before  they  were  summoned  (vers. 
4,  5),  and  they  thought  it  wisest  to  swim  with  the  stream.  It  may  be  they  were 
guided  by  other  and  inscrutable  impulses  (ver.  23),  and  were  constrained,  they  knew 
not  how,  to  prophesy  as  they  did ;  it  may  be  they  honestly  mistook  the  vox  popuh 


C44  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  foH.  xxn.  1—63. 

for  the  vox  Dei,  but  probably  the  working  of  their  minds  was  this  :  "  The  king 
wishes  it.  Jehoshaphat  assents  to  it.  TJie  people  are  set  npon  it.  Wo  should  be 
going  against  common  sense  and  our  own  interests  to  resist  it." 

And  so  the  king  was  a  second  time  paid  in  his  own  coin.  Those  martial  pro- 
phecies had  been  minted  in  his  own  brain.  He  wished  for  lies  and  he  had  them.  His 
own  passions  and  pride  were  reflected,  were  echoed,  in  the  voices  of  his  four  hundred 
soothsayers.  It  is  the  case  of  which  both  sacred  and  profane  history  supply  so  manj 
examples,  Homo  vult  decvpi  et  decipiatur.  It  is  thus  Q-od  deals  with  deceivers  still. 
He  leaves  them  to  be  deceived,  to  be  the  prey  of  their  own  disordered  fancies.  It 
is  notorious  how  men  find  in  the  Bible  what  they  wish  to  find  there  ;  how  all  un- 
suspectingly they  read  their  own  meanings  into  the  words  of  Scripture  :  how  they 
interpret  its  injunctions  by  the  rule  of  their  own  inclinations.  "He  fce'eth  on 
ashes  ;  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul,  nor 
say,  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand?  "  (Isa.  xUv.  20).  "  Ephraim  is  joined  unta 
idols :  lethim  alone  "  (Hosea  iv.  17). 

8.  The  silence  of  the  Lord's  prophets.  Why  was  it,  we  cannot  help  asking  here, 
why  was  it  that  there  were  no  true  prophets  present,  at  this  crisis  in  the  history  of 
Israel,  to  step  forth  and  warn  the  Mng  against  this  undertaking  ?  Why  were  the 
four  hundred  deceivers  left  to  have  their  own  way  ?  We  see  here  the  fruit  of  perse- 
cution, the  recompense  of  those  fierce  dragonnades  which  Jezebel  had  maintained 
against  the  prophetic  order.  Of  the  men  who  might  have  interposed  to  prevent 
this  disastrous  expedition,  some  were  dead,  others  were  banished;  king  and  queen 
had  wickedly  silenced  them.  They  now  reap  the  fruit  of  those  repressive  measures. 
Their  curses  come  home  to  roost.  Elijah  might  have  saved  king  and  country,  but 
he  is  biding  from  the  wrath  of  Jezebel,  or  is  withdrawn  by  God  firom  the  arena  of 
history.  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah  foresaw  the  end,  but  Aliab  had  imprisoned 
him,  and  could  not  brook  to  take  his  advice,  and  had  persuaded  himself  that  his 
admonitions  were  the  outcome  of  personal  enmity.  It  is  true  this  prophet  was  not 
silent,  but  plainly  foretold  defeat  and  death ;  but  Ahab  was  in  a  manner  bound  not 
to  regard  his  warnings.  He  had  told  Jehoshaphat  it  would  be  so.  It  would  look 
Kke  cowardice  to  be  influenced  by  his  vaticinations.  And  so  he  is  left  to  the  prophets 
of  his  choice :  no  band  is  raised  to  stop  him :  be  goes  straight  into  the  jaws  of  deatbi 
the  victim  of  his  own  folly  and  cruelty  and  sin. 

II.  The  iNSTEtTMENTS  of  retribution  were — 

1.  The  hing  whorft  Ahab  had  wichedly  spa/rei.  We  have  already  seen  in  what 
the  sin  of  sparing  the  tyrant  Ben-hadad  consisted  (p.  492).  It  is  now  for  us  to 
observe  that  this  foolish  and  impious  deed  brought  its  own  peculiar  Nemesis.  It  was 
Ben-hadad  himself  who  said,  "  Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  but  with  the 
king  of  Israel  only."  Ahab's  ill-advised  clemency  procures  his  own  destruction. 
With  base  natures,  it  only  needs  that  we  shoidd  put  them  under  obligations 
which  they  cannot  possibly  discharge,  in  order  to  provoke  their  bitter  enmity. 
But  it  is  much  more  material  to  observe  here  that  in  Ben-hadad's  conduct  we  may 
see  a  parable  of  the  cruelrevenge  which  a  cherished  sinwiU  often  take  on  those  who 
have  once  conquered  and  then  trifled  with  it.  The  devil  that  was  cast  out  returns 
bringing  with  him  seven  other  devils  more  wicked  than  himself  (Matt.  xii.  45).  We 
are  constantly  as  tender  to  the  sins  which  tyrannized  over  ns  as  was  Ahab  to  Ben- 
hadad.  Instead  of  slaying  them — hewing  them  in  pieces  before  the  Lord — ^we  leave 
the  roots  of  bitterness  in  the  heart's  soil,  and  they  spring  up  and  trouble  us.  It  is 
like  that  peasant  of  whom  we  have  all  read,  who  found  a  viper  in  the  field,  benumbed 
with  the  winter's  cold,  and  put  the  venomous  beast  into  his  bosom  to  warm  it  back 
into  life.  The  first  use  it  made  of  its  restored  power  was  to  wound  and  destroy  its 
benefactor.    How  dearly  have  we  often  paid  for  our  pleasant  vices  I 

2.  The  Syrians  who  were  once  subjects  of  Israel.  It  is  well  to  remember  here 
that  these  enemies  who  gave  Ahab  his  death-wound  at  Bamoth  were  onoe  under 
the  heel  of  Israel  (2  Sam.  viii.  6).  Now  we  see  their  relations  reversed.  Syria  has 
now  become  the  standing  oppressor  of  the  chosen  people.  We  have  already  pointed 
out  8ome<of  the  steps  which  led  to  this  result.  The  sin  of  Solomon  (see  p.  223)  and 
the  unfaithfulness  of  Asa  alike  were  factors  in  the  change.  But  the  most  influential 


CH.  XXII.  1—53.1  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  645 


rfeason  waB  the  godlessness  of  Ahab.  But  three  years  ago  Syria  lay  at  his  mercy ; 
its  po-wer  was  completely  broken.  But  Ahab,  so  far  from  learning  that  the  Lord 
was  God  (ch.  xx.  18,  28),  had  ignored  the  Lord,  and  acted  as  if  his  own  mijiht 
had  gotten  him  the  victory.  How  fitting  that  these  same  Syrians  should  be  th« 
instruments  to  scourge  him. 

8.  An  unhnown,  tmconscious  archer.  The  arrow  that  pierced  Ahab's  corselet  was 
shot  "  in  simplicity,"  without  dehberate  aim,  with  no  thought  of  striking  the  king. 
It  was  an  unseen  Hand  that  gnuded  that  chance  shaft  to  its  destination.  It  was  truly 
I'  the  aiTow  of  the  Lord's  vengeance."  (Of.  2  Kings  xii.  17.)  It  would  be  deeply 
instructive  could  we  know  the  thoughts  of  that  unhappy  Mug,  as  with  the  arrow  in 
his  side,  and  the  blood  draining  from  his  wound,  and  forming  a  sickening  pool  in 
the  well  of  the  chariot,  he  was  stayed  up  those  wretched  weary  hours  until  the  sun- 
let  against  the  Syrians.  Surely  he  knew  at  last  that  "  the  Lord  was  God  "  (ch. 
xviii.  39  ;  xx.  13,  28).  His  cry  would  now  be,  "Thou  hast  found  me,  0  my  enemy." 
He  would  think,  it  may  be,  of  Elijah's  and  Micaiah's  prophecies ;  he  would  think 
of  Naboth's  bleeding  and  mangled  corpse ;  he  would  think,  above  aU,  that  his  sin 
had  found  hina  out,  and  that  Jehovah  had  conquered.  He  had  fought  all  his  life 
for  Baal,  but  it  was  in  vain ;  he  had  been  kicking  against  the  pricks ;  he  had  been 
wresthng  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with  an  Invisible,  Irresistible,  Omnipotent 
QxA,  and  now  he  is  thrown,  cast  down  never  to  rise  again. 

III.  It  now  only  remains  for  us  to  consider  the  oirodmstanoes  of  Ahab's  death. 
These  were  of  so  portentous  and  exceptional  a  character  as  to  mark  it — 

1.  Aa  a  direct  visitation  of  Ood.  The  army,  that  day  defeated,  the  contingent 
of  Jndah,  the  citizens  of  Samaria,  the  subjects  of  both  kingdoms,  could  not  tbink 
that  a  mere  chance  had  happened  to  Ahab  when  they  remembered  (1)  That  this 
death  had  been  distinctly  foretold.  Not  once  or  twice,  but  three  times  had  a  pro- 
phetic voice  foreshadowed  for  him  a  sudden  and  shameful  end  (ch.  xx.  42 ;  xxi.  19 ; 
xiii.  17, 28).  Moreover,  Micaiah,  the  last  of  these  monitors,  had  staked  his  reputation 
as  God's  prophet  on  the  fulfilment  of  his  prediction  of  disaster.  And  his  oracle  had 
not  been  spoken  in  secret ;  he  had  appealed  to  the  entire  assembly  gathered  round 
the  two  kings — and  the  flower  of  Israel  and  Judah  alike  were  there — and  even  to 
neighbouring  nations  (ver,  28,  Heb.),  to  be  witnesses  of  his  words,  and  those  wordi 
were  fresh  in  their  memories.  (2)  How  the  king  met  his  death.  For  it  was  of 
course  known  to  the  army  that  Ahab  liad  disguised  himself,  whilst  Jehoshaphat  had 
put  on  his  robes.  After  the  sinister  prophecy  of  Micaiah,  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
allied  armies  would  watch,  with  the  gravest  anxiety,  for  the  issue.  They  would  per- 
ceive that  the  king  himself  was  not  without  his  fears  ;  they  would  wonder  whether 
his  disguise  would  procure  his  escape.  And  when  at  the  end  of  the  day  they  learnt 
that  Jehoshaphat  who  had  been  arrayed  like  a  Mug,  and  who  on  that  account  had 
been  exposed  to  imminentperil,  had  escaped  unhurt,  whilst  their  king,  who  had  never 
been  recognized,  had  been  pierced  by  a  chance  arrow  between  the  joints  of  his 
harness  and  mortally  wounded,  was  there  one  but  would  see  the  finger  of  God  in 
this  death  ?  Surely  if  the  Psalmist's  words  were  then  written,  they  would  occur  to 
their  minds,  "  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  spirit,  and  whither  shall  I  flee  from 
thy  presence  ?  "  &c.  (Pea.  oxxxix.  9 — 12),  or  that  other  Psahn,  "  God  shall  shoot  at 
them  with  a  swift  arrow ;  suddenly  shall  they  be  wounded  "  (Psa.  Ixiv.  7),  and  the 
result  would  be  that  all  men  would  fear  and  declare  the  work  of  God  {ib.  ver.  9),  and 
confess  that  this  was  His  doing.  The  fugitives  who  stole  away  in  the  dark  an  J  black 
night  to  their  homes,  hke  sheep  without  a  shepherd,  would  have  learnt  one  lesson 
at  least  that  day,  viz.,  that  there  was  "  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth." 

2.  Aa  God'a  appropriate  recompense  for  the  sins  of  that  age.  We  have  aheady 
seen  how  this  history  puts  its  stamp  of  reprobation  on  (1)  the  calf- worship,  inasmuch 
as  by  the  prophets  of  the  calves  the  king  was  beguiled  into  this  enterprize.  But 
the  sin  of  Jeroboam  was  not  the  special  sin  of  Ahab's  reign.  On  the  contrary,  the 
calf- worship  was  rather  overshadowed  and  eclipsed  by  the  frightful  idolatries,  which 
had  so  much  greater  fascination  for  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief.  It  was  the  charac- 
teristic of  that  reign  that  the  unclean  rites  of  Baal  and  Astarte,  the  abominations  of 
the  Amorites,  were  re-established  in  the  land.  We  see  in  Aliab's  death  (2)  the  reqmtal 

1  KiNas.  ^  " 


646  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [ch.  xxii.  1—53, 

of  his  share  in  that  sin  (ch.  xvi.  81,  32).  The  idolatry  which  had  desolated  the  church 
was  avenged  by  a  horde  of  idolaters  ravaging  the  land  and  slaying  the  arch-idolater 
in  battle.  There  is  a  rough  lex  talionis  here.  (Of.  Jer.  v.  19.)  If  they  would  have 
idolatry  they  should  taste  the  tender  mercies  of  idolaters.  On  that  iield  were  the 
predictions  of  Moses  (Dent.  zxviiL  25),  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xii.  25),  and  Solomon 
(1  Kings  viii.  83)  fulfilled. 

(3)  But  a  recompense  still  more  exact  and  conspicnons  attended  the  impurities 
which  Ahab  had  practised  under  the  name  of  religion.  He  had  filled  the  land  with 
prostitutes.  What  a  proof  of  the  just  judgment  of  God  it  was  that  these  infamous 
persons  added  dishonour  to  his  death  I  He  had  maintained  them  through  hfe  :  he 
should  be  associated  with  them  in  his  end.  The  harlots  bathed  in  the  pool  that 
was  reddened  with  his  blood  (vers.  88,  Heb.) 

(4)  Nor  was  the  connexion  of  Ahab's  death  vnth  the  sin  of  releasing  Ben-hadad 
any  less  conspicuous.  What  meant  that  strange  malignant  command,  "  Fight  .  .  . 
only  with  the  Mng  of  Israel  ?  "  Was  it  not  that  the  Syrian  king,  on  whom  Ahab 
would  not  execute  vengeance,  hadbecome,  in  the  counsels  of  God,  an  instrument  of 
vengeance,  a  minister  to  execute  wrath,  against  the  anointed  of  the  Lord  ?  "  Thy 
life  shall  go  for  his  life  " — ^it  was  thus  that  every  religious  mind  would  interpret  so 
singular  and,  considering  the  circumstances  (chap,  xx.),  so  otherwise  inexplicable  a 
word  of  command.  It  was  as  if  Ben-hadad  had  proclaimed  that  his  mission  primarily 
was  to  settle  the  long  arrearages  of  justice  with  that  wicked  Ahab. 

(5)  How  the  murder  of  Naboth  was  avenged  that  shameful  day,  it  is  hardly  neces- 
sary to  point  out.  There  was  a  strict  retaliation — ^wound  for  wound,  sferipe  for 
Btiipe,  blood  for  blood,  dishonour  for  dishonour.  There  were  many,  besides  Jehu 
and  Bidkar,  who  would  recall  the  fierce  threatening  of  the  Tishbite  (ch.  xxi.  19) ; 
many,  besides  priests  and  prophets,  would  remember  the  axiom  of  their  law,  "  blood 
defileth  the  land,"  &c.  (Num.  xxxv.  38),  or  would  think  on  that  day  of  the  so- 
called  "  precept  of  Noah,"  "  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood 
be  shed"  (Gen.  ix.  6).  The  elders  of  Jezreel,  yes,  and  Jezebel  herself,  understood 
that  Naboth's  blood  had  cried  from  the  ground,  and  that  the  cry  had  come  up  into 
the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth.  It  was  His  foot  that  was  dipped  in  the  blood  of 
His  enemies  (Psa.  Ixviii.  23). 

And  this  ignominious  death — in  what  sharp  contrast  it  stands  vdth  the  indolent, 
luxurious,  sensual  life  I  "  The  ivory  house  that  he  made,"  what  an  irony  we  may 
see  in  those  words !  ''  Shalt  thou  reign,  because  thou  closest  thyself  in  cedar.  .  .  . 
He  shall  be  buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass,"  &c.  (Jer.  xxii.  15,  19).  The  cities 
he  built,  the  victories  he  won,  how  poor  and  empty  do  these  exploits  seem  as  we 
stand  by  the  pool  of  Samaria,  and  see  the  livid,  blood-stained  corpse  dragged  firom 
the  chariot  I  The  Latin  poet  asks  what  all  his  pleasures,  travels,  knowledge,  can 
avail  a  man  who  has  to  die  after  all ;  but  the  question  presents  itself  vrith  tenfold 
force  when  life's  fitful  fever  is  followed  by  such  a  sleep,  by  such  a  dream,  as  Ahab's. 
"  It  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  born  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  24). 

And  the  death  of  Ahab  was  followed  by  the  dispersion  of  his  army.  When  the 
proclamation  rang  through  the  host,  "  Every  man  to  his  country,"  and  when  the 
serried  ranks  precipitately  broke  up,  and  horseman  and  footman  fled  for  his  life, 
then  the  share  of  Israel  in  the, sins  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  was  in  part  expiated. 
Tliere  was  not  a  man  but  knew  why  "  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  stand  before 
their  enemies."  "There  is  an  accursed  thing  in  the  midst  of  thee,  0  Israel" 
(Josh.  vii.  12,  13).  Baal  had  troubled  them,  bad  made  of  the  heights  of  Bamoth  s 
Tsiy  valley  ol  Aohor. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Bad  Company.  According  to  the  order  of  the  chapters  in  the  LXX., 
which  is  probably  the  original  or  true  order,  chapter  xx.  should  immediately  precede 
this  Then,  after  the  history  of  the  waf  between  Ahab  and  Ben-hadad,  this  chapter 
opens  naturally  :  "  And  they  continued  three  years  virithout  war  between  Syria  and 


OH.  xxn.  1—53.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  647 

Israel."  In  the  third  year  of  this  peace  Jehoshaphat  visited  Ahab ;  and  from  this 
-visit  arose  serious  events,  which  are  admonitory  to  us  that  we  shoiild  avoid  the 
company  of  the  wicked. 

I.  Bad  company  compromises  character,  1.  It  injurea  morals.  (1)  The  earlier 
career  of  Jehoshaphat  was  faultless.  He  is  highly  commended  for  his  faithfulness 
to  God  and  zeal  against  idolatry  (2  Chron.  xvii.  1 — 6).  (2)  His  first  feult  was 
£anctioning  the  marriage  of  his  son  Jehoram  with  AthaUah  the  daughter  of  Ahab 
(2  Kings  viii.  18,  26).  (8)  This  led  the  way  to  the  further  fault  of  that  friendly 
visit  to  Ahab  mentioned  here,  for  which  he  was  rebuked  by  "  Jehu  the  son  of 
Hanani  the  seer  "  (2  Chron.  xix.  2).  (4)  Yet  once  again  we  find  him  falling  into 
a  similar  snare.  He  agreed  with  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Ahab,  a  wicked  scion  of  a 
wicked  house,  jointly  to  equip  a  fleet  at  the  port  of  Bzion-Geber,  on  the  Eed  Sea,  to 
sail  to  Ophir  for  gold.  In  this  also  he  incurred  the  anger  of  the  Lord  and  suffered 
the  loss  of  his  fleet  (ver.  48  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  35 — 37).  Note :  A  fault  is  like  a  seed, 
fruitful  "  after  its  kind."  A  fault  once  committed  prepares  the  way  for  a  repetition. 
2.  It  da/mageB  rejgutation.  (1)  Reputation  is  character  as  estimated  by  men. 
This  estimate  may  or  may  not  be  just;  for  men  may  judge  wrongly  ttirough 
ignorance  of  circumstances  which  would  put  a  new  complexion  upon  conduct. 
Therefore  judgments  should  be  charitable,  and  not  too  hastily  formed.  (2)  But 
it  is  a  maxim  among  men,  generally  true,  that  "  you  may  Imow  a  man  by  hia 
friends."  Friendships  involve  sympathies.  It  had  been  better  for  Jehoshaphat|B 
reputation  had  he  never  made  affinity  with  the  wicked  house  of  Ahab.  (8)  This 
principle  wiU  apply  to  books.  Hence  the  kindred  maxim,  "You  may  see  tk 
man  in  his  Ubrary."  It  is  bad  enough  when  the  newspaper  shuts  up  the  Bible ;  it 
is  worse  when  the  Bible  is  neglected  through  preference  for  sensational  fictitious 
literature.  8.  It  impmn  iwfluence.  (I)  This  follows.  Character  is  influence. 
Reputation  ia  influence.  Advice  will  be  readily  received  from  a  genuine  man, 
which  coming  from  an  artificial  character  would  be  spumed.  (2)  What  a  power 
for  good  or  evil  is  moral  influence  1  See  the  evil  exemplified  in  Israel  under  Ahab 
and  Jezebel.  See  the  good  in  Judah  under  Jehoshaphat.  Lessons:  Let  your 
character  be  true.  Jealously  guard  your  reputation.  Look  to  these  for  the  sake  of 
your  influence.  ,         ,   .      ,    , . 

II.  Bad  compaky  compromises  happiness.  Because — ^1.  nevppmetf  m  twooloea  vn 
eha/racter.  (1)  This  truth  is  abundantly  illustrated  in  sacred  history.  Examples 
«re  furnished  in  the  text.  Secular  history  teaches  this  truth.  Everyday  experience 
evinces  it.  (2)  Yet  is  it  difficult  so  to  convince  individuals  of  this  as  tolead  them 
to  abandon  sin  and  throw  thefr  energies  wholly  into  the  blessed  service  of  God. 
Happiness  is  proportionate  to  the  completeness  of  consecration.  This  consecration 
cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  friendship  of  the  world  (James  iv.  4).  2.  Goodnest 
is  grieved  in  it.  (1)  Jehoshaphat  was  not  long  in  the  company  of  Ahab  before  his 
«ar  was  offended  by  horrible  words.  "I  hate  him."  Whom  did  Ahab  hate? 
Micaiah,  the  faithful  prophet  of  the  Lord.  Does  not  this  look  like  a  declaration  of 
hatred  against  the  Lord  ?  (See  Prov.  xiv.  31 ;  xvii  6 ;  Zech.  u.  8.)  (2)  Why  does 
Ahab  hate  Micaiah  ?  "  For  he  doth  not  prophesy  good  concernmg  me,  but  evU. 
Because  he  does  not  falsify  the  truth  of  God  to  flatter  me.  Because  he  does  not 
play  the  devil  to  please  me,  as  these  four  hundred  do  1  Note  :  Hatred  to  God  means 
love  to  Satan.  (3)  Such  sentunents  were  distressing  to  the  feelmgs  of  Jehoshaphat. 
To  the  revulsion  of  his  righteous  soul  he  gave  expression  (but  too  feeble)  m  the 
remonstrance,  "Let  not  the  king  say  so."  The  conversation  of  such  as  are  m 
sympathy  with  evil  wiU  offend  the  good  in  proportion  to  their  pureness.  8.  1 1  leads 
(he  most  wary  into  trouble.  For  the  persuasions  of  the  wicked  are  subtle.  (1)  in 
presence  of  Jehoshaphat  "  The  kmg  of  Israel  said  unto  his  servants^  ]&iow  ye 
that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  ours,  and  we  be  still,  and  take  it  not  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  king  of  Syria  ?  "  It  was  a  considerable  city  in  the  tribe  of  Gad  on  the  other  side 
Jordan,  and  one  of  the  cities  of  reftige.  It  was  one  of  the  cities  which  Ben-hadad, 
by  the  letter  of  his  covenant,  was  bound  to  restore  (see  ch.  xx.  84).  The  cause  of 
Israel  was  obviously  just.  (2)  Then  turnmg  to  Jehoshaphat,  Ahab  said,  Wilt  thon 
CO  with  me  to  battle  at  Kamoth-GUead  ?  "     To  which,  earned  away  with  th« 


648  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xxil  1—63. 

ob-viong  jnBtioe  of  fhe  oanse,  Jehoshaphat  responded,  "  I  am  as  fhon  art,  my  people 
as  thy  people,  my  horses  as  thy  horses."  This  was  too  strong  a  compliment  tO' 
Ahab  and  his  people,  and  the  response  was  too  ready.  We  may_  not  champion 
every  jnst  cause.  It  may  be  wrong  to  champion  a  good  cause  in  wicked  company. 
(3)  Bethinking  himself,  as  a  godly  man  should  do,  "  Jehoshaphat  said  unto  the 
king  of  Israel,  Inquire,  I  pray  thee,  at  the  word  of  the  Lord."  A  good  man  seeks 
to  take  God  with  him,  and  so  long  as  he  abides  in  this  holy  company  he  is  safe. 
But  let  him  beware  that  he  be  not  persuaded  by  the  wicked  to  forsake  it.  (4)  Ahab 
was  equal  to  the  occasion.  He  had  four  hundred  prophets  ready  with  one  mouth 
to  pronounce  for  the  war,  and  that,  too,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  This  hireUng 
company,  however,  did  not  satisfy  Jehoshaphat,  yet  he  fell  into  their  snare.  H» 
shoidd  have  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  to  withdraw  given  him  in  the 
prophecy  of  Micaiah;  but,  under  the  spell  of  Ahab's  evil  influence,  he' went  to  the 
battle  and  got  into  trouble.  There  is  no  safety  in  the  company  of  the  wicked.  4. 
It  provokes  judgments  of  God.  (1)  The  good  partake  in  the  plagues  of  their  wicked 
associates.  Jehoshaphat  barely  escaped,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  with  his  life ; 
and  he  suffered  the  loss  of  many  of  his  people  (see  Eev.  xviii.  4).  The  fly  that  keeps 
aloof  is  not  entangled  in  the  spider's  web.  (2)  The  good  incur  Divine  judgments 
for  their  own  sin.  The  sin  of  friendship  with  the  enemies  of  God,  The  sin  such 
friendship  must  infallibly  occasion.  Such  was  the  experience  of  Jehoshaphat  (seo 
2  Chron.  xiz.  2).    Such  wiU  be  yours.    Avoid  it. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  9 — 14. — The  False  and  the  True,  There  would  be  no  counterfeit  eoia  if 
there  were  no  sterling ;  so  neither  would  there  be  false  prophets  if  there  were  no 
true.  Because  there  are  both,  their  qualities  have  to  be  tested,  that  we  may  refuse 
the  spurious  and  value  the  genuine  (see  Jer.  xxui.  88).  To  this  end  let  us  consider— 

L  Tests  WHICH  uay  not  be  tbusted.  1.  The  test  of  profession.  (1)  Abab'a 
prophets  "  prophesied."  That  is  to  say  (a)  They  used  modes  usual  with  prophets 
to  prooure  information  from  Heaven.  These  were  sacrifice,  prayer,  music  (see 
1  Sam.  z.  6,  6 ;  2  Kings  iii.  16),  and,  when  time  permitted,  fasting,  (jb)  They  used 
modes  usual  with  prophets  to  communicate  the  information  when  received. 
"  ZedeMah,  the  son  of  Chenaanah,  made  him  horns  of  iron :  and  he  said.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  With  these  shalt  thou  push  the  Syrians,  until  thou  have  consumed 
them  "  (cf.  Jer.  xzvii.  2  ;  xxviii.  13).  The  "  horn  "  was  the  symbol  of  a  king  (see 
Dan.  vii.  24 ;  Eev.  ivii.  12).  These  were  "  two,"  to  represent  Ahab  and  Jehoshaphat, 
Israel  and  Judah.  They  were  of  "  iron  "  to  express  strength  (see  Dan.  ii.  40).  The 
prophecy  was  that,  aided  by  Jehoshaphat,  Ahab  should  push  the  Syrians  to  destruc- 
tion. (2),  They  prophesied  "in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Some  think  because  their 
number  corresponded  to  that  of  the  prophets  of  Ashere  (ch.  xviii.  19)  these  were 
the  same,  having  escaped  when  the  prophets  of  Baal  were  slain  at  the  brook  Kishon 
(oh.  xvui.  40).  If  so,  then  their  profession  on  this  occasion  was  designed  to  deceive 
Jehoshaphat  (see  Jer.  xxiii.  80).  (8)  Anyhow  there  was  profession  enough,  but  it 
was  hollow,  and  proved  conclusively  that  profession  must  not  be  taken  as  a  test  of 
truth.  2.  The  test  of  numbers.  (1)  Here  were  "  four  hundred  "  who  prophesied 
professedly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Against  this  number  Micaiah  the  son  of 
Imlah  stands  alone ;  yet  the  truth  of  God  is  with  him  against  the  multitude. 
"  Truth  is  not  always  to  be  determined  by  the  poU.  It  is  not  numbers,  but  weight, 
that  must  carry  it  in  the  oouncU  of  prophets  "  (Bishop  Hall).  (2)  This  instance 
does  not  stand  alone.  The  majority  was  in  the  wrong  against  Noah.  Elijah  was 
in  the  minority  on  Oarmel,  but  he  was  right.  Jesus  had  the  whole  Jewish  Church 
against  Him,  though  He  was  Truth  itself.  8.  The  test  of  uncmimity.  (1)  The 
four  hundred  were  united  against  Micaiah.  Sometimes  there  is  unanimity  of  this 
kind  against  a  common  object,  where  otherwise  there  is  little  agreement.  Herod 
and  FUate  made  friends  in  opposition  to  Jesus.  (2)  But  these  prophets  were  agreed 
among  themselves.  They  all  seem  to  have  followed  the  leadership  of  Zedekiah. 
"And  all  the  prophets  prophesied  so,  saying,  Go  up  to  Eamoth-GUead,  and 
prospar ;  for  the  Lord  shall  deUver  it  into  the  king's  hand."  4.  How  does  thi* 
argument  bear  upon  fhe  authority  of  the  Ohwrch!    (1)  It  is  pleaded  that  tiw 


«H.  xxn,  1—88.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  610 


Church,  which  is  practically  understood  to  bo  the  clergy  in  council,  has  authority 
to  bind  the  conscience  in  matters  of  faith.  The  arguments  relied  upon  to  sustain 
this  view  are  generally  based  upon  claims  of  profession,  numbers,  and  agreement. 
(2)  On  the  other  hand,  the  definition  of  the  Church  is  questioned,  and  the  claims 
are  refused  as  insufficient  for  their  purpose,  since  by  them  Ahab's  prophets  might 
prove  themselves  true  I 

II.  Tests  which  mat  be  tedstbd.  1.  The  witneise*  should  he  honest.  (1) 
Ahab's  prophets  were  interested  in  their  testimony.  They  enjoyed  the  patronage 
of  the  king,  and  they  said  what  they  knew  would  gratify  him.  Their  testimony, 
therefore,  is  open  to  suspicion.  (2)  Mioaiah,  on  the  contrary,  had  nothing  to  gain, 
but  everything  to  lose,  in  taking  his  course.  He  knew  the  temper  of  tlae  king.  He 
was  importuned  by  the  king's  messenger  to  concur  with  the  king's  prophets.  He 
bad  already  suffered  for  his  faithfulness,  for  he  seems  to  have  been  brought  fiom 
the  custody  of  Amon,  in  whose  prison  he  had  probably  lain  for  three  years.  By 
flattering  Ahab  he  might  now  obtain  release,  but  by  taking  an  opposite  course  be 
could  only  expect  to  go  back  to  jail.  Probabilities  also  were  against  him,  for  in  the 
last  two  battles,  Ahab,  without  the  aid  of  Jehoshaphat,  worsted  the  Syrians. 
Should  the  king  of  Israel  now  "  return  in  peace  "  what  may  Micaiah  expect?  (3) 
Nothing  but  the  consciousness  that  he  was  uttering  the  truth  of  God  could  account 
for  the  son  of  Imlah  deUberately  encountering  all  this.  And  only  upon  this  ground 
could  he  hopefor  any  favour  from  Ood.  Suspicion,  therefore,  as  to  the  honesty  of 
Micaiah  is  out  of  the  question.  (4)  But  can  it  be  pleaded  that  the  honesty  of  the 
ecclesiastics  who  framed  the  decrees  of  councils  is  beyond  suspicion  ?  In  decreeing 
the  infallibility  of  the  bishop  of  Borne,  e.g.,  were  they  disinterested,  when  they  knew 
how  pleasing  to  him  would  be  the  reputation  of  such  an  attribute,  and  when  they 
knew  what  patronage  and  power  to  injure  were  vested  in  his  hands  ?  2.  They  should 
have  miraculouB  authentication.  (1)  It  is  easy  to  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord," 
but  not  so  easy  to  evince  it.  The  four  hundred  could  say  it,  but  they  could  show 
no  miracle  to  prove  that  they  spoke  from  God.  (2)  It  was  otherwise  with  Micaiah. 
For,  with  the  Jews,  we  presume  he  was  that  prophet  who  "  prophesied  evil  eon- 
eerning  Ahab,"  and  authenticated  his  message  by  the  sign  of  the  hon  destroying 
his  fellow  for  disobedience  (c£  ver.  8  with  ch.  xx.  35—43).  (3)  Clergy  in  council 
may  claim  Divine  authority  for  their  decrees,  but  unless  they  can  verify  their  claim 
by  adequate  signs  they  presume  when  they  impose.  8.  Their  testimony  should  be 
agreeable  to  the  word  of  God.  (1)  "  Micaiah  said,  As  the  Lord  liveth,  what  the 
Lord  saith  unto  me,  that  wiU  I  speaik."  The  one  question  for  us  in  these  days  is 
this :  Is  the  testimony  agreeable  to  the  Bible  ?  This  we  know  by  infallible  proofs 
to  be  the  word  of  God.  "  But,"  it  is  objected,  "  the  Bible  needs  authoritative  in- 
terpretation, and  who  is  to  interpret  but  the  Church  ?  "  To  which  we  may  answer, 
And  the  Church  still  more  needs  authoritative  interpretation,  and  who  is  to  inter- 
pret but  the  Bible  ?  The  a,uthority  of  the  Bible  is  admitted ;  that  of  the  Church  is 
in  question.  (2)  The  right  of  private  judgment  must  be  maintained.  For  the 
exercise  of  this  right  we  shall  every  one  of  us  give  account  of  himself  unto  God. 
That  ill-defined  thing,  the  Church,  cannot  release  us  from  this  obUgation.  We 
isannot  put  our  judgment  and  conscience  into  commission. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  15—23. — Micaiah's  Prophecy.  It  is  evident  from  the  text  and  from  ver.  8 
that  this  was  not  the  first  time  Ahab  and  Micaiah  had  met.  The  Jews  suppose, 
apparently  with  reason,  that  Mioaiah  was  that  prophet  who,  when  Ahab  sent 
Ben-hadad  away  with  a  covenant,  said  to  the  king  of  Israel,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord : 
Because  thou  hast  let  go  out  of  thine  hand  a  man  whom  I  appointed  to  utter 
destruction,  therefore  thy  life  shall  go  for  his  life,  and  thy  people  for  hie  people  " 
(see  ch.  xx.  35^43).  In  considering  the  prophecy  of  Micaiah  now  before  us,  w« 
notice — 

I.  Teat  it  is  peefacbd  with  a  sallt  of  ikont.  1.  He  answers  the  king  in  the 
words  of  his  prophets.  (1)  Cf.  vers.  6,  12,  15.  (2)  These  words  are  equivocal 
"  The  Lord  shaU  deliver  ii  into  the  band  of  the  kmg."  What  king?  "Thekmg" 
may  mean  either  Ahab  or  Ben-hadad.    What  ?    This  is  not  clear ;  for  the  word 


•60  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  xxu.  1— 68» 

"  it "  is  supplied.  Is  it  Bamotb-Gilead  or  something  else  that  is  to  be  delivered 
into  the  hand  of  the  king  (of  Israel)  ?  or  is  it  the  king  of  Israel  or  something  else 
to  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  (of  Syria)  ?  What  kind  of  prophecy  is  this? 
(3)  The  utterance  of  these  prophets  resembles  those  of  the  heathen  oracles,  the 
following  appropriate  samples  of  which  are  given  by  A.  Clarke  :  "  The  Delphic 
oracle  spoke  thus  of  Croesus,  which  be  understood  to  Tiis  own  destruction;  '  Croesus, 
Hcdym penetrans,  magncmi  suhvertet  opum  vim;'  which  is  to  say,  '  If  you  march 
against  Cyrus,  he  will  overtbi-ow  you,'  or  '  you  will  overthrow  Jmn.'  He  trusted  in 
the  latter,  the  former  took  place.  He  was  deluded,  yet  the  oracle  maintained  its 
credit.  So  in  the  following :  '  Aio  te,  Macida,  Bomanos  vincere  posse.  Ibis 
redibis  nunquam,  in  hello  peribis.'  Pyrrhus,  king  of  Epirus,  understood  by  this 
that  he  should  conquer  the  Bomans,  against  whom  he  was  making  war ;  but  the 
oracle  could  be  thus  translated :  '  The  Eomans  shall  overcome  thee.'  He  trusted  in 
the  former,  made  unsuccessful  war,  and  was  overcome  ;  and  yet  the  juggling  priest 
saved  his  credit.  The  latter  line  is  capable  of  two  opposite  meanings :  '  Thou  shalli 
go,  thou  shalt  return,  thou  shalt  never  perish  in  war,'  or, '  Thou  shalt  go,  thou  shalt 
never  return,  thou  shalt  perish  in  war.' ''  2.  But  he  repeats  those  words  with 
significant  expression.  (1)  The  bare  repetition,  with  proper  emphasis,  3f  the  eqni> 
yocal  words  of  the  false  prophets  would  be  a  fine  stroke  of  irony.  But  when  to 
emphasis  were  added  tone,  gesture,  play  of  feature,  the  irony  would  become  very 
keen.  (2)  This  sarcasm  of  Micaiah  is  worthy  to  compare  with  that.of  Elijah  (see 
oh.  xviii.  27).  "  Go  and  prosper."  This  assurance  of  thy  prophets  is  vague  enough 
to  encourage  the  confidence  of  a  simpleton  1  8.  Ood  uses  terrible  rhetoric  in  Hi* 
wrath.  (1)  Irony  and  sarcasm  are  fitting  weapons  to  be  wielded  against  those  who 
have  neither  conscience  nor  reason  (see  Prov.  xxvi.  3—6).  Ahab  was  a  man  of  this 
class.  Witness  the  logic  of  his  hatred  (ver.  8).  He  felt  the  sting  (ver.  16).  (2) 
These  weapons  are  formidable  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty  (see  Psa.  ii.  4,  6; 
xxxvii  13 ;  Prov.  i.  24 — 32  ;  Eocles.  xi.  9 ;  MaL  ii.  17  and  iii.  1 ;  Bom.  iL  1 — 9). 

II.  That  it  compares  pavoubablt  with  that  of  his  competitobs.  1.  lit 
hv/rden  is  the  reverse  of  equivocal.  (1)  There  is  in  sacred  prophecy  a  doable  sense, 
but  the  sound  is  certain.  It  is  not  a  dubiousness  but  a  manifoldness  of  meaning,  a 
development,  an  evolution,  such  as  we  find  in  a  seed  that  opens  first  into  the  blade, 
then  into  the  ear,  and  eventually  into  the  full  com  in  the  ear.  (2)  This  prophecy 
of  Micaiah  gave  a  distinct  answer  to  the  question  of  Ahab  (ver.  13).  The  advice 
was  to  forbear.  These  "  sheep."  The  sheep  is  not  a  creature  fitted  for  battle. 
They  have  "  no  shepherd."  Their  king,  deserted  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  has  not  the 
qualities  of  a  shepherd.  Therefore  "  Let  them  return  every  man  to  his  house  in 
peace."  (3)  But  the  advice  contains  a  prophecy.  It  is  to  this  efi'eot :  their  king 
who  ought  to  be  their  shepherd,  shall  fall  at  Bamotb-Gilead,  and  his  people  shafi 
be  like  sheep,  "  scattered  upon  the  mountains  "  by  the  power  of  the  enemy  (compare 
Zeoh.  xiii.  7).  2.  The  vision  shows  that  all  worlds  a/re  v/nder  Divine  control, 
(1)  "I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  his  throne."  Here  was  a  comparison  with  the  scene 
before  him,  described  ver.  10.  Ahab  and  Jehoshaphat  are  enthroned  as  kings  on 
the  earth ;  but  there  is  a  King  in  the  heavens  immeasurably  above  them;  (2)  "  And 
aU  the  host  of  heaven  standing  by  him  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left."  The 
host  of  heaven  stood  while  Jehovah  sat.  They  awaited  His  commands.  Those  on 
His  "  right  hand"  probably  to  render  services  of  benevolence;  those  on  His  "  left," 
services  of  judgment.  (3)  Then  comes  in  another  kind  of  agency  (vers.  20—23). 
This  scene  is  analogous  to  that  described  in  the  Book  of  Job  (see  Job  i.  6 ;  ii.  7). 
'.rhings  in  heaven,  things  in  earth,  things  under  the  earth,  all  serve  the  purposes  of 
Divine  Providence  (see  Job  xii.  16 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  11, 12 ;  Bev.  xx.  7, 8).  (4)  The  way- 
wardness of  Ahab  showed  how  fully  he  was  under  the  control  of  the  spirit  of  false- 
hood. This  is  seen  in  his  senseless  resentment  against  Micaiah.  Turning  t» 
Jehoshaphat,  he  said,  "  Did  I  not  tell  thee  that  he  would  prophesy  no  good  con- 
cerning me,  but  evU  ?  "  as  if  Mioaiah's  own  utterances  could  control  the  providence 
of  God.  Then  turning  to  his  oflicers  he  had  Micaiah  marched  back  to  the  prison 
where  Ahab  knew  he  could  find  him  (cf.  ver,  8  with  vers.  26,  27).  Let  us  give  due 
heed  to  the  more  sure  word  of  prophecy. — J.  A.  M. 


CH.  XXII.  1-.68.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  SS] 


Vers.  24— 29.— r^e  Argument  of  Wiolcedness.  The  Bible  is  a  book  of  texts 
because  it  is  a  book  of  types.  It  does  not  profess  to  give  full  histories,  but  refers  to 
pubho  records  for  these  (see  Josh.  x.  13 ;  2  Sam.  i.  18;  1  Kings  xi.  41 ;  1  Chron.  ix  1) 
-Inspiration  selects  from  histories  typical  or  representative  incidents  to  bring  out  the 
principles  of  the  grace  and  truth  of  God.  In  the  scene  before  us  we  have  types  of 
wickedness  m  Zedekiah  and  Ahab,  the  one  ecclesiastical,  the  other  civil,  which 
may  be  profitably  studied  in  the  arguments  they  use  contendmg  with  Micaiah.  the 
representative  of  the  truth  of  God.     These  arguments  are 

I.  Eage  AGAINST  THE  TRUTH.  The  rcason  is  obvious,  viz.,  because  the  truth  is 
the  worst  that  can  be  said  of  the  wicked.  1.  It  is  the  worst  that  can  be  said  of 
their  cha/racter.  (1)  It  shows  up  their  selfishness.  The  one  object  of  Ahab  was 
that  "  good  "  might  be  prophesied  for  him.  To  gain  this  he  sold  himself  to  his 
four  hundred  hars.  These  hars,  to  gain  the  patronage  of  Ahab,  sold  their  con- 
sciences. Because  Ahab  could  not  gain  flattery  from  Micaiah,  he  hated  him.  (2) 
It  shows  up  their  folly.  For  what  was  the  selfishness  of  Ahab  but  self-deception? 
The  patronage  of  liars  could  not  convert  falsehood  into  truth,  neither  could  the 
persecution  of  a  true  man  convert  truth  into  falsehood.  Zedekiah,  in  deceiving 
Ahab,  deceived  his  own  soul.  AU  sin  is  foUy.  (3)  It  evinces  their  degradation, 
for  it  proves  them  to  be  the  dupes  and  serfs  of  infernal  spirits.  Can  degradation 
go  lower  ?  Z.Itis  the  worst  that  can  be  said  of  their  doom-.  (1)  The  wicked  are 
to  be  destroyod  in  time.  Ahab  in  particular  was  to  fall  at  Bamoth-Gilead.  From 
that  battle  he- was  "  not  to  return  in  peace."  Zedekiah  was  to  "  go  into  an  inner 
chamber  to  hide  himself,"  as  Ben-hadad  bad  done  (ch.  xx.  30),  and  there  to  meet 
his  fate.  While  to  the  righteous  death  is  an  entrance  to  glory,  it  is  the  "  king  of 
terrors  "  to  the  wicked  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  55—67).  The  sting  is  here  :  (2)  The  wicked 
are  to  be  destroyed  in  eternity.  The  alarm  with  which  the  ancients  received  pre- 
dictions of  maltreatment  to  their  corpses  arose  from  their  apprehension  that  it 
presaged  a  posthumous  retribution  upon  the  soul.  The  dogs  licking  the  blood  of 
Ahab  would  suggest  _  that  devils  would  not  only  be  the  instigators  but  also  the 
instruments  of  his  ruin.  (3)  Who  can  estimate  the  horrors  of  damnation  ?  The 
truth  will  prove  to  be  the  worst  that  can  be  said  of  the  lost.  Is  it  wonderful,  then, 
that  the  wicked  should  abhor  the  truth  ?  8.  They  are  therefore  constrained  to 
hypocrisy.  (1)  For  their  own  sakes  they  have  to  play  the  hypocrite.  They  conceal 
their  selfishness  and  affect  generosity,  conscious  that  were  their  base  soul-hunger 
to  come  honestly  to  the  day,  they  would  become  odious.  They  hide  their  folly  and 
•ffect  wisdom  lest  they  should  suffer  contempt.  (2)  For  the  sake  of  society  wicked 
men  are  hypocrites.  Were  they  to  be  honestly  known  to  each  other,  respect  and 
confidence  would  be  at  an  end ;  in  fact,  society  would  be  impossible.  There  are  no 
friendships  in  helL 

II.  The  resentment  of  violence.  1.  The  logic  of  the  wicked  is  weak.  (1) 
Zedekiah's  speech  was  pertinacious  :  "  Which  way  went  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  from 
me  to  speak  unto  thee?  "  He  assumed  what  Micaiah  had  not  conceded,  that  ha 
ever  had  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  Micaiah  had  declared  him,  on  the  contrary,  to  have 
been  influenced  by  a  "  spirit "  of  a  very  different  description.  Zedekiah  also  denied 
what  he  should  have  disproved,  viz.,  that  Micaiah  had  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  (2) 
Ahab  wanted  a  prophet  of  the  God  of  truth  to  tell  lies  to  please  him.  He  found  four 
hundred  to  tell  him  Ues,  professedly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  But  the  one  honest 
man  who  told  him  the  truth  he  imprisoned,  because  the  truth  did  not  please  him. 
Yet  the  truth  was  what  he  adjured  him  to  tell.  What  reason  is  there  in  all  this  ? 
(3)  What  sinner  is  there  in  our  day  who  can  clear  himself  of  folly  ?  (See  Prov. 
xiii.  19 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  19.)  2.  The  strength  of  the  wicked  is  tyranny.  (1)  The 
reason  of  Zedekiah  was  in  his  fist  (ver.  24).  "  Which  way  ?  "  From  the  fist  to 
the  cheek?  The  coward  us  d  this  argument  with  a  council  of  four  hundred 
ecclesiastics  about  him,  and  the  civil  power  in  reserve.  So  was  Jesus  insulted 
(see  Matt.  xxvi.  57—68).  So  were  the  Protestant  confessors.  False  prophets  have 
ever  been  the  worst  enemies  of  the  true.  Micaiah  did  not  return  the  blow,  but  referred 
the  decision  to  God.  True  prophets  wield  other  than  carnal  weapons.  (2)  The  reason 
of  Ahab  was  in  his  bribes  and  prisons.      Mioaidh  could  not  be  cajoled  u  the  fooi 


BSa  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [ch.  xxn.  1—68. 

hundred  were,  therefore"  the  king  of  Israel  said,  Tate  Micaiah,  carry  him  back  unto 
Amon  the  governor  of  the  city,  and  to  Joash  the  king's  son,  and  say.  Thus  saiththe 
king,  put  this  fellow  in  prison,  and  feed  him  with  bread  of  afBiction,  and  with  water 
of  affliction,  until  I  come  in  peace."  (3)  But  truth  is  not  vanquished,  thus.  How 
confident  was  Ahab  that  he  should  "come  in  peace  "  I  And  this  is  that  Ahab  who. 
three  or  four  years  before  so  sagaciously  said  to  Ben-hadad,  "  Let  not  him  that 
girdeth  on  his  harness  boast  himself  as  he  that  putteth  it  off."  Persistency  in  sin  does 
not  sharpen  men's  wits.  Time  vindicates  truth.  To  this  vindicator  Micaiah  called  the 
attention  of  the  people  (ver.  29).  (4)  But  where  was  Jehoshaphat  ?  He  was  silent 
when  he  should  have  spoken  for  the  prophet  of  God.  See  the  influence  of  bad 
company.  "  So  the  king  of  Israel,  and  Jehoshaphat  the  king  of  Judah  went  ap  to 
Bamoth-Gilead."    Alas,  Jehoshaphat  1 — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  30 — 38.  Lesions  of  the  Battle.  After  disposing  of  Micaiah  by  sending  him 
to  prison  with  hard  fare  as  the  reward  of  his  faithfulness,  Ahab  and  Jehoshaphat 
gathered  their  forces  and  set  out  together  to  fight  for  the  recovery  of  Eamoth-Gilead. 
The  events  of  the  day  show — 

I.  That  prophecy  mat  tend  to  its  own  fulfilment.  1.  Miccdah's  words  in- 
fluenoed  Ahah's  conduct.  (1)  Though  Ahab  had  imprisoned  the  prophet  he  could 
not  shake  off  the  influence  of  his  prophecy.  So  with  a  view  to  obviating  its  effect  he 
proposed  to  disguise  himself  He  speaks  of  himself  in  the  third  person  (ver.  30), 
thus  (B'annn),  "  He  will  [strip]  disguise  himself  " — a  form  of  speech,  perhaps,  con- 
Bidered  suitable  to  an  action  in  which  he  was  to  appear  as  a  third  person.  To  com- 
plete the  deception,  if  we  follow  the  LXX.,  he  induced  Jehoshaphat  to  put  on  his 
(Ahab's)  robes,  (a)  Note  the  subtlety  of  the  wicked.  Ahab's  proposal  to  Jehoshaphat 
was  ostensibly  to  give  him  the  post  of  honour  in  commanding  the  army.  This,  too, 
may  have  suggested  the  use  of  the  third  person  in  speaking  of  himself.  Ahab's  real 
purpose  was  to  divert  from  himself  the  fury  of  the  battle;  and  probably  he  hoped 
Jehoshaphat  might  be  slain.  In  that  case  lus  son-in-law  would  succeed  to  the  throne 
of  Judah,  and  he  might  be  able  so  to  manage  him  as  to  serve  his  own  purposes.  (6) 
In  all  this  we  see  the  danger  of  bad  company.  We  see  it  likewise  in  the  sad  fact 
that  Jehoshaphat  should  become  a  party  to  a  contrivance  to  falsify  the  word  of  God  I 
(2)  But  how  useless  are  disguises  when  the  providence  of  Omniscience  is  concerned ! 
Ahab  might  hide  himself  from  the  Syrians,  but  he  could  not  hide  himself  from 
God.  Neither  could  he  hide  himself  from  angels  and  devils,  who  are  instruments 
of  Divine  Providence,  ever  influencing  men,  and  even  natural  laws,  or  forces  of 
nature.  Note :  No  disguise  will  avail  to  evade  the  scrutiny  and  retributions  of  the 
judgment-day.  (3)  Yet  by  his  disguise  Ahab,  unwittingly,  helped  the  prophecy. 
"  The  king  of  Syria  commanded  his  thirty  and  two  captains  that  had  rule  over  his 
chariots,  saying.  Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  save  only  with  the  king  of 
Israel."  Suppose  Ahab  had  been  in  Jehoshaphat's  place,  and  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  captains,  what  would  have  become  of  the  words  of  Elijah  ?  (See  oh. 
xxi.  19.)  But  as  things  worked  out  these  words  became  literally  true.  2.  They  also 
influenced  the  conduct  of  the  Syrians.  (1)  The  Syrians  would  be  aware  of  the 
prophecy  of  Micaiah  dooming  Ahab  to  fall  at  Bamoth-Gilead.  For  in  a  country 
about  the  size  of  North  Wales,  Samaria  being  distant  from  Eamoth-Gilead  only 
thirty  miles,  the  news  of  this  public  meeting  of  kings  and  contest  of  prophets  could 
not  be  a  secret.  Ahab  would  facilitate  the  publication  of  the  enoom-agement  he 
had  from  the  four  hundred,  to  strike  terror  into  the  Syrians  ;  but  where  the  news 
of  his  encouragement  went  the  words  of  Micaiah  also  would  travel.  (2)  Probably 
this  intelhgence  determined  the  Syrians  to  "fight  only  against  the  king  of  Israel," 
in  which  they  would  have  the  God  of  Israel  with  them,  the  formidableness  of  whose 
hostility  fcheyhad  experienced  in  the  last  two  battles  (compare  2  Chron.  xxxv.  21, 
22).  To  this  Jehoshaphat  probably  was  indebted  for  the  sparing  of  his  life,  for 
"  God  moved  the  Syrians  to  depart  from  him  "  (see  2  Chron.  xviii.  31).  And  prob- 
ably they  were  influenced  by  it  to  agree  to  the  proclamation  to  disband,  when  the 
death  of  Ahab  became  known  (of.  vers.  17,  36).  3.  Note  a  remarkable  illustra- 
tion of  this  principle  in  che  zeal  of  Jehu  in  exterminating  the  house  of  Ahab  (see 


a.  xxn.  1— «8.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  KINOa  068 


S  Kings  k.  25,  26 ;  x.  10, 11, 16,  17).    Those  -who  are  « looking  for,"  are  thereby 
"hastening  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God"  (see  2  Peter  iii.  12). 

II.  That  nbverthelbss  the  hand  of  God  is  in  it.  I.  TMs  waa  evident  in 
the  case  of  Ahab.  The  purpose  of  Ben-hadad,  should  Ahab  have  fallen  into  his 
hands,  is  not  recorded.  Would  he  return  Ahab's  compliment  of  releasing  him 
with  a  covenant?  Would  he  show  Ahab  how  he  ought  to  have  treated  him  ?  (2) 
But  God  had  other  means  than  the  captains  of  Ben-hadad  to  accomplish  His  purpose. 
"  A  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture  (marg.  "  in  his  simpUcity  ")  and  smote  the  king  of 
Israel  between  the  joints  and  harness."  A  simpleton  brings  down  a  king  1  (See 
Prov.  i.  82.)  God  guided  the  arrow  to  the  opening  in  the  joints  of  the  armour,  as 
He  guided  the  pebble  from  the  sling  of  David  into  the  frontals  of  Goliath.  No 
armour  is  proof  against  the  shafts  of  Divine  vengeance.  (3)  The  hand  of  God  also 
was  seen  in  the  sequel.  The  prophecies  of  Elijah  and  Micaiah  seem  to  be  in  con- 
flict The  one  speaks  of  the  dogs  Ucking  the  blood  of  Ahab  at  "  Samaria ; "  the 
other  of  Ahab  falling  at  "  Bamoth-GUead."  Who  but  God  could  so  order  events 
that  there  should  be  no  conflict  here  ?  "  The  blood  ran  out  of  the  wound  into  the 
midst  (Heb.  bosom)  of  the  chariot ; "  perhaps  more  correctly,  "  into  the  bosom  of 
the  charioteer,"  on  which  the  king  leaned.  "  And  one  washed  the  chariot ;  "  or 
rather,  "  And  the  driver  washed  himself  in  the  pool  of  Samaria,  and  the  dogs 
Ucked  his  blood"  i.e.,  the  blood  of  Ahab  which  fell  from  the  bosom  of  the  driver. 
"  And  the  things  they  washed,"  For  mjt  denotes  the  several  hinds  of  things, 
being  derived  from  ]T,  a  Irnid  or  species.  Before  the  person  and  things  defiled  with 
blood  were  permitted  to  enter  the  city,  they  were  to  be  washed ;  and  the  dogs 
licked  np  the  blood  that  fell  from  the  driver's  bosom,  and  off  the  things,  as  they  lay 
to  be  washed  (see  Psa.  IxviiL  23).  (4)  But  were  not  the  words  of  Elijah  "  In  the 
place  where  the  dogs  Ucked  the  blood  of  Naboth  "  (viz.,  Jezreel)  "  shall  dogs  Uck  thy 
blood,  even  thine  "  ?  But  in  the  context  there,  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  is  said  to  be 
in  Samaria  (see  ch.  xxi.  18, 19),  because  Jezreel,  like  Bethel,  was  one  of  the  "  cities 
of  Samaria"  (see  ch.  xiii.  82)1  In  the  very  vineyard  of  Naboth  did  the  blood  of 
Ahab  flow  from  the  veins  of  his  son  (see  2  Kings  ix.  26,  26).  The  providence  that 
accomplished  is  no  less  admirable  than  the  omniscience  that  predicted.  2.  This 
was  aho  evident  in  the  case  of  Jehoshaphat.  (1)  Micaiah  did  not  say  that  the 
king  of  Judah  should  fall  at  Bamoth-Gilead ;  but  his  prophecy  did  intimate  that  he 
womd  be  of  httle  use  to  the  army.  The  word  (d*3*IN)  in  ver.  17  rendered  "  master  " 
is  plural,  and  evidently  associates  Jehoshaphat  with  Ahab.  When  Ahab  was 
wounded  to  death  and  Jehoshaphat  had  fled  for  his  hfe,  the  people  had '"no 
masters,"  so  the  proclamation  soon  followed  which  determined  "  eveiy  man  to  his 
bouse  in  peace."  (2)  Jehoshaphat's  danger  lay  in  his  being  assimilated  to  Ahab. 
He  should  never  have  said,  "  I  am  as  thou  art "  (ver.  4),  then  would  he  not  have 
been  persuaded  to  don  Ahab's  robes.  By  the  influence  of  his  company  Jehoshaphat 
was  becoming  morally  like  him,  and  therefore  was  in  danger  of  sharing  his  miser- 
able fate  (see  Prov.  xiii.  20).  (3)  To  avoid  this  danger  he  had  to  become  himself 
again.  "  He  cried  out "  [to  Jehovah]  (see  2  Chron.  xviii.  81) ;  and  thus  was  dis- 
covered to  the  captains,  who  would  expect  to  hear  Ahab  cry  rather  to  Baal.  The 
hand  of  God  was  evident  in  his  deliverance  ;  and  this  he  might  read  as  a  parable 
assuring  him  that  his  future  safety  must  lie  in  his  renotmcing  evU  companions  and 
returning  to  the  piety  of  his  earher  years. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  39,  40,  51 — 53. — Sti/rvival.  After  the  account  of  Ahab's  death  and  burial, 
and  of  the  manner  in  which  the  dogs  of  Samaria  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Elijah, 
the  earlier  verses  of  our  text  follow.  In  the  first  of  these  the  reader  is  referred  to 
the  archives  of  the  nation  for  an  account  of  the  "  rest  of  the  acts  "  and  works  of 
this  monarch,  viz.,  those  to  which  inspiration  was  not  here  specially  directed.  In 
the  second,  the  succession  of  Ahaziab  is  mentioned.  With  these  verses,  because  of 
the  unity  of  the  subject,  we  associate  the  three  verses  referring  to  the  reign  of 
Ahaziah,  vrith  which  the  chapter  closes.     Taking  the  latter  first  in  order,  we  see — 

L  That  Ahab  snRvrvED  in  Ahaziah.  1.  This  was  legally  true.  (1)  "  So  Ahab 
dept  with  his  fathers:  and  Ahaziah  his   son  reigned  in  his  stead."    In  law,  ■ 


564  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [ch.  xxn.  1— 58. 

man  is  said  to  "live  in  his  heirs."  He  is  never  legally  dead  while  he  has  an 
heir.  There  is  a  good  reason  for  this.  Ahaziah  would  never  have  mounted 
the  throne  of  Israel  unless  his  father  had  been  there  before  him.  He  reigned 
in  the  posthumous  influence  of  Ahab.  His  representative.  (2)  When  a  man  is 
what  is  called  "the  architect  of  his  own  fortune,"  he  is  said  to  have  had  "no 
father."  But  in  this  language  the  fact  is  ignored  that,  under  Providence,  this 
"  architect "  is  indebted  to  his  ancestry  for  his  existence,  for  his  feoulties,  and  for 
the  circumBtances  which  he  may  have  seized  and  moulded  into  this  "fortune."  2. 
It  was  also  morally  true.  (1)  In  Ahaziah  the  vices  of  Ahab  were  reproduced. 
"  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  walked  in  the  way  Qf  his  father."  The 
bad  example  of  his  father  wrought  its  influence  into  his  character,  and  thus  Ahab 
survived  in  Ahaziah.  (2)  The  record  descends  to  particulars.  "  He  walked  in  the 
way  of  his  father,  and  m  the  wan/  of  his  mother."  Here  not  only  is  Jezebel  repro- 
duced in  Ahaziah,  but  Ahab's  sin  in  marrying  Jezebel  also  survives.  "And  in  the 
way  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin."  Here  is  not  only  the 
posthumous  influence  of  Jeroboam,  but  also  of  the  sin  of  Ahab  in  perpetuating  it. 
"  For  he  served  Baal,  and  worsliipped  him."  The  establishment  of  this  Canaanitish 
abomination  was  due  to  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  and  they  infamously  survive  in  its  per- 
petuation. (3)  Note  (a)  A  Church  is  not  the  more  ferue  for  being  estabUshed.  Here 
were  two  State  Churches  which  were,  in  the  Biblical  sense,  atheistic.  (6)  For  eon- 
current  endowment,  whatever  may  be  said  for-its  expediency,  there  can  be  no  moral 
defence.  8.  But  there  was  no  necessity  for  this.  (1)  Legal  representation  is  an 
accident  over  which  we  have  no  control.  It  is  a  notable  truth  that  men  have  influ- 
ences in  spite  of  themselves,  and  that  these  also  are  posthumous.  (2)  But  moral 
representation  is  in  a  different  category.  Ahaziah  might  have  reigned  in  Ahab's 
stead  without  imitating  his  vices.  "  Jehoram  the  son  of  Ahab,"  e.g.,  "wrought 
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord ;  but  not  like  his  father,  and  hke  his  mother ;  for  he 
put  away  the  image  of  Baal  tiiat  his  father  had  made  "  (2  Kings  iii.  2).  (3)  Ahaziah 
should  have  been  admonished  by  the  history  of  the-  judgments  of  God  upon  the 
house  of  Jeroboam.  He  should  have  taken  the  warning  given  in  the  judgments  of 
God  on  the  sins  of  his  father.  His  guilt,  therefore,  was  upon  his  own  head,  and  he 
suffered  accordingly.  He  reigned  two  years.  God  makes  short  work  with  some 
sinners.  His  death  was  provoked  by  ms  perversity  (see  2  Kings  i  3,  4).  We  see 
further — 

II.  That  Ahab  bckvives  in  histobt.  1.  He  survived  im,  secular  history.  His 
•cts  and  works  were  written  in  the  chronicles  of  his  nation.  (1)  Amongst  these 
were  mentioned  "  all  the  cities  that  he  built."  Perhaps  this  building  of  cities 
simply  meant  the  construction  of  fortifications  for  their  defence.  Whether  they 
reflected  credit  or  discredit  upon  his  memory  we  cannot  pronounce.  A  man  may 
do  a  great  dealof  work  to  very  little  profit.  (2)  The  chronicles  mentioned  "  the 
ivory  house  which  he  made."  This  palace  had  its  description  probably  fi:om  the 
quantity  of  that  valuable  substance  used  in  its  ornamentation.  But  this  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  to  his  honour.  A  kingdom  impoverished  through  famines, 
wars,  and  idolatries  was  in  no  position  to  bear  the  cost  of  such  a  piece  of 
luxurious  and  selfish  vanity.  Amos  accordingly  denounces  this  work  of  pride 
(Amos  iii.  15).  _  (3)  The  survival  of  Ahab  in  secular  history  was  a  consequence  of 
his  social  position.  The  masons  and  carpenters,  whose  skill  brought  the  works  of 
Ahab  to  perfection,  had  no  mention  there.  Social  status  is  a  talent  fi-om  God,  for 
the  right  use  of  which  men  are  accountable.  2.  He  survives  in  sacred  history. 
(1)  The  sacred  history  consists  of  selections  from  the  secular  xtnier  the  guiding 
influence  of  Divine  inspiration,  with  a  view  to  illustrating  the  principles  of  the 
providence,  truth,  and  grace  of  God.  To  illustrate  such  principles  is  the  noblest 
end  of  writing.  So  of  reading.  What  quantities  of  trash,  in  which  the  claims  of 
God  are  ignored,  is  both  written  and  read  I  (2)  In  these  selections  the  notices  of 
the  wicked  are  generally  brief.  Perhaps  no  wicked  man  has  a  larger  share  of  the 
sacred  writings  occupied  with  his  acts  than  Ahab.  Such  acts  are  not  agreeable  to 
the  Spirit  of  God.  But  in  the  hands  of  inspiration  they  are  made  an  influence  for 
good.    They  are  recorded,  apparently,  because  of  their  relation  to  the  actions  of 


uH.  xxu.  1—68.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  SM 


prophets  and  good  men.  They  are  made  to  serve  as  a  dark  background  to  show 
up  to  admuration  virtuous  qualities,  and  to  be  made  themselves  odious  in  tha 
contrast.  The  principles  of  the  wicked  should  only  be  studied  to  be  shunned.  So 
God  brings  good  out  of  evil.  (3)  The  sacred  records  have  survived  the  secular. 
•'The  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Israel "  has  long  since  perished.  The 
sacred  records  have  come  down  to  our  times.  In  these,  after  a  lapse  of  nearly 
thurty  centuries,  Ahab  survives.  But  for  these  his  name  would  not  be  known. 
Note  (a)  the  Providence  which  has  preserved  the  Scriptures  evinces  their  Divine 
authenticity.  (6)  Thmgs  are  permanent  as  they  stand  related  to  the  everlastiag 
God.    (c)  The  posthumous  influence  points  to  the  immortahty  of  ican.— J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  41—50. — Jehoshaphat.  These  words  give  a  summary  of  the  life  of  this 
king  of  Judah,  and  faithfully  record,  as  the  Scriptures  do  to  admiration,  the  good 
and  the  bad,  as  these  will  be  considered  in  the  judgment  of  the  great  day. 
Consider — 

I.  The  praise  of  Jbhoshaphat.  1.  He  came  of  a  good  stock.  (1)  He  was  "  of 
the  house  and  Hneage  of  David."  The  traditions  of  that  house  were  La  many 
respects  a  glorious  inheritance.  David  was  a  "man  after  God's  own  heart."  la 
no  instance  was  be  found  inclining  to  idolatry.  (2)  He  was  the  son  of  Asa.  01 
his  mother  we  have  this  siguiflcant  mention  :  "  And  his  mother's  name  was 
Azubah,  the  daughter  of  Shilhi.  And  he  walked  in  the  ways  of  Asa  his  father,  and 
departed  not  from  it,  doing  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  This 
suggests  the  healthiness  of  his  mother's  moraJ  influence.  The  reference  here  to 
Asa,  too,  is  highly  honourable.  (3}  The  blessing  of  pious  parents  is  inestimable. 
It  works  beneficially  in  example,  in  precept,  in  soUcitude.  This  last  is  most 
effectual  in  prayer  to  God.  Those  who  are  favoured  with  godly  parents  should 
praise  God  evermore.  Wicked  children  of  pious  parents  are  doubly  culpable. 
i.  He  improved  his  advoMiages.  (1)  He  "  walked  in  the  ways  of  Asa  his  father." 
These  were  ways  of  righteousness.  Let  the  children  of  godly  parents  now  ask 
themselves  whether  they  walk  in  the  good  ways  of  their  ancestors.  (2)  He 
"tamed  not  aside  from  it."  He  showed  no  favour  to  idolatry.  The  note  which 
foUowB  is  no  impeachment  of  the  truth  of  this  statement :   "  Nevertheless  the  high 

E laces  were  not  taken  away ;  for  the  people  oifered  and  burnt  incense  yet  in  the 
igh  places."  The  high  places  that  Jehoshaphat  spared  were  those  in  which  the 
true  God  was  worshipped  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  patriarchal  times 
(see  2  Chron.  zzxiii.  17).  (3)  He  went  farther  than  Asa  in  the  work  of  reiorma- 
tion: — "The  remnant  of  the  Sodomites  which  remained  in  the  days  of  Asa  his 
father  he  took  oat  of  the  land."  The  parallel  place  to  this  in  the  Clironicles  is : 
"  And  his  heart  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  :  moreover  he  took  away  the 
high  places  and  the  groves  (DntJ'N)  out  of  Judah"  (2  Chron.  xvii.  6;  xix.  3).  By 
removing  the  Sodomites  we  understand  that  he  demoUshed  their  shrines,  theil 
Asherim,  their  instruments  of  pollution.  When  the  nests  are  destroyed  the  rooks 
fly.  8.  This  was  to  his  praise.  (1)  Others,  similarly  placed,  failed  to  make  this 
good  use  of  their  advantages.  Jehoram,  his  own  son,  may  be  mentioned  in  sad 
contrast  to  him.  Several  of  his  ancestors  had  scandalously  departed  from  the 
godly  ways  of  their  father  David.  Men  will  be  justified  or  condemned  in  the  light 
of  such  comparisons  in  the  last  great  day  (see  Luke  xi.  31,  32).  (2)  God  rewarded 
him  with  prosperity  (2  Chron.  xvii.  4,  5).  He  had  an  army — probably  an  enrolled 
miUtia — of  1,100,000  men.  The  Philistines,  Arabians,  and  Edomites  were  subject 
to  him.  The  note  here,  that  "  there  was  then  no  king  io  Edom :  a  deputy  was 
king,"  which  prefaces  the  account  of  his  fleet  at  Ezion-Geber,  was  designed  to 
explain  how  Jehoshaphat  was  able  to  have  a  fleet  at  a  port  which  belonged  to 
Edom  (see  oh.  ix.  26),  viz.,  because  he  appointed  the  viceroy  in  Edom  which  was 
tributary  to  him  (see  Gen.  xxvii.  29,  37 ;  2  Sam.  viii.  14).  _ 

II.  Thb  blame  of  Jehoshaphat.  This  seems  all  to  have  been  connected  with 
the  "peace  "  which  he  made  "with  the  king  of  Israel."  It  appears  to  have  com- 
menoed  with— 1.  The  marriage  of  his  son.  (1)  Jehoram,  the  eldest  sou  of  Jehosha- 
ph»t,  and  with  his  consent,  took  Athaliah,  the  daughter  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  to  b« 


fi66  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS.  [oa.  zxn.  1— 6a, 

his  wife.  Jehoshapbat's  heaii;  was  lifted  up  with  the  abnndatice  of  bis  "  riches  and 
honour,"  anil  "joined  affinity  with  Ahab"  (see  2  Chron.  zviii.  1).  He  became  too 
great  to  be  content  with  an  humble  match  for  his  son,  and  sacrificed  godhneBs  to 
grandem-.  He  has  many  imitators  in  this.  (2)  Unequal  yoking  has  ever  been 
prolific  in  mischief.  Athaliah  inherited  the  evil  spirit  of  both  her  parents,  and  she 
led  away  the  heart  of  Jehoram  from  God  to  his  ruin.  The  object  of  this  marriage 
was  to  buUd  up  the  house  of  Jehoshaphat,  but  it  weU-nigh  proved  its  ruin  (see 
2  Chron.  xxii.  10,  H).     God  is  the  builder  of  families  (see  2  Sam.  vii.  11,  27 ; 

1  Kings  ii.  24;  xi.  38;  Psa.  cxxvii.  1).  2.  His  friendship  with  Ahab,  (1)  This 
evil  grew  out  of  the  marriage.  The  peace  between  Israel  and  Judah,  which  in  the 
abstract  was  a  benefit,  was  probably  a  condition  of  the  marriage.  But  the  firiend- 
ship  between  Jehoshaphat  and  Ahab  which  followed,  was  too  intimate  for  the  good 
of  the  king  of  Judah's  soul.  (2)  Evils  beget  evils.  This  friendship  led  to  Jehosha- 
phat helping  Ahab  in  his  war  against  Syria,  and  had  nearly  cost  Jehoshaphat  his  Ufe. 
It  also  sullied  his  reputation,  for  he  was  persuaded  into  it  by  Ahab  against  the  voipe 
of  Mioaiah.  This  friendship  exposed  Jehoshaphat  to  the  reproof  of  the  prophet 
Jehu  (2  Chron.  xix.  2).  8.  Eis  friendship  with  Ahaziah.  (1)  This  son  of  Ahab 
was  DO  more  a  companion  fit  for  Jehoshaphat  than  Ahab.  For  Ahaziah  "walked  in 
the  way  of  his  father,  and  in  the  way  of  his  mother,  and  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam 
the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin:  fox  be  served  Baal  and  worshipped  him, 
and  provoked  to  anger  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  according  to  all  that  his  father  had 
done."  (2)  Yet  Jehoshaphat  formed  a  trade  alliance  with  Ahaziah.  They  jointly 
fitted  out  a  fleet  at  the  port  of  Ezion-Geber,  on  the  Bed  Sea,  to  sail  to  Ophir  for 
gold.     But  for  this  God  rebuked  him,  and  "the  ships  were  broken  "  in  the  port  (see 

2  Chron.  xx.  35 — 37).  Let  no  m.oney  consideration,  no  gold  of  Ophir,  induce 
godly  young  men  to  enter  into  trade  partnerships  with  the  ungodly.  (3)  This 
judgment  of  God  had  a  salutary  effect  upon  Jehoshaphat.  For  when  Ahaziah 
would  renew  the  attempt  at  Ezion-Geber,  Jehoshaphat  declined  (ver.  49).  Let  oa 
be  careful  never  to  repeat  a  blunder. — J.  A.  M. 

Vers.  1 — 28. — Crime  brings  its  own  pvmshtnent.  I.  Thk  wiceed  bcsh  ttfoh 
DEBTEUOTION.  1.  Ahab  provokes  the  war  in  which  he  himself  will  perish.  The 
peace  which  had  lasted  so  long  might  have  continued.  Every  day  it  was  pro- 
longed was  a  day  placed  between  him  and  death ;  and  yet  with  his  own  hand  he 
brings  to  an  end  the  period  of  grace.  How  often  are  the  calamities  of  the  wicked 
invoked  by  themselves,  and  are  the  finit  of  their  own  rashness  I  2.  It  came  as  the 
prompting  of  the  deepest  wisdom.  Jehoshaphat'a  presence  afforded  the  oppor- 
tunity of  forming  a  league  to  which  success  seemed  certain.  The  selfish  cim- 
ning  of  the  sinful  becomes  a  snare  to  them.  8.  Be  closes  his  ea/r  against  God'i 
deterring  counsel.  (1)  When  asked  to  inquire  of  God,  he  brings  those  only  who 
will  speak  the  things  that  accord  with  his  own  determination.  The  false  prophets 
are  called,  but  not  the  true.  (2)  When  compelled  to  bring  Micaiah  from  the  prison 
(see  ver.  26,  "  carry  him  bach  unto  Amon,"  &c.),  he  endeavours  to  prevent  Jehosha- 
phat being  moved  by  his  words.  Micaiah  is  his  enemy,  therefore  a  prophecy  of  good 
is  not  to  be  expected  from  him,.  (3)  When  warned  he  will  not  be  hindered,  but 
defies  God,  who  would  save  him,  by  insulting  and  persecuting  His  servant  (ver.  27). 

II.  The  false  peophets.  1.  They  bind  the  cords  which  are  leading  a  sinful 
sovj  to  death.  The  word  which  they  profess  to  speak  for  God  is  a  word  which  it 
pleases  the  Mng  to  hear.  It  is  the  echo  of  his  own  desires  (ver.  6).  There  are 
those  who  by  voice  and  pen  proclaim  a  new  gospeL  It  is  no  longer  sought  to  lead 
up  the  world  to  God  and  thus  reconcile  it  to  Him.  It  is  boldly  declared  that  the 
reconciliation  is  already  effected.  God  has  come  down  to  it.  There  is  no  anger 
and  no  threatening  and  no  terrible  shadow  of  judgment.  There  is  nothing  but 
goodness  and  love.  They  are  the  false  prophets  of  to-day,  and  these  do  for  the  men 
of  their  generation  what  those  did  for  Ahab.  2,  Their  blasphemy.  When  a  prophet 
of  Jehovah  was  asked  for  (ver.  7),  they  who  have  hitherto  spoken  only  of  Adonai  do 
not  scruple  to  take  the  name  of  the  Highest  into  their  lips  (vers.  11,  12).  We  do 
uot  escape  the  false  prophets  when  we  appeal  from  their  speech  conoeminK  the 


OB.  xxiL  1—68.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  667 

God  of  nature  to  His  revealed  will,  the  word  of  the  Lord.  They  meet  ns  there. 
It  is  in  vain  we  seek  to  rest  npon  the  plainest  words ;  they  are  explained  away. 
Hell  is  a  superstitions  dream,  and  the  cross  of  the  disciples  of  Christ  a  mere  figure 
of  speech,  with  no  hard,  stem  reality  hehind  it.  8.  They  a/re  possesaed  by  a  spirit  of 
fahehood  (vers.  21 — 23).  Their  position  is  more  a  punishment  of  past  sin  than 
conscious  transgression.  They  speak  with  honesty  of  a  sort,  but  it  is  out  of  their 
heart's  darkness.  They  were  willing  to  be  deceived,  and  they  have  been  deceived. 
They  did  not  wish  to  know  God  as  He  is,  and  they  have  been  left  with  the  god  of 
their  own  imagination.  In  which  school  are  we,  that  of  the  false  prophets,  or  of 
the  true  ?  4.  They  smiie  the  true  servamts  of  Ood.  Zedekiah's  blow  preceded  the 
king's  judgment.  It  proved  nothing  but  his  own  soul's  distance  from  God.  It  was 
the  act  of  a  man  provoked  by  zeal  for  his  own  honour.  He  who  had  been  moved  by 
zeal  for  God's  honour  would  have  stood  in  silent  awe  of  that  terrible  bat  certain 
judgment  which  the  man  was  braving. 

III.  The  teue  servant  op  God.  1.  In  a  corrupt  eovrt  his  it  no  welcome 
presence  (ver.  8).  The  distance  between  Ahab  and  God  was  reflected  in  that  which 
separated  him  from  the  speaker  of  God's  word.  Continued  faithfalness,  if  it  may 
not  win,  must  be  repelled  and  hated.  "  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  speak  well  of 
you  ;  for  so,"  &o.  2.  The  necessity  laid  on  him  to  decla/re  the  whole  ooimsel  of  Ood 
(ver.  14).  He  cannot  turn  to  the  right  hand  or  the  left;  the  world's  wealth  cannot 
bribe  him,  its  power  and  cruelty  cannot  terrify  him.  What  king  or  people  desire 
to  hear,  or  courtly  prophets  or  current  creeds  have  said,  weighs  nothing  with  him. 
He  cannot  speak  in  God's  name  aught  save  what  Ood  has  said.  S.  'H.is  message. 
He  speaks  first  in  easily  discerned  irony  (vers.  16,  16).  It  was  an  intimation  to  the 
king  that  he  desired  to  hear  no  prophecy  that  would  run  counter  to  his  inclinations. 
Then,  when  he  is  solemnly  appealed  to,  a  picture  is  presented  (ver.  17)  of  the 
smitten,  shepherdless  people,  which  might  well  have  touched  even  Ahab's  heart. 
Next  king  and  people  are  led  up  to  the  throne  of  God.  The  servant  and  his  words 
»re  forgotten  in  the  revelation  of  his  Master.  Even  the  false  prophet's  utterances 
are  turned  to  account ;  they  and  the  reliance  which  the  king  is  placing  on  them 
are  part  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  vengeance.  There  was  deeper  tenderness  and 
truer  love  for  Ahab  in  that  one  breast  than  in  all  the  four  hundred.  4.  The  great- 
ness of  all  true  service  for  Ood.  There  is  a  glory  about  that  despised,  persecuted 
man  before  which  that  of  both  kings  pales.  It  is  a  glorjr  which  nothing  can  tear 
from  the  loyal  heart,  and  which  shines  the  brighter  amid  the  world's  darkenmg 
hate.     It  is  a  glory  which  may  be  our  own. — U. 

Vers.  29 — 40.— r7te  Certamty  of  God's  Threatenings.  I.  Ahab's  attempt  to 
BLUDB  THE  DiviNE  VENGEANCE.  1.  Eis  apprehension  of  coming  evil.  If  Mioaiah's 
words  were  not  the  words  of  God,  why  should  he  take  precautions  ?  His  heart 
gives  the  lie  to  his  own  unbeUef ;  the  words  olmg  to  him.  The  bold  refusal  to  listen 
to  God's  word  is  no  assurance  that  the  soul  will  not  afterwards  be  shaken  by  a 
fearfal  looking  for  of  judgment.  2.  His  wngenerousness  (ver.  30).  "  I  will  dis- 
guise myself;  but  put  thou  on  thy  robes."  The  effect  of  the  counsel  was 
necessarily  to  concentrate  the  enemy's  attention  upon  Jehoshaphat.  Sm  not  only 
makes  a  man  a  coward,  it  robs  hun  of  nobleness.  8.  The  immediate  effect  of 
Ahab's  stratagem.  Ben-hadad's  arrangements  for  the  capture  or  slaughter  ot 
Ahab  were  rendered  of  no  avail.  The  captains  could  not  find  the  man  they 
sought.  A  momentary  success  often  attends  the  plans  of  those  who  endeavour 
to  flee  from  God.  4.  The  chance  shot.  The  success  of  Ahab  s  device  only 
served  to  make  the  blow  come  more  plamly  from  the  hand  of  God.  Ben-hadad  s 
purpose  could  be  baffled,  but  not  His.     There  is  no  escape  from  God. 

II  The  fulfilmbnt  op  God's  word.  1.  He  fell  at  Bmnoth-OUead  {ver.  M). 
S.  "Israel  was  scattered  upon  the  hills,"  amd  the  command  was  gwen  to  retwrn 
(vers.  17,  36).  3.  The  dogs  licked  Ahab's  blood  (ch.  xxi.  19),  not  m  Jezreel,  mdeed, 
because  the  judgment  then  pronounced  was  that  of  the  overthrow  of  the  djmasty. 
This  wa^  delayed  on  account  of  Ahab's  r«P«nt=\"=e'  ^'i^,J^^PP«,'?^4'„f  .P^rS 
"in  his  son's  days"  (ch.  xxi.  29).   But  the  personal  part  of  the  prediction.     The  dogi 


558  1KB  FIEST  BOOK  OP  KINGS.  [oh.  xxil  1—68. 

Bhall  lick  thy  blood,  even  thine,"  was  not  revoked.  There  are  prophecies  both  of 
evil  and  of  good,  within  the  range  of  which  we  set  ourselves.  God's  words  are 
touching  us,  and  will  likewise  be  literally  fulfilled. — U. 

Vers.  41 — 53. — Two  Life  Stories.    I.  Jehoshaphat's.    1.  He  prolonged  the  good 

influence  of  his  father's  reign.  Judah's  thought  was  stUl  kept  under  the  light  ol 
truth,  and  its  life  more  fuUy  led  inio  the  ways  of  God :  he  completed  his  father's 
reforms  (ver.  46).  The  continuance  of  God's  work  anywhere  is  as  important  as 
the  origination  of  it.  2.  He  was  consistent.  "  He  turned  not  aside  from  it."  He 
did  not  merely  begin  well ;  over  his  whole  reign  there  rested  the  Divine  approval; 
he  did  "that  which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord."  The  life  which  is  ever 
sinning,  repenting,  forgetting,  achieves  nothing.  It  is  like  a  plant  uprooted  and 
planted  again,  to  be  again  uprooted,  &o.,  and  which,  even  should  its  life  be  pre- 
served, will  never  bear  fruit.  It  is  lUje  "  a  backsliding  heifer,"  and  with  such  a  life 
the  great  Husbandman's  work  cannot  be  carried  on.  8.  There  was  fa/Uv/re  as  well 
as  success  vn  his  ca/reer.  "  Nevertheless  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away." 
He  had  endeavoured  to  remove  them  (2  Ohron.  xvii.  6).  But  "  the  people  ofiEiered 
and  burnt  incense  yet  in  the  high  places."  The  mightiest  efforts  in  the  great  war- 
fare with  darkness  leave  something  for  other  hands  to  do,  and  must  till  He  come 
who  alone  can  perfect  aU  things.  4.  He  sought  to  he  at  peace  with  his  brethren 
(ver.  44).  He  went  further  in  this,  indeed,  than  he  ought  to  have  done  (2  Chron. 
six.  2),  but  the  desire  for  peace  was  laudable.  6.  He  humbled  hn/mself  v/nder  QtoXs 
rebuke  (compare  vers.  48,  49  with  2  Chron.  zx.  86 — 37).  At  first  he  had  been  be- 
guiled into  fellowship  with  the  idolatrous  king  of  Israel  without  reflecting  upon  the 
danger  which  lay  in  it  for  himself  and  his  people.  But  when  God  had  manifested 
His  displeasure,  nothing  could  make  him  renew  the  confederacy.  The  judgment 
might  mistake,  but  the  heart  was  loyal  to  God. 

II.  Ahaziah'b.  1.  A  sinful  life.  "  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  With 
Bnch  a  life  there  was  no  possibility  A  blessing  for  his  people.  The  roots  of  his  use- 
fulness were  destroyed.  To  do,  we  must  first  of  all  become.  Our  work  cannot  rise 
above  the  level  of  our  life.  2.  A  disastrous  policy  (vers.  62,  53).  He  continued 
the  work  of  Israel's  destruction.  The  departure  made  by  Jeroboam  and  perfected 
by  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  he  accepted  in  its  full  rejection  of  Jehovah.  He  did  not  go 
beyond  them,  he  simply  did  "  according  to  all  that  his  father  had  done,"  but  in 
doing  this  his  sin  was  of  the  deepest  dye.  His  father  had  been  judged,  but  God 
was  still  braved,  and  Israel  was  led  still  nearer  to  destruction.  We  may  only  con- 
tinue what  others  have  begun ;  but  if  we  pay  no  heed  to  the  proo&  of  God's  anger, 
and  take  no  thought  of  the  inevitable  results  of  the  policy  we  pursue,  our  persistence 
may  be  one  of  the  deepest  crimes  against  God  and  man. — U. 

Ver.  84. — The  Pierced  Armowr.  This  occurred  during  the  third  campaign  of 
Ben-hadad  against  Israel.  Micaiah  had  forewarned  Ahab  against  the  danger  he 
incurred,  and  was  cast  into  prison  for  his  pains.  The  warning  was,  however,  taken 
sufficiently  to  heart  to  induce  the  king  to  disguise  himself.  Describe  the  expedient 
adopted,  and  its  remarkable  failure.  Ahab  was  in  many  respects  a  typical  sinner. 
He  was  an  idolater,  a  persecutor,  impenitent,  though  sometimes  touched ;  and  in 
the  plenitude  of  power  he  fell.    We  see  here — 

I.  A  MAN  AEMED  AGAINST  GoD.  True  he  was  fighting  against  the  Syrians,  but  as 
he  girded  on  his  armour  he  remembered  and  defied  the  words  of  the  prophet. 
His  ominous  prophecy  should  not  be  fulfilled,  he  would  yet  come  back  safe  and 
victorious  to  put  Micaiah  to  death,  and  with  this  determination  he  put  Jehoshaphat 
in  command,  and  clad  himself  with  proof  armour.  In  spirit,  therefore,  he  was 
fighting  not  only  against  the  hosts  of  Syria,  but  against  the  word  of  God.  Hence 
let  us  depict  one  who  is  armed  against  God.  Reverse  the  description  St.  Paul  gives 
(Bph.  vi.)  of  one  armed  by  God.  The  impenitent  sinner  represented  by  Ahab 
defends  himsel£  1.  By  false  hopes  (Deut.  xjcix.  19,  20).  These  constitute  his 
"  helmet,"  which  wards  off  true  thoughts  of  self  and  sm.  He  blindly  trusts  in 
Divine  mercy,  while  sin  is  unrepented,  forgetting  that  "  a  God  all  meroy  is  a  Ood 


DH.  XXII.  1—63.]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OE  KINGS.  659 

unjust"  (Yotmg).  "There  is  none  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  vre 
may  be  saved,"  &o.  "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation?  " 
2.  By  a  hardened  heart.  This  is  his  "  breastplate."  A  man  impenitent  is  a  man 
lost.  Some  are  "  past  feehng,"  their  consciences  are  "  seared  as  vrith  a  hot  iron," 
and  God  gives  them  over  to  their  "  hardness  of  heart,"  and  to  an  "  impenitent 
mind."  "Who  has  hardened  himself  against  God,  and  prospered?"  We  may 
become  "hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."  B.  By  deficmt  words.  There  is  a 
tongue  which  is  set  on  fire  of  helL  Adduce  examples.  Ahab  defied  Micaiah.  4. 
By  an  unbelieving  mind.  The  king  questioned  the  truth  of  the  prophet's  message. 
He  had  more  confidence  in  his  own  past  success  and  in  his  military  skill  than  in 
the  declaration  of  a  man  who  knew  something  of  God  butnothing  of  war.  Unbelief 
ever  prevents  the  inflowing  of  Divine  goodness.  Jesus  "  could  do  no  mighty  works 
because  of  their  unbeUef."  5.  By  a  dumb  spirit.  No  asking  for  pardon,  no  cry 
for  mercy  rose  from  Ahab's  heart,  or  it  would  not  have  proved  too  late ;  for  the 
Lord  is  "  not  wUling  that  any  should  perish." 

II.  A  MAN  STRICKEN  BY  GoD.  The  chance  arrow  of  the  Syrian  archer  fulfilled 
the  Divine  purpose.  1.  By  the  arrow  of  conviction.  God's  word  is  sharp  and 
powerftil,  and  pierces  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  is  a 
discemer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  (1)  It  may  be  shot  umwittingly, 
as  the  archer  drew  at  a  venture  not  knowing  what  he  might  hit.  Let  our  words 
for  God  be  pointed,  and  be  winged  by  faith,  and  He  ■wSi  see  that  they  hit  the  mark. 
{2)  It  may  touch  the  one  vulnerable  spot.  That  arrow  pierced  "  between  the  joints 
of  armour  "  otherwise  proof.  So  David's  stone  would  have  fallen  powerless  on  tiie 
greaves  or  the  breastplate  of  the  giant  of  Gath.  God,  who  knows  our  hearts,  tries 
every  avenue.  Through  our  reason,  through  our  affections,  through  our  conscience. 
His  word  seeks  to  find  its  way.  2.  By  the  arrow  of  judgment.  (1)  It  was  foretold 
{ver.  28).  Ahab  ran  the  risk.  So  do  they  who  continue  in  sin  after  hearing  of  "  a 
certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devoui 
the  adversaries."  (2)  It  was  inevitable.  All  disguise  and  precaution  were  un- 
availing. The  justice  of  God  sooner  or  later  reaches  the  right  man.  (8)  It  wai 
terrible.  The  weak,  sensuous  man,  whose  promise  had  sometimes  been  bo  feir, 
fell  in  a  moment  from  kingship,  from  life,  and  from  hope.  "  He_  that  being 
reproved  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  oltai 
semody."— A.  B. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


TO 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KINGS. 


OHAPTEB  L 

MOB 

The  Chamber  of  Sickness  . .  . .  12 

Adonijah's  History  and  its  Lessons  . .  13 

Adonijah  and  the  Loid's  Anointed  . .  15 
The  Jewish  Prophet :  an  Example  to 

the  Christian  Pastor        . .  . .  16 

The  Benedictus  of  the  Old  Testament, 

and  the  BenediotoB  of  the  Kew     ..  17 

The  Two  Triumphal  Entries  ..  18 

The  Sin  of  Ambition  ..  ..  18 

Ifoial  Brdn  in  a  Beligious  Home  ..  20 
The  Dethronement  of  the  False  by  the 

Enthronement  of  the  Trae  ••  23 

CHAPTEB  n. 

A  Jewish  Deathbed  ••  •• 

Eikon  Basi]ik6      ..  ••  •• 

"  Show  thyself  a  man "      . .  .  • 

A  Boyal  Father's  Last  Words  . . 

A  Charge  from  a  Dying  King  .. 

The  Brothers        ..  ••  •• 

The  Degraded  High  Priest . .  . . 

The  Death  of  Joab  ..  .. 

The  End  of  the  Transgressor  . . 

Bettibotiona         ..  ••  •• 

CHAPTEB  in. 

The  Grace  and  Place  of  Love  •* 

God's  Gifts  and  Solomon's  Choice    . . 

The  Prayer  of  Solomon  and  its  Fulfil- 
ment •  .  •• 

A  Wise  Prayer      .. 

Waiting  for  God's  Voice;  a  Sermon 
for  Children 

The  Beverent  Prayer  of  a  Eoyal 
Petitioner  ••  ••  •• 

1  KINGS, 


29 
81 
32 
33 
34 
39 
42 
48 
47 
48 


63 
64 

66 
66 

67 

69 


The  Wisdom  of  Solomon's  Choice  . .  60 
Solomon's  Judgment  a  Foreshadowing 

of  the  Judgment  to  come  ..'      63 

"Let  it  be  neither  mine  nor  thine, 

but  divide  it"  ..  ..  ..64 

CHAPTEB  IV. 

The  Servants  of  Solomon  . .  . .      71 

The  Twelve  Prefects  and  the  Twelve 

Apostles  ..  ..  ..72 

The  Golden  Age   . .  . .  . .      77 

"  The    greatest,    wisest,   meanest  ol 

mankind"         ..  ..  ..78 

A  ProsperoQS  Beign  . .  . .       80 

The  Voice  of  Nature  speaking  for  God      81 

CHAPTEB  V. 

Tyre  and  Israel— a  Lesson  on  Personal 

Influence          ..            ..  ..  89 

Sure  Foundations               ..  •.  91 

The  Temple          ..            ..  ..  92 

The  Building  of  the  Temple  . .  94 

Lessons    from    the   Conduct  of    a 

Heathen  Prince               ..  ..  94 

CHAPTEB  VL 
Christianity  built  on  the  Foundations 

of  Judaism        . .  •  •  •  •     m 

The  Ark  of  the  Covenant  of  the  Lord  115 
The  Purposes  of  the  Temple  . .     116 

Building  in  Silence  ..  ..     118 

The  Mystery  of  the  Cherubim  . .     119 

"The  house   which   King    Solomon 

buUt  for  the  Lord"  ..  ..121 

The  Glorious  House  of  the  Lord       . .     121 
2  o 


662 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


CHAPTER  YIL 

The  Pillars  of  Brass 

The   Molten    Sea   and    the   Brazen 

Layers 
The  Clay  Gronnd  in  the  Circuit  of  the 

Jordan  ••  «• 

Jaohin  and  Boaz  ..  «« 


CHAPTEB  Vm. 


its 


The  Dedication  of  the  Temple  and 

Teaching 
The  Silence  and  the  Darkness 
The  Holy  of  Hohes  and  the  Heayen 

of  Heayens        . .  , . 

The  Prayer  of  Dedication  . . 
The  Feast  on  the  Sacrifices 
The  Ark  of  the  Coyenant   . . 
The  Presence  of  the  Lord  in  the  House 

of  the  Lord       . .  . . 

TheGloiy-Clond  .. 
The  UnfuMlled  Paiposes  of  Life 
The  Prayer  of  Dedication  . . 
The  Praying  King 
The  Consecration  of  the  Temple 
The  Stranger's  Interest  in  the  Temple 
Occasions  for  Prayer  ,. 

A  Boysl  Benediction  ,« 

CHAPTEB  IX. 

The  Beflond  Appearance  to  Solomon 
The  Benewed  Coyenant      ..  .. 

The  Two  Altars  of  Jndaism  •• 

Solomon's  Worship  .. .  •« 


136 

138 

140 
143 


161 
164 

165 
167 
169 
171 

172 
173 

175 
176 
177 
179 
180 
181 
182 


186 
188 
196 
800 


CHAPTEB  X. 

The  Qneen  of  Sheha           ..  205,209 

The  Qneen  of  the  Sooth     ..  ..203 

The  Decline  and  Fall  of  Solomon  ..    216 


CHAPTEB  XL 

The  Sin  of  Solomon           .. 

223 

The  Fall  of  a  King              .. 

226 

The  Anger  of  God               .. 

227 

Solomon's  Sin      ..            .. 

228 

The  Downfall  of  Solomon  .. 

229 

Solomon's  Fall     . .            . . 

230 

The  Punishment  of  Solomon's 

Sin  !! 

238 

Premonitions  of  Wrath      . . 

241 

Jeroboam              ..             •• 

242 

The  Message  of  Ahijah       .. 

243 

Bolonion'g  En4    .»            .• 

244 

THEMB 

The  Diyine  Chastisements  , 
The  Call  to  Jeroboam 
The  Successful  Man 


245 
245 
246 


The  Judgments  of  God  on  Judah  and 
Israel  from  the  Death  of  Solomon  to 

the  Time  of  Ahab           ..  ..    247 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

Judicial  Infatuation            ..  ..    256 

The  Dead  and  the  Liying   ..  ..     259 

Israel's  Magna  Charta        .•  ••    260 

Infatuation            ..             ••  ..    2Rn 

The  Eeyolution     ..             ..  ..261 

The  Message  of  Shemaiah  . .  ..    26/^ 

The  Bending  of  the  Kingdom  ..     263 

Behoboam's  Folly                ..  ..265 

TheReyolt           ..            ..  ..266 

The  Accomplishment  of  the  Predicted 

Judgment          ..             ..  ..     267 

The  Sin  of  Jeroboam          ..  ..    274 

Jeroboam's  Despondenoj  ..  ..    277 

Jeroboam's  Calyes              ••  ._.    278 

Jeroboam's  Sin    ..            ..  279, 280 

The  Golden  Calves             ..  ..    281 

CHAPTEB  Xm. 

Protest  and  Excommunication  .,    286 

The  Fire  of  Jehovah           ..  ..289 

The  Man  of  Sin    ..            ..  ..    289 

The  Man  of  God  ..            ..  ..    290 

The  Nameless  Prophet       ..  ..291 

The  King  confronted  by  the  Prophet    293 
TheManof  God  and  the  People  of  God    300 

The  Two  Prophets              ..  ..    303 

The  Old  Serpent  again       ..  ..    805 

The  Voice  of  Reproof          ..  ..306 

The  Visitation  of  Judgment  . .    307 

The  Law  of  Extremity        ..  ..308 

Lead  us  not  into  Temptation,  &e.     , ,    309 

The  Disobedient  Prophet    ..  ..310 

The  Tempter        ..            ..  ..811 

Judgment  and  its  Besult    ..  •<    812 

CHAPTEB  XIV. 

Abijah  and  Ahijah             ..  ••    817 

The  Impenitent  Seeker       ..  ..    821 

Spiritual  Vision    ..             ..  ..     322 

Hard  Tidings       ..            ..  ..322 

The  Reprobate's  Doom        ..  ..324 

The  Future  of  Israel           ..  ..324 

Death  and  Mourning          .,  ..    82fi 


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX. 


066 


The  Beview          . .            . .  . .     326 

Early  Kety  in  an  tJnezpected  Plaefl    327 

The  Dead  Child    ..            .,  ..329 

Affliction  and  Judgment     ..  ..    330 

The  Invasion  of  Shishak    ..  .,     333 

The  Sin  of  Judah                 ..  ,.336 

The  Entailments  of  Sin      ..  ..    887 

Unfaithfulness  and  its  Bebuke  ..    887 

CHAPTBB  XV. 

The  Beign  of  Asa               ..  ,.  343 

Church  and  Dissent            ..  ,,  346 

The  Succession  of  Abij  am  .,  350 

Beformation          ..             .,  ,.  351 

The  War  Policy  of  Asa        ..  ..852 

"  Belqyed  for  the  father's  sake  "       . .  353 

"  Zeal  without  trust "         ..  ..  353 

BeligiooB  Sincerity              ,,  ..  354 

CHAPTER  XV.  Ver.  25— XVL 

The  Punishment  of  Jeroboam's  Sin  . .  362 

The  Working  of  Jeroboam's  SId       ..  864 
The  Seed  of  Evil-doers       ..            ..866 

God's  Threatenings  find   at   last  a 

Complete  Fnlfilmeut       ..            ..  867 

Uniighteons  Zeal               ..            ,.  367 

Jehn's  Prophecy  ..            .,            „  368 
The  House  of  Baasha         ..            ..369 

A  Divine  Judgment  and  its  Instrument  870 

The  Kingdom  of  Men         . .            . .  370 

Change  without  Improvement          ..  871 

Omri's  Beign        ..            ..            ..  372 

Moral  Buin  through  Moral  Weakness  875 

Ahab's  Wickedness             ..            ..  877 

The  Temerity  of  Hiel         ..            ..  878 

CHAPTEB  XVII. 

The  Mission  and  Ministry  of  Elijah  . .     888 

The  SoUtaiy  Place              ..  ..391 

The  Food  of  the  SaintB      ..  ..393 

The  Furnace  of  Trial         ..  ..895 

Elijah    ..            ..            ..  ,.398 

Besonrces  of  Frovidenoa     ..  •.     899 

The  Widow  of  Zidon          ..  ..400 

The  Barrel  of  Meal             ..  ..401 

The  Beproaches  of  Death   ..  ..     402 

The  Sign  of  the  Widow's  Son  . .    403 

The  Messenger  of  Jehovah  . .  . .     404 

Strange  Provision  in  a  Sad  Necessity    406 

The  Widow's  Cruse             ..  ..407 

Siaf&c  for  the  Dead           •*  * .    40S 


THEm  FAAB 

EUjah  the  Tishbite             .,  „  410 

Entertaining  a  Stranger     ..  .,  411 

Life  from  the  Dead            ..  „  418 

Elijah's  Advent  and  Servioe  ..  414 

Divine  Care          ..            ..  ..416 

Affliction  and  its  FruitB      ..  ..  416 

First  Preparation  of  Elijah  for   his 

Great  Mission  ..             ..  ,,  416 

Second  Preparation  of  Elijah  ..  416 

CHAPTEB  XVra. 

The  Governor  of  Ahab's  House  ..  480 

The  King  and  his  Master    ..  ,.  433 

Israel's  Conversion             „  ,.  435 

Effectual  Fervent  Prayer    .,  ,.  438 

The  Cry  for  Life  ..             ..  ..440 

The  Servant  of  the  Lord     ..  ..  440 

TheTroubler        ..             ..  ,.  442 

CinistorBelialr  ..            ..  ..  442 

TheTestof  Fire  ..            .,  ..  444 

The  Failure          ..            ..  ..  445 

The  Preparation  ..            «.  ..  446 

The  Triumph        ..            „  ,.  447 

The  Sound  of  Bain             .«  ,.  448 

Obadiah..            ..            .,  ..449 

A  Solemn  Alternative         ••  ..  450 

Beligious  Indecision           ..  ..  451 

Elijah's  Prayer  for  Bain    ..  ..  462 

The  God  that  answereth  by  Fire  ..  464 

The  Betum  of  Blessing       . .  . .  465 

Elijah  and  the  Prophets  of  Baal  . .  466 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

God  and  the  Man  of  Gk>d    ..  ..  466 

Elijah's  Prayer  for  Death   ..  ..  470 

Elijah  at  Horeb    ..            ..  ..  471 

The  CaU  of  Elisha            ..  472,476 

The  Desponding  Prophet    ..  ..  474 

The  Causes  of  Despondency  . .  476 
A  Question  from  God  for  the  Con- 
sideration of  Man           ..  ..  478 

The  Still  Small  Voice         ..  ..  479 

The  Prophet's  DespoiT       ..  ..  480 

Elijah  at  Horeb    ..            ..  ..  480 

The  Prophet's  CaU              ..  ..481 

Betom  of  Elijah  to  the  Desert  ..  481 

CHAPTBB  XX. 

The  Purgatory  of  Nations  and  Kings  49S 

The  Spirit  of  War              -.  ..  4W 


M4 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX. 


TBUn 

M*B 

TBSU 

*MI 

The  Hand  of  Ood 

.    600 

Sin's  Friendships,  and  what  they  lead  to 

628 

Wisdom  in  Counsel 

.    601 

Guilt  and  MerQy  ••            ••            •■ 

639 

False  Meioy          .. 

.    602 

Naboth'B  Vineyard             ••           •• 

680 

Veiled  MerdeB      .. 

.    604 

Beidsted  Mercy     .. 

'.'.            '..    604 

CHAFTEB  XXII. 

The  Negleoted  Opportnnity              . 

.    606 

The  Death  of  Ahab  and  the  Defeat  of 

Israel  ..            ..            ..            .. 

641 

OHAPTEB  XXI. 

Bad  Company       ..            ••            .. 

646 

The  martyrdom  of  Nabotb . .            , 

.    612 

The  False  and  the  Tme     ..           .. 

548 

Divine  Retaliation 

.    616 

Mioaiah's  Prophecy             ..            .. 

549 

Divine  Belentings 

.    618 

The  Argnment  of  Wickedness          .. 

651 

Covetonsness        .. 

.    620 

Lessons  of  the  Battle         ..            ., 

652 

A  Sinful  Nation    .. 

,.    621 

Survival                ..            ..            .. 

653 

Divine  Inqmsition 

,.    622 

Jehosbaphat         ..            ..            .. 

656 

AhaVa  Bepentance 

..    624 

Crime  brings  its  own  Fnnishment    . . 

666 

The  Progress  of  Sin 

,.    626 

The  Certainty  of  God's  Threatenings 

567 

Partial  Penitence . . 

,.    626 

Two  Life  Stories  ..           .. 

668 

Fiiit  8t^  iB  the  Path  et  Crime     . 

..    62} 

Ihe  Pierced  Armont          ..           .. 

558 

