CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


mx 


B 

i 

052036 


B    Cornell  University 
S    Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104986 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY   THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY   THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERTLL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.   PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE    BOOK   OF   JOB. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  1.   Analysis  of  the  Book. 

The  Book  of  Job  is  a  work  which  divides  itself  manifestly  into  sections. 
These  may  be  made  more  or  fewer,  according  to  the  extent  to  which  the 
work  of  analysis  is  carried  out.  The  least  critical  reader  cannot  fail  to 
recognize  three  divisions  :  I.  An  historical  prologue,  or  introduction  ;  II.  A 
main  body  of  moral  and  religious  discourses,  chiefly  in  the  form  of  dialogue ; 
and  m.  An  historical  conclusion,  or  epilogue.  Pai-t  I.  and  Part  III.  of  this 
division,  being  comparatively  brief  and  concise,  d5  not  lend  themselves 
very  readily  to  any  subdivision ;  but  Part  II.,  which  forms  the  main  bulk 
of  the  treatise,  and  extends  from  the  beginning  of  ch.  iii.  to  ver.  6  of 
ch.  xlii.,  falls  naturally  into  several  very  distinct  portions.  First  there  is 
a  long  dialogue  between  Job  and  three  of  his  friends — Eliphaz,  Bildad, 
and  Zophar — ^which  reaches  from  ch.  iii.  1  to  the  end  of  ch.  xxxi.,  where 
a  marked  line  is  drawn  by  the  insertion  of  the  phrase,  "The  words  of 
Job  are  ended."  Then  follows  a  harangue  by  a  new  speaker,  Elihu, 
which  occupies  six  chapters  (ch.  xxxii. — xxxvii.).  Next  comes  a  discourse 
,  SBtibed  to  Jehovah  himself,  which  occupies  four  chapters  (ch.  xxiviii. — 
xli.) ;  and  after  this  there  is  a  short  speech  by  Job  (ch.  xliL  1 — 6),  extending 
to  less  than  half  a  chapter.  Further,  the  long  dialogue  between  Job  and 
his  three  friends  resolves  itself  into  three  sections — a  first  dialogue,  in 
which  all  the  four  speakers  take  part,  reaching  from  ch.  iii.  1  to  the  end  of 
ch;  xiv. ;  a  second  dialogue,  in  which  again  all  the  speakers  are  engaged, 
extending  from  ch.  xv.  1  to  the  end  of  oh.  zxi. ;  and  a  third  dialogue,  in 
which  Job,  Eliphaz,  and  Bildad  take  part,  reaching  from  ch.  xzii.  1  to  the 

MB.  i 


tNTRODUCTION    TO 


end  of  ch.  xxxi.     The  scheme   of   the   book   may   thus   be   exhibited  a» 
follows : — 

L  Introductory  historical  section.    Oh.  1.,  iL 

n.  Moral  and  religiouB  digcourBes.     Ch.  iii. — xlii.  6. 

1.  Discourses  between  Job  and  his  three  friends.    Ch.  lU.— xxxL 

(1)  First  dialogue.    Ch.  iii. — xiv. 
f2)  Second  dialogne.    Ch.  xv. — xxL 
(3)  Third  dialogue.     Ch.  xxii. — xxxi. 

2.  Harangue  of  EUhn.  Ch.  xxxii.7— xxxtIL 
8.  Discourse  of  Jehovah.  Oh.  xxxvlii. — xlL 
4.  Short  speech  of  Job.    Ch.  xlii.  1 — 6. 

in.  Concluding  historical  section.    Ch.  xlii.  7 — 16. 

1.  The  "  Introductory  section  "  explains  the  cironmstances  under  whiob 
the  dialogues  took  place.  The  person  of  Job  is,  first  of  all,  set  before  as. 
He  is  a  chieftain  of  the  land  of  Uz,  of  great  wealth  and  high  rank — "  the 
gfreatest  of  all  the  Beney  Kedem,  or  men  of  the  East  "  (ch.  i.  3).  He  has 
a  numerous  and  flourishing  family  (ch.  i.  2,  4,  5),  and  enjoys  in  advanced 
life '  such  a  degree  of  earthly  happiness  as  is  accorded  to  few.  At  the  same 
time,  he  is  noted  for  his  piety  and  good  conduct.  The  author  of  the 
section  declares  him  to  have  been  "  perfect  and  upright,  one  that  feared 
God,  and  eschewed  evil "  (oh.  i.  1),  and  later  on  adduces  the  Divine 
testimony  to  the  same  effect :  "  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job,  that 
there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that 
feareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil  ?  "  (ch.  i.  8  ;  ii.  3).  Job  is  living  in  this 
prosperous  and  happy  state,  respected  and  beloved,  with  his  family  abont 
him,  and  a  host  of  servants  and  retainers  continually  ministering  to  his 
wants  (ch.  i.  16^17),  when  in  the  courts  of  heaven  a  scene  occurs  which 
brings  this  happy  condition  of  things  to  an  end,  and  reduces  the  patriarch 
to  extreme  wretchedness.  Satan,  the  accuser  of  the  brethren,  appears 
before  the  throne  of  God  together  with  the  blessed  company  of  the  angels, 
and,  having  his  attention  called  to  Job  by  the  Almighty,  replies  with  the 
scoff,  "  Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought  ?  "  and  then  backs  up  his  sarcasm 
with  the  bold  assertion,  "  Put  forth  thy  hand  now,  and  touch  all  that  he 
hath,"  i.e.  withdraw  his  blessings,  "  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  face  " 
(ch.  i.  9 — 11).  The  question  is  thus  raised  with  respect  to  Job's  sincerity, 
and,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  with  respect  to  the  sincerity  of  all  other 
apparently  religious  and  God-fearing  men — Is  there  such  a  thing  as  real 
piety  ?  Is  not  the  appearance  of  it  in  the  world  a  mere  form  of  selfishness  P 
Are  not  the  so-called  "perfect  and  upright  men"  mere  self-seekers,  like 
others,  only  self-seekers  who  add  to  their  other  vices  the  detestable  one  of 
hypocrisy  P  The  question  is  one  of  the  highest  moral  interest,  and,  to 
solve  it,  or  to  help  towards  solving  it,  God  allows  the  trial  to  be  made  in 
the  person  of  Job.     He  permits  the  accuser  to  strip  Job  of  his  earthly 

'  Job's  family  of  ten  grown-up  children,  the  issue  of  one  wife,  necessitates  a  minimum 
of  fifty  years  of  age,  and  suggests  as  more  probable  the  age  of  sixty  or  seventy.  His  position 
in  the  community  whereof  he  was  %  member  (ch.  xxix.  7—10. 21—25)  favours  the  \oaget 
period. 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  IM 


prosperity,  to  deprive  him  of  hia  property,  destroy  Ms  numerous  offspring, 
and  finally  inflict  npon  him  a  most  loathsome,  paiufnl,  and  terrible  disease, 
from  which  there  was,  humanly  speaking,  no  hope  of  recovery.  Under 
this  accumulation  of  evils,  the  faith  of  Job's  wife  gives  way  entirely,  and 
she  reproaches  her  husband  with  his  patience  and  tameness,  snggesting  to 
him  that  he  should  do,  exactly  what  Satan  had  declared  that  he  would  do, 
"  Curse  God,  and  die "  (ch.  ii.  9).  But  Job  remains  firm  and  unmoved. 
At  the  loss  of  hie  property  he  says  not  a  word;  when  he  hears  of  the 
destruction  of  his  children,  he  shows  the  tokens  of  natural  grief  (ch.  i.  20), 
but  only  utters  the  sublime  speech,  "  N'aked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's 
womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return  thither :  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  (oh.  i.  21) ;  when  he  is 
stricken  with  his  foul  disease,  he  submits  without  a  murmur ;  when  hia 
wife  offers  her  foolish  and  wicked  counsel,  he  repels  it  with  the  remark, 
"  Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  women  speaketh.  "What  ?  Shall  we 
receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  "  "  In  all 
this  did  not  Job  sin  with  his  lips  "  (oh.  ii.  10),  nor  did  he  "  charge  God 
foolishly  "  (ch.  i.  22).  Here  the  narrative  might  have  ended,  Satan  being 
baffled.  Job's  character  vindicated,  and  the  real  existence  of  true  and  dis- 
interested piety  having  been  irrefragabjy  manifested  and  proved.  But  a 
new  incident  supervened,  giving  rise  to  the  discussions  with  which  the 
book  is  mainly  concerned,  and  in  which  the  author,  or  authors,  whoever  he 
or  they  were,  was,  it  is  evident,  chiefly  anxious  to  interest  readers.  Three 
of  Job's  friends,  hearing  of  his  misfortunes,  oame  to  visit  him  from  some 
considerable  distance,  to  condole  with  him  on  his  sufferings,  and,  if  possible, 
to  comfort  him.  After  one  burst  of  irrepressible  grief  on  beholding  his 
miserable  state,  they  sat  down  with  him  in  silence  on  the  gronnd,  "  seven 
days  and  seven  nights,"  without  addressing  to  him  a  word  (ch.  ii.  13). 
Then  at  length  he  broke  the  silence,  and  the  discussion  began. 

2.  The  discussion  opened  with  a  speech  from  Job,  in  which,  no  longer 
able  to  control  himself,  he  cursed  the  day  that  gave  him  birth,  and  the 
night  of  hia  conception,  lamented  that  he  had  not  died  in  his  childhood 
and  expressed  a  longing  to  go  down  to  the  grave  at  once,  as  having  no 
further  hope  on  earth.  BUphaz,  then,  probably  the  oldest  of  the  three 
"comforters,"  took  the  word,  rebuking  Job  for  his  want  of  fortitude,  and 
at  once  suggesting  (ch,  iv.  7 — 11) — what  becomes  one  of  the  main  points 
of  controversy — ^that  Job's  calamities  have  come  upon  him  from  God's 
hand  as  a  punishment  for  sins  which  he  has  committed,  and  of  which  he 
has  not  repented.  On  this  view  he  naturally  exhorts  him  to  repent,  confess, 
and  turn  to  God,  promising  him  in  that  case  a  renewal  of  all  his  former 
prosperity  (ch.  v.  18 — 26).  Job  replies  (ch.  vi.  and  vii.),  and  then  in  turn 
the  other  two  "  comforters  "  address  him  (ch.  viii.  and  xi.),  re-echoing  in 
the  main  the  arguments  of  Eliphaz,  while  Job  answers  them  severally  in 
ch.  ix.,  X.,  and  xii. — xiv.  As  the  discussion  continues,  the  disputants  wax 
hoi.     Bildad  is  harsher  and  blunter  than  Eliphaz;   Zophar,  ruder  and 


LNTKODDUTIOJS   TO 


coarser  than  Bildad ;  while  Job,  on  his  part,  exasperated  by  his  friends' 
unfairness  and  want  of  sympathy,  grows  piwsionate  and  reckless,  uttering 
words  which  he  is  obliged  to  acknowledge  to  r^  rash,  and  retorting  upon 
his  opponents  their  own  disconrteou"  language  (ch.  xiii.  4).  The  argument 
makes  little  progress.  The  "  friends  '  maintain  Job's  guilt.  Job,  while 
admitting  that  he  is  not  exempt  from  human  frailty,  acknowledging 
"  iniquities  of  his  youth  "  (cb.  xiii.  26),  and  allowing  frequent  sins  of 
infirmity  (ch.  vii.  20,  21 ;  x.  14;  xiii.  23;  xiv.  16,  17),  insists  that  he  "is 
not  wicked  "  (ch.  x.  7)  ;  that  he  has  not  fallen  away  from  God ;  that,  if 
his  canse  is  heard,  he  is  certain  to  be  justified  (ch.  xiiL  8).  To  the 
"  friends  "  this  insistence  seems  almost  blasphemous,  and  they  take  a  worse 
and  worse  view  of  his  moral  condition,  becoming  convinced  that  he  has 
been  secretly  guilty  of  some  unpardonable  sin,  and  is  hardened  in  guilt, 
and  iiTecoverable  (ch.  xi.  20 ;  xv.  4 — 6).  The  fact  of  his  sufferings,  and 
their  intensity,  is  to  them  proof  positive  that  he  lies  under  the  anger  of  God, 
and  therefore  must  have  provoked  him  by  some  heinous  sin  or  other.  Job, 
in  rebutting  their  arguments,  allows  himself  to  be  drawn  into  statements 
with  regard  to  God's  indifEerence  to  moral  good  and  evil  (ch.  ix.  22 — 24, 
xii.  6)  which  are,  to  say  the  least,  incautious  and  presumptuous,  while  he 
also  goes  near  to  tax  God  with  injustice  towards  himself  (ch.  iii  20 — 26  ; 
vii.  12 — 21 ;  ix.  30 — 35,  etc.).  At  the  same  time,  he  in  no  way  renounces 
God  or  ceases  to  trust  in  him.  He  is  confident  that  in  some  way  or  other 
and  at  some  time  or  other,  his  own  innocence  will  be  vindicated,  and  God's 
jastice  manifested.  Meanwhile  he  hangs  upon  God,  turns  to  him  when 
his  friends'  words  are  too  Cruel,  continually  prays  to  him,  looks  to  him  for 
salvation,  proclaims  that,  "  though  he  slay  him,  yet  will  he  trust  in  him  " 
(ch.  xiii.  16).  Finally,  he  expresses  a  presentiment  that,  after  death,  when 
he  is  in  the  grave,  God  will  find  a  mode  of  doing  him  justice,  will "  remember 
him  "  (ch.  xiv.  13),  and  give  him  a  "renewal  "  (ch.  xiv.  14). 

3.  A  second  dialogue  begins  with  the  opening  of  ch.  xv.,  and  extends  to 
the  end  of  ch.  xxi.  Again  Eliphaz  takes  the  word,  and,  after  reproaching 
Job  for  presumption,  impiety,  and  arrogance  (ch.  xv.  1 — 16),  in  a  tone 
much  more  severe  than  that  which  he  had  used  previously,  resumes  the 
argfument,  and  endeavours  to  prove,  from  the  authority  of  the  wise  men  of 
old,  that  wickedness  is  always  punished  in  this  life  with  the  utmost 
severity  (vers.  17 — 35).  Bildad  follows,  in  ch.  xviii.,  with  a  series  of 
denunciations  and  threats,  apparently  assuming  the  guilt  of  Job  as  proved, 
and  maintaining  that  the  calamities  which  have  fallen  upon  him  are  exactly 
what  he  ought  to  have  expected  (vers.  5 — 21).  Zophar,  in  oh.  xx.,  con- 
tinues the  same  strain,  ascribing  Job's  calamities  to  special  sins,  which  he 
supposes  him  to  have  committed  (vers.  5 — 19),  and  menacing  bini  with 
further  and  worse  evils  (vers.  20—29).  Job  makes  reply  to  each  of  the 
friends  separately  (ch.  xvi.,  xviL,  xix.,  and  xxi.),  but  at  first  scarcely 
deigns  to  grapple  with  their  arguments,  which  seem  to  him  "words  of 
wind "  (eh.  xvi.  8).     Instead,  he  addresses  himself  to  God,  desoribes  hi« 


THE  BOOK   OP  JOB. 


Bu:Sering8  (vers.  6 — 16),  maintains  his  innocence  (ver.  17),  and  appoala  to 
earth  and  heaven  to  declare  themselves  on  his  side  (vers.  18,  19),  and  to 
God  himself  to  be  his  Witness  (ver.  19).  "  The  train  of  thought  thus 
suggested  carries  him,"  as  Canon  Cook  observes,*  "  much  further  in  the 
way  towards  the  great  truth — that,  since  in  this  life  the  righteous  certainly 
are  not  saved  from  evil,  it  follows  that  their  ways  are  watched,  and  their 
sufferings  recorded,  with  a  view  to  a  future  and  perfect  manifestation  of 
tiio  Divine  justice.  This  view  becomes  gradually  brighter  and  more 
definite  as  the  controversy  proceeds,  and  at  last  finds  expression  in  a  strong 
and  clear  declaration  of  his  conviction  that  at  the  latter  day  (evidently  the 
day  which  Job  had  expressed  a  longing  to  see,  ch.  xiv.  12 — 14)  God  will 
personally  manifest  himself,  and  that  he.  Job,  will  then  see  him  in  his 
body,  with  his  own  eyes,  and  notwithstanding  the  destruction  of  his  skin, 
t.e.  the  outward  man,  retaining  or  recovering  his  personal  identity.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  Job  here  (ch.  xix.  25 — 27)  virtually  anticipates  the 
final  answer  to  all  difficulties  supplied  by  the  Christian  revelation."  On 
the  other  hand,  provoked  by  Zophar,  Job  concludes  the  second  dialogue 
with  a  very  wrong-headed  and  overcoloured  view  of  the  happiness  of  the 
wicked  in  this  life,  and  maintains  that  the  distribution  of  good  and  evil 
in  the  present  world  proceeds  on  no  discoverable  principle  (ch.  xxi.  7 — 33). 

4.  The  third  dialogue,  which  begins  with  ch.  xxii.  and  terminates  at  the 
close  of  ch.  xxxi.,  is  confined  to  three  interlocutors — Job,  Eliphaz,  and 
Bildad,  Zophar  taking  no  part  in  it,  at  any  rate  as  the  text  stands  at 
present.  It  comprises  four  speeches  only — one  by  Eliphaz  (oh.  xxii.),  one 
by  Bildad  (ch.  xxv.),  and  two  by.  Job  (ch.  xxiii.,  xxiv.,  and  ch.  xxvi. — xxxi.). 
The  speech  of  Eliphaz  is  an  elaboration  of  the  two  points  on  which  he  had 
principally  insisted  throughout — Job's  extreme  wickedness  (ch.  xxv.  5 — 20), 
and  God's  readiness  to  pardon  and  restore  him  if  he  will  humble  himself 
in  the  dust,  repent  of  his  evil  doings,  and  turn  to  God  in  sincerity  and 
truth  (ch.  xxv.  21 — 30).  Bildad's  speech  consists  of  a  few  short  reflections 
on  the  majesty  of  God,  and  the  weakness  and  sinful i  es?  of  man.  Job,  in 
his  reply  to  Eliphaz  (ch.  xxiii.,  xxiv.),  repeats  in  the  main  his  former 
statements,  enforcing  them,  however,  by  new  arguments.  "  His  own 
innocence,  his  longing  for  judgment,  the  misery  of  the  oppressed,  and  the 
triumph  of  the  oppressors,  are  successively  brought  forward.'"  In  his 
second  speech  (ch.  ^xvi. — xxxi.)  he  takes  a  wider  and  more  comprehensive 
survey.  After  brushing  aside  the  irrelevant  remarks  of  Bildad  (ch.  xxvi. 
1 — 4)j  he  proceeds  to  deliver  with  all  solemnity  his  "last  word"  (ch.  xxxi. 
40)  upon  the  whole  controversy.  First  of  all,  he  makes  a  full  acknow- 
ledgment of  God's  greatness,  might,  and  inscrutableness  (ch.  xxvi.  5 — 14). 
Then  he  addresses  himself  once  mwe  to  the  question  of  God's  dealings 
with  the  wicked  in  this  life,  and,  retracting  his  previous  utterances  on  the 
gubjeot  (ch.  ix.  22 — 24 ;  lii.  6 ;  xxi.  7 — 33 ;  xxiv.  2 — 24),  admits  that,  as  a 

>  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  roL  L  p.  1089. 
*  'Bpaaker's  Oommentary,'  toL  It.  jf.  i. 


INTEODTJOTION  TO 


general  rule,  retributive  justice  overtakes  them  (ch.  xxvii.  11 — 23).  Next, 
he  shows  that,  great  as  is  man's  cleverness  and  ingenuity  with  respect  to 
earthly  things  and  physical  phenomena,  with  respect  to  heavenly  things 
and  the  spiritual  world  he  knows  next  to  nothing.  God  is  inscrutable  to 
him,  and  his  nearest  approach  to  wisdom  is,  through  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
to  direct  his  conduct  aright  (cb.  xxviii.).  Finally,  he  turns  his  eye  upon 
himself,  and  in  three  touching  chapters  describes  his  happy  condition  in 
his  former  life  before  his  troubles  came  (ch.  xxix.),  the  miserable  state  to 
which  he  has  since  then  been  reduced  (ch.  xxix.),  and  his  moral  character 
and  condition,  as  shown  by  the  way  in  which  he  has  conducted  himself 
under  all  the  various  circumstances  and  relations  of  human  existence  (ch, 
xxxi.).  This  last  review  amounts  to  a  complete  vindication  of  his  character 
from  all  the  aspersions  and  insinuations  of  his  opponents. 

6.  A  new  speaker  now  appears  upon  the  scene.  Elihn,  a  comparatively 
young  man,  who  has  been  present  at  all  the  colloquies,  and  heard  all  the 
arguments,  dissatisfied  alike  with  the  discourses  of  Job  and  with  the  replies 
made  to  them  by  his  "'comforters  "  (ch.  xxxii.  2,  3),  interposes  with  a  long 
harangue  (ch.  xxxii.  6 — xxxvii.),  addressed  partly  to  the  "  comforters " 
(ch.  xxxii.  6 — 22),  but  mainly  to  Job  himself  (ch.  xxxiii.,  xxxv. — xxxvii.), 
and  having  for  its  object  to  shame  the  "  comforters,"  to  rebuke  Job,  and  to 
vindicate  God's  ways  from  the  misrepresentations  of  both  parties  to  the 
controversy.  The  speech  is  that  of  a  somewhat  arrogant  and  conceited 
young  man.  It  exaggerates  Job's  faults  of  temper  and  language,  and 
consequently  censures  him  unduly;  but  it  adds  one  important  element  to 
the  controversy  by  its  insistence  on  the  view  that  calamities  are  sent  by 
God,  for  the  most  part,  as  chastisements,  not  punishments,  in  love,  not  in 
anger,  and  have  for  their  main  object  to  warn,  and  teach,  and  restrain  from 
evil  courses,  not  to  take  vengeance  on  past  sins.  There  is  much  that  is 
elevating  and  instructive  in  Elihu's  arguments  and  reflections  (oh.  xxxiiL 
14 — 30;  xxxiv.  5 — 11;  xxxvi.  7 — 16;  xxxvii.  2 — 13,  etc.);  but  the  tone 
of  the  speech  is  harsh,  disrespectful,  and  presumptuous,  so  that  we  feel  no 
surprise  at  Job  not  condescending  to  answer  it,  but  meeting  it  by  a  con- 
temptuous silence. 

6.  Suddenly,  though  not  without  some  preliminary  warnings  (ch.  xxxvi. 
32,  33 ;  xxxvii.  1 — 5),  in  the  midst  of  a  tempest  of  thunder,  lightning,  and 
rain,  God  himself  takes  the  word  (ch.  xxxviii.),  and  makes  an  address 
which  occupies,  with  one  short  interruption  (ch.  xl.  3—5),  four  chapters 
(ch.  xxxviii.— xli.).  The  object  of  the  address  is  not,  however,  to  solve 
the  various  questions  raised  in  the  course  of  the  controversy,  but  to  bring 
Job  to  see  and  acknowledge  that  he  has  been  rash  with  his  tongue,  and 
that,  in  questioning  the  perfect  rectitude  of  the  Divine  government  of  the 
world,  he  has  trenched  on  ground  where  he  is  incompetent  to  form  a 
judgment.  This  is  done  by  "a  marvellously  beautiful  and  comprehensive 
anrvey  of  the  glory  of  creation,"  and  especially  of  the  animal  creation,  with 
its  wonderful  variety  of  instincts.     Job  is  challenged  to  declare  how  things 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  vil 


were  origiiiAUy  made,  how  tbey  are  ordered  and  walntaiaed,  bow  the  stars 
are  kept  ia  their  courses,  how  the  various  phenomena  of  nature  are  pro- 
duoed,  how  the  animal  creation  is  sngtaiued  and  provided  for.  He  makes 
a  half-SQbmission  (ch,  xl,  8-^5) ;  and  then  he  is  asked  two  further 
questions — Will  be  undertake  the  government  of  mankind  for  a  space  (ch. 
xl,  10 — 14)  ?  Can  he  control  and  keep  in  order  two  out  of  God's  many 
creatures-'-'behemoth  and  leviathan — the  hippopotamus  and  the  crocodile 
(ch.  zl.  15—84 ;  xli.  1-^4)  ?  If  not,  on  what  grounds  does  he  presume 
to  question  God's  actual  government  of  the  world,  which  no  one  is  entitled 
to  question  who  is  not  competent  to  take  the  rule  himself  ? 

7,  Briefly,  but  unreservedly,  in  ch,  xlii.  1 — 6  Job  makes  his  final  sub- 
mission. He  has  "spoken  unadvisedly  with  his  lips,''  he  has  "uttered 
that  which  he  did  not  understand "  (ver.  3),  The  knowledge  which  he 
had  claimed  to  have  is  "  too  wonderful  for  him ;  "  wherefore  he  "  abhors 
himself,  and  repents  in  dust  and  ashes  "  (ver.  6). 

8.  The  entire  dialogue  being  thus  ended,  a  short  historical  section  follows 
(ch.  xlii.  7 — 16),  and  terminates  the  book.  God,  we  are  told,  having 
rebuked  the  arrogancy  of  Job's  utterances,  and  reduced  him  to  a  state  of 
absolute  submission  and  resignation,  turned  upon  the  "  comforters,"  con- 
demning them  as  far  more  guilty  than  Job,  since  they  "  had  not  spoken 
the  thing  that  was  right  concerning  him,  as  his  servant  Job  had  "  (vers.  7, 
8).  The  theory  by  which  they  had  thought  to  maintain  God's  perfect 
justice  was  unsound,  untrue.  It  was  contradicted  by  the  facts  of  human 
experience — to  maintain  it,  despite  this  contradiction,  was  not  to  honour 
God,  but  to  dishonour  him-  The  three  "comforters"  were  therefore 
required  to  offer  for  themselves,  in  the  way  of  expiation,  a  burnt  offering ; 
and  a  promise  was  given  them  that,  if  Job  would  intercede  on  their  behalf, 
they  should  be  accepted  (ver,  8).  The  sacrifice  was  offered,  and,  after 
Job's  intercession  had  been  made,  Jehovah  "  turned  his  captivity,"  or,  in 
other  words,  made  restitution  to  him  of  all  that  he  had  lost,  and  more. 
He  recovered  his  health.  His  wealth  was  restored  to  double  its  previous 
amount  (ver.  12  compared  with  ch.  i.  3) ;  his  friends  and  relatives  flocked 
around  him,  and  increased  his  store  (ver.  11)  ;  he  was  once  more  blessed 
with  children,  and  bad  the  same  number  as  before,  viz,  "seven  sons  and 
three  daughters  "  (ver,  13) ;  and  his  daughters  were  women  of  surpassing 
beauty  (ver.  16).  He  himself  lived,  after  his  restoration,  a  hundred  and 
forty  yearSt  uid  "saw  his  sons,  and  his  sons'  sons,  even  four  generations." 
At  last  be  passed  from  the  earth,  "  being  old  and  fall  of  days  "  (ver.  1 7). 

S  2.    Ihtkobitt  or  thb  Book. 

Four  prinoipal  objections  have  been  taken  to  the  "  integrity "  of  the 
Book  of  Jofab  It  has  been  argued  that  the  difference  of  style  is  so  great 
between  the  two  historical  sectionB  (oh.  1.,  ii.,  and  ch.  zlii.  6 — 17)  and 
the  rest  of  the  work  as  to  render  it  impossible,  or,  at  any  rate,  highly 


TiU  INTBODUCrrON   TO 


improbable,  that  they  proceeded  from  the  same  author.  Not  only  m  there 
the  radical  difference  which  exists  between  Hebrew  prose  and  Hebrew 
poetry,  but  the  prose  of  the  historical  sections  is  of  the  plainest  and  least 
ornate  kind,  while  the  poetry  of  the  body  of  the  book  is  highly  wrought, 
extremely  ornate,  and  in  places  over-rhetoricaL  The  historical  sections, 
moreover,  are  written  in  pure  Hebrew,  while  the  body  of  the  work  has 
many  forms  and  expressions  characteristic  of  the  Chaldee.'  Jehovah  is  the 
ordinary  name  of  God  in  the  historical  sections,  where  it  occurs  twenty- 
six  times;  it  is  found  but  once  in  the  rest  of  the  treatise  (ch.'xii.  9).'  On 
the  other  hand,  Shaddai,  "  the  Almighty,"  which  is  used  to  designate  God 
thirty  times  in  the  body  of  the  work,  does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  opening 
and  concluding  sections.  But,  notwithstanding  these  diversities,  it  is  the 
present  opinion  of  the  best  critics,  both  English  and  continental,  that  there 
are  no  sufficient  reasons  for  assigning  the  two  portions  of  the  work  to 
different  authors.  The  "  prosaic  words "  of  the  opening  and  concluding 
section,  says  Ewald,  "  harmonize  thoroughly  with  the  old  poem  in  subject- 
matter  and  thoughts,  in  colouring  and  in  art,  also  in  language,  so  far  as 
prose  can  be  like  poetry." '  "  The  Book  of  Job  is  now  considered,"  says 
Mr.  Fronde,  "  to  be,  beyond  all  doubt,  a  genuine  Hebrew  original,  completed 
by  its  writer  almost  in  the  form  in  which  it  now  remains  to  ns.  The 
questions  on  the  authenticity  of  the  prologue  and  epilogue,  which  were  once 
thought  important,  have  given  way  before  a  more  sound  conception  of  the 
dramatic  unity  of  the  entire  poem."  *  "  The  best  critics,"  observes  Canon 
Cook,  "  now  acknowledge  that  the  style  of  the  historical  portions  is  quite 
as  antique  in  its  severe  grandeur  as  that  of  the  Pentateuch  itself — to  which 
it  bears  a  striking  resemblance — or  as  any  other  part  of  this  book,  while 
it  is  strikingly  unlike  the  narrative  style  of  all  the  later  productions  of  the 
Hebrews.  ...  At  present,  indeed,  it  is  generally  acknowledged  that  the 
entire  work  would  be  unintelligible  without  these  portions."  ' 

A  portion  of  ch.  xxvii.,  extending  from  ver.  11  to  the  end,  is  regarded  by 
some  as  either  a  transfer  to  Job  of  what  was  originally  a  speech  of  Zophar's 
or  else  an  absolute  interpolation.  The  ground  of  this  view  is  the  difficulty 
caused  by  the  contrast  between  the  sentiments  expressed  in  the  passage  and 
those  to  which  Job  has  previously  given  utterance,  especially  in  ch.  xxiv. 
2—24,  joined  with  the  fact  that  the  omission  of  any  speech  from  Zophar  in 
the  third  colloquy  destroys  "  the  symmetry  of  the  general  form "  of  the 
dialogue.  But  ancient  and  modern  ideas  of  symmetry  are  not  altogether 
alike;  and  the  Hebrew  writers  generally  are  certainly  not  among  those  who 

•  For  a  Ust  of  ChaldaiBmB,  Bee  Professor  Lee'e  'Book  of  Job,'  Introduction,  p.  50  note 
2.  He  enumerates  twenty-eight,  and  remarks  that "  many  of  them  occur  several  times  " 
and  that  "  many  more  might  be  added."  ' 

»  J.e.  in  the  dialogues,  or  dramatic  portion  of  the  work.  In  the  historical  framework 
wherein  the  dialognes  are  set  it  occurs  also  in  ch.  xxxviii.  1 ;  x\.  i.  3,  6 ;  and  xlii.  1. 

•  Quoted  by  Canon  Cook,  in  Smith's '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  p.  1091, 

•  •  Short  Studies  on  Great  Subjects,'  vol.  i.  p.  283. 

•  'Piotionwy  of  the  BlbJe,'  vol.  i.  pp.  X09l,  1098, 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  ix 


regard  exact  and  complete  Bjtnmetry  as  imperative,  and  will  not  sacrifice  it 
to  any  other  consideration.  Zopbar's  silence  at  the  close  of  ch.  xzvi.,  like 
Bildad's  short  speech,  in  ch.  zxr.,  is  probably  intended  to  mark  the  exhaustion 
of  Job's  opponents  in  the  controversy,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  their  entire 
collapse  at  the  end  of  ch.  xxxi.  Zophar's  silence  is  sufficiently  accounted 
for  by  his  having  nothing  to  say ;  if  he  had  spoken,  the  place  for  his  speech 
would  have  been  between  ch.  xxri.  and  xxvii.,  where  evidently  a  pause 
occurred,  Job  having  waited  for  him  to  speak,  if  he  were  inclined  to  do  so. 
As  for  the  supposed  facility  with  which  speeches  in  a  dramatic  form  might 
be  transferred  from  one  speaker  to  another  by  inadvertence — if  the  speeches 
were  merely  headed  by  a  name,  it  would,  no  doubt,  be  possible ;  but  not 
where  they  are  introduced,  as  in  the  Book  of  Job,  by  a  formal  statement 
"Then  answered  Zophar  the  Naamathite,  and  said"  (ch.  xi.  1;  zx.  I). 
Four  consecutive  words  do  not  readily  drop  out ;  not  to  mention  that,  in  the 
case  supposed,  three  more  must  have  fallen  out  at  the  beginning  of  ch.  xzviii. 
Moreover,  the  style  of  the  disputed  passage  is  entirely  unlike  that  of  Zophar'i 
two  speeches.  As  for  the  marked  contrast  between  the  matter  of  the 
passage  and  Job's  former  utterances,  it  must  be  freely  and  fully  admitted  ; 
but  it  is  sufficiently  explained  by  the  supposition  that  Job's  previous 
utterances  on  the  subject  had  been  tentative  and  controversial,  not  the 
expression  of  his  real  sentiments,  and  that  he  would  naturally  wish  to 
supplement  what  he  had  said,  and  correct  what  was  faulty  in  it,  before  he 
brought  his  part  in  the  controversy  to  a  close  (ch.  xxxi.  40,  "  The  words 
of  Job  are  ended").  Am  for  the  passage  being  a  mere  interpolation,  it  ia 
enough  to  observe  that  no  critical  basis  has  been  assigned  for  this  view; 
and  that  a  scholar  so  competent  as  Bwald  remarks,  in  winding  up  his  judg- 
ment upon  the  subject,*  "  Only  a  grievous  misunderstanding  of  the  whole 
book  would  have  misled  the  modem  critics  who  hold  that  this  passage  is 
interpolated  or  misplaced." 

Another  supposed  "  interpolation  "  is  the  passage  commencing  with  ver. 
15  of  ch.  xl.  and  terminating  at  the  end  of  ch.  xli.  This  has  been  regarded, 
first,  as  inferior  to  the  rest  of  the  book  in  style,  and,  secondly,  as  superfluous, 
not  having  any  bearing  upon  the  argument.  The  latter  objection  is  cer- 
tainly strange,  since  the  passage  has  exactly  the  same  bearing  upon  the 
argument  as  the  whole  of  ch.  xxxix.,  which  is  not  objected  to.  The  argu- 
ment from  supposed  difference  of  style — always  a  delicate  one — is  sufficiently 
met  by  the  criticism  of  Renan,  who  says,'  "  Le  style  du  fragment  dont  nous 
parlous  est  eelm  des  meilleurs  endroits  du  poeme.  Nulle  part  la  coupe  n'est 
plus  vigoureuse,  le  parallelisme  plus  sonore ;  tout  indique  que  ce  singulier 
morceau  est  de  la  mSme  main,  mais  non  pas  du  mSme  jet,  qiie  le  reste  du 
diseourt  de  Jihovah." 

But  the  principal  attack  upon  the  integrity  of  the  Book  of  Job  is  directed 
against  the  long  harangue  of  Elihu,  vhich  commences  in  ch.  xxxii.  (ver.  7), 

'  Quoted  by  Canon  Cook,  in  the  'SpMkei:'*  Coromeatery,'  vgl,  iv.  p.  7> 
*  '  Le  Livre  de  Job,'  p.  1. 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


and  (Joea  not  termina,te  nntU  the  close  of  cb.  xx;?vji.,  thns  oconpying  six 
chapters,  and  forming  nearly  one-seventh  of  the  entire  treatise.  It  is  urged 
here  again  that  the  difference  of  language  and  style  between  these  chapters 
and  the  rest  of  the  book  indicates  ft  totally  distinct  and  mnch  later  author, 
while  the  tone  of  thought  and  the  doctrinal  views  are  also  thonght  to  be 
markedly  different,  and  to  suggest  a  comparatively  late  date,  Further,  it 
is  maintained  that  the  "  long  dissertation  "  adds  nothing  to  "  the  progress 
of  the  argument,"  and  "betrays  not  the  faintest  conception  of  the  real  cause 
of  Job's  sufferings." '  It  is  thus  otiose,  superfluous,  quite  unworthy  of  the 
place  which  it  occupies.  Some  critics  have  gone  so  far  as  to  excise  it.  It 
is  necessary  to  consider  these  arguments  seriatim.  (I)  The  difference  of 
style  must  be  admitted ;  it  is  unquestionable,  and  allowed  on  all  sides.  The 
language  is  obscure  and  difficult,  the  Ghaldaisms  numerous,  the  transitions 
abrupt,  the  arguments  rather  indicated  than  worked  out.  But  these 
characteristics  may  have  been  intentionally  gjiven  to  the  speech  by  the 
author,  who  assigns  to  each  of  his  interlocutors  a  marked  individuality,  and 
in  Elihu  introduces  a  young  man,  impetuous,  rude  of  speech,  full  of  thoughts 
which  struggle  for  utterance,  and  embarrassed  by  the  novelty  of  having  to 
find  words  for  them  in  the  presence  of  persons  superior  to  him  in  age  and 
position.  That  the  difference  of  style  is  not  such  as  to  necessarily  indicate 
another  author,  may  be  concluded  from  the  suggestion  of  Benan — an 
excellent  judge  of  Hebrew  style^-^that  the  passage  was  written  by  the  author 
of  the  remainder  of  the  book  in  his  old  age.  (2)  The  tone  of  thought  and 
the '  doctrinal  views,  though  certainly  in  advance  of  those  assigned  to 
Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar,  cannot  be  truly  said  to  surpass  those  of 
Job,  though  in  some  points  additional  to,  and  an  improvement  on,  them. 
Job  has  really  a  deeper  insight  into  Divine  truth,  and  into  the  scheme  of 
the  universe,  than  Elihu,  and  his  doctrine  of  a  "  Redeemer  "  (ch.  xix.  25) 
goes  beyond  that  of  the  "  angel-interpreter  "  of  the  Buzzite  (ch,  xxxiii.  23). 
(3)  It  may  be  true,  as  Mr.  Froude  says,  that  Elihu's  speech  "  betrays  not 
the  faintest  conception  of  the  real  cause  of  Job's  sufferings," '  but  this  was 
inevitable,  since  none  of  the  interlocutors  on  earth  is  supposed  to  have 
known  anything  of  the  antecedent  colloquies  in  heaven  (ch.  i.  7—12 ;  ii. 
2 — 6)  ;  but  it  is  certainly  very  far  from  the  truth  to  say  that  the  speech 
*'  adds  nothing  to  the  progress  of  the  argument,"  "  Elihu  brings  forward 
and  establishes  the  view  only  just  indicated  (ch.  V.  17, 18),  and  never  dwelt 
on,  by  any  other  interlocutor,  that  the  afSictions  wherewith  God  visits  bis 
servants  are,  in  comparatively  few  cases,  penal,  being  generally  of  the  nature 
of  chastisements,  dealt  out  in  love,  and  designed  to  be  remedial,  to  check 
departures  from  tbe  right  path,  to  "  keep  baqk  from  the  pit "  (oh.  xxxiii. 
18),  to  purify,  refine,  and  bring  about  moral  improvement.  He  opens  the 
view,  nowhere  else  put  forward  in  the  book,  that  life  is  a  discipline,  pros- 
perity and  adversity  being  intended  equally  to  serve  as  "  instruction  "  (cb. 

•  Fronds, '  Short  Studies  o«  Great  Subjeots,'  vol.  i.  p,  319,  note. 
•  Ibid.  »  JbiO. 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


xxxiii.  16),  and  to  subserve  tte  formation  m  eacli  mdividnal  of  that  charac- 
ter, temper,  and  frame  of  mind  which  God  desires  to  have  formed  in  him.' 
To  regatd  Ejlihti  as  "  jUroceeding  evidently  on  the  false  hypothesis  of  the 
three  friends,"  and  as  echoing  their  views,  is  to  do  him  scant  justice.  He 
takes  an  independent  line  ;  he  is  far  from  regarding  Job's  sufferings  as  the 
penalty  of  his  sins,  stiU  farther  from  taxing  him  with  the  long  catalogue  of 
offences  ascribed  to  him  by  the  others  (cL  xviii.  5 — 21 ;  xx.  5 — 29 ;  xxii. 
5 — 17).  He  finds  in  him  tw6  faults  only,  and  they  ate  not  faults  in  his 
earlier  life,  whereby  he  had  provoked  his  visitations,  but  faults  in  his 
existing  temper,  exhibited  in  his  decent  utterances — ^namely,  undue  self- 
confidence  (ch.  xxxii.  2  ;  xxxiii.  9  ;  xxxiv.  6),  and  presumption  in  judging 
God's  ways  and  charging  him  with  injustice  (ch.  xxxiv.  5 — 12 ;  xxxv.  2, 
etc.).  It  is  reasonable  to  regard  Elihu  as  having  by  his  reasonings 
influenced  the  mind  of  Job,  convinced  him  of  having  transgressed,  and  dis- 
posed him  for  that  humility  which  secures  his  final  aoeeptance  (ch.  xl.  3 — 5, 
xlii.  2 — 6).  Thus  his  interposition  in  the  argument  is  far  from  being  otiose, 
or  superfluous  ;  it  is  really  a  step  in  advance  of  all  that  has  gone  before, 
and  helps  towards  the  final  dSnouemeni. 

§  3.  Ghabaotbr. 

It  has  been  much  debated  whether  the  Book  of  Job  is  to  be  looked  upon 
as  an  historical  composition,  as  a  work  of  imagination,  or  as  something 
between  the  two.  The  eafly  Christian  Fathers  and  the  earlier  Jewish 
rabbis  treat  it  as  absolutely  historical,  and  no  whisper  arises  to  the  con- 
trary till  several  centuries  after  the  Christian  era.  Then  a  certain  Resh 
Lakish,  in  a  dialogue  with  Samuel  Bar-Nachman,  jtfeserved  to  us  in  the 
Talmud,  suggests  that  "  Job  did  not  exist,  and  was  not  a  created  man,  but 
is  a  mere  parable."  *  This  opinion,  however,  did  not  for  a  long  time  take 
any  firm  hold,  even  of  any  Jewish  SchooL  Maimonides,  "  the  most  cele- 
brated of  the  rabbis,"  treated  it  as  an  open  question,"  while  Hai  Gaon, 
Rashi,  and  others  directly  contradict  Eesh  Lakish,  and  maintain  the  his- 
torical character  of  the  narrative.  Ben  Gershom,  on  the  other  hand,  and 
Spinoza  agree  with  Eesh  Lakish,  regarding  the  work  as  one  of  fiction, 
intended  for  moral  and  religious  instruction.  The  same  view  is  maintained, 
among  Christian  writers,  by  Spanheim,  Carpzov,  Bonillier,  Bernstein,  J.  D. 
Miohaelis,  Hahn,  Bwald,  Schlottmann,  and  others. 

The  arguments  in  favour  of  this  view  are,'  first,  that  the  work  is  not 
placed  by  the  Jews  among  their  historical  Scriptures,  but  in  the  Hagiographa, 
or  writings  intended  for  religious  instruction,  together  with  the  Psalms,  the 
Proverbs,  the  Song  of  Solomon,  Lamentations,  and  Boelesiastes.  Secondly, 
that  the  narrative  is  incredible,  the  appearance  of  Satan  among  the  angel» 

•  Oompaie  Btttlei's  <  Analogy,'  pt.  i.  ch.  t. 

«  'Babft  Bathra,'  IS,  o.  *  '  More  NeTooMm,'  ita  22. 

*  See  the  summary  in  BoBenmilUer's '  Prolegomena  iU  Jobum,'  pp.  6—9, 


xil  INTftODtJCTlON  tO 


of  God,  and  the  familiar  dialogues  between  the  Alaiiglity  and  the  prince  of 
darkness  being  plainly  fictions,  while  the  ntterance  bj  Job  of  long  dis- 
courses, adorned  with  every  rhetorical  artifice,  and  strictly  bound  by  the 
laws  of  metre,  while  he  was  suffering  excruciating  agonies  from  mental 
gfrief  and  sharp  physical  pains,  is  so  unlikely  that  it  may  be  pronounced 
morally  impossible.  The  round  numbers  (ch.  i.  2,  3 ;  xlii.  12,  13),  and  the 
Bxcred  character  of  the  numbers — three  (ch.  i.  2,  3,  17;  ii.  11;  xlii.  13),, 
seven  (ch.  i.  2,  3 ;  ii.  13  ;  xlii.  8,  13),  and  ten  (ch.  i.  2 ;  xlii.  13) — are  also 
objected  to;  the  exact  doubling  of  Job's  substance  (ch.  xUi.  10,  12)  and 
exact  restoration  of  the  old  number  of  his  sons  and  daughters  (ch.  i.  2  ;  xlii. 
14)  are  thought  most  improbable ;  while  an  exact  doubling  of  his  former 
term  of  life  is  detected  in  ch.  xlii.  16,  and  pronounced  to  be  another  indica- 
tion of  a  fictitious,  not  a  real,  history.  Hence  the  conclusion  is  drawn 
that  the  story  of  Job  is  "  no  single  thing  which  happened  once,  but  that  it 
belongs  to  humanity  itself,  and  is  the  drama  of  the  trial  of  man,  with  Almighty 
God  and  the  angels  as  spectators  of  it."  ' 

These  arguBaents  are  met,  first,  by  the  remark  that  in  the  Hagiographa 
are  contained  some  admittedly  historical  books,  as  Ezra,  Nohemiah,  and 
Chronicles ;  secondly,  by  the  denial  that  there  is  anything  incredibie  or 
unworthy  of  God  in  the  scenes  depicted  in  ch.  i.  6 — 12  ;  ii.  1 —  7-  thirdly,  by 
the  suggestion  that  Job  probably  made  his  speeches  in  the  interrais  i>etween 
his  attacks  of  pain,  and  that  rhythmic  utterance  is  no  unusaal  gift  ?.mr>iig 
the  sages  of  Arabia ;  *  fourthly,  by  the  observation  that  there  is  ncthino 
to  prevent  round  numbers  or  sacred  numbers  from  being  also  historical  ■ 
fifthly,  by  the  remark  that  the  Oriental  writers,  and  indeed  historical  writer* 
generally,  are  in  the  habit  of  using  round  numbers  instead  of  exact  ones 
partly  for  brevity,  partly  to  avoid  the  pretence  of  such  an  accuracy  of  know- 
ledge as  is  scarcely  ever  possessed  by  any  historian ;  and  sixthly,  by  the 
statement  that  we  are  not  intended  to  understand  an  exact  doubling  of  all 
Job's  possessions  by  what  is  said  in  ch.  xlii.  10,  12.  Further,  it  is  noted 
that  the  (assumed)  exact  duplication  of  his  age  before  his  calamities  by  the 
years  that  he  lived  after  them  is  a  gratuitous  supposition  of  the  critics 
since  Job's  age  at  the  time  when  his  misfortunes  fell  upon  him  is  nowhere 
stated,  and  may  have  been  anything  between  sixty  and  eighty,  or  indeed 
between  sixty  and  a  hundred. 

In  favour  of  the  historical  character  of  the  book,  it  is  urged,  first,  that 
the  real  existence  of  Job  as  an  historical  personage  is  attested  by  Ezekiel 
(xiv.  14,  20),  by  St.  James  (v.  11),  and  by  Oriental  tradition  genei-ally;' 
secondly,  that  "  the  invention  of  a  story  without  foundation  in  facts,  the 
creation  of  a  person  represented  as  having  a  real  historical  existence,  is 
wholly  alien  to  the  spirit  of  antiquity,  appearing  only  in  the  latest  epoch 
of  the  literature  of  any  ancient  people,  and  belonging  in  its  complete  form 

"  Fronde,  'Short  Studies  on  Great  Subjects,'  voL  i.  p.  297. 

•  Sohultens, '  Oommentarius  in  Jobum,'  iii.  1.  p.  45. 

•  'Dictiouary  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  L  p.  1094. 


TBB  BOOK  OP  JOB.  tiU 


to  the  most  modem  times ; " '  thirdly,  that  had  the  work  been  a  fiction  of 
a  late  period  (as  supposed  by  the  sceptical  school)  it  could  not  possibly  have 
presented  so  vivid,  so  true,  and  so  harmonions  a  pictore  of  the  patriarchal 
times,  no  ancient  writer  having  ever  succeeded  in  reproducing  the  manners 
of  a  past  age,  or  in  avoiding  allnsion  to  those  of  his  own,  antiquity  not 
having,  in  M.  Kenan's  words,"  "  any  idea  of  what  wo  call  local  colouring." 
Further,  it  is  remarked  that  the  book  at  once  professes  to  be  historical,' 
and  carries  with  it  such  internal  evidence  of  truthfulness  and  reality  as 
is  entirely  unmistakable.  "  This  effect  of  reality,"  says  Canon  Cook,*  "  is 
produced  by  a  number  of  internal  indications  which  can  scarcely  be 
accounted  for  save  by  a  faithful  adherence  to  objective  truth.  In  all  the 
characters  there  is  a  thorough  consistency ;  each  agent  in  the  traasaction 
has  peculiarities  of  thought  and  feeling,  which  give  him  a  distinct  and  vivid 
personality ;  this  is  more  especially  the  case  with  Job  himself,  whose  cha- 
racter is  not  merely  drawn  in  broad  out-lines,  but,  like  that  of  David  and 
others,  whose  history  is  given  with  most  detail  in  Scripture,  is  developed 
under  a  variety  of  most  trying  circumstances,  presenting  under  each  change 
new  aspects,  but  ever  retaining  its  peculiar  and  most  living  individuality. 
Even  the  language  and  illustrations  of  the  several  speakers  have  distinct 
characteristics.  The  incidents,  moreover,  which  in  a  fiction  would  probably 
have  been  noted  in  a  vague  and  general  manner,  are  narrated  with  minute- 
ness and  an  accurate  observance  of  local  and  temporary  conditions.  Thus 
we  may  remark  the  mode  in  which  the  supernatural  visitation  is  carried 
into  execution,  by  natural  agencies  and  under  circumstances  peculiar  to  the 
district,  at  a  season  when  the  inroads  of  Chaldean  and  Sabean  robbers  were 
customary  and  peculiarly  dreaded  ;  by  fire  and  whirlwinds  such  as  occur  at 
intervals  in  the  desert ;  and  lastly  by  elephantiasis,  of  which  the  symptoms 
are  described  so  accurately  as  to  leave  no  doubt  that  the  writer  must  have 
recorded  what  he  actually  observed,  unless  indeed  he  inserted  them  with 
the  special  intention  of  giving  an  air  of  truthfulness  to  his  composition. 
Were  such  a  supposition  in  itself  plausible,  in  this  case  it  would  be  confuted 
by  the  fact  that  these  symptoms  are  not  described  in  any  single  passage,  so 
as  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  reader,  but  are  made  out  by  a  critical  and 
scientific  examination  of  words  occurring  at  distant  intervals  in  the  com- 
plaints of  the  sufferer.  The  most  refined  art  could  scarcely  produce  this 
result ;  it  is  rarely  attempted,  still  more  rarely,  if  ever,  attained  in  the  most 
artificial  ages ;  it  was  never  dreamed  of  by  ancient  writers,  and  must  be 
regarded  in  this  case  as  a  strong  instance  of  the  undesigned  coincidences 
which  sound  criticism  accepts  as  a  sure  attestation  to  the  genuineness 
[authenticity  ?]  of  a  work." 

If,  however,  on  these  grounds  the  general  historical  character  of  the  Book 

'  Ewald, '  Das  Buoh  Ijob,'  Einleitung,  p.  IS. 

•  '  Le  Livre  de  Job,'  Introduction,  p.  xvi. 

■  Professor  Stanley  Leathes,  in  the  Bishop  of  Glonoester'B '  Old  TeBtament  Oommentar; 
for  English  Readers,'  voL  iv.  p.  3. 

•  •  Speaker'*  Oommentary,'  vol.  iv.  p.  10. 


XW  iNtRODUCWON  TO 


of  Job  be  admitted,  it  still  remains  to  be  considered  whether  human 

ingenuity  and  imagination  has  any  part  in  it.    Nothing  was  more  common 

in  antiquity  than  to  take  a  set  of  historical  foots,  and  expand  them  into  a 

poem,  whereof  the  greater  portion  was  the  creation  of  the  brain  and  genius 

of  the  author.    In  the  poem  of  Pentaur,*  ascribed  to  the  fourteenth  century 

B.C.,*  a  set  of  incidents  are  taken  from  the  Hittite-Bgyptian  War,  and  so 

poeticized  as  to  cover  Bameses  the  Gh-eat  with  a  manifestly  unreal  halo  of 

glory.    The  Homeric  poems,  and  the  entire  series  of  works  belonging  to  the 

epic  cycle,  proceed  upon  the  same  system^— on  a  basis  of  fact  is  erected  a 

superstructure  the  larger  portion  of  which  is  fiction.     There  is  reason  to 

believe  the  same  of  the  Maha-Bharata  and  Bamayana  of  the  Hindoos.  Greek 

tragedy  famishes  another  instance.     Looking  to  these  precedents,  to  the 

general  cast  of  the  work,  and  to  the  difficulty  of  supposing  that  a  real 

historical  report  of  such  long  speeches  as  those  of  Job  and  his  friends  could 

have  been  made  and  handed  down  by  tradition  even  to  the  earliest  time  at 

which  any  one  supposes  that  the  Book  of  Job  could  have  been  written, 

critics  generally  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that,  while  the  narrative  rests 

on  a  solid  substratum  of  fact,  in  its  fotm  and  general  features,  in  its 

reasonings  and  representations  of  character,  the  book  is  a  work  of  creative 

genius.     From  this  conclusion  the  present  writer  is  not  inclined  to  dissent, 

though  he  would  incline  to  the  views  of  those  who  regard  the  author  of 

Job  as  largely  guided  by  the  traditions  ttrhioh  he  was  able  to  collect,  and 

the  traditions  themselves  as  to  a  large  extent  trustworthy, 

§  4.   pROBABtE  Date  akd  Axithob. 

The  indications  of  date  derived  from  the  matter  of  the  book,  from  its 
tone,  and  from  its  general  style,  strongly  favour  the  theory  of  its  high 
antiquity.  The  language  is  archaic,  more  akin  to  the  Arabic  than  that  of 
any  other  portion  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  and  full  of  Aramaisms  which 
are  not  of  the  later  type,  but  such  as  characterize  the  antique  and  highly 
poetic  style,  and  occur  in  parts  of  the  Pentateuch,  in  the  Song  of  Deborah, 
and  in  the  earliest  Psalms."  The  style  has  a  "grand  archaic  character," 
which  has  been  recognized  by  almost  all  critics.  "  Firm,  compact,  sonorous 
as  the  ring  of  a  pure  metal,  severe  and  at  times  rugged,  yet  always  dignified 
and  majestic,  the  language  belongs  altogether  to  a  period  when  thought 
was  slow  but  profound  and  intensely  concentrated,  when  the  weighty  and 
oracular  sayings  of  the  wise  were  wont  to  be  engraved  on  rocks  with  a  pen 
of  iron,  and  in  characters  of  molten  lead.  It  is  a  truly  lapidary  style,  such 
as  was  natural  only  in  an  age  when  writing,  though  known,  was  rarely 
used,  before  language  had  acquired  clearness,  fluency,  and  flexibility,  but 
lost  much  of  its  freshness  and  native  force."  * 

'  See  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  68—78.  »  Ibid.,  p.  66. 

«  8o  Ewald,  Kenan,  Schlottuiauu,  and  Koeegarten.    (See  'Dictionuy  of  the  Bible,'  toL 
i.  p.  1095.) 


'  Ibid.    Compere  •  Speaker's  Commentary,'  toL  L  p.  II 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


The  manneM,  oustoma,  institutions,  and  general  mode  of  life  described  in 
fclie  book  are  such  aa  belong  especially  to  the  times  which  are  commonly 
called  "patriarchal."  The  pastoral  desorlptiona  hare  the  genuine  air  of 
the  wild,  free,  vigorous  life  of  the  desert.  The  city  life  (ch.  xxix.)  is 
exactly  that  of  the  earliest  settled  communities,  with  connoils  of  grey- 
bearded  elders,  judges  in  the  gate  (ch.  xxix.  7),  the  chieftain  at  once  judge 
and  warrior  (oh.  xxix.  25),  yet  with  written  indictments  (ch.  xxxi.  35) 
and  settled  forms  of  legal  procedure  (ch.  ix.  33;  xrii.  3;  xxxi.  28).  The 
citdlization,  if  such  it  may  be  called,  is  of  the  primitive  type,  with  rock- 
inscriptions  (ch.  ix.  24),  mining  such  as  was  practised  by  the  Egyptians  in 
the  Sinaitic  peninsula  from  B.C.  2000,  great  buildings,  ruined  sepulchres, 
tombs  watched  over  by  sculptured  figures  of  the  dead  (oh.  xxi.  32).  The 
historical  allusions  touch  nothing  of  a  recent  date,  but  only  such  ancient 
things  as  the  Pyramids  (ch.  iii.  14),  the  apostasy  of  Nimrod  (ch.  ix.  9),  the 
Flood  (ch.  xxii.  16),  the  destruction  of  the  "cities  of  the  plain"  (ch.  xviii. 
15),  and  the  like ;  they  include  no  mention— not  the  faintest  hint—of  any  of 
the  great  events  of  Israelite  history,  not  even  of  the  ExoduB,  the  passage  of 
the  Red  Sea,  or  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Sinai,  much  less  of  the  conquest 
of  Canaan,  or  of  the  stirring  times  of  the  judges  and  the  first  great  kings 
of  Israel.  It  is  inconoeivablej  as  has  been  often  said,  that  a  writer  of  a  late 
date,  say  of  the  time  of  Captivity,  or  of  Josiah,  or  even  of  Solomon,  should, 
in  a  long  work  like  the  Book  of  Job,  intentionally  and  successfully  avoid 
all  reference  to  historical  occurrences,  and  to  changes  in  religious  forms  or 
doctrines  of  a  date  posterior  to  that  of  the  events  which  form  the  subject 
of  Ms  narrative. 

It  is  a  legitimate  conclusion  from  these  facts,  that  the  Book  of  Job  is 
probably  more  ancient  than  any  other  composition  in  the  Bible,  excepting, 
perhaps,  the  Pentateuch;  or  portions  of  it.  It  must  almost  certainly  have 
been  written  before  the  promulgation  of  the  Law.'  How  long  before  is 
doubtful.  Job's  term  of  life  (two  hundred  to  two  hundred  and  fifty  years) 
would  seem  to  place  him  in  the  period  between  Bber  and  Abraham,  or  al 
any  rate  in  that  between  Bber  and  Jacob,  who  lived  only  a  hundred  and 
forty-seven  years,  and  after  whom  the  term  of  human  life  seems  to  have 
rapidly  shortened  (Dent.  xxxi.  2;  Ps.  xc.  10).  The  book,  however,  was 
not  written  until  after  Job's  death  (ch.  xlii.  17),  and  may  have  been 
written  some  considerable  time  after.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  seems 
most  reasonable  to  place  the  composition  towards  the  close  of  the  patriarchal 
period,  not  very  long  before  the  Exodus. 

The  only  tradition  which  has  come  down  to  us  with  respect  to  the  author- 
ship of  the  Book  of  Job  ascribes  it  to  Moses.  Aben  Ezra  (about  a.».  1150) 
declares  this  to  be  the  general  opinion  of  "  the  sages  of  blessed  memory."' 
In  the  Talmud  it  is  laid  down  as  undoubted,  "  Moses  wrote  his  own  book  " 
{i.«.  the  Pentateuch), "  the  section  about  Balaam,  and  Job.'*  *    The  testimony 

'  •  DioKonary  of  the  Bible,*  vol.  L  p.  1099.  ' '  CommentarinB  in  Jobum,'  it  11. 

■ '  Bttba  Batbnt,'  p.  14,  h.    Compare  Ephrem  Syrus, '  Jobi  Librum  Moyiei  eoripiit.' 


l»l  DJTRODtTOTlON  TO 


may  not  possess  ranch  critical  value,  but  it  is  the  only  tradition  that  we  have. 
Apart  from  this,  we  float  upon  a  sea  of  conjecture.  The  most  ingenious  of 
the  conjectures  put  forward  is  that  of  Dr.  Mill  and  Professor  Lee,*  who  think 
that  Job  himself  put  the  discourses  into  a  written  form,  and  that  Muses, 
having  become  acquainted  with  this  work  while  he  was  in  Midian,  deter- 
mined to  communicate  it  to  his  countrymen,  as  analogous  to  the  trial  of 
their  faith  in  Egypt ;  and,  in  order  to  render  it  intelligible  to  them,  added 
the  opening  and  concluding  sections,  which,  it  is  remarked,  are  altogether 
in  the  style  of  the  Pentateuch.*  A  far  less  probable  theory  assigns  the  anthor- 
ship  of  the  bulk  of  the  book  to  Elihu."  Those  who  reject  these  views,  yet 
allow  the  antiquity  of  the  composition,  can  only  suggest  some  unknown 
Palestinian  author,  some  av^p  ■noXuTporroi,  who,  like  the  old  hero  of  Ithaca, 

HoWuy  ayOpc&vuv  iBey  &trrea  Ktii  v6ov  tyva^ 
lloWi,  S'  irf  iv  nivTif  rdBey  &\yea  iv  Kara  Buithy, 
'Apri/ievos  ^vx^"  •  •  • 

and  who,  "  having  broken  free  from  the  narrow  littleness  of  the  peculiar 
people,  divorced  himself  from  them  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly,"  and 
having  "  travelled  away  into  the  world,  lived  long,  perhaps  all  his  life,  in 
exile."*  Such  vague  fancies  are  of  little  value;  and  the  theory  of  Dr. 
Mill  and  Professor  Lee,  though  unproved,  is  probably  the  nearest  approach 
to  the  truth  that  can  be  made  at  the  present  day. 

§  5.  Object  of  the  Woek. 

The  author  of  the  Book  of  Job,  though  dealing  with  historical  facts,  is 
scarcely  to  be  termed,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  an  historian.  He 
is  a  didactic  writer,  and  comes  forward  with  a  moral  and  religious  object. 
Placing  the  complicated  problem  of  human  life  before  him,  he  sets  himself 
to  inquire  into  a  number  of  its  most  hidden  and  abstruse  mysteries.  Why 
are  some  men  especially  and  exceptionally  prosperous?  Why  are  others 
crushed  and  overwhelmed  with  misfortunes  ?  Does  God  care  for  men,  or 
does  he  not  ?  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  disinterested  goodness  ?  What  is  this 
life  to  lead  to  ?  Is  the  grave  the  end  of  everything,  or  is  it  not  ?  If  God  rules 
the  world,  does  he  rule  it  on  the  principle  of  absolute  justice  ?  If  so,  how, 
when,  and  where  is  this  justice  to  appear  ?  Further  and  deeper  issues  are 
the  questions — Can  man  be  jusb  before  God  ?  and  can  he  comprehend  God  ? 

First  and  foremost  is  placed  the  question — ^Is  there  such  a  thing  as  disin- 
terested goodness  ?  This  Satan  by  implication  denies  ("  Doth  Job  fear 
God  for  nought  ?  "  ch.  i.  9),  and  we  know  how  persistently  it  has  been 
denied  by  worldly  and  wicked  men,  the  servants  of  Satan,  ever  since.  This 
question  is  answered  by  the  entire  narrative,  considered  as  a  history.  Job 
is  tried  and  tested  in  every  possible  way,  by  unexampled  misfortunes,  by  a 
most  painful  and  loathsome  disease,  by  the  defection  of  his  wife,  by  the 
cruel  charges  of  his  friends,  by  the  desertion  of  his  relatives,  by  the  insult. 

« •  The  Book  of  Job,'  Introduction,  pp.  36—48.  «  Ibid.,  p.  39.  •  Ibid,  p.  44. 

*  Froude, '  Short  Studies  on  Great  Subjects,'  vol.  I.  pp.  295,  298. 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOS.  xtrt 


icg  language  and  actions  of  the  rabble  (oh.  xxx.  1 — 10)  ;  yet  he  retains  Lis 
integrity,  he  remains  faithful  to  God,  he  continues  to  place  all  his  hope  and 
trust  in  the  Almighty  (ch.  xiii.  15 ;  xxxi.  2,  6,  23,  35).  A  crucial  experi- 
ment has  been  made,  and  Job  stands  the  test — there  is  no  reason  to  believe 
that  with  any  other  good  and  righteous  man  the  result  would  be  different. 

A  secondary  position  is  occupied  by  the  inquiry  concerning  the  grounds 
npon  which  prosperity  and  adversity,  happiness  and  unhappiness,  are  dis- 
tributed to  men  in  this  life.  To  this  question  the  three  friends  have  a  very 
short  and  simple  answer — they  are  distributed  by  God  in  exact  accordance 
with  men's  deserts — "  God  being  just  and  righteous,  temporal  prosperity 
and  wretchedness  are  dealt  out  by  him  immediately  by  his  own  will  to  his 
subjects  according  to  their  behaviour."  *  This  theory  Job  strenuously  com- 
bats— he  knows  that  it  is  not  true — in  the  inmost  depth  of  his  consciousness 
he  is  certain  that  he  has  not  provoked  the  calamities  which  have  fallen 
upon  him  by  his  sins.  But  if  so,  how  are  his  sufferings  to  .be  accounted 
for  ?  What  other  theory  of  the  distribution  of  temporal  good  and  evil  is 
there  ?  Can  it  be  that  God  does  not  care  ?  that  goodness  and  wickedness 
are  indifferent  to  him  (ch.  ix.  22,  23)  ?  If  not,  why  do  so  many  of  the 
ungodly  prosper  (ch.  xii.  6 ;  xxi.  7 — 33)  ?  Why  is  the  just,  upright  man  so 
often  oppressed  and  laughed  to  scorn  (oh.  xii.  4)  ?  Job  despairs  of  solving 
the  problem,  and  is  almost  driven  to  question  the  justice  of  God.  But 
Elihu  is  brought  forward  to  furnish  another  and  a  truer  answer,  though  it 
may  not  be  a  complete  one.  God  sends  calamities  on  good  mgn  by  way  of 
chastisement,  not  of  punishment;  in  love,  not  in  anger;  to  purify  and 
strengthen  them,  to  purge  out  faults,  to  "  save  from  the  pit "  (ch.  xxxiii. 
18,  28),  to  purify  them  and  enlighten  them  (see  the  Exposition  of  ch. 
xxxiii.,  introductory  paragraph).  To  teach  this  is  certainly  one  of  the  main 
pui-poses  of  the  book,  and  one  to  which  considerable  space  is  devoted. 

Another  purpose  which  the  writer  must  certainly  have  had  in  view 
was  to  raise  the  question  concerning  man's  future  destiny.  Was  death  the 
end  of  all  things  ?  What  was  Sheol  ?  and  what  was  the  condition  of  those 
who  dwelt  in  it  ?  Shepl  is  mentioned  by  name  no  fewer  than  eight  times 
in  the  book,"  and  referred  to,  and  to  some  extent  described,  in  other 
passages  (ch.  x.  21,  22 ;  xviii.  18).  Job  looks  upon  it  as  about  to  become 
his  abode  (ch.  xvii.  13),  and  even  entreats  to  be  sent  there  (cli.  xiv.  13).  He 
speaks  of  being  kept  there  secretly  for  some  indefinite  time,  after  which 
he  looks  for  a  "  renewal "  (ch.  xiv.  13).  Moreover,  in  one  passage,  where 
"a  clear,  bright  hope,  like  a  sudden  gleam  of  sunlight  between  clouds," 
bursts  upon  him,  he  expresses  his  conviction  that  "in  another  life,  whon 
his  skin  is  wasted  off  his  bones,  and  the  worms  have  done  their  work  on 
the  prison  of  his  spirit,"  he  will  be  allowed  to  see  God  his  Redeemer-to 
"Bee  him,  and  have  his  pleadings  heard.'"    A  purpose  to  penetrate,  if 

•  Froude, '  Short  Studies  on  Great  SubjectB,'  vol.  L  p.  292. 

•  Oh.  vil.  9 :  xi.  8 :  xiv.  13 ;  xvii.  13, 16 ;  xxi.  13 ;  xxiv.  13 :  xiri.  fl. 
-  Froude, '  Short  Studies  on  Great  Subjeotg,'  voL  1.  pp.  309,  812. 


xtM  introduction  to 


possible,  the  darkness  of  the  tomb  mast  therefore  be  ascribed  to  the  writer, 
and  a  desire  at  once  to  cheer  men  by  the  glorioas  hope  of  a  fatnre  life, 
and  to  clear  God  of  any  suspicion  of  unjnst  rule  by  pointing  to  a  time 
when  justioe  will  be  done,  and  the  inequalities  of  the  existing  condition 
of  things  redressed  by  the  permanent  establishment  of  conditions  entirely 


new 


Can  man  be  pst  before  God  ?  This  is  another  question  raised ;  and  it  is 
answered  by  a  distingwo.  Absolutely  just  he  cannot  be.  Sins  of  infirmity 
must  attach  to  him,  sins  of  his  youth  (ch.  xiii._26),  sins  of  temper,  sins  of 
rash  speech  (ch.  vi.  3,  26 ;  xxxiii.  8 — 10),  and  the  like.  But  just,  in  the 
sense  of  "  honest,"  "sincere,"  "bent  on  serving  God,"  he  maybe  and  he 
must  be,  unless  he  is  to  be  a  hypocrite  and  a  castaway  (ch.  ix.  21 ;  x.  7 ; 
xii.  4,  etc.).  Job  holds  fast  by  his  innocency,  and  is  pronounced  by  God 
himself  to  be  "  perfect  and  upright,  one  that  feared  God  and  eschewed 
evil"  (ch.  i.  1 ;  ii.  3).  He  is  ultimately  approved  by  God,  and  accepted 
(ch.  xlii.  7,  8),  while  those  who  have  tried  their  best  to  make  him  confess 
himself  a  sinner  are  condemned,  and  only  pardoned  on  his  intercession 
(ch.  xlii.  3,  4).  Men  are  thus  taught  by  this  book,  not  certainly  without 
the  express  intention  of  the  writer,  that  they  can  do  right  if  they  try,  that 
they  can  purify  themselves,  and  live  noble  and  worthy  lives,  and  that  they 
are  bound  to  do  so. 

Lastly,  there  is  the  question  of  man's  power  to  know  God,  which  occupies 
a  considerable  space,  and  is  answered,  like  the  preceding  question  by 
drawing  a  distinction.  That  man  has  a  knowledge  of  God  to  a  large  extent 
knows  him  to  be  just,  wise,  and  good,  eternal,  almighty,  omniscient,  is 
assumed  throughout  the  book,  and  written  on  almost  every  page  of  it 
But  that  man  can  fully  comprehend  God  is  denied,  and  disproved  by  very 
cogent  and  valid  reasonings  (ch.  xxviii.  12—28 ;  xxxvi.  26—33 ;  xxxvii. 
1—23 ;  xxxviii.  4—41 ;  xxxix. ;  xl. ;  xli.).  Man,  therefore,  must  not  presume' 
to  sit  in  judgment  upon  God,  who  "  doeth  great  things,  which  man  cannot 
comprehend "  (ch.  xxxvii.  6),  and  "  whose  ways  are  past  finding  out." 
His  attitude  must  be  one  of  submission,  reserve,  and  reverence.  He  must 
continually  bear  in  mind  that  he  has  no  faculties  to  grasp  the  whole  range 
of  actual  facts  and  consider  their  relations  one  to  another,  no  power  to 
comprehend  the  scheme  of  the  universe,  much  less  to  sound  the  depths  of 
the  being  of  him  who  made  it.  As  Bishop  Butler  points  out,  in  two 
chapters  of  his  'Analogy,"  that  the  ignorance  of  man  is  a  sufficient  answer 
to  most  of  the  objections  which  men  are  in  the  habit  of  urging  against  the 
wisdom,  equity,  and  goodness  of  the  Divine  government,  whether  as  made 
known  to  us  by  reason  or  by  revelation,  so  the  author  of  '  Job '  is  evidently 
bent  on  impressing  strongly  upon  us,  as  one  of  the  main  lessons  to  be 
learnt  from  reflection  and  experience,  and  one  of  the  main  teachings  which 
he  would  enforce  upon  us  by  his  treatise,  that  we  are  quite  incompetent 

•  Pt  i.  oh.  vii.  8Bd  pt  il  oh.  iv.    Compare  his  Bennon,  "On  tl,e  Ignorance  of  M«n- 
^  Sermons  preached  at  the  Rolls  Chapel,'  sermon  xv.  pp.  150— 160> 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  xix 


to  understand  the  general  scheme  of  things,  and  therefore  quite  unfit  to 
criticize  and  judge  God's  doings.  He  has  revealed  himself  to  us,  not  for 
speculative,  but  for  practical  purposes,  and  it  is  our  true  wisdom  to  know 
that  we  only  kuow  him  sufficiently  for  our  practical  guidance  (ch.  xxyiii. 
12—28). 

§   6.    LlTEBATHRB   OF  JOB. 

The  earliest  commentary  on  Job  is  that  by  Ephrem  Syrus,  Presbyter  of 
Edessa,  who  lived  in  the  fourth  century  after  Christ.  This  work  was 
translated  from  the  Syriac  into  Latin  by  Petrus  Benedictus,  and  will  be 
found  in  his  '  Opera  Syriaca,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  1 — 20  (Rome,  1740).  It  is  scanty, 
and  of  little  value.  Jei-ome's  translation,  which  forms  a  part  of  the 
Vulgate,  is,  on  the  contrary,  of  the  highest  importance,  and  should  be 
consulted  by  all  students,  as,  practically,  a  most  valuable  commentary. 
The  work  called  Jerome's  '  Commentary  on  Job  ' '  appears  not  to  be 
genuine,  and  may  safely  be  neglected.  Some  '  Annotations  '  by  Augustine, 
Bishop  of  Hippo  about  A.d.  390 — 4)10,  are  interesting,  and  will  be  found 
in  most  editions  of  that  author.  The  most  important,  however,  of  the 
patristic  commentaries  is  that  by  Gregory  the  Great,  entitled,  '  Expositiones 
in  Job,  sive  Moralium  Libri  xxxv.,'  published  separately  at  Rome  in  1476, 
and  at  Paris  in  1495.  This  exposition  throws  little  light  on  the  text,  but 
is  valued  for  moral  and  spiritual  purposes.  It  belongs  to  the  end  of  the 
sixth  century. 

Among  Jewish  comments  the  most  valuable  are  those  of  Aben  Ezra' 
(a.P,  1168),  Nachmanides'  (a.d.  1250),  and  Levi  Ben  Gershon  *  (a.d.  1326). 
An  Arabic  paraphrase  by  Saadia,  and  an  Arabic  commentary  by  Tanchnm, 
are  praised  by  Ewald.'  The  commentary  by  Cardinal  Caietan'  (a.d.  1535), 
the  paraphrase  of  Titebnann'  (a.d.  1547),  the  commentary  of  Stench' 
(a.D.  1567),  the  partial  commentary  of  De  Huerga '  (a.d.  1582),  and  the 
aomplete  one  of  Zuniga"  (a.d.  1584),  evince  the  industry,  and  in  some 
respects  the  learning,  of  scholars  belonging  to  the  unreformed  Church 
during  the  course  of  the  sixteenth  century,  but  are  unsatisfactory,  since 
their  writers  were  wholly  unacquainted  with  Hebrew.  The  best  work  of 
this  period,  written  at  the  very  dose  of  the  century,  and  displaying  con- 

•  '  In  HiBtoriam  Jobi  Commentariornm  Libri  ili.,'  Basle,  1527. 

«  « Commentarius  in  Jobum,'  publighed  ia  the  '  Biblia  Eabbinioa  Bombergi»iui,'  Venice 
.525-6. 

•  •  Commentarius  in  Jobum,'  published  in  the  same. 

•  •  Commentarius  in  Jobum,'  Naples,  1487. 

•  'Das  Buoh  Ijob,'  Yoyrede,  p,  xi. 

•  *  Commentarii  in  Librum  Jobi,'  Borne,  1535. 

»  'Elucidatio  Paraphrastioa  in  Jobum,'  Antwerp,  1547. 

•  •  Enanatioues  in  Librum  Jobi,'  Venice,  1567. 

•  « Oommentaiia,  in  xviii.  Priora  Capita  Jobi,'  CompJuti,  1581 
••  '  C«mmentaria  in  Librum  Job,'  Toledo,  1584. 


INTRODUdTION  TO 


siderable  knowledge  of  the  original,  is  that  of  De  Pineda '  (a.d.  1597 — 1600), 
which  contains  a  resume  of  all  that  is  mo^t  valuable  in  the  labours  of  his 
Roman  Catholic  predecessors.  Among  the  early  Reformers,  Bucer,' 
CEcolampadius,'  and  Calvin'  produced  works  on  Job,  which  have  some 
merit,  the  '  Conciones  '  of  Calvin  having  an  especial  value.  These  publi- 
cations were  followed  by  the  very  elaborate  commentauy  of  Mercer'  in 
1575,  and  by  the  paraphrase  and  commentary  of  Theodore  Beza  '  in  1583. 
Nothing  further  of  much  importance  was  published  on  the  continent  by 
divines  of  the  Reformed  communions  until  the  translation,  commentary, 
and  paraphrase  of  Le  Clero'  (a.d.  1731),  which  was  followed  in  1737  by  the 
great  work  of  A.  Schultens,"  to  which  the  present  writer  begs  to  acknow- 
ledge his  great  obligations.  Eosenmuller  says,  in  his  notice  of  this  work, 
"  Schultens  surpasses  all  the  commentators  who  have  preceded  him  in  an 
exact  and  refined  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew  tongue,  and  also  of  the  Arabic, 
as  well  as  in  varied  erudition  and  acuteness  of  judgment.  His  chief  faults 
are  prolixity  in  the  statement  and  examination  of  the  views  of  others,  and 
an  indulgence  in  etymological  fancies  which  have  no  solid  foundation."  • 

In  England,  the  earliest  work  on  Job  of  any  importance  was  that  of 
Samuel  Wesley,''  published  in  1736,  almost  simultaneously  with  the  magnum 
opus  of  Schultens.  This  book  was  not  one  of  much  value,  but  it  was 
followed,  in  1742,  by  the  scholarly  production  of  Dr.  Richard  Grey,"  in 
which  the  Latin  version  of  Schultens,  and  a  large  number  of  Schultens's 
notes,  were  reproduced  for  the  benefit  of  his  own  countrymen,  while  the 
text  also  was  placed  before  them,  both  in  Hebrew  type  and  in  Roman 
characters.  Attention  having  been  thus  drawn  in  England  to  the  labours 
of  foreign  scholars  on  the  Book  of  Job,  several  other  works  on  the  subject 
were  published  by  Englishmen  in  rapid  succession,  as  especially  the  follow- 
ing:  'A  Dissertation  on  the  Book  of  Job,  its  Nature,  Argument,  Age,  and 
Author,'  by  John  Garnett,  B.D.  (London,  1761)  ;  '  The  Book  of  Job,  'with 
a  Paraphrase  from  the  third  verse  of  the  third  chapter,  where  it  is  supposed 

'  •  Commentarionun  in  Librum  Job  Libri  xiii.,  adjnncta  singulis  oapitibus  sua  Taranl  imm  • 
Matriti,  1597-1601.  "I'liragi, 

'  '  Commentaria  in  Librnm  Job,'  Strasburg,  ]  528. 
'  '  Exegemata  in  Job  et  in  Danielem,'  Basle,  1532. 
'  '  Conciones  in  Jobum,'  Geneva,  1569. 

*  '  Commentarii  in  Librum  Job,'  Geneva,  1575. 

'  •  Jobus,  Oommentario  et  Paraphrasi  Illustratus,'  Geneva  1583 

"VeterisTestamenti  Libri  Hagiographi,  Jobus,  Davidis'pealmi,  Salomonis  Proverbia. 
Concionatrix,  et  Canticum  Cantieorum  ex  translatione  Job.  Clerioi,  cum  eiusdem  Com 
menteno  phi_lologico  in  omnes  memoratos  libros.  et  paraphra.si  in  Jobum  et  P8almo7 
Amsterdam,  1731.  ^ooimuoj 

Leyden!'l737°''''  ""^  ^°^'  ^*"''''°'  "^  ^'''"'""'  ^°'"""'  '*  Oommentario  Perpetno, 

•  'Elenolius  Interpretum  Jobi'  (prefixed  to  his  •  Scholia  in  Jobum  '),  p  xxxvi 
II    Dissertationes  et  Conjecturae  in  Librum  Jobi,'  London,  1736 

.nt,-«n,,„''"'  ^"^n  ""  ^^f  ^?"^°«  •"«*»««  I>i"«"8.  cum  Versione  Latin,  A.  Sohnltena 
Botisque  ex  ejus  Commentario  excerptis,'  London,  1742.  oonniten* 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  xxi 


the  metre  begins,  to  the  seventh  verse  of  the  forty-second  chapter,  where 
it  ends,'  by  Leonard  Chappelow,  B.D.,  Arabic  Professor  (Cambridge  and 
London,  1752) ;  and  '  An  Essay  towards  a  new  English  Version  of  the 
Book  of  Job,  from  the  original  Hebi'ew,  with  a  Commentary,'  by  Thomas 
Heath  (London,  1755).  It  cannot  be  said  that  these  books  were  of  any 
great  importance,  or  advanced  much  either  the  critical  knowledge  of  the 
text  of  Job  or  a  correct  and  judicious  exegesis. 

No  great  progress  was  made  in  either  of  these  two  respects  until  the 
commencement  of  the  present  century.  Then,  in  1806,  Rosenmiiller 
published  the  first  edition  of  his  remarkable  work,^  which  he  afterwards, 
in  1824,  republished  in  an  enlarged  form,  in  his  '  Scholia  in  Vetus 
Testamentum,'  pars  qninta.  This  was  a  great  advance  on  all  previous 
efforts  ;  and  it  was  shortly  followed  by  the  even  more  striking  production 
of  Ewald,  '  Das  Buch  Ijob '  (Gottingen,  1836) — a  work  exhibiting  profound 
learning  and  great  originality  of  genius,  but  disfigured  by  many  wild 
speculations,  and  involving  an  entire  denial  of  the  inspiration  of  Scripture. 
Comments  by  Umbreit,  Hahn,'  Hirzel,"  and  Dillmann  *  have  since  issued 
from  the  German  press,  which  are  generally  characterized  by  diligence  and 
ingenuity,  but  lack  the  genius  of  Ewald,  while  they  avoid,  however,  spme 
of  his  eccentricities.  The  latest  German  comment  of  importance  is  that 
of  Merx,  a  well-known  Orientalist,  which  contains  a  Hebrew  text,  a  new 
translation,  and  an  introduction,  together  with  critical  notes.  This  work 
exhibits  much  learning,  but  a  singular  lack  of  judgment." 

M.  Kenan's  '  Livre  de  Job  '  (Paris,  1859)  is  the  last  word  of  French 
scholarship  on  the  subject  before  us.  It  has  all  his  merits,  but  also  all  his 
defects.  The  style  is  clear,  eloquent,  brilliant;  the  appreciation  of  the 
literary  excellences  of  Job,  keen  ;  the  scholarship  advanced,  if  not  faultless ; 
but  the  exegesis  leaves  much  to  be  desired. 

In  England,  during  the  present  century,  the  most  important  work  which 
has  appeared,  dealing  exclusively  with  Job,  is  that  of  Dr.  Lee.'  Published 
in  the  year  1837,  after  the  second  edition  of  Bosenmiiller  had  seen  the 
light,  but  before  the  great  work  of  Ewald,  this  volume  is  deserving  of  the 
attentive  consideration  of  all  students.  It  is  the  composition  of  an  advanced 
Hebraist,  and  of  one  well  versed,  besides,  in  other  Oriental  studies.  It 
exhibits  much  critical  acumen,  and  great  independence  of  thought  and 
judgment.  No  subsequent  commentary  wholly  supersedes  it ;  and  it  will 
probably  long  retain  a  special  value  on  account  of  its  copious  illustrations 

•  •  Jobus:  Latine  Vertit  et  Annotationo  Perpetoa  illuBtravit,'  B.  T.  0.  BosenmuUer, 
Leipsic,  1806. 

•  Published  in  1850. 

»  Published  in  the  •  Kuiz-Gefasstes  Exegetisohes  Handbuoh  znm  Alten  Testament,' 
Leipsio,  1849  aod  1852  (1st  and  ioi  edit.). 

•  Published  in  the  third  edition  of  the  same.  '  Published  in  1871. 

•  '  The  Book  of  the  Patriarch  Job,  translated  from  the  Original  Hebrew,  with  an  laUo- 
dvction  mi  »  Commentjuy,'  by  Samuel  Lee,  D.D.,  London,  1837. 


Mil  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OP  JOR 

from  the  Persian  and  the  Arabic,  Other  useful  English  commentaries 
are  those  of  Bishop  Wordsworth  (London,  1865-71),  Canon  Cook  (London, 
1873),*  and  Dr.  Stanley  Leathes  (London,  Paris,  and  New  Tork,  1884).' 
Canon  Cook  also  published  an  important  article  on  Job  (not  altogether 
superseded  by  the  Introduction  to  his  '  Commentary ')  in  Dr,  William 
Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  in  the  year  1863.  An  article  of  less 
value,  but  still  of  some  interest,  will  be  found  in  Kitto's  '  Biblical  Cyclo- 
p88dia'  (Edinburgh,  1856).  Mr.  Eroude's  essay  on  'The  Book  of  Job' 
belongs  to  the  year  1853,  when  it  appeared  in  the  Westminster  Review. 
Highly  ingenious,  and  characterized  by  his  wonted  vigour  and  eloquence, 
it  will  always  be  read  with  pleasure  and  advantage,  but  is  unsatisfactory 
from  a  deficiency  of  critique,  and  a  rather  narrow  prejudice  against 
orthodoxy.  Among  other  minor  works  on  Job  are  '  Qusestionum  in 
JobeidoB  Locos  Vexatos,'  by  Hupfeld,  published  in  1853  ;  '  Animadver- 
siones  Philologicoe  in  Jobum,'  by  Schultens  (Utrecht,  1708) ;  '  Jobi 
Physica  Sacra,'  by  Scheuchzern  (Zurich,  1721)  ;  '  Eleine  Geog^aphisch- 
historische  Abhandlung  zur  Erlauterung  einiger  Stellen  Mosis,  und  Vor- 
nehmlich  des  ganzen  Buchs  Hiob,'  by  Kofih  (Lemgo,  1747) ;  '  ObservE^ 
tiones  Miscellaneas  in  Librum  Job,'  by  Bouillier  (Amsterdam,  1758)  ; 
'  Animadversiones  in  Librum  Job,'  by  Eckermann  (Lubeck,  1779)  ;  '  Notes 
on  tlie  Book  of  Job,'  by  the  Kev.  A.  Barnes  (London,  1847)  ;  '  Comment 
on  Job,'  by  Keil  and  Delitzsch  (in  T.  Clark's  series),  Edinburgh,  1866 ; 
'  The  Book  of  Job,  as  expounded  to  his  Cambridge  Pupils,'  by  Hermann 
Hedwig  Bernard  (Cambridge,  1884)  ;  and  '  Commentary  on  Job,'  by  the 
Rev.  T.  Eobinson,  D.D.,  in  the  'Preacher's  Commentary  on  the  Old 
Testament '  (London,  1884). 

'  Fnbliahod  in  the  •  Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  it.  pp.  1 — 145. 

•  Published  in  the  <  Old  Testament  Commentary  for  English  Beaden,'  of  Bishop  MUooit, 

vol.  iv.  pp.  1 — 73. 


THE   BOOK    OF   JOB. 


Iktboocotobt  Seotiob.    Ob.  i.  ako  n.    Historioal  Aooount  of  Job's  Affliotiox*, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


The  "  Historioal  Introduction  "  to  Job 
extends  to  two  chapters.  In  the  first  nre 
are  given  an  account,  firstly,  of  his  outward 
circumstances — his  abode,  wealth,  family, 
etc.,  and  of  his  character  (vers.  1 — 5); 
secondly,  of  the  circumstances  under  which 
God  allowed  him  to  be  tried  by  nfflio- 
tions  (vers.  6—12) ;  thirdly,  of  the  eaflier 
afflictions  tliemselves  (vers.  13 — 19)  j  and, 
fourthly,  of  his  beliaviour  under  them  (vers, 
20^22).  The  second  chapter  gives,  firstly, 
the  ground  of  liis  further  trial  (vers.  1—6); 
secondly,  the  nature  of  it,  and  his  behaviour 
under  it  (vers.  7—10);  and  thirdly,  the 
coming  of  his  three  friends  to  him,  and 
their  behaviour  (vers.  U — 13).  The  narra- 
tive is  characterized  by  remarkable  simpli- 
city and  directness.  It  lias  a  decided  air 
of  antiquity  about  It,  and  presents  but  few 
Uuguistio  difficulties. 

Ver.  1. — There  was  a  man.  This  opening 
presents  to  us  the  Book  of  Job  as  a  detached 
work,  separate  from  and  independent  of  all 
others.  The  historical  books  are  generally 
united  each  to  each  by  the  vau  connective. 
In  the  land  of  Uz.  Uz,  or  Huz  (Hebrew, 
VV)>  seems  to  have  been .  originally,  like 
Jndah,  Moab,  Aramon,  Bdom,  etc.,  the  name 
of  a  man.  It  was  liome  by  a  sou  of  Nalior, 
the  brother  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  21),  and 
again  by  a  son  of  Dishan,  the  son  of  Seir 
the  Horite  (Gen.  xzxvi.  28).  Some  regard 
it  as  also  ft  personal  name  in  Gen.  x.  23. 
But  from  this  use  it  passed  to  the  de- 
scendants of  one  or  more  of  these  patriarchs, 
and  from  them  to  the  country  or  oountries 
joaL 


which  they  inhabited.  The  "  land  of  Oi " 
is  spoken  of,  not  only  in  this  passage,  but 
also  in  Jer.  xxv.  20  and  Lam.  iv.  21,  These 
last-oited  places  seem  to  show  that  Jere- 
miah's "  land  of  Uz  "  was  in  or  near  Edom, 
and  therefore  south  of  Palestine;  but  as 
Uzzites,  like  so  many  nations  of  these  purta, 
were  migratory,  we  need  not  be  surmised 
if  the  name  Uz  was,  at  different  times, 
attached  to  various  localities.  Arabian  tra- 
dition regards  the  region  of  the  Hauran, 
north-east  of  Palestine,  as  Job's  country. 
The  other  geographical  names  in  the  Book 
of  Job  point  to  a  more  eastern  location,  one 
not  far  remote  from  the  southern  Euphrates, 
and  the  adjacent  parts  of  Arabia.  Sheba, 
Dedan,  Teman,  Buz,  Bhuah,  an«^i  Chesed 
(Casdim)  all  point  to  this  locality.  On  the 
other  baud,  there  is  a  passage  in  the  in- 
scriptions of  Asshor-bani-pal  (oiro.  b.o. 
6S0 — 625)  whieb,  associating  together  the 
names  of  Huz  and  Buz  (Khazu  and  Bazu), 
appears  to  place  them  both  in  Central  Arabia, 
not  far  Itom  the  Jebel  Shammar  ('Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  it  p.  470).  Mjr  own  con- 
clusion wonld  be  that,  while  the  name  "  land 
of  Uz  "  designated  at  various  periods  various 
loealittes.  Job's  "  land  of  Uz "  lay  a  little 
west  of  the  Lower  Euphrates,  on  the  borders 
of  Chaldea  and  Arabia.  Whose  name  was 
Job.  In  the  Hebrew  the  name  is  "  lyyob," 
whence  the  "Eyoub"  of  the  Arabs  and 
the  "Hiob"  of  the  Germans.  It  is  quite 
a  distinct  name  from  that  of  the  third  son 
of  lesacliar  (Gen.  xlvi.  18),  which  is  properly 
expressed  by  "Job,"  being  nW  lyydb  is 
supposed  to  he  derived  from  &(b  (?.%),  "to 
be  hostile,"  and  to  mean  "  cruelly  or  hos- 
tilely  treated,"  in  which  case  we  must  sup- 
pose it  to  have  been  first  given  to  the 
patriarch  in  his  later  life,  and  to  have 
superseded  some  other,  as  "Peter"  super- 
seded  "Simon,"  and  "Paul"   superseded 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  1, 1 — 22, 


"  Sanl."  Aceording  to  a  Jewish  tradition, 
adopted  by  gome  of  the  Christian  Fathers, 
Job's  original  name  was  "Jobab,"  and 
under  this  name  he  reigned  as  King  of 
Edom  (Gen.  xxxvi.  33).  But  this  kingship 
Is  scarcely  compatible  with  the  view  given 
of  Mm  in  the  Book  of  Job.  The  supposed 
connection  of  the  name  of  Juba  with  that 
of  Job  is  very  doubtful.  And  that  man  was 
perfect  Tam  (d;j),  the  word  translated 
"  perfect,"  seems  to  mean  "  complete,  entire, 
not  wanting  in  any  respect."  It  corresponds 
to  the  Greek  teAeios,  and  the  Latin  integer 
(comp.  Horace, '  Od.,'  i.  22. 1, "  Integer  vitse, 
Bcelerisque  pums  ").  It  does  not  mean  "  abso- 
lutely sinless,"  which  Job  was  not  (oomp. 
ch.  ix.  20;  xl.  4).  And  upright.  This  is 
the  exact  meaning  of  ydshdr  (1K(;).  "The 
Book  of  Jasher"  was  "the  Book  of  the 
Upright"  {fii$\lov  TOW  eieovs,  2  Sam.  i.  18). 
One  that  feared  God,  and  eschewed  evil; 
literally,  fearing  God  and  departing  from 
evil.  The  same  testimony  is  given  of  Job 
by  God  himself  in  ver.  8,  and  again  in 
ch.  ii.  S  (comp.  also  Ezek.  xiv.  14,  20). 
We  must  suppose  Job  to  have  reached  as 
near  perfection  as  was  possible  for  man  at 
the  time. 

Yer.  2. — And  there  were  bom  onto  him 
seven  sons  and  three  daughters.  The  n^m- 
bers  three  and  seven,  and  theirprpductjtpn, 
aK~c§rlamly  sacred'  numberai  regarded  as 
SJtrpteSBive^-  ideal-perfection.     But^;his 

i\cif>  pnt  pr-amanf.  thnir  haingalan   historical. 

As  Oanou  Cook  observes,  "  Striking  coinci- 
dences between  outward  facts  and  ideal 
numbers  are  not  uncommon  in  the  purely 
historical  Jjortions  of  Scripture  "  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary,'  vol.  iv.  p.  20).  There  are 
twelve  apostles,  seventy  (7  X  10)  disciples 
seut  out  by  our  Lord,  seven  deacons,  three 
synoptic  Gospels,  twelve  minor  prophets, 
$even  princes  of  Persia  and  Media,  ten  sons 
of  Haman,  three  of  Noah,  Gomer,  Terah, 
Levi,  and  Zemiah,  seven  of  Japhet,  Mizraim, 
Seir  the  Horite,  Gad,  and  Jesse  (1  Chron. 
ii.  13 — 15),  twelve  of  Ishmael,  twelve  of  Jacob, 
etc.  Our  Lord  is  thirty  (3  x  10)  years  old 
when  he  begins  to  teach,  and  his  ministry 
lasts  three  years ;  he  heals  seven  lepers,  casts 
out  of  Mary  Magdalene  seven  dtvils,  speaks 
upon  the  cross  seven  "  words,"  bids  Peter 
forgive  his  brother  "seventy  times  seven," 
etc.  It  is  thus  not  only  in  vision  or  in 
prophecy,  or  in  symbolical  language,  that 
these  "ideal  numbers"  come  to  the  front 
far  more  frequently  than  others,  but  also  in 
the  most  matter-of-fact  histories. 

Ver.  3.— His  substance  also;  literally, 
his  aeguititiim  (from  njg,  acguirere),  but 
Dsed  of  wealth  generally.  Seyen  thousand 
sheep,  and  three  thousand  camels,  and  five 
bundled  yoke  of  oxen,  and  five  hundred  she- 
•ues.     Note,  first  of  all,  the  absence  of 


horses  or  mules  from  this  list — an  indication 
of  high  antiquity.  Horses  were  not  known 
in  Egypt  till  the  time  of  the  shepherd- 
kings  (about  B.o.  1900 — 1650),  who  intro- 
duced them  from  Asia.  None  are  given  to 
Abraham  by  the  Pharaoh  contemporary  with 
him  (Gen.  xiL  16).  We  hear  of  none  as 
possessed  by  the  patriarchs  in  Palestine; 
and,  on  the  whole,  it  iff  not  probable  that 
they  had  been  known  in  Western  Asia  very 
long  before  their  introduction  into  Egypt. 
They  are  natives  of  Central  Asia,  where 
they  are  still  found  wild,  and  passed  gradu- 
ally by  exportation  to  the  more  southern 
regions,  Armenia,  Asia  Minor,  Syria,  Pales- 
tine, Arabia.  Note,  secondly,  that  the  items 
of  Job's  wealth  accord  with  those  of  Abra- 
ham's (Gen.  xii.  16).  Thiidly,  note  that  Job's 
wealth  in  cattle  is  not  beyond  credibility. 
An  Egyptian  lord  of  the  time  of  tlie  fourth 
dynasty  relates  that  he  possessed  above 
1000  oxen  and  cows,  974  sheep,  2,235  .goats, 
and  760  asses  (Eawlinson's  '  Egypt,'  vol.  ii. 
p.  8S).  _  Further,  the  proportion  of  the 
camels  is'  nuticeable,  and  implies  a  resi- 
dence on  the  borders  of  the  desert  (see 
the  comment  on  ver.  1).  And  a  very  great 
household ;  literally,  and  a  very  great  service, 
or  retinue  of  servants.  Oriental  emirs  and 
sheikhs  consider  it  necessary  for  their  dig- 
nity to  maintain  a  nnmber  of  attendants 
and-  retainers  (except,  perhaps,  in  feudal 
times)  quite  unknovm  to  the  West.  Abra- 
ham had  three  hundred  and  eightem 
trained  servants,  bom  in  his. house  (Gen. 
xiv.  14),  Egyptian  households  were  "  full 
of  domestics,"  comprising  attendants  of  all 
kinds— grooms,  artisans,  clerks,  musicians, 
messengers,  and  the  like.  A  sheikh,  situ- 
ated as  Job  was,  would  also  require  a  certain 
number  of  guards,  while  for  his  cattle  he 
would  need  a  large  body  of  shepherds,  ox- 
herds, and  the  like  (see  Birch's  'Egypt 
from  the  Earliest  Times,'  p.  44).  So  that 
this  man  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  men 
of  the  east.  The  Beney  Kedem,  or  "men 
of  the  east,"  literally,  «ons  of  the  east, 
seems  to  include  the  entire  population  be- 
tween Palestine  and  the  Euphrates  (Gen. 
xxix.  1;  Jndg.  vi.  3;  vii.  12;  vili.  10;  Isa. 
xi.  14 ;  Jer.  xlix.  28,  etc.).  Many  tribes  of 
Arabs  are  similarly  designated  at  the  present 
day,  e.g.  the  Beni  Harb,  the  Beni  Suhr,  the 
Beni  Nairn,  the  Beni  Lam,  etc.  It  would 
seem  that  the  Phoenicians  must  have  called 
themselves  Beni  Kedem  when  they  settled 
in  Greece,  since  the  Greeks  knew  them  as 
"  Cadmeians,"  and  made  them  descendants 
of  a  mythic  '•  Cadm-us  "  (Herod.,  v.  57—59). 
The  numo  "Saracens"  is  to  some  extent 
analogous,  since  it  means  "Men  of  the 
morning." 

Ver.  4 — And  his  ions  went  and  feasted. 
"Went  and  feasted"  seems  to  mean  "  wero 


OH.  1. 1—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


in'the  habit  of  feasting"  (Bosenmttller,  Lee). 
In  their  houses.  Each  had  hia  own  resi- 
dence, and  the  residence  was  not  a  tent, 
but  a  "house."  Job  and  hia  aona  were  not 
mere  nomads,  but'  belonged  to  the  settled 
population.— 3>he.Bame-48  implied— by-the 
•♦^oaghiogof  the  oxen"  (ver.  14),  and  indeed 
by  Job's  "  yoke  of  oxen  "  in  ver.  3.  Every 
one  his  day.  Most  commentators  regard 
these  feasts  as  birthday  festivities.  Each 
son  in  his  turn,  when  his  birthday  arrived, 
entertained  his  six  brothers.  Others  think 
that  each  of  the  seven  brothers  had  his  own 
special  day  of  tbe  week  on  which  he  received 
his  brothers  at  Iiis  table,  so  that  the  feasting 
was  continuous.  But  this  scarcely  suits 
the  context.  And  it  is  admitted  that  "  his 
day"  (in  oh.  iii.  1)  means  "his  birthday." 
The  celebration  of  birthdays  by  means  of 
a  feast  was  a  very  widespread  custom  in 
the  East  (see  Gen.  xl.  20;  Herod.,  i.  133; 
iz.  110;  Mark  xiv.  21).  And  sent  and 
called  for  their  three  sisters  to  eat  and  to 
drink  with  them.  This  by  itself  ia  aufScient 
to  ahow  that  the  feasta  were  occasional,  not 
continuous.  Constant  absence  of  daughters, 
day  after  day,  from  the  parental  board  is 
inconceivable. 

Ver.  5. — And  it  was  bo,  when  the  days 
of  their  feasting  were  gone  about ;  rather, 
uohen  the  days  of  the  feasting  had  come 
round;,  i.e.  whenever  one  of  the  birth- 
days had  arrived  in  due  course,  and  the 
feasting  had  taken  place.  That  Job  sent 
and  sanctified  them.  In  the  old  world,  out- 
side the  Mosaic  Law,  the  father  Of  the  family 
was  the  priest,  to  whom  alone  it  belonged 
to  bless,  purify,  and  offer  sacrifice.  Job, 
after  each  birthday-feast,  sent,  it  would 
seem,  for  his  sons,  and  purified  them  by  the 
accustomed  ablutions,  or  possibly  by  some 
other  ceremonial  process,  regarding  it  as 
probable  that,  in  the  course  of  their  feasting, 
they  had  contracted  some  defilement.  It 
would  seem  by  the  next  clause  that  the 
purification  took  place  at  the  close  of  the 
day  of  festivity.  And  rose  up  early  in  the 
morning,  and  offered  burnt  offerings.  Burnt 
offerings  were  instituted  soon  after  the  Fall, 
as  we  learn  from  Gen.  iv.  4,  and  were  in 
common  use  long  before  the  Mosaic  Law 
was  given  (see  Gen.  vUi.  20 ;  xxii.  8, 13  j 
xxxi.  54 ;  Exod.  xviii.  12 ;  '  Records  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  20,  21 ;  vol.  xii.  pp.  49, 71, 
etc.).  The  practice  was  common,  so  far  aa 
appears,  to  all  the  nations  of  antiquity,  except 
the  Persians  (Herod.,  i.  132).  According  to 
the  number  of  them  aU.  One,  apparently, 
for  each  child,  since  each  might  have  sinned 
in  the  way  suggested.  The  offerings  were 
clearly  intend  as  expiatory.  Tor  Job 
said^  It  may  be  that  my  sons  have  sinned, 
and  cursed  God  in  their  hearts.  Two  wholly 
different  meanings  are  assigned  by  good 


Hebraists  to  the  expression  orftt*  -pa.  As- 
cording  to  some,  -jna  has  its  nsual  sense, 
"  to  bless,"  and  D WN  signifies  "  false  gods," 
or  "  idols ; "  according  to  the  others,  who 
form  the  great  majority,  a>rhii  has  its  usual 
sense  of  "God,"  and  -j-o  has  the  unusual 
sense  of  "  curse  "  (so  Buxtorf,  Eosenmiiller, 
Schultens,  Oook,  Stanley  Leatbes,  among 
moderns,  and  among  ancient  authorities,  the 
Septnagint  and  the  Vulgate).  How  the  same 
word  comes  to  have  the  two  wholly  opposite 
senses  of  "to  bless"  and  "to  curse"  has  been 
differently  explained.  Some  think  that,  as 
men  blessed  their  friends  both  on  receiving 
them  and  on  bidding  them  adien,  the  word 
1T3  got  the  sense  of  "bidding  adieu  to," 
"dismissing,"  "renouncing."  Others  re- 
gard the  use  of  -jia  for  "  to  curse  "  as  a  mere 
euphemism,  and  compare  the  use  of  saeer 
and  sacrari  in  Latin,  and  such  expressions 
as  "  Bless  the  stupid  man  I  "  •'  What  a 
hlessed  nuisance  1 "  in  English.  The  male- ' 
dictory  sense  seems  to  be  established  by 
ch.  ii.  9  and  1  Kings  xxi.  10.  By  "cursing 
God  in  their  hearts"  Job  probably  means 
"forgetting  him,"  "putting  him  out  of 
aight,"  "  not  giving  him  the  honour  which 
is  his  due."  Thus  did  Job  continually; 
literally,  as  in  the  margin,  cdl  the  days; 
i.e.  whenever  one  of  the  festival-days 
occurred. 

Ver.  6. — Now  there  was  a  day  when  the 
sons  of  Ood  oame  to  present  themselves 
before  the  Lord.  By  "the  sons  of  God" 
it  is  generally  admitted  that,  in  this  plaoa, 
the  angels  are  meant  (so  again  in  ch. 
xxxviii.  7).  The  meaning  of  the  phrase  ia 
probably  different  in  Gen.  vi.  2.  Angels 
and  men  are  alike  "  sons  of  God,"  as  created 
by  him,  in  his  image,  to  obey  and  serve 
him.  Christ,  the  "  Only  Begotten,"  is  his 
Son  in  quite  a  different  sense.  We  may 
gather,  perhaps,  from  this  place  and  ch. 
ii.  1  that  there  are  fixed  times  at  which 
the  angelic  host,  often  sent  out  by  the 
Almighty  on  distant  errands,  has  to  gather 
together,  one  and  all,  before  the  great 
white  throne,  to  pay  homage  to  their  Lord, 
and  probably  to  give  an  account  of  their 
doings.  And  Satan  came  also  among  them. 
The  word  "  Satan  "  has  the  article  prefixed 
to  it  ( jnBTi)  here  and  elsewhere  in  Job,  aa 
in  Zech.  iii.  1,  2  and  in  Luke  xxii  31; 
Bev.  xii.  9.  Thus  accompanied,  it  is  less  a 
proper  name  than  an  appellative — "  the 
adversary  "  (comp.  1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  i  iairlSiKos'). 
In  1  Chron.  xxi.  1,  without  the  article,  it 
is  undoubtedly  a  proper  name,  aa  in  the 
!N'ew  Testament,  passim.  Accusation  of 
men  before  God  is  one  of  the  special  offloei 
of  the  evil  spirit  (see  Zech.  iii.  1, 2),  who  ia 
"  the  accuser  of  the  brethren,  he  that  acousei 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  1. 1—22. 


them  before  God  day  and  night"  (Eev.  xii. 
10).  Tlie  accueatioiis  that  he  makes  may 
be  either  true  or  false,  but  they  are  so 
often  false  that  his  ordinary  New  Testament 
name  is  i  Sid^o\os,"th6  Slanderer."  The 
existence  of  an  evil  spirit  must  have  been 
known  to  all  who  read  or  heard  the  stoiy 
of  the  fall  of  man  (Qeu.  iii.),  and  the 
descriptive  epithet,  "the  Adversary,"  is 
likely  to  have  been  in  use  from  a,  very  early 
date.  The  notioa  that  the  Satan  of  the 
Old  Testament  is  a  reflex  of  the  Persian 
Ahriman,  and  that  the  Jews  derived  their 
belief  upon  the  subject  from  the  Persians, 
is  quite  untenable.  The  character  and 
position  of  Satan  in  the  Hebrew  system  are 
quite  unlike  those  of  Ahriman  (^Atigro- 
mainyus)  in  the  religion  of  the  Zoroastrians 
(sea  '  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iii.  pp. 
104—113). 

Ver.  7. — And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan, 
Whence  comest  thou  t  God  condescends  to 
address  the  evil  spirit,  and  asks  him  ques- 
tions—not that  anything  could  be  added  to 
his  own  knowledge,  but  that  the  angelB, 
who  were  present  (ver.  6),  might  hear  and 
have  their  attention  ciillcd  to  the  doings  of 
Satan,  which  would  need  to  be  watched  by 
them,  and  sometimes  to  be  restrained  or  (it 
may  be)  prevented  (oomp.  1  Kings  xxii.  20, 
where  again  the  colloquy  is  opened  by  God 
asking  a  question).  Then  Satan  answered 
the  Lord,  and  said,  From  going  to  and  fro  in 
the  earth,  and  from  walking  np  and  down 
in  it.  Satan,  theiefure,  is  not  himself,  like 
the  bulk  of  his  evil  angels,  "  reserved  in 
everlasting  cliaim  under  darkness  to  the 
judgment  of  the  last  day"  (Ju  le  6).  He 
searches  the  whole  eiirth  continually,  never 
pausinjr,  never  resting,  but  "  going  about," 
as  St.'Peter  says  (1  Pet.  v.  8),  "  like  a  roar- 
ing lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour," 
waiting  till  the  coming  of  the  "thousand 
years,"  when  an  angel  will  "  bind  him  with 
a  great  chain,  and  cast  him  into  the  bottom- 
less pit "  (Eev.  XX.  1, 2).  It  will  be  a  happy 
day  for  the  earth  when  that  time  comes. 

Ver.  8. — And  the  lord  said  unto  Satan, 
Hast  thou  considered?  literally,  Soit  thou 
tet  thine  heart  on  ?  equivalent  to  "  Hast 
thou  given  thine  attention  to  ?  "  (comp.  Isa. 
xli.  22 ;  Hag.  i.  5,  7).  My  servant  Job ;  t.e. 
"my  true  servaut,  faithful  in  all  that  he 
does"  (comp.  Heb.  iii.  6).  It  is  a  high 
honour  to  aay  man  for  God  to  acknowledge 
him  as  his  servant  (see  Josh,  i  2 ;  1  Kings 
xi.  13,  etc.).  That  there  ia  none  like  him  in 
the  earth ;  rather, /or  there  is  none  like  him 
(see  the  Eevised  version).  This  is  given  as 
a  reason  why  Satan  should  have  paid  special 
attention  to  his  case,  and  is  a  sort  of  chal- 
lenge :  "  Thou  that  art  always  spying  out 
some  defect  or  other  in  a  righteous  man, 
hast  thou  noted  my  servaut  Job,  and  dis- 


covered any  fault  in  him  ?"  A  perfect  and 
an  upnght  man,  one  that  feareth  God,  and 
esoheweth  evU  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  1). 
Ver.  9, — Then  Satan  answered  the  Lota, 
and  said.  Doth  Job  fear  Ood  for  nought  t 
Satan  insinuates  that  Job's  motive  is  pwcepf 
selfish.-  He  serves  God,  not  for  love  of  Godj_^ 
or  for  love  o'f  goodness,  but  for  what  hej^fs" 
by  it.  Satan  is  too  shrewd  to  endeavour,  as 
JwVb  friends  do  later,  to  pick  holes  in  Job's 
conduct.  No ;  that  is  exemplary.  But  the 
true  character  of  acts  is  determined  by  the 
motive.  What  is  Job's  motive?  flteAoifl, 
not  serve  God  to  gain  his  protection  and 
MefiBlirg?  Siiiiilariy,  in  modem  limesj'  un- 
dly  liibn  argue  that  religious  and  devout 
leiBons  are  religious  and  devout  with  a 
iew  to  their  own  interest,  because  tliey  » 
ixpect  to  gain  by  it,  either  in  this  world,  ot 
jin  the  next,  or  in  both.  This  is  a  form  of 
"SUllffiiBy'WHftU'  it"  is  Impossible  to  escape. 
And  bad  men,  who  are  conscious  to  them- 
selves of  never  acting  except  from  a  selfish 
motive,  may  well  imagine  the  same  of  others. 
It  is  rarely  that  such  an  insinuation  can  be 
disproved.  In  the  present  instance  God  vin- 
dicates his  servant,  and  covers  the  adversary 
with  shame,  as  the  other  adversaries  and 
calumniators  of  righteousness  will  be  covered 
at  the  last  day. 

Ver.  10. — ^'Vg<i  »">«•  ttiop  mafla  aT^  ymi^a 
about  him?  t.e.  " hedgai  liitn„ftrQund,-^o- 
tectcd^Itffi7made~a  sort  of  invisible  fenca 
airout-him;'  through -w!i4<^trno.^vil..80»ldi^^ 
-creep."  This  was  undoubtedly  true.  God 
ftpd  85  protected  him.  But  the  question 
was  not  as  to  this  fact,  but  as  to  Job's  motive. 
Was  it  mere  prudence  ? — tlie  desire  to  secure 
a  continuance  of  this  protection  ?  And  about 
his  house ;  i.e.  "  his  family  " — ^his  sons  and 
daughters — the  members  of  his  household. 
And  about  all  that  he  hath  on  every  side.  Hia 
possessions — land,  houses,  cattle,  live  stock 
of  all  kinds,  furniture,  goods  and  chatlelg. 
Thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands 
(comp.  Fs.  i.  3,  where  it  is  said  of  the  righteout 
man,  that  "whatsoever  he  doeth,  it  Shall 
prosper").  So  it  was  with  Job.  God'a 
blesbing  was  upon  him,  and  success  crowned 
all  his  enterprises.  "The  work  of  his 
hands"  will  include  everything  that  he 
attempted.  And  his  substance  is  increased 
in  the  land.  In  the  former  clause  we  have 
the  cause,  God's  blessing ;  in  the  latter  the 
effect,  a  great  increase  in  Job's  "  suljstance," 
or  "cattle"  (marginal  reading).  (On  the 
final  nunibur  of  his  cattle,  see  ver.  3.) 

Ver.  11.— But  put  forth  thine  hand  now; 
literally,  send  forth  thy  hand,  as  a  man  does 
who  strikes  a  blow  (comp.  Gen.  xxii.  12; 
Exod.  iii.  20 ;  ix.  15,  etc.).  And  touch  all 
that  he  hath ;  or,  smite  all  that  he  hath ;  i.e. 
ruin  him,  strip  bim  of  his  possessions.  And 
\6  Will  ourse  thee  to  thy  foce.     Frofessoi 


OH.  1. 1— 22J 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


Lee  tranelateB,  "If  not,  he  will  bless  thee 
to  thy  face!"  the  LXX.,  "Surely  he  will 
bless  thee  to  thy  face ; "  Caoon  Oook,  "  See 
if  he  will  not  renounce  thee  openly."  But 
the  majority  of  Hebraists  agree  with  the 
Authorijsed  Version.  Satan  su  ggosts  that,  if 
Job  be  stripped  of  hisfJflSSessidnsria-wilU 
openly  oiirse-Gedroad  renouaoaluB  worship. 
Hejre~1ie  did  not  so  mnch  calumniate,  or  lie, 
as  show  the  evil  thoughts  that  were  in  his 
own  heart.  Ko  doubt  he  believed  that  Job 
would  act  as  he  said. 

Ver.  12.— And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan, 
Behold,  all  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power ; 
literally,  in  thy  hand,  as  in  the  margin. 
God  withdraws  his  protection  from  Job's 
P^pjSras^-hrdoes-iKJt 'himself  take  thSm 
away7  as'Satan  had  suggested  (ver.  11)  ;  but 
he  allows  Satan,  who  can  do  nothing  with- 
out his  allowance,  to  deal  with-  them  as  he 
pleases.  As  "God  dispenses  blessinRs  through"" 
tHSarnfelio  host  (Ps.xci.  U,  12;  Heb.i.  14), 
so  he,  sometimes  at  any  rate,  allows  spirits 
of  evil  to  be  the  ministers  of  his  chastise- 
ments. Only  upon  himself  put  not  forth 
thine  hand.  The  penon  of  Job  was  not  to 
be  touched  as  yet.  He  was  to  be  injured 
only  in  his  belongings.  So  Satan  went 
forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  Having 
obtained  a  permi^ion  whi^„jbS_jtlSEgM 
w<i«rld'  gefvennis" purpose,'  SatanVdid  jjot 
.delayrJM»t**efflptty^ep!nted;t6"taKa3van-^ 
t»g&^fttre5|ffira|t2E|SKfiStIiiB»i  -VTo  Be  in* 
ttre"pfeience~of  God  must  be  an  intense 
pain  to  the  evil  one. 

Ver.  13. — And  there  was  a  day  when  his 
sons  and  his  daughters  wore  eating  and 
drinking  wine  in  their  eldest  brother's 
house.  .  One  of  the  birthdays,  the  eldest 
brother's  probably,  had  come  round,  and  the 
ordinary  gathering  (see  ver.  1)  bad  taken 
place — the  feasting  and  drinking  had  begun, 
while  the  father,  remaining  in  his  own  house, 
was  perhaps  interceding  with  God  for  his 
children,  or  anxiously  considering  the  pos- 
sibility that,  in  their  light-hearted  merri- 
ment, they  might  have  put  God  away 
altogether  from  their  thoughts,  and  so  have 
practically  renounced  him,  when  the  series 
of  calamities  began.  How  often  calamity 
comes  to  us  when  we  are  least  expecting  it, 
when  all  seems  quiet  about  us,  when  every- 
thing is  prospering — ^nay,  even  when  a  high 
festival-time  has  come,  and  the  joy-bells  are 
sounding  in  our  ears,  and  our  hearts  are 
elated  within  us  I  Job  was,  at  any  rate, 
spared  the  sudden  plunge  from  exuberant 
joy  into  the  depths  of  woe.  It  was  his  habit 
to  preserve  an  even  temper,  and  neither  to 
be  greatly 'exalted,  nor,  unless  under  an 
extremity  of  suffering,  to  be  greatly  depressed. 
He  was  now,  however,  about  to  be  subjected 
(o  a  fleiy  trial. 

Ver.  14, — And  there  oame  a  messsenger 


unto  Job,  and  said.  The  oxen  were  plongh- 
iag,  and  the  asses  (literally,  the  she-asees) 
feeding  beside  them  (literally,  at  their  hand). 
Note  that,  notwithstanding  the  festival, 
labour  was  still  going  on;  there  was  no 
general  holiday;  the  oxen  were  at  work  in 
the  field,  not  perhaps  all  of  them,  but  the 
greater  number,  for  the  ploughing-time  is 
short  in  the  Oriental  countries,  and  the 
"earing"  is  all  done  at  the  same  lime. 
The  bulk  of  Job's  labourers  were  probably 
engaged  in  the  business,  and  they  had 
brought  the  asses  with  them,  probably  to 
keep  them  under  their  eye,  lest  thieves 
should  carry  them  off,  when  the  catastrophe 
related  in  the  next  verse  occurred. 

Ver.  15.— And  the  Sabeans  (literally, 
Sheba)  fell  upon  them,  and  took  them  away. 
The  Sabeans  were  the  principal  people  of 
Arabia  in  ancient  times,  and  the  name 
seems  to  be  used  sometimes  in  the  general 
sense  of  "Arabs"  (see  Ps.  Ixxii.  10,  15; 
Jer.  vi.  20).  We  may  suppose  (hat  here, 
either  the  general  sense  is  intended,  or,  if 
the  specific  one,  then  that,  at  the  date 
whereto  the  story  of  Job  belongs,  there  were 
Sabeans  in  Eastern  as  well  as  in  Southern 
Arabia,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Upper 
Persian  Gulf  as  well  as  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Indian  Ocean.  The  plundering 
habits  of  all  the  Arab  tribes  are  well  known. 
Strabo  says  that  the  Sabeans,  even  at  the 
height  of  their  prosperity,  made  excursions 
for  the  sake  of  plunder  into  Arabia  Petiaea 
and  even  Syria  (Strab.,  xvi.  4)  Yea,  they 
have  slain;  rather,  they  slew,  or  they  smote. 
The  servants ;  literally,  the  young  men ;  i.e. 
the  labourers  who  were  engaged  in  plough- 
ing, and  would  be  in  duty  bound  to  resist 
the  carrying  off'  of  the  cattle.  With  the 
edge  of  the  sword.  Tlie  lance  is  the  chief 
weapon  of  the  modern  Budouin,  but  it  may 
have  been  different  anciently.  Or  the  ex- 
pression used  may  merely  mean  "with 
weapons  of  war."  And  I  only  am  escaped 
alone  to  tell  thee.  Professor  Lee  trans- 
lates, *'  And  I  have  hardly  escaped  alone  to 
tell  thee." 

Ver.  16. — While  he  was  yet  speaking; 
literally,  he  yet  speaking;  en  rovTov 
\a\ovi'Tos,  LXX.  The  writer  hurries  his 
words  to  express  the  rapidity  with  which 
one  announcement  followed  another  (see 
vers.  17, 18).  There  came  also  another,  and 
said,  The  fire  of  Ood  is  fallen  from  heaven. 
"The  fire  of  God"  is  undoubtedly  light- 
ning (oomp.  Numb.  xi.  1 — 3;  2  Kings  i. 
10,  14;  Ps.  l^xviii.  21).  This  Satan,  under 
permission,  might  wield,  as  being  "  the 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  "  (Eph.  ii.  2) ; 
but  there  is,  no  doubt,  something  very  extra- 
ordinary in  a  storm  extending  over  the 
pastures  occupied  by  nine  thousand  sheep, 
and  destroyine  the  whole  of  them  (Oook) 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  r.  1—22. 


Still,  it  cannot  be  said  that  such  a  storm  is 
impossible;  and  perhaps  the  damage  done 
wa«  not  greater  than  that  which  followed 
on  the  seventh  Egyptian  plague  (see  Exod. 
ix.  18 — 26).  And  hath  burned  up  the  sheep, 
and  the  servants ;  literally,  the  young  men  ; 
i.e.  the  shepherds  who  were  in  attendance 
upon  the  sheep.  And  consumed  them ; 
literally,  devoured  them.  Fire  is  often  said 
to  "  devour "  what  it  destroys.  "  The 
Egyptians,"  says  Herodotus,  "believe  fire 
to  be  a  live  animal,  which  eats  whatever  it 
san  seize,  and  then,  glutted  with  the  food, 
dies  with  the  matter  which  it  feeds  upon  " 
'Herod.,  iii.  16).  And  I  only  am  escaped 
alone  to  tell  thee  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  15). 

Ver.  17.— While  he  was  yet  speaking, 
there  came  also  another  (see  the  comment 
on  ver.  16).  The  exact  repetition  of  a 
clause,  without  the  alteration  of  a  word  or 
a  letter,  is  very  archaic  (comp.  Gen.  i.  4,  8, 
13, 19,  23,  31 ;  and  for  another  repetition, 
Gen.  i.  10,  12,  18,  21,  25).  And  said,  The 
Chaldeans;  literally,  the  Caidim  (nn'^'S), 
which  is  the  word  uniformly  used  in  the 
Hebrew  where  the  Authorized  Version  has 
"Chaldeans"  or  "Chaldees."  The  native 
name  seems  to  have  been  Kdldi  or  Kalda^, 
whence  the  Greek  XoXSaioi,  and  the  Latin 
Chaldaei.  It  is  very  difficult  to  account  for 
the  Hebrews  having  substituted  a  sibilant 
for  the  liquid;  but  it  was  certainly  done 
from  the  earliest  period  of  their  literature 
(Gen.  xi.  31)  to  the  latest  (see  Targums, 
passim).  Some  derive  the  Hebrew  Caidim 
from  "Chesed,"  one  of  the  sons  of  Nahor 
(Gen.  xxii.  22) ;  but  Abraham  left  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees  before  Chesed  was  born  (Gen. 
xxii.  20).  And  there  is  no  evidence  of  any 
connection  between  Chesed,  who  was  born 
at  Haran,  and  the  Babylonian  C3haldeans. 
The  Chaldeans  were  probably  early  settlers 
in  Babylonia ;  by  degrees  they  were  pressed 
to  the  south,  and  gave  the  name  of  Chaldea 
to  Lower  Babylonia,  or  the  tract  nearest  to 
the  Persian  Gulf  (Strab.,  xvi.  1,  §  66; 
Ptolemy,  '  Geographia,'  v.  20).  From  a 
remote  date  they  were  a  settled  and  civilized 
people;  but  no  doubt  originally  they  had 
the  same  predatory  instincts  as  their  neigh- 
bours. Made  out  three  hands.  Professor 
Lee  translates,  "  appointed  three  captains," 
which  is  a  possible  meaning  of  the  words ; 
but  the  weight  of  authority  supports  the 
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version.  And 
fell  upon  the  camels.  Perhaps  the  most 
valuable  part  of  Job's  possessions.  Three 
thousand  camels  would  be  regarded  as  a 
splendid  capture  by  any  body  of  Oriental 
marauders.  And  have  carried  them  away, 
yea,  and  slain  the  servants  (literally,  the 
young  men,  as  in  ver.  16)  with  the  edge 
«f  the  sword ;  and  I  only  am  escaped  alone 


to  tell  thee  (compare  the  comment  on  ver. 
15). 

Ver.  18.— While  he  was  yet  speaking, 
there  came  also  another,  and  said  (see  the 
comment  on  vei.  16),  Thy  sons  and  thy 
daughters  were  eating  and  drinking  wine  in 
their  eldest  brother's  house  (oomp.  ver.  13). 
It  is  a  common  proverb  that  "  misfortunes 
never  come  singly."  Shakespeare  says  they 
"come  not  single  foes,  but  in  battalions." 
Still,  so  overwhelming  a  series  of  calamities 
falling  upon  a  single  individual  all  in  one 
day  could  not  but  strike  those  who  heard 
of  them  as  abnormal,  and  almost  certainly 
supernatural.  So  Job's  friends  concluded 
(ch.  V.  17). 

Ver.  19. — ^And,  behold,  there  came  a  great 
wind  from  the  wilderness;  rather,  from 
across  the  wilderness — a  wind  which  began 
in  the  region  lying  on  the  other  side  of  the 
wilderness,  and  sweeping  across  it,  came 
with  full  force  upon  the  inhabited  tract 
where  Job  and  his  sons  were  dwelling. 
The  desert  winds  are  often  very  violent. 
Generally  they  are  laden  with  heavy  clouds 
of  fine  sand,  which  cause  intolerable  dis- 
comfort and  thirst;  but  when  they  sweep 
over  a  rooky  and  gravelly  region,  they  are 
simply  of  extreme  violence,  without  other 
distressing  feature.  They  then  resemble 
the  hurricanes  or  tornadoes  of  the  West 
Indies.  We  may  reasonably  connect  this 
hurricane  with  the  thunderstorm  of  ver.  16. 
And  smote  the  four  oorners  of  the  house, 
and  it  fell.  The  "  houses  "  of  the  East  are 
not  the  solid  structures  of  heavy  timber, 
brick,  and  stone  to  which  we  of  the  West 
are  accustomed,  but  light  fabrics  of  planks 
and  palisades,  thatched  mostly  with  reeds. 
Houses  of  this  kind,  when  the  rain  descends, 
and  the  winds  blow  and  beat  against  them 
(Matt.  vii.  6),  readily  fall.  Upon  the  young 
men;  rather,  the  young  persons.  Na'ar  (nyj) 
is  of  both  genders  in  early  Hebrew  (see  Gen. 
xxiv.  14,  etc.).  And  they  are  dead ;  and  I 
only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee.  Again, 
the  calamity  has  a  completeness  which 
marks  it  as  supernatural.  The  fall  of  a 
house  does  not  usually  destroy  all  the 
inmates. 

Ver.  20.— Then  Job  arose.  Not  tilLihe 
last  calamity  was  announced  did  Job  stir. 
The  loss  of  his  wealth  little  moved  him. 
Btrt- when  "he  heard  that  lis  oMldreirwere 
destroyed,  all  of  them  "  af  ofiT  tBlfswoop," 
then  be  could  endure  no ^phgeKTiut^rose 
-ftom  the  Seat  on  whioE  hcTwas  sutmgj'and 
.showed  forth  his  grief.  First  he  rent  -his- 
inantle',  -"the  outer  robe  worn  by  men  of 
rank  "  (Cook) — a  customary  sign  of  grief  in 
the  ancient  world  (Gen.  xxxvii.  29,34 ;  xUv. 
13;  1  Kings  xxi.  27;  2  Kings  xix.  1 ;  Esth.  iv. 
1 ;  Joel  ii.  13 ;  Herod.,  viii.  99  ;  Livy,  i.  13, 
etc.);   then  he  shaved  his  head — another 


OH.  1. 1—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


lesi  usnal  but  still  not  uncommon  sign  of 
grief,  forbidden  under  tlie  Law  of  the  Jews 
(Lev.  xxi.  5;  Deut.  xiv.  1),  but  widely 
practised  by  the  Gentiles  (Isa.  xv.  2 ;  Jer. 
xlvii.  5 ;  xlviii.  37 ;  Herod.,  ii.  36 ;  ix.  24 ; 
Plut.,'Vit.  Pelop.,'  §  34;  Q.  Ourt.,'Vit.  Alex,,' 
X.  5,  §  17).  And  fell  down  upon  the  gronnd, 
and  wondiipped.  After  giving  vent  to  his 
natural  grief.  Job  made  an  act  of  adoration. 
Recognizing  the  fact  that  adversity,  as  well 
as  prosperity  comes  from  God,  and  sub- 
mitting himself  to  the  Divine  will,  he 
"worshipped."  How  often  has  his  act 
flashed  across  the  minds  of  Christians,  and 
enabled  them,  in  their  dark  hour,  to  imitate 
him,  and  repeat  his  words,  "The  Lord 
gave,"  etc.  I 

Ver.  21— And  said,  Waked  came  I  on*;  of 
my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return 
thither.  There  is  some  difficulty  in  the 
word  "  thither,"  since  no  man  returns  to  his 
mother's  womb  (John  iii.  4),  at  death  or 
otherwise.  The  expression  must  not  be 
pressed.  It  arises  out  of  the  analogy,  con- 
stantly felt  and  acknowledged,  bg^segft^ 
"mother"  earth  and  u  man's  actual  motKer 
(conlp:'^'tt-<«si3tr4^.— -Tho-Lf»d-gave,  -and 
the  Lord  hath  taken  away.  Job  is  here 
represented  as  knowing  God  by  his  name 


"Jehovah,"  though  elsewhere  the  "great 
Name"  appears  once  only  in  the  words  of 
Job  (ch.  xii.  9),  and  never  in  the  words  oi 
his  friends.  The  natural  conclusion  is  that 
the  name  was  known  in  the  Ian"!  of  Uz  at 
the  time,  but  was  very  rarely  used — scarcely, 
except  in  moments  of  excitement.  Blessed 
be  the  Name  of  the  Lord ;  literally,  may 
the  Name  of  Jehovah  he  blessed  1  The  em- 
phatic word  is  kept  for  the  last.     According 

htrffiSP'(vSri!)!^ffiSwOTria'TOat  "he" 
opettlyand-resSlnfely  Messes  eJod-.*  -'ThateHie 
sal!ttS"^ord'iB used  itfitg-t-w^o  op^isite  senses 
rather  accentuates  the  antithesis. 

Ver.  22. — ^In  all  this  Job  sinned  not.  It 
was  only  the  commencement  of  the  proba- 
tion ;  but,  so  far,  at  any  rate.  Job  had  not 
sinned — ^he  had  preserved  his  integrity,  had 
spoken  and  done  rightly.  Nor  charged  God 
foolishly ;  literally,  gave  not  folly  to  God, 
which  is  explained  to  mean  either  "  did  not 
attribute  to  God  anything  inconsistent  with 
wisdom  and  goodness "  (Delitzsoh,  Merx), 
or  "did  not  utter  any  foolishness  against 
God"  (Ewald,  Dillmann,  Cook).  The 
latter  is  probably  the  true  meaning  (comp. 
ch.  vi.  6 ;  xxiv.  12). 


flOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  hero  of  the  poem.  I.  The  patriarch's  name.  Job.  1.  Historical. 
Not  fictitious,  but  real  (Ezek.  xiv.  14 ;  Jas.  v.  H).  Even  if  the  Book  of  Job  proceeded 
from  the  brilliant  Solomonio  period,  the  person  of  Job  must  be  looked  for  in  remote 
patriarchal  times.  2.  Significant.  Meaning  "Persecuted,"  or  "Repenting,"  if  not 
better  connected  with  a  root  denoting  "joyous  exultation."  Scripture  names  are  fre- 
quently suggestive  of  traits  in  character  (e.g.  Jacob,  Peter,  Barnabas)  or  points  in 
history  (e.g,  Abraham,  Israel,  Benjamin,  Samuel).  3.  Hlustrious.  Allied  to  that  of 
princes  (Gen.  xlvi.  13 ;  xxxvi.  33),  like  whom  probably  he  was  descended  from  the 
father  of  the  faithful  (Gen.  xxv.  6).  The  piety,  no  less  than  the  intellectual  endow- 
ments, of  ancestors  sometimes  reappears  in  their  posterity,  4.  Ebnoured.  Commended 
by  God  (Ezek.  xiv.  14),  extolled  by  St.  James  (v.  11),  immortalized  by  the  Hebrew 
bard, 

II.  The  patriarch's  cottntiw.  Uz.  1,  Heathen.  Though  considerably  civilized, 
as  surviving  monuments  attest,  the  sons  of  the  Bast  were  not  embraced  within  the 
Abrahamic  covenant,  in  which  respect  they  fell  behind  the  sons  of  Israel  (Kom.  ix.  4). 
For  countries,  as  for  individuals,  the  institutions  of  religion  are  a  higher  honour  and  a 
greater  privilege  than  the  blessings  of  civilization.  Yet:  2.  Not  Ood-forsalcen.  If 
Job's  countrymen,  like  Abraham's,  were  addicted  to  idolatry  (oh.  xxxi.  26 — 28),  it  is 
apparent  that  a  remnant  still  adhered  to  the  primeval  faith  of  mankind.  Probably  no 
age  or  people  has  ever  been  wholly  bereft  of  light  from  heaven  or  of  the  gracious 
influences  of  God's  Spirit.  In  the  darkest  times  and  most  idolatrous  lands  God  has 
been  able  to  find  a  seed  to  serve  him  (1  Kings  xix.  18 ;  Kom.  xi.  4,  5). 

in.  The  patbiarou's  piett.  1.  Ferfect,  Used  of  Noah  (Gen.  vi.  9)  and  of 
Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  1) ;  describes  the  patriarch's  religious  character  with  reference  to 
itself  as  (1)  complete,  full-orbed,  well-proportioned,  thoroughly  symmetrical,  pcesessing 
all  the  attributes  and  qualities  indispensable  to  spiritual  manhood — an  ideal  after 
which  Old  Testament  saints  strove  (Ps.  cxix.  6)  and  New  Testament  believers  aspired 
(Acts  xxiv.  16),  and  which  by  Christ  (Matt.  v.  48),  Paul  (1  Thess.  v.  23),  and  by  St.  James 
(L  4)  is  propounded  as  the  goal  of  Christian  attainment ;  and  as  (2)  sincere,  clear  and 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oa.  1. 1— 22 


transparent  in  motive,  single  and  undivided  in  aim,  pure  and  unmixed  in  affection, 
without  guile,  without  hypocrisy,  without  duplicity — a  quality  again  exemplified  by 


.6).    2.  Upright.  ...  .... 

which  waB  "straight,"  or  without  deviation  (i.e.  conscious;  Eccles.  viL  20),  in  either 
thought  or  act  from  the  prescribed  path  of  duty,  and  also  distinguishing  it  from  the 
"crooked  ways"  of  the  ungodly  (Ps.  cxxv.  i,  5;  Prov.  ii.  15),  against  which  saints 
are  warned  (Josh.  i.  7 ;  Prov.  iv.  25,  27),  and  which  they  strive  to  shun  (Ps,  oi.  8 ; 
Heb.  xiii.  18).  3.  Qod-fearing.  Setting  forth  the  aspect  which  Job's  piety  main- 
tained towards  God — an  outlook  not  of  dark,  slavish  terror,  but  of  bright  filial  reverence 
and  holy  awe,  such  solemn  and  profound  veneration  as  a  contemplation  of  the  Divine 
character  is  fitted  to  inspire  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  7;  xcix.  3),  as  Abraham  cherished  (Gen,  xxiL 
12),  as  is  inculcated  upon  Cliristians  (Heb.  xii.  28),  and  as  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all 
true  greatness  (Ps.  cxi.  10 ;  ch.  xxviii.  28 ;  Prov.  i.  7).  4.  Sin-hating.  Completing 
the  portrait  of  the  patriarch's  religious  character  by  depicting  the  attitude  in  which  it 
stood  to  moral  evil,  whether  in  himself  or  in  the  world  around,  which  was  not  a  position 
of  indifference  or  neutrality,  but  of  active  and  determined  hostility — a  necessary  feature 
in  the  character  of  the  good  man  as  portiayed  in  Scripture  (Ps,  xxxiv.  14;  xxxvii. 
27 ;  Prov,  xiv.  6 ;  Eph.  v.  11 ;  1  John  iii.  3,  6). 

IV.  The  pathiaboh's  estate,  1.  Extensive,  It  comprised  seven  thousand  sheep, 
bespeaking  him  an  opulent  fluckmaster ;  three  thousand  camels,  implying  that  he  acted 
as  a  princely  merchant;  five  hundred  yoke  of  oxen,  pointing  to  a  large  farm ;  and  five 
hundred  she-assos,  which  were  highly  prized  for  their  milk ;  while  along  with  these  it 
embraced  "  a  very  great  household,"  or  a  multitude  of  servants,  such  as  ploughmen, 
shepherds,  camel-drivers,  besides  guards,  overseers,  traffickers,  and  scribes ;  from  which 
it  is  certain  that  the  patriarch  conld  not  have  been  an  idler — thus  showing  that  piety 
is  not  incompatible  with  great  business  activity,  or  the  ordinary  occupations  of  life 
necessarily  detrimental  to  the  culture  of  the  soul  (Rom,  xiL  11);  2,  Valuable.  Tba 
different  items  of  the  above  catalogue  clearly  show  that  Job  was  rich,  material  wealth 
being  in  his  case  allied  with  spiritual  treasure,  thus  proving  that,  though  good  men 
are  not  always  rich,  as  unfortunately  rich  men  are  not  always  good,  it  is  yet  by  no 
means  impossible  to  be  both ;  witness  Abraham  (Gen.  xiii,  2),  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvi,  13, 14), 
Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.  10),  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  (Matt,  xxvii,  67).  3.  Eemovahle,  As 
the  event  showed,  and  as  is  the  case,  with  the  estate  of  every  man,  great  or  small,  upon 
the  earth  (J  as.  i.  10, 11;  1  John  ii.  17), 

V.  The  patkiakch's  family.  1,  Numerous.  Under  the  Old  Testament  economy 
a  large  family  was  promised  as  a  special  recompense  to  the  pious  (Ps.  cxiii.  9 ;  cxxvii. 
4,  5 ;  cxxviii.  1 — i),  and  though  an  abundant  offspring  is  not  now  a  sign  of  grace  or 
an  evidence  of  religion,  yet  children  are  among  the  most  precious  of  Heaven's  gifts,  and 
happy  is  the  man  that  hath  his  quiver  full  of  them,  2.  Happy.  Whether  the 
entertainments  they  gave  were  birthday  commemorations,  or  periodically  returning 
religious  festivals,  or  weekly  banquets,  they  obviously  formed  a  cheery  and  genial 
household.  Innocent  festivity  is  neither  unbecoming  nor  irreligious,  since  it  is  not 
true  that  "  man  was  made  to  mourn "  (Burns),  while  it  is  true  that  God's  people  are 
commanded  to  rejoice  evermore  (Eccles,  ix.  7 ;  Ps.  c.  1 ;  Phil.  iv.  4).  3.  Loving.  If 
Job's  family  were  mirthful,  they  were  likewise  harmonious  and  united.  Few  spectacles 
on  earth  are  more  beautiful  than  families  whose  members  are  endeared  to  one  another 
by  reciprocal  affection  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  1) ;  and  yet  good  men  have  often  seen  their  house- 
holds torn  by  unseemly  strife;  e.g.  Adam,  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  David. 

VI.  The  patriabch's  solicitude.  1.  Beasonalle.  Gaiety  and  merry-making, 
while  innocent  in  themselves  and  sanctioned  by  religion,  have  a  tendency  to  cause  the 
heart  to  forget  God.  Those  who  frequent  social  banquets  and  indulge  in  the  world's 
delicacies  are  apt  to  become  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God  (2  Tim.  ili,  4) ; 
e.g.  Solomon,  Dives,  Demas.  2.  Becoming.  As  a  pious  man,  Job  could  scarcely  fail  to 
be  concerned  about  the  behaviour  of  so  many  young  people,  especially  while  attending 
a  feast.  As  a  father,  he  was  doubly  constrained  to  have  respect  to  their  spiritual  and 
eternal  welfare.  Even  more  is  it  the  duty  of  a  parent  to  train  up  his  sons  and  daughters 
in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord  than  to  prov«le  for  their  education  and 


0H.I.1— 22J  THE  eoOK  OP  JOB. 


■ettlement  in  life  (Bph.  vi.  4).  3.  Earnest.  The  father  who  could  be  at  such  pains 
and  expense  about  the  religious  education  of  his  children  as  Job  appears  to  have  been 
was  clearly  in  earnest,  and  might  profitably  be  taken  as  a  pattern  by  Christian  parents. 
Contrast  the  parental  negligence  of  Eli  (1  Sara.  ii.  29).  4.  Habitual.  As  Job's  zeal 
was  prompt,  so  likewise  was  it  constant.  The  godly  practice  of  Divine  worship  was 
maintained  with  unwearied  regularity,  week  after  week,  or  at  least  upon  the  close  of 
every  festive  occasion.  As  a  parent's  responsibility  for  liis  chiMiea  does  imt  terminate 
with  their  childhood,  so  neither  should  his  endeavours  to  promote  their  welfare  cease 
with  their  arriving  at  the  stage  of  manhood  and  womanhood. 

Learn:  1.  God  may  have  children  outside  the  pale  of  the  Church  visible.  2. 
Prosperity  and  piety,  though  not  commonly  conjoined,  are  by  no  means  incompatible. 
3.  God's  people  should  aim  at  the  possession  of  a  piety  which  is  "  perfect  and  entire, 
wanting  nothing."  4.  Good  men's  families  should  themselves  be  good.  5.  Pious 
parents  should  train  their  children  in  the  fear  of  God  and  in  the  observance  of  his 
precepts. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Joh.     I.  An  Oriental  pbinob.      II.  A  wbamht  man.      III.  An 

EMINENT  SAINT.      IV.   A   GODIiT   PARENT.      V.   A  SACRIFICING   PRIEST. 

Ver.  3. — Wealth  and  piety.  I.  Their  common  ohabactebistics.  1.  God's  gifts; 
and  therefore  to  be  received  with  thankfulness.  2.  Man's  ornaments;  aud  there- 
fore to  be  borne  humbly.  3.  A  Christian's  talents ;  and  therefore  to  be  used  with 
fidelity. 

II.  Their  reciprocal  relations.  1.  Wealth  and  piety  are  not  necessaiily  incom- 
patible. 2.  Wealth  and  piety  are  often  mutually  destructive.  3.  Wealtli  and  piety 
may  prove  reciprocally  helpful. 

III.  Their  comparative  excellences.  1.  Piety  may  be  obtained  by  all ;  wealth 
can  be  secured  only  by  a  few.  2.  Piety  is  useful  to  all;  wealth  is  injurious  to  some. 
3.  Piety  will  abide  with  all;  wealth  can  remain  with  none. 

Lessons.  1.  They  that  have  piety  can  do  without  wealth.  2.  They  that  have 
wealth  cannot  do  without;  piety, 

Ver.  4. — Banqueting.     I.  An  ancient  orsTOM.      IT.  A  permissible  enjoyment. 

III.   A   NATUllAL   action.      IV.   A   DANGEROUS   OCCUPATION. 

Ver.  6. — FaanUy  worship.  I.  Should  precede  the  business  of  the  day.  Job 
rose  np  early  in  the  morning. 

II.  Should  be  performed  in  the  asskmbled  household.  Job  gathered  all  his 
sons  to  his  devotions. 

III.  Should  be  celebrated  after  dub  preparation.  Job  sanctified  his  sons  by 
the  customary  ablutions. 

IV.  Should  be  inspired  by  faith  in  the  atoning  sacbifiob.  Job  offered  up 
burnt  offeiings. 

V.  Should  be  accompanied  by  liberal  oblations.  Job  presented  victims  to  the 
number  of  them  all. 

VI.  Should  be  marked  by  confession  and  intercession.    Job  interceded  for  his 

children.  ■,,■,.■, 

VIL  Should  be  maintained  with  unbroken  regularity.    Job  did  so  contninally. 
Learn :  (1)  The  duty,  (2)  the  propriety,  (3)  the  need,  and  (4)  the  value,  of  family 

worship. 

Vers.  6 — 12. — The  fundamental  controversy  of  the  poem.  I.  The  occasion  of  the 
coKTBOVERBY.  The  presence  of  Satan  among  the  sons  of  Gnd.  1.  The  celestial  assembly. 
(1)  The  beings  composing  it.  Suns  of  God,  i.e.  angels  {vide  oh.  xxxviii.  7  and  cf.  Ps. 
xxix.  1),  here  styled  "sons  of  Blohim,"  to  indicate  their  nature,  as  deriving  their 
existence  from  God  (cf.  Luke  iii.  38);  their  dignity,  as  enjoying  an  exalted  rank  in  the 
scale  of  being  (cf.  Dan.  iii.  25) ;  and  their  office,  as  serving  in  the  capacity  of  ministers 
to  the  Supreme  (of.  Ps.  Ixxxii.  6).  (2)  The  purpose  <  their  gathering.  "  To  present 
themselves  before  the  Lord ; '  not  to  assist  in  the  dekjerations  of  the  Infinite  Mind 


10  THE  BOOK  OF  JOa  [oh.  1.1—22. 

(Isa.  xl.  13,14;  Rom.  xL  34),  but  as  ambassadors  returning  from  their  respective 
circuits  to  render  account  of  their  ministrations  and  to  receive  commissions  for  future 
execution.  Even  so  must  all  God's  intelligent  creatures  upon  earth  appear  before  the 
dread  tribunal  of  the  skies  (2  C!or.  v.  10),  and  every  one  give  an  account  of  himself 
to  God  (Eom.  xiv.  12).  2.  The  unexpected  visitor.  (1)  The  import  of  his  name. 
"Satan,"  the  adversary,  the  calumniator,  the  accuser;  not  the  evil  genius  of  the  later 
theology  of  the  Jews,  but  the  dark,  sullen  spirit  of  Divine  revelation,  who  headed  the 
revolt  in  heaven  against  the  authority  of  God  (Bev.  xii.  7—9),  seduced  our  first  parents 
into  sin  (Gen.  iii.  1 — 6 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  3),  tempted  JesuB  Christ  (Matt.  iv.  1),  warred 
against  him  throughout  his  entire  career  on  earth  (Matt.  xiii.  39;  Luke  x.  18;  John 
xii.  31),  now  ruleth  in  the  children  of  disobedience  (Eph,  iL  2),  and  fights  against 
the  children  of  light  (Eph.  vi.  11 — 16).  (2)  The  nature  of  his  occupation.  _"  Going 
to  and  firo  through  the  earth,  and  walking  up  and  down  In  it;"  which  points  out 
his  dominion — this  lower  world,  i.e.  conceived  as  alienated  from  God,  and  involved  in 
moral  and  spiritual  darkness  (Eph.  ii.  2 ;  1  John  v.  19 ;  Eev.  xvi.  10)  j  his  activity, — 
though  at  present,  in  some  cases,  reserved  in  chains  (Jude  6),  he  is  still  permitted  a 
large  amount  of  liberty  (1  Pet.  v.  8) ;  his  diligence, — he  never  intermits  his  business, 
but  ever  prosecutes  his  infernal  errands,  going  to  and  fro,  and  walking  up  and  down ; 
his  unrest,  having,  as  afterwards  Cain,  fallen  under  a  ban  of  wandering,  which  has 
doomed  him  to  be  always  seeking  rest,  but  finding  none  (Matt,  xii,  45),  as  ever  since 
his  children  have  been  like  the  troubled  sea  which  cannot  rest  (Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21).  (3) 
The  object  of  his  coming.  If  to  present  himself  before  the  Lord  with  the  other  sons 
of  God  (ch.  iL  1),  i.e.  to  report  concerning  his  wicked  machinations,  his  appearance,  we 
may  rest  assured,  was  wholly  involuntary  and  compulsory,  which  may  remind  us  that 
Satan,  no  less  than  other  creatures,  is  subject  to  Divine  authority ;  that  Satan's  pro- 
ceedings in  the  world  are  under  the  perpetual  surveillance  of  the  Almighty;  and  that 
Satan  can  neither  travel  further  nor  work  longer  than  he  receives  express  commission 
from  Jehovah  to  do.  But  it  is  probable  that  the  underlying  motive  of  Satan's 
intruding  upon  Heaven's  assembly  was  not  to  render  an  account  of  any  mission  with 
which  he  had  been  entrusted,  but  to  prosecute  his  diabolic  work  of  calumniating  God'i 
children  who  were  yet  on  earth  (cf.  Rev.  xii.  10 ;  Zech.  iii.  1), 

II.  The  paetibs  to  the  contboversy.  Jehovah  and  Satan.  1.  Jehovah.  (1)  The 
self-existent  and  all-sufficient  Deity  (Bxod.  iii.  14).  (2)  The  Lord  of  angels  (ch.  iv. 
18).  (3)  The  Fear  of  saiuts  (Gen.  xxxi.  42 ;  ch.  L  1).  (4)  The  Governor  of  the 
imiverse  (ch.  ix.  12 ;  xxxiv.  13 ;  xxxvi.  23 ;  xii.  11).  2.  Satan.  (1)  The  creature  of 
God.  (2)  The  impersonation  of  eviL  (3)  The  adversary  of  Christ.  (4)  The  accuser 
of  the  brethren. 

III.  The  bdbjeot  of  the  oonteoversy.  The  disinterested  character  of  piety  or 
religion.  1.  The  Divine  challenge.  "  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job,  that  there 
is  none  like  him  in  the  earth?"  The  language  of:  (1)  Divine  condescension,  in  not 
only  noticing  a  creature,  but  stooping  to  converse  with  an  adversary,  yea,  with  a  devil 
(Ps.  cxiii.  6).  (2)  Divine  observation,  in  particularizing  Job  by  name,  and  dilating  on 
his  character,  which  demonstrates  that  God's  knowledge  of  his  people  extends  to  such 
minute  details  as  the  names  they  bear,  the  professions  they  make,  the  characters  tkey 
possess  (Exod.  xxxiii.  12;  Isa.  xlix.  1;  John  x.  3).  (3)  Divine  admiration,  in  so 
commending  Job's  piety  as  to  show  that  he  took  a  holy  piide  in  his  servant's  worth, 
as  heever  does  (Zeph.  iii.  17).  (4)  Divine  afi'eotion,  in  so  speaking  of  the  patriarch  as 
to  evince  that  he  was  a  special  object  of  Divine  regard,  calling  him  "  my  servant," 
as  Christ  afterwards  styled  his  followers  "  my  friends  "  (John  xv.  14).  (5)  And  Divine 
protection,  the  question  instinctively  suggesting  Jehovah's  jealous  care  of  his  servant 
(Zech.  ii.  8).  2.  The  Satanic  answer.  "Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought?"  etc  Con- 
taining :  (1)  A  reluctant  admission — that  Job  did  fear  God,  and  that,  in  respect  of 
outward  appearance  at  least  of  religion,  he  had  attained  to  incomparable  eminence. 
Saints  should  aim  to  possess  a  piety  so  conspicuous  that,  however  aspersed,  it  cannot 
be  contradicted,  even  by  the  devil.  (2)  A  base  insinuation— that  the  piety  of  the 
patriarch  proceeded  from  purely  mercenary  motives.  See  the  malignity  of  Satan  in 
attempting  to  depreciate  what  he  finds  it  impossible  to  deny— an  art  in  which  Satan's 
servants  are  generally  adepts.  (3)  A  momentous  implication— the  higher  question 
of  the  efficacy  of  the  plaa  of  redemption  and  the  suffiowncy  of  Divine  grace  being 


eH.Ll— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  U 

practically  involved  in  the  standing  or  falling  of  Job,  whose  sincerity  was  impeached. 
In  the  devil's  sermons  there  is  always  more  than  meets  the  ear  (cf.  Gen.  iii.  5).  (4) 
An  audacious  proposition — that  God  should  bring  the  question  in  debate  to  an  issue  by 
experiments  on  the  patriarch,  as  if  God  had  doubts  concerning  the  integrity  of  his 
servant,  or  as  if,  although  he  had,  he  was  likely  to  subject  that  servant  to  the  ordeal 
of  suffering  in  order  to  please  the  devil  1  Verily  there  are  no  limits  to  the  impudence 
of  Satan !  (5)  A  rash  prediction — that  Job  would  forthwith,  on  the  application  of  the 
touchstone  of  adversity,  rebound  to  the  opposite  extreme  and  "  curse  God  to  his  face," 
which  he  did  not,  showing  that  Satan's  prophecies,  like  his  promises,  generally  turn 
out  lies. 

IV.  The  determination  of  the  controvekst.  By  the  trial  of  the  patriarch.  1. 
The  Divine  permission,  "  Behold,  all  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power."  A  permission  (1) 
truly  amazing  when  we  consider  by  whom,  to  whom,  and  concerning  whom  it  was  given, 
how  far  it  reached,  and  for  what  purpose  it  was  designed ;  yet  (2)  perfectly  justifiable, 
since  Job's  possessions  were  more  Jehovah's  than  the  patriarch's  (Ps.  xxiv.  1 ;  1. 10 — 
12 ;  Expd.  xix.  5 ;  Hag.  ii.  18 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  4),  as  the  patriarch  afterwards  recognized 
(ch.  i.  21),  and  might  be  disposed  of  as  God  pleased  without  the  charge  being  incurred 
of  doing  wrong  to  his  creature ;  and  (3)  absolutely  necessary,  if  the  trial  was  to  be  so 
conducted  that  no  loophole  should  remain  for  the  least  suspicion  of  its  thoroughness 
and  impartiality ;  though  at  the  same  time  (4)  mercifully  limited,  only  the  patriarch's 
possessions  being  put  into  the  adversary's  power,  and  not  his  person  as  in  the  second 
trial  (ch.  ii.  7),  God  never  suffering  his  people  to  be  tried  above  that  which  they  are 
able  to  bear  (1  Cor.  x.  13),  or  more  than  is  necessary.  2.  The  Divine  limitation. 
"  Only  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  hand ; "  which  reminds  us  (1)  that  Satan  has 
no  power  against  a  saint  further  than  God  permits  (John  xix.  11) ;  (2)  that  God  can 
set  a  bar  to  the  malignity  of  Satan,  as  well  as  to  the  waves  of  the  sea  (ch.  xxxviii.  11) 
and  the  rage  of  man  (Ps.  IxxvL  10);  (3)  that  God  can  cast  a  shield  around  the 
persons  of  his  people  in  the  day  of  their  calamity  (ch.  xxii.  25 ;  Ps.  xci.  1 — 7) ;  and  (4) 
that  God  frequently  protects  hia  people  against  Satan's  assaults  when  they  are  not 
aware. 

Learn:  1.  That  if  Satan  can  find  his  way  into  the  assemblies  of  God's  sons  in 
heaven,  it  need  hardly  surprise  one  to  detect  him  amongst  the  congregations  of  God's 
children  on  earth.  2.  That  if  so  eminent  a  saint  as  Job  did  not  escape  impeachment 
by  the  devil,  it  will  not  be  wonderful  if  lesser  saints  should  be  accused.  3.  That  if 
God  permitted  a  Job  to  be  put  into  the  devil's  power,  as  Christ  allowed  a  Peter  to  be 
cast  into  Satan's  sieve,  it  may  almost  be  expected  that  ordinary  Christians  will  also 
be  subjected  to  trial.  4.  That  if  God  set  a  limit  to  Satan's  power  in  dealing  with  his 
servant  Job,  he  will  not  accord  unlimited  authority  to  the  adversary  when  he  comes 
to  try  those  who  are  less  able  to  withstand  his  assaults.  6.  And  that  if  Job  was 
sustained  when  passing  through  the  fiery  ordeal,  so  will  all  who  like  Job  are  sincere  in 
heart  be  upheld  in  the  day  of  their  calamity. 

Ver.  7i—A  sermon  on  Satan.  L  The  chakagter  of  Satan's  pebsoh.  The 
question  implies:  1.  The  existence  and  personality  of  the  spirit  of  evil.  2.  Hig 
angelic  nature.  3.  His  incessant  activity.  4.  His  unwearied  vigilance.  6.  The 
restlessness  of  his  wicked  heart. 

II.  The  sphere  of  Satan's  action.  1.  Generally,  the  earth  as  opposed  to  heaven. 
2.  Particularly,  (1)  the  human  heart;  (2)  the  human  family;  (3)  the  Christian 
Church  ;  (4)  the" heathen  world. 

III.  The  mode  of  Satan's  wobkino.    1.  By  temptation.   2.  By  accusation. 
Learn:     1.   The   necessity  of  watchfulness.     2.  The    value  of  prayer.     3.   The 

importance  of  putting  on  the  Christian  armour.    4.  The  advantage  of  Christian  work. 

Ver.  9. — "Doth  Job  fear  Ood  for  nought t"  I.  Yes!  God's  servants  are  not 
hypocrites.  1.  Those  who  serve  God  from  mercenary  motives  do  not  truly  serve  him 
at  all  (Isa.  i.  13).  2.  Those  who  serve  God  sincerely  adhere  to  him  when  all  creature- 
comforts  are  withdrawn  (Hab.  iii.  17). 

II.  No  1  Ood's  servants  do  not  go  unrewarded.  Like  Job,  they  are  honoured  with  .• 
L  Divine  attention  (Ps.  xxfiiL  18).  2.  Divine  approbation  (Ps.  cxlvii  11>  8.  DiTint 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  1.1—22. 

provision  (Pa.  xxxiv.  9;  oxi.  6).   4.  Divine  protection  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  9);  ct  the  Old 
Testament  saints  in  the  times  of  Malachi  (iii.  16). 

Vers.  13— 22.— 3%e  first  trial  of  the  patriarch.  I.  The  pbbparatton  fob  thb 
TBIAL.  The  patriarch  at  the  height  of  Ma  prosperity.  The  season^  pitched  upon  for 
making  an  assault  upon  the  patriarch  was  a  day  of :  1.  Festive  rejoicing ;  when  the 
patriarch's  family  were  convened  at  a  banquet  of  unusual  magnificence,  "  eating  and 
drinking  wine  in  their  eldest  brother's  house;"  such  a  sumptuous  entertainment 
doubtless  as  became  the  firstborn  to  provide.  2.  Busy  industry ;  when  the  whole 
household  of  the  patriarch  was  astir  with  unwonted  activity :  the  ploughmen  driving 
furrows  through  the  soil  with  the  assistance  of  the  patient  oxen,  while  the  she- 
asses  cropped  the  pastures  in  their  vicinity ;  the  shepherds  tending  the  vast  droves  of 
sheep  which  spread  themselves  across  the  plain;  and  the  camel-drivers  going  and 
returning  with  their  caravans  of  costly  merchandise.  3.  Unmingled  happiness;  in 
which  the  patriarch,  it  may  well  be  imagined,  surveying  his  earthly  lot,  observing 
the  loving  unity  and  innocent  gladness  of  his  children,  and  beholding  the  fidelity 
and  diligence  of  his  servants,  realized  that  his  cup  of  terrestrial  felicity  was  full 
and  even  overflowing.  4.  Fancied  security ;  in  which  not  a  cloud  appeared  in  all 
the  wide  and  clear  horizon  ;  not  a  shadow  dimmed  the  brightness  of  the  sky,  not  a 
speck  of  trouble  anywhere  could  be  detected  to  excite  the  patriarch's  alarm.  It  was 
such  a  day  as  seldom  falls  to  the  lot  of  God's  people  on  earth  to  enjoy ;  and  the  seleo 
tion  of  that  day  above  all  others  for  casting  down  the  patriarch  from  the  pinnacle  of 
his  greatness  and  the  summit  of  his  felicity  was  doubtless  craftily  designed  that 
the  very  loftinesi  of  the  patriarch's  elevation  might  intensify  the  depth  and  severity 
of  his  fall. 

II.  The  management  of  thb  trial.  The  patriarch's  prosperity  overthrown; 
1.  The  swiftly  completed  ruin.  (1)  Sudden  in  its  coming;  the  citadel  of  Job's 
integrity  being  more  likely  to  be  carried  by  a  coup  de  main  than  by  a  leisurely  and 
deliberate  attack,  inasmuch  as  to  be  forewarned  is  also  to  be  forearmed,  and  dangers 
that  men  see  they  can  usually  adopt  measures  to  avert.  (2)  Universal  in  its  sweep ; 
the  devil  falling  not  a  step  behind,  if  he  could  not  advance  a  step  beyond,  the  Divine 
permission,  with  one  terrible  avalanche  of  disaster  descending  on  the  fair  scene  of 
the  patriarch's  prosperity,  and  leaving  not  a  spot  unvisited  by  his  devouring  rage. 
(3)  Pitiless  in  its  devastation ;  exempting  only  four  domestics  (not  sons !  which  might 
have  been  a  mitigation ;  but  the  devil's  mercies  are  generally  cruel),  consigning  all  the 
rest  to  one  overwhelming,  remorseless  destruction.  (4)  Cunning  in  its  contrivance; 
being  effected  not  directly  and  immediately  by  the  devil  himself,  but  by  natural 
agencies — Sabeans  and  Chaldeans,  lightnings  and  hurricanes — so  that  it  might  appear 
to  be  the  work  of  God's  ordinary  providence,  and  be  ascribed  by  the  stricken  man  to 
the  Deity  whom  he  served  and  adored.  2.  The  skilfully  arranged  report.  (1)  Messenger 
following  upon  messenger,  like  Ahimaaz  speeding  after  Cushi  (2  Sam.  xviii.  22),  so 
that  the  full  tale  of  misfortunes  might  not  be  declared  at  once,  but  with  exquisite 
torture  protracted  to  the  utmost.  (2)  Calamity  heaped  upon  calamity ;  not  a  single 
messenger  arriving  with  happy  tidings,  but  each  one  with  a  heavier  burden  than  his 
predecessor.  (3)  Stroke  descending  upon  stroke ;  not  one  speaker  having  the  grace, 
like  Ahimaaz  when  reporting  Absalom's  death  to  David,  to  mitigate  the  blow  to  the 
old  man ;  but,  like  Cushi,  each  one  with  excruciating  minuteness  of  detail  dwelling  on 
his  tale  of  misery,  and  with  something  like  selfish  satisfaction  emphasizing  the  fact  of 
his  own  escape  to  be  the  bearer  of  the  appalling  news,  not  perceiving  that  that  might 
only  be  an  aggravation  of  the  patriarch's  distress ;  and  with  no  interruption  in  the 
awful  torrent  of  adversity,  not  so  much  as  a  moment  to  breathe  in,  but  oa  and  on  in 
one  incessant  stream  :  "  While  he  was  yet  speaking ; "  and,  "  While  he  was  yet 
speaking;"  and,  "While  he  was  yet  speaking."  Clearly  if  Satan's  craft  was  con- 
si  licuous  in  his  preparation  for  the  trial,  it  was  equally  apparent  in  hi?  management 
of  the  same. 

III.  Thb  issue  of  the  trial.  The  patriarch's  reception  of  the  news.  1.  With 
penitential  sorrow ;  expressed  in  the  symbolic  actions  of  rending  his  garments  (cf 
Gen.  xxxvii.  34 ;  Josh.  vii.  6 ;  2  Sam,  i.  11 ;  iii.  31)  and  shaving  his  head  (of.  Isa.  xv. 
2 ;  xxiL  12 ;  Jer.  vii.  29 ;  sli.  6 ;  Micab  i.  16);  the  first  tevctlinK  the  vehemence  and 


OB.  r.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  18 


Intensity  of  the  patriarch's  emotion,  and  the  second  pointing  to  its  oalmnest  and 
moderation,  2.  With  pious  resignation^  Acknowledging:  (1)  His  originally  destitute 
Condition :  "  Naked  came  1  out  of  my  mother's  womb ; "  so  that  his  calamities  had  only 
set  him  where  he  was  at  first— an  argument  for  contentment  (1  Tim^Ti,  7).  (2). His 
prospective  departure  from  tlie  world  :  "  Naked  shall  I  return  thither ; "  so  that  after 
all  he  had  but  experienced  a  little  earlier  what  was  certain  to  befall  him  in  the  end 
(of.  Bcolea.  v.  15 ;  xii.  7  ;  and  '  Measure  for  Measure,'  act  iii.  sc.  2)— an  argument  for 
submission.  (3)  His  entire  dependence  upon  God  for  all  the  blessings  of  his  earthly 
lot :  "  The  Lord  gave ; "  so  that  he  himself  could  claim  no  absolute  ownership  in  any- 
thing he  had  lost  (1  Cor.  iv.  7 ;  Jas.  i.  17)— an  argument  for  acquiescence.  (4)  His 
devout  recognition  of  the  hand  of  God  in  his  aflictions  and  losses  :  "  The  Lord  hath 
taken  away;"  so  that  not  only  had  he  laid  his  hand  upon  him  who  had  perfect  right  to 
do  so,  but  in  removing  his  possessions  and  children  he  had  merely  taken  what  was  first 
his  own — a  fourth  argument  for  .resignation.  3.  With  lowly  adoration.  Falling  on 
the  ground  and  worshipping;  thus  giving  the  lie  to  Salaii's  calumny  by  retaining  his 
steadfastness  and  maintaining  his  integrity ;  not  cursing  God  to  his  face,  but  Solemnly, 
reverently,  and  devoutly  adding,  "  Blessed  be  the  Name  of  Jehovah  !  " 

IV.  The  veedict  on  the  triai..  The  complete  vindibation  of  the  patriarch.  His 
triumphant  passage  through  the  appalling  ordeal  is :  1.  Commended  by  God.  The 
statement  of  the  historian  we  must  regard  as  but  the  transcript  of  the  Divine  judg- 
ment upon  the  trial :  "  In  all  this  Job  sinned  not,  neither  chari;ed  God  foolishly." 
2.  Admitted  ty  Satan.  This  appears  from  ch.  ii.  4,  where,  though  the  devil  is 
prepared  with  an  explanation  of  the  cause,  he  is  yet  constrained  to  admit  the  fact  of 
Job's  steadfast  allegiance  to  Jehcvah  throughout  his  first  onslaught.  3.  Recorded  by 
the  historian.  So  that  wherever  this  ancient  poem  finds  a  reader  there  shall  the  Courage 
and  fidelity  of  the  stricken  patriarch  be  known  and  admired. 

Learn :  1.  That  if  God  has  his  times  and  seasons,  and  Christ  has  his  hours,  and 
man  his  opportunities  for  working,  so  also  the  devil  has  his  days  for  his  Satanic  move- 
ments. 2.  That  the  devil's  assaults  upon  human  virtue  and  Christian  fidelity  are 
always  characterized  by  consummate  wisdom  as  regards  both  the  times  and  the  instru- 
ments as  well  as  the  methods  of  attack.  3.  That  the  power  of  Satan  to  injure  man  is 
well-nigh  unlimited,  at  least  when  God  permits.  4.  That  the  most  prosperous  estate 
of  man  may,  in  a  moment,  be  converted  into  the  profoundest  misery,  as  the  brightest 
day  may  be  followed  by  the  darkest  night.  5.  That  calami!  ies  seldom  fall  upon  God's 
people  singly  and  alone,  are  apt  to  be  misconstrued  as  to  their  origin  and  design,  but 
should  never  fail  to  lead  the  heart  closer  to  God.  6.  That  God's  people  should  in  times 
of  adversity  remember  their  origin  and  prepare  for  their  end.  7.  That,  whether  suffering 
or  rejoicing,  saints  should  imitate  the  piety  of  Job,  recognize  God's  hand  in  everything, 
and  "  in  everything  give  thanks." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Introductory.  On  the  general  teaching  of  the  book.  For  all  earnest  readers ;  for  all 
who  can  think  seriously,  feel  deeply ;  all  who  have  in  their  own  persons  loved  and  lost; 
who  have  known  life  in  its  brightest  and  its  darkest  moods ;  all,  again,  who  have  that 
fine  gift  of  sympathy  which  niakeS  the  pain  and  woe  of  humanity  their  own ;— this 
book  has  a  most  powerful  attraction,  a  profound  charm.  Here  we  have  suffering 
through  all  the  scale  of  human  being ;  suffering  tuned  to  music  most  plaintive,  which 
strikes  some  response  from  the  chords  of  every  human  heart.  Here,  too,  we  have 
reflection  upon  suffering,  intense  thought  bent  without  fear  and  without  reserve  upon 
the  great  questions  of  life.  Who  has  not,  in  some  weary,  desponding  hour,  at  some 
time  or  other,  sighed  forth,  "  What  is  the  meaning  of  it  all  ?  "  It  is  a  question  which 
seems  to  answer  itself  joyously,  or  rather  to  require  no  asking,  in  the  brighter  days  of 
life.  Nature  and  the  heart  of  man  smile  upon  one  another  with  the  reflection  of  the 
gladness  of  the  Creative  Mind  when  he  saw  that  all  his  works  were  very  good.  But 
id  many  a  midnight  hour  of  mental  darkness  the  question  that  we  thought  answered 
and  set  at  rest  forces  its  presence  upon  us,  and  demands  an  answer  of  our  reason.  And 
Beason, "  from  wave  to  wave  of  fimcied  misery  driven,"  loses  her  bearings ;  ignorant  ot 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  1. 1—22, 


the  ktitude,  she  knows  not  whither  to  steer  for  a  port.  This  is  the  mood  of  Job.  And 
relief  comes  at  length,  in  an  unexpected  way,  from  the  Source  whence  alone  it  can 
come.  We  are  taught  the  great  lesson  of  suffering— to  wait  and  to  hope.  He  whd 
tarries  in  patience  until  he  beholds  the  "  end  of  the  Lord  "  shall  find  an  abundant 
reward  of  his  faith  and  constancy.  .     i.    ,  . 

I.  The  enigmas  of  lite.  Pain,  loss,  disease,  exchanged  for  pleasure,  gain,  health, 
and  riches.  Man  cannot  tmderstand  this  process.  And  he  cannot  willingly  submit  to 
what  he  does  not  understand.  1.  He  has  an  instinct  for  happiness,  which  he  cannot 
deny  without  denying  himself.  He  and  all  nature,  he  feels,  and  truly  feels,  were  con- 
structed for  happiness.  He  is  bound  to  work  for  this  end,  both  in  himself  and  others. 
The  Creator  (he  is  thus  naturally  taught  to  reason)  must  he  a,  happy  and  happiness- 
loving  Being,  ever  blessed,  ever  blessing.  Thus,  when  a  rebuff  is  given  to  these  powerful 
and  clear  instincts,  and  their  truth  is  suddenly  extinguished,  as  it  were,  in  the  man's  own 
bosom ;  when  all  the  springs  of  natural  joy  are  in  a  moment  dried  up  like  the  summer 
torrent  of  the  East ; — what  wonder  that  he  should  complain  ?  Is  he  the  victim  of  some 
radical  deception  ?  Are  all  his  thoughts  illusions  ?  Whence  came  those  instincts  for 
happiness,  which  one  day  appear  to  be  an  infallible  guide,  and  which  the  next  day's 
calamity  mocks  and  baffles  ?  The  mechanism  of  the  mind  itself  is  loosened,  the  column 
of  reason  totters.  This  train  of  thought  calls  to  our  memory  '  King  Lear,'  a  work  of 
art  that  in  many  points  may  remind  us  of  Job,  only  that  there  is  wanting  in  Lear  that 
constant,  unshakable  faith  in  eternal  justice  and  goodness  which  brings  at  last  solution 
to  every  perplexity,  rest  from  every  struggle  with  the  inevitable.  2.  It  is  no  enigma 
of  life  that  suffering  should  be  connected  with  guilt.  This  connection  is  and  ought  to  be. 
Such  is  another  intuitive  perception  of  the  human  heart.  We  can  understand  and 
approve  this  relation,  even  when  we  are  the  subjects  of  it.  The  horrible  mystery  of 
pain  does  not  exist,  or  at  least  is  not  felt  to  be  intolerable,  when  the  man  can  say,  "  I 
indeed  suffer  justly  the  reward  of  my  deeds  1 "  Had  Job  felt  that  he  had  brought  these 
woes  upon  himself  by  disobedience  to  the  Almighty  will,  he  would,  as  an  awak/ened 
man,  have  been  consoled  by  the  reflection ;  for,  in  that  case,  repentance  was  open  to 
him,  and,  with  repentance,  the  removal  of  the  worst  part  of  suffering — its  curse.  But 
it  was  just  the  absence  of  this  clear  connection  which  made  the  burden  of  calamity  so 
oppressive,  which  deprived  his  sorrow  of  its  only  alleviition.  Especially  was  this  so  in 
that  ancient  time  in  which  Job  lived.  It  is  evident,  from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  dis- 
course of  the  friends,  that  the  only  authorized  explanation  of  personal  suffering  was 
personal  guilt.  So  much  was  this  so,  that  the  very  words  in  Hebrew  seem  to  confuse 
the  two  notions.  "  The  dictionary  even  opposed  the  prevalence  of  another  doctrine. 
Crime,  punishment,  pain,  suffering,  injustice,  misfortune,  are  in  Hebrew  almost  indis- 
cernible. He  who  has  struggled  with  the  difficulties  presented  by  these  words  under- 
stands better  than  any  the  impossibility  of  the  Hebrew  mind  arriving,  with  words  so 
confused,  at  a  distinction  that  we  regard  as  the  principle  of  all  morality  "  (Benan').  3. 
But  Job,  on  the  other  hand,  dares,  with  all  the  independence  of  the  just  thinker,  of  the 
man  who  cannot  be  untrue  to  the  clearest  light  of  his  self-consciousness,  to  deny  the  appli- 
cation of  this  judgment  to  his  case.  He  denies  that  his  present  sufferings  point  back  to 
previous  sins.  Whatever  be  the  solution  of  the  problem,  that,  he  knows,  cannot  be  the 
true  one.  No  deluge  of  religious  commonplace  shall  move  him  from  his  fixed  position, 
his  conscious  integrity  of  soul.  No  agony  can  wring  from  him  an  echo  to  the  shallow 
cant  of  men  who  prate  about  suffering  without  really  having  suffered.  Despite  all  that 
wife  and  friends  can  urge,  he  will  not,  caimot,  desert  the  side  of  truth,  or  what  he  feels 
to  be  the  truth.  And  in  this  experience  truth  does  not  condemn  him;  on  the  whole  it 
acquits  him.  This  is  one  of  the  most  instructive  lessons  the  entire  poem  yields  us — to  . 
be  true  to  ourselves,  to  follow  the  hght  within,  let  others  scold  and  rebuke  as  they  yvill. 
More  frc  quently,  no  doubt,  we  need  to  apply  this  lesson  in  an  humiliating  way.  If  we 
are  true  to  oiu-selves,  we  shall  have  to  admit  that  we  have  brought  our  troubles  upon 
ourselves  by  our  own  faults.  But  sometimes  it  may  be  otherwise.  The  link  may  be 
wanting  which  unites  the  effect  to  its  cause.  If  we  feel  this  to  be  so,  we  must  have 
the  courage  to  say  so ;  and  on  the  same  ground  upon  which  we  ought  to  have  the 
honesty  to  acknowledge  the  sinful  origin  when  we  have  detected  it.  Job  is  an  example 
of  that  manly  simplicity  of  heart,  that  faithfulness  to  self,  without  which  we  cannot 
be  genuine  men,  nor  &ir  and  tolerant  to  others.    It  does  not  follow,  because  a  man 


OH.1. 1— 22.J  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  16 

stands  by  what  his  conscience  or  consciousness  tells  him,  that  his  conscience  is  neces- 
sarily in  the  right.  St.  Paul  pointed  out  this  (Acts  xxvi.  9 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  4).  Still,  a  man 
must  hold  by  conscience  as  the  nearest  oracle  till  he  gets  better  light,  which  is  certain  in 
the  eiid  to  come  when  needed.  4.  Equally  important,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  rebuke  to 
cant,  which  this  book  so  powerfully  supplies.  Cant  is  the  habit  of  repeating  second- 
hand opinions,  of  taking  certain  things  for  granted  because  they  are  commonly  asserted, 
although  we  have  no  su£Bcient  ground  in  our  own  experience  of  their  truth.  It  is  the 
habit  of  pretending  feelings  which  we  have  not,  because  they  are  considered  to  be 
the  correct  feelings  under  certain  circumstances.  It  is  imitation  in  thought  and 
aSectation  in  sentiment.  It  attends  on  genuine  thought  and  sincere  emotion,  as  the 
shadow  on  the  sun.  No  one  will  deny  that  the  religious  world  is  full  of  it.  There 
is  a  fine  illustration  of  it  in  the  discourses  of  Job's  friends,  and  rebuke  of  it  in  the 
manifestation  of  the  Almighty  at  the  end.  5.  While  we  have  a  presentation  of  the 
great  enigmas  of  life  in  the  course  of  the  poem,  we  have  also  an  exposure  of  the  per- 
jilexities  of  human  thought  and  the  vain  attemvts  to  solve  them.  The  narrow  dogma 
that  all  suffering  is  explained  by  guilt,  on  which,  in  one  form  or  other,  the  Mends  of 
Job  are  never  weary  of  insisting,  along  with  that  grand  principle,  the  strict  justice  of 
the  Almighty,  which,  in  their  view,  renders  the  dogma  indisputable, — this  is  the  only 
clue  offered  to  guide  the  poor  darkened  sufferer  out  of  the  prison  of  his  thoughts.  But 
it  fails  to  lead  him  to  the  light.  And,  indeed,  how  utterly  inadequate  are  such  partial 
principles,  drawn  from  a  very  limited  area  of  experience,  when  applied  to  measure  the 
height,  and  depth,  and  length,  and  breadth  of  God's  moral  universe  1  Another  great 
lesson,  then,  which  this  book  reads  us  is  that  of  modesty  and  silence — the  need  of  the 
confession  of  failure  and  incapacity  to  penetrate  the  secrets  of  the  Divine  mechanism  to 
the  bottom.  We  see  but  in  part  and  know  but  in  part ;  cannot  by  searching  find  out 
God  unto  perfection.  Higher  than  heaven  this  knowledge,  what  can  we  do  ?  deeper 
than  hell,  what  can  we  know  ?  There  are  clear  and  undoubted  revelations  of  his  good- 
ness which  fill  the  heart  with  joy  and  stir  the  tongue  to  praise.  There  are  other, 
mysterious,  hints  of  himself  in  pain  and  sadness,  which  overwhelm  the  heart  with  awe 
and  check  the  effusion  of  the  lips.  But  since  nothing  can  ever  disprove,  or  justly  be 
brought,  on  any  pntence  of  reason,  to  the  disparagement  of  his  justice,  wisdom,  and 
love,  let  us  adore  in  silence.  Let  our  souls  wait  patiently  for  him,  until  he  again 
appear,  shining  upon  us  with  the  brightness  of  noonday  ! 

Jl.  Solution  op  life's  enigmas.  1.  The  book  appears  intended  to  convey  a 
solution  of  our  mental  trouble  and  doubt  of  mind,  so  far,  that  is,  as  any  solution  is 
possible.  A  complete  solution  is  impossible ;  Scripture,  philosophy,  experience,  all 
unite  in  declaring  this.  Could  we  know  the  secret  of  pain  and  evil,  suffering  and 
calamity,  in  all  their  forms,  we  should  touch  the  very  secret  of  life  itself ;  and  in 
touching  that  secret  we  should  touch  the  secret  of  God's  Being — nay,  we  should  be 
as  God.  Humanity  is  another  name  for  limitation  ;  God  is  the  Infinite.  We  live  at 
points  on  the  circumference  of  existence ;  he  is  the  Centre.  Is  it  not  an  absurdity 
when  man  refuses  to  learn  and  acknowledge  once  for  all  that  in  seeking  to  know  too 
much  he  is  travelling  out  of  his  bounds ;  in  his  impatience  with  enforced  ignorance 
he  is  impatient  of  being  what  he  is,  and  raises  a  quarrel  against  his  Maker  and  against 
the  scheme  of  things  which  can  but  end  in  his  complete  discomfiture  and  overthrow? 
2.  But  there  is  some  solution,  although  not  a  complete,  not  a  positive  and  all-explaining 
one.  There  is  a  negative  solution,  which  is  very  comforting  to  every  true  and  pious 
heart.  All  suffering  has  not  its  root  in  personal  sin.  There  may  be  intense  suffering 
in  the  very  bosom  of  innocence,  as  a  frost  or  blight  may  settle  on  the  purest  rose  of 
the  garden.  This  point  is  clearly  established  by  the  Divine  vindication  of  "  my  servant 
Job."  He  has  not  been  singled  out  as  a  mark  for  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  becausa 
he  is  a  peculiarly  bad  man.  Bather  the  opposite  is  true.  It  is  the  good  who  ar* 
reserved  for  trial.  It  is  the  beloved  of  the  Eternal  whom  he  chastens,  in  order  that 
it  may  be  seen  what  power  has  faith  in  the  soul  of  man,  what  enduring  constancy  ol 
virtue,  like  thrice-proved  gold,  has  every  man  who  confides  in  the  eternal  rectituda 
and  love.  3.  Suffering  is,  then,  consistent  with  the  relative  innocence  of  the  sufferer. 
This  is  one  result  of  Job's  long  trial.  Suffering  is  consistent  with  the  perfect  goodness 
of  God.  This  is  another.  He  may  give,  and  he  is  good ;  he  may  take  away,  still,  blessed 
be  his  Name  I    He  may  replace  blooming  health  by  loathsome  leprosy ;  cause  the  once 


16  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  i.  1-22. 

rofit-olothed,  prosperous  inmate  of  a  wealthy  home  to  sit  in  sackcloth,  amidst  ashes  by 
a  deserted  hearth ;  yet  still — 

"Perfect  then  are  all  his  ways. 
Whom  earth  adores  and  heaven  obeys." 

Noble  book  t  that  gave,  perhaps,  to  the  ancient  world  the  first  hint  of  the  solution  oi 
the  mystery  of  pain,  by  detaching  from  it  the  hitherto  inseparable  association  of  a 
curse ;  which  teaches  men  to  believe  that  the  Divine  Author  of  all  we  suffer  and  all 
we  enjoy  is  One  ever-blessed  God,  and  so  dispels  that  dread  Manicheanlsm  so  congenial 
to  the  natural  mind  ;  book,  which  contains  in  germ  the  gospel  revelations  concerning 
Divine  chastisement  and  human  sanctiflcation,  and  the  whole  subjection  of  human  ^ 
nature  to  the  mixed  conditions  of  the  present  life  in  expectation  of  a  glorious  ultimate 
manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  I  4.  The  riddle  of  human  suffering,  then,  is  not  to  be 
read,  as  men  often  superficially  read  it,  in  the  light  of  some  assumption  which  itself 
requires  justification.  It  is  and  will  remain  an  enigma.  And  like  the  statue  of  lais 
so  carefully  veiled,  the  book  impresses  silence,  silence  1  chiding  the  explications  and  solu- 
tions of  our  babbling  tongues.  The  enigma  of  pain,  of  all  that  we  call  evil,  is  essentially 
the  enignm  of  life  itself.  The  key  that  will  unlock  the  one  will  open  also  the  other,  and  it 
lies  ready  to  no  human  hand.  This  solution  wilLnot  content  an  atheist  or  a  materialist, 
perhaps.  It  will  not  be  of  any  service  to  men  who  have  not  yet  made  up  their  minds- 
whether  to  believe  in  a  Will  of  perfect  intelligence  and  justice,  in  a  personal  Author  of 
this  scheme  of  things.  It  is,  indeed,  the  fatal  flaw  in  all  systems  of  unbelief  or  no-belief, 
that  they  can  make  nothing  of  evil.  They  cannot  get  rid  of  it,  they  cannot  explain  it 
away.  It  remains  a  disturbing  element  in  every  optimist  view  of  life.  Better  man 
as  you  may  in  body  and  in  mind,  it  will  not  disappear.  It  is  a  leaden  weight  upon 
the  feet  of  all  but  the  believer  in  the  eternally  wise  and  just  God,  Extremes  meet ; 
and  alike  to  the  enlightened  rationalist  and  the  darkened  devotee  of  superstition,  pain 
is  a  curse.  But  to  the  believer  in  God  it  is  a  part  of  the  revelation  of  God,  It  is  an 
aspect  of  the  Shechinah.  It  is  the  dark  side  of  that  cloud  whose  edges  are  silvered 
with  the  eternal  splendour.  Darkness  and  light,  the  evening  and  the  morning,  the 
week  of  toil  and  the  sabbath  of  rest,  pain  and  pleasure,  sadness  and  gladness,  death  and 
birth,  time  and  eternity,  short  sowing  and  long  reaping,  acute  but  brief-lived  trials, 
unending  fruitions, — these  are  the  conditions  of  human  existence.  To  reconcile  ourselves 
to  them  in  and  through  the  Author  of  them ;  not  to  fight  against  them,  but  loyally  to 
accept  them,  and  see  that  the  end  and  meaning  of  all  is  reflected  in  the  soul  itself; 
— these  are  the  lessons  of  the  Book  of  Job.  For  there  is  no  strength  without  trial ;  no 
wisdom  without  experience  of  both  good  and  evil;  no  refinement  without  pain;  no 
progress  without  self-dissatisfaotion ;  nothing  permanent  or  real  that  costs  us  nothing ; 
no  fellowship  with  the  Eternal  except  by  the  initiation  of  suffering,  by  the  endurance 
of  the  cross.  To  all  who  believe  that  the  latter  end  of  their  life  is  to  be  made  better 
than  their  beginning  through  the  will  of  One  who  calls,  adopts,  and  sanctifies  men  for 
himself,  this  book  will  be  full  of  light  and  help.  They  will  turn  to  its  pages  to  remind 
their  hearts  that  their  Eedeemer,  their  Vindicator,  ever  lives;  that  "blessing,  not 
cursing,  rules  above,  and  that  in  it  we  live  and  muve." — J, 

Vers.  1 — 5. — JoVs  life  and  character.  The  scene  opens  in  all  brightness,  and  the 
hero  of  this  sacred  poem  stands  befure  us  bnthed  in  the  sunshine  of  earthly  prosperity, 
and,  better,  crowned  with  the  favour  of  God — a  uuly  enviable  man.  We  have  in  these 
few  lines  given,  in  brief,  suggestive  touches — 

1.  A  PICTURE  OP  COMPLETE  HAPPINESS.  There  are  internal  and  external  elements 
of  earthly  blias ;  and  neither  must  be  absent  if  that  bliss  is  to  be  full  and  complete. 
First  in  importance  is  the^inlfimaLeleinfiftt— the  kingdom  of  God  within  the  man. 
Yet  a  starved  or  stinted'Virtue,  struggling  with  poverty  and  adversity,  is  a  sight  to 
kindle  pity  as  well  as  admiration.  Our  moral  sense  is  only  thoroughly  satisfied  when 
we  see  goodness  furnished  with  sufficiency  of  this  world's  means.  The  moral  energies 
are  cramped  by  extreme  misery ;  they  find  in  competence  a  stage  upon  which  they  can 
move  with  ease  and  grace,  and  put  forth  all  their  powers  in  harmonious  development 
The  great  master,  Aristotle,  taught  that  the  secret  of  happiness  lay  in  the  rational  and 
virtuous  activity  of  the  soul  in  the  whole  of  its  life.    But  he  also  insisted  that  a 


OB.  1. 1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOR  IT 


Rufficiect  proyision  of  external  goods  was  esseatial  to  complete  happiness,  just  as  the 
equipping  of  the  Greek  chorus  was  necessary  for  the  representation  of  a  drama.  Yet  the 
inferiority  of  the  external  elements  of  happiness  to  the  internal  is  indicated,  not  only 
by  their  coming  second  in  the  description  of  the  sacred  poet,  but  by  the  swift  tragic 
sequel,  the  darkening  of  the  scene,  the  sudden  breaking  up  of  house  and  home  and 
fortune  of  the  prosperous  man.  And  here  we  are  reminded  of  the  saying  of  another 
illustrious  Greek,  Solon ;  "  Call  no  man  happy  till  the  day  of  his  death."  The  fate  of 
Croesus,  whose  name  was  a  synonym  for  worldly  luck  in  the  ancient  Greek  world, 
pointed  the  moral  of  tliat  saying,  according  to  the  charming  story  of  Herodotus,  as 
Job's  vicissitudes  give  point  to  it  here.  This  world  passeth  ;  all  that  is  external  to  us 
is  liable  to  loss,  change,  uncertainty.  Only  the  "  sweet  and  virtuous  soul,  like  seasoned 
timber,  never  gives."  The  ruins  of  a  falling  world  leave  the  true  man  unshaken. 
Doing  the  will  of  God,  united  to  him  by  conscious  obedience  and  trust,  he  abides  for 
ever.  Thus,  in  the  concise  emphatic  designation  of  Job's  character,  in  the  very  first 
verse  of  thdTpoem,  its  key-note  is  struck. 

n.  Lineaments  of  character.  Four  words,  like  a  few  expressive  touches  from  a 
master's  pencil,  place  before  us  the  character  of  the  patriarch.  1.  "  That  man  was 
peifect."  That  is,  he  was  sound  (integer  vitse,  as  the  Roman  poet  says)  in  heart  and 
life,  blameless  in  the  ordinary  sense  in  which  we  use  that  word,  free  from  glaring  vice 
or  gross  inconsistency.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  general  epithets  like  these,  denoting 
attributes  of  human  character,  are  derived  from  our  experience  of  external  objects. 
They  are,  therefore,  figurative  expressions,  not  to  be  used  in  an  exact  mathematical 
sense,  which,  of  course,  is  inapplicable  to  such  an  object  as  human  character.  Perfect, 
as  a  sound  animal  is  said  to  be ;  without  blemish,  like  a  snowy,  sacrificial  lamb ;  spotless, 
like  a  "  garnered  fruit,"  without  "  pitted  speck."  There  are  two  aspects  of  perfection 
— the  negative  and  the  positive.  Negative  perfection  is  more  the  Old  Testament  view. 
It  is  when  the  character  presents  a  blank  on  the  side  of  those  gross  vices,  those  sins 
against  honour  and  truth  and  every  Divine  and  social  bond,  which  incur  the  hatred  ol 
man  and  the  displeasure  of  Heaven.  The  New  Testament  view  brings  out  the  positive 
side  of  "  perfection."  It  is  not  only  the  life  void  of  offence,  but  it  is  the  completeness 
of  the  Christian  man  in  those  heavenly  graces,  that  bright  resplendent  adornment  of 
the  sanctified  character,  which  in  the  sight  of  God  is  of  great  price.  But  there  are 
conditions  of  life  in  which  there  is  comparatively  little  scope  for  the  development  ot 
character  widely  on  the  positive  side.  There  is  but  a  small  circle  of  duties,  employments, 
amusements,  relations,  in  such  circumstances  as  in  the  primeval  and  pastoral  simplicity  of 
Job.  How  different  from  this  highly  developed,  widely  and  variously  interesting  modem 
life  of  ours  I  Where  more  is  given,  more  will  be  required.  But  the  example  of  Job  con- 
sists in  the  simplicity  and  integrity  with  which  he  moved  about  in  the  sphere  of  bis 
little  sovereignty,  and,  with  every  facility  for  indulging  passion,  for  infringing  right,  for 
encroaching  on  the  happiness  of  others,  kept  himself  white  as  the  lily,  nobly  free  from 
blame.  Not  that  he  was  that  insipidity  of  character,  a  merely  correct  man.  Intense 
selfishness  is  often  found  in  your  correct  men.  We  see  from  glimpses  presently  given 
us  in  the  course  of  the  poem  that  ho  was  an  actively  good  man.  Here  we  may  read 
the  exquisite  descriptions  of  his  past  life  in  ch.  xxix.  and  xxxi.,  forced  from  him  in 
his  self-defence.  We  look  upon  the  picture  of  a  man  who  is  the  pillar  of  his  com- 
munity, a  light,  a  comfort,  a  joy  to  dependents  and  equals  alike.  It  is  a  picture  vvhich 
the  thousands  of  our  countrymen  who  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  fortune,  position, 
education,  and  influence  in  their  respective  neighbourhoods,  may  be  invited  to  con- 
template and  to  imitate.  The  Divine  pleasures  and  the  noble  reward  of  a  right  use 
of  wealth  and  position,  form  for  multitudes  of  the  great  a  field  but  little  explored. 
Amidst  the  serious  warnings  of  Scripture  and  of  experience  against  the  dangers  of 
prosperity,  let  the  pure  example  of  Job  stand  out  to  remind  the  prosperous  that  they 
may  make  their  means  a  help  instead  of  a  hindrance  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  may 
enslave  the  unrighteous  mammon  ;  in  gaining  much  of  this  world,  need  not  necessarily 
lose  their  souls!  2.  He  was  upright.  The  idea  is  that  of  a  right  line.  And  the 
opposite  image  is  conveyed  by  the  word  "froward,"  or  "crooked,"  from  the  curved, 
deviatin"  line!  As  the  country-people  say  of  an  honest  man, "  He  acts  straight,"  and  as 
our  fine  old  English  word  gives  it,  "  straightforward."  There  is  a  certain  mathematics 
of  conduct.     Never  to  depart  from  truth,  even  in  jest ;  not  to  extenuate,  nor  to 

30%  0 


18  THE  BOOK  OP  JOE  [aB.t.l—Zl 

exaggerate,  nor  to  be  partial  in  our  Btatements ;  not  to  add  to  nor  talfe  tTora/aett}  to 
"  tell  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth ; "  to  abstain  from  flattery 
on  the  one  hand,  and  slanderous  perversion  on  the  other ;  to  regard  one's  word  as  one's 
bond ;  to  think  and  speak  with  others  in  that  candour,  that  clearest  light  in  which  we 
ever  commune  with  ourselves ;  to  hate  semblances  and  dissemblances,  to  get  rid  of 
duplicities  and  confusions;  in  all  relations,  to  self,  to  God,  to  others,  to  be  one  and 
the  same  man ;  to  avoid  turnings  and  twistings  in  our  route ;  to  go  straight  to  our 
ends,  like  an  arrow  to  its  mark ; — this  is  the  spirit,  this  is  the  temper,  of  the  "  upright " 
man.  His  character  resembles  the  fine-drawn  lines  of  a  true  work  of  art ;  ifhile  the 
"froward"  man  reminds  us  of  the  ill-drawn  design,  whoso  deformity  no  amount  of 
overlaying  and  ornament  can  disguise.  3.  Godfearing.  This  and  the  following 
epithet  complete  the  representation  of  the  two  former.  No  man  is  "perfect'  without 
being  a  fearer  of  God ;  none  upright  without  departing  from  evil.  Religion  takes  its 
rise  in  man's  feeling  of  awe  towards  the  vast  unseen  Power  and  Cause  revealed,  through 
things  seen.  His  conscience,  by  its  exhortations,  speaks  to  him  of  theTightecnsness  of 
the  unseen  eternal  Cause,  All  his  experience  inward  and  outward  impresses  upon  him 
the  sense  of  his  absolute  dependence.  Obedience,  active  and  passive,  to  tl  e  Eternal 
Will  is  the  primary  law  revealed  in  the  heart  of  man  amidst  Sinai-like  thunders,  over 
all  the  woild,  and  in  all  times.  Feelings  like  these  constitute  man's  curliest  and 
universal  religion ;  Scripture  designates  them  by  this  comprehensive  expres^sion,  "  the 
fear  of  God,  tbe  fear  of  the  Eternal."  It  is  no  slavish  feeling,  if  man  be  true  to  himself. 
It  is  not  a  blind  terror,  not  a  Panic  inspiration.  It  is  fear  chastened  and  elevated  by 
intelligence,  by  spiritual  fellowship ;  it  is  unbounded  respect,  immeasurable  reverence ; 
it  is  ever  on.  the  way  to  become  perfect  love.  The  result  of  this  genuine  religion  upon 
the  character  is  to  make  us  view  all  things  in  their  relation  to  the  unseen  and  the 
eternal.  Thus  life  is  dignified,  lifted  out  of  meanness,  receives  a  certain  significance 
and  purport  in  its  smallest  details.  Without  religion  we  exist  as  animals,  we  do  not 
live  as  men.  The  busiest  career,  the  loudest  reputation,  the  most  splendid  worldly 
success — what  sense,  what  meaning,  is  there  in  it  without  the  principle  in  the  heart 
which  consciously  binds  it  to  the  unseen  ?  "  'Tis  a  tale  told  by  an  idiot,  full  of  sound 
and  fury,  but  meaning  nothing."  i.  "Eschewed  evil."  Or,  a  man  who  departed  from 
evil.  This  was  the  habit  of  his  life.  It  completes  what  is  given  in  the  second  trait. 
His  rectitude,  leading  him  in  a  direct  line  of  conduct,  delivers  him  from  the  bypaths 
of  deceit,  of  transgression,  the  ways  of  darkness  and  of  shame.  Here,  then,  in  these 
four  words  we  have  suggested  the  idea  of  complete  piety,  the  picture  of  a  constant  and 
a  noble  life,  standing  "  foui-square  to  all  the  winds  that  blow."  We  see  a  spotless 
character,  attended  by  a  fair  fame  in  the  world;  the  secret  foundation  on  which  the 
moral  structure  rests  is  revealed  to  us,  in  a  habit  of  principle,  a  heart  full  of  the 
fear  of  God.  We  look  upon  the  patriarch,  moving  in  the  pure  air  and  the  holy 
sunlight  of  Heaven's  favour,  blessed  with  the  good  will  of  men,  and  with  all  those 
hopes  of  the  future  which  a  past  happiness  inspires,  little  dreaming  that  his  skies 
are  so  soon  to  be  darkened,  and  the  foundations  of  his  earthly  joy  to  be  so  violendy 
shaken, 

HI.  Features  of  external  prosperity.  These,  too,  are  briefly  and  suggestively 
sketched,  and  need  not  be  dwelt  upon  at  length.  All  the  elements  of  a  high  prosperity 
and  great  position  in  that  simple  state  of  life  are  present.  1.  His  family.  He  had 
ten  children,  the  sons  more  than  twice  as  numerous  as  the  daughters.  Men  felt  in 
those  times  that  a  large  family  was  a  great  blessing,  one  of  the  visible  marks  of 
Heaven's  favour.  Sons  especially  were  a  new  source  of  wealth  and  importance  to  the 
household.  Parents  in  our  day  are  perhaps  seldom  in  the  habit  of  thanking  God  for 
large  families.  They  are  too  ready  to  groan  beneath  the  care,  rather  than  to  cheer- 
fully admit  the  reality  of  the  blessing.  Yet  how  constantly  do  we  see  proofs  of  the 
happiness  of  large  families,  even  in  poverty  !  A  rightly  ordered  household  is  the 
Diyinest  of  schools.  Character  is  so  variously  developed  and  in  so  many  ways  tried 
and  educated  m  them.    In  the  variety  of  this  little  world  there  is  a  fine  preparation 


OH.  1. 1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  II 

no  object  of  pity  in  any  time  when  men  are  obeying  the  laws  of  God  in  their  social 
life.  It  is  the  solitary,  and  those  who  are  doomed  to  lead  a  too  self-centred  existence, 
who  need  our  pity.  2.  His  property.  It  consisted,  we  are  told,  in  ample  herds  o/ 
cattle — sheep,  camels,  oxen,  asses,  and  in  a  proportionate  number  of  servants.  All 
man's  wealth  is  derived  from  the  earth  and  its  products  in  plants  and  animals.  And 
it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  reminded  of  this.  We  whose  wealth  is  represented  by  mera 
symbols  and  figures  for  the  most  part  have  not  the  sense  of  our  dependence  brought 
home  to  us  so  vividly  as  he  who  leads  the  simple  pastoral  life  of  Job.  There  is  health 
and  blessing  in  the  calling  of  the  husbandman  and  the  shepherd,  living  so  near  to 
Mother  Earth,  constantly  reminded  of  their  dependence  upon  her,  of  their  power  by 
diligence  to  extract  comfort  from  her  bosom.  We  all  were  Once  tillers  and  herdsmen 
and  hunters ;  these  are  man's  primeval  occupations,  and  he  must  return  to  them  again 
and  again  if  he  is  to  continue  to  prosper.  Let  us  take  the  lesson  that  all  sources  of  profit 
which  are  connected  with  the  improvement  of  the  earth  are  the  healthiest  that  we  can 
draw  upon.  To  develop  the  earth  and  the  mind  of  man — ^natural  and  spiritual  cultiva- 
tion—these are  noble  works  and  worthy  pursuits.  Let  the  emigration  of  the  young  and 
vigorous  into  the  vast  untilled  tracts  of  the  world  be  encouraged.  There  let  them  wed 
toil  with  nature,  and  build  up  scenes  of  comfort  and  happiness  like  that  in  which  the 
patriarch  dwelt. 

IV.  Piety  AMrosT  the  temptations  of  pbosperitt.  It  was  an  ancient  saying 
that  a  good  man  struggling  with  adversity  was  a  sight  for  the  gods.  But  how  much 
more  so  a  good  man  struggling  with  prosperity.  For  while  adversity  menaces  our 
physical  well-being,  not  less  does  prosperity  endanger  our  spiritual  health.  It  does  not 
openly  attack,  it  softens,  it  relaxes,  it  undermines.  For  ten  men  who  can  bear  poverty 
is  there  one  who  can  bear  riches?  What  lovely  spiritual  blossoms  spring  out  of  the 
scant  soil  of  outward  misery,  like  the  prisoner's  flower  between  the  stones  of  his 
dungeon  1  What  moral  emaciation,  what  leanness  of  soul,  may  attend  the  full  purse, 
cower  in  the.  splendid  mansion,  lurk  beneath  the  fine  raiment  of  the  worldly  great! 
Even  with  true  men,  who  are  not  to  be  easily  overcome  by  outward  temptations,  it 
holds  good,  and  they  will  own,  in  the  beautiful  words  of  Milton,  that  riches  "  slacken 
Yirtue  and  abate  her  edge."  We  are  not,  indeed,  to  infer,  because  so  much  is  said  in 
the  Gospel  on  the  dangers  of  riches  to  the  soul,  that  there  are  no  dangers  in  poverty. 
But  the  truth  is  that  the  dangers  of  riches  are  more  subtle,  less  obvious,  being 
associated  with  pleasure,  not  with  pain.  Poverty  stings,  riches  lull  the  soul.  Misery 
may  pervert  the  conscience ;  but  luxury  seems  to  put  it  to  sleep.  Our  life  is  a  struggle 
of  the  outward  with  the  inward.  The  outward,  in  one  form  or  other,  threatens  to  get 
the  better  of  us.  On  this  great  contest  and  agony  the  real  interest  of  life,  aU  its  tragedy 
and  poetry,  depend.  And  if  it  kindles  admiration,  enthusiasm,  awakens  the  sense  of  the 
sublime  to  see  the  victory  of  the  sonl  over  adversity,  poverty,  contempt,  should  it  not 
equally  delight  our  best  feeling  to  see  the  victory  of  the  soul  over  riches  and  prosperity? 
In  the  case  of  many,  take  away  their  surroundings,  and  they  are  nothing.  The  picture 
is  worthless  apart  from  the  frame.  Others  are  great  in  any  circumstances.  They  do 
not  make  the  man.  It  is  the  man  who  makes  them  interesting.  They  may  change, 
they  may  be  reversed ;  the  man  remains  the  same.  It  is  such  a  moral  hero  of  the 
tranquil  scenes  of  peace  that  we  are  to  contemplate  in  Job.  His  piety  is  well  brought 
out  in  the  contrast  between  the  thoughtlessness  of  his  children  and  his  own  seriousness 
(vers.  4,  5).  They,  in  the  heyday  of  youth  and  health  and  spirits,  were  wont  on  holi- 
days or  birthdays  to  meet  and  hold  high  festival  in  one  another's  houses.  They  give 
the  type  of  the  thoughtless  cultivators  of  pleasure.  Nor  is  it  hinted  that  there  was 
anything  vicious  in  their  pleasures.  They  loved  the  joyous  pastimes  of  their  season  or 
life,  and  they  took  pleasure  in  one  another's  company — that  was  all.  No  hint  is  given 
that  in  the  subsequent  calamity,  they  fell  victims  to  the  judgment  of  God  upon  their 
sins.  They  pass,  with  this  brief  mention,  out  of  sight,  and  all  the  interest  centres  upon 
Job.  What  he  felt  and  knew  was  that  pleasure,  however  innocent,  dulls,  like  riches,  the 
soul  towards  Goi  Young  people  have  been  seen  to  remove  the  family  Bible  from  its 
place  in  making  preparations  for  a  dance,  as  if  conscious  that  there  was  something  in  the 
free  indulgence  of  the  instincts  of  pleasure  inconsistent  with  the  presence  of  the  solemn 
reminders  of  religion.  But  pleasure  has  already  travelled  beyond  the  limits  of  modera- 
tion, and  entered  the  region  of  lawlesspcss,  licence,  and  escess,  when  there  c^n  be  « 


20  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  i.  1— 2a 

^sposition  to  ignore,  even  for  a  moment,  the  holy  influences  of  religion,  the  presence 
of  God.  In  contrast,  then,  to  the  gay  abandonment  to  mirth,  the  thoughtless  devotion 
to  the  pleasures  of  the  hour  on  the  part  of  his  children,  we  see  in  Job  a  mind  which 
no  distraction  could  divert  from  tiie  constant  sense  of  his  relation  to  his  God.  A  kindly 
father,  he  did  not  interfere  to  spoil  his  children's  natural  and  innocent  festivities  on 
these  special  occasions  of  joy;  but  his  thought  followed  them,  with  upliftingg  of  the 
heart,  and  prayers  for  their  preservation  from  those  evils  which  may  arise  in  the  very 
midst  of  the  scenes  of  highest  social  enjoyment,  like  serpents  from  a  bed  of  flowers. 
Still,  we  need  not  assume  excess  or  evil  on  the  part  of  Job's  children ;  the  language 
merely  suggests  the  anxiety  of  his  mind  lest  such  should  be.  It  may  be  that  the 
fear  of  God  had  entered  their  hearts  too,  and,  restraining  their  enjoyment  within  due 
bounds,  and  inspiring  thankfulness,  allowed  their  festivals  to  be  crowned  with  the 
favour  of  Heaven.  One  of  our  famed  English  writers,  describing  the  scene  at  an  old 
French  peasant's  house,  when,  afler  the  labours  of  the  day,  before  retiring  to  rest, 
the  young  people  of  the  household  joined  in  a  cheerful  dance,  says  he  noticed  some 
slight  gesture,  some  uplifting  of  the  eyes  or  hands,  at  a  particular  point — "  in  a  word,  I 
thought  I  saw  religion  mingling  with  the  dance  1 "  A  beautiful  hint  for  those  who  are 
perplexed  with  the  problem  how  to  unite  religion  with  relaxation,  to  satisfy  the  instinct 
for  amusement  consistently  with  piety.  There  is  no  solution  to  be  found  for  the 
problem  except  in  the  cheerful  and  loyal  surrender  of  the  heart  to  God,  and  the  intel- 
ligent worship  of  him  in  all  our  activities,  all  our  pleasures.  It  is  a  narrow  or  a  spurious 
conception  of  religion  which  shuts  us  out  from  any  genuine  pleasures.  The  habitual 
recognition  of  our  Creator  in  the  use  of  this  sensitive  organization  of  body  and  mind 
which  is  his  gift  is  the  means  of  enhancing  and  at  the  same  time  hallowing  every  healthy 
pleasure  of  the  body  and  the  soul.  One  of  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit,"  one  of  the  graces 
of  the  Christian  life,  one  of  the  results  of  true  piety,  is  "  temperance,"  "  moderation,"  or 
"  self-control."  We  see  this  in  Job.  And  we  see  the  genuineness  of  his  piety  amidst 
prosperity  in  the  anxiety  he  feels  lest  his  children  should  have  transgressed  against 
this  law  of  conduct  (ver.  5).  "  It  may  be,"  he  said,  "  that  my  sons  have  sinned,  and  said 
farewell  to  God — abandoned  or  forgotten  him  in  their  hearts."  The  next  point  is — 
piety  manifested  in  ritual.  Ritual,  or  cultus,  has  an  important  place  in  the  history 
and  development  of  religion.  It  is  the  outward  presentation  of  religion,  as  symbolic  of 
an  inward  reality.  As  cleanliness  and  neatness  of  person,  propriety  and  gentleness  of 
manners,  have  a  certain  value  as  an  index  of  the  inner  man,  so  with  the  ritual  and  sym- 
bolic side  of  relit;ion.  It  is  a  kind  of  language,  and  has  the  only  value  that  language  can 
have — that  of  meaning  something.  When  it  no  longer  has  a  meaning,  it  must  pass 
away  and  be  replaced  by  a  more  vital  mode  of  expression.  For  both  language  and 
ritual  aie  the  changing  element  in  religion ;  the  inward  and  spiritual  is  the  abiding  aud 
eternal.  Now,  we  are  here  carried  back  to  a  time  when  the  outward  expression  of  piety 
was  different  and  more  elaborate  than  with  us.  Sacrifices  of  various  kinds  offered  a 
most  significant,  powerful,  varied  medium  of  communication  of  the  soul's  penitences 
devotions,  aspirations  to  God.  Here  we  have  the  ritual  of  penitence— the  trespass 
offering.  It  is  the  devout  longing  for  reconciliation  to  God,  oneness  with  God,  that  is 
expressed,  following  on  the  sense  of  a  rupture,  or  possible  rupture,  through  carelessness 
or  transgression  of  the  soul's  true  relations  to  him.     An  account  of  such  oflerinsa 

under  the  Law  of  Moses  will  be  found  in  Lev.  iv. ;  vi.  17 — 23 ;  vii.  1 10.    And  Job 

rising  early  after  each  of  these  festivals,  was  wont  to  send  for  his  children  individuallyl 
that  they  might  be  present  at  the  solemn  sacrifice,  and  thus  symbolically  receive 
purification  and  absolution  from  the  stain  of  guilt.  Thus  there  rises  before  us,  in  this 
concluding  trait  of  the  character  of  Job,  the  picture  of  one  who  sought  first  the  kingdom 
of  God,  and  to  be  right  with  liim — an  example  of  paternal  love  and  piety ;  of  one" who 
identified,  like  Joshua  (xxiv.  15),  his  household  with  himself  in  the  service  of  the  EternaL 
By  the  pleasing  art  of  the  sacred  poet,  our  interest,  our  sympathy,  is  already  powerfully 
drawn  towards  the  hero  of  his  story.  The  curtain  falls  on  this  bright  life-scene  as  if 
with  the  good  wishes  and  prayers  of  all  spectators.  May  the  shadow  of  Job  never  grow 
less !  May  his  path  be  as  the  shining  light,  increasing  to  the  perfect  day  !  May  he 
continue  blessing  and  blessed  in  the  bosom  of  his  family  and  household,  advance  to 
"  old  age  with  honour,  troops  of  friends,"  and  com«  to  hia  end  in  his  season,  as  a  diock 
pf  corn,  fully  ripe  I — J. 


OH.  1.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  21 

Vera,  6 — 12. — Goumds  in  heaven  concerning  man's  life  on  earth.  I.  Etbbt  man's 
IIFB  IS  AN  OBJECT  OF  INTEKEST  IN  HEAVEN.  This  Is  a  sublime  thought,  powerfully 
suggested  by  the  present  passage,  and  full  of  comfort  for  every  man  who  trusts  in  the 
goodness  of  God.  "Every  man's  life  a  plan  of  God's"  (see  the  powerful  sermon  of 
Dr.  Bushnell  on  this  subject).  Even  of  men  who  do  not  consciously  know  God  or 
own  his  providence,  this  is  true.  Their  career  is  ooatroUed  by  a  mysterious  direction ; 
their  mistakes  or  misdeeds  overruled  for  good.  Of  Gyrus,  for  example,  it  is  said,  "  I 
have  called  thee  by  thy  name :  I  have  sumamed  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known 
me"(Isa.  xlv.  4). 

II.  But  in  how  PEcnLiAELV  happy  a  sense  is  this  true  of  eveet  good  man's 
life!  His  way  is  often  entangled,  perplexed,  darkened  to  himself;  but  never  so  to 
God.  From  the  bright  scene  of  heavenly  light  and  contemplation,  where  the  map  of 
every  life  is  spread  open  to  view,  we  are  soon  to  |jlimge  into  gloom  and  sorrow  by  the 
side  of  the  afflicted  servant  of  God.  But  let  us  carry  the  memory  of  this  glimpse  of 
heaven  through  all  the  windings  of  the  maze  of  grief  which  soon  we  are  to  tread  iu 
fancy,  and  may  one  day  follow  in  actual  experience.  Already  let  us  take  the  lesson 
home — that  the  way  of  God's  children  is  not  hidden,  their  cause  not  passed  over,  by 
the  Most  High.  Their  steps  are  ordered  by  him.  In  their  blindness  they  will  be 
led  by  paths  they  have  not  known.  They  may  seem  to  themselves  exiled  from  joy, 
banished  from  light  and  love ;  but  he  will  yet  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and 
crooked  ways  straight,  and  will  never  forsake  them.  For  in  the  life  of  flower  and 
bird  even,  much  more  in  the  life  of  man,  there  is  a  plan  of  God. 

III.  Every  man's  life  the  object  of  opposing  infujencbs:  of  good  and  evil, 
pleasure  and  pain,  happiness  and  misery,  heaven  and  helL  Nowhere  is  this  grand 
secret  of  the  mechanism  of  our  being  more  distinctly  disclosed  than  in  this  book.  The 
presence  of  an  evil  influence,  ever  curious  and  busy  about  our  life,  is  distinctly  acknow- 
ledged ;  its  origin  hh  in  mystery.  We  must  recognize  this  dualism  of  influence  on 
man's  life  without  attempting  to  solve  it.  After  all  that  has  been  thought  and  said 
on  the  subject,  we  can  only  acknowledge  that  it  is  a  fundamental  condition  of  our 
earthly  existence.  To  ignore  it,  and  try  to  live  in  some  fool's  paradise  of  extreme 
optimism,  is  to  expose  ourselves  to  disappointment  and  to  danger;  or  to  fall  into  the 
other  extrenae  of  a  gloomy,  desponding  pessimism  is  to  be  unfaithful  to  that  instinctive 
sense  of  God's  goodness- which  is  deep-seated  in  the  heart.  Scripture  guides  us  in  a 
midille  course  between  these  extremes — places  before  us,  in  equal  distinctness,  the  two 
poles  of  thought,  the  opposing  currents  of  influence;  and  this  makes  the  practical  duty 
manifest,  to  abhor  the  evil  and  cleave  to  the  nood,  to  fill  the  heart  with  reverence  and 
trust  for  God,  and  to  depart  from  evil  in  all  its  forms. 

IV.  The  spikit  of  acoosation  concerned  with  good  men's  lives.  This  is  the 
great  characteristic  of  the  evil  spirit  spoken  of  in  various  parts  of  Scripture.    He  is 

'"Satan,"  that  is,  "the  Adversary,"  one  whose  delight  is  in  laying  snares  for  men, 
seducing  them  from  rectitude,  and  then  slandering  and  accusing  them  before  God. 
"  The  accuser  of  our  brethren,  who  accuses  them  before  our  God  day  and  night "  (Rev. 
xii.  10).  Here,  in  the  court  of  heaven,  the  radiant  scene  of  Divine  glory  which  is 
brought  before  our  view,  while  the  rest  of  the  retinue  of  angels,  "  sons  of  God,"  aie 
present  to  discharge  their  functions  of  praise  and  of  service,  the  evil  genius  of  men 
comes  to  enjoy  the  dark  pleasure  of  detraction  and  spite.  While  those  bright  spirits 
habitually  look  on  the  bright  side  of  things,  upon  the  creation  lit  up  by  the  smile  of 
Gtd,  reflecting  everywhere  his  wisdom  and  his  power,  Satan  dwells  upon  the  dark 
side  of  things— upon  that  frailty  and  corruptibility  of  man,  which  appears  to  be  the 
only  blemish  in  the  fine  picture  of  God's  world.  Note  the  restlessness  of  this  spirit  of 
aecusation.  To  and  fro  he  roams  in  the  earth,  seeking  rest,  but  finding  none.  How 
true  a  picture  is  this  of  every  human  heart  which  has  given  way  to  evil,  and  has  thus 
become  a  mirror  of  the  dark  spirit!  How  restless  are  all  men  who  are  ill  at  ease  in 
themselves,  because  devoid  of  peace  with  their  Godl  The  hunger  for  mischief  is  the 
counterpart  of  the  hunger  for  righteousness.  They  roam  about,  discontented,  mad- 
dened at  the  sight  of  goodness  and  purity  which  they  have  lost;  barking,  snappmg, 
biting,  devouring,  like  beasts  of  prey— fastening  upon  noble  reputations  and  dragging 
them  to  the  ground,  as  the  panther  springs  upon  the  noble  stag  of  the  forest.  What 
ueed  have  we  to  be  warned  against  the  misery  of  allowing  ourselves  to  become  the 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  tea.  1. 1—22, 


servants  of  so  dark  a  spirit,  the  agents  of  suoh  malice  I  Whenever  we  find  the  rust  of 
slander  and  backbiting  gathering  too  easily  on  our  tongues,  whenever  we  find  that  the 
sight  of  good  men's  failures  affords  us  more  pleasure  than  that  of  their  success  and 
honour,  we  have  need  to  look  closely  into  the  heart.  We  must  be  ill  before  we  can 
enjoy  these  diseased  pleasures.  A  soul  in  health  towards  Q-od  delights  to  see  the 
reflection  of  that  health  in  the  faces  and  the  lives  of  others.  It  is  the  misery  of  con- 
scious sin  which  seeks  relief  in  the  sin  of  others.  Whether  in  good  or  in  evil,  we 
cannot  endure  to  be  alone.  The  fulness  of  the  heart's  joy  must  have  expression,  and 
so  must  the  burden  of  its  unpardoned  guilt — the  one  in  words  of  charity  to  men  and 
praise  to  God;  the  other  in  those  of  bitterness  and  blasphemy.  But  this  scene  sets 
before  us  a  man  who  is  to  become  the  object,  rather  than  the  subject,  of  this  malignant 
influence.  Job  is  the  victim,  not  the  agent,  of  Satanic  slanders.  And  it  is  well  to 
consider  here  what  there  is  in  the  constitution  of  our  nature  which  lays  us  open  to 
these  diabolical  attempts.  1.  There  is  a  weak  side  in  the  nature  of  every  one.  The 
sensnons  side  of  nature  presents  a  constant  opening  to  attack.  We  can  be  easily  bribed 
by  bodily  pleasures  and  frightened  by  bodily  pains.  Our  aflfectious  too  often  expose 
us.  We  may  be  fortified  on  all  sides ;  yet  there  is  some  postern  door  or  secret  entrance 
to  the  seat  of  will,  which  our  wife,  or  little  child,  or  bosom  fiiend  is  well  acquainted 
with  and  has  the  key  of,  and  can  readily,  at  any  hour  of  day  or  night,  pass  through. 
Our  tastes,  pursuits,  circumstances,  varioiisly  constitute  sources  of  weakness.  Some 
men  appear  richer  toward  God  amidst  poverty  and  struggle ;  with  many  comfort  and 
competence  seem  to  foster  and  beautify  their  piety.  In  the  case  of  Job,  an  attack  is 
suddenly  made  all  along  the  line ;  he  is  assailed  in  all  the  weak  points  of  humanity. 
And  in  this  completeness  of  bis  trial,  with  the  result,  lies  a  main  pomt  of  instruction 
in  the  book.  2.  In  the  best  of  men  there  is  a  mixture  of  motives.  A  man  chooses 
the  right  from  principle— from  the  fear  of  God  in  his  heart.  But  he  has  promises 
beforehand  to  stimulate  and  encourage  his  choice,  and  successes  afterwards  to  con- 
firm it.  None  long  travels  on  the  narrow  way  without  discovering  that  it  is  not  only 
the  right  path,  but  the  wise  one ;  not  only  the  right  and  the  wise  jath,  but  the  p^th 
of  happiness,  honour,  and  peace.  Therefore,  at  any  given  point  in  a  man's  course,  it 
may  be  difficult  to  determine  what  is  the  ruling  motive  of  good  within  him.  Did  lie 
begin  to  be  good  because  he  believed  beforehand  that  it  would  turn  out  well  with  him 
in  this  world?  Does  he  persevere  because  he  has  discovered- by  experience  that  god- 
liness is  profitable  for  this  life?  or  is  the  fear  and  love  of  the  Eternal  and  his 
righteousness  the  greatest,  deepest,  secret  of  his  career?  Who  can  answer  these  ques- 
tions ?  Can  any  observer  from  outside  ?  Can  the  man  himself  answer  these  questions  ? 
No.  Trial,  judgment,  the  sifting  by  the  winnowing-fan,  the  cleansing  of  the  refiner's 
fire,  can  alone  declare  what  sort  of  man  he  is  to  himself  and  to  others.  By  trial  the 
inferior  and  the  superior  motives  are  separated.  "  Experience  worketh  knowledge ; "  and 
all  new  knowledge  is  new  power.  Blessed,  then,  the  man  that  endureth  affiiction. 
The  fine  old  Greek  proverb,  in  his  case,  toS^/ioto,  /lafl^/iora,  comes  true — "  to  suffer  is 
to  learn."  Thus  the  very  malignancy  of  his  adversary,  by  the  overruling  of  supreme 
wisdom  and  goodness,  turns  to  his  advantage ;  the  calumnious  foe  becomes  the 
unwilling  friend.  As  the  general  feels  grateful  for  an  assault  which  has  been  severe, 
but  in  resisting  which  ho  has  been  taught  a  new  lesson  in  war,  so  the  faithful  heart 
thanks  God  in  the  end  for  the  permission  of  those  trials  which  have  called  forth  to 
the  utmost  and  corroborated  the  holy  energies  within.  3.  Every  outwardly  good 
deed,  every  outwardly  good  lift,  admits  of  a  twofold  explanation,  until  the  real  facts 
he  known.  This  follows  from  the  theory  of  motives.  The  most  disinterested  action, 
in  semblance,  may  conceivably  be  referred,  by  a  subtle  analysis  of  motives,  to  soma 
egotistic  and  more  or  less  faulty  motive.  Here  we  have,  in  the  theory  of  Satan  con- 
cerning the_  piety  of  Job,  an  illustration  of  these  laws.  And  the  evil  spirit,  we  may 
say,  is  within  his  right  in  insisting  upon  it,  until  the  facts  of  experience  shall  refute 
him.  It  is  trial  alone  which  can,  by  its  clear  manifestation,  refute  the  dark  insinua- 
tions of  our  spirilnal  foes.  Every  man  has  two  sides  to  his  life— an  outward  and  an 
inward.  Does  the  inward  correspond  to  the  outward?  Who  can  judge  without 
proof?  What  all-silencing  proof  can  there  be  but  facts,  stamped  by  suffering,  written 
in  blood  and  in  fire  ?  The  Greeks  had  a  saying  that  the  character  of  a  man  was 
aot  to  be  known  until,  he  was  placed  in  authority  (Sophodea,  •  Aatigone  'i    Cer- 


m.  1 1-22.3  'sm  uooK  OB"  JOB.  ^ 

tainly  that  is  one  form  of  trial,  through  which  Job  had  passed,  gaining  noble  instruc- 
tion. But  it  is  a  form  of  temptation  far  more  severe  to  be  cast  down  suddenly  from 
previous  influence  and  wealth,  than  to  be  suddenly  raised  to  it.  Our  instinctive  sym- 
pathy and  pity  towards  those  who  have  thus  suffered  teach  us  that  it  is  so.  And  yet 
this  is  the  trial  for  the  chosen  of  God,  for  the  selected  specimens  of  his  grace,  the  vessels 
of  his  holy  fashioning.  He  will  rebut  and  discomfit  the  slanders  of  the  adversary  and 
of  all  his  followers,  who  love  to  scoff  at  the  reality  of  goodness,  to  discount  and  depreciate 
and  deny  every  human  excellence,  by  subjecting  his  faithful  ones  to  the  last  intensity 
of  the  furnace,  that  the  truth  and  eternal  reality  of  his  work  in  the  soul  may  be 
manifest  to  the  eyes  of  all,  both  of  the  good  and  the  eviL 

V.  Life,  then,  is  divinblt  dblivekkd  to  tbiau  This  is  the  teaching  of  this 
passage ;  it  is  the  teaching  of  all  Scripture.  There  is  a  precise  permission  from  the 
sovereign  will  for  evil  to  wreak  its  malice  upon  the  good  man.  There  is  a  distinction 
between  the  way  in  which  good  and  evil  respectively  come  upon  us  from  the  Divine 
hand.  Good  comes  immediately,  directly,  fresh  from  the  heart  and  love  of  him  who 
is  all  goodness.  But  evil  comes  indirectly,  through  the  dark  and  devious  channels  of 
evil  and  hostile  wills.  In  blessing,  in  joy,  God  visits  us  in  Person,  Ms  sunshine  pierces 
through  the  windows  of  the  soul  unsought.  But  evil  is  only  a  licensed  visitor  to  our 
dwelling,  to  our  heart.  And  it  is  difficult  to  recognize  behind  the  gloomy  shape  a 
controlling  hand,  a  solicitous  and  loving  eye.  But  it  is  one  of  the  deep  lessons  of  piety 
that  we  have  all  to  learn — ^to  say  in  affliction,  "  God  permits  this,"  as  well  as  in  joy, 
"  God  sends  this."  It  may  be  learnt.  In  the  low-stooping  thunderous  cloud,  in  the 
bursting  rain  and  hail  over  our  heads,  we  may  feel  the  nearness  of  God,  know  his  hand 
to  be  laid  upon  our  conscience,  his  voice  to  be  appealing  to  the  inmost  sense  of  our 
relation  to  him,  which  had  perhaps  slumbered  beneath  the  bright  and  cloudless  blue. 

VL  God  does  not  deltveb  life  to  dbste0otion,  though  he  mat  dblitee  it 
FOB  A  TIME  TO  THE  FOWBB  OF  EVIL.  "  He  hath  ))ot  appointed  us  to  wrath,  but  to 
obtain  salvation."  Jehovah  says  to  Satan,  "  All  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power ;  only 
upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  hand."  Let  us  fix  our  attention  on  this  antithesis : 
what  a  man  has  and  what  a  man  is.  The  stoic  Epictetus  dwelt,  in  his  noble  exhorta- 
tions, on  this  contrast.  There  are  things  he  says  which  are  "  within  us,"  within  our 
power,  within  the  scope  of  our  choice  and  control ;  other  things  which  are  "  not  within 
our  power,"  over  which  our  will  has  little  or  no  controL  The  important  matter,  then, 
in  self-government,  is  to  be  master  of  this  inward  sphere  of  thought,  feeling,  purpose. 
Then  outward  changes  can  work  us  no  real  harm.  One  who  had  duly  imbibed  these 
lessons  said  of  his  persecutors,'"  They  may  kill  me,  but  thoy  cannot  hurt  me."  But 
the  aspect  of  this  truth  in  the  light  of  the  Christian  revelation  is  more  winning  than 
the  cold  and  haughty  self-reliance  of  stoicism.  He  who  has  given  himself  up  to  the 
love  and  guidance  of  a  heavenly  Father  knows  that  his  soul  is  safe,  whatever  the 
disease  of  his  body  or  the  sufferings  of  his  mind.  Oast  down  he  may  he,  destroyed  he 
cannot  be,  so  long  as  he  is  held  by  the  hand  that  sustains  the  world,  "  Wherefore  let 
them  that  suffer  in  well-doing  commit  their  souls  unto  him,  as  unto  a  faithful  Creator." 

VII.  This  passage  shows  us  that  there  is  liqht  in  heaven  while  thkeb  is 
DABKNESS  UPON  EABTH.  There  is  the  silver  lining  behind  the  cloud  of  every  earthly 
affliction ;  for  the  presence  of  eternal  wisdom  and  love  is  there.  All  was  soon  to  be 
darkness,  dismay,  and  doubt  for  the  mind  of  Job ;  but  to  him  who  sees  the  end  from 
the  beginning  all  was  clear  and  full  of  meaning.  The  machinations  of  the  devil  will 
only  serve  to  bring  out  the  fidelity  and  patience  of  his  chosen  servant,  who  will  live  to 
see  the  "end  of  the  Lord,"  that  he  is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy.  Let  us  lift 
up  our  thoughts,  in  every  season  of  personal  or  national  depression,  in  every  time  of 
discouragement,  when  wickedness  abounds,  when  the  devil  seems  to  be  advancing  his 
kingdom  and  the  light  of  faith  is  waning,  to  that  eternal,  unquenchable  light  of  the 
wisdom  that  cannot  err,  the  will  that  evil  never  can  defeat.  Let  us  nsver  forget  that 
"Blessing,  not  cnrsing,  mies  above. 
And  that  in  it  we  live  and  move." 

J. 

Vers.  13 23.-1^  invasion  of  trtnihle,  and  its  first  effect  on  Job.    The  lessons  on 

wlii^  we  have  been  dwtittag,  and  on  which  Job  had  doubtless  deeply  meditated  in  ths 


24  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  i.  1—22. 

leisure  of  his  prosperous  days,  were  now  to  receive  the  illustration  of  actual  experience. 
A  series  of  waves  breaks  in  upon  his  peaceful  home  and  heart,  and,  in  the  space  of  • 
few  short  hours,  turns  the  smiling  scene  into  utter  desolation.  We  may  notice  in  the 
•tory  the  following  points :  the  calamities  of  Job,  and  their  first  effect  upon  his  mind, 

I.  The  calamities.  Their  suddenness  and  unexpectedness.  A  bright  holiday 
was  selected  by  Providence  for  the  discharge  of  those  torrents  of  woe.  The  young 
people  were  making  merry  in  their  eldest  brother's  house — perhaps  on  his  birthday— 
when  the  bolt  out  of  the  blue,  without  a  moment's  warning,  struck.  The  imagination 
is  powerfully  affected  by  such  contrasts.  We  do  not  pity  ourselves  or  others  so  deeply 
when  we  have  had  time  to  prepare  for  the  storm.  The  shock  of  the  blow  is  broken 
when  it  finds  us  forewarned  and  forearmed.  Men  must  all  suffer  at  some  time,  and  at 
some  time  must  die ;  but  the  terror  of  the  unlooked-for  sorrow  is  as  great  as  the  joy 
of  the  unlooked-for  blessing.  But  since  there  is  a  truth  in  the  sayins;  that  "the 
unexpected  always  happens,"  how  important  to  secure  that  only  preparation  for  it 
which  is  within  our  power — a  mind  like  Job's,  fixed  in  principle,  because  fixed  on  God ! 

II.  Theke  was  gradation  in  these  troubles.  They  began  in  the  inferior  elements 
of  life,  and  quickly  rose-  to  their  climax  in  the  superior.  There  was  first  the  loss  of 
property,  in  three  distinct  blows.  First  the  oxen  and  the  asses,  then  the  sheep,  and  then 
the  camels,  were  destroyed ;  and  the  whole  of  the  herdsmen  successively  swept  away. 
After  the  first  loss,  the  instinct  of  Job  would  doubtless  be'  to  say,  "  Thank  God  for 
what  is  left;"  and  the  same  after  the  second;  but  the  third  cuts  off  these  reflections, 
and  strikes  home  the  dreary  conviction,  "  I  am  a  ruined  man  ! "  Who  can  know  but 
those  who  have  suffered  it  what  it  is  to  lose  a  third  or  two-thirds  of  their  worldly 
goods — ^much  more  to  lose  one's  all?  Shakespeare  truly  says  that  "'tis  tenfold  bitterer 
to  lose  than  'tis  great  at  first  to  acquire,"  Still,  a  noble  and  loving  soul,  accustomed  to 
find  in  affection  life's  choicest  boon,  will  be  consoled  by  the  thought, "  My  family  is  left 
me ;  and  their  redoubled  tenderness  and  sympathy,  and  cares  and  hopes  for  them,  will 
stiil  make  life  worth  living."  But  even  this  sentiment,  if  it  rose  in  the  mind  of  the 
mined  man,  is  blighted  in  the  bud  by  the  terrible  news  that  his  sons  and  daughters 
have  all  perished  by  a  sudden  and  violent  death.  Thus  did  some  hidden  wrath  seem 
to  exhaust  its  vials  of  concentrated  fury  on  his  devoted  head ;  and  he  who  had  basked 
so  long  in  the  sunshine  is  plunged  into  the  darkness,  without  apparently  a  single  beam 
of  comfort  or  of  hope  from  without.  Nay,  more ;  that  his  children  should  have  been  cut 
off  in  the  blossom  of  their  sins,  in  the  very  height  of  their  mirth,  hurried  away  without 
time  for  fui'ther  expiation  or  prayer,  seemed,  alter  all  the  father's  earnest  piety,  as  if 
Heaven  had  abandoned  and  doomed  him, 

III.  We  may  notice,  too,  the  variety  op  the  sodbces  of  these  afflictions.  The 
first  came  from  the  hand  of  men,  from  robbers,  from  men  of  violence  and  deceit.  The 
second  fell  from  heaven,  in  the  form  of  devouring  fire.  The  third,  again,  was  a  human 
outrage;  and  the  fourth  and  most  dreailful  again  from  the  tempestuous  violence  of 
heaven.  For  a  just  man  to  be  the  prey  of^ injustice,  to  know  that  bad  men  gain  at  the 
expense  of  hid  loss, is  a  bitter  experience;  but  to  see  mysterious,  superhuman  power, as 
it  were,  in  alliance  and  compact  with  the  wicked,  is  an  awful  aggravation. 

IV.  But  what  is  the  effect  on  the  sufferer's  mind?  a  glorious  halo  indeed 
surf  yundt.  him  in  this  awful  moment.  Now  is  the  time  to  see  what  there  is  in  goodness, 
whS^t  is  the  real  nature  of  faith  ;  now  or  never  the  accuser  must  be  abashed,  and  faint 
hearts  must  take  courage,  and  God  must  be  glorified.  We  learn  from  Job's  behaviour 
that  a  true  life  in  God  is  destined  to  triumph  over  all  outward  change  and  loss,  over 
darkness,  mystery,  and  death,  1,  Faith.  He  believes  in  God,  Not  for  a  moment  is 
his  liiith  shaken.  And  his  first  instinct  is  to  throw  hLpaself  upon  his  God.  He  falls 
upou  "  the  wwld's  great  altar-stairs  which  slope  through  darkness  up  to  God."  "  Behold, 
he  prays,"  and  Satan  already  trembles  for  his  wager.  Oh,  let  us  ever  bend,  reed-like, 
beneath  the  storm  of  Heaven-sent  trial;  not  be  broken  like  the  rigid  oakl  He 
who  can  say  from  the  heart,  like  the  poor  father  in  the  Gospels  (Mark  ix.  24), 
"Lord,  I  believ«,"  shall  presently  find  the  floods  abating,  and  a  great  calm  around 
him.  2.  Resignation.  Our  will  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  supreme  turns  and  crises 
of  being.  We  did  not  come  into  this  world,  we  ought  not  to  attempt  to  go  out  of  it,  - 
by  an  act  of  our  own.  We  must  be  resigned  to  live  or  to  die.  A  supreme  will 
determines  our  coming  and  our  going,  our  entrance  and  our  exit,  in  this  short  scene 


OH.  1 1—22.3  THE  BOOK  OF  JOa 


2£ 


of  life.  We  did  not  determine  the  external  conditiou  in  which  we  should  be  born. 
We  all  came  naked  into  the  world,  and  shall  pass  away  taking  nothing  with  us. 
Our  bodily  composition  is  earthy,  and  it  must  crumble  back  to  earth.  To  her,  the 
all-receiving  mother  of  human-kiud,  we  must  each  return.  The  de  p  sense  of  these 
relations  is  fitted  to  impress  the  habit  of  resignation.  Ami,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
transitoriness  and  weakness  of  our  earthly  estate  should  throw  us  upon  the  great 
spiritual  realities.  Besignation  is  not  religious,  self-renunciation  is  not  complete, 
until  we  learn  not  only  to  give  up  earth  and  earthly  will,  but  to  cast  ourselves 
on  the  bosom  of  the  Eternal.  He  gives  and  he  takes  away  the  things  that  are  no 
part  of  us,  but  only  that  he  may  hold  ourselves,  our  souls,  to  him  lor  ever.  3.  Thanhs- 
giving.  Whatl  thanks  to  God  when  he  takes,  as  well  as  whai  he  gives?  Is  this 
natural?  is  this  possible?  All  is  natural,  is  possible,  to  faith.  Fur  laith  rests  not  upon 
what  Crod  does  at  this  or  that  moment,  but  upon  what  he  ever  is.  His  action  varies ; 
in  himself  there  is  no  variableness,  nor  shadow  of  a  turning.  Joy  and  sorrow,  light 
and  darkness,  every  possible  phase  of  human  experience, — these  are  the  language  of  God 
to  the  soul.  His  meaning  is  one  through  all  tones  of  his  voice.  Blessed,  then,  be  the 
Name,  not  of  the  bestowing,  health  and  joy  imparting  Father  of  light.  Giver  of  every 
good  and  perfect  gilt ;  but  blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Eternal,  true  to  himself  in  all 
his  purposes,  true  to  his  children  in  all  his  dealings  with  them  for  their  good. 

"  Blessed  be  the  hand  that  gives. 
Still  blessed  when  it  takes." 

Oh  that  these  songs,  e^rq/'undts  and  e  tenebris — '"from  the  depth  "  and  "  the  darkness  " 
— might  be  heard  moie  clearly,  more  unfalteringly,  i-n  all  our  public  devotions  as  well 
as  in  all  our  private  prayers  1  This  offering  of  self  to  God  in  trust,  submission,  thanks- 
giving, is  a  "  reasonable  sacrifice."  And  as  its  savour  ascends  to  heaven,  it  brings  its 
peaceful  answer  back  to  the  heart.  The  twenty-second  verse  reminds  us  by  contrast,  of 
the  dinger  of  sinning  against  Gud  by  reproaches  and  murmurs  in  our  sorrow.  "Job 
sinned  not,  and  gave  no  offence  to  God,"  as  the  words  may,  |iorhap^,be  better  rendered. 
And  after  dwelling  so  much  upon  that  temper  which  pleases  our  heavenly  Father,  let 
us  enforce  the  lesson  by  reflecting  on  what  we  are  so  ready  to  i'ui  i;et — that  he  is  justly 
displeased  by  indulgence  in  doubts  of  his  existence  or  goodness,  reboUiun  against  the 
course  of  his  providence,  and  the  refusal  of  praise  to  his  holy  Name. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — T!ie  typical  conditions  of  domestic  happiness.  This  early  Eastern 
poem,  designed  to  throw  light  on  the  methods  of  the  Divine  disci pliue  of  men,  opens 
vrith  a  pleasing  picture  of  domestic  felicity,  presenting  a  typical  example  of  happy 
family  life.  But  Job  is  the  cential  figure.  It  is  the  Book  of  Job.  All  has  its 
relation  to  him.  He'l'd " tile ' "one  "suCjecT " o'l  the  j5wKr''Nirt"iB0fe- (■wriy^is-Je'b^erfegfr 
fbiiii  iiiii  lli('MTiiiin^lnirrTinTh1rtr7tiTTnTimil"lTtTTr'"'''^ll  *''°  °'?infiiitfi  nf  diiir""*-'"  ^Tpi- 
ness  are  present.     They  are  seen  in — 

I.    IhE   PlfiESONAI.   CHAEACTBE   OF   TUB    HEAD   OF   THE    HOUSE.        lu  -his    Spirit    he    JS 

"perfeet."  not  marked,  by  jnmLSsS-  As  "  a  just  man  "  he  walks  in  his  integrity, 
ItETs  deportment  and  his  dealing  with  men  he  is  "  uprij^ht."  No  ciuoked  vagaries  mar 
his  character  or  conduct.  Honesty,  straightforwardness,  sincerity,  are  the  conspicuous 
virtues  of  this  good  man.  Towards  God  he  is  reverent,  devout,  obedient.  The 
foundation  of  all  vrisdom,  as  of  all  virtue,  is  present— he  '•  fears  God."  Evil  he 
"eschews,"  he  avoids  it.  Such  are  the  characteristics  necessary  in  the  head  of  a  godly, 
happy  household. 

[I.  A  second  feature  is  seen  in  the  number  of  the  members  of  the  family  and 
THEiB  AFFECTIONATE  RELATIONSHIPS.  Eaclj  adds  his  owu  element  of  character,  and 
the  varii  ty  of  those  elements  secures  the  completeness  of  the  family  life,  while  affec- 
tioQ  preserves  its  unity.     Love  is.  (he  bond  of  perfectness  in  the  family  as  in  all 

communities.  '      .'  ••        ■,      j-     -1 

III.  A  further  element  is  foufld  in  the  abukdant  PossES8ioNa,jaig>ng  the  family 

from  want  to,9ffl«fi»fier*nd  brti^iffg  witWll  itS  reacnail  mat  could  [.remote  its  comfort 

and  enjoyment. 
IV   Over  the  whole  is  cast  the  guard  and  the  sanctity  of  habitual  religious 

0B8BBVAN0B.    Declaring  (1)  Job's  faith  in  God|  (2)  his  reverent  fear;  (3)  bis  kBow- 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  loii.  1 1—22. 


ledge  of  the  doctrine  of  redemption  by  sacrifice;  (4)  his  religious  domestic  discipline. 
In  all  these  Job  is  a  model  for  the  head  of  a  family.  ,  iv    w    ^ .» 

Most  proper  was  it  that  such  a  man  should  be  "  the  greatest  of  the  sons  of  the  fiast. 
Happy  the  nation  whose  greatest  men  are  its  best !     Happy  the  people  amongst  whom 
the  most  observable  are  the  most  worthy  of  imitation.     Such  was  Job,  the  subject  of 
one  of  the  most  interesting,  as  of  one  of  the  oldest,  examples  of  poetical,  dramatic, 
religious  writing. — B.  Gt. 

Vers.  4,  5. — The  mnctification  of  the  home ;  or,  parental  priesthood.  Parentage 
involves  authority,  responsibility,  power,  and  honour.  It  imposes  special  spiritiial^  or 
religious  duties;  it  demands  right  personal  conduct,  as  an  example  ;  prudent  discipline 
and  careful  instruction.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  father  to  protect  his  family,  not  from 
temporal  evils  only,  but  from  spiritual ;  to  provide  for  their  temporal  and  spiritual  needs. 
The  religious  duties  of  parents  embrace — 

L  Belioious  example. 

n.  Eeligious  instetjotion. 

m.  Eeligious  government  ob  discipline. 

IV.  Eeligious  worship. 

The  Christian  father,  standing  as  the  priest  or  representative  of  his  family  before 
God,  has  not  to  offer  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  his  family,  but  may  and  should  plead 
the  one  Sacrifice  on  behalf  of  all  committed  to  his  care.  These  the  first  conditions  of 
a  happy  home.  In  Job's  case  the  spiritual  instincts  of  the  father  are  excited  on  behalf 
of  his  family  exposed  to  the  evils  of  surrounding  idolatry.  The  Christian  father  has 
equal  cause  to  be  watchful.  Consider  (1)  responsibilities,  (2)  toils,  (3)  rewards,  of 
&ithfiil  Christian  parents. — B,  G. 

Vers.  6—19. — The  trial  of  the  righteous  man.  The  central  subject  of  this  book  is 
the  trial  of  the  righteous  man.  Job  is  acknowledged  of  God  to  be  "a  perfect  and  an 
upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil."  Yet  h§uisJirieii»*BcUried 
Boreljjjjjj^Qfjfi^BJSSioaJiWii'd.  The  difficulty  to  be  solved  by  the  history  of  Job  is 
— ^Sowcanlt^me  to  pass  that  the  r^hteous  suffer?  To  what  end  is  this  permitted  ? 
The  triatTSfJWis  ^fvIdedTnto'^b  parts— the'firstls  briefly  recounted,  it  contains  the 
main  facts;  the  second  part  is  extended.  The  discussion  of  the  book  relates  to  the 
whole. 

I.  Attention  is  instantly  directed  to  the  agent  or  the  trial.  Satan — the 
adversary.  All  our  knowledge  of  the  spirit-world  is  derived  from  Holy  Scripture. 
The  teaching  of  Scripture  concerning  evil  spirits  is  full,  minute,  consistent.  No 
valid  objection  to  the  existence  of  evil  spirits  can  be  raised  on  the  ground  of  our 
ignorance,  or  our  unfamiliarity  with  the  phenomena  attending  the  action  of  evil 
spirits.  It  is  impossible  to  remove  the  teaching  concerning  Satan  from  Scripture  with- 
out doing  so  great  violence  to  it  as  to  derange  the  whole.  To  a  revelation  we  come  to 
be  taught,  not  to  cavil.  But  the  story  is  pictorially  and  dramatically  represented. 
Satan  is  throughout  "  the  agent  of  probation."  Satanic  action  is  not  prevented,  but 
controlled  by  God.  The  spirit  of  Satan  is  revealed  by  the  malignant  accusation  made 
against  Job.  He  charges  Job  with  selfishness ;  his  motive  to  obedience  is  a  false  one ; 
his  intejirity  will  not  stand  a  severe  test.  Very  significant  is  the  representation  of 
the  allowed  Satanic  testing — "  All  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power." 

II.  Attention  is  directed  to  the  nature  of  the  trial.  It  embraces  the  loss 
to  Job  of  his  substance,  hb  servants,  and  his  children.  Wave  after  wave  of  sorrowful 
intelligence  reaches  him.  Yet  it  is  sudden.  While  one  was  "  yet  speaking,  there  came 
also  another."  It  robbed  the  man  of  property,  of  his  possessions ;  the  man  of  honour, 
authority,  and  influence,  of  his  servants;  the  tender  father,  of  his  family.  How  sad 
the  change  in  his  circumstances  I  How  poignant  his  grief  from  the  loss  of  his  children  I 
How  desolate  the  home  1  How  suddenly  the  brightness  of  noon  changed  for  the  dark- 
ness of  midnight  1  It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive  a  picture  of  more  severe  trial.  It 
was  intense,  widespread,  irreparable. 

III.  Attention  is  directed  to  the  teaching  op  thk  trial.  1.  The  folly  of 
depen^ng  too  oontidentLy-an  eaethly-happiBestir.  Bvery-eendition-  oM»a4JJ5fles8~]^e8ent ; 
efcty  grouftiof  hfipe  for  i^  continuance  ;,jtet.towj8pi8sdily4sgtroyedi    STThe  deman4 


Jii.  1 1-22.J  THE  BOOK  OP  JoS.  £? 

for  other  resources  of  blessedness  than  those  found  in  the  changeful  condltiuns  of  the 
present  life.  The  hand  must  not  grasp  earthly  riches  too  firmly.  ^IHhat  is  of  earth 
fadeth:  how  needful  to  seek  "durable  riches"!  3.  The  whole  surroundTngg' aad^os- 
sISgiem-orfiK'rSarti'^a^'IMIBgragtSiSrS^  testing  of  virtue.  4.  The  necessity 
for  such  a  view  of  one's  life,  and  such  a  habit  of  obedience,  as  to  be  able  to  bow  to  the 
Divine  will  in  the  midst  of  our  heaviest  trials.— B.  G. 

Ver.  8. — The  righteous  man.  Eighteousness  as  descriptive  of  human  character 
illustrated  in  Job.  A  few  wprds  only  used.  The  Divine  description.  Highest  testi- 
mony. Generally  "my  servant,"— fthe  most  honourable  distinction.  There  is  no 
higher  calling  in  life  than  to  serve  God.  But  Job  stands  in  special  distinction — he  is 
unequalled  amongst  men.  His  is  the  typical  example  of  righteousaess  till  a  Greater 
than  he  appears.  "  There  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth."  A  truly  honourable  position 
to  be  the  first  man  of  one's  age.  Job  has  the  special  honour  of  this  Divine  judgment. 
Needful  for  us  to  know  the  elements  of  so  exalted  a  character.  They  are  stated.  The 
righteousness  of  Job  is  displayed  in — 

L  Inwabd  banotity.  Freedom  from  evil ;  "  perfect  "—wholeness,  completeness  of 
character;  not  to  be  supposed  free  from  human  frailty,  but  free  from  blemishes  of 
character  and  conduct ;  a  just  man,  having  a  well-balanced,  self-controlled,  law-abiding 
spirit. 

II.  Uprightness.  Conformed  to  that  which  is  right ;  holdin?  a  right  relation  to  God 
and  man;  correct  and  honourable  in  his  dealings;  a  man  of  probity,  truth,  and  honour. 
•'  One  that  feareth  God." 

III.  Ebvebknce  towards  God.  Pious;  fulfilling  religious  duties;  devotional. 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  ; "  "  the  root  of  the  matter  "  in  Job. 

IV.  Abhorbenob  op  evil.  Having  fear  of  God,  he  stands  aloof  from  everything  on 
which  the  Divine  disapprobation  rests.  A  pure  mind  withdraws  from  foulness,  as  a 
charitable  man  from  selfishness,  and  an  upright  man  from  baseness. 

Such  a  character  is  fitted  to  be  a  servaut  of  God.  On  such  the  blessing  of  the  Lord 
rests.  But  such  are  not  exempt  from  trial.  Even  virtue  must  be  tested.  Into  the  hands 
of  the  dark  agent  of  human  probation  even  Job  must  be  cast.  This  book  reveals  this 
truth,  and  illustrates  and  answers  the  difficulties  suggested  by  it. — E.  G. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — The  triumph  of  faith.  The  trial  in  its  great  severity  has  fallen 
upon  Job.  His  oxen  and  asses  have  been  rapaciously  torn  away  from  him  by  the 
Sabeans;  many  of  his  servants  have  been  slain  with  the  edge  of  the  sword;  the  fire  of 
God  has  consumed  the  sheep  and  the  shepherds  who  took  charge  of  them  ;  the  camels 
the  Chaldeans  have  stolen,  and  slain  the  camel-keepers ;  the  house  of  the  eldest  son,  in 
which  Job's  sons  and  daughters  were  feasting,  has  been  smitten  by  a  great  wind,  and 
it  has  fallen,  crushing  the  young  men  beneath  its  ruins.  Could  greater  calamities 
ha[)pen  to  any  man?  This  picture  of  desolation  is  complete.  "SUrtly  6very  quality  ol 
charaetw-is- te&fee4»~  -W'bat-eaiHbr-passimiatsfrB^HeB'fr-eomplaiBiag^ — Wtei*'49"J»b^ 
cOmineHn-fets>'hoi»»  ?     He  presents  the  example  of  the  triumphant  victory  of  faith. 

I.  The  victory  of  faTTU  uau  itd  i'Duhdatiom  in  a  RBeetmfnuji  or  tme-^ivinb 
SUPREMACY.    "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away."    To  live  in  the  abid- 
ing acknowledgniein  "or  the  Divirie"SlTpreffiaflytrHi6  first  "MiiUiSitemjat)uSI!aS^']i 
a*tmim.pWBg-faith.'-  It-  sees  ail-lfflTifrt5"Trr-flmd'sr-Hris"Emg"or^^         feared 
GrsirJCmt-Hrtl-ystEtflB  God..  Fear  supports  faith  as  truly  as  it  sanctifies  love. 

II.  The  victory  op  faith  is  promoted  by  reverential  devotion.  Even  tibo 
keen  pangs  of  sorrow  did  not  prevent  Job  from  lowly  worship.^  He  sought  tBe~DWd 
nr*BTi^T3f-«arT5a:lamlt7rsaS'l^W3g"^  to  withdraw 
him  from  God;  but  he  is  driven  to  despair,  for  there  is  no  helper;  and  the  poor  smitten 
spirit  cannot  stand  alone.  Anotlier  is  driven  to  God,  and  finds  a  Hiding-place  and  Eoct 
of  defence.  When  we  make  God  our  Eel'uge,  he  become*  our  Strength.  It  is  foolish 
to  forget  God  in  the  time  of  our  need.  He  can  help  us  when  all  other  help  fails.  F-i 
will  not  Bee  his  feeble  creatures  come  to  him  with  lowly  prayer,  asking  his  aid  with 
heart  sincere,  and  yet  leave  them  to  their  own  resources.  He  who  before  God  confesso» 
his  want  gains  for  himself  the  Divine  riches. 

IIL  Thb  victobt  oj  faith  is  consistent  with  great  painfulnesb  and  bobbow 


THE  book;  of  job.  [oh  '•  1—^2. 


Job  rent  his  mantle  and  abaved  off  his  hair— Eastern  methods  of  representing  sorrow. 
The  great  Exemplar  was  "exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death."    Ha  also  "  suffered 
—was  pre-eminently  "a  Man  of  sorrows."    The  godly  in  all  ages  have  been  put  to  the 
proof.    "  It  came  to  pass  that  God  did  tempt  Abraham."    This  is  to  be  said  of  every 
■on  of  Abraham. 

IV.  Thb  victoet  of  faith  is  thk  lowly  but  bkoomino  tbibutb  of  the  hijman 

HEAET   TO    THE    BUPBBMAOY,    THB   WISDOM,   AND   THE   OOODSB88    OF    GOD. 

V.  The  victoby  of  faith  ensures  the  utmost  Divinb  appboval;  and,  as  this 
completed  history  is  designed  to  show,  ends  in  a  final  reward  which  hides  the  recollec- 
tion of  the  toil  and  suffering  by  which  it  is  attained.  The  great  lesson  of  all:  "Have 
faith  in  God."— B.  G. 

Ver.  X.—Job.  The  Book  of  Job  opens  with  a  description  of  Its  hero.  The  portrait 
is  drawn  with  tie  few  swift,  strong  strokes  of  a  master-hand.  We  have  first  the  outer 
man  and  then  the  inner — first  Job  as  he  was  known  to  any  casual  observer,  and  then 
Job  as  he  was  seen  by  the  more  thoughtful  and  penetrating,  i.e.  as  he  was  in  his 
true  self. 

I.  The  outer  man.  1.  A  num.  Job  first  appears  before  us  as  a  man.  (1)  Only 
a  man.  Not  a  demi-god,  not  an  angel.  Frail  as  a  man,  feeble,  and  fallible.  (2)  A 
true  man.  Diogenes  went  about  with  a  lanthorn  to  search  for  a  man.  He  need  not 
have  gone  far  if  he  had  been  in  the  land  of  Uz.  Here  was  one  who  revealed  the 
heroism  of  true  manhood  in  the  hour  of  most  severe  triaL  (3)  A  typical  man.  Job 
is  not  called  "  the  man,"  but  "  a  man,"  one  of  a  race.  He  is  not  named  "  the  son  of 
man."  Only  One  could  bear  that  title  in  its  fulness  of  meaning.  Job  was  an  excep- 
tional man  indeed.  But  he  was  not  unique.  We  are  not  to  think  of  him  as  standing 
alone  The  drama  which  is  enacted  in  his  experience  is  a  type — though  on  a  large 
scale — of  the  drama  of  human  life  generally,  2.  A  Oentile.  Job  was  of  "  the  laud 
of  Uz" — a  Syrian  or  an  Arab,  Yet  his  story  occurs  in  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  aud 
there  he  appears  as  one  of  God's  most  choice  saints.  Even  in  the  Old  Testament  the 
Books  of  Job  and  Jonah  show  that  all  Divine  grace  is  not  confined  to  the  narrow 
line  of  Israel.  God  has  now  those  whom  he  owns  in  hi  athen  lands.  To  be  out  of 
the  covenant  is  not  to  be  renounced  by  God,  if  one's  heart  and  life  are  turned  heaven- 
wards. 3.  A  marked  individual.  "  Whose  name  was  Job."  This  man  had  a  name, 
and  his  history  has  made  it  a  great  name.  Though  one  of  a  race,  every  man  has 
his  own  personality,  character,  and  career.  The  significance  of  a  name  will  depend 
on  the  conduct  of  the  man  who  bears  it.  Job— Judas;  what  opposite  ideas  do 
these  two  names  suggest  ?  What  will  be  the  flavour  of  our  names  for  those  who  come 
after  us  ? 

II.  The  inneb  man.  1.  A  mmrcU  character.  (1)  Inwardly  true.  This  seems  to 
be  the  idea  of  the  biblical  word  "  perfect."  No  one  is  perfect  in  our  sense  of  the  word. 
Certainly  Job  was  not  faultless,  nor  had  he  attained  to  the  top  of  the  highest  pinnacle  of 
grace.  But  he  was  no  hypocrite.  There  was  no  guile,  no  duplicity,  in  him.  He  was 
true  to  the  core,  a  man  of  moral  simplicity,  who  wore  no  mask.  Tests  of  trouble  could 
not  prove  such  a  man  false.  (2)  Outwardly  upright.  This  characteristic  is  a  necessary 
consequence  of  the  preceding  one.  No  liian  can  be  inwardly  true  whose  way  of  life  is 
crooked.  Truth  in  the  inward  parts  must  be  followed  by  righteousness  of  conduct. 
Note  what  tremendous  stress  the  Bible  lays  on  plain  integrity.  There  is  no  saintliness 
without  it.  Job  was  an  honest  man — true  to  his  word,  fair.ln  his  dealings,  trustworthy, 
and  honourable.  Such  is  the  man  in  whom  God  delights.  2.  A  religious  character. 
(1)  Positively  devout.  "  One  that  feared  God."  Thus  Job  had  "  the  beginning  of 
wisdom."  Here  was  the  secret  of  his  moral  integrity.  The  deepest  moral  charac- 
teristics of  a  good  man  rest  on  liis  religion.  The  interior  life  cannot  be  sonnd  without 
this ;  for  then,  even  if  the  second  table  of  commandments  m  ly  he  kept,  the  first  is 
neglected  (2)  Negatively  ojiposed  to  sin.  Sin  is  the  opposite  of  devoutness.  The 
religious  man  not  only  shun.s  it;  he  hates  it.  Tiiough  somutinios  he  weakly  succumbs 
to  it,  yet  he  detests  it  It  is  not  enough  not  to  sin,  we  must  hate  and  loathe  sin.— 
W.  F.  A. 

Yen.  2—5. — Th«  daiiger*  </  prosperity.    This  book  proposes  to  give  as  a  picture  of 


OB.  L 1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  29 

extreme  «nd  probably  unprecedented  adversity.  It  is  fitting  that  it  should  open  with 
a  scene  of  exception^prospwityj,  Jip  serve  as  a  eonteastttoctbft-d^rk  scenes  Jhat  follow. 
Moreover,  tbB"TOt^ftErMol£  is  the  better  realized  if  we  observe  tlTal  tbe'ongmal 
prosperity  is  considered  in  its  moral  aspect,  as  concealing  a  possible  temptation  to  sin. 
L  The  peosperity  was  suBsj^^ijEiAfc  1.  A  large  family.  This  is  always  regarded 
in  the  Bible'ftS  a  mark  of  prosperity.  It  is  arrafifliafHffSrTOiSl  condition  of  congested 
populations  that  has  led  to  the  opposite  idea  in  our  own  time.  Certainly,  where 
there  are  means  for  a  livelihood,  the  family  is  a  source  of  joy  and  influence,  as  well  as 
wholesome  self-sacrifice.  2.  ^ffdifirWitf-y  Job  htid  more  than  the  means  for  a 
livelihood.  According  to  the  estimate  of  a  pastoral  life,  he  was  a  very  rich  man, 
notoriously  rich,  and  without  an  equal.  Yet  this  man  knew  and  feared  God.  It  is 
therefore  possible  with  God  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (Matt. 
xix.  2a). 

II.  THE  PB08PEBITY  WAS  ENJOYED.  Job's  sons  and  daughters  Were  feastjn^  together. 
Here  is  a  picture  of  happy  family  life  iiI*W8"BIi(ls"r^l^p3uencC'^""Tire^^  and 
lJi^tiowi»)»iiibatiiiiii»iBefaa«8'peiBeB^a''^cii'p  oTprdsperity  were  not  known  in  Job's  house- 
hjld.  His  family  was  united  and  affectionate.  It  was  by  no  means  ascetic;  but  we 
have  no  reason  for  thinking  it  ought  to  have  been  so.  No  reproach  is  urged  against 
Job's  sons  and  daughters  for  feasting  together.  There  is  a  time  for  innocent  enjoyment, 
and  when  this  is  taken  temperately  and  gratefully,  only  snperstitious  fears  can  suggest 
the  idea  of  a  Nemesis.  The  motto  Oarpe  diem  is  mean  and  execrable,  because  it 
carries  with  it  an  implied  renunciation  of  duty. 

III.  There  was  a  danger  m  this  pbospebity.  Job  feared  lest  his  children  might 
have  renuauced  'God-iirttretr"BSart"8T~Tr^  danger'bf  godlessness.  This  is  serious  in 
the  mind  of  Job,  thoi;^h  it  did  not  show  itself  in  unkind  or  unjust  conduct  to  men. 
To  forsake  God  is  sin,  even  though  a  man  pay  his  debts.  2.  An  internal  evil.  "  In 
their  hearts."  There  might  be  no  open  blasphemy ;  yet  the  hearts  of  the  gay  and 
careless  young  men  and  women  might  be  alienated  from  (iod.  Even  this  is  sin.  3.  An 
evil  threatened  hy  prosperity.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  is  the  very  sin  which  Job 
is  subsequently  tempted  to  commit  by  the  agonies  of  overwhelming  calamities.  Here 
he  thinks  that  prosperity  may  induce  it  in  his  children,  for  that  tempts  men  to  be 
satisfied  with  earth,  to  be  vain,  proud,  and  self-compl  icent. 

IV.  Job  guarded  against  the  danger.  The  patriarchal  religion  made  the  father 
the  priest  of  his  household.  So  he  must  be  always  when  he  realizes  his  position. 
Parents  lay  up  property  for  their  children;  it  is  more  important  that  they  should  make 
provision  for  their  children's  spiritual  welfare.  They  watch  anxionsly  for  symptoms 
of  disease  in  them ;  much  more  should  they  be  on  their  guard  against  the  first  signs 
of  moral  defects.  Job's  children  were  sanctified — ceremonially  cleansed.  Ours  need  to 
be  truly  dedicated  to  God  by  parental  prayers. — ^W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  7. — Satan's  wanderings.  Here  Satan  appears  in  a  very  prominent  and 
privileged  position.  He  is  the  accuser  rather  than  the  tempter.  At  all  events,  he  has 
a  range  of  influence  which  suggests  most  terrible  possibilities.  We  must  remember 
that  we  are  perhaps  reading  a  symbulical  drama,  and  must  not  take  every  line  of  it 
with  dry  literal  exactness,  as  necessarily  descriptive  of  actual  historical  events. 
Nevertheless,  it  suggests  truths  of  great  and  lasting  importance. 

L  Satan  is  at  large.  He  was  at  large  in  the  days  of  Job,  and  he  is  so  now.  The 
days  have  not  yet  come  when  Satan  is  to  he  completely  bound  and  made  quite  power- 
less for  harm.  We  need  therefore  to  be  watching,  for  when  we  are  most  off  our  guard 
lie  is  most  likely  to  appear. 

II.  Satan  is  in  motion.  "  Going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth."  Be  is  not  always 
tempting  us.  He  left  Christ  "  for  a  season  "  after  the  greui  forty  days'  temptation 
(Luke  iv.  13).  But  if  he  leaves  us  for  a  time,  it  is  to  return  again — no  one  can  say 
how  soon.    Otoe  of  his  devices  is  to  surprise  us  with  novel  temptations. 

III.  Satan  is  watchful.  His  eye  was  on  Job.  He  had  found  that_  perfect  and 
upright  man,  studied  him,  lud  laid  deep  plans  for  attacking  him.  Satan  is  indeed  the 
old  serpent,  cunning  and  (  ipable.  There  is  no  weak  place  in  the  armour  that  can 
possibly  escape  the  vigjlaii  le  of  our  horrible  foe. 

IV.  Batak  k  subject  to  God's  judgment.    He  appears  in  Job  as  privilegp'!  to 


M  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  i.  1—22. 

present  himself  among  the  sons  of  God.  The  complete  rebellion  and  utter  fall  of  the 
prince  of  evil  is  not  yet  seen.  But  even  where  that  is  recognized,  as  in  the  New 
Testament,  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  be  able  to  call  his  rebellious  creature  to 
account. 

V.  Satan  is  now  restbiotbd  by  Christ's  victoet.  He  cannot  rangs  at  largo  so 
freely  as  before.  Jesus  Christ  lived  on  earth,  wrestled  with  him,  and  flung  the  foul 
fiend  to  the  earth.  Our  Lord  has  bound  the  strong  man,  and  robbed  his  house 
(Mark  iii.  27).  It  is  true  that  the  bondage  is  not  yet  complete.  But  the  powers  of 
evil  are  crippled  wherever  the  light  of  Christ  shines. 

VI.  Satan's  range  does  not  extend  above  the  earth.  He  wanders  to  and 
fro — in  the  earth.  A  wide  lange,  but  limited.  Here  we  are  tempted  by  the  spirit  of 
evil.  But  no  temptations  can  enter  heaven.  We  have  but  to  hold  out  faithfully  through 
our  earthly  pilgrimage,  and  there  will  be  rest  from  the  assaults  of  our  great  enemy 
when  we  pass  to  the  home  of  the  victorious. 

VII.  Satan's  range  shoitld  be  equalled  bt  that  of  the  messengers  op  tee 
GOSPEL.  If  he  thus  wanders,  so  should  the  Christian  missionaries.  Wherever  the  bite 
of  the  serpent  is  found,  there  should  the  healing  balm  be  sent.  Sin  is  world-wide,  so 
also  are  the  grace  and  power  of  Christ. — W.  F.  A. 


Ver.  9. — Disinterested  piety,  Satan's  suggestion  is  obvious  enough.  Job  is  religious' 
but  Job  is  prosperous.  Cast  down  his  prosperity,  and  his  religion  will  come  down  too 
like  a  house  of  cards. 

L  True  religion  brings  great  rewards.  As  a  matter  of  fact.  Job  was  making 
the  best  of  both  worlds.  While  he  was  fearing  and  serving  God,  God  was  blessing  and 
smiling  upon  him.  1.  Religion  often  hrings  earthly  prosperity.  It  is  frequently  true 
that  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy."  God  shows  his  love  in  very  evident  ways  to  many 
of  his  children,  blessing  them  "  in  basket  and  store."  When  a  good  man  is  prosperous 
in  business  or  home  it  is  only  right  that  he  should  acknowledge  the  kind  tand  from 
which  all  his  happiness  comes.  2.  Religion  always  hrings  heavenly  prosperity.  It 
must  be  well  with  the  soul  that  is  near  to  God.  He  who  owns  Christ  does  most 
certainly  possess  a  pearl  of  great  price.  Even  the  poor  man  in  his  adversity  is  rich 
with  spiritual  treasure  when  he  has  the  love  of  God  in  his  heart, 

II.  The  religion  which  depends  on  rewards  is  not  true.  Job  got  much 
through  his  service  of  God,  or  rather  along  with  that  service ;  for  all  he  had  was  of  God's 
free  grace,  not  of  desert.  But  if  he  had  only  been  religious  in  the  spirit  of  the  hire- 
ling, working  for  pay,  his  religion  would  have  been  rank  hypocrisy.  This  is  true  of 
future  as  well  as  earthly  rewards.  It  applies  not  only  to  the  tradesman  who  goes  to 
church  that  he  may  please  church-going  customers;  it  is  true  also  of  one  who  is  a 
slave  to" other- worldliness,"  and  who  behaves  like  a  fanatical  Mohammedan  when 
he  rushes  forward  to  certain  death  in  battle,  inspired  by  the  expectation  of.flvina 
immediately  to  a  paradise  of  houris.  Self-seeking  in  religion  is  always  fatal  It  is 
natural  to  look  forward  to  the  rewards  which  God  promises ;  but  it  is  fatal  to  ail  devo- 
tion to  make  the  pursuit  of  those  rewards  our  chief  motive.  The  true  servant  of  God 
will  say— 

"  And  I  will  ask  for  no  reward. 
Except  to  serve  thee  stiU." 

IIL  It  is  possible  to  render  disinterested  service  to  God.  The  accuRer  dM 
not  believe  this ;  he  spoke  with  Satanic  cynicism.  There  are  people  who  pride  thern- 
selves  on  being  men  of  the  world,  and  who  deny  that  there  is  any  such  thing  as  disS- 
Snlfn  ^^'''T'^l^.  ^T^^^  ^^^re^^o^  is  that  they  judge  all  i^en  by  theif  own  ow 
standard ;  or  that  they  have  not  the  eyes  to  see  the  best  side  of  life.  With  all  tW 
boasted  keenness  of  vision  there  is  a  whole  realm  of  noble  living  which  is  entirelv 
beyond  their  ken.  The  Satan-spirit  can  never  understand  the  Chrift-Ipirlt  Now  the 
great  problem  of  the  Book  of  Job  lies  in  this.  That  book  is  to  proT  he  faZ'ty  of 
Satan  s  base  insinuation.  It  is  to  show  to  the  astonished  accuser  that  dWntereJt^ 
devotion  IS  possible  It  is  to  prove,  in  the  extreme  instance  of  Job.  that  a  man  mS 
lose  all  the,  apparent  rewards  of  reUgion.  and  yet  not  give  up  his  religion ;  thShe  may 
gyffer  grievous  adversit,-  wjd  yet  not  renounce  W  God.    Job  is  1»  x^im^Si^mxl 


OH.  1. 1— 22J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  SI 

tion  of  this  truth.  But  hehind  Job  Is  God,  and  the  real  secret  is  that  God  can  and  does 
inspire  disinterested  devotion.^W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  12. — In  Satan's  pmver.  I.  God  pkrmits  TBMPOBAt  advbrsitt.  1.  It  cannot 
come  without  his  permission,  Satan  roams  over  the  earth,  longing  for  mischief;  yet 
he  cannot  do  any  harm  till  he  obtains  leave  from  the  court  of  heaven.  It  is  some 
consolation  in  adversity  to  know  that  this  has  not  fallen  without  God's  observing  it, 
nor  even  in  spite  of  his  will.  That  which  he  distinctly  sanctions  cannot  be  really 
bad.  Therefore  adversity  is  not  the  evil  it  appears  to  be.  2.  Ood  does  not  always  inflict 
evil  immediately.  It  is  not  God,  but  Satan,  who  smites  Job.  It  would  seem  that  God 
would  never  have  done  it,  and  that  if  Satan  had  not  sought  permission  to  hurt  Job, 
Job's  prosperity  would  have  remained  unshaken.  This  is  not  like  the  narratives  of 
destroying  angels  sent  forth  by  God  to  smite  Jerusalem  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  16)  and  to 
destroy  the  Assyrian  host  (2  Kings  xix.  35).  In  those  cases  the  calamity  was  from 
God.  Here  it  originates  ih  Satan,  though  it  is  permitted  by  God.  Possibly  we  may 
see  a  ray  of  light  on  the  mystery  of  suffering  in  this  fact,  especially  as  a  similar  thing 
is  seen  in  the  New  Testament,  in  the  case  of  the  woman  "  whom  Satan  has  bound " 
(Luke  xiii.  16),  and  in  the  case  of  a  person  "  delivered  over  to  Satan  "  (1  Tim.  i.  20). 
St.  Paul's  thorn  in  the  flesh  was  not  a  messenger  of  God,  but  "  a  messenger  of  Satan  " 
(2  Cor.  xii.  7).  There  are  evils  which  God  would  not  initiate,  yet  which  it  would  not 
be  well  for  him  at  once  to  restrain  by  force. 

II.  God  limits  the  adversity  he  permits.  Satan  is  permitted  to  lay  hold  on  all 
that  Job  possesses,  but  not  to  touch  the  man  himself.  Thus  the  adversity  is  limited, 
and  on  various  grounds.  1.  According  to  necessity.  It  shall  be  no  greater  than  is 
necessary  to  accomplish  its  object.  God  is  lavish  of  mercies ;  he  is  parsimonious  with 
afflictions — even  in  the  case  of  the  huge  afiflictions  of  a  Job  I  But  he  is  the  Judge  of 
how  much  trouble  is  necessary,  and  we  cannot  estimate  it.  2.  According  to  powers  of 
endurance.  God  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  beyond  that  we  are  able  to  endure 
(1  Cor.  X.  13).  He  knew  Job  when  he  permitted  tremendous  troubles  to  fall  upon 
him.  Those  Titanic  shoulders  could  carry  a  giant's  load  of  calamity.  Weaker  souls 
are  more  gently  dealt  with. 

ni.  The  adversity  is  only  permitted  for  the  bake  of  a  great  good.  To 
the  casual  observer  it  looks  as  though  Job  were  merely  delivered  over  for  Satan  to 
make  diabolical  sport  with  him,  as  the  Philistines  made  sport  with  blind  Samson.  But 
God  would  not  thus  cruelly  deal  with  any  man.  The  fact  is,  Job  is  to  prove  a  great 
truth  to  devils  and  angels,  and  ultimately  to  men  also.  The  testing  of  his  fidelity  is 
a  lesson  for  the  universe.  It  shows  that  God  inspires  disinterested  devotion.  Now, 
Job  was  not  aware  of  this  purpose.  Had  he  known  it,  the  trial  would  have  be6n 
frustrated.  To  him  the  series  of  calamities  is  an  overwhelming  mystery,  and  he  is 
tried  the  more  by  its  inexplicable  character.  We  cannot  see  the  purpose  of  our 
troubles.  But  there  it  a  purpose.  Possibly  one  explanation  is,  not  that  we  are  merely 
to  suffer  for  our  own  soul's  discipline,  but,  like  Job,  for  the  sake  of  lessons  which, 
without  our  knowing  them,  may  be  taught  to  others  by  means  of  our  experience.— 
W.  F.A. 

Vers,  13 — ^19. — JoVs  wnparaMeled  calamities.  Everything  is  done  to  heighten  and 
intensify  the  impression  of  Job's  calamities.    Let  us  note  their  salient  features. 

I.  They  occur  at  a  season  of  festivity.  It  was  a  feast-day,  and  Job's  whole 
family  was  gathered  together  in  his  eldest  son's  house.  Then  of  all  times  the  affec- 
tionate father  would  be  least  prepared  for  ominous  rumours  of  calamity.  The  thunder- 
bolt fell  from  the  cloudless  blue  sky.  Without  a  note  of  warning,  the  fearful  storm 
burst  in  an  overwhelming  deluge.  This  is  a  lesson  against  trusting  to  prosperity,  as 
though  it  contained  a  promise  of  its  own  certain  continuance.  But  it  is  no  unmerciful 
arrangement  of  Providence  that  the  dark  future  is  hidden  from  us.    We  are  made  sad 

*  We  look  before  and  after." 
If  we  saw  all  the  future,  we  could  not  endure  the  present. 

II.  They  ococr  in  rapid  succession.  So  closely  do  these  calamities  follow  one 
upon  imother  that,  before  the  first  messenger  has  told  his  tale,  a  second  herald  arrives 


81  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  i.  1—22. 


with  more  evU  news,  followed  as  speedily  by  a  third,  and  he  after  no  more  delay  by 
the  last,  with  his  most  dreadful  message.  It  has  often  been  noticed  how  troubles  come 
in  batches.  In  Job's  case  we  can  sea  the  reason.  One  fearful  power  of  malignity  is 
behind  the  whole  series. 

in.  They  comb  fkom  various  qtjaetbbb.  Though  Satan  is  the  ultimate  cause 
of  all  the  calamities,  he  does  not  inflict  any  of  them  with  his  own  hand.  He  keeps 
that  hidden,  and  finds  means  to  send  emissaries  from  all  quarters — Arabs  from  the 
south  fall  on  the  homo  farm ;  lightning  from  heaven  smites  the  sheep  on  the  downs ; 
three  robber-bands  of  roving  Ohaldees  from  the  north  swoop  down  on  the  caravan  nf 
camels  that  carries  Job's  wealth  of  merchandise  ;  and,  worse  than  all  else,  a  hurricane 
from  the  desert  smites  and  fells  the  house  where  Job's  sons  and  daughters  are  feast- 
ing. Who  can  dwell  in  security  when  trouble  may  come  in  so  many  directions?  It 
is  impossible  for  the  strongest  man  to  fortify  himself  against  it.  Kone  of  us  can  do 
more  than  make  reasonable  preparations,  which  may  all  prove  useless.  But  all  may 
trust  the  providence  of  Ijim  who  rnles  wind  and  storm  and  heart  of  man,  and  without 
whose  permission  not  a  hair  of  our  head  can  be  touched. 

IV.  Thet  abb  aggravated  as  they  proceed.  The  worst  comes  last.  It  is 
terrible  for  a  rich  man  to  see  his  wealth  melting  before  his  eyes  in  a  few  moments. 
This  was  Antonio's  trouble  when  his  fleet  of  merchandise  was  destroyed  ('Merchant  of 
Venice '),  but  it  was  not  so  fearful  as  Malcolm's,  when  all  his  children  were  murdered 
at  once  ('  Macbeth '),  or  the  late  Archbishop  Tait's,  when  one  after  another  his 
children  died  of  an  epidemic  of  fever.  Let  the  impoverished  man  be  thankful  if  his 
family  is  spared  to  him.  Note :  1.  Possibly  trouble  is  softened  by  coming  with  suc- 
cessive shocks.  Each  may  drown  the  effect  of  its  predecessor.  2.  Job's  trouble  was 
only  once  surpassed — ^in  Gethsemane. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  21,  22. — Job's  resignation.  We  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  magnificent 
calmness  of  Job  after  receiving  the  successive  blows  of  unprecedented  calamities.  He 
is  not  stunned;  he  is  not  distracted.  He  possesses  his  soul  in  patience.  With  a 
singular  dignity  of  bearing  he  is  seen  to  be  greater  now  in  ais  calamity  than  ever  he 
appeared  when  at  the  height  of  success. 

L  How  Job  behaved.  1.  He  mausned.  /This  was  natural,  reasonable,  and  right. 
He  would  have  been  leas  than^man  if  he  had  taken  Ms  tT^^teO^teitit-a'Isa'figr  God 
loves-the  heart  of  "flSSff.TISt  the"*S{!3Hy  heart ;  and  t^e  TSeaSoTlesh  must  needs  feel 
great  trouble  very  keenly.  God's  saint  is  not  a  stoic.  But  though  Job  mourned,  he 
did  so  with  calmness  and  sell-restraint.  He  did  not  fling  himself  down  in  passionate 
grief.  His  rising,  his  rending  his  mantle — from  neck  to  girdle,  according  to  custom — 
his  shaving  his  head,  all  indicate  his  marvellous  self-possession.  He  goes  through  the 
dreary  process  of  conventional  mourning  with  unflinching  decision.  His  calmness, 
however,  only  covers  the  depth  of  his  sorrow.  There  is  something  terrible  about  that 
methodical  process.  The  tragedy  is  sublime.  2.  Ee  worshimed.  He  did  not  renounce 
God.  On  the  contraryj^ j3l£ssed-.the.;Same xifOhe  Lor4.  Me  could  nCt'uYllTgrstand 
thff  meanmg  and  end  of  his  strange,  experience.    But  he'^Enew^^gtodT-aisar^e  never 

I  dreamed  of  doubting  God5_JJareover,  his  trouble  drives  him  to  God.  He  falls  before 
QoA  itt  ad  oration.  "TKe  singular  thing  is  that  he  is  not  seen  praying  for  help.  His 
trouble  is  beyond  help,  and  he  is  not  one  to  whine  in  weak  misery.  He  loses  himself 
in  adoration  of  God.  This  is  the  great  secret  of  fortitude— not  to  cry  for  deliverance, 
but  to  forget  ourselves  in  God. 

II.  What  Job  received.  He  spoke  to  God,  or  perhaps  uttered  a  soliloquy,  for  the 
relief  of  his  own  heart,  yet  doubtless  conscious  of  the  sustaining  presence  of  God.  His 
words  show  his  perfect  reasonableness.  There  is  nothing  which  makes  people  so 
unreasonable  as  trouble.  Yet  Job  was  not  yet  turned  one  hair's  breadth  from  the  line  of 
truth  and  reason  by  his  fearful  calamities.  It  is  a  great  seoarity  to  see  things  as  they 
are.  Half  our  distress  arises  from  our  viewing  them  in  false  lights  of  passion  and  pre- 
judice. If  we  are  only  calm  enough  to  look  about  us,  we  may  discover  a  strange 
revealing  light  in  great  calamities.  They  break  through  the  conventional  forms,  and 
flash  out  facts.  1.  Job  saw  his  own  Uitleness.  In  a  moment  he  perceived  that  he 
had  no  natural  right  to  all  he  had  possessed.  He  had  nothing  when  he  entered  the 
world  J  he  could  carry  nothing  out  with  him.    Pride  prepares  for  distresses  whiqi 


OB.  n.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


88 


humility  escapes.  When  we  perceive  how  very  small  we  are,  we  cannot  be  amazed 
at  any  loss  which  we  may  sustain.  2.  Job  recognized  Ood'a  right.  Hgj[ba.gixes  has 
ajQ^£„ta.with^w.  AH.  we  have.ia-on  loaa^fcom-jQaad.  This  truth  does  not  make 
our  loss  the  less,  but  a  perception  of  it  calms  the  foolish,  rebellious  spirit,  which  i»  the 
source  of  our  deepest  misery. — W.  F.  A. 

Yer.  22. — Standing  fire.  Thus  ends  the  first  scene.  ^gj^js4Bompletely  .defeated. 
His  surmise  is  proved  to  be  utterly, false.  God  has  permitted  the  hedge  about  Job  to 
b«e<:brok«i  through,  aiid  the  destroyer  has  ravaged  his  possessions  till  the  garden  is 
turned  into  a  desert.     Yet  the  good  man  does  not  renounce  God. 

I.  To  CHARGE  God  with  wbono  is  a  bin.  This  was  the  sin  to  which  Satan  was 
tempting  Job.  The  suggestion  was  that  he  should  say  that  God  was  acting  cruelly, 
unjustly,  wrongly.  Now,  as  this  seems  a  natural  inference  from  the  events,  why  was 
it  wrong  for  Job  to  follow  it?  The  answer  must  be  found  in  the  truth  that  God  is 
not  known  inductively  by  means  of  external  phenomena. 

"  Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense." 

He  has  made  himself  known  by  special  revelations,  and  he  is  ever  making  himself 
more  and  more  known  in  the  voice  of  conscience.  From  these  sources  we  know  that 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  do  right.  To  doubt  this  is  to  forsake  the  higher  light 
and  to  sink  into  culpable  folly.  To  prefer  a  charge  against  God  is  worse  than  to  doubt 
him.    At  least  we  might  be  silent. 

II.  The  absence  of  sin  can  only  s^i  pkovbd  by  tbials.  It  is  easy  to  hide  sin 
from  v^WTtrtimei^'quieir^TEe'irthe^se  metal  may'sKiSe  as  brightly  as  the  pure 
gold.  The  fiery  test  reveals  its  worthlessness.  The  important  question  is  as  to 
whether  we  have  a  character  that  will  stand  fire.  It  is  of  little  value  for  a  man  not  to 
be  sinning  when  he  has  no  inducement  to  sin.  His  goodness  then  is  at  best  a 
negative  innocence,  and  very  possibly  it  is  only  a  slumbering  of  latent  evil. 

III.  The  most  difficult  thino  is  not  to  sen  when  one  is  most  tempted.  There 
were  fMM^  sins,  Tdovtbtles8i"to  which  Jub  was  not-»t-ail  H^lgi.:;:^It'wa3  little  fcThis 
eredit'tfaai;  he  was  not'guilty  of  them.  The'point  of  mterest  was  that  "in  all  this," 
i.e.  in  this  specially  trying  series  of  calamities.  Job  did  not  commit  the  particular  sin 
to  which  they  pointed,  i.e.  charging  God  with  wrong.  People  pride  themselves  on  their 
goodness  in  various  directions ;  but  this  is  of  small  importance  if  they  fail  when  they 
are  really  tempted. 

IV.  The  secret  of  standing  fire  is  in  the  stkenqth  of  God.  Now  Job  has  the 
reward  of  his  long  devotion  to  God.  Ver.  5  shows  him  a  man  of  prayer  in  the  days  of 
prosperity;  it  shows  him  praying  for  liis  children  in  their  need;  thus  Job  was  being 
prepared  unconsciously  for  the  evil  day.  When  it  came  it  fouud  him  ready,  though 
it  was  quite  unexpected,  because  it  found  him  living  near  to  God.  When  the  whirl- 
wind is  about  us  it  is  too  late  to  think  of  strengthening  the  tent-stakes.  We  need  the 
inward  strength  of  God,  which  comes  by  the  slow  growth  of  Christian  experience,  if 
we  are  to  stand  like  the  stmdy  oak  in  the  sudden  swirl  of  calamities. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n. 


Vers.  1 — 18. — This  chapter  concludes  the 
"  Introductory  section."  It  consists  of  three 
parts.'  Vera.  1 — 6  contain  an  account  of 
Satan's  second  appearance  in  the  courts  of 
heaven,  and  of  a  second  colloquy  between 
him  and  the  Almighty.  Vers.  7—10  con- 
tain the  sequel  to  this  colloquy,  viz. 
Satan's  further  affliction  of  Job,  and  his 
«onduot  under  it    Vers.  11—13  contain  an 

JOB. 


account  of  the  arrival  of  Job's  three  special 
friends  to  mourn  with  him  and  to  comfort 
him ;  and  of  their  behaviour  during  the 
first  seven  days  after  their  arrival 

Ver.  1. — ^Again  there  was  a  day  when  the 
sons  of  Ood  came  to  present  themselves 
before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also  among 
them.  There  is  no  "  again  "  in  the  original. 
The  words  used  are  an  exact  repetition  of 
those  contained  iu  ver.  6  of  oh.  i.  But  they 
mark,  no  doubt,  a  second  eccasion  on  which 

J> 


S4 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  n.  1— IS. 


the  angelic  host  came  to  present  themselves 
before  the  throne  of  God,  and  Satan  came 
with  them.  To  present  himself  before  the 
Lord.  These  words  are  additional  to  those 
used  in  the  former  passage.  We  may  gather 
from  them,  that,  whereas  on  the  former 
occasion  Satan  came  only  to  observe,  and 
with  no  intention  of  drawing  God's  special 
attention  to  himself,  he  now  had  such  in- 
tention, and  looked  forward  to  a  colloquy. 
He  anticipaied,  doubtless,  that  the  cireum- 
stances  of  Job's  probation  would  be  referred 
to,  and  he  had  prepared  himself  to  make 
answer. 

Ver.  2. — And  the  Lord  said  onto  Satan, 
From  whence  comest  thou?  And  Satan 
answered  the  Lord,  and  said,  From  going  to 
and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  from  walking  np 
and  down  in  it  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  i.  7, 
of  which  this  is  an  almost  exact  repetition). 

Yer.  3. — And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan, 
Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job,  that 
there  is  none  like  biin  in  the  earth,  a  perfect 
and  an  npright  man,  one  that  feareth  God, 
and  escheweth  evil  1  Thus  far  is  identical 
with  ch.  i.  1  (quod  vide).  The  rest  of  the 
verse  is  additional,  having  reference  to  the 
conduct  of  Job  under  his  earlier  trials  (ch.  i. 
20—22).  And  still  he  holdeth  fast  Ms 
integrity.  This  has  been  justly  called  "the 
key-note  of  the  whole  book  "  (Cook).  Satan 
had  declared  that  Job's  integrity  rested  on 
no  solid  basis,  and  would  easily  be  over- 
thrown and  disappear.  God,  confident  in 
his  servant's  faithfulness  and  truth,  had 
allowed  him  to  assail  it.  What  was  the 
result?  God  declares  it  with  his  own 
moutli.  Job's  "integrity"  had  not  been 
wrested  from  him;  he  still  maintained  it 
(ch.  i.  21,  22),  as  he  was  about  to  do  till  the 
end  (oh.  xlii.  1 — 6).  Compare  the  ideal 
"  just  man  "  of  Horace — 

"  Justum  et  tenaoem  propositi  virum 
Non  civiura  ardor  prava  jubentium, 
Xon  vultus  instautis  tyranni 
Meuta  quatit  solidn,  neque  Anster, 
Dux  inquieti  turbidus  HadritB.  .  .  . 
Si  fractus  illabatur  orbis, 
Impavidum  ferient  ruins9." 

(■Od.,'ai.3.) 

Although  thon  movedst  me  against  him  (see 
ch.  i.  9 — 11),  to  destroy  him;  literally,  to 
swallcrw  him  up ;  i.e.  to  ruin  him,  overwhelm 
him  with  calamities.  Without  cause;  i*.«. 
"  when  he  had  done  nothing  to  deserve  such 
treatment." 

Ver.  i. — And  Satan  answered  the  Lord, 
and  said.  Skin  for  skin.  No  doubt  a  pro- 
verbial expression,  resembling  "  Bye  for  eye, 
tooth  for  tooth;"  "Tit  for  tat,"  and  the 
like;  but  not  expressive  of  retaliation.  Satan 
means  that,  to  keep  his  own  "  skin  "  intact, 
a  man  will  sacrifice  another's  "  skin,"  even 


that  of  his  nearest  and  dearest.  Job,  he 
insinuates,  submitted  to  the  loss  of  his 
children  without  a  murmur,  because  he 
feared  that  otherwise  God  would  stretch 
forth  his  hand  against  his  person,  and  smite 
it  or  destroy  it.  He  cannot  imagine  any 
motive  for  submission  and  apparent  resigna- 
tion but  a  selfish  one  (comp.  ch.  i.  9).  Tea, 
all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his 
life;  t.«.  "a  man  will  submit  to  the  loss, 
not  only  of  all  his  possessions,  but  even  of 
those  whom  he  loves  best,  to  save  his  own 
life— he  will  do  anything  for  that."  So  the 
"  false  accuser."  All  the  numerous  acts  of 
self-sacrifice  which  human  history  presents, 
and  has  presented  from  the  first,  are  ignored. 

Ver.  5. — But  put  forth  thine  hand  now, 
and  touch  his  bone  and  his  flesh;  {.e.  "his 
person  " — any  part  of  his  body.  And  he  will 
curse  thee  to  thy  face  (see  the  comment  on 
ch.  i.  11). 

Ver.  6. — ^And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan, 
Behold  he  is  in  thine  hand ;  i.e.  "  he  is  in 
thy  power,  to  do  with  him  as  thou  pleasest " 
— except  iu  one  respect.  Again  it  is  strongly 
marked  that  Satan's  power  is  under  God's 
control,  and  extends  only  so  far  as  God 
allows.  But  save  his  life;  rather,  only 
spare  Ma  life  (Revised  Version).  The  di- 
dactic purposes  for  which  God  was  allowing 
his  faithful  servant  to  be  tried  in  the  furnace 
of  affliction  would  have  been  frustrated  by 
Job's  removal  from  the  earth.  Individually 
he  might  equally  well  have  been  compensated 
in  another  world ;  but  then  the  lesson  of  his 
example  to  living  men,  and  the  lesson  of  his 
story  to  all  future  generations  of  mankind, 
would  have  been  lost.  Besides,  God  but 
rarely,  in  the  old  world,  gave  a  faithful 
servant,  still  in  the  full  vigour  of  life  (ch. 
xlii.  16,  17),  "over  unto  death"  (Ps.  cxviii. 
18). 

Ver.  7. — So  went  Satan  forth  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  (comp.  ch.  1 12,  ad  fin.). 
Satan,  we  may  be  sure,  is  always  anxious 
to  quit  the  immediate  presence  of  God ;  for 
"what  communion  hath  light  with  dark- 
ness ?  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  14).  But  now  he  had  a 
special  motive  for  haste  in  hia  anxiety  to 
put  Job  to  the  test.  Doubtless  he  was 
confident  that  he  would  triumph.  And 
smote  Job  with  sore  boils.  "  With  a  malig- 
nant inflammation"  (Lee).  It  has  been 
generally  concluded,  from  the  scattered 
notices  of  his  malady  contained  in  the  Book 
of  Job  (especially  ch.  viL  4,  5 ;  xvii.  1 ;  xix. 
17—20 ;  and  xxx.  17—19),  that  the  disease 
with  which  Satan  "smote  Job"  was  ele- 
phantiasis— sometimes  called  Elephantiasis 
Arabum — a  marked  and  strongly  developed 
form  of  leprosy  (Rosenmnller,  Michaelis, 
Professor  Lee,  Canon  Cook,  Stanley  Leathes, 
etc.).  Elephantiasis  is  thus  popularly 
described  by  Canon  Cook,  in  the  *  Speakers 


tm.  n.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


85 


Commentary,'  rol.  iv.  p.  26 ;  "  An  intense 
heat,  a  burning  and  ulcerous  swelling,  or 
leprosy  in  its  most  terrifio  form,  taking  its 
name  from  the  appearance  of  the  body, 
which  is  covered  with  a  knotty,  cancerous 
bark  like  the  hide  of  an  elephant ;  the 
whole  frame  is  in  a  state  of  progressive  dis- 
solution, ending  slowly  but  surely  in  death." 
A  modem  scientific  work  gives  the  follow- 
ing more  exact,  but  more  technical,  account 
of  the  disease  :  "A  non-oontagious  disease 
characterized  by  recurrence  of  febrile  par- 
oxysms, attended  by  inflammation,  and  pro- 
gressive hypertrophy  of  the  integument  and 
areolar  tissue,  chiefly  of  the  extremities  &nd 
genital  organs ;  and  occasionally  by  swell- 
ing of  the  lymphatic  glands,  enlargement 
and  dilatation  of  the  lymphatics,  and  in 
some  cases  by  the  coexistence  of  chyluria, 
and  the  presence  in  the  blood  of  certain 
nematode  htematozoa,  together  with  various 
eyiuptoms  of  a  morbid  or  depraved  state  of 
nutrition"  (Quaiu's  'Dictionary  of  Medi- 
cine,' vol.  i.  p.  431).  The  disease  is  not  now 
regarded  as  incurable,  though,  without  an 
entire  change  of  scene  and  climate,  it  is 
regarded  as  very  seldom  cured  (ibid,,  p.  432). 
From  the  sole  of  Ms  foot  onto  his  crown. 
Klephautiasis  is  generally  local,  attacking 
some  part  of  the  body,  as,  especially,  the 
extremities  or  the  genital  organs.  But  in 
the  worst  forms,  the  entire  body  suffers. 

Ver.  8. — ^And  he  took  him  a  potsherd  to 
scrape  himself  withal.  "  The  surface  of  the 
integuments,"  says  Dr.  Qnain,  "is  often 
much  inflamed,  and  sometimes  discharges  a 
serous  ichor,  or  chyle-like  fluid,  according 
to  the  extent  to  which  the  lymphatics  are 
engaged  in  the  particular  case"  (ibid.,  p. 
432).  This  "  serous  or  lymph-like  fluid  "  is 
occasionally  "acrid  and  ofiensive."  Job 
seems  to  have  used  his  potsherd  to  scrape 
it  away.  And  he  sat  down  among  the  ashes. 
Not  as  a  curative  process,  or  even  as  an 
alleviation  of  his  pains,  but  simply  as  was 
the  custom  of  mourners  (comp.  Isa.  xlvii.  3 ; 
Iviii  5 ;  Jer.  vi.  26 ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  30 ;  Jonah 
iii.  6).  The  LXX.  renders,  "  on  the  dung- 
heap  ; "  but  this  meaning,  if  a  possible  one, 
is  highly  improbable. 

Ver.  9. — Then  said  his  wife  onto  him, 
Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  integrity  1  Job's 
wife  had  said  nothing  when  the  other  ca- 
lamities had  taken  place — then  she  had 
"refrained  her  tongue,  and  kept  silence," 
though  probably  with  some  difBoulty.  Now 
she  can  endure  no  longer.  To  see  her 
husband  so  afflicted,  and  so  patient  under 
his  aflliotions,  is  more  than  she  can  bear. 
Her  mind  is  weak  and  ill  regulated,  and 
she  suffers  herself  to  become  Satan's  ally 
and  her  husband's  worst  enemy.  It  is 
noticeable  that  she  urges  her  husband  to 
do  exactly  that  which  Satan  had  suggested 


that  he  would  do  (oh.  i.  11 ;  iL  S),  and  bad 

evidently  wished  him  to  do,  thus  fighting  on 
his  side,  and  increasing  her  husband's  difiS- 
culties.  The  only  other  mention  of  her  (ch. 
xix.  17)  implies  that  she  was  rather  a  hin- 
drance than  a  help  to  Job,  Curse  God,  and 
die ;  i.e.  "  renounce  God,  put  all  regard  for 
him  away  from  thee,  even  though  lie  kill 
thee  for  so  doing."  Job's  wife  implies  that 
death  is  preferable  to  such  a  life  as  Job 
now  leads  and  must  expect  to  lead  hence- 
forward. 

Ver.  10. — But  he  said  unto  her,  Thou 
speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  women 
speaketh ;  rather,  as  one  of  the  vUe  (ptimpious) 
women  speaketh.  Nabal,  the  term  used,  is 
expressive,  not  of  mere  natural  folly,  but 
of  that  perversion  of  the  intellect  which, 
comes  on  men  when  their  hearts  and  under- 
standings are  corrupted  and  degraded  (see 
2  Sam.  xiii.  13 ;  Ps.  xiv.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxii.  6). 
What }  shall  we  reoeive  good  at  the  hand  of 
Ood,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  Job  re- 
members all  the  good  which  he  has  received 
of  God  during  his  past  life,  all  the  blessings 
and  prosperity  bestowed  on  him  (ch.  i. 
2,  3),  and  asks — Would  it  be  fair  or  right  to 
take  aU  the  good  things  as  a  matter  of 
course,  and  then  to  murmur  if  evil  things 
are  sent  ?  He  accepts  both  prosperity  and 
affliction  as  coming  from  God,  and  expresses 
himself  as  willing  to  submit  to  his  will. 
But  he  has,  perhaps,  scarcely  attained  to 
the  conviction  that  whatever  God  sends  to 
his  faithful  servants  is  always  that  which 
is  best  for  them — that  afflictions,  in  fact,  are 
blessings  in  disguise,  and  ought  to  be  re- 
ceived with  gratitude,  not  with  murmuring 
(comp.  Heb.  xii.  5—11).  In  all  this  did  not 
Job  sin  with  his  lips.  Thus  far,  that  is, 
Job  "  kept  the  door  of  his  mouth  "  strictly, 
righteously,  piously.  Later  on  he  was  not 
always  so  entirely  free  from  fault 

Ver.  11. — Now  when  Job's  three  friends 
heard  of  all  this  evil  that  was  come  upon 
him.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Job  had 
no  more  than  three  friends — ^indeed,  Elihu 
the  Buzzite  appears  later  on  as  one  of  his 
friends  (ch.  xxxii.  2— 6)— but  he  had  three 
contemporaries  with  whom  he  was  especially 
intimate,  old  men  (ch.  xxxii.  6),  with  whom 
he  was  probably  accustomed  to  confer  from 
time  to  time,  and  who  were  in  the  habit  of 
giving  him  their  advice.  All  three,  appa- 
rently, lived  at  a  distance  ;  and  it  seems  to 
have  been  some  weeks  before  the  news  of 
his  misfortunes  reached  them.  When  the 
news  came  they  held  communication  one 
with  another,  and  agreed  to  pay  hira  visits 
of  condolence  at  a  certain  definite  time, 
which  was  determined  upon  between  them. 
Some  months — at  least  two — seem  to  have 
elapsed  between  the  date  of  Job's  lateit 
affliction  and  the  time  of  their  arrival  (oh. 


se 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  n.  1—13. 


vii.  8).  They  came  every  one  from  his  own 
plaoe.  They  had  separate  homes,  and  pro- 
bably lived  at  some  considerable  distance 
from  one  another.  Eliphaz  the  Temanite. 
There  was  an  Eliphaz,  the  son  of  Esau  by 
his  wife  Adah,  who  had  a  son  Teman  (Gen. 
xxxvi.  i;  1  Chron.  i.  35,  30);  but  it  is 
not  supposed  that  this  can  be  the  person 
here  intended.  The  name  Teman  did  not 
become  geographical  until  the  descendants 
of  this  Eliphaz's  son  had  multiplied  into  a 
tribe,  when  they  gave  name  to  the  portion 
of  Arabia  which  they  inhabited.  This  tract 
seems  to  have  been  either  a  part  of  Edom, 
or  in  its  immediate  vicinity  (Gen.  xxsvi.  42, 
43 ;  Jer.  xlix.  7, 8,  20 ;  Ezek.  xxv.  13 ;  Obad. 
8,  9),  but  cannot  be  located  with  accuracy. 
The  TemanitbS  were  celebrated  for  their 
Visdom,  as  we  learn  from  Jeremiah,  who 
says  (xlix.  7),  "Concerning  Edom,  thus  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Is  wisdom  no  more  in 
Teman?  is  counsel  perished  from  the  pru- 
dent? is  their  wisdom  vanished?"  Job's 
friend  was  probably  among  their  wisest  men 
at  the  time ;  and  his  discourses  certainly 
show  a,  coQsiderable  knowledge  of  human 
nature.  They  do  not,  however,  solve  the 
riddle  of  the  universe.  And  BUdad  the 
Shuhite.  Bildad  is  a  name  which  does  not 
occur  elsewhere  in  Scripture,  neither  is  there 
any  other  mention  of  Shuhites.  Conjecture 
has  identified  the  Shuhites  with  the  Saccssi 
of  Ptolemy  ('  Geograph.,'  v.  15),  whom  he 
places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Batansea  and 
Trachouitis.  But  the  Saccsei  are  unheard 
of  till  Ptolemy's  time,  and  seem  to  be  a 
tribe  of  very  small  importance.  Perhaps 
Bildad  belonged  to  the  people  known  to 
the  Assyrians  as  the  Tsukhi,  or  Sukhi 
('Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  i.  p.  14),  who 
dwelt  on  tlie  Middle  Euphrates  from  about 
Anah  to  Hit  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii. 
pp.  60,  67).  And  Zophar  the  Naamathlte. 
Zophar,  or  rather  Tsophar,  is  another  un- 
known name.  There  was  a  Naamah,  a  city, 
in  south-western  Judsea  (Josh.  xv.  41),  to 
which  Zophar  nmy  have  belonged,  though 
probably  a  region,  rather  than  a  city,  is  here 
intended.  For  they  had  made  an  appoint- 
ment together ;  or, agreed  together,  by  message 
or  letter  probably.  To  oome  to  mourn  with 
him  and  to  comfort  him.  A  good  intention, 
at  any  rate,  and  one  agreeable  to  the  apos- 
tolic injunction  to  ns  to  "  weep  with  them 
that  weep"  (Rom.  xii.  15).  That  they 
failed  to  carry  out  their  intention  (ch.  xvi, 
2 ;  xxi.  34)  was  owing  to  a  want  of  judg- 


ment, and,  perhaps,  in  port,  to  a  want  of 
love. 

Yer.  12. — ^And  when  they  lifted  up  their 
eyes  afar  off,  and  knew  him  not.  Job  was 
seated  on  an  ash-heap  outside  his  dwell- 
ing (ver.  8).  The  three  friends,  who  had 
probably  met  by  agreement  at  some  point 
near  his  residence,  and  drew  nigh  together, 
saw  the  figure  at  some  distance,  and  looked 
to  see  who  it  was.  But  Job  was  so  dis- 
figured by  the  disease  that  they  failed  to 
recognize  him.  They  lifted  np  their  voicej 
and  wept,  tn  the  clamorous  manner  of 
Orientals  (comp.  Herod.,  ii.  14 ;  iii.  119 ;  viii, 
99;  ix.  24  ;  and  .^schylus, '  Persffi,' ^amm). 
And  they  rent  every  one  his  mantle  (see  the 
comment  on  ch.  i.  20),  and  sprinkled  dust 
upon  their  heads  toward  heaven  (comp. 
Josh.  vii.  6;  1  Sam.  iv.  12;  2  Sam.  i.  2; 
xiii.  19 ;  Keh.  ix.  1  ;  Ezek.  xxvii  80 ;  Lam. 
ii.  10 ;  and  see  also  Homer,  '  II.,'  Xviii  22 — 
24 ;  Helioder, '  Hist,  .^th.,'  i.). 

Ver.  13. — So  they  sat  down  with  him  upon 
the  ground  seven  days  and  seven  nights. 
Prot'tEsor  Lee  supposes  that  this  is  not  to  be 
taken  literally.  "  It  means,"  he  says,  "  that 
they  sat  with  him  a  considerable  length  of 
time  before  they  opened  the  Question  dis- 
cussed in  this  book,  not  that  they  sat  pre- 
cisely seven  days  and  seven  nights,  and  said 
not  so  much  as  one  word  to  him"  ('The 
Book  of  the  Patriarch  Job,'  p.  194).  But 
the  period  of  "  seven  days  "  was  appropriate 
to  mournings  (Gen.  i.  10 ;  2  Sam.  xxxi.  13 ; 
Ezek.  iii.  15),  and  if  they  could  stay  with 
him  one  day  and  one  night  without  speak- 
ing, why  not  seven  ?  Food  would  be  brought 
them,  and  they  might  sleep  rolled  up  in 
their  hegedi.  The  long  silence  may  be 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  "  among  the 
Jews,"  and  among  Orientals  generally,  "  it 
is  a  point  of  decorum,  and.  one  dictated  hf 
a  fine  and  true  feeling,  not  to  speak  to  a 
person  in  deep  affliction  until  he  gives  an 
intimation  of  a  desire  to  be  comforted" 
(Cook).  So  long  as  Job  kept  silence  they 
had  to  keep  silence,  at  least  so  far  as 
he  was  oonoerned.  'Tliey  might  speak  to 
any  attendants  who  drew  near,  and  they 
might  speak  one  to  another.  Note  the 
words  which  follow :  And  none  spake  a  word 
unto  him.  None  spake  to  him;  but  no  eti- 
quette imposed  complete  silence  on  them, 
for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  great. 
Bo  great  that  he  could  not  as  yet  bear  to 
be  spoken  to. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1—6. — A  new  trial  moved  for.  I.  Thb  old  oooabion  ebtubned.  1.  Hu 
fathering  of  the  sons  of  God.  The  recurrence  of  this  celestial  scene  reminds  us  of:  (1) 
the  immutable  sovereignty  of  Jehovah,  who,  on  this  second  occasion  as  on  the  first, 


OH.  n.  l->ia.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  8f 

■till  appears  enthroned  amidst  the  principalities  and  powers  of  heaven — tho  devils  also 
heing  subject  to  him  (cf.  1  Pet.  iii.  22) ;  (2)  the  permanence  of  moral  obligation  in 
the  heavenly  world  and  amongst  angels  as  well  as  on  the  earth,  neither  lapse  of  time 
nor  change  of  circumstances  having  the  slightest  effect  in  releasing  God's  intelligent 
creatures  from  the  bonds  of  responsibility ;  and  (3)  the  constancy  and  cheerfulness 
with  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  upper  world  delight  to  do  God's  holy  will — an 
example  of  obedience  proposed  for  the  study  and  imitation  of  beUevers  (Matt.  vi.  10). 
2.  The  reappearance  of  the  adversary.  If,  on  the  former  occasicn,  the  entrance  of 
Satan  amongst  God's  celestial  sons  might  permissibly  be  regarded  as  an  impertinent  , 
intrusion,  in  the  present  instance  his  return  must  be  held  as  having  taken  place  in 
accordance  with  a  tacit  understanding  that,  in  due  course,  he  should  appear  to  report 
the  result  of  his  experiment  with  the  patriarch,  which,  perhaps,  may  explain  the  intro- 
duction of  the  words,  "  to  present  himself  before  the  Lord,"  omitted  from  the  account 
of  the  first  assembly. 

II.   The  old  coktrovbbst  bbsumbd.     1.    The  patriarchs   enemy  interrogated. 
"  From  whence  comest  thou  ? "    Note  (1)  God's  universal  cognizance  of  things  that 
transpire  on  earth  (ch.  xxviii.  10,  24 ;  xxxiv.  22) ;  (2)  God's  perpetual  surveillance 
of  the  devil  in  his  movements ;  and  (3)  God's  constant  watchfulness  against  his  attacks 
(Eev.  iii.  10).     2.  The  patriarcKa  piety  commended.     "  Hast  thou  considered  my 
servant  Job?"  (see  homiletics  on  cli.  i.  1,  8).     Whether  or  not  containing  "a  covert 
sneer  at  the  bafiBed  adversary,"  the  question  reminds  us  of:   (1)  God's  faithfulness 
towards  his  people.     Noth withstanding  all  that  had  occurred.  Job  was  still  God's 
servant,  and  God  as  ready  to  own  him  for  his  servant  as  when  the  patriarch  was 
rejoicing  in  the  fulness  of  prosperity  (Isa.  xliv.  21 ;  liv.  10).     (2)  God's  judgment  con- 
cerning his  people.    God  can  always  distinguish  between  a  man  and  his  surroundings. 
The  Omniscient  judges  no  one  by  his  material  eavironment,  but  by  the  character  of 
his  heart  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7 ;    2  Sam.  vii.  20 ;    Ps.  vii.  9).     (3)  God's  affection  for  his 
people.    As  Job's  afflictions  had  not  destroyed  his  piety,  so  neither  had  they  alienated 
God's  love.     Never  in  the  day  of  calamity  does  Jehovah  renounce  his  saints,  but 
rather,  because  of  tribulation,  clings  to  them  with  fonder  affection  (1  Sam.  xii.  22;  Ps. 
xoi.  15 ;  Eoin.  xi.  2 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19 ;  Eev.  ii.  9).     3.  The  patriarcKa  sincerity  attested. 
(1)  The  Divine  satisfaction  with  the  patriarch.     "He  stiU  holdeth  fast  his  integrity." 
Constancy  in  piety  is  a  rare  jewel  in  the  saint's  casket,  lends  a  special  lustre  to  his 
other  virtues,  is  ever  highly  prized  by  its  possessor,  and  never  fails  to  elicit  Heaven's 
commendation.     The  Divine  approbation  also,  besides  being  an  ample  recompense  for 
all  the  saint's  trials  (Rom.  viii.  18),  is  the  only  sure  test  of  genuine  religion  (2  Cor.  x. 
18),  the  greatest  honour  a  saint  can  receive  (Matt.  x.  32),  and  the  final  portion  of  those 
who  hold  fast  their  integrity  to  the  end  (Mai.  iii.  17 ;  Eev.  iii.  5).    (2)  The  Divine 
indignation  against  Satan.     "  Although  thou  movedst  me  to  destroy  him."    See  the 
widely  differing  estimates  of  trouble  taken  by  God  and  Satan.     What  the  devil  called 
a  touch  God  calls  a  swallowing  up :  that  marks  the  tenderness  of  God's  heart.    Note 
the  different  relations  in  which  God  and  Satan  stood  to  Job's  affliction — God  acting, 
and  the  devil  tempting ;  marking  God's  sovereignty,  but  Satan's  responsibility.    "  God's 
aBlicting  of  his  people  is  (so  to  saj)  a  blowing  of  the  bellows  to  kindle  his  displeasure 
against  wicked  instruments  (Isa.  xlvii.  5, 6 ;  Zech.  i.  15)  "  (Hutcheson).    (3)  The  Divine 
sorrow  about  himself.     "  Thou  movedst  me  .  .  .   without  cause."     Indicating   the 
reluctance  with  which  God  in  any  case  proceeds  against  a  saint  (Lam.  iii.  33),  and  the 
regret  which  he  felt  in  this  case,  since  he  knew  so  well  there  was  no  sufficient  reason 
for  entertaining  a  suspicion  against  the  patriarch's  piety.    Let  it  teach  us  that "  though 
all  men  have  sins  enoujh  to  be  the  meritorious  cause,  yet  oftentimes  sin  is  not  the 
moving  cause  of  their  afflictions"  (Caryl). 

III.  The  old  calumny  revived.  Job's  victory  in  the  previous  conflict  is  by  the 
devil:  1.  Tacitly  admitted.  Satan  finds  it  impossible  to  repel  the  statements 
advanced'  by  Jehovah  concerning  his  servant.  Saints  should  study  to  live  so  that  their 
piety  cannot  be  contradicted,  however  much  it  may  be  aspersed  by  Satan  and  wicked 
men  and  that  God,  when  he  speaks  in  commendation  of  their  integrity,  may  be  justified. 
2.  keasonably  explained.  On  the  ground  that  the  trial  was  not  severe  enough. 
"Skin  for  skin,"  etc. — a  proverb,  which,  however  explained  (see  Exposition),  practically 
charges  the  patriarch  with  unnatural  barbarity  in  disregarding  the  loss  of  his  children 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  n.  1— 1& 


iince  hig  own  skin  was  saved,  as  well  as  with  intense  and  revolting  selfishness  in 
making  the  supreme  consideration,  in  all  his  thoughts  and  calculations,  the  preservation 
of  his  own  life.  3.  Wholly  undervodued.  As  in  his  (the*  devil's)  estimation,  proving 
nothing  and  contributing  nothing  to  the  solution  of  the  grand  problem  in  debate.. 
Hence  he  does  not  hesitate  to  suggest  that  the  matter  should  a  second  time  be  sub- 
mitted to  the  ordeal  of  trial. 

IV.  The  old  pkoposition  eepbated.  "  But  put  forth  thine  hand  now ;  ^  which 
demand  was  certainly :  1.  Presumptuous ;  considering  by  whom  it  was  made,  Satan, 
and  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  Jehovah ;   thus  showing  the  illimitable  pride  of  the 

•  devil  (Isa.  xiv.  12, 13, 14).  2.  Unnecessary  ,•  remembering  the  person  against  whom  it 
was  directed,  and  the  issue  of  the  preceding  trial  to  which  he  had  been  subjected.  3. 
Cfruel ;  seeing  that  Job  had  already  been  afflicted  by  the  double  stroke  of  bankruptcy 
and  bereavement,  and  this  was  a  request  that  God  would  aggravate  his  misery  by 
laying  his  hand  upon  his  person.  But  who  would  ever  look  for  humane  and  tender 
feelings  in  a  devil?  4.  MaligiMnt ;  when  regard  is  had  to  its  object  and  motive — the 
latter  being  hostility  to  God  and  hatred  of  piety ;  the  former  the  overthrow  of  Job's 
religion  and  the  damnation  of  Job's  person. 

V.  The  old  permission  eenewbd.  "  Behold,  he  is  in  thine  hand."  The  patriarch 
was  again  delivered  up  into  the  power  of  the  adversary.  1.  Sovereignly  ;  God  having 
a  perfect  right  to  dispose  of  the  persons  of  his  people,  no  less  than  their  properties.  2. 
Betdly ;  to  be  tried  in  whatever  manner  his  Satanic  ingenuity  might  devise,  always, 
of  course,  within  the  prescribed  limits.  3.  Immediately ;  from  this  time  forward  being 
rendered  accessible  to  the  hostile  assaults  of  the  adversary.  Yet :  4.  Reservedly ; 
with  certain  restrictions  as  to  his  life,  which  was  not  to  be  taken  from  him.  And  ako, 
one  cannot  help  thinking :  5.  Confidently ;  without  the  slightest  apprehension  of  an 
unfavourable  issue  to  the  trial,  so  high  was  the  estimation  in  which  God  held  his 
servant. 

Learn :  1.  Concerning  the  devil.  That  he  is  seldom  satisfied  with  only  one  attempt 
against  the  virtue  of  a  saint ;  that  he  is  exceedingly  unwilling  to  admit  himself  defeated 
on  the  field  of  spiritual  conflict ;  and  that  he  ever  plants  his  fiercest  batteries  against  the 
citadel  of  a  saint's  integrity.  2.  Concerning  the  saint.  That  he  need  hardly  anticipate 
a  long  period  of  exemption  from  either  trials  or  temptations ;  that  whatever  calamities 
befall  him,  he  should  labour  to  discern  God's  providential  hand  in  their  occurrence ;  and 
that  he  may  confidently  trust  God  will  not  give  him  over  completely  to  the  devil.  3. 
Concerning  God.  That  though  he  may  suffer  his  saints  to  be  tried,  he  does  not  cease 
to  love  them ;  that  though  he  may  lengthen  Satan's  chain,  he  doesn't  loosen  it ;  and 
that,  though  he  may  sometimes  listen  to  Satan's  charges  against  the  saints,  he  never 
believes  them. 

Ver.  4. — The  value  of  life.  I.  Mobe  valuable  than  material  possessions.  1.  In 
origin ;  being  the  breath  of  God's  Spirit,  while  they  are  only  the  work  of  God's  hand. 

2.  In  nature;  being  conscious  of  its  owa  existence,  while  they  are  only  dead,  insensate 
things.  3.  In  capacities ;  being  possessed  of  intellect,  reason,  conscience,  will,  while 
they  have  only  properties  and  qualities  peculiar  to  matter.  4.  In  design;  being 
intended  for  the  conscious  enjoyment  of  God,  while  they  can  never  consciously  enjoy, 
but  only  obediently  and  passively  glorify,  their  Maker. 

II.  Less  valuable  than  spirPtual  possessions.  1.  In  character ;  being  a  natural 
endowment,  while  these  are  essentially  gifts  of  grace.  2.  In  usefulness ;  without  these 
being  a  failure  so  far  as  realizing  its  appropriate  end  is  concerned,  whereas  these 
enhance  the  dignity  and  capabilities  of  life.  3.  In  happiness ;  life  with  grace  being 
immensely  more  enjoyable  than  mere  existence  without  it.  4.  In  duration ;  life  being 
doomed  to  decay  and  dissolution,  while  the  riches  of  the  soul  endure  for  ever. 

Lessons.     1.  Pri^e  life  as  a  gift  of  God.     2.  Adorn  life  with  the  grace  of  God. 

3.  Use  life  for  the  glory  of  God.  4.  Return  life  (when  it  is  called  for)  into  the  hands 
rfGod. 

Yer.i.— Satan's  proverb.  1.  The  import  of  it.  That  a  man  will  part  with  every- 
thing about  him  to  save  his  life. 

IL  The  falsehood  or  it.     1.  Men  wrill  part  with  all  outward  things  to  save  life. 


OH.  n.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  8* 

2.  Som«  men  will  even  part  with  a  good  conscience  to  save  life.    3.  But  there  are 
those  who  would  rather  die  than  renounce  their  integrity. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  patriarch's  second  trial.  I.  The  twofold  assault  upon  thb 
PATBiABGH.  1.  2%e  infliction  of  a  loathsome  disease.  (1)  Its  author.  Satan.  That 
diseases  generally  come  through  violation  of  hygienic  laws  is  matter  of  everyday 
observation  and  of  special  scientific  affirmation.  But  that  Job's  malady  had  a  diabolic 
origin,  as  had  also  many  of  the  physical  ailments  that  prevailed  in  the  Bast  about  the 
time  of  Christ,  must  he  accepted  on  the  ground  of  revelation.  And  as  in  Christ's  day 
Beelzebub  was  permitted  to  wield  a  larger  influence  than  usual  over  men's  bodies,  that 
the  power  of  Christ  in  destroying  the  works  of  the  devil  might  be  the  more  conspicuously 
displayed,  so  the  exceptional  ability  of  Satan  to  produce  bodily  malady  in  Job's  case 
existed  solely  for  a  special  purpose.  It  would  therefore  be  contrary  to  good  theology 
as  well  as  sound  science  to  ascribe  the  "  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to "  to  diabolic  rather 
than  to  natural  causes.  (2)  Its  nature.  "  Sore  boils ; "  supposed,  and  with  probability, 
to  have  been  a  malignant  form  of  elephantiasis,  a  disorder  having  many  of  the 
characteristics  of  leprosy.  From  incidental  allusions  scattered  throughout  the  poem, 
it  appears  to  have  been  an  exceedingly  painful  disease,  accompanied  in  its  early  stages 
by  severe  bodily  itching  (oh.  ii.  8 ;  ix.  17, 18),  and  attended  in  its  progress  with  extreme 
debility,  and  utter  prostration  of  mind  as  well  as  body,  leading  to  disturbed  slumbers, 
terrifying  dreams,  and  even  suicidal  temptations  (ch.  vi.  4,  11,  14 ;  vii.  4,  13, 14). 
A  quickly  spreading  disease,  rapidly  covering  the  body  with  pustules,  or  boils,  some- 
times from  head  to  foot  (ch.  ii.  7 ;  vii.  5).  A  certainly  corrupting  disease,  producing 
emaciation,  and  causing  rottenness  in  the  flesh  and  bones  (ch.  xiii.  28 ;  xvi.  8 ;  xxxiiL 
21).  A  truly  loathsome  disease,  rendering  the  wretched  sufferer  an  object  of  disgust 
even  to  his  nearest  relatives  and  friends  (ch.  xix.  13 — 19),  and  ultimately,  though  not 
immediately,  a  mortal  disease  (ch.  xvi.  22 ;  xvii.  1 ;  xxx.  23).  (3)  Its  design.  To  try 
the  patriarch  (a)  by  wearing  out  his  strength,  and  so  rendering  him  more  accessible 
to  the  entrance  of  diabolic  temptations ;  (&)  by  making  him  an  object  of  abhorrence 
to  mankind,  and  so  in  a  manner  cutting  him  off  from  human  sympathy ;  and  (c)  by 
leading  him  to  regard  his  malady  as  a  special  visitation  from  Heaven,  and  so  tempting 
him  to  entertain  harsh  thoughts  of  Jehovah.  2.  The  injection  of  a  vehement  temptation. 
(1)  The  time  when  it  was  made.  Not  at  the  beginning  of  his  malady,  but  after  it  had 
somewhat  developed,  when  his  strength  was  impaired,  his  nerves  were  unstrung,  and 
his  mind  was  depressed,  and  when,  no  longer  permitted  to  enter  the  dwellings  of  men, 
he  sat  himself  down  upon  the  mezbele,  or  ash-heap,  outside  his  dwelling — an  object  of 
loathing  and  disgust  to  passers-by.  (2)  The  person  through  whom  it  was  directed. 
Not  the  devil  himself,  since  then  it  would  scarcely  have  acquired  the  force  of  a  tempta- 
tion ;  nor  even  a  friend  like  Eliphaz,  Bildad,  or  Zophar — counsellors  who  afterwards 
fared  rather  badly  at  Job's  hands ;  but  she  who  of  all  on  earth  was  his  nearest  and 
dearest — his  wife,  the  bride  of  his  youth,  the  mother  of  his  noble  sons  and  fair  girls 
now  dead,  the  companion  of  his  joys  and  sorrows.  Beyond  question,  it  was  politic  to 
attack  the  patriarch  through  his  wife ;  and  probably  for  this  reason  she  was  spared — 
not  because  having  her  was  a  greater  trial  to  the  good  man  than  losing  her  would  have 
been,  but  because  the  devil  wanted  a  tool  against  her  husband  (of,  Adam's  temptation 
through  Eve).  (3)  The  counsel  which  was  offered.  "  Bless  God  "  («e.  for  the  last  time; 
t.e.  "  renounce  him  "),  "  and  die  1 "  perhaps  words  of  wifely  sympathy  wrung  from  her 
loving  bosom  by  the  cruel  sufferings  which  had  been  heaped  upon  her  husband ; 
certainly  words  of  passionate  vehemence  calculated  to  bear  down  the  opposition  of  a 
sufferer  growing  every  day  feebler  through  incessant  pain ;  and  words  of  much  plausi- 
bility, suggesting  a  thought  which  seemingly  had  much  in  its  favour,  that  his  sufferings 
were  to  be  ascribed  purely  to  his  religion;  but  also  words  of  essectial  wickedness, 
since  not  only  was  the  thought  they  suggested  untrue,  but  the  advice  itself  was 
wrong. 

II.  The  twofold  victory  of  the  patriaeoh.  1.  The  inroad  of  physical  diseai* 
he  met  vnth  patient  submission.  "  He  took  a  potsherd  and  scraped  himself  withal." 
Indulging  in  no  complaints  against  Providence  for  afftictiag  him,  and,  when  the  malady 
had  so  far  developed  that  his  presence  became  offensive  to  his  friends  and  neighbours, 
quietly  retiring  to  the  ash-heap.    Admirable  meekness !     Exquisite  pationoa  I    Incom- 


40  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  n.  1—18 

^arable  submiBsion !  "  In  all  this  Job  sinned  not  with  bis  lips.''  2.  The  entrance  of 
wifely  temptation  he  encowntered  with  i  (1)  Deserved  rebuke.  "  Thou  speakest  as  one 
of  the  foolish  women  speaketb."  Language  distinctly  bearing  that  the  popular  estimate 
of  Job's  wife,  which  makes  her  to  have  been  a  sort  of  Oriental  shrew,  is  incorrect, 
implying  as  it  does  that  the  patriarch  was  surprised  to  hoar  her  talk  so  much  out  of 
character,  not  like  a  saint  and  the  wife  of  a  saint  as  she  was,  but  like  one  of  the 
foolish  or  ungodly  women.  Carried  away  by  the  tumultuousness  of  her  womanly 
feeling,  in  a  moment  of  passionate  thoughtlessness  she  had  lost  her  self-control,  and 
given  utterance  to  desperate  words,  which  were  such  as  to  call  for  censure ;  and  the 
feiihful  husband,  much  as  he  loved  his  wife,  and  laden  as  he  was  himself  with  misery, 
did  not  shrink  from  administering  the  needful  admonition.  (2)  Lofti/  resignation. 
"Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  wj  not  receive  evil?" 
The  voice,  not  of  stoical  indifference,  or  of  heartless  despair,  or  of  cold,  callous,  reluctant 
acquiescence  in  a  fate  which  cannot  be  escaped,  but  of  intelligent  and  cheerful  submission 
to  a  providence  which  he  recognizes  to  be  at  once  righteous  and  good.  "  In  all  this 
Job  sinned  not  with  his  lips." 

Learn :  1.  That  God's  saints  in  this  world  have  sometimes  to  endure  trial  upon  triaL 
2.  That  periods  of  protracted  suffering' are  spiritually  more  dangerous  than  sharp  and 
sudden  strokes  of  greater  severity.  3.  That  the  fiercest  trials  often  arise  at  unexpected 
moments,  and  from  least  anticipated  quarters,  4.  That  the  moat  painful  temptation 
a  good  man  can  experience  is  the  temptation  to  renounce  his  religion.  5.  That  Hatan'g 
mercies  (e.g.  in  sparing  Job's  wife)  have  always  somewhat  of  cruelty  in  them.  6.  That 
the  greatest  outward  blessings  may  sometimes  prove  a  snare — Job's  wife,  and  Adam's. 
7.  That  it  is  perilous  for  good  men  or  women  to  give  way  to  passion.  8.  That  in 
times  of  violent  emotion  a  strong  guard  should  be  set  upon  the  door  of  the  lips. 
9.  That  good  people  may  sometimes  give  very  bad  advice.  10.  That  the  devil's  prime 
aim  in  tempting  men  is  to  make  them  renounce  God,  and  die.  11.  That  God's  people 
should  on  no  account  let  go  their  integrity.  12.  That  those  who  have  been  recipients 
of  God's  mercies  should  not  repine  when  for  their  good  he  changes  the  dispensation. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Job  and  his  wife,    I.  A  fooush  wouas. 

II.  A    FAITHFUL    HUSBAtfD. 

III.  A    THANKFUL  SAINT. 

IV.  A    SUBMISSIVE   SUFFEBBB. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Four  voices.     I.  The  voiob  op  folly.     "  Curse  God,  and  die." 

IL  The  voice  of  rebuke.    "  Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  women  speaketh." 

III.  The  VOICE  of  qbatitude.    "  We  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord." 

IV.  The  voice  of  submission.    "  Shall  we  not  receive  evil  ? " 

Vers.  9, 10  (along  with  Gen.  iiL  1 — 6). — Job  and  Adam :  a  parcUhl  and  a  contrast. 
I.  A  PARALLEL.  1.  Both  Were  tempted,  2,  By  Satan.  3.  Through  their  wives.  4, 
To  renounce  their  allegiance  to  God. 

II.  A  CONTRAST.  1.  In  the  times  of  their  temptation,  Adam  when  at  the  summit 
of  felicity  ;  Job  when  in  the  depth  of  misery.  2.  In  the  modes  of  their  temptation. 
Adam,  assailed  by  the  thought  that  God  had  unjustly  deprived  him  of  good;  Job, 
by  the  suggestion  that  God  had  unrighteously  iifflicted  him  with  evil.  3.  In  the 
results  of  their  temptation.  Adam  fell ;  Job  stood.  See  (1)  in  Adam  the  representa- 
tive of  all  men ;  and  (2)  in  Job  the  foreshadowing  of  the  God-Man. 

Vers.  11—13. — The  patriarch's  third  trial;  or,  the  coming  of  the  friends.  I.  The 
HONOURABLE  NAMES  THEV  BOBB.  l..Eliphaz  the  Temanitc.  Probably  a  deBcendant  of 
Teman,  the  son  of  Eliphaz,  the  son  of  Esau  by  his  wife  Adah  (Gen.  xxxvi.  10,  11 ;  1 
Chron.  i.  35,  36) ;  belonging  to  the  race  of  Teman,  which  extended  over  a  considerable 
portion  of  Arabia,  about  midway  between  Palestine  and  the  Euphrates ;  very  likely 
the  oldest  of  the  three  friends.  2.  Bildad  the  Shuhite.  Perhaps  sprung  from  Shuah, 
the  youngest  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah  (Gen.  xxv.  2),  and  residing  in  a  district  of 
Arabia,  not  far  from  the  Temanite  country ;  may  be  reasonably  supposed  the  second 
eldest  of  the  friends,    3,  Zt^hew  the  Naamathite.    Otherwise  unknown  except  through 


OH.  n.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  41 


this  book ;  though,  from  his  ac(juaintance  with  Bildad,  Eliphaz,  and  Job,  it  may  h« 
inferred  he  also  was  a  person  of  distinction.  Probably  all  three  were,  like  the  patriarch 
in  his  prosp*ity,  powerful  Arabian  sheiks. 

II.  Thk  excellent  0HAKA0TBE8  THET  POSSESSED.  1.  Points  of  agreement.  (1) 
Intellectuai  ability.  Without  alleging  that  all  three  stood  upon  the  same  platform  in 
respect  of  mental  calibre  (which  they  did  not,  Eliphaz  holding  unmistakably  the  pre- 
eminence), it  is  apparent  that  they  all  were  thinkers  of  no  mean  capacity.  It  is  a 
special  ornament  to  men  in  high  social  position  to  be  possessed  of  corresponding  mental 
faculties;  besides  immensely  adding  to  their  personal  enjoyment  and  public  usefulness 
(of.  Eccles.  X.  16).  (2)  Beligiom  principle.  Unquestionably  good  men,  who  not  only 
revered  Jehovah,  but  practised  the  Divine  will  so  far  as  they  understood  it.  They  were 
likewise  sincerely  desirous  of  promoting  Job's  highest  welfare,  while  they  unfeignedly 
sympathized  with  him  in  his  appalling  trouble.  If  we  cannot  quite  adopt  their 
speculative  and  religious  formulas,  any  more  than  we  can  commend  their  wisdom  or 
kindness  in  lecturing  the  patriarch  as  they  did;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  due  to  them 
not  to  estimate  their  characters  from  the  gall  and  wormwood  outpoured  on  their 
devoted  heads  by  Job,  when  stung  to  madness  through  their  reproaches.  (3)  Mistaken 
views.  All  three  were  equally  astray  in  the  fundamental  doctrine  they  propounded 
in  the  course  of  their  debate  with  the  patriarch,  viz.  that  suffering  was  so  indis- 
solubly  associated  with  ain  that  the  one  was  the  measure  of  the  other — a  theory 
which  Job  strenuously  combats  throughout  the  poem ;  thus  giving  rise  to  what  we 
designate  the  second  problem  of  the  book,  viz.  as  to  the  precise  relation  subsisting 
between  sin  and  suffering  as  they  appear  on  earth.  2.  Points  of  difference.-  (1) 
Eliphaz,  a  man  of  erudition,  a  person  given  to  profound  spiritual  reflection,  a  seer  who 
discerned  spirits,  dreamed  dreams,  and  enjoyed  intercourse  with  the  unseen  world,  may 
be  held  to  represent  the  prophet  of  the  period.  (2)  Bildad,  of  smaller  build  and  nar- 
rower vision,  a  strong  traditionalist  in  religion,  with  a  profounil  veneration  for  the 
ancients,  who  accepted  his  theology  from  his  ancestors  without  putting  ugly  questions 
as  to  its  truth,  and  was  prepared,  by  quoting  maxims  and  citing  proverbs  of  hoary 
antiquity,  to  contend  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  was  probably  designed 
to  typify  the  sage  of  the  time.  (3)  Zophar  the  Naamathite,  an  echo  of  his  friends  as  to 
sentiment,  as  to  manneir  moFe  boisterous  and  arrogant  than  either,  full  of  commonplaces 
and  conventional  dogmas,  which  he  enunciated  with  imposing  dignity  and  tremendous 
authority,  may  be  regarded  as  the  good  man  of  the  day,  the  vulgar  but  sincere  formalist, 
who  says  sharp  and  bitter  things,  and  always  means  what  he  says,  as  well  as  says  what 
he  means  (Cox). 

III.  The  MELANCHOLY  TIDINGS  THBT  RECEIVED.  How  they  leamt  the  news  of  Job's 
evil  fortunes  is  not  related,  but  the  fact  that  they  did  reminds  us  of :  1.  The  rapidity 
with  which  evil  tidings  usually  spread ;  since  it  was  obviously  not  long  before  the 
report  of  their  friend's  calamities  reached  their  ears.  2.  The  organic  unity  of  society  ; 
which  renders  it  impossible  for  any  one  to  either  suffer  or  rejoice  alone  (cf.  1  Cor.  xii. 
26).    3.   TTie  special  ausceptibiUty  of  friendly  hearts  for  learning  of  others'  woes. 

IV.  The  mutual  appointment  thbt  made.  A  token  of :  1.  Lively  interest  in  the 
patriarch's  welfare.  Seeing  they  must  have  communicated  with  each  other  concerning 
their  neighbour's  evil  hap,  thus  showing  they  were  not  indifferent  to  what  had  occurred. 
2.  Loving  sympathy  mth  the  patriarch's  distress.  For  they  meant  to  mourn  with  him 
and  to  comfort  him,  not  to  treat  him  to  a  mere  call  of  ceremony.  3.  High  appreciation 
of  the  patriarch's  worth.  Since  they  planned  to  go  together  to  the  scone  of  sorrow,  which, 
if  it  did  spring  from  a  due  regard  to  their  own  dignity  as  princes,  was  perhaps^  also 
traceable  to  their  sense  of  what  was  owing  to  the  rank  and  worth  of  their  old  friend. 
It  says  much  for  the  three  neighbours  that  they  did  not  neglect  Job  now  that  he  was 
a  poor,  diseased  leper. 

V.  The  fervent  emotion  they  displayed.  1.  Tearful  sympathy.  Catching  a 
sight  of  their  former  neighbour,  whom  they  had  known  and  revered  in  his  prosperity, 
now  Bitting  on  the  ash-heap,  outside  his  house,  and  hardly  recognizing,  in  the 
emaciated  features  on  which  they  gazed,  the  noble  form  of  the  quondam  prince  whose 
glory  outshone  the  radiance  of  all  his  contemporaries,  they  lifted  up  their  voicef  and 
wept.  Orientals  are  proverbially  more  emotinnal  and  lachrymose  than  phlegmatic 
Ocddent^s;  but  still  it  must  have  been  au  affecting  spectacle  to  behold  the  three 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oB.  n.  1— 13. 


great  princes  moved  to  tears  by  the  patriarch's  distress.  2.  Genuine  amazement. 
"They  rent  every  one  his  mantle."  A  symbol  of  horror  and  astonishment,  as  in  the 
case  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxvii.  34),  Joshua  (vii.  6),  Ezra  (ix.  3),  Caiaphas  (Matt.  xxvi. 
65).  3.  Profound  sorrow.  "  They  sprinkled  dust  upon  their  heads  towards  heaven ; " 
i.e.  threw  handfuls  of  dust  into  the  air,  as  the  Arabs  still  do,  that  it  might  fall  upon 
their  heads,  in  token  that  they  were  deeply  moved  by  the  troubles  and  calamitiel  that 
had  fallen  on  their  friend. 

VI.  The  pbouliae  attitude  thbt  assumed.  It  is  unnecessary  to  suppose  that 
they  were  absolutely  silent,  but  merely  that  they  spake  nothing  to  him  during  all 
that  period,  certainly  not  in  any  way  alluding  to  the  cause  of  his  distress.  And  this 
silent  attitude  may  have  been  expressive  of  (1)  ceremonial  propriety,  if  this  was 
the  customary  manner  of  Oriental  mourning,  which  is  doubtful ;  but  was  more  pro- 
bably dictated  by  (2)  delicate  sensibility,  which  forbade  them  to  intrude  upon  the 
solitude  of  a  sorrow  so  overpowering  as  that  which  they  beheld ;  and  (3)  reverential 
awe,  as  seeing  in  the  patriarch  one  upon  whom  the  hand  of  God  was  visibly  laid  (cf. 
Gen.  xxxiv.  5;  Lev.  x.  3;  Ps.  xlvi.  10;  Ezek.  iii.  15);  if  it  did  not  also  spring  from 
(4)  rising  suspicion,  the  thought  beginning  to  thrust  itself  into  view,  which  indeed, 
according  to  their  philosophy,  could  not  long  be  repressed,  that  the  agonized  and 
wretched  sufferer  before  them  must  have  been,  notwithstanding  his  previous  high 
reputation  for  piety,  a  hypocrite  at  bottom,  whose  disguised  insincerities  and  secret 
iniquities  had  at  length  drawn  down  upon  him  the  just  judgment  of  a  holy  and 
incensed  God. 

Learn :  1.  That  good  men  may  often  misunderstand  Gk)d's  truth,  misconstrue  God's 
providence,  and  misjudge  God's  people.  2.  That  good  men  should  always  study  to  be 
distinguished  for  sympathy  towards  the  suffering  and  sorrowing.  3.  That  good  men 
who  aspire  to  be  brothers  of  consolation  should  not  forget  that  silence  is  sometimes 
more  soothing  than  speech.  4.  That  good  men  should  never  cherish  secret  suspicions 
of  those  whom  they  seek  to  comfort. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Benewed  assaults  and  temptations  of  the  adversary.  The  first  scene 
in  this  drama  of  afiSiction  has  closed,  and  a  fresh  one  opens,  bringing,  however,  no 
happy  change,  no  alleviation,  but  rather  an  aggravation  of  the  hero's  woe.  A  second 
time  the  adversary  of  mankind  appears  in  the  heavenly  court  to  launch  his  malicious 
shafts  of  accusation  against  the  servant  of  God.  His  purpose  is  now  more  intent,  his 
aim  more  deadly,  than  ever.  But  we,  as  spectators,  can  see  a  bright  light  still  steadily 
shining  above  the  cloud  in  that  unfailing  favour  and  kindness  of  the  EternsJ,  who 
cannot,  will  not,  desert  his  own.    Looking  more  closely  to  the  particulars,  we  see— 

I.  The  PITT  OF  God  foe  his  buffeeino  servants.  (Vers.  1—3.)  Jehovah  looks 
down  and  beholds  "his  servant  Job,"  as  he  stands  unshaken  amidst  a  very  hurricane  of 
calamity,  holding  to  his  integrity  as  something  dearer  than  life ;  and  he  condescends  to 
expostulate  with  the  accuser.  Has  not  the  trial  gone  far  enough  ?  Is  not  the  test  that 
Job  has  already  undergone  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  most  sceptical  observer  of  his  truth  ? 
Must  the  furnace  be  heated  still  another  degree  ?  But  the  adversary  is  not  content ; 
and  it  would  appear  that,  if  further  trial  is  demanded,  the  demand  is  not  to  be  resisted, 
according  to  the  laws  of  heaven.  The  moral  government  of  the  world  may  require 
this.  Thus,  while  the  pity  of  God  would  relieve  from  further  suffering,  his  righteous- 
ness— which  is  his  adherence  to  fixed  law — may  require  its  continuance,  until  every 
doubt  concerning  a  particular  character  be  solved.  But  the  language  ascribed  to  the 
heavenly  Father  is,  meanwhile,  full  of  the  tenderest  compassion!'  There  is  indi- 
vidualizing regard.  There  is  recognition  of  integrity  and  innocence.  There  is  pro- 
found sympathy.  We  are  reminded  of  the  touching  words  of  Ps.  ciii.,  "  He  knows 
our  frame ;  he  remembers  that  we  are  dust." 

II.  In  opposition  to  this,  we  observe  the  malignant  pbbsevebanok  of  the  devil. 
1.  Eis  specious  plea  against  Job.  (Vers.  ^ .  5.)  In  the  form  of  a  proverb  he  launches  a 
keen  insinuation ;  "  Skin  for  skin ;  "  like  after  like ;  one  thing  after  another  will  a  man 
give  for  dear  life.    Job  has  only  made  a  barter  after  aU.     He  loses  all  his  property  •  but 


iH.  n.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  43 

then  lie  has  that  left  which  outweighs  all  the  rest.  The  loss  of  goods  teaches  him  to 
prize  the  health  which  is  left.  He  feels  the  greatness  of  this  blessing  as  he  never  felt  it 
before.  Any  circumstance  which  teaches  us  the  worth  of  a  common  blessing  is  so  far 
an  advantage  to  us.  An  eminent  living  man  has  said  that,  given  health,  we  have  no 
right  to  complain  of  anything  in  the  world.  Job,  then,  has  only  been  half  tempted 
after  all ;  and  the  trial  will  only  run  its  full  course  when  it  has  assailed  this  last  great, 
chief  blessing — his  health  of  body  and  of  mind.  Such  is  the  "  case  "  of  the  devilish 
prosecutor  against  Job.  2.  The  final  test  permitted.  (Vers.  6 — 8.)  The  All-disposer 
grants  the  permission :  "  He  is  in  thy  power ;  but  spare  his  life !  "  And  then  a  sudden 
poison  strikes  through  the  sufferer's  blood ;  he  becomes  from  head  to  foot  a  mass  of  disease 
and  loathsomeness,  sits  in  ashes,  scraping  himself  with  a  potsherd,  to  allay  the  fearful 
irritation  of  his  malady.  His  mind  is,  of  course,  deeply  affected  by  the  illness  of  his  body. 
Natural  hope  is  extinct.  It  is  a  life  in  ruins.  Yet  that  Divine  and  immortal  principle 
we  call  the  soul  is  still  intact,  still  glimmers  like  a  bright  spark  amidst  the  embers  of 
a  dying  fire. 

III.  Temptation  in  the  guise  of  affection.  (Vers.  9, 10.)  And  now  what  remains 
of  conscious  life  is  to  know  one  further  shock ;  and  the  hand  of  woman,  the  voice  of  a 
wife,  is  employed  to  urge  the  tottering  sufferer  over  the  brink  on  which  he  sits,  into 
despair  and  total  renunciation  of  faith  and  God.  Then  his  wife  said  to  him, "  Dost  thou 
still  hold  fast  to  thine  innocence  ?  Say  farewell  to  God,  and  die !  "  1.  This  is  a  second 
signal  instance  in  which,  in  the  Old  Testament,  woman  plays  the  part  of  the  tempter. 
There  is  instruction  in  this  pointed  fact.  Woman  is  the  weaker  vessel,  in  mind  as  in 
body.  She  has  less  firmness  of  intellectual  texture.  Her  weakness  as  well  as  her 
strength  lies  in  feeling.  She  is  quick  in  impulses,  both  of  good  and  of  evil.  She 
represents  passion,  and  man  represents  strength.  On  the  whole,  she  is  less  capable  of 
strong,  profound,  patient  convictions,  less  able  to  take  a  large  view  of  questions,  09  look 
beyond  the  present  and  immediate  aspects  of  things.  Here  is  the  picture  of  a  lively 
temper,  quick  to  feel  resentment  at  pain  or  gratitude  for  good ;  but  a  shallow  under- 
standing, unused  to  meditation  and  reflection  on  the  deeper  meanings  of  life.  Her 
language  is  that  of  haste  and  passion.  But  this  serves  to  bring  out  by  contrast  the 
calm,  reflective  piety,  the  convictions  established  by  lifelong  thought  and  experience  of 
her  husband.  2.  The  rebuke  of  Job  to  his  wife.  (1)  "Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the 
foolish  women ; "  that  is,  thy  language  is  like  that  of  a  heathen,  not  of  one  who  has 
been  trained  in  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  the  true  God.  The  heathen  turn 
fickly  from  one  god  to  another  as  pleasure  and  pain  or  the  caprice  of  fancy  may 
suggest.  For  their  gods  are  but  idols,  creatures  of  their  own  imagination,  which  they 
take  up  and  cast  down  as  children  with  their  toys.  But  there  is  only  one  God  for  me  1 
And  that  God,  the  eternally  Wise  and  Good  in  all  that  he  gives,  in  all  that  he  with- 
holds 1  (2)  Tliere  are  two  sides  of  life,  ami  the  one  must  be  taken  along  with  the 
other.  Here,  too,  the  language  of  manly  reasonableness  and  of  intelligent  piety  speaks 
out.  Life  is  a  garment  woven  of  both  pleasure  and  pain,  of  seeming  good  and  evil. 
The  one  conditions  the  other.  All  experience  teaches  that  constant  happiness  is  the 
lot  of  none.  Why,  then,  should  I  expect  to  be  an  exception  ?  Surely  we  are  but 
crude  scholars  in  life's  great  school,  so  long  as  we  think  we  are  entitled  to  immunity 
from  any  particular  form  of  suffering.  We  are  still  children  who  think  they  have 
a  right  to  their  own  way,  and  are  astonished  to  find  themselves  withstood.  "  Who  told 
thee  thou  hadst  a  right  to  be  happy  ?    Art  thou  a  vulture  screamiug  for  thy  food  ?  " 

«  CJonldst  thou,  Pausanias,  learn 
How  deep  a  fault  is  this  I 
Couldst  thou  but  once  discern 
Thou  hast  no  right  to  bliss  I " 

Here  then  the  weakness  of  distrust  and  the  folly  of  despair  in  the  human  heart, 
renreseated  by  Job's  wife,  stand  opposed  to  the  nobleness  and  grandeur  of  a  fathom- 
less confidence  in  the  Eternal.  God  is  the  Author  at  last  of  all  we  suffer.  Is  that 
a  reason  for  forsaking  God  ?  No,  replies  faith ;  it  is  a  reason  for  reposing  more  entirely 
upon  his  everlasting  arms.    « If  my  bark  sinks,  'tis  to  another  sea.  —J. 

Vers.  11— 13.— .4  picture  tf  fritndikip.    In  this  short  section  we  have  a  beautiful 


4i  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  n.  1—18. 


picture  of  true  friendship  in  its  prompt  sympathy,  its  ready  offices.  The  three  intimate 
friends  of  Job,  on  hearing  of  his  troubles,  arrange  to  visit  him  and  offer  the  comfort 
of  their  presence  and  condolence.    We  are  reminded — 

I.  Op  the  blessing  or  pbibndship.  Sympathy  is  the  indispensable  need  of  the 
heart.  It  deepens  the  colour  of  all  our  pleasures;  it  throws  a  gleam  of  light  athwart 
our  deepest  gloom.  "Eejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice;  and  weep  with  them  that' 
weep."  Our  joys  do  not  burst  into  flower  till  they  feel  the  warm  atmosphere  of  friend- 
ship. Our  heaviest  griefs  only  cease  to  be  crushing  when  we  have  poured  our  tale  into 
the  ear  of  one  we  love.  One  of  the  humblest,  yet  best  offices  a  friend  can  render  to 
a  sufferer  is  to  be  a  good  listener.  Draw  him  out ;  get  him  to  talk ;  movement  and 
change  of  mind  are  what  he  needs.  Exertion,  if  only  the  exertion  of  speech,  will  do 
him  good.  Do  not  pour  upon  him  a  cataract  of  well-meaning  but  stunning  common- 
places. Imitate  the  kindness  of  Job's  friends,  but  not  their  want  of  tact  and  per- 
ception. Let  him  only  feel  that  in  your  presence  he  can  relieve  himself  of  all  that  is 
on  his  mind,  and  will  not  fail  to  be  kindly  understood. 

II.  Seasonable  silence  in  the  pbesenob  op  bobeow.  On  the  arrival  of  the 
friends,  seeing  the  heart-rending  condition  of  the  noble  chieftain,  wkom  they  had  last 
seen  in  the  height  of  his  health  and  prosperity,  now  sitting  in  the  open  air,  banished 
by  disease  from  his  dwelling,  defaced  by  that  disease  beyond  recognition,  an  utterly 
broken  man,  they  express  their  grief  by  all  the  significant  gestures  of  Eastern  manners 
— ^weeping,  rending  their  clothes,  sprinkling  dust  upon  their  heads.  They  then  take 
their  places  by  his  side,  and  keep  a  profound  and  motirnful  silence  for  a  week,  as 
Ezekiel  did  when  he  visited  his  countrymen  captives  by  the  river  Chebar.  What 
exquisite  manners  are  taught  us  in  the  Bible  I  And  the  great  superiority  of  its  teach- 
ing in  this  respect  over  the  common  teaching  of  the  world  is  that  it  founds  all  manners 
upon  the  heart.  It  is  truth,  love,  sympathy,  which  can  alone  render  us  truly  polite, 
refined,  and  delicate  in  our  relations  to  others,  teaching  us  always  to  put  ourselves  in 
thought  in  the  other's  place.  "  There  is  a  time  to  keep  silence."  In  great  grief  we 
recognize  the  hand  of  God,  and  he  bids  us  be  still  and  own  him.  Our  smaller  feelings 
bubble,  our  deeper  ones  are  dumb.  There  are  times  when  reverence  demands  silence, 
and  a  single  word  is  too  much.  Leave  the  sufferer' alone  at  first.  Let  him  collect  him- 
self; let  him  ask  what  God  has  to  say  to  him  in  the  still,  small  voice  that  comes  after 
the  earthquake  and  the  storm.  "  Sacred  silence,  thou  that  art  offspring  of  the  deeper 
heart,  frost  of  the  mouth,  and  thaw  of  the  mind ! "  Sit  by  your  friend's  side,  clasp 
his  hand,  say  simply,  "  God  comfort  you,  my  brother  1 "  In  the  earlier  stage  of  a  fresh 
and  sudden  grief  this  will  be  enough.  We  cannot  doubt  that  the  wounded  heart  of 
Job  was  greatly  comforted  by  the  silent  presence  of  his  sympathizing  friends.  It  was 
better  than  all  their  spoken  attempts  at  consolation.  Let  us  thank  God  for  friendship 
and  for  true  friends ;  they  are  messengers  from  him.  "  God,  who  comforteth  them 
that  are  cast  down,  comforted  me  by  the  coming  of  Titus  I " — J. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  severer  tests  of  faith.  Job  has  triumphed  in  the  severe  ordeal. 
His  possessions,  his  servants,  his  family,  have  been  torn  from  him.  In  the  bitterness 
jf  his  sorrow  he  has  "  rent  his  mantle,"  and  shown  the  signs  of  his  humiliation  by 
cutting  off  the  hair  of  his  head.  But  in  the  paroxysms  of  his  grief  he  has  "  held  fast 
his  integrity;"  he  " sinned  not,  nor  charged  God  foolishly."  So  far  he  has  passed 
through  the  fire  unscathed,  and  belied  the  false  accusations  of  the  adversary.  But 
further  trials  are  at  hand.  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  and  purpose  of  the  book 
to  re|iresent  the  lowest  condition  of  human  sorrows.  Besides  loss  of  possessions  and  loss 
of  his  beloved  children.  Job  must  needs  be  subjected  to  the  loss  of  healtti^ — to  a  dire 
and  painful  and  loathsome  disease.  All  this  is  aggravated  by  the  unwise  taunts  and 
advicu  of  his  wife,  and  the  prolonged  and  irritating  accusations  and  false  views  of  his 
friends.  It  is  a  condition  of  extreme  suffering  unrelieved  by  any  human  consolations. 
Job  is  alone  in  his  sufferings,  unsustained,  his  pain  even  increased  by  the  very  voices 
that  should  have  brought  comfort  to  him.  Up  to  the  time  of  his  friends'  visit 
Job  has  remained  unmoved  in  his  uncomplaining  integrity.  "In  all' this  did  not  Job 
sin  wiih  his  lips."  The  test  to  which  he  was  subjected  by  the  severe  and  reproachful 
and  unhelpful  words  of  his  friends  is  presented  in  its  detailed  relation  throughout  the 
book.    We  leant — 


OH.  n.  1—13.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  46 

L  That  rr  ib  fossiblb  pob  even  the  BiaHTEons  man  to  buffbb  nr  the 
EXTBEMB8T  DEOBBB.  It  ig  One  part  of  the  purpose  of  the  book  to  illustrate  this  truth 
for  sufferers  in  all  time,  to  make  knowu  that  "  many "  may  be  "  the  a£Qictions  of  the 
righteous," 

II.  That  the  purposb  of  these  extreme  afflictions  is  the  testing  and 
PKBFBOTING  OF  viBTUB,  whioh,  even  in  the  case  of  the  righteous,  is  necessarily  imperfect. 
Reading  through  this  book,  it  would  appear  that  the  work  of  Satan  is  to  test  virtue, 
Satan  is  called  "  the  agent  of  probation."  He  displays  a  malignant  and  antagonistic  spirit. 
But  whatever  may  seem  to  be  the  motives  on  the  one  side,  it  is  obviously  the  Divine 
purpose  to  make  the  testing  an  occasion  of  blessing  to  him  who  is  tested.  "  When 
he  is  tried  he  shall  receive  a  crown  of  life."  Satan  must  be  considered  as  a  servant  of 
the  most  high  God,  whose  agency  is  employed  in  the  spiritual  discipline  of  the  righteous. 
The  conditions  of  temptation  to  evil  are  so  intimately  identified  with  all  those  of  the 
human  life,  that  we  can  only  think  of  them  as  a  necessary  part  of  the  present 
constitution  under  which  human  life  is  held.  By  it  virtue  is  exposed  to  injury ;  but 
in  its  fires  virtue  is  purified  and  perfected. 

III.  That  the  triumph  of  vietub  in  kesismno  temptation  to  evil  and  to 

IMPATIENCE  UNDER  THE  OPPRESSION  OF  PAIN,  IS   THE  UTMOST  TRIUMPH   OF   THE    HUMAN 

SOUL,  AND  ENSURES  THE  HIGHEST  BBWAED.  He  who  subjects  the  dcllcato  life  to  the 
tierce  blast  of  evil  will  not  so  expose  it  as  needlessly  to  endanger  its  highest  interests. 
Temptation  does  not  appeal  to  the  virtue  of  the  heart,  but  to  its  remaining  faultiness, 
which  it  exposes  for  destruction,  and  so  proves  its  own  beneficent  action. 

ly.  In  the  history  of  Job  we  further  leain  that  even  lofty  virtue  mat  be  bowed 

DOWN,   AND   show  SIGNS   OF   WEAKNESS   BEFORE   FINALLY   TRIUMPHING. 

V.  We  also  learn  the  wisdom  of  patiently  submitting  to  the  trials  oF  life, 
HOWEVER  SEVERE,  KebellioDsuess  brings  no  ease  to  the  troubled  spirit.  The  only 
alternative  offered  to  Job  was,  "  Curse  Giid,  and  die."  The  better  course  is  to  retain 
integrity,  to  sin  not,  nor  charge  God  foolishly. — K.  G. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — Human  impotence  in  presence  of  great  sorrow.  The  prompting  of 
piu-e  and  faithful  frionaship  leads  Job's  friends  to  hurry  to  his  help.  They  "  come  to 
mourn  with  him  and  to  comfort  him."  When  yet  afar  off  they  lift  up  their  eyes  and 
behold  their  friend.  But,  alas!  disease  has  wrought  so  great  a  change  in  him  that 
they  know  him  not.  Then  "  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept."  In  their  wild, 
ungoverned  passionate  grief  "  they  rent  every  one  his  mantle,"  and  seizing  the  dust 
of  the  ground  they  cast  it  in  the  air  toward  heaven,  and  let  it  fall  on  their  heads  in 
token  of  their  grief.  Thus  with  signs  of  deep  suffering  in  sympathy  with  their  friend 
they  oast  their  cry  with  the  sand  upwards  to  heaven.  Then,  with  great  skill,  the 
writer  indicates  the  helplessness  of  men  in  the  presence  of  overwhelming  sorrow. 
"  They  sat  down  with  him  on  the  ground  seven  days  and  seven  nights,  and  none  spake 
a  word  unto  him :  for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  great."  So  the  sorrow 
that  extorted  the  wild  cry  of  pity  closed  the  lips  of  consolation.  We  behold  the 
meu  Staggered  by  the  bitterness  of  their  friend's  lot.  He  cannot  help  himself,  and  they 
cannot  help  biin.  How  true  a  picture  of  all  deep  sorrow  I  It  is  to  be  said  by  every 
severe  sufferer  as  by  the  typical  One, "  Of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me ;  "  for  even 
tender,  loving  sympathy  cannot  penetrate  to  the  depths  of  another's  sufferings.  With 
these  feelings  we  gaze  on  the  sufferer,  feeling  how  painful  it  is  to  be  unableto  extend 
a  helpful  hand  or  to  speak  an  effectual  word,  It  is  humiliating  to  us.  It  is  abasing 
to  our  pride. 

I.   ThB   causes  of  our  impotence  in  PEESBKOE  op  BBVBBB  BUFPEBING  ABB  :   1.    OuT 

inability  to  descend  to  the  depth  of  the  sorrow  of  another.  It  is  only  as  we  ouraelves 
are  sufferers  that  we  can  know  what  others  feel.  We  must  have  drunk  of  the  same 
cup  if  we  would  know  its  bitterness.  2.  But  even  though  we  have  suffered  as  we 
■ee  others  suffer,  no  words,  even  of  the  tenderest  pity,  can  effectually  relievo  the 
mourner.  Hollow  human  words,  words  of  merely  pretended  sympathy,  only  wound 
the  sufferer  more  deeply  ;  while  words  of  true  friendship,  cooling  and  cheering  as  they 
may  be,  can  take  up  no  part  of  the  burden.  For  a  time  they  draw  off  the  mind  of 
the  sufferer  from  his  sorrow,  but  it  returns  as  a  flowing  tide. 
IL  The  painfulhess  to  a  true  fbiend  or  conscious  inoompbtenob  effectually 


46  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  n.  1—13. 

TO  AID  THE  BUTFEBEB.  Days  OF  hours  of  Bilence  are  days  or  hours  of  keen  suffering 
to  the  faithful  friend  unable  to  stanch  the  wound,  to  abate  the  fever,  to  restore  the 
lost  possession  or  the  lost  friend.     By  all  we  are  driven  to — 

III.  The  tbue  and  only  effectual  sympathizee,  the  God-Man,  who,  having 
suffered,  and  having  power  to  descend  to  the  lowest  depths  of  the  human  heart,  and 
having  the  Divine  resources  at  command,  the  power  to  inspire  the  word  of  consolation 
and  supporting  strength ;  and  who,  measuring  the  need  of  the  sufferer,  can  abate  the 
severity  of  bodily  pain  or  mental  anguish.  To  the  sufferer  the  welcome  of  this  honest 
sympathy  opens  the  door  for  the  incoming  of  the  true  Healer  and  Comforter  and 
Helper,  who  can  give  strength  to  the  feeble,  and,  above  all,  can  sanctify  sorrow  and 
calamity  to  higher  ends,  and  make  all  things  work  together  for  good.  He  can  brighten 
hope  and  sustain  faith  and  strengthen  patience,  can  soothe  the  fretted  spirit,  and  give 
peace  and  joy  and  life. — E.  Q-. 

Ver.  4. — "  Satan's  old  saw "  (Browning).  Satan  was  defeated  in  the  first  trial,  but 
not  convinced.  With  persistent  malignity  he  proceeded  to  suggest  a  more  severe  test. 
It  was  no  fault  of  his  that  the  first  test,  hard  as  it  was,  had  not  gone  to  the  utmost 
extremity;  for  he  had  been  expressly  limited  by  the  words,  "Only  upon  himself  put 
not  forth  thine  hand"  (ver.  12).  He  had  gone  to  the  full  length  of  his  tether,  but  that 
had  not  satisfied  him ;  so  he  must  apply  for  a  larger  privilege  of  mischief-making.  He 
requests  permission  to  touch  the  person  of  Job,  either  quoting  or  coining  the  proverb 
which  Browning  has  called  "  Satan's  old  saw." 

I.  The  foecb  of  the  pbovbrb.  Take  it  how  you  will — that  a  man  will  sacrifice  a 
less  vital  part  to  save  a  more  vital  part,  holding  up  his  arm  to  shelter  his  head;  or  that 
he  will  give  the  lives  of  his  cattle,  slaves,  children,  to  save  his  own  body's  skin ;  or 
that  he  will  sell  hide  after  hide  of  precious  skins  from  his  warehouse,  i.e.  all  his  property, 
for  his  life — ^the  proverb  plainly  means  that  a  man  will  make  any  sacrifice  to  save  his 
life.  1.  ITiere  is  an  instinct  of  self-preservation.  Here  we  come  to  an  impulse  of 
nature.  When  in  a  state  of  nature  all  creatures  try  to  save  their  own  lives  at  any  cost. 
Even  the  would-be  suicide,  when  once  he  finds  himself  drowning,  screams  for  help,  and 
clutches  madly  at  the  rope  that  is  flung  to  him.  Accordingly,  juries  usually  bring  in 
a  verdict  predicating  an  unsound  mind  .in  the  case  of  any  one  who  has  succeeded  in 
taking  his  own  life.  Now,  this  instinct  of  self-preservation  is  a  gift  from  the  Author 
of  nature ;  it  is  innocent  because  Divine,  and  powerful  because  primitive.  2.  Life  is 
a  first  condition  of  all  experience  and  possession.  If  a  man  loses  his  life  he  loses  his 
aU.  He  may  sacrifice  many  things  for  the  sake  of  one  coveted  end — selling  all  he  has 
to  buy  one  pearl  of  great  price ;  he  may  risk  his  life  on  a  great  ventiu-e ;  but  if  he  loses 
his  life  he  can  obtain  nothing  in  return.  "  What  is  a  maa  profited  if  he  shall  gain 
the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  life  ?  "  (Matt.  xvi.  26).  3.  Life  is  seen  to  be  supremely 
valued.  Starving  men  become  cannibals.  In  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  women  boiled 
their  own  children  for  a  last  meal,  natural  affection  itself  being  sacrificed  to  the  instinct 
of  self-preservation.     Desperate  men  sell  their  lives  dearly. 

II.  The  falsity  of  the  peovbkb.  We  must  be  on  our  guard  how  we  quote  texts  firom 
Scripture.  This  is  especially  important  in  the  Book  of  Job,  where  the  form  is  dramatic. 
The  proverb  before  us  is  in  Scripture ;  yet  it  is  not  from  God,  but  from  ,the  devil.  This 
very  fact  should  make  us  suspicious  about  it.  It  looks  like  truth,  but  it  comes  from  the 
"  father  of  lies."  1.  It  denies  the  higher  life.  Satan  refers  to  a  natural  instinct.  But 
that  instinct  does  not  cover  the  whole  of  our  being.  His  lie  is  the  more  deadly  because 
it  is  the  exaggeration  of  a  truth,  or  rather  because  it  is  the  statement  of  one  truth 
which  needs  to  be  qualified  with  another  truth.  Bishop  Butler  has  taught  us  that 
human  nature  in  its  fulness  includes  conscience.  But  conscience  may  go  against  the 
lower  part  of  our  nature.  The  higher  life  may  dominate  and  suppress  the  instincts  of 
the  lower.  2.  Jt  ignores  the  fact  of  self-sacrifice.  Satan  uttered  his  saw  as  though  it 
were  a  generalization  from  wide  experience.  We  may  have  our  fine  theories  as  to  how 
things  ought  to  be;  he  will  tell  us  how  he  finds  them  really  existing  in  the 
world.  The  devil  only  perceives  the  lower  life,  only  perceives  ■the  selfish  side  of 
man.  He  is  the  "spirit  that  denies,"  because  he  ie  blind.  But  self-sacrifice  is  as 
much  a  fact  as  self-preservation.  The  cross  is  its  great  witness.  The  good  Shepherd 
giving  his  life  for  the  sheep  is  the  triumphant  refutation  of  Satan's  old  saw.     So  'ti 


OH.  n.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


47 


a  secondary  way  are  Job  in  his  fidelity,  and  eTery  martyr  and  hero  and  C!hri«t-Iike 
man. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Job's  leprosy.  Satan  has  now  obtained  permission  to  go  a  step  further, 
and  lay  his  hand  on  the  person  of  God's  servant.  He  uses  the  new  privilege  with 
skilful  ingenuity,  selecting  the  most  horrible  and  loathsome  disease,  and  smiting  Job 
with  the  worst  form  of  leprosy — elephantiasis. 

I.  The  misery  of  the  infliction.  1.  It  touches  the  man  himself.  Hitherto  the 
blows  have  fallen  on  his  outer  world,  though,  indeed,  they  have  come  very  near  to  him 
in  striking  his  children.  Still,  he  has  not  felt  them  directly.  Satan  has  drawn  a  marked 
line  between  these  external  troubles  and  personal  troubles  (vers.  4, 5).  Now  he  crosses 
the  line.  Every  man  must  feel  what  touches  himself,  though  some  may  be  too  callous, 
too  unimaginative,  or  too  unsympathetic  fully  to  appreciate  what  is  outside  tliem.  No 
man  can  feel  his  brother's  toothaclie  as  acutely  as  he  feels  his  own.  2.  It  lays  hold  of 
hit  tody.  Bodily  pain  is  not  the  worst  form  of  suffering.  A  broken  heart  is  infinitely 
more  pitiable  than  a  broken  skin.  Still,  bodily  pain  has  this  about  it,  that  it  cannot  be 
denied  or  eluded.  It  is  a  very  tangible  and  unquestionable  fact.  3.  It  is  loathsome  and 
disgusting.  Elephantiasis  makes  its  victim  an  object  of  repulsion,  hideous  to  behold, 
shunned  by  all  his  fellows.  Job  had  been  a  prince  among  men,  living  in  universal 
respect.  He  now  comes  down,  not  only  to  poverty,  but  also  to  a  condition  of  visible 
degradation  and  disgust.  To  the  man  of  sensitive  feelings  shame  is  worse  than  pain. 
4,  It  is  hopeless.  Elephantiasis  was  thought  to  be  incurable.  Job  took  no  medical 
remedies.  He  only  retired  to  his  ash-heap,  seeking  temporary  alleviations.  The  worst 
agony  can  be  endured  with  some  patience  if  there  is  a  prospect  of  cure ;  but  even  a 
milder  complaint  becomes  intolerable  if  there  is  no  hope  of  escape. 

II.  The  BEHAViotTB  OF  THE  suFFBBEB,  The  most  significant  thing  about  the  narra- 
tive here  is  that  so  little  is  said  about  the  behaviour  of  Job.  As  yet  we  have  no  word 
from  him  under  his  fearful  malady.  The  silence  is  eloquent.  1.  Great  suffering  stifles 
thought.  This  is  a  merciful  provision  of  Providence.  We  could  not  bear  both  to  feel 
acutely  and  to  think  profoundly  at  the  same  time.  There  is  a  sort  of  mental  anodyne 
in  fearful  bodily  pain.  Its  paroxysms  act  as  an  ansesthetio  to  the  finer  feelings  of  the 
soul.  When  the  worst  of  the  bodily  pain  is  over  the  mind  recovers  itself;  but  at  first 
it  is  stunned  and  crushed  into  numbness.  2.  True  fortitude  accepts  alleviations  of 
suffering.  Job  does  what  little  he  can  to  relieve  the  intolerable  torments  of  his  disease. 
He  has  no  idea  of  attitudinizing  as  a  martyr.  Small  sufferers  may  tty  to  make  the 
most  of  their  pains,  foolishly  nursing  them,  and  obviously  playing  for  pity.  This  is 
not  the  case  witli  the  great  tragic  heroes.  The  depth  oi  their  sufferings  are  known 
only  to  God.  3.  Bitter  distress  seeks  solitude.  Job  retired  to  the  ashes.  His  complaint 
made  this  action  necessary ;  his  mood  must  also  have  welcomed  the  retirement.  In 
bitter  distress  the  soul  would  be  alone — yet  not  alone,  for  God  is  present  as  truly  among 
the  abbes  as  in  the  gorgeous  temple. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  9. — Husband  and  wife.  I.  The  wife's  temptation.  1.  Its  source.  Job  is 
now  tempted  by  his  own  wife — ^by  her  who  is  nearest  to  him,  and  who  should  be  almost 
his  second  self.  Chrysostom  asks,  "Why  did  the  devil  leave  him  his  wife?"  and 
replies,  "  Because  he  thought  her  a  good  scourge  by  which  to  plague  him  more  acutely 
than  by  any  other  means."  Certainly  the  temptation  which  comes  through  one  whom 
we  love  is  the  most  powerful.  Christ  met  the  tempter  in  a  favourite  disciple.  It  is 
the  duty  of  love  not  simply  to  sympathize,  but  also  to  give  good  counsel;  it  is  its 
error  only  to  show  sympathy  by  aggravating  the  evil  tendencies  of  a  trouble.  2.  Its 
excuse.  Men  have  been  too  hard  on  Job's  wife  for  this  one  foolish  saying  of  hers, 
forgetting  how  huge  was  her  affliction.  Indeed,  a  great  injustice  has  been  done  her, 
and  while  sympathy  and  admiration  have  been  lavished  on  the  husband,  the  partner 
in  distress  has  scarcely  received  a  glance  of  pity.  But  his  troubles  were  her  troubles. 
She  had  been  in  affluence,  the  happy  mother  of  a  happy  family.  Now  she  is  plunged 
into  poverty  and  misery,  bereft  of  her  children,  with  her  once  honoured  husband  in 
disease  and  corruption.  Is  it  wonderful  that  she  should  utter  one  hasty,  impatient 
word  ?  3.  Its  point.  We  cannot  say  that  Job's  wife  urged  him  to  curse  God  ;  for 
she  may  have  meant,  "  renounce  God."    At  all  events,  let  him  give  up  the  struggle  and 


48  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oH,  n.  1— 18. 

commit  suicide.  It  is  the  Stoic's  advice.  Others  since  have  advised  euthansaia  in 
unbearable  sufferings.  It  needed  a  brave  heart  to  resist  such  an  appeal.  Only  those 
who  have  been  plunged  into  the  lowest  depth  know  the  fearful  inducement  to  despair 
of  life  and  go— 

"Anywhere,  anywhere,  out  of  the  world." 

II.  The  husband's  eeplt.  1.  Its  reprimand.  Job  quietly  tells  his  vfife  that  she 
is  talking  like  one  of  the  foolish  or  ungodly  women.  (1)  There  is  patience  in  this 
reprimand ;  he  does  not  angrily  repudiate  her  hasty  advice.  (2)  It  is  diBcriminatiQg< 
Job  sees  at  once  the  defect.  His  wife  has  forsaken  her  higher  plane  of  living,  and  fallen 
down  to  conventional  ideas  of  the  world.  There  was  this  excuse  for  her,  however,  that  her 
conduct  was  not  without  precedent,  though  the  precedent  was  not  worthy  to  be  followed, 
(3)  It  is  generous.  Job  delicately  hints  that  her  words  are  unworthy  of  her.  He 
implies  that  she  is  not  herself  one  of  the  foolish  women.  Often  the  best  and  most 
•  tective  reprimand  is  an  appeal  to  a  person's  self-respect.  2.  lU  resignation.  (1)  It 
recognizes  G-od  as  the  Source  of  all  thinj;s.  Job  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  that  Satan 
has  a  hand  in  his  calamities.  He  attributes  them  wholly  to  God.  Thus  he  fails  to 
see  one  side  of  the  dread  mystery  of  iniquity.  Yet  there  was  truth  in  what  he  said. 
Nothing  happens  but  by  God's  permission.  (2)  It  admits  the  justice  of  God's  dealing. 
How  fair  is  Job!  And  how  unfair  are  many  men  in  accepting  boundless  mercies  without 
a  thought  of  gratitude,  and  then  shrieking  with  rage  at  the  first  twinge  of  adversity  I 
If  we  struck  the  balance  between  our  blessings  and  our  troubles,  should  we  not  find  the 
former  vastly  outweighing  the  latter?  And  if  we  accept  the  blessings  from  God,  should 
we  not  be  prepared  to  take  the  reverse  of  them  also  ?  3.  Its  self-restraint.  "  In  all 
this  did  not  Job  sin  with  his  lips."  It  is  uncharitable  of  the  Targum  to  add,  "  But  in 
his  thoughts  he  already  cherished  sinful  words."  If  thoughts  of  rebellion  were  begin- 
ning to  risa — and  Job  was  but  mortal — the  brave  matt  Silenced  them.  It  is  much  to 
learn  how  to  "be  still."— W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  11 — ^13. — Job's  comforters.  We  now  enter  on  ft  new  scene,  one  that  prepares 
for  the  main  action  of  the  drama.  Hitherto  the  court  of  heaven,  the  roving  errands  of 
Siitan,  the  personal  and  domestic  afilictions  of  Job,  have  engaged  our  attention.  Now 
the  light  of  the  larger  human  world  is  let  in  on  this  scene.  Job  is  not  in  purgatory," 
shut  off  iirom  companionship  of  living  men.  Indeed,  his  greatest  trouble  is  yet  to  come 
from  the  blundering  conduct  of  that  companionship. 

L  Teoublb  should  collbot  friends.  We  see  Very  much  of  the  faults  of  Job's 
three  friends  in  the  course  of  the  poem.  Let  us  be  fair  to  them,  and  recognize  their  good 
points.  They  were  true  friends ;  they  did  honestly  desire  and  attempt  to  reader  to  Job 
all  the  consolation  that  was  in  their  power.  They  aimed  at  being  "  friends  in  need." 
False  friends  fall  off  in  the  hour  of  trouble.  Such  a  spectacle  as  that  of  Job  on  his  dung- 
heap  would  not  invite  the  crowd  of  sycophants  that  swarms  about  the  table  of  the  great 
man.  No  doubt  Job  had  been  pestered  with  plenty  of  such  pretended  friends  in  the 
old  days  of  his  fame.  Doubtless  one  blessing  among  his  many  calamities  was  that  he 
was  now  relieved  of  their  presence.  But  three  genuine  friends  still  hold  to  him  and 
seek  him  out  in  the  time  of  his  deepest  distress.  It  is  well  to  go  to  the  house  of 
mourning.    But  few  are  they  who  know  how  to  conduct  themselves  when  there. 

II.  Sympathy  ib  the  best  comfort.  The  three  friends  were  amazed  at  the  sight 
which  presented  itself.  They  were  prepared  to  see  trouble,  but  no  imagination  could 
picture  so  huge  a  distress  as  that  of  Job.  It  needed  to  be  witnessed  to  be  believed.  The 
sight  of  it  calls  forth  natural  sympathy.  Although  the  decorous  Orientals  proceeded  at 
once  to  adopt  the  conventional  forms  of  mourning,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that 
their  sympathy  was  genuine  and  heartfelt.  It  is  only  the  heart  made  callous  by 
selfishness  that  is  incapable  of  sympathy.  In  this  most  Divine  attribute  of  human 
nature  we  may  recognize  the  root  of  what  is  most  fruitful  in  good.  Sympathy  is  the 
spring  of  all  the  most  helpful  service,  and  when  the  service  is  impossible,  the  sympathy 
itself  is  consoling ;  for  it  is  much  to  know  that  friends  feel  with  us  in  our  trouble. 

III.  Sympathy  mat  be  shown  in  silence.  Those  seven  days  and  seven  nights  of 
silence  are  a  sublime  spectacle.  Job's  comforters  began  well.  It  would  have  been  good 
for  their  reputation  if  they  had  gone  home  at  the  end  of  the  week.     Then  they  would 


<)&,  m.  1—26.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOR 


49 


have  been  known  aa  model  comforters  instead  of  becoming  bywords  for  tormentors. 
We  often  make  a  mistake  in  thinking  we  ought  "  to  aay  something."  Great  distress 
should  hush  hasty  words.  There  are  times  when  the  gentlest  words  sound  harsh  on 
pained  ears.  What  is  wanted  in  trouble  is  not  advice,  but  sympathy ;  and  this  is  best 
shown  by  the  unbidden  tear,  the  silent  pressure  of  the  hand,  the  look  of  love.  We  feel 
a  sad  separation  from  one  who  is  in  great  sorrow,  for  sorrow  is  naturally  lonely.  Only 
Christ  can  perfectly  enter  into  it.    He  needs  no  words. — W.  F.  A. 


Seotion  IL    Oh.  in. — xiv.    First  Colloquy  between  Job  and  his  Fbiends. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  III. 
The  "  Historical  lutroduotion  "  ended,  we 
come  upon  n  long  colloquy,  in  which  the 
several  dramatis  persons  speak  for  them- 
eelves,  the  writer,  or  compiler,  only  prefac- 
ing each  speech  with  a  very  few  necessary 
words.  The  speeches  are,  one  and  all  of 
them,  metrical ;  and  are  well  represented  in 
the  Revised  Version.  The  first  colloquy 
extends  from  ch.  iii  3  to  oh.  ziT.  22. 

Ver.  1. — After  this  opened  Joh  Ms  mouth' 
The  first  to  take  the  word  is  Job,  as,  indeedi 
etiquette  made  necessary,  when  the  visit 
paid  was  one  of  condolence.  It  can  only  be 
conjectured  what  the  feelings  were  which 
bad  kept  him  silent  so  long.  We  may, 
perhaps,  suggest  that  in  the  countenances 
and  manner  of  his  friinds  he  saw  something 
which  displeased  him,  something  indica- 
tive of  their  belief  that  he  had  brought 
his  afflictions  upon  himself  by  secret  sins  of 
a  heinous  character.  Pharisaism  finds  it 
very  difficult  to  conceal  itself;  signs  of  it 
are  almost  sure  to  escape  ;  often  it  manifests 
itself,  without  a  word  spoken,  most  offen- 
sively. The  jphrase, "opened  his  mouth,"  is 
not  to  be  dismissed  merely  as  a  Hebraism. 
It  is  one  used  only  on  solemn  occasions, 
end  implies  the  utterance  of  rieep  thoughts, 
well  considered  beforehand  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  21 ; 
Matt.  V.  2),  or  of  feelings  long  repressed, 
and  now  at  length  allowed  expression.  And 
cnrsed  Ms  day ;  "  cursed,"  i.e.,  the  "  day 
of  his  birth."  Some  critics  think  tljat 
"  cursed  "  is  too  strong  a  word,  and  suggest 
"  reviled ;  "  but  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
"to  curse"  is  a  frequent  meaning  of  hh^ 

and  it  is  difficult  to  see  in  Job's  words  (vers. 
3 — 10)  anything  but  a  "curse "of  a  very 
intense  character.  To  curse  one's  natal  day 
is  not,  perhaps,  a  very  wise  act,  since  it  can 
have  no  eifect  on  the  day  or  on  anything 
else;  but  so  great  a  prophet  as  Jeremiali 
imitated  Job  in  this  respect  (Jer.  xx.  14 — 
18),  so  that  before  Christianity  it  would 
seem  that  men  were  allowed  thus  to  leliove 


their  feelings.    All  that  such  cursing  means 
is  that  one  wishef 


VDl'S.  J!," 


"WiF'HiiBiiij;  MU'saiai'iet 


the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  bom.  An 
idle  wish,  doubtless ;  the  vague  utterance  of^ 
extreme  despair.  Days  cannot  perish,  or,^ 
at  any  rate,  one  day  cannot  perish  more 
than  another.  They  all  come,  and  then  are 
gone ;  but  no  day  can  perish  out  of  the  year, 
which  will  always  have  its  full  complement^ 
of  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days  till 
time  shall  be  no  more.  But  extreme  despair 
does  not  reason.  It  simply  gives  utterance 
to  the  thoughts  and  wishes  as  they  arise. 
Job  knew  that  many  of  his  thoughts  were 
vain  and  foolish,  and  confesses  it  furtlier  on 
(see  ch.  vi.  8).  And  the  night  in  which  it 
was  said;  rather,  wMoh  said.  Day  and 
night  are,  both  of  them,  personified,  as  in 
Ps.  xix.  2.  There  is  a  man  child  conceived. 
A  man  child  was  always  regarded  in  the 
ancient  world  as  a  special  blessing,  since 
tlius  the  family  was  maintained  in  being. 
A  girl  passed  into  another  family. 

Ver.  i. — Let  that  day  be  darkness ;  t.e. 
let  a  cloud  rest  upon  it — ^let  it  be  regarded 
as  a  day  of  ill  omen,  "  carbone  notandu3.4(^ 
Job  recognizes  that  his  wish,  that  the  day 
should  perish  utterly,  is  vain,  and  limits 
himself  now  to  the  possible,  let  not  God 
regard  it  from  above;  i.e.  let  not  God,  from 
the  heaven  where  he  dwells,  extend  to  it 
his  protection  and  superintending  care!^ 
Neither  let  the  light  shine  upon  it.  Pleo- 
nastic, but  having  the  sort  of  force  which 
belongs  to  reiteration. 

Ver.  5. — Let  darkness  and  the  shadow  of 
death.  ''  The  shadow  of  death  "  (rrahx)  is^ 
a  favourite  expression  in  the  Book  of  Job, 
where  it  occurs  no  fewer  than  nine  times. 
Elsewhere  it  is  rare,  except  in  the  Psalms, 
where  it  occurs  four  times.  It  is  thought 
to  be  an  archaic  word.  Stain  it;  rather, 
claim  it,  or  claim  it  for  their  ovm  (Revised 
Version).  Let  a  olond  dwell  upon  it;  let 
the  blackness  of  the  day  terrify  it.  The 
hot,  stifling  "blackness"  of  the  khamsin 
wind  is  probably  meant,  which  suddenly 
turns  the  day  into  night,  spreading  aU 
around  a  tMck  lurid  darkness.    When  such 


60 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  ra.  1—26. 


»  irlnd  arises,  wo  are  told,  "The  sky  in- 
stantly becomes  black  and  heavy ;  the  sun 
loses  its  splendour,  and  appears  of  a  dim 
violet  hue ;  a  light,  warm  breeze  is  felt, 
which  gradually  inoreasea  in  heat  till  it 
almost  equals  that  of  an  oven.  Though  no 
vapour  darkens  the  air,  it  becomes  so  grey 
and  thick  with  the  floating  clouds  of  im- 
palpable sand,  that  it  is  sometimes  neces- 
sary to  use  candles  at  noonday  "  (Eussell, 
*  Ancient  and  Modern  Egypt,'  p.  55). 

Ver.  6. — As  for  that  night.  The  nip;ht, 
that  is,  of  Job's  conception  (see  above, 
ver.  3).  let  darkness  seize  upon  it.  The 
Kevised  Version  has  thiah  darkness,  but  ttiis 
is  unnecessary.  Let  it  not  be  joined  unto 
the  days  of  the  year.  According  to  the 
Massorites'  pointing,  we  should  translale, 
"Let  it  not  rejoice  among  the  days  of  tlie 
year;"  and  so  the  Revised  Version.  But 
many  of  the  best  critics  prefer  the  pointing 
which  is  followed  by  the  LXX.  and  by 
King  James's  translators.  Tlie  succeeding 
clause  strongly  supports  this  interpretation. 
Let  it  not  come  into  the  number  of  the 
months  (comp.  ver.  3,  and  the  comment 
on  it).  Job  wishes  the  day  of  his  birth  and 
the  night  of  his  conception  to  be  utterly 
blotted  out  from  the  oalendM ;  biit,  aware 
that  this  is  impossible,  he  subsides  into  a 
milder  class  of  imprecations. 

Ver.  7. — Lo,  let  that  night  be  solitary; 
or,  sterile;  "let  no  one  be  born  in  it."  Let 
no  joyful  voice  come  therein;  literally,  no 
mmg.  Perhaps  the  meaning  is,  "  Let  no 
such  joyful  announcement  be  made,"  as  that 
mentioned  in  ver.  3. 

Ver.  8. — Let  them  curse  it  that  curse  the 
day.  Very  different  explanations  are  given 
of  this  passage.  Some  suppose  it  to  mean, 
"  Let  those  desperate  men  curse  it  who  are 
in  the  habit  of  cursing  their  day,"  like  Job 
himself  (ch.  iii,  1)  and  Jeremiah  (xx.  14). 
Others  suggest  a  reference  to  such  as 
claimed  power  to  curse  days,  and  to  divide 
them  into  the  lucky  and  the  unlucky.  In 
this  case  Job  would  mean,  "Let  the  sorcerers 
who  curse  days  curse  especially  this  day," 
and  would  thus  seem,  if  not  to  sanction  the 
practice,  at  any  rate  to  express  a  certain 
amount  of  belief  in  the  sorcerers'  power. 
Tlie  second  clause  has  also  a  double  inter- 
pretation, wliioh  adapts  it  to  either  of  these 
two  suggested  meanings  {vide  infra).  Who 
are  ready  to  raise  up  their  mourning. 
This  is  an  impossible  rendering.  Translate 
(with  the  Eevigrd  Vergion),  who  ate  ready 
to  rouse  up  leviathan.  "  Bousing  leviathan  " 
may  be  understood  in  two  ways.  It  may  be 
regarded  as  apoken  in  the  literal  sense  of 
those  who  aie  rash  enough  and  desperate 
enough  to  stir  up  the  fury  of  the  crocodile 
(see  the  comment  on  oh.  xli.  I),  or  it  a 
mela;ihorical  ueuse  of  such  us  stir   up  to 


action  by  their  soroeries  the  great  power  of 
evil,  symbolized  in  Oriental  mythologies  by 
a  huge  serpent,  or  dragon,  or  crocodile. 
On  the  whole,  the  second  and  deeper  sense 
seems  preferable ;  and  we  may  conceive  of 
Job  as  believing  in  the  power  of  sorcery, 
and  wishing  it  used  against  the  night  which 
he  so  much  dislikes. 

Ver.  9. — Let  the  stars  of  the  twilight 
thereof  be  dark;  i.e.  "let  not  even  the  light 
of  a  star  illuminate  the  morning  or  evening 
twilight  of  that  night ;  let  it  be  dark  from 
beginning  to  end,  uncheered  even  by  the 
ray  of  a  slar."  Let  it  look  for  light,  but 
have  none.  Again  a  personification.  The 
night  is  regarded  as  consciously  waiting 
in  hope  of  the  appearance  of  morning,  but 
continually  disappointed  by  the  long  linger- 
ing of  the  darkness.  And  let  it  nqt  see  the 
dawning  of  the  day;  rather,  as  in  the  margin  ' 
and  in  the  Eevised  Version,  let  it  not  behold 
the  eyelids  of  the  morning  (compare  Milton's 
'  Lycidas,'  "  Under  the  opening  eyelids  of 
the  morn,"  and  Soph., '  Antigone,' ''ii  xP""'' 
(r47]s  afiepas  ^\4<papov). 

Ver.  10. — Because  it  shut  not  up  the  doors 
of  my  mother's  womb ;  1  iterally,  o/  my  womb ; 
i.e.  "  of  the  womb  which  bare  me."  By  a 
stretch  of  imagination,  the  night  is  supposed 
to  have  power  to  open  or  shut  wombs,  and  is 
blamed  for  not  having  shut  up  the  womb  in 
which  Job  was  conceived.  Nor  hid  sorrow 
from  mine  eyes ;  i.e.  "  and  did  not  so  pre- 
vent all  the  sorrows  that  have  befallen  me." 

Ver.  11. — Why  died  I  not  from  the  womb  ? 
"  From  the  womb  "  must  mean,  "  as  soon  as 
I  came  out  of  the  womb,"  not  "  while  I  yet 
remained  within  it"  (comp.  Jer.  xx.  17, 
"  Because  he  slew  me  not  from  the  womb  "). 
Many  of  the  ancients  thought  tbat  it  was 
best  not  to  be  born ;  and  next  best,  if  one 
were  bom,  to  quit  the  earth  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. Herodotus  says  that  with  the  Trauri, 
a  tribe  of  Thracians,  it  was  the  custom, 
whenever  a  child  was  born,  for  all  its  kindred 
to  sit  lound  it  in  a  circle,  and  weep  for  the 
woes  that  it  would  have  to  endure  now  that 
it  was  come  into  the  world;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  whenever  a  person  died,  they 
buried  him  with  laughter  and  rejoicings, 
since  they  said  that  he  was  now  free  from  a 
host  of  suflerings,  and  enjoyed  the  oom- 
pletest  happiness  (Herod.,  v.  4).  Sophoolea 
expresses  the  feeling  with  great  terseness 
and  force :  Mj;  ^vvai  rhv  fiirai/ra  yi/c^  Kdyov" 
Tb  S',  ^iff!  <fojTf,  ^TJTOi  KeiSev  SSey  ircp  Vf« 
iro\h  Seirfpov,  S>s  T(£x"rTa  ('  CEd.  Col.,'  1225 — 
1228):  "Not  to  be  born  is  best  of  all ;  once 
born,  next  best  it  is  by  far  to  go  back  there 
from  whence  one  came  as  speedily  as  pos- 
sible." Modern  pessimism  sums  up  all  in 
tliephrase  that  "life  is  not  worth  living." 
Why  did  I  not  give  up  the  ghost  when  I 
came  out  of  the  beUyl    Aj  go  often,  tlie 


OH.  m,  1—26.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOBw 


SI 


second  clause  of  the  distich  repeats  the  idea 
of  the  first,  merely  varying;  the  phraseology. 

Ver.  12 Why  did  the  knees  prevent  me  ? 

I.e.  "  Why  did  my  mother  take  me  on  her 
knees  and  nurse  me,  instead  of  casting 
me  on  the  gvound,  where  I  should  have 
perished  ?  "  There  seems  to  be  an  allusion 
to  the  practice  of  parents  •nly  bringing 
up  a  certain  number  of  their  children  (see 
Eosenmiiller,  '  Scholia  in  Vit.  Test.,'  vol.  v. 
p.  101).  Or  why  the  breasts  that  I  should 
suck  ?  i.e.  "  Why  wei  e  breasts  offered  to  me, 
that  I  should  suck  them?  How  much 
better  would  it  have  been  if  I  had  been 
allowed  to  perish  of  inanition  I" 

Ver.  13. — For  now  should  I  have  lain  still 
and  been  quiet.  "  In  that  case,  I  should  now 
(npp)  have  been  lying  still  and  resting  my- 
self," instead  of  tossing  about,  and  being  full 
of  restlessness  and  suffering."  I  should  have 
slept.  The  life  in  the  intermediate  state  is 
called  "  sleep,"  even  in  the  New  Testament 
(Matt.  ix.  24;  John  xi.  11;  Acts  vii.  <^0; 
1  Cor.  XV.  18,  51,  etc.).  Job,  perhaps,  ima- 
gined it  to  be,  actually,  a  sound,  dreamless 
slumber.  Then  should  I  have  been  at  rest ; 
literally,  then  (in)  would  there  have  been  rest 
for  me." 

Ver.  14. — With  kings  and  oounsellers  of 
the  earth.  As  a  great  man  himself,  nobly 
born  probably.  Job  expects  that  his  place  in 
another  world  would  have  been  with  kings 
and  nobles  (see  Isa.  xiv.  9 — 11,  where  the 
King  of  Babylon,  on  entering  Sheol,  finds 
himself  among  "  all  the  kings  of  the  nations  "). 
Which  huilt  desolate  places  for  themselves. 
Some  understand  "  restorers  of  cities  which 
had  become  waste  and  desolate ; "  others, 
"  builders  of  edifices  which,  since  they  built 
them,  have  become  desolate ; "  others,  again, 
«  builders  of  desolate  and  dreary  piles,"  such 
as  the  Pyramids,  and  the  rock-tombs  com- 
mon in  Arabia,  which  were  desolate  and 
dreary  from  the  time  that  they  were  built. 
The  brevity  studied  by  the  writer  makes  his 
meaning  somewhat  obscure. 

Ver.  15.— Or  with  princes  that  had  gold, 
who  filled  their  houses  with  silver.  This 
may  either  mean  simply, "  princes  who  were 
rich  in  silver  and  gold  during  their  life- 
time," or  "  princes  who  have  gold  and  silver 
buried  with  them  in  their  tombs."  It  was 
the  custom  in  Egypt,  in  Phoenicia,  and  else- 
where throughout  the  East,  to  bury  large 
quantities  of  treasure,  especially  gold  and 
silver  vessels,  and  jewellery,  in  the  se- 
pulchres of  kings  and  other  great  men.  A 
tomb  of  a  Scythian  king  in  the  Crimea, 
opened  about  fifty  years  ago,  contained  a 
golden  shield,  a,  golden  diadem,  two  silver 
vases,  a  vase  in  electrum,  and  a  number  of 
ornaments,  partlv  in  electrum  and  partly  in 
gold  (see  the  author's  '  Herodotus,'  vol.  iii.  p. 
59,  3rd  edit,).    Another  Scythian  tomb  near 


the  Caspian,  opened  by  the  Bussian  authori- 
ties, contained  ornaments  set  with  rubies  and 
emeralds,  together  with  four  sheets  of  gold, 
weighing  forty  pounds.  A  third,  near  Aste- 
rabad,  contained  a  golden  goblet,  weighing 
seventy  ounces ;  a  pot,  eleven  ounces,  and 
two  small  trumpets.  The  tombs  of  th^inga 
and  queens  in  Egypt  were  so  richly  sttpplied 
with  treasure  that,  in  the  time  of  the  twen- 
tieth dynasty,  a  thieves'  society  was  formed 
for  plundering  them,  especially  of  their 
golden  ornaments  ( Brugsch,  '  History  of 
Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  247,  1st  edit.).  The  tomb 
of  Cyrus  the  Great  contained,  we  are  told 
(Arrian,  'Exp.  Alex.,'  vi.  29),  a  golden 
couch,  a  golden  table  set  out  with  drinking- 
oups,  u  golden  bowl,  and  much  elegant 
clothing  adorned  with  gems.  Phoenician 
tombs,  in  Oyprns  especially,  have  recently 
yielded  enormous  treasures  (Di  Cesnoia, 
'  Cyprus,'  pp.  310— 31()).  If  the  "  gold  "  and 
"silver"  of  the  present  passage  refer  to 
treasures  buried  with  princes  and  kings,  we 
must  understand  by  the  "  houses "  of  the 
second  clause  their  tombs.  The  Egyptians 
called  their  tombs  their  "eternal  abodes" 
(Died.  Sic,  i.  51). 

Ver.  16. — Or  as  an  hidden  untimely  birth  I 
had  not  been;  as  infants  which  never  saw 
light.  This  is  added  as  another  way  in 
which  Job  might  have  escaped  his  misery. 
Though  conceived  and  brought  to  the  birth, 
he  might  have  been  still-born,  and  so  have 
known  no  suffering. 

Ver.  17. — There.  The  word  has  no  ex- 
pressed antecedent,  but  the  general  tenor  of 
the  passage  supplies  one.  "  There  "  is  equi- 
valent to  "  in  the  grave."  The  wicked  cease 
from  troubling ;  i.e. "  cease  from  their  state 
of  continual  perturbation  and  unrest"  (comp. 
Isa.  Ivii.  20,  "  But  the  wicked  are  like  the 
troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  rest,  whose 
waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt ").  This  is  their 
condition,  so  long  as  they  live ;  nothing  satis- 
fies them ;  they  are  always  in  trouble  them- 
selves, and  always  causing  trouble  to  others. 
In  the  grave  alone  do  they  rest,  or  seem 
to  rest.  And  there  the  weary  be  at_  rest  j 
literally,  the  weary  in  strength,  or  "  in  re- 
spect of  strength ; "  i.e.  those  whose  strength 
is  utterly  exhausted  and  worn  out.  Here 
Job  undoubtedly  alludes  to  himself.  He 
looks  to  the  grave  as  his  only  refuge,  the 
only  hope  he  has  of  recovering  peace  and 
tranquillity. 

Ver.  18. — ^There  the  prisoners  rest  to- 
gether. "There  those  who  in  life  were 
prisoners,  condemned  to  work  at  enforced 
labours,  enjoy  sweet  rest  together."  They 
hear  not  the  voice  of  the  oppressor ;  rather, 
of  the  taskmaster  (comp.  Exod.  iii.  7 ;  v.  6, 
where  the  same  word  is  used).  The  task- 
master continually  urged  on  the  wearied 
labourers  with  such  words  as  those  of  Exod. 


52 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB, 


[oh.  ni.  1 — 26. 


T.  13,  "Fulfil  your  works,  fulfil  your  daily 
tu:>ks."  In  the  grave  these  hated  sounds 
would  not  be  lieard. 

Ver.  19. — The  small  and  great  are  there ; 
i.e. "  all  are  there,  the  small  and  great  alike ; " 
for — 

"  Onrnes  eodem  cogimur,  omnium 
Versatur  uma  serins  ooins 
Bora  exitura,  et  nos  in  setenram 
KxiUum  impositura  oymbse." 

(Hor, 'Od.') 

And  the  servant  is  free  from  his  master; 
rather,  the  slave  (iaj>). 

Ver.  20. — Wherefore  is  light  given  to  him 
that  is  in  misery  1  Why,  Job  asks,  is  the 
miserable  man  forced  to  continue  on  the 
earth  and  see  tlie  light  to-day  f  Why  is  lie 
not  sent  down  at  onoe  to  the  darkness  of  the 
grave  ?  Surely  this  would  have  been  better. 
Man  often  speaks  as  if  he  were  wiser  than 
his  Maker,  and  could  have  much  improved 
the  system  of  the  universe,  if  he  had  had 
the  arranging  of  it ;  but  he  scarcely. means 
what  he  says  commonly.  Such  talk  is,  how- 
ever, foolish,  as  is  all  captious  questioning 
concerning  the  ways  of  God.  The  proper 
answer  to  all  such  qnestioning  is  well  given 
by  Zophar  in  ch.  xi.  7,  8,  "  Oanst  thou  by 
seai'cliinc;  find  out  God?  canst  thou  find 
out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ?  It  is  as 
high  as  heaven ;  what  canst  thou  do  ?  deeper 
than  hell  (Sheol) ;  what  oanst  thou  know  ?  " 
And  life  onto  the  bitter  in  soul  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  11,  ad  fin.), 

Ver.  21.— Which  long  for  death,  but  it 
Cometh  not ;  literally,  which  wail  for  death, 
anxiously  and  longingly  (oomp.  Ps.  xxxiii. 
20).  And  dig  for  it  more  than  for  hid  trea- 
sures; i.e.  "seek  it  more  earnestly  tlian 
even  they  seek  who  dig  for  hid  treasures." 
As  Professor  Lee  remarks,  "  From  the  great 
instability  of  all  Eastern  governments,  trea- 
sures were  in  Eastern  countries  often  hid 
away  "  ('  Book  of  Job,'  pp.  200,  201).  And 
hence  treasure-seeking  became  a  profession, 
which  was  pursued  with  avidity  by  a  large 
number  of  persons.  Even  at  the  present 
day  Orientals  are  so  possessed  witli  the  idea, 
that  they  imagine  every  European,  who  is 
eager  to  unearth  antiquities,  must  be  seeking 
for  buried  treasure. 

Ver.  22. — Which  rejoice  exceedingly ;  lite- 
rally, to  exultation,  or  "  to  dancing ; "  i.e.  so 
that  they  almost  dance  with  joy.  And  are 
glad,  when  they  can  find  the  grave.  Job 
speaks  as  if  he  knew  of  such  oases ;  and,  uo 
doubt,  the  fact  of  suicide  proves  that  among 
men  there  are  some  wIjo  prefer  to  die  rather 
than  live.  But  suicides  are  seldom  alto- 
gether in  possession  of  their  senses.  Of  sane 
men  it  may  be  doubted  whether  one  in  a 
thousand,  however  miserable,  really  wishes 
to  die,  or  is  "glad  when  he  can  find  the 


grave."  In  snoh  thoughts  as  those  to  which 
Job  here  gives  expression  there  is  something 
mnrbid  and  unreal. 

Ver.  23. — Why  is  light  given  to  a  man 
whose  way  is  hid  1  "  Obscured,"  that  is, 
"  darkened,"  "  placed  under  a  cloud  "  (conip. 
ver.  20,  where  the  sentiment  is  nearly  the 
same).  And  whom  God  hath  hedged  in. 
Not  in  the  way  of  protection,  as  ijv  ch.  i.  10, 
but  of  obstruction  and  confinement  (comp. 
ch,  xix,  8  and  Hos.  ii.  6),  Job  feels  bimsrlf 
confined,  imprisoned,  blocked  in.  He  can 
neither  see  the  path  which  he  onght  to  pur- 
sue nor  take  steps  in  any  direction, 

Ver.  21. — For  my  sighing  cometh  befbre  I 
eat  •  literally,  he/ore  my  meat ;  i.o.  "  more 
early  and  more  constantly  than  my  food" 
(Professor  Lee).  And  my  roarings  are  poured 
out.  The  word  translated  "  roaring  "  is  used  ' 
primarily  of  the  roar  of  a  lion  (Zech.  xi.  3 ; 
cOmp.  Amos  iii.  8) ;  secondarily,  of  the  loud 
cries  uttered  by  men  who  sufier  pain  (see 
Ps.  xxii.  1 ;  xxxii.  4).  (On  the  loud  cries  of 
Orientals  when  suffering  from  grief  or  pain, 
see  the  comment  on  ch.  ii.  12.)  like  the 
waters ;  i.e.  freely  and  copiously,  without  let 
or  stint.  Perhaps  the  loud  sound  of  rushing 
water  is  also  alluded  to. 

Ver.  25. — For  the  thing  which  I  greatly 
feared  is  come  upon  me  ;  literally,/or  Ifear 
a  fear,  and  it  comes  upon  me.  The  meaning 
is  not  that  the  afiliction  which  has  come 
npon  him  is  a  thing  which  Job  had  feared 
when  he  was  prosperous;  but  that  now  that 
he  is  in  adversity,  he  is  beset  with  fears,  and 
that  all  his  presentiments  of  evil  are  almost 
immediately  accomplished.  The  second 
clause,  And  that  which  I  was  (rather,  an) 
afraid  of  is  come  unto  me,  merely  repeats 
and  emphasizes  the  first  (see  the  comment 
on  ver.  11). 

Ver.  26. — I  was  not  in  safety,  neither  had 
I  rest,  neither  was  I  quiet ;  yet  trouble  came. 
Some  Hebraists  give  <^nite  a  different  turn 
to  this  passage,  rendering  it  as  follows :  "  I 
am  not  at  ease,  neither  am  I  quiet,  neither 
have  1  rest ;  but  trouble  cometh  "  (see  the 
Revised  Version,  and  compare  Canon  Cook's 
rendering  in  the  '  Speaker's  Oommeutary,' 
vol.  iv.  p.  29,  "  I  have  no  peace,  nor  quiet, 
nor  rest ;  but  trouble  cometh  ").  Professor 
Lee,  however,  certainly  one  of  the  most 
eminent  of  modem  Hebraists,  maintains  that 
the  far  more  pregnant  meaning  of  tlie  Autlio- 
rized  Version  gives  the  true  sense.  "  If  I 
rightly  apprehend,"  he  says,  "the  drift  of 
the  context  here.  Job  means  to  have  it  under- 
stoud  that  he  is  conscious  of  no  instance  in 
which  he  has  relaxed  from  his  religious 
obligations ;  of  no  season  in  which  his  fear 
and  love  of  God  have  waxed  weak ;  and,  on 
this  account,  it  was  the  more  perplexing  that 
such  a  complication  of  miseries  had  befallen 
him"  ('The  Book  of  Job,'  pp.  201,  202); 


CH.  m.  1 — ^26.] 


THE  BOOS  OP  JOB. 


6S 


•nd  he  translates  the  passage  (ibid.,  p.  121), 
*  I  slackened  not,  neither  was  I  quiet,  neither 
took  I  rest ;  ;et  trouble  came."    Job's  com- 


plaint is  thns  far  more  pointedly  terminated 
than  by  a  mere  otiose  statement  that, "  with- 
out rest  or  pause,  trouble  oame  upon  trouble." 


HOMILBTIGS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. —  The  stricken  patriarch's  lament:  1.  Deploringhis  hirth.  L  Delibeeatb 
DISCOURSE.  1.  The  time.  "  After  this ; "  i.e.  after  the  seven  days'  silence,  after  wait- 
ing, perhaps,  for  some  expression  of  sympathy  from  his  friends,  perhaps  also  after  dis- 
cerning no  mitigation  in  his  misery — an  indication  that  Jolj  spoke  not  under  the 
influence  of  some  sudden  paroxysm  of  grief,  but  with  fixed  resolve  and  after  mature 
consideration.  Language  that  is  passionate  may  also  be  deliberate ;  and  although  hasty 
words  are  sometimes  more  excusable  than  composed  utterances,  as  a  rule  it  is  wiser 
and  better,  especially  when  under  strong  emotion,  to  be  "  swift  to  hear,  but  slow  to 
speak  "  (Jas.  i.  19).  2.  Z%e  manner.  "  Opened  Job  his  mouth."  The  usual  Ilebrew 
formula  for  intimating  the  commencement  of  a  speech ;  this  may  also  mark,  in 
aecdrdance  with  Oriental  custom,  the  grave  composure  and  solemn  stateliness  with 
which  Job  began  his  address,  as  well  as  hint  at  the  exceptional  character  of  his 
discoursa  Already,  since  the  beginning  of  his  troubles,  he  had  twice  opened  his  mouth 
to  bless  God  and  justify  his  ways ;  never  until  now  had  he  opened  his  mouth  to  curse. 

II.  Impassioned  bloquencb.  1.  The  sublimity  of  Job's  language.  "  There  is 
nothing  in  ancient  or  modern  poetry  equal  to  the  entire  burst,  whether  in  the  wilJuess 
and  horror  of  its  imprecations,  or  the  terrible  sublimity  of  its  imagery"  (Goode). 
"Theie  is  indeed  a  tremendous  bulk  and  heat  in  his  words;  his  imagination  has 
Titanic  grasp  and  violence  in  it.  All  nature's  powers  he  translates  into  living  thioge" 
(Davidson).  2.  The  naturalness  of  Job's  language.  Even  on  the  hypothesis  that  the 
verses  contain  rather  the  formulated  conceptions  of  the  author  than  the  ipsissima  verba 
of  Job,  one  cannot  but  feel  the  dramatic  suitability  of  both  their  tl. ought  and  language 
to  the  situation,  as  well  as  to  the  individual  to  whom  they  have  been  assigutd.  It  does 
nut  strike  one  as  too  lofty  for  a  man  of  the  intellectual  calibre  of  Job;  nor  does  it 
appear  to  be  inappropriate  as  a  vehicle  for  the  burning  thoughts  that  were  then 
struggling  for  utterance  within  his  grief-laden  soul.  3.  The  influence  of  Job's  language. 
"The  boldest  and  most  animated  poets  of  Jerusalem  made  it  the  model  of  their 
threnodies  or  grief-songs,  whenever  uttered  in  scenes  of  similar  distr'ess"  (Goode;  of. 
Lam.  iii.  1 — 20 ;  Jer.  xx.  14 — 16  ;  Ezek.  xxx.  14 — 18 ;  xxxii.  7 — 9,  etc.).  Among  the 
instauces  in  which  modern  poetry  has  been  indebted  to  the  imagery  of  the  present 
cliapter,  may  be  mentioned  Shakespeare,  'King  John,'  act  iii.  sc.  1;  act  iii.  so.  4; 
'  Macbeth,'  act  ii.  so.  4. 

III.  Wild  impeeoation.  1.  The  dag  of  his  birth  is  in  general  terms  execrated : 
"  Let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  born  "  (ver.  3) ;  meaning,  let  it  be  erased  from  the 
calendar  of  existence,  let  it  be  filled  with  misery,  buried  in  obscurity,  and  loaded  with 
dishonour,  or  let  it  be  blotted  out  from  all  remembrance.  After  which  in  detail  he 
prays  that  it  may  be :  (1)  Enshrouded  in  darkness  (ver.  4) ;  unillumined  by  the  light 
of  heaven,  which  imparts  loveliness  to  all  mundane  .things — an  imprecation  conversely 
reminding  us  of  the  value  of  light.  (2)  Abandoned  by  God  (ver.  4),  who,  while 
interesting  himself  in  all  his  other  creatures,  should  never  ask  after  it.  "  Job's  wish  of 
tlarkness  had  done  his  day  no  great  hurt,  unless  he  had  taken  the  eye  of  God  from  it 
also"  (Caryl).  God's  favour  is  the  greatest  blessing  of  the  creature  ;  and  neither  day 
nor  man  can  be  truly  happy  from  which  that  favour  is  withdrawn.  (3)  Reclaimed  by 
death  (ver.  5) :  "  Let  darkness  and  deathshade  claim  it"— redeem  it  as  a  stray  portion 
of  their  original  kingdom,  which  had  wandered  into  the  realms  of  light,  anH  carry  it  back 
to  its  primeval  abode.  Adhering  to  the  metaphor  which  compares  the  light  of  day  to 
a  captive  escaped  from  the  prison-house  of  darkness,  we  may  remember  by  whose  power 
it  was  that  the  light  was  first  liberated  (Gen.  i.  3),  and  whose  hand  it  is  that  still 
directs  it  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  (ch.  xxxvii.  3).  We  may  note  too  that  we  have  a  better 
Kinsman  than  Job's  day  had— one  who  can  buy  us  back,  not  like  it,  from  light  to 
darkness,  but  from  darkness  to  light.  (4)  Haunted  by  terrors :  "  Let  the  blackness  ol 
the  day  terrify  it "  (ver.  5);  as  if  it  were  a  living  thing  cowering  and  shrinking  in  abject 


64  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  in.  1—26. 

horror  before  troops  of  black  omens  continually  occurring  on  it,  such  as  eclipses, 
unnatural  obscurations,  pestilential  vapours,  dark  storm-clouds ;  meaning,  let  it  be  a 
day  to  inspire  terror  in  all  beholders.  The  human  soul  is  easily  alarmed  by  unusual 
phenomena;  but  why  should  it  when  God  is  in  them  (Ps.  xovii.  1 — 5)?  2.  The 
night  of  hU  conception  he  likewise  anathematizes  in  general  terms  (ver.  3) ;  after  which, 
personifying  it,  he  measures  out  for  it  too  a  series  of  detailed  imprecations,  imploring 
that  it  might  be:  (1)  Excluded  from  the  calendar;  being  overtaken  by  the  surging 
waves  of  primal  darkness,  seized  and  carried  back  upon  its  ebbing  tide  to  "  chaos  and 
old  night,"  so  that  it  should  never  join  in  the  choral  procession  of  the  days  and  months 
that  compose  the  year  (ver.  6) — a  foolish  curse,  since  the  blotting  out  of  the  night 
could  have  no  effect  upon  his  sorrow.  (2)  Destitute  of  gladness ;  "  sitting  in  solitary, 
unrelieved  gloom,  nothing  living  and  rejoicing  in  life  coming  from  its  womb,  while 
other  nights  around  it  experience  a  parent's  joy,  and  ring  with  birthday  rejoicing " 
(ver.  7)— a  cruel  curse,  which  sought  to  transfer  his  own  misery  to  others.  (3)  Cursed 
by  enchanters,  those  who  by  their  incantations  can  bring  calamities  on  days  otherwise 
propitious,  rousing  up  leviathan  (whether  the  crocodile,  as  the  emblem  of  evil,  or  the 
dragon,  i.e.  the  constellation  of  the  serpent,  as  the  enemy  of  the  sun  and  moon,  vide 
Exposition)  to  swallow  it  up  (ver.  8) — a  superstitious  curse,  showing  that  good  men  are 
not  always  so  enlightened  as  they  should  be.  (4)  Doomed  to  darkness;  always 
trembling  on  the  verge  of  daylight,  but  never  beholding  the  eyelids  of  the  dawn 
(ver.  9) — a  presumptuous  curse,  since  it  thought  to  arrest  a  divinely  appointed 
ordinance. 

IV.  Astounding  selfishness.  1.  TTiinJcing  nothing  of  the  happiness  of  others. 
(1)  Neither  of  his  mother's  joy  in  his  birth,  who  doubtless  rejoiced  over  his  advent 
into  life,  as  Sarah  did  over  Isaac's,  as  Elisabeth  did  over  John's,  and  as  every  mother 
worthy  of  the  name  does  over  her  babe's ;  who  probably,  in  the  exultation  of  the 
moment,  named  him  Job  ("  Joyous  "),  and  experienced  a  fresh  thrill  of  gladness  every 
time  she  paused  to  note  his  opening  manhood  and  his  ripening  piety; — of  all  which  she 
would  have  been  bereft  had  Job  not  been  born.  (2)  Nor  of  the  interest  of  others  in 
his  birthday,  not,  perhaps,  because  it  was  his,  but  because  it  was  their  own,  or  their 
children's,  or  their  parents',  or  their  friends' ;  and  why  should  they  have  all  their 
happiness  blighted  because  Job  counted  it  a  terrible  misfortune  that  he  had  been 
ushered  into  life?  2.  Thinking  continually  upon  the  misery  of  himself.  The  sole 
reason  for  his  tremendous  imprecation  is  the  fact  that  on  that  particular  day  (and 
night)  he  had  entered  on  his  miserable  career  of  existence.  Suffering  and  sorrow,  which 
are  sent,  and  supposed,  to  render  men  sympathetic,  not  unfrequently  result  in  selfishness, 
especially  when  conjoined  with  impatience,  which  is  "  ordinarily  a  great  ponderer  of 
griefs,  because  they  are  ours,  little  weighing  the  troubles  of  others  "  (Hutcheson). 

V.  Rashness  APPROACHINO  TO  WICKEDNESS.  1.  Its  extenuations.  Much  to  be  ascribed 
to  (1)  the  emotional  nature  of  Orientals ;  (2)  the  comparatively  unenlightened  age  in 
which  Job  lived;  (3)  the  extreme  severity,  multiplicity,  and  continuance  of  his 
troubles ;  and  (4)  the  provocation  he  may  have  received  from  the  reproachful  and  sus- 
picious looks  of  his  friends.  2.  Its  aggravations.  With  every  disposition  to  palliate  Job's 
offence,  it  is  impossible  to  acquit  him  of  sin;  for  (1)  he  immoderately  indulged  his 
sorrow,  which,  though  natural  in  itself,  and  at  times  becoming,  and  even  sanctioned  by 
religion,  should  yet  never  be  permitted  to  exceed  (1  Cor.  vii.  30)  ;  (2)  he  overstepped  the 
bounds  of  propriety  in  speech,  employing  phrases  and  terms  full  of  passion  as  well  as 
force,  whereas  saints  should  exercise  restraint  upon  their  tongues  as  well  as  tempers  (Ps. 
cxli.  3 ;  Col.  iv.  6 ;  Titus  ii.  8) ;  (3)  he  used  the  language  of  imprecation,  which  became 
not  a  good  man  (Eom.  xii.  14),  and  was  a  frequent  mark  of  bad  men  (Ps.  x.  7 ;  oix.  18) ; 
(4)  if  he  cursed  not  God,  he  execrated  God's  gift,  his  birthday,  thus  showing  himself 
guilty  of  presumption  in  denouncing  what  God  had  blessed  (Gen.  i.  28 ;  Ps.  cxxvii. 
3),  and  of  ingratitude  in  despising  what  God  had  bestowed,  viz.  life  (Gen.  ii.  V:  Acts 
xvii.  28);  (5)  he  did  all  this  knowingly  and  deliberately  (ch.  iii.  1);  and  (6)  without 
regard  to  the  Interests  of  others. 

Learn :  1.  That  a  good  man  may  stand  long,  and  yet  at  length  show  symptoms  of 
falling.  «  Be  not  highminded,  but  fear."  2.  It  is  specially  to  be  deplored  when  great  gifts 
are  employed  for  sinful  purposes.  Upon  every  talent  should  be  inscribed,  "  Holiness  to  the 
Lord  I "  3.  That  the  tongue  is  a  world  of  iniquity  when  it  is  set  on  fire  of  hell.    "  Behold 


m.  m.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOa  66 

how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  1 "  4.  That  every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and 
to  bo  received  with  thanksgiving ;  even  birthdays,  for  which  saints  should  bless  God 
while  they  live.  5.  That  though  sins  may  be  palliated,  they  still  require  to  be 
pardoned ;  excuses  do  not  cancel  guilt.  6.  That  from  the  greatest  depth  of  wicked- 
ness into  which  a  child  of  God  can  fall,  he  may  ultimately  be  recovered.  "  The  blood  of 
JesuB  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin." 

.  Vers.  11 — 19. — The  stricken  patriarch's  lament :  2.  Bewailing  his  life.  L  The 
DESPISED  SIFT — LIFE.  In  bittemess  of  soul.  Job  not  only  laments  that  ever  he  had 
entered  on  the  stage  of  existence  at  all,  but  with  the  perveise  ingenuity  of  grief  which 
looks  at  all  things  crosswise,  he  turns  the  very  mercies  of  God  into  occasions  of 
complaint,  despising  God's  care  of  him  :  1.  Be/ore  birth.  "  Why  died  I  not  from  the 
womb  ?  "  i.e.  while  I  was  yet  unborn  ;  surely  a  display  of  monstrous  ingratitude,  since, 
if  God  did  not  protect  the  tender  offspring  of  men  prior  to  their  birth,  it  would  be 
impossi)>le  that  they  should  ever  see  the  light  (contrast  Ps.  cxixix.  13).  2.  At  birth. 
"  Why  did  1  not  give  up  the  ghost  when  I  came  out  of  the  belly  ?  "  To  which  he 
might  himself  have  returned  answer  :  (1)  Because  of  God's  sovereign  will ;  man  being 
God's  creature  (Gen.  v.  1 ;  Dent.  iv.  32  ;  ch.  x.  8 ;  xii.  10 ;  xxvii.  3 ;  xxxiii.  4),  and 
Qt)d  ever  doing  according  to  his  will  among  the  armies  of  heaven  and  the  inhabitants 
of  earth  (ch.  ix.  12  ;  xii.  9  ;  xxxiii.  IS).  (2)  Because  of  God's  great  power,  the  hour 
of  birth  being  a  time  so  fraught  with  peril  to  a  tender  babe  as  well  as  to  a  suffer- 
ing mother,  that  only  God's  watchful  guardianship  can  account  for  a  child  not  dying 
as  soon  as  it  is  born  (ch.  xxxi.  15 ;  Ps.  Ixxi.  6).  (3)  Because  of  God's  spontaneous 
kindness ;  life  being  a  gift  to  the  bestowal  of  which  God  can  be  moved  by  nothing 
but  his  own  free  favour,  as  Job  afterwards  acknowledged  (ch.  x.  12).  3.  After  birth. 
"  Why  did  the  knees  prevent" — i.e.  anticipate — "  me?  or  why  the  breasts  that  I  should 
suck  ?  "  (ver.  12).  To  which,  again,  he  might  have  responded  that  man  is  so  helpless 
in  infancy  that  without  the  safe  shelter  of  a  father's  arms  and  the  strong  support 
of  a  father's  knees,  as  well  as  the  warm  nest  of  a  mother's  bosom  and  the  rich  con- 
solations of  a  mother's  breasts  ("  consolationes  lactis  humani,"  Augustine,  '  Confessions,' 
bk.  i.  ch.  vi.),  he  must  inevitably  perish.  That  God  has  provided  these  for  man  is 
a  signal  proof  of  the  Divine  wisdom  and  loving-kindness.  That  any  should  despise 
them  is  a  mark  of  thoughtlessness,  if  not  of  depravity  (cf.  Ps.  xxii.  9,  10;  Ixxi.  5,  6). 

II.  The  lost  blessing — the  grave.  Thus  imdervaluing  God's  great  gift  of  life, 
he  proceeds  to  depict  a  blessing  of  which  he  foolishly  as  well  as  sinfully  supposes  himself 
to  have  been  deprived  in  consequence  of  having  entered  on  the  stage  of  existence,  viz. 
the  peaceful  repose  of  the  grave,  ip  which  he  should  have  enjoyed :  1.  Perfect  rest. 
"  Now  should  I  have  lain  still,"  like  one  reclining  on  his  couch  after  the  labours  of  the 
day— death  being  compared  to  a  night  of  resting  after  the  day  of  working  life  (Eccles. 
ix.  10 ;  Ps.  civ.  23 ;  Rev.  xiv.  13).  "  And  been  quiet " — at  peace,  withdrawn  from  every 
kind  of  trouble  and  annoyance — the  grave  being  a  place  of  absolute  security  against 
every  form  of  temporal  calamity  (vers.  17,  18 ;  Eccles.  ix.  6).  "  I  should  have  slept " 
—death  being  often  likened  to  a  sleep  (John  xi.  11 ;  Acts  vii.  60;  xiii.  36 ;  1  Thess. 
iv.  13;  V.  10).  "Then  had  I  been  at  rest;"  my  sleep  being  untroubled,  a  profound 
slumber  unvisited  by  dreams— the  rest  of  the  grave  being,  especially  for  the  good  man, 
a  couch  of  the  most  peaceful  repose  (Gen.  xv.  15  ;  Eccles.  xii.  5  ;  ch.  vii.  21 ;  xxx.  23), 
in  comparison  with  which  Job's  maladies  and  miseries  allowed  him  neither  rest  nor 
quiet.  2.  Dignified  companionship.  "  Then  had  I  been  at  rest  with  kings  and  coun- 
sellors of  the  earth,"  etc.  Enjoying  a  splendid  association  with  the  great  ones  of  the 
earth,  now  lying  in  their  magnificent  mausoleums,  instead  of  sitting,  as  I  presently  do,  on 
this  ash-heap,  in  sublime  but  sorrowful  isolation,  an  object  of  loathing  and  disgust  to 
passers-by.  The  human  heart,  in  its  seasons  of  distress,  longs  for  society,  in  particular 
the  society  of  sympathetic  friends ;  and  sometimes  the  loneliness  of  sorrow  is  so  great 
that  the  thought  of  the  grave,  with  its  buried  millions,  presents  to  the  sufferer  a  wel- 
come relief.  However  obscure,  isolated,  miserable,  the  lot  of  a  saint  on  earth,  death 
introduces  him  to  the  noblest  fellowships— of  his  fathers  (Gen.  xv.  15 ;  xxv.  8); 
of  "the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect"  (Heb.  xii.  23);  of  the  Saviour  (Luke 
xxiii  43  •  Phil.  i.  23).  3.  Absolute  equality.  Whereas  he  was  now  spurned  by  hw 
fellows,  he  would  then,  had  he  died  in  infancy,  have  attained  to  as  much  glory  as  the 


M  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [on.  m.  1—26. 

aforesaid  counsellors,  kings,  and  princes,  who,  notwithstanding  their  ambitious  great- 
ness, which  had  led  tbem  to  construct  gorgeous  sepulchres  and  amass  untold  hoards  of 
wealth,  were  now  lying  cold  and  stiff  within  their  desolate  palaces.  Behold  the  vanity 
of  earthly  greatness ! — monarchs  mouldering  in  the  dust  (Isa.  xiv.  11 ;  Ezek.  xxxiL  23). 
See  the  impotence  of  wealth — it  cannot  arrest  the  footsteps  of  death  (Jas.  i.  11;  Luke 
xvi.  22).  Note  that  death  is  a  great  leveller  (Bccles.  li.  14,  16 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  48 ;  Heb. 
ix.  27),  and  the  grave  a  place  where  distinctions  are  unknown  (ver.  19;  Eocles.  iii.  20). 
4.  Complete  tranquillity.  "Asa  hidden  untimely  birth  I  had  not  been,  and  as  children 
that  have  never  seen  the  light "  (ver.  16  ;  cf.  Eccles.  vi.  4, 5) ;  unconscious  and  still  as 
non-existence  itself,  as  those  "  upon  whose  unopened  ear  no  cry  of  misery  ever  fell,  and 
on  whose  unopened  eye  the  light,  and  the  evil  which  the  light  reveals,  never  broke; "  a 
tranquillity  deeper  (and,  in  Job's  estimation,  more  blessed)  than  that  of  those  who  only 
attain  rest  after  passing  through  life's  Uls — a  doctrine  against  which  both  the  light  of 
nature  and  the  voice  of  revelation  protest  (vide  homily  on  ver.  16).  5.  Entire  eman- 
cipation. A  perfect  cessation  from  all  life's  troubles,  and  a  final  escape  from  the 
exactions  of  his  unseen  oppressor.  "  There  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,"  etc. 
(vers.  17 — 19 ;  cf.  Eocles.  ix.  5 — 10) — a  sentiment,  again,  which  is  only  partially  correct, 
ij».  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the  ills  of  life. 

Lessons,  1.  God's  best  gifts  are  often  least  appreciated.  2.  Men  frequently  mis- 
take ill  for  good.  3.  What  we  have  not  commonly  appears  more  desirable  than  what  we 
have.  4.  "  Better  is  a  living  dog  than  a  dead  lion."  5.  The  grave  is  a  poor  place  for 
a  man  to  hide  his  sorrows  in.  6.  It  is  better  to  bear  the  ills  we  have  than  fly  to  others 
that  we  know  not  of.  7.  It  is  well  to  scrutinize  keenly  all  that  we  either  think  or  say 
in  trouble.  8.  There  is  a  greater  sin  than  despising  the  gift  of  temporal  existence, 
viz.  despising  the  offer  of  eternal  life. 

Vers.  13 — 19. — The  grave,    I.  A  eeqion  of  impbnrtbart.k  hahknkb*. 

IL    A   REALM   OF   tTNBHOKEN   SILENCE. 

III.  An   abode   OP   DEEP  TBANQUILLITY, 

IV.  A   BED   or   PEACEFUL  SLUMBER. 

V.  A   WORLD   OF   ABSOLUTE   EQUALITY. 

VI.  A   PLACE   OF   UNIVERSAL   EENDEZVOUg. 

VII.  A   HOUSE   OF   TEMPORARY   LODGINO. 

Lessons.     1.  Humility,    2.  Contentment.    3.  Dilii;cuce.     4.  Watchfulness. 

Ver.  16. — "  Tote  or  not  to  he."  I.  Against  being  and  in  favour  of  not-beino, 
1.  Life  is  little  other  than  a  capacity  for  suffering  aflJiction.  2.  At  the  best,  life  is  so 
short,  and  man's  powers  so  feeble,  that  nothing  he  undertakes  can  attain  to  perfection. 

3.  Ill  every  instance  life  involves  the  terrible  necessity  and  painful  experience  of  dying. 

4.  Life  always  carries  in  its  bosom  the  possibility  of  coming  short  of  everlasting  felicity. 
II.  In  favour  of  being  and  against  not-being.     1.  Life  in  itself  is  a  thing  of 

pure  enjoyment.  2.  Man's  powers,  though  imperfect,  are  susceptible  of  infinite 
improvement.  3.  The  day  of  existence,  whether  long  or  short,  affords  a  noble  oppor- 
tunity for  serving  God.  4.  The  fact  that  one  is  born  gives  him  a  chance,  by  being 
bom  again,  of  attaining  to  salvation  and  eternal  life. 

Lessons.  1.  Notwithstanding  all  the  miseiies  of  human  life,  it  is  better  to  have 
been  born  than  to  have  remained  in  non-existence.  2.  Notwithstanding  all  its  brevity 
and  imperfection,  life  is  worth  living.  3.  Because  of  all  its  hardships  and  sorrows,  it 
should  be  given  up  with  resignation  when  God  recalls  it  to  himself. 

Vers.  20 — 26. — The  stricken  patriarch's  lament :  3.  Desiring  his  death.  I.  Doleful 
LAMENTATION.  Job  pitifully  wails  forth  that  his  soul  was  in  bitterness  because  of:  1, 
The  miieries  of  life.  Which  he  depicts  as :  (1)  inward  trouble ;  not  merely  bodily  pain 
but  mental  anguish,  bitterness  of  soul  (ver,  20);  the  acutest  form  of  all  distress  (Prov' 
xviii.  14;  cf.  '  Macbeth,'  act  v.  so.  3).  (2)  Constant  trouble,  which  came  to  him  as 
regularly  as  his  daily  bread  :  "  My  sighing  comefch  before  I  eat "  (cf.  Ps,  Ixxx.  5 ;  Isa.  xxx. 
20).  (3)  Abundant  trouble,  like  the  gushing  forth  of  waters :  "  My  roarings  are  pou  red 
out  like  the  waters"  (ver.  24)— a  frequent  image  for  affliction  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxii.  17  ■  Ps. 
xiu.  7 ;  Ixxxviii.  7).    (4)  Paralyzing  trouble,  terror  overtaking  him  the  moment  ha 


OH.  in.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  6T 

thought  of  it :  "I  feared  a  fear,  and  it  came  upon  me  "  (ver.  25 ;  cf. "  He  that  but  fears," 
etc.,  *  Henry  IV.,*  pt.  2,  act  i.  sc.  1).  (5)  Superfluous  trouble ;  i.e.  his  misery  had  not 
sprung  upon  him  revelling  in  sinful  and  luxurious  ease,  which  might  have  afforded  some 
justification  for  so  appalling  a  visitation  as  had  overtaken  him  ;  but  when  already  he  was 
a  stricken  man,  another  and  a  greater  sorrow  leapt  forth  upon  him  :  "  1  was  not  in  safety, 
neither  had  I  rest,  neither  was  I  quiet ;  yet  trouble  came  "  (ver.  26).  2.  I'he  perplexities 
of  providence.  To  these  he  alludes  when  he  describes  himself  as  a  man  "  wliose  way  is 
hid,  and  whom  God  hath  hedged  in  "  (ver.  23).  The  term  "  way  "  is  ofteu  put  for  course 
of  life  (Pa.  i.  6 ;  Prov.  iv.  19 ;  Isx.  xxvi.  7  ;  Jer.  z.  23)  ;  and  a  man's  way  may  be  said  to 
be  hid(t.e.  to  himself)  when  either  its  future  character  is  coacealed  from  his  perception, 
or  the  reason  for  its  present  shape  is  not  understood.  Now,  to  all  men  a  veil  inscrutable 
separates  the  future,  the  immediate  no  less  than  the  remote,  from  the  present  (Prov. 
xxviL  1 ;  Jas.  iv.  14).  The  special  ground  of  complaint  felt  by  Job  was,  not  so  much 
that  be  had  been  subjected  to  adversity,  but  that  he  could  not  discern  the  reason  of 
God's  mysterious  dealings  with  him ;  that  his  sufferings  so  engirt  him  like  a  Jofty  wall, 
that  he  not  only  knew  not  which  way  to  turn,  but  that  he  failed  to  discover  any  way 
to  turn.  The  like  perplexity  has  frequently  been  experienced  by  Go(i's  people  (cf.  Jer. 
xii.  1 ;  Ps.  xlii.  6 ;  IxxiiL  2 ;  Lam.  iii.  7).  But  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  God's 
ways  should  be  perfectly  patent  to  the  finite  understanding.  Man  cannot  always 
fathom  the  purposes  or  comprehend  the  plans  of  his  fellow-creatures :  how  much  less 
should  he  think  to  gauge  the  counsel  of  him  whose  wisdom  is  "  fold  over  fold  "  (ch. 
xi.  6) ;  or  discern  the  reason  of  every  dark  dispensation  that  is  measured  out  by  him 
whose  judgments  are  a  great  deep  (Fs.  xxxvi.  6)  1  Hence  God  charges  his  saints,  when 
they  see  that  clouds  and  darkness  surround  h^  throne,  that  his  footsteps  are  in  the 
sea,  and  that  his  way  is  not  known,  to  preserve  their  souls  in  patience,  to  decline  to 
be  perplexed,  and  to  calmly  trust  their  present  way  and  future  course  to  him  who 
always  walketh  in  the  light,  and  who,  out  of  the  greatest  entanglements  and  darkest 
riddles  of  life,  is  able  to  evolve  his  own  glory  and  their  good  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5 ;  Isa.  xxvi. 
3,  4 ;  Eom.  viii.  28). 

II.  QtTEBULOUS  EXPOSTULATION.  "  Wherefore  is  light  given  to  him  that  is  in  misery," 
etc?  (vers.  20,  23).  The  interrogation  indicated:  1.  Astonishing  presumption  on  the 
part  of  Job,  not  only  in  questioning  the  Supreme,  seeing  that  he  giveth  no  account 
ot  his  doings  unto  any,  and  least  of  all  to  men  (ch.  xxxiii.  13;  Ps.  xlvL  10;  Jer. 
xviii.  6 ;  Dan.  iv.  35) ;  but  much  more  in  addressing  to  him  such  a  question,  which 
practically  meant — ^Why  should  a  man  be  sent  into  this  world  ?  or,  if  sent  into  it,  why 
should  he  be  kept  in  it,  unless  his  existence  is  to  be  always  encircled  wiih  the  radiance 
of  prosperity,  and  exhilarated  with  the  wine  of  joy,  and  unless  he  is  to  be  assisted 
both  to  pierce  the  veil  of  futurity  and  to  penetrate  the  overshadowing  clouds  of  the 
present?  2.  Monstrous  ingratitude;  in  first  depreciating  what,  after  Christ  and  sal- 
vation, is  God's  highest  gift  to  man,  viz.  existence ;  in  forgetting  the  manifold  blessings 
he  had  enjoyed  during  the  former  penod  of  his  prosperity ;  and  in  overlooking  the  fact 
that  he  had  some  good  gifts  remaining  still.  But  men  are  prone  to  forget  past  mercies 
(Ps.  ciii.  2;  cf. '  Troilas  and  Cressida,'  act  iiL  sc.  3),  and  to  appreciate  what  they  have 
not  more  highly  than  what  they  have.  True  thankfulness  magnifies  the  gifts  it  has 
received,  and  does  not  grudge  that  the  great  Giver  still  reserves  something  to  bestow 
(cf.  *  Timon  of  Athens,'  act  iii.  sc.  6).  3.  Extraordinary  ignorance ;  in  not  discerning 
that  the  ultimate  end  and  chief  aim  of  life  are  not  to  render  men  happy,  but  to  make 
them  holy;  not  to  make  them  wise  as  the  gods  (Gen.  iii.  5),  but  to  form  them  into 
sons  of  God  (Heb.  ii.  10) ;  and  that  these  sublime  purposes  may  be  secured  as  well 
through  adversity  as  through  prosperity.  But  perhaps  the  absence  of  gospel  light 
should  explain  and  extenuate  in  Job's  case  what  in  ours  would  be  reprehensible  in  ihe 

6Xtr6II16 

III.  Melancholy  exultation.  Job's  vehement  longing  for  death  bespoke :  1.  An 
inUnte  pressure  of  irdsery.  Seeing  that  life  is  essentially  joyous  (Ecoles.  xi.  7),  that 
men  naturally  cling  to  life  above  every  earthly  possession  (ch.  ii.  4),  and  that  the 
intrinsic  worth  and  happiness  of  life  are  a  thousandfold  increased  by  the  addition  of 
Heaven's  favour,  it  indicates  an  amount  and  degree  of  wretchedness  transcending  ordi- 
nary experience  when  a  man  yearns  for  life's  extinction,  exults  in  the  prospect  of  disso- 
lution, would  be  blithe  to  find  a  grave,  however  humble  or  obscure— 


68  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  ra.  1—26 


"Mad  from  life's  history, 
Glad  to  detith'a  mystery, 
Swifttobehurl'd, 
Anywhere,  anywhere  out  of  the  world." 

(Hood, '  Bridge  of  Sighs.") 

They  who  find  life's  calamities  in  any  measure  tolerable  have  reason  to  bless  G-'id  fur 
laying  on  them  no  heavier  burden  than  they  are  able  to  bear,  and  for  imparting  to 
them  strength  to  bear  the  burden  which  he  does  impose.  Goii's  grace  alone  keeps  men 
from  sinking  beneath  the  weight  and  pressure  of  life's  ills.  Contrast  with  Job's  present 
state  of  mind  that  of  St.  Paul  ia  the  Eoman  prison  (Phil.  i.  23).  2.  An  utter  extinction  of 
hope.  "  The  miserable  hath  no  other  medicine,  but  only  liope  " — hope  that  things  will 
eventually  improve ;  that  the  clouds  of  adversity  will  yet  give  place  to  the  fair  sunshine 
of  prosperity ;  but  even  this  the  patriarch  appears  to  have  abandoned.  It  would  bo 
incorrect  to  affirm  that  Job  had  absolutely  lost  his  hold  on  God;  but  of  hope  in  a 
return  to  health  and  happiness  he  had  none.  Yet  in  this  Job  erred — erred  two  ways : 
in  thinking  himself  at  the  worst,  which  he  was  not ;  and  in  despairing  of  recovery, 
which  he  should  not.  It  is  seldom  so  sad  with  any  one  that  it  could  not  be  sadder; 
and  it  is  seldom  so  bad  that  it  cannot  be  improved.  AU  things  are  possible  with  God, 
and  God  reigneth  ;  therefore  nil  desperandum  either  in  nature  or  in  grace.  3.  A  sad 
want  of  faith.  Had  Job  been  able  calmly  to  trust  himself  and  his  future  to  God,  it  is 
certain  he  would  not  have  so  inordinately  longed  for  death.  He  would  have  reasoned 
that  neither  the  miseries  of  life  nor  the  perplexities  of  providence  were  a  sufficient 
reason  for  God's  cancelling  the  grant  of  life,  or  for  a  saint  seeking  the  relief  of  death ; 
since:  (1)  God  has  an  absolute  right  to  dispose  of  his  creatures  as  he  may.  (2)  No 
man  has  a  claim  on  God  for  complete  exemption  from  trouble.  (3)  Affliction  in  some 
shape  or  another  is  every  man's  desert  in  this  world.  (4)  The  higher  purposes  of  life 
may  be  secured  better  through  adversity  than  through  prosperity.  (5)  It  is  not  certain 
that  escape  from  misery  would  in  every  instance  be  attained  by  escape  from  life.  (6) 
And  it  is  possible  for  bodily  calamity  and  mental  trouble  and  soul-anguish  to  pass 
away  before  the  end  of  life,  while  life  once  withdrawn  can  never  be  restored. 

Learn:  1.  Men  are  apt  to  think  there  is  no  reason  for  that  for  which  they  can  see 
no  reason.  2.  The  best  gifts  of  God  may  become  burdensome  to  their  possessors.  3. 
Some  look  for  death,  but  cannot  find  it ;  death  ever  finds  those  for  whom  it  looks,  i. 
Afflictions  are  commonly  accompanied  by  much  darkness,  which  faith  only  can  illumine. 
5.  Though  a  man's  way  is  sometimes  hid  from  himself,  it  never  is  concealed  from  God. 

Ver.  20. — Twomarvels  that  are  nomysteries.  I.  Living  men  aee  often  miserable. 
1.  Surprising ;  when  we  consider  (1)  that  men  are  the  creatures  of  a  loving  God ;  (2) 
that  their  Creator  designed  them  for  happiness;  (3)  that  the  most  abundant  provision 
has  been  made  for  their  felicity.  Yet :  2.  Not  inexplicable ;  when  we  remember  (1)  that 
men  are  sinful  creatures,  and  deserve  to  be  miserable ;  (2)  that  men  carry  the  true  source 
of  misery  within  themselves,  in  their  sinful  hearts;  and  (3)  that  men  not  unfrequently 
neglect  that  which  alone  can  remove  their  misery — God's  grace  and  Christ's  blood. 

II.  Miserable  men  often  continue  living.  1.  Astonishing;  if  we  reflect  upon 
(1)  the  frailty  of  life,  and  the  ease  with  which  it  may  be  terminated;  (2)  the  heaviness 
of  that  burden  of  sorrow  it  is  sometimes  called  to  support ;  (3)  the  intensity  with 
which  sufferers  not  unfrequently  long  for  death.  Still :  2.  Not  insoluble ;  if  we  recollect 
(1)  how  they  are  kept  in  life  by  the  power  of  God ;  and  (2)  why  they  are  kept  in  life, 
viz.  (a)  to  glorify  God,  by  exhibiting  his  power  in  sustaining  them,  and  his  grace  in 
giving  them  opportunity  to  improve;  (5)  to  benefit  themselves,  by  allowing  time  for 
Buffering,  if  possible,  to  perfect  them  in  obedience ;  and,  supposing  this  end  attained, 
(c)  to  instruct  their  fellows  how  to  bear  and  how  to  profit  by  affliction. 

Ver.  23  (along  with  ch.  i.  10). — TTie  two  hedges ;  or,  the  hedge  of  profperity  and  the 
hedge  of  adversity.  I.  In  what  thet  compare.  1.  In  being  planted  by  God.  Job's 
prosperity  was  from  God;  his  adversity  was  not  without  God.  2.  In  encirclin<r  the 
saint.  Job  was  equally  a  pious  man  in  both  positions.  3.  In  being  both  removable. 
If  Job's  prosperity  was  exchanged  for  adversity,  hi»  adversity  was  afterward*  succeeded 
by  prosperity. 


OH.  m.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  69 

II.  In  what  they  contrast.  1.  In  the  frequency  of  their  getting.  Adversity 
a  more  frequent  experience  than  prosperity.  2.  In  the  comfort  they  afford.  Prosperity 
a  hedge  of  roses;  adversity  of  thorns.  3.  In  the  effects  they  produce.  Prosperity 
more  dangerous  to  a  man's  spiritual  interests  than  adversity. 

III.  In  what  they  suggbst.  1.  That  God's  hand  is  in  everything.  2.  That  the 
saint's  good  may  he  advanced  hy  everything.  3.  That  the  devil's  arrows  shoot  at 
everything. 


HOMILIES  BY   VARIOUS  AUl'HOBS. 

Vers.  1 — 26. — The  eloquence  of  grief .  This  hook,  so  entirely  true  to  nature,  presents 
hei-e  one  of  the  darkest  moods  of  the  grief-stricken  heart.  The  first  state  is  that  of 
paralyzed  silence,  dumbness,  inertia.  Were  this  to  continue,  death  must  ensue.  Stag- 
nation will  he  fatal.  The  currents  of  thought  and  feeling  must  in  some  way  be  set 
fl  'wing  in  their  accustomed  channels,  as  in 'the  beautiful  little  poem  of  Tennyson  on 
the  mother  suddenly  bereaved  of  her  warrior-lord — 

"  All  her  maidens,  wondering,  said. 
She  must  weep  or  she  must  die." 

A  period  of  agitation  ensues  when  the  mind  resumes  its  natural  functions ;  and  the  first 
mood  that  succeeds  to  silent  prostration  is  that  of  bitter  resentment  and  complaint.  As 
we  hail  the  irritability  of  a  patient  who  has  been  deadly  sick  as  the  sign  of  returning 
convalescence,  so  we  may  look  upon  this  petulance  of  grief  when  it  finds  at  length  a 
voice.  We  do  not  blame ;  we  pity,  and  are  tender  towards  the  irritable  invalid  whose 
heart  we  know- to  be  in  its  depth  patient  and  true ;  and  he  who  knows  the  heart  better 
than  we  do  is  forbearing  with  those  wild  cries  which  suffering  may  wring  from  even 
constant  and  faithful  bosoms  like  Job's.  We  may  read  these  words  of  passion  with  con- 
sideration if  God  can  listen  to  them  without  rebuke.  There  are  three  turns  in  the 
th'Hight  here  expressed. 

I.  The  spirit  of  man  in  ebvolt  fkom  life.     Cwses  on  the  dwy  of  his  Urth.    (Vers. 

1 io.)    There  seems  to  be  some  reference  to  the  ancient  belief,  which  we  find  in  later 

times'among  the  Eomans,  in  unlucky  or  ill-starred  days.  Such  a  day,  to  the  sufferer's 
present  feeling,  must  have  been  the  day  of  his  birth.  But  he  will  learn  better  by-and- 
by.  He  cannot  see  things  rightly  through  the  present  medium  of  pain.  True 
religion  teaches  us — the  Christian  religion  above  all — that  no  "  black  "  days  are  sent 
us  from  him  who  causes  his  sun  to  shine  on  the  evil  and  the  good.  It  is  only  ill 
deeds  that  make  ill  days.  We  have  met  with  Job's  complaint  again  and  again  in 
different  forms.  Men  and  women  have  complained  that  they  were  brought  into  the 
world  without  their  consent  being  asked,  and  sometimes  passionately  exclaim,  "  I  wish 
I  had  never  been  born  1 "  Let  us  admit  what  our  calm  and  healthy  judgment  dictates— 
these  feelings  are  morbid  and  transitory ;  and  they  are  partial,  because  they  represent 
only  one  and  that  an  extreme,  mood  of  the  ever-changing  mind.  We  must  take  our 
morning,'  not  our  midnight,  moods  if  we  would  know  the  truth  about  ourselves.  The 
instinct  which  leads  us  to  keep  birthdays  with  joy  and  mutual  congratulation  should 
instruct  us  in  our  debt  of  thankfulness :  "  Thanks  that  we  were  men  I  " 

II  The  ibbationalitt  of  despair.  (Vers.  11—19.)  But  such  wishes  against  the 
inevitable  and  for  the  impossible,  the  mind,  even  in  the  paroxysm  of  despair,  feels  to  be 
absurd  It  sinks  to  a  degree  less  irrational  in  the  next  wish  that  an  early  death  had  pre- 
vented'all  this  misery.  Would  that  a  frost  had  nipped  the  just-blown  flower  (vers.  11, 
12^  I  Yet  this  mood  is  only  a  shade  less  unreasonable  than  thu  former.  For  does  not 
the  'instinct  which  leads  us  aU  to  speak  of  death  in  infancy  and  early  childhood  as 
"  untimely  premature,"  rebuke  this  fretfulness,  and  witness  to  the  truth  again  that 
life  is  a  good  ?  And  does  not  the  common  aspiration  after  "  length  of  days,  so  marked 
in  the  Old  Testament,  supply  another  argument  in  the  same  direction  ?  Job  will  yet 
live  to  smUe  from  out  of  the  depths  of  a  serene  old  age,  at  these  passionate  clamours 
of  a  turbulent  grief.  Again,  he  passes  into  the  contemplation  of  death  with  pleasure, 
with  a  deep  craving  for  its  rest.  He  describes,  in  simple,  beautiful  language,  that  final 
earthly  resort,  where  agitated  brains  and  restless  hearts  find  at  .ast  peace  (vera.  17— la;, 


60  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  ni.  1—26, 

Such  a  sentiment,  again,  is  common  to  the  experience  of  suffering  hearts,  is  deeply 
embedded  in  the  poetry  of  the  world.  But  how  far  more  common  and  frequent 
the  happy,  healthy  mood  which  finds  a  zest  and  relish  in  the  mere  sense  of  existence, 
in  the  simple,  natural  pleasures  of  every  day  1  The  longing  for  the  rest  of  the  grave 
is  the  mood  of  Intense  weariness  and  disease;  and  it  is  counteracted  by  the  mood  of 
restored  health,  which  longs  for  activity,  even  in  heaven.  Well  has  that  poet,  who  has 
entered  so  deeply  into  all  the  phases  of  modern  sadness,  sung— 

"Whatever  crazy  Sorrow  saith, 
No  life  that  breathes  with  human  breath 
Hath  ever  truly  longed  for  death. 
Tis  life  whereof  our  nerves  are  scant  j 
Oh,  life,  not  death,  for  which  we  pant ; 
More  life  and  fuller,  that  we  want." 

III.  Intebeooation  of  life's  mysteries.  (Vers.  20 — 26.)  Once  more,  from  lon^og 
for  death,  the  distressed  mind  of  the  sufferer  passes  to  impatient  questioning.  Why 
shuald  life,  if  it  is  to  be  given  to  any,  be  given  to  sufferers  who  desire  death?  why 
should  it  be  given  to  him  who  can  find  no  rest,  who  is  ever  in  dread  of  fresh  woes  ? 
This  complaint,  again,  is  natural,  but  it  is  not  wise.  We  are  impatient  of  pain ;  we 
should  otherwise  have  no  quarrel  with  the  mystery  of  being.  But  pain  is  a  great 
fact  in  the  coostitution  of  the  world;  it  is  there;  it  is  there  evidently  by  Divine 
appointment ;  it  cannot  be  glozed  over  nor  explained  away.  Tlie  wisdom  of  piety  is 
in  reconciling  ourselves  to  it  as  the  dispensation  of  Glod,  in  submitting  to  it  as  hie 
will,  supporting  it  with  patience.  Then,  "though  no  affliction  for  the  present  be 
joyous,  but  grievous,  yet  afterward  it  will  yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  " 
(Heb.  xii.  11).     In  hope  let  us — 

"  Strain  through  years 
To  catch  the  far-off  interest  of  tears." 

To  the  question  of  Job  the  answer  is — Suffering  is  the  signet  of  a  m.ijostio  being. 
The  light  of  eternity,  falling  athwart  our  tears,  forms  a  rainbow  prophetic  of  our 
glorious  destiny.  But  the  fiual  and  most  significant  of  all  answers  is  the  cross  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  the  union  of  highest  life  with  extremest  suffering. 
Bom  to  suffer,  and  by  suffering  to  be  made  perfect,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  supplies  for 
them  that  trust  in  him  a  power  by  which  they  can  rise  out  of  the  mysterious  darknean 
of  pain,  believing  that  what  is  tried,  even  as  by  fire,  shall  be  found  unto  praise  and 
honour  and  glory  at  his  appearing.  The  study  of  this  paroxysm  of  extreme  pain  of 
mind  will  be  instructive  if  it  help  us  to  govern  any  similar  moods  which  may  arise 
in  our  own  minds. 
Lessons.    1.  There  is  a  natural  and  precious  relief  firom  mental  pain  in  words. 

"  Poor  breathing  orators  of  miseries  1 
Let  them  have  scope ;  though  what  they  do  impart 
Help  nothing  else,  yet  they  do  ease  the  heart." 

2.  God,  our  gracious  Father,  is  not  offended  by  our  sincerity.  Greater  tlian  our 
hearts,  he  knows  all  things.  This  book  and  many  of  the  psalms  teach  us  a  ciiildliUe 
piety  by  repeating  words  in  which  sufferers  poured  forth  all  their  complaints  as  well 
as  thanksgivings  into  the  ear  of  him  who  misunderstands  nothing.  3.  There  is  an 
exaggeration  in  all  the  moods  of  depression.  We  are  prone  to  overstate  the  ills  of 
life,  and  to  forget  the  numberless  hours  of  joy  in  which  we  have  instinctively  thanked 
God  for  the  blessing  of  existence.  4.  The  very  intensity  and  exaggeration  of  such  moods 
point  forward  to  a  reaction.  They  will  not  continue  long  in  the  course  of  nature. 
God  has  mercifully  so  constructed  this  fine  mechanism  of  body  and  mind  that  these 
extremes  bring  their  own  remedy.  Patience,  then.  The  hour  is  darkest  that  is  nearest 
the  dawn.    "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning." — J. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Human  infirmity  revealed  in  deep  affliction.  Frail  is  the  heart  of 
man.  With  all  its  heroism,  its  endurance  and  power,  yet  the  stout  heart  yields  and 
the  brave  spirit  is  cowed.  The  strongest  bends  beneath  the  heavy  pressure.  But  if 
the  human  life  is  to  be  trathfully  presented,  its  failures  as  well  as  its  excellencea 


OH.  III.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  «1 

must  be  Bet  forth.  It  is  an  evidence  that  the  writer  is  attempting  an  impartial 
Btatement,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  poetical  representations  is  not  led  away  to  mere 
extravagance  and  exaggeration  in  depicting  the  qualities  of  the  righteous  man.  Job's 
strength  of  heart  receives  a  shook.  He  is  in  the  whirlpool  of  suffering  and  sorrow. 
He  will  recover  himself  in  time ;  but  for  the  present  he  is  as  one  who  has  lost  his 
balance.  Let  it  not  be  forgotten  how  severe  the  strain  upon  him  is.  His  possessions 
have  been  torn  from  him ;  his  family  stricken  down  by  death ;  his  body  is  the  seat 
of  a  fierce  and  foul  disease ;  his  friends  are  powerless  to  help  him.  No  wonder  that 
"his  grief  was  very  great."  Oat  of  that  grief  springs  his  wail  of  complaint — the  cry 
of  a  spirit  overburdened.  This  is  an  instance  of  what  may  escape  from  the  lips  of  a 
strong  and  good  man  under  the  pressure  of  unusual  afSiction.  In  judging  the  cry  of 
sorrow  or  foiming  our  estimate  of  the  character  of  him  who  raises  it,  we  must 
remember — 

I.  That  it  does  not  accurately  bepbesent  the  utterance  op  a  oalm  unbiassed 
JDDGMKNT.  The  Sufferer  ia  so  liable  to  be  unmanned  at  such  an  hour.  There  is  too 
vivid  a  perception  of  the  pains  of  life  for  the  cry  to  be  an  accurate  judgment  on 
life  itself. 

II.  That  it  is  the  expression  op  the  soul's  feelings  in  the  extremity  op  its 
CIRCUMSTANCES.  And  alihough  the  true  test  of  strength  is  in  an  ability  to  bear  the 
heaviest  pressure,  yet  that  perfection  of  virtue  by  which  the  severest  strain  can  be 
borne  with  calmness  is  only  an  uncommon  experience;  if,  indeed,  it  can  ever  be  found 
but  in  the  Perfect  One. 

ni.  The  INHERENT  HUMAN  PBAILTT.  In  this  instance  Job,  "  the  perfect  man  and 
upright,"  falls  behind  the  one  absolute  Example  of  patient  endurance  of  the  severest 
sufferings.  Job,  judged  by  the  ordinary  standard  of  humanjife,  must  be  pronounced 
a  model  of  patient  endurance.  The  inherent  weakness,  the  true  mark  of  humanity, 
is  apparent  here.  The  world  needed  one  "  greater  than  Job  "  as  its  typical  Example 
of  patience. 

IV.  But  in  all  we  may  also  learn  the  uselessness  op  that  ory  op  sorrow  which 
DEMANDS  THE  IMPOSSIBLE.  In  quiotness  and  self-composure  Job  would  not  have  cried 
thus,  Eeason  is  not  always  supreme.  In  moments  of  great  suffering  her  authority 
is  assailed,  impaired,  even  sometimes  lust. 

In  our  judgment  upon  the  cries  of  our  frail  brethren,  we  must,  therefore,  extend 
our  utmost  charity,  make  every  allowance  for  the  extreme  conditions  of  which  they 
are  the  expressions ;  and  in  our  own  habit  of  life  accustom  ourselves  so  to  receive 
our  minor  aflictions  that  we  may  be  tuLored  to  comport  ourselves  rightly  under  the 
extremest  pressure. — E.  G. 

Vers.  13—19. — The  grave  a  rest.  In  the  toil  and  sorrow  of  life  men  long  for  rest. 
They  lighten  the  toils  and  brighten  the  darkness  of  the  present  by  the  hope  of  repose 
and  gladness  in  the  future.  Without  such  a  hope  life's  burdens  would  be  much 
heavier  than  they  are ;  and  in  some  cases  almost  insupportable.  As  the  worn  labouier 
longs  for  the  rest  of  the  even-tide,  so  does  the  over-wrought  spirit  ol'  the  sad  desire 
the  rest  of  the  grave.  It  is  proper  to  consider  if  this  is  a  healthy,  a  just,  a  well- 
grounded  desire.  To  the  grave  men  of  widely  different  characters  look  for  rest.  Let 
us  think  of  the  grave — 

I.  As  LONGED  POR  BY  THE  WEAEY.  "  Then  had  I  been  at  rest."  This  is  not  always 
to  be  oommeuded.  The  present  is  our  time  for  toil.  These  are  the  hours  of  the  day. 
They  that  sleep  should  sleep  in  the  night.  It  is  not  a  Christian  spirit  to  wish  life 
shorter.  Bather  should  we  ask  for  grace  to  be  faithful,  even  unto  death.  Besignation, 
obedience,  hope,  will  check  the  desire  to  diminish  the  term  of  life.  What  is  suicide  but 
the  adding  violence  to  this  desire  ?    For  our  change  we  must  wait. 

II.  As  THE  ONLY  REST  KNOWN  TO  THE  IGNORANT.  By  Christian  teaching  and 
discipline  we  learn  where  the  spirit  may  find  rest ;  and  we  are  encouraged  to  wait  for 
the  end  of  our  toil.     But  the  ignorant  know  nothing  of  this  good  hope. 

HI.  The  qrave  brings  no  best  to  the  unfaithful.  He  owns  rest  who  does  a 
day's  work.  To  him  that  rest  is  sleep.  To  the  idler  death  will  bring  no  rest.  It  will 
change  the  conditions  and  surroundings  of  life.  But  it  is  a  dire  delusion  to  suppose 
that  the  spirit,  in  putting  off  the  garment  of  the  flesh,  will  escape  from  aU  toil.    Its 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  in.  1— 2& 

burdens  are  within  itself,  not  in  the  fleshy  tent.  All  sensation  is  in  the  mind  during 
the  bodily  life,  and  all  the  sad  weariness  of  the  spirit,  springing  from  consciousness  of 
disobedience,  that  spirit  carries  with  it.  The  sting  of  punishment  for  the  wicked  pierces 
the  spirit ;  often  through  the  flesh,  it  is  true.  But  the  sting  is  not  left  in  the  flesh,  to 
be  cast  off  when  the  body  is  laid  down.  The  weapons  f)f  the  spiritual  foe  penetrate 
beyond  the  clothes.  The  wicked  deluded  in  life  is  deluJed  b_v  death.  Some  long  so 
eagerly  for  death  that  they  rush  through  the  thin  veil  that  separates  them  from  the 
regions  of  the  dead.  But  it  is  rushing  from  darkness  to  light.  It  is  rushing  into  the 
presence  of  the  All-seeing  One  whose  apprehended  judgment  upon  life  is  the  severest  of 
all  punishments. 

IV.  The  kest  of  the  grave  ib  a  tkue  reward  to  the  faithful.  Fidelity  in 
toil  has  its  reward  in  rest.  To  the  faithful  ones  it  is  sweet.  But  not  as  a  mere  cessation 
of  activity.  1.  It  ends  for  them  the  time  of  exposure  to  temptation.  2.  It  marks  the 
limits  of  probation.  3.  It  exchanges  warfare  for  triumph;  hard  toil  for  honourable 
reposB ;  danger  for  safety ;  the  cross  for  the  crown.  4.  It  brings  the  perfectuess  of 
all  blessing  in  the  everlasting  life  and  the  fulness  of  joy  which  are  promised  to  the 
obedient  and  the  pure. — R.  Or, 

Vers.  20 — 26. — The  unanswered  question.  From  the  lips  of  Job  words  escape  which 
prove  how  deeply  he  suffered.  "  Why  ?  "  is  ever  on  the  lips  of  men  when  they  consider 
God's  hidden  work.  But  he  giveth  none  account  of  his  ways.  Clouds  and  darkness 
are  round  about  him.  Happy  the  man  who  at  all  times  is  persuaded  that  justice  and 
judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his  throne.  The  question  here  proposed  by  Job  is  the 
unanswered  question  running  through  the  whole  book.  Until  all  is  accomplished,  the 
design  of  the  process  is  unexplained.  That  the  afSictions  of  Job  had  some  other 
purpose  than  merely  to  respond  to  Satan's  appeal,  none  will  deny ;  but  what  the  purpose 
was  is  not  stated  in  words.  The  whole  story  alone  explain*  it.  New  Testament 
readers  have  light  upon  the  mystery  of  human  suffering  denied  to  the  saints  of  old. 
But  with  all  the  light  and  teaching  granted,  a  veil  of  mystery  still  hangs  over  all.  Partial 
answers  may,  however,  be  found.  The  demand  of  Job  is  unreasonable.  It  amounts 
to  requiring  that  all  who  suffer  should  be  permitted  at  once  to  end  their  sorrows  in  the 
silence  of  the  grave.  In  other  words,  that  none  should  suffer.  "  Why  is  life  given  unto 
the  bitter  in  soul  ?  "  It  is  the  cry  of  a  sufferer  distracted  by  his  pain.  Eeasons  why 
death  should  not  come  immediately  to  him  that  longs  for  it  may  be  readily  given. 
Let  our  thoughts  rest  on  the  purposes  that  are  obviously  answered  by  pain. 

I.  SuFFBRINa    arises    FROM    THE     INFRINGEMENT  OF    SOME   NATUKAL   LAW,   EITHER 

WILFULLY  OB  iGNORANTLY  DONE.  Pain,  therefore,  is  the  guardian  of  the  life,  giviug 
sharp  warning  of  disobedience  or  of  ignorant  exposure  to  wrong.  How  often  would  life 
be  sacrificed  in  ignorance  were  not  pain  to  declare  the  departure  from  the  path  of 
safety ! 

II.  Pain  forms  an  element  of  that  testing  of  the  human  spirit  by  means 
OF  WHICH  character  IS  DEVELOPED.  Patience,  bravery,  faith,  resignation,  hope,  and 
obedience,  and  many  other  graces  that  adorn  the  human  spirit,  are  called  into  play  and 
strengthened  by  the  sharp  severities  of  pain.    It  is  a  means  of  growth. 

III.  Afflictions,  if  not  directly  imposed  by  a  Divine  hand,  are  used  as  means  of 
SPIRITUAL  COKEBCTION,  INSTRUCTION,  AND  GovEKNMENT.  The  great  law  finds  its  appli- 
cation here,  "  It  is  for  chastening  that  ye  endure."  A  wise  father  disciplines  his  loved 
son,  not  sufferihg  him  to  run  wild.  So  the  Lord,  the  true  Father,  "  dealeth  with  "  men 
"  as  with  .sons." 

IV.  The  true  end  of  all  suffering  is  thus  found  in  the  growth,  the  sanctity 
THE  culture,  and  PERFECTING  OF  THE  SOUL.  "That  we  may  be  partakers  of  his 
holiness."— E.  G. 

Ver.  1. — The  curse  of  despair.  Job  had  endured  bravely  up  to  this  moment.  But 
^■hen  his  courage  broke  down  his  despair  swept  all  before  it  like  an  avalanche.  Existence 
itself  then  seemed  only  a  curse,  and  Job  thought  it  a  matter  of  regret  that  he  had  ever 
^een  brought  into  the  world.    In  bis  despair  he  cursed  the  day  of  his  birth. 

I.  The  CAUSES  op  the  cuksb.  Job  was  no  mere  dyspeptic  pessimist.  His  utterance 
»f  despair  was  not  simply  bred  from  the  gloom  of  a  discontented  mind.    Nor  was  he  \ 


CH.  III.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  63 

hasty,  impatient  man  who  rebelled  against  the  first  sign  of  opposition  to  hia  will. 
The  cii'se  was  wrung  out  of  him  by  a  most  terrible  conjunction  of  circumstanceB. 

1.  Unparalleled  calamities.  He  had  lost  nearly  all — not  property  only,  but  children ;  not 
outside  things  only,  but  health  and  strength.  He  was'bereft  of  almost  everything  in 
the  world  that  promised  to  make  life  dear.     Why,  then,  should  he  value  it  any  longer  ? 

2.  Long  brooding  over  trouble.  Job  did  not  speak  in  haste.  For  seven  days  he  had 
been  sitting  dumb  with  his  three  silent  companions — dumb,  but  not  unconscious. 
What  an  array  of  thoughts  must  have  passed  through  his  mind  while  he  thus  suppressed 
all  utterance !  Benumbed  at  first,  perhaps,  his  mind  must  have  gradually  roused  itself 
to  take  in  all  the  truth.  Thus  he  had  time  to  realize  it.  Nothing  is  worse  than  to 
suffer  without  being  able  to  do  anything  to  meet  and  conquer  our  trouble.  Action  is 
a  powerful  antidote  to  despair.  Inaction  intensifies  pain.  Thought  and  imagination 
add  tremendous  horrors  of  the  mind  to  the  greatest  external  and  bodily  troubles.  3. 
Sympathy.  The  kind  presence  of  his  friends  broke  down  Job's  self-restraint.  Men 
can  bear  in  solitude  with  calmness ;  but  sympathy  opens  the  wells  of  emotion.  This 
is  best,  for  the  heart  that  does  not  let  out  its  pent-up  feelings  will  break  with  con- 
cealed agony. 

11.  The  character  of  the  ouesb.  1.  Its  bitterness.  Satan  said,  "  Skin  for  skin, 
yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life"  (ch.  ii.  4).  Now  Job  unconsciously 
answers  the  superficial  word  of  the  accuser,  though  from  an  unexpected  point  ol'  view. 
Life  itself  may  become  so  cruel  as  to  be  not  worth  living,  as  to  be  a  curse  rather  than 
a  blessing.  But  the  trouble  must  indeed  be  great  that  can  thus  conquer  and  reverse  a 
primary  instinct  of  nature.  The  exceeding  bitterness  of  future  punishment  will  be  that 
the  life  which  has  become  dead,  and  yet  which  is  not  unconscious,  must"  still  be  endured. 

2.  Its  humiliation.  Job  cursed  his  day,  only  his  day ;  he  did  not  curse  his  God,  nor 
the  universe.  He  did  not  vent  his  agony  in  rage  against  the  whole  order  of  things.  He 
confined  it  to  his  own  miserable  existence.  At  worst  he  only  complained  that  he  had 
been  brought  into  being ;  he  did  not  complain  that  the  general  order  of  the  world  was 
unjust.  Here  is  a  token  of  humility,  iiatience,  self-control.  Weak  sufferers  rail  against 
all  things  in  earth  and  heaven.  They  take  their  expeiience  as  a  sign  of  universal 
mismanagement.     It  is,  indeed,  difficult  not  to  judge  the  universe  by  our  own  feelings. 

3.  Its  mistake.  Job's  despair  was  very  excusable.  Yet  it  was  an  error.  It  was  an 
outbreak  of  impatience,  though  sadly  piovuked  and  bravely  limited.  No  man  is  able 
to  judge  of  the  worth  of  his  own  life.  The  life  which  is  miserable  to  its  owner  may 
yet  be  serving  some  high  Divine  purpose,  may  yet  be  a  blessing  to  mankind.  This 
was  the  case  with  Job's.  We  cannot  know  tlie  use  and  value  of  life  till  we  see  it  as  a 
finished  whole  and  from  the  other  side  of  the  grave. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  14. Z%e  pyramids.    The  rock-tombs,  mausoleums,  and  pyramids,  which  are 

most  striking  features  of  Eastern  and  especially  of  Egyptain  architecture,  are  noted  by 
Job  with  some  feeling  of  envy.  It  is  not  that  the  splendour  of  these  strange  works 
excites  his  admiration.  His  thought  dwells  rather  on  their  desolation,  but  this  desolation 
is  brought  out  the  more  vividly  by  contrast  with  their  vastness  and  original  magnificence. 
To  be  associated  with  such  imposing  embodiments  of  the  idea  of  de.ith  is  just  the  most 
enviable  goal  of  despair.    Job  thus  directs  our  attention  to  the  pyramids.    Let  us  note 

their  significant  features.  ,     ,    ., ,         .  „  ^  i      i        o 

I  Theib  use.  What  was  the  object  of  the  builders  of  these  monstrous  structures? 
Por  a  long  while  men  regarded  the  question  as  an  insoluble  riddle.  Some  suggested 
that  the  pyramids  contained  mystic  prophecies  shaped  in  symbolical  measurements 
of  architecture.  Others  saw  in  them  astronomical  records  and  libraries  of  science. 
But  whatever  subsidiary  ends  they  may  have  served,  it  is  now  generally  agreed  that 
the  primary  object  of  the  pyramids  was  to  serve  as  tombs  for  then-  builders,  ihus  they 
emphasize  the  importance  of  death.  We  strive  to  Danish  the  thought  of  our  end;  the 
Ea vptians  kept  it  most  prominently  before  their  eyes.  We  toil  for  the  present  mmisiry 
of  life  •  the  Egyptians  toiled  for  the  dead.  A  Pharaoh  spent  far  more  m  constructing  a 
home  for  his  corpse  than  in  building  a  palace  for  his  present  life.  Here  was  a  strauga 
perversion  of  the  idea  that  we  should  prepare  for  death  and  look  forward  to  existence 

^iTthbib  vastness.    The  great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh  was  one  of  the  wonder*  of  the 


64  THE  BOOS  OP  JOB.  [ch.  in.  1—26. 

world,  and  already  of  hoary  antiquity  when  the  Book  of  Job  was  written.  It  is  now 
certainly  the  most  stupendous  structure  that  has  ever  been  built.  1.  A  sign  of  patient 
toil.  Thousands  of  poor  slaves  must  have  been  sacrificed  to  the  construction  of  such 
a  building.  Theia  is  scarcely  any  limit  to  the  results  that  may  be  produced  by  unre- 
mitting labour.  2.  A  proof  of  concentration  of  effort.  Only  a  Pharaoh  could  build  a 
pyramid  in  those  old  days.  It  needed  the  master  of  a  nation  to  gather  together  the 
materials  and  the  workmen.  The  greatest  works  come  from  combination  of  efforts. 
The  highest  spiritual  efforts  must  not  be  in  isolation.  We  must  learn  to  unite  and 
concentrate  our  spiritual  service. 

III.  Their  dbsolatigit.  These  pyramids  were  "desolate  places"  from  the  first. 
They  were  never  beautiful.  The  dismal  use  to  which  they  were  put  must  always  have 
given  to  them  an  atmosphere  of  gloom.  They  were  and  are  the  most  enduring  structures 
in  the  world ;  yet  their  polished  surface  has  been  stripped  off,  and  on  near  approach  they 
appear  like  massive  ruins.  They  were  designed  to  preserve  the  mummied  remains  of 
their  masters  in  safety;  but  their  secret  chambers  are  emptied,  robbed  by  unknown 
hftuds  of  their  carefully  concealed  contents.  We  cannot  disguise  the  fact  that  death  is 
desolation.  We  may  build  a  splendid  tomb,  but  it  will  only  cover  loathsome  corruption. 
We  cannot  cheat  death  and  decay  by  any  earthly  device.  True  immortality  cannot  be 
found  on  earth.  But  the  Christian  looks  forward  to  a  more  solid  and  enduring  home 
than  any  pyramid — to  "  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  17. — The  peace  of  the  grave.  I.  Trouble  anticipates  the  peace  of  the 
GRAVE.  There  is  a  famous  picture  of  Orcagna's  in  the  Oampo  Santa  at  Florence, 
representing  Death  suddenly  appearing  in  a  motley  crowd  of  men  and  women,  and 
producing  the  most  opposite  effects.  The  rich,  the  young,  and  the  gay  flee  in  terror; 
but  the  poor,  the  miserable,  and  the  sick  stretch  forth  arms  of  longing  welcome  to 
their  deliverer.  When  life  is  despaired  of,  death  is  sweet.  Seeing  that  all  must  die, 
this  is  some  compensation  for  the  inequalities  of  life.  The  sleep  of  the  tired  toiler  is 
deep  and  calm ;  and  the  footsore  pilgrim  on  life's  highway  looks  forward  at  times  tp 
his  final  rest  with  unspeakable  eagerness.  He  can  endure  in  view  of  the  delicious 
repose  which  he  sees  beyond  all  his  sufferings — a  repose,  however,  which  has  no  attrac- 
tion for  the  healthy  and  happy.  It  is  only  a  false  sentimentalism  that  leads  vigorous 
young  people  to  apply  the  well-known  words  of  the  text  to  themselves. 

U.  Wickedness  is  at  the  boot  of  the  trouble  that  makes  the  peace  of  the 
GRAVE  DESIRABLE.  Job's  flrst  thought  is  that  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  in  the 
land  of  the  dead.  There  the  captive  no  longer  hears  the  odious  voice  of  his  oppressor. 
Injustice  and  heartless  selfishness  make  a  hell  of  this  earth,  which  would  be  a  very 
paradise  if  all  men  lived  in  the  atmosphere  of  1  Cor.  xiii.  It  is  horrible  to  think  how 
often  man's  cruelty  to  man  has  turned  the  natural  love  of  life  into  a  yearning  for  the 
release  of  death.  Certainly  this  wrong  cannot  continue  beyond  the  grave.  And  yet 
there  is  a  deeper  and  more  personal  truth.  Our  own  sin  is  our  greatest  trouble.  Too 
often  we  are  ourselves  the  wicked  who  trouble  our  owii  hearts. 

III.  ChRISTIANITT   offers    something    better   than    the   peace    of    the   GRAVE. 

We  must  remember  that  we  have  not  here  a  complete  Divine  oracle  concerning  the 
future.  Job  is  merely  giving  utterance  to  his  despair.  There  is  a  certain  truth  in  what 
he  says,.but  it  is  not  the  whole  truth.  It  is  true  that  "  there  remaineth  a  rest  to  the 
people  of  God  "  (Heb.  iv.  9).  But  Christ  offers  more  than  negative  relief  from  the 
troubles  of  this  life.  He  brings  to  us  eternal  life.  To  the  Christian  death  is  not  sink- 
ing into  silence  for  ever,  but  sleeping  in  Christ  to  awake  in  a  new  resurrection-life. 
Job  looked  forward  to  the  still  grave.    We  can  anticipate  the  blessed  heaven. 

IV.  The  Christian  hope  rests  on  more  than  the  experience  of  death.  To 
die  was  all  that  Job  hoped  for ;  to  die  as  an  embryo  dies  who  has  never  known  life  seems 
to  him  far  better  than  to  drag  out  such  a  weary  existence  as  he  now  sees  before  him. 
Thus  the  mere  dying  and  ceasing  to  be  are  enough.  But  for  the  larger  Christian  hope 
more  is  needed.  Death  is  not  the  door  to  heaven ;  Christ  is  that  Door.  There  is  no 
certain  road  to  peace  through  death;  for  death  may  lead  to  darker  distress  in  a  future 
of  banishment  from  God.  There  is  no  peace  in  the  "outer  darkness,"  but  "weepinc 
and  gnashing  of  teeth."  For  future  rest  even,  and  for  the  life  eternal  which  is  better 
than  rest,  we  have  to  be  bom  from  above,  and  to  be  walking  on  earth  in  the  footsteps 


OH.  III.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  65 

of  Christ.    If  wo  are  doing  this,  it  is  not  for  us  to  long  for  death,  but  to  "  work  while 
it  is  day;  for  the  night  cometh,  wherein  no  man  can  work." — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  19. — Death,  the  kvdler.  No  thought  is  more  hackneyed  than  the  idea  that  the 
present  inequalities  of  life  end  at  death.  Yet  the  practical  significance  of  this  idea 
is  never  fully  realized  and  acted  on.  Let  us  consider  its  lessons.  What  does  death  the 
leveller  teach  xis  ? 

I.  It  teaches  humility.  The  master  of  an  empire  will  soon  own  but  six  feet  of 
BoiL    The  worms  will  shortly  feed  on  one  to  whom  princes  bowed  as  slaves, 

••  O  mighty  Ctesar !  dost  thon  lie  so  low  ? 
Are  all  thy  conquests,  glories,  triumpha,  8poil% 
Shrunk  to  this  little  measure  ? 
But  yesterday  the  word  of  Oasar  might 
Have  stood  against  the  world :  now  lies  he  there^ 
And  none  so  poor  to  do  him  reverence." 

n.  It  warns  against  injustice.  The  oppressor's  sway  is  but  brief.  After  a  few 
swift  years  the  rod  will  fall  from  his  hand,  and  he  will  lie  exactly  on  a  level  with  the 
oppressed.  How  will  he  face  his  victims  when  he  and  they  are  in  equal  state?  Christ 
bids  his  disciples  make  themselves  friends  by  means  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness, 
that  at  the  end  they  may  receive  them  into  everlasting  habitations.  There  is  a  generous 
way  of  using  money  and  influence  that  helps  to  win  true  friends  among  our  brethren. 
They  who  have  acted  in  the  opposite  way  must  expect  a  friendless  future. 

III.  It  BNC0URAGK8  PATIENCE.  The  iujustice  is  but  temporary.  The  hard  scrvitudo 
will  cease  with  death.  The  slave  may  look  forward  to  his  complete  liberation.  Hope 
may  be  the  present  inspiration  of  those  whose  lot  is  the  most  bitter,  if  only  they  can 
be  assured  of  a  portion  in  the  life  beyond  the  grave. 

IV.  It  points  to  higheb  than  barthlt  things  for  true  greatness.  If  there 
were  nothing  above  the  words  of  our  text,  Job's  thought  would  suggest  a  cynical  con- 
tempt for  all  ambition  and  aspiration,  because,  if  all  must  end  at  last  in  the  low  plain 
of  death,  nothing  can  be  of  permanent  value.  But  if  there  is  another  world,  the  collapse 
of  this  world  should  urge  us  the  more  to  store  our  treasures  in  that  heavenl  legion. 
This  does  not  mean  that  we  aio  simply  to  live  in  preparation  for  the  future  beyond 
death  ;  for  we  may  have  heaven  in  the  present  life ;  but  it  means  that  we  should  find 
true  greatness  in  heavenly  thingp,  in  spiritual  grace  and  service. 

V.  It  calls  us  into  true  brotherhood.  Why  should  we  wait  for  death  to 
abolish  the  shams  and  pretensions,  the  unjust  claims  and  cruel  oppressions,  of  earth  ? 
The  large  liberty  of  the  future  should  be  a  type  and  pattern  for  more  fair  dealings  in 
the  present.  Already  we  might  begin  the  process  of  liberation  and  justice  which  death 
will  ultimately  accomplish.  We  need  not  resort  to  the  violent  levelling  processes  of 
the  anarchist.  Mihilism  is  not  Christianity.  But  it  is  incumbent  upon  us  to  do  all 
that  is  in  our  power  to  establish  a  state  of  society  which  recognizes  the  brotherhood  of 
man.— W.  F.  A. 

"Ver.  23. — The  mystery  of  limUationt.  Job  here  refers  to  two  kinds  of  limitations — 
limits  to  knowledge  and  limits  to  power.     Bach  is  mysterious  and  perplexing. 

I.  The  mystery  of  limited  knowledge.  There  are  many  kinds  of  knowledge 
that  are  of  no  immediate  and  practical  importance  to  us.  It  would  satisfy  our  curiosity 
if  an  answer  could  be  found  for  our  inquiries  about  such  subjects ;  but  it  is  by  no  means 
necessary  that  an  answer  should  be  forthcoming,  and  we  can  very  well  be  content  to  go 
on  without  it.  But  the  case  is  very  different  where  we  have  to  do  with  our  own  lives 
and  their  course  of  experience.  Here  the  mystery  is  as  perplexing  and  distressing  as  it 
is  profound  and  insoluble.  This  is  just  Job's  trouble.  His  way  is  hid.  1.  The  mean- 
ing of  the  present  is  not  seen.  The  events  that  happen  are  so  contrary  to  expectation 
and  apparently  to  reason.  Changes  seem  to  happen  like  the  aimless  shiftings  of  a 
kaleidoscope.  Useless  troubles  appear  to  fall  upon  us.  Undeserved  calamities  seem  to 
assail  us.  2.  The  prospect  of  thefutwre  is  ohseure.  If  we  could  discern  a  happy  issue 
out  of  our  troubles,  they  might  be  endured  with  equanimity.  But  perhaps,  as  in  Job's 
case,  it  is  often  impossible  to  see  whither  they  are  leading  us.  There  is  no  bow  in  the 
cloud.    3.  The  diseCpUne  of  life  i*  condueted  in  mystery.    Assuredly  there  is  a  purpose 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  in.  1—26. 


in  the  mystery,  though  we  cannot  see  it.  It  would  be  bad  for  us  to  know  all.  Job 
could  not  have  proved  his  disinterested  devotion  so  effectively  as  he  did  prove  it  if  he 
had  known  that  the  eye  of  the  universe  was  on  Satan's  experiment  of  which  he  was 
the  subject.  God  trains  us  in  faith  by  means  of  obscurity.  In  the  mean  time  he  does 
not  leave  us.  Our  way  may  be  hidden,  but  it  is  known  to  God.  He  is  able  to  lead 
■us  safely  over  the  darkest  paths. 

II.  The  mtstbbt  op  limited  PovraB.  1.  Suman  faculties  are  limited.  They 
must  be,  or  we  should  be  infinite  beings,  i.e.  we  should  be  as  God.  But  if  there  are 
necessarily  some  bounds  to  our  power,  we  have  only  a  question  of  degree  when  we  are  con- 
sidering where  this  boundary  is  set.  Still,  the  weak  man  wonders  why  he  is  not  strong. 
Why  should  not  the  pigmy  be  a  giant  ?  Why  should  not  the  commonplace  man  have 
the  intellect  of  a  Plato?  Why  cramp  him  with  a  small  mind?  This  is  all  mysterious, 
as  it  seems  to  bring  injustice.  But  God  only  expects  according  to  what  is  given,  and 
surely  there  are  some  who  cannot  be  trusted  with  the  powers  which  others  are  capable 
of  using.  2.  Human  circumstances  are  limited.  A  man  has  great  powers ;  but  he  is 
hedged  in.  How  hard  this  seems !  If  only  he  were  at  liberty  what  grand  feats  would 
he  perform !  So  the  poor  man  thinks  he  would  do  wonders  if  he  were  but  a  millionaire. 
But  we  have  all  to  learn  that  "  he  shall  choose  our  inheritance  for  us,"  because  he 
knows  us  better  than  we  know  ourselves.  Meanwhile  the  very  hedge  has  its  good 
effect.  Satan  had  complained  that  God  had  set  a  hedge  about  Job  (ch.  i.  10)  for  pro- 
tection. Job  apparently  sees  another  hedge,  and  thinks  it  a  hindrance.  But  may  not  the 
hindrance  be  a  protection  ?  The  river  runs  the  swifter  when  its  channel  is  narrowed. 
There  is  a  gathering  of  strength  from  the  concentration  of  effort  that  limited  circum- 
stances require.  There  is  an  inspiration  in  difficulty.  If  we  all  haJ  perfect  hberty  and 
power,  we  should  lose  the  bracing  discipline  which  now  helps  to  train  us.  Finally, 
observe,  no  hedge  set  up  by  God  can  keep  us  from  our  true  mission  or  our  rightful 
heritage.  Job  did  not  fail,  but,  on  the  contrary,  did  his  great  life's  work  the  better 
through  the  mysterious  cramping  of  his  circumstances. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  25,  26. — Fea/rs  confirmed  ly  facts.  Job  complained  that  he  was  not  foolishly 
confident  in  his  prosperity,  and  so  courting  a  reverse  of  fortune  by  pride  and  presump- 
tion. On  the  contrary,  he  was  anticipating  the  possibility  of  evil  and  walking  in  fear. 
His  action,  as  it  appears  in  the'  opening  verses  of  the  book,  shows  us  a  man  of  an 
anxious  temperament  (ch.  i.  5).  He  thinks  it  hard  that  trouble  should  come  to  him 
who  had  feared  it.  This  may  be  unreasonable  in  Job ;  but  it  is  quite  natural,  and  not 
at  all  inuxplicable.  Inconsistent  as  it  may  seem,  our  very  anticipation  of  evil  is 
unconsciously  taken  as  a  sort  of  insurance  against  it.  Because  we  are  prepared  to 
expect  it  we  somehow  come  to  think  that  we  should  not  receive  it.  Our  humility, 
foresight,  and  apprehension  are  unconsciously  treated  as  making  up  a  sort  of  compensa- 
tion which  shall  buy  off  the  impending  evil.  When  they  turn  out  to  be  nothing  of 
the  kind  we  are  sadly  disappointed. 

I.  OuE  WORST  PEAES  MAT  BE  REALIZED.  1.  On  earth.  Anxious  people  are  not 
ipso  facto  saved  from  trouble.  The  world  does  contain  great  evils.  The  ills  of  life  are 
not  confined  to  tlie  imagination  of  the  despondent.  They  are  seen  in  plain  prosaic 
facts.  2.  After  death.  The  fear  of  death  will  not  save  from  death,  nor  will  the  fear 
of  hell  save  from  hell.  A  person  may  have  very  dark  views  of  his  impending  fate,  and, 
if  he  deserves  it,  he  may  find  that  it  is  quite  equal  to  his  fears.  Nothing  can  be  more 
disastrous  than  the  notion  that  the  expectation  of  future  punishment  is  only  the  dream 
of  a  scared  conscience.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap  "  is  a  great 
fundamental  law  of  nature. 

II.  The  eight  way  to  dispel  pbabs  is  to  remove  theib  gboonds.  To  soothe 
fears  without  touching  the  facts  which  justify  them  is  the  height  of  folly.  The  facts 
remain,  however  much  we  may  be  hoodwinked  into  disregarding  them.  Salvation  is 
not  to  be  got  by  means  of  any  manipulation  of  the  sinner's  fears.  Sin  is  the  funda- 
mental cause  of  all  ruin,  and  the  justification  of  men's  worst  fears.  The  one  necessity 
is  to  remove  the  sin ;  then  the  fears  will  vanish  of  their  own  accord.  The  sickening 
letters  from  condemned  criminals,  who  are  quite  sure  that  they  are  going  strai-rht  from 
the  gallows  to  heaven,  although  they  give  no  sign  of  genuine  penitence  for  sin,  reveal 
a  very  unwholesome  style  of  religious  instruction.     Surely  the  chief  business  of  i 


PH.  IT.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


87 


Christian  teacher  is  not  to  lull  the  fears  of  an  alarmed  conscience,  and  induce  a  condition 
of  placid  resignation.  Hypnotism  would  do  this  more  effectively ;  hut  to  be  hypnotized 
into  placidity  is  not  to  he  saved.  If,  however,  men  learn  to  confess  tlieir  sins,  and  to 
loathe  themselves  on  account  of  those  sins,  then  indeed  the  gospel  of  Christ  assures 
perfect  redemption  for  all  who  turn  to  him  in  faith.  When  this  is  the  soul's 
experience  fear  may  be  banished.  Trouble,  indeed,  may  come.  But  it  is  useless  to 
anticipate  it.  It  is  better  to  take  our  Lord's  advice,  and  "  be  not  anxious  for  the 
morrow." — W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  rv. 


Job  having  ended  his  complaint,  Eliphaz 
the  Temanite,  the  first-named  of  his  three 
friends  (ch.  ii.  11),  and  perhaps  the  eldest 
of  them,  takes  the  word,  and  endeavours  to 
answer  him.  After  a  brief  apology  for  ven- 
turing to  speak  at  all  (ver.  2),  he  plunges 
into  the  controversy.  Job  has  assumed  that 
he  is  wholly  guiltless  of  having  given  any 
cause  for  God  to  a£9ict  him.  Eliphaz  lays 
it  down  in  the  most  positive  terms  (vers.  7, 
8)  that  the  innocent  never  suffer,  only  the 
wicked  are  afflicted.  He  then  passes  on  to 
the  description  of  a  vision  which  has  ap- 
peared to  him  (vers.  12 — 21),  from  which 
he  has  learnt  the  lesson  that  men  must 
not  presume  to  be  "more  wise  than  their 
Maker." 

Ver.  1. — Then  Eliphaz  the  Temanite  an- 
swered and  said  (see  the  comment  on  ch. 
ii.  11). 

Ver.  2. — If  we  assay  to  oommune  with 
thee,  wilt  thou  he  grieved  ?  rather,  If  one 
assay  a  word  against  thee,  wilt  thou  be 
angry  f  Eliphaz  feels  that  what  he  is  about 
to  say  will  be  unwelcome,  and,  as  it  were, 
apologizes  beforehand.  Surely  Job  will  not 
be  angry  if  a  friend  just  ventures  a  word. 
But  who  can  withhold  himself  from  speak- 
ing! Let  Job  be  angry  or  not,  Eliphaz 
must  speak.  It  is  impossible  to  hear  such 
words  as  Job  has  uttered,  and  yet  keep 
silence.  God's  wisdom  and  justice  have 
been  impugned,  and  must  be  vindicated. 

Ver.  3. — Behold,  thou  hast  instructed 
many;  or,  eorrected  many.  When  others 
have  been  afflicted  and  murmured,  thou 
hast  corrected  them,  and  shown  them  that 
they  were  suffering  only  what  they  de- 
served to  suffer.  In  so  doing,  thou  hast 
strengthened  the  weak  hands ;  "  given 
moral  strength,"  ».«.,  "to  those  who  were 
morally  weak,"  upheld  them,  saved  them 
from  impatient  words  and  hard  thoughts 
of  God. 

Yer.  4. — ^Thy  words  have  upholden  him 
ibaX  was  falling.    Many  a  man,  just  on  the 


point  of  falling,  has  been  stopped  in  time 

by  thy  wise  words  and  good  advice  to  liim. 
This  is  a  strong  testimony  to  Job's  kindli- 
ness of  heart,  and  active  sympathy  with 
sufferers  during  the  period  of  his  prosperity. 
And  thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble 
knees  ;  literally,  the  bowing  knees  —  those 
that  were  just  on  the  point  of  collapsing 
anri  giving  way  through  exhaustion  or 
feebleness  (comp.  Isa.  xxxv.  3). 

Ver.  5. — But  now  it  is  come  upon  thee, 
and  thou  faintest.  Now  it  is  thy  turn — 
calamity  lias  come  upon  thee,  and  all  that 
thou  wert  wont  to  say  to  others  is  forgotten. 
The  wise  physician  cannot  heal  liimself. 
Instead  of  receiving  thy  chastisement  in  a 
right  spirit, thou  "faintest,"  or  rather,  "thou 
art  angry,  art  offended  " — as  the  same  verb 
is  also  to  be  translated  in  the  second  verse. 
There  is  a  tone  of  sarcasm  about  these 
remarks,  which  implies  a  certain  hardness 
and  want  of  real  affection  in  the  speaker, 
and  which  cannot  but  have  been  perceived 
by  Job,  and  have  detracted  from  the  force 
of  what  Eliphaz  urged.  If  one  has  to 
rebuke  a  friend,  it  should  be  done  with 
great  delicajy.  Our  "  precious  balms " 
should  not  be  allowed  to  "  break  his  head  " 
(Ps.  cxli.  6).  It  toucheth  thee,  and  thou 
art  troubled;  or,  perplexed — "confounded." 

Ver.  6. — Is  not  this  thy  fear,  thy  con- 
fidence, thy  hope,  and  the  uprightness  of 
thy  ways?  Translate,  with  the  Revised 
Version,  Is  not  thy  fear  of  God  thy  con- 
fidence, and  thy  hope  the  integrity  of  thy 
ways  1  The  verse  is  composed,  as  usual, 
of  two  clauses,  balancing  each  other ;  and 
the  meaning  seems  to  be  that,  if  Job  is  as 
convinced  of  his  piety  and  uprightness  as  he 
professes  to  be,  he  ought  still  to  maintain 
confidence  in  God,  and  a  full  expectation  of 
deliverance  from  his  troubles.  If  he  does 
not,  what  is  the  natural  inference  ?  Surely, 
that  he  is  not  so  confident  of  his  innocence 
as  he  professes  to  be. 

Ver.  7. — Kememher,  I  pray  thee,  who  ever 
perished,  being  innocent  I  The  heart  of  the 
matter  is  now  approached.  Job  is  called 
upon  to  "remember"  the  long- established 
moral  axiom,  that  only  evil-doing  bringi 
down  upon  men  calamities,  and  that  there- 
fore, where  calamities  fail,  there  must  be 


68 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB, 


[oh.  it.  1—21. 


precedent  wickedness.  If  he  does  not  admit 
this,  he  is  challenged  to  bring  forward  ex- 
amples, or  even  a  single  example,  of  suffer- 
ing innocence.  If  he  does  admit  it,  he  is 
left  to  apply  the  axiom  to  himself.  Or 
where  were  the  righteons  cut  off?  Was 
the  example  of  "righteous  Abel"  (Matt, 
xxiii.  35)  unknown  to  lOlipbaz?  And  Imd 
he  really  never  seen  that  noblest  of  all 
sights,  the  good  man  struggling  with  adver- 
sity? One  would  imagine  it  impossible 
to  attain  old  age,  in  the  world  wherein  we 
live,  without  becoming  convinced  by  our 
own  observation  that  good  and  evil,  pros- 
perity and  adversity,  are  not  distributed  in 
this  life  according  to  moral  desert ;  but  a 
preconceived  notion  of  what  ought  to  have 
been  seems  here,  as  elsewhere  so  often  in 
the  field  of  speculation,  to  have  blinded  men 
to  the  actual  facts  of  the  case,  and  driven 
them  to  invent  explanations  of  the  facts, 
which  militated  against  their  theories,  of 
the  most  absurdly  artificial  character.  To 
account  for  the  sufferings  of  the  rigliteous, 
the  explanation  of  "  secret  sins ''  was  intro- 
duced, and  it  was  argnerl  ihat,  where 
affliction  seemed  to  fall  on  Ihc  good  man, 
his  goodness  was  not  real  goodness — it  was 
a  counterfeit,  a  sham — the  fabric  of  moral 
excellence,  so  fair  to  view,  was  honey- 
combed by  secret  vices,  to  which  the  seem- 
ingly good  man  was  a  prey.  Of  course,  if 
the  afflictions  were  abnormal,  extraordinary, 
then  the  secret  sins  must  be  of  a  moat 
heinous  and  horrible  kind  to  deserve  such 
a  terrible  rutribution.  This  is  what  Eliphaz 
hints  to  be  the  solution  in  Job's  case.  God 
has  seen  his  secret  sins — he  has  "  set  them 
in  the  light  of  his  countenance  "  (Ps.  xc.  8) 
— ;ind  is  punishing  them  openly.  Job's 
duty  is  to  bumble  himself  before  Gorl,  to 
confess,  repent,  and  amend.  Then,  and 
then  only,  may  he  hope  that  God  will 
remove  his  hand,  and  put  an  end  to  his 
■iifferings. 

Ver.  8. — Even  as  I  have  seen;  rather, 
according  at  1  have  teen — so  far,  tb&t  is,  as 
my  observation  goes  (see  the  Revised  Ver- 
sion, which  is  supported  by  Professor  Lee 
and  Canon  Cook).  They  that  plough  iniiiuity, 
and  sow  wickedness,  reap  the  same  (comp. 
Prov.  xxii.  8 ;  Hos.  viii.  7 ;  x.  13 ;  Gal.  vi. 
7, 8).  The  words  translated  "  iniquity  "  and 
"wickedness"  express  in  the  original  both 
moral  tind  physical  evil.  Men  sow  the  one 
and  reap  the  other.  Eliphaz  extends  this 
general  rule  into  a  universal  law,  or,  at  any 
rale,  declares  that  he  has  never  known  an 
exception.  He  has  not,  therefore,  been 
griuved  and  perplexed,  like  David,  by 
"  seeing  the  ungodly  in  such  prosperity " 
(Ps.  Ixxiii.  3).  He  would  seem  not  to  have 
been  a  man  of  very  keen  observation. 

Ver.  9 By  the  blast  of  God  they  perish ; 


rather,  6y  the  breath  of  Ood,  as  in  oh.  xxxvii 
10.  The  word  used  (npB'})  means  always, 
as  Professor  Lee  observes, "  a  slight  or  gentle 
breathing."  The  slightest  breath  of  God's 
displeasure  is  enough  to  destroy  those  against 
whom  it  is  directed.  And  by  the  breath 
of  his  nostrils  are  they  consumed.  Here 
"  blast "  would  be  better  than  "  breath,"  for 
nn  is  a  stronger  word  than  not!':.  Similarly, 
fc'  is  a  stronger  word  than  n3«'.  The 
breath  kills,  the  blast  utterly  consumes, 
transgressors. 

Ver.  10. — The  roaring  of  the  lion,  and  th« 
voice  of  the  fierce  lion,  and  the  teeth  of  the 
young  lions,  are  broken.  Wicked  men, 
especially  oppressors,  are  often  compared  to 
lions  in  Scripture  (see  Ps.  vii.  2 ;  x.  9 ;  xvii. 
12,  etc.;  Ezek.  six.  3,5;  Nah.  ii.  12;  Zeph. 
iii.  3,  etc.).  The  meaning  of  Eliphaz  is 
that,  within  his  experience,  all  classes  of 
wicked  men,  young,  or  old,  or  middle-aged, 
weak  or  strong,  have  received  in  this  life 
the  reward  of  their  iniquity.  However 
fiercely  they  might  roar,  however  greedily 
they  might  devour,  their  roaring  has  died 
away,  their  teeth  have  been  broken  in  their 
mouths,  vengeance  has  lighted  on  them  in 
some  shape  or  other;  they  have  paid  the 
penalty  of  their  transgressions.  Five  classes 
of  lions  seem  to  be  spoken  of  in  this  and 
the  ibllovving  verses:  (1)  the  whelp  (ver. 
11);  (2)  the  half-grown  lion,  just  able  to 
make  its  voice  heard"  (3)  the  young  'ull- 
grown  lion  (cepMr};  (4)  the  lion  in  full 
maturity  (ariyeJi);  and  (5)  the  old  lion  which 
is  growing  decrepit  (laish)  To  these  is 
joined  (ver.  11)  labi,  "  the  lioness."  Lions 
are  still  frequent  in  the  Mesopotamian 
region  ('  Ancient  Monaichies,'  vol.  i.  pp  39, 
221),  though  no  longer  found  in  Palestine, 
nor  in  Arabia. 

Ver.  11. — ^The  old  lion  perisheth  for  lack 
of  prey.  The  human  counterpart  of  the 
"old  lion"  is  the  oppressor  whose  strength 
and  cunning  begin  to  fail  him,  who  can  no 
longer  carry  things  with  a  high  hand,  enforce 
his  will  on  men  by  bluster  and  threats,  or 
even  set  traps  for  them  so  skilfully  that 
they  blindly  walk  into  them.  Political 
charlatans  whose  rSle  is  played  out,  bullies 
whose  nerve  is  beginning  to  fail,  card- 
sharpers  whose  manual  dexterity  has  de- 
serted them,  come  under  this  category.  And 
the  stout  lion's  whelps;  rather,  the  whelps 
of  the  lioness  (see  the  Revised  Version).  Are 
scattered  abroad.  Even  the  seed  of  ill-doers 
suffer.  They  are  involved  in  their  parents' 
punishment  (see  Exod.  xx.  5).  Eliphaz 
darkly  hints  that  Job  mny  liavo  been  among 
the  class  of  oppressors,  or  (at  any  rate)  of 
transgressors,  and  that  the  untimely  fate  of 
his  children  may  have  been  the  oousequenM 
of  his  evil-doinga. 


OH.  IT.  1 — 21.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


69 


Vers.  12— 21.— BHphaz  proceeds  to  nar- 
rate a  spiritual  experience  of  a  very  strange 
and  striking  character.  It  was  niglit,  and 
he  had  fallen  asleep,  when  suddenly  he  was, 
or  seemed  to  himself  to  be,  awake.  A 
horrible  fear  oame  over  him,  and  all' his 
limbs  trembled  and  quaked.  Then  a  spirit 
soemed  to  pass  before  his  face,  while  every 
hair  on  his  body  rose  up  and  stiffened  with 
horror.  It  did  not  simply  pass  across  him, 
but  stood  still,  in  a  formless  form,  which 
he  could  see  but  not  clearly  distinguish. 
There  was  a  deep  hush.  Then  out  of  the 
silence  there  seemed  to  come  a  voice,  a 
whisper,  which  articulated  solemn  words. 
"  Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just  than  Gkid? 
Shall  a  man,"  etc.  ?  Supernatural  visitations 
were  vouchsafed  by  God  to  many  besides 
the  chosen  people — to  Laban,  when  he  pur- 
sued Jacob  (Gen.  xsxi.  24),  to  Abimelech 
(Gen.  XX.  6),  to  the  Pharaoh  of  the  time  of 
Joseph  (Gen.  xli.  1 — ^7),  to  his  chief  butler 
(Gen.  xl.  9—11),  and  his  chief  baker  (Gen. 
xl.  16,  17),  to  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor 
(Numb.  xxii.  12,20;  xxiii.  5—10,  16—24; 
ixiv.  8—9,  15—24),  to  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Dan.  ii.  28—35;  iv.  1—32),  and  others. 
The  method  and  manner  of  these  visitations 
raise  a  multitude  of  questions  which  it  is 
impossible  to  answer,  but  are  convincing 
evidence  to  all  who  believe  Scripture  to  be 
true,  that  communications  can  pass  between 
the  spiritual  and  material  worlds  of  a 
strange  and  mysterious  character.  The 
communication  to  Eliphaz  may  have  been  a 
mere  vision,  impressed  upon  his  mind  in 
sleep,  or  it  may  have  been  actually  brought 
to  him  by  a  spiritual  messenger,  whom  he 
could  dimly  see,  and  whose  voice  he  was 
privileged  to  hear.  Modem  paendo-soience 
pronounces  such  seeing  and  hearing  to  be 
impossible.  But  poets  are  often  clearer- 
sighted  than  scientists,  and  Shakespeare 
utters  a  pregnant  truth  when  he  says — 

"  There  are  more  tilings  in  heaven  and  eartli, 
Horatio, 
Than  are  dreamt  of  in  your  philosophy." 

Ver.  12.— Now  a  thing  was  secretly 
brought  to  me ;  rather,  a  word  (or,  a  message) 
teas  brought  to  me  stealtMly.  And  mine  ear 
received  a  little  thereof;  rather,  a  whisper 
Otereof  (see  the  Revised  Version,  and  Comp. 
ch.  xxvi.  14,  and  the  Vulgate,  which  gives 
Bustirrvs).     As  the  form  of  the  visiou  was 


not  distinct  to  Eliphaz's  eyes  (ver.  16),  s« 
neither  were  the  words  which  were  uttered 
distinct  to  his  ears.  He  thinks  himself 
able,  however,  to  give  the  sense  of  them 
(see  vers.  17 — 21). 

Ver.  13. — la  thoughts  from  the  visions  of 
the  night;  literally,  in  tJie  perplexities  oj 
tlie  visions  of  night ;  i.e.  "  in  that  perplexing 
time  when — ^how,  they  know  not — visions 
come  to  men."  The  word  translated 
"thoughts"  occurs  only  here  and  in  ch. 
XX.  2.  When  deep  sleep  falleth  on  men. 
Something  more  than  ordinary  sleep  seems 
to  be  meant — something  more  approacliing 
to  what  we  call  "trance"  (comp.  Gen  if 
21;  XV.  12;  1  Sam.  xxvi.  12,  where  the 
same  word  is  used). 

Ver.  14. — S'ear  came  upon  me,  and  trem- 
bling j  compare  the  "horror  of  great  dark- 
ness "  which  fell  upon  Abraham  (Gen.  xv. 
12).  Our  nature  shrinks  from  direct  contact 
with  the  spiritual  world,  and  our  earthly 
frame  shudders  at  the  unearthly  presence. 
Which  made  the  multitude  of  my  bones  to 
shake ;  or,  wluch  made  my  bones  greally  to 
shake  (so  the  LXX.,  Professor  Lee,  and 
others). 

Ver.  15. — Then  a  spirit  passed  before  my 
face.  It  has  been  argued  (Bosenmuller) 
that  "  a  breath  of  air,"  and  not  "  a  spirit," 
is  intended;  but,  in  tbat  case,  how  are  we 
to  understand  the  expressions  in  the  fol- 
lowing- verse :  "  it  stood  still,"  "  the  form 
thereof,"  "an  image"?  A  breath  of  air, 
the  very  essence  of  which  is  to  be  in  motion, 
cannot  stand  still,  nor  has  it  any  "form," 
"appearance,"  or  "image."  Granted  that 
the  Hebrew  ruakh  (nn)  may  mean — like 
the  Greek  iryeS/ia,  and  the  Latin  spirilus^ 
either  an  actual  spirit,  or  a  breath,  a  wind, 
it  follows  that,  in  every  place  where  it  oc- 
curs, we  mast  judge  by  the  context  which  is 
meant.  Here  certainly  the  context  points 
to  an  actual  living  spirit,  as  what  EUphaz 
intended.  Whether  a  spirit  really  appeared 
to  him  is  a  separate  question.  The  whole 
may  have  been  a  vision ;  but  certainly  the 
impression  left  on  Eliphaz  was  that  he 
had  had  a  communication  (totu  the  spirit- 
world.  The  hair  of  my  flesh  stood  up.  Not 
the  hair  of  his  head  only,  but  every  hair  on 
his  whole  body,  stiffened,  bristled,  and  rose 
up  on  end  in  horror  (see  the  comment  ou 
ver.  14). 

Ver.  16. — It  stood  still,  but  I  could  not 
discern  the  form  thereof.  Canon  Cook 
quotes,  very  appositely,  Milton's  representa- 
tion of  Death  as  a  fearful  shape, 

"If  shape  it  could  be  called  that  shape 
had  none 
Distinguishable  in  member,  jsint,  or  lim)>, 
Or  substance  might  be  called  that-luadow 
seemed," 


70 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOR 


[CH.  rr.  1—21. 


An  image  was  before  mine  eyes ;  or,  an  ap- 
pearance (LXX.,  /iop(jyli).  Tliere  was  silence  j 
or,  a  7i«sA— "status  aeris  nuUo  motu  tur- 
bati,  et  tianquillissimus  "  (Schultens).  And 
I  heard  a  voice,  saying.  After  a  while  the 
silence  was  broken  by  a  voice,  which  whis- 
pered in  Eliphaz's  ear  (comp.  ver.  12). 

Ver.  17. — ShaU  mortal  man  he  more  just 
than  God!  Is  it  to  be  supposed  that  the 
ways  of  God  can  be  rightly  criticized  and 
condemned  by  man  ?  Surely  not ;  for  then 
man  must  be  more  penetrated  with  the 
spirit  of  justice  tlian  the  Almighty.  If  our 
thoughts  are  not  as  God's  thoughts,  it  must 
be  our  tlioughts  that  are  wrong.  Shall  a 
man  be  more  pore  than  his  Kaker  1  Equally 
impoasible.  God  alone  is  absolutely  pure. 
The  best  man  must  be  conscious  to  himself, 
as  Isaiah  was  (Isa.  vi.  5),  of  uncleanness. 

Ver.  18. — Behold,  he  put  no  trust  in  his 
servants  ;  rather,  he  putteOi  no  trust,  or  he 
putteth  not  trust.  The  "  servants  "  intended 
are  those  that  minister  to  liim  directly  in 
heaven,  the  members  of  the  angelic  host, 
as  appears  from  the  parallelism  of  the  other 
clause  of  the  verse.  Even  in  them  God  does 
not  trust  implicitly,  since  he  knows  that 
they  are  frail  and  fallible,  liable  to  err,  etc., 
only  kept  Irom  sin  by  his  own  sustaining 
and  assisting  grace  (comp.  ch.  xv.  15,  where 
Eliphaz  expresses  the  same  belief  in  his 
own  person).  And  his  angels  he  charged 
with  folly;  rather,  chargeth.  The  exact 
meaning  of  the  word  translated  "  folly  "  ia 
uncertain,  since  the  word  does  not  occur 
elsewhere.  The  LXX.  renders  by  (rKoKi6i> 
Ti,  "  crookedness ; "  Bwald,  Dillmann,  and 
others,  by  "  error."  The  teaching  clearly 
is  that  the  angels  are  not  perfect— the 
highest  angelic  excellence  falls  infinitely 
sliort  of  God's  perfectness.  Even  angels, 
therefore,  would  be  incompetent  judges  of 
God's  doings. 

"Ver.  19.~How  much  less  in  them  that 
dwell  in  houses  of  clay !  rather,  how  much 
more  doth  lie  not  put  trust  in  them  that  in- 
habit Iwusee  of  eUiyl  i.e.  "aarthly  bodies," 
bodies  made  out  of  the  dust  of  the  ground 
(Gen.  ii.  7;  comp.  ch.  xixiii.  6).    Whose 


foundation  is  in  the  dust ;  ije. "  whose  origin 
was  the  dust  of  the  ground,"  wliioli  were 
formed  from  it  and  must  return  to  it,  ac- 
cording to  the  words  of  Gen.  iii.  19,  "Dust 
thou  art,  and  unto  dust  thou  must  return." 
Wliich  are  crushed  before  the  moth.  This  ig 
somewliat  obscure.  It  may  mean, "  which  are 
so  fragile  that  a  moth,  a  fly,  or  other  weak 
creature  may  destroy  them,"  or  "  which  are 
crushed  with  the  same  ease  with  which  a 
moth  is  crushed  and  destroyed." 

Ver.  20. — They  are  destroyed  from  morn- 
ing to  evening.  Human  bodies  undergo  a 
continuous  destiuction.  From  the  moment 
that  we  arc  born  we  begin  to  die.  Decay  of 
powers  is  coeval  with  their  first  exercise. 
Our  insidious  foe,  Death,  marks  us  as  his 
own  from  the  very  first  breath  that  we 
draw.  Our  bodies  are  machines  wound  up 
to  go  for  a  certain  time.  The  moment  that 
we  begin  to  use  them  we  begin  to  wear  them 
out.  They  perish  for  ever.  The  final  result 
is  that  our  "  houses  of  clay  "  perish,  crumble 
to  dust,  disappear,  and  come  to  nothing. 
They  "perish  for  ever,"  says  Eliphaz,  re- 
peating what  he  believed  the  spirit  of  ver. 
15  to  have  said  to  him;  but  it  is  not  clear 
that  lie  understood  more  by  this  than  that 
they  perish  and  disappear  for  ever,  so  far 
as  this  life  and  this  world  are  concerned. 
Without  any  regarding  it.  No  one  is  sur- 
prised or  thinks  it  hard.  It  is  the  lot  of 
man,  and  every  one's  mind  is  prepared  for  it. 

Ver.  21. — Doth  not  their  excellency  which 
is  in  them  go  away  %  "  Their  excellency  " 
(Din')  would  seem  to  mean  that  which  is 
highest  in  them — their  spirit,  or  gouL  It 
does  not  make  much  difference  if  we  trans- 
late, witli  the  Old  Testament  Kevisers  "  their 
tent-cord,"  since  that  would  be  merely  a 
metaphor  for  the  soul,  which  sustains  tha 
body  as  the  tent-cord  does  the  tent.  What 
deserves  especial  remark  is  that  the  "ex- 
cellency "  does  not  perish ;  it  goes  away, 
departs,  or  is  removed.  They  die,  even 
without  wisdom;  literally,  not  in  loisdom; 
i.e.  not  having  learnt  in  the  whole  course 
of  their  lives  that  true  wisdom  which  their 
life-trials  were  intended  to  teach  them. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Eliphaz  to  Job :  the  opening  of  the  second  contro-versy :  1.  The  relation 
of  suffering  to  sin.  I.  A  courteous  exordium.  Eliphaz,  the  oldest  and  wisest  of  the 
friends,  adopts  an  apologetic  strain  in  replying  to  Job's  imprecation,  representing  the 
task  assumed  by  him  as :  1.  Painful  to  Job  ;  which  it  certainly  was.  In  circumstances 
even  the  must  favourable,  it  requires  no  little  grace  to  receive  admonition  with  equa- 
nimity ;  not  to  speak  of  counting  it  a  kindness  and  esteeming  it  an  excellent  oil  (Ps. 
cxli.  6),  and  embracing  its  dispenser  with  affection  (Prov.  ix.  8) ;  and  much  more  when 
that  admonition  is  not  only  felt  to  be  undeserved,  but  spoken  at  a  time  when  the  soul, 
crushed  beneath  the  burden  of  its  misery,  wants  sympathy  rather  than  reproof,  and  when, 
besides,  the  reproof  is  unfeeling  in  its  tone  and  somewhat  flavoured  with  self-complace&cy 


CH.IV.  1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  71 

on  the  part  of  the  giver.  If  to  hear  and  accept  rebuke  be  a  sign  of  grace  (Prov.  xv.  5) 
and  a  pathway  to  wisdom  (Prov.  xv.  32)  and  honour  (Prov.  Xiii.  18),  it  is  much  more 
a  mark  of  tender  piety  and  fine  Christian  sagacity  to  be  able  to  speak  the  truth  iu  love 
(Bph.  iv.  15),  and  to  rebuke  with  long-suffering  (2  'i'im.  iv.  2).  Eeproof  that  lacerates 
seldom  profits.  2.  Distasteful  to  himself  {EUphaz).  Charity  dictates  that  the  best 
construction,  rather  than  the  worst,  should  be  put  upon  the  conduct  of  the  Temanite. 
Hence,  instead  of  pronouncing  his  language  coarse,  haughty,  arrogant,  and  violent,  we 
regard  it,  especially  in  the  introduction,  as  characterized  by  delicacy  and  consideration, 
hinting,  as  it  manifestly  does,  that  Blipha*  had  entered  on  the  olBce  of  Mentor  to  his 
friend  with  reluctance;  and  certainly  an  ofSce  so  fitted  to  give  pain,  and  so  apt  to 
produce  harmful  results,  should  never  be  engaged  in  except  with  palpable  tokens  of 
grief.  3.  Required  h/  conscience.  "  But  who  can  withhold  himself  from  speaking  ?  " 
The  impulse  which  Eliphaz  confessed  was  not  the  kindling  heat  of  poetic  fire,  but  the 
moral  constraint  of  duty.  (1)  Duty  to  God  (Lev.  six.  17).  A  safe  rule  never  to  dis- 
tribute censure  except  when  so  impelled.  Only  "compulsion  from  our  own  spirit 
should  not  be  mistaken  for  impulsion  from  God's."  Men  who  never  speak  but  under 
a  sense  of  duty,  seldom  speak  unkindly  or  in  vain.  (2)  Duty  to  Job  (Prov.  xxvii.  5). 
Unless  satisfied  of  our  own  sincerity  in  aiming  at  the  good  of  those  we  censure,  it  ig 
better  to  be  silent  j  nay,  it  is  wrong  to  speak.  (3)  Duty  to  himself  (Prov.  xxviii.  23). 
The  light  possessed  by  Eliphaz  would  have  made  silence  on  his  pait  both  a  gross 
dereliction  of  duty  and  an  indirect  participation  iu  the  sin  of  Job.  If,  therefore,  he 
would  keep  his  conscience  clean,  he  must  "  assay  to  commune  with  his  friend." 

II.  A  GENEROUS  COMMENDATION.  The  piety  of  Job  was  acknowledged  by  Eliphaz 
to  have  been :  1.  Oonspiauoua.  "  Behold ! "  Eminent  piety  can  usually  speak  for  itself, 
always  secure  attention,  and  seldom  fails  to  elicit  commendation.  Even  so  should 
Christians  let  their  light  shine  (Matt.  v.  16 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  12).  2.  Philanthropic.  Job's 
piety  was  not  simply  intellectual  and  emotional,  but  also  practical,  aiming  at  the 
gijod  of  others.  Like  the  great  Exemplar  (Matt,  xx.  28 ;  Acts  x.  38),  of  whom  in 
some  respects  he  was  a  type,  this  Arabian  patriarch  went  about  doing  good  (ch.  xxix. 
12 — 17).  So  Christ  instructs  his  followers  to  do  (Matt.  x.  42 ;  Luke  x.  37 ;  John  xiv. 
15 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  1 ;  Gal.  v.  14 ;  Col.  iii.  12 — 14).  Where  works  of  faith  and  labours  of 
love  are  entirely  absent,  there  is  ground  to  suspect  that  genuine  religion  is  not  present 
(Gal.  V.  22 ;  Jas.  i.  27 ;  1  John  iii.  17).  3.  Manifold.  (1)  Instructing  the  ignorant 
(oh.  xxix.  21 — 23),  giving  counsel  as  a  prince  or  magistrate  in  the  gate,  or  as  a  friend 
and  leader  supplying  directions  for  daily  duty.  (2)  Correcting  the  way  ward— according 
to  another  translation — by  either  the  infliction  of  penalties  for  wrong-doing  or  the 
administration  of  judicial  reprimand.  (3)  Sustaining  the  weak,  upholding  the  sinking 
and  fainting  heart  by  kindly  sympathy,  and  strengthening  the  feeble  knees  and  hands 
by-  helpful  succour.  4.  Eabitaal.  The  tenses  of  the  verbs  indicate  customary  actions 
and  lifelong  habits.  Isolated  good  deeds  do  not  necessarily  proceed  from  gracious 
hearts ;  there  can  be  no  better  evidence  of  saintship  than  a  lifetime  of  holy  walking. 

IIL  A  DELICATE  INSINUATION.  1.  Uiat  Job's  piety  had  failed  where  it  ought  to  have 
stood.  "  But  now  it  is  come  upon  thee  and,  thou  faintest ;  it  toucheth  thee,  and  thou 
art  troubled"  (ver.  5).  Either  (1)  an  expression  of  sincere  astonishment  that  Job,  who 
had  so  often  and  so  efficiently  ministered  consolation  to  others,  should  bave  proved 
faint-hearted  when  like  trouble  fell  upon  himself,— reminding  us  that  it  is  easier  to  preach 
patience  than  to  practise  it,  that  they  who  counsel  others  should  strive  to  illustrate 
their  own  precepts,  and  that  the  world  is  never  slow  in  remarking  the  deficiencies  of 
good  men ;  or  (2)  an  utterance  of  keen  invective  (if  we  adopt  the  uncharitable  view  of 
Eliphaz's  language),  as  if  he  meant  to  taunt  Job  with  doing  the  very  thing  for  which  he 
had  so  piously  admonished  others,  exhibiting  the  same  craven  spirit  in  adversity  against 
which  he  had  warned  them,— an  interpretation  which,  if  it  is  correct,  reminds  us  that 
good  men  are  long  in  getting  rid  of  their  corruptions,  that  grace  often  finds  a  lodging 
in  strange  quarters,  that  theHoratian  maxim  of  seeing  and  approving  better  things  and 
yet  following  worse  was  not  unknown  to  Eliphaz  any  mom  than  to  Paul;  but  on 
either  hypothesis  (3)  the  record  of  a  frequent  experience.  Job  having  been  neither  the 
first  nor  the  last  who  has  felt  himself  unequal  to  the  task  of  practising  what  he  has  tried 
to  preach  2  That  Job's  confidence  had  stood  where  it  ought  to  have  failed.  « Is  not  thy 
fear  thy  confidence?    And  thy  hope,  is  it  not  the  uprightness  of  thy  ways? "  (ver.  6> 


72  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ofi.  iVi  1--21. 

(1). Perhaps  implying  that  Job  had  been  previously  resting  with  complacent  satisfactiuii 
on  his  religious  character,  and  deriving  ho^  of  Divine  favour  from  the  elevation  of  hia 
piety,  which)  if  Job  had  been  doing,  he  had  been  livibg  in  egregious  error,  since  "  by 
the  deeds  of  the  Law  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified ; "  but  the  statement  of  Eliphaz 
vras  a  gratuitous  slander,  which  one  gOod  man  should  always  be  careful  in  circulating, 
saying,  Or  even  thinking  about  another,  since  God  alone  can  read  the  heart.  (2) 
InBinuatibg  that  this  previous  confidence  on  the  part  of  Job  had  been  ill  grounded, 
inasmuch  as  his  piety  could  not  have  been  sincere,  in  which  case  Job  must  have  been 
guilty  of  hypocrisy ;  but  this,  again,  was  a  ibere  inference  on  the  part  of  Eliphaz^  and 
in  point  of  fact  was  incorrect.  (3)  Directing  Job  to  find  encouragement  and  hope 
In  a  return  to  the  fear  of  God  and  to  moral  rectitude  of  hfe — an  advice  which,  as 
addressed  to  Job-,  was  not  required}  andj  as  given  by  Eliphaz,  was  a  pure  impei  tineUce. 

IV.  A  FALLACIOUS  PHILOSOPHY.  1.  That  good  men  never  perish.  "  Remember,  I 
pray  thee,  who  ever  perished^  being  innocent?  or  where  were  the  righteous  cut  off?" 
(ver.  7).  (1)  An  unkind  statement,  even  if  it  had  been  true ;  considering  Job's  sitila- 
tion.  If  there  is  " a  time  to  speak,"  there  is  also  "a  time  to  be  silent; "  and  though 
it  is,  unquestionably  wrong  to  suppress  or  tamper  with  the  truth,  there  is  nothing 
in  religion  that  requires  one  to  proclaim  all  the  truth  irrespective  bf  circumstances, 
or  even  to  present  truth  under  any  circumstances  in  its  most  repulsive  forms.  (2)  An 
incorrect  statement,  as  well  as  an  unkind  one.  It  was  ccmtradicted  by  the  plainest  facts 
of  history,  as  Job  maintained,  and  as  the  least  competent  observer  might  have  perceived 
(Gen.  ivi  8 ;  Acts  ii.  22, 23 ;  Heb.  xi.  37)i  Those  who  undertake  to  comfort  sufferers,  and 
those  who  propound  philosophies  of  affliction  (or,  indeed^  of  anything),  should  be  careful 
to  adhere  to  truth.  2.  That  bad  men  always  perish.  "  Even  as  I  have  seen,  they  that 
plpugh  iniquity,  and  sow  wickedness,  rSap  the  same  "  (ver.  8) ;  in  which  may  be  noted ; 
(1)  The  graphic  description  of  wicked  meh,  who  are  depicted  (o)  metaphorically  as 
ploughing  iniquity  and  sowing  wickedness,  alluding,  fjerhaps,  to  the  deliberate  purpose, 
mental  activity,  steady  perseverance,  onward  progress,  and  eager  exiiectation  With  which 
great  criminals  contrive  and  earry  out  their  nefarious  schemes ;  and  (6)  analogically, 
being  likened  to  a  lioii  passing  through  the  successive  stages  of  its  developraeiit,  and 
ilicreasing  as  it  grows  in  strength,  ferocity,  and  violehce.  (2)  The  melancholy  over- 
throw of  wicked  men,  who  are  consumed  (o)  ih  accordance  With  the  natural  laws  of 
retribution,  reaping  the  whirlwitid  where  they  have  sown  the  wind  (Prov.  xxii.  8  i 
Hos.  viji.  7;  x.  13;  Gal.  vi.  7,  8);  (i)  by  the  express  visitation  Of  God,  perishing 
(as  Job's. children  did,  is  what  he  means)  by  the  blast  Of  God,  and  before  the  breath  of 
his  nostrils;  and  (c)  to  the  coinplete  extinction  of  their  former  greatness,  the  pi-uvi- 
dentialLy  overtaKen  and  divinely  punished  transgressor  being  compared  to  an  old  lioness, 
once  formidable  and  powerful  roaring  and  devouring,  but  now  lying  helpless  and 
impotent,  tooihless  and  voiceless,  dying  for  lack  of  prey,  and  abandoned  even  by  her 
whelps.  (3)  The  amount,  of  truth  in  the  representation^  which  is  correct  in  so  far 
as  it  describes  individual  cases;  as  e.g.  the  antediluvians,  tKe  cities  of  the  plain, 
Adohibezek  (Judg.  i.  7),  Belshazzar  (Dan.  v.  22, 30),  Herod  (Acts  xii.  23) ;  but  incorrect 
in  so  far  as  it  claims  to  be  of  universal  application. 

Learn  :  1.  To  cultivate  the  habit  of  politeness  of  B|)feech.  Courtesy  is  a  dibtate  of 
religion  as  well  as  an  element  of  virtue.  2.  To  commeiid  where  we  can,  and  reprove 
only  wWse  we  must.  To  detect  gr  odness  in  others  is  a  higher  attainment  than  to 
espy  faults.  3.  To  beware  of  trusting  in  self-righteousness,  as  much  after  conversion 
as  before.  The  saint's  trust  should  never  be  in  himself,  but  always  in  his  God.  4.  To 
be  cautious  in  making  general  deductions  from  what  may,  after  all,  be  isolated  facts. 
Qne  man's  observation  does  not  afl'ord  a  basis  broad  enough  for  the  construction  of  a 
philosophy  of  life.  5.  To  think  about  the  harvests  we  shall  reap  before  commencing 
to  plough  and  sow.  "  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked :  for  whatsoever  a  man 
Eowetb,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 

Vers.  6—%.— Affliction.  I.  The  boukob  op  it.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  It  comes  not 
without  a  cause.  "The  Curse  causeless  shall  not  come"  (Prov.  xxvi.  2).  (2)  It 
comes  not  for  any  cause  ;  t.e.  by  haphazai-d,  ty  accident),  since  the  whole  nniverse  is 
under  the  dominion  of  law  (Matt.  x.  29).  (3)  It  comes  not  from  a  material  cause; 
it  springs  not  from  the  ground  ;  it  is  not  the  result  of  a  man's  terrestrial  enviroamenl 


OH.  IT.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  73 

2.  Positively,  (1)  It  comes  from  withiu  man  himBolf  j  It  is  the  fruit  of  his  own  sin, 
(2)  It  comes  in  accordaTice  with  universal  moral  law,  which  connects  sin  and  suffering 
together  as  cause  and  effect.  (3)  It  comes  as  an  inseparable  concomitant  of  man's 
nature.    Man,  when  he  is  born,  finds  hirnself  introduced  into  a  scene  of  trouble. 

II,  The  CHAnAOTBBisTics  OP  IT.  1.  Universal,  It  is  the  portion,  not  of  one  man, 
or  a  few,  or  even  of  many,  but  of  the  race.  It  forms  a  portion  of  the  birthright  of 
humanity.  2,  Certain.  It  is  absolutely  unavoidable.  As  surely  as  the  sparks 
ascend,  so  surely  will  those  sinful  passions  rage  that  entail  suffering  and  misery. 

3.  Perpetual,  Meeting  man  upon  the  threshold  of  bis  birth,  it  accompanies  him 
throughout  life  till  its  close. 

III.  Thb  escape  from  it.  1.  Not  hy  rrfractory  rebellion.  Not  by  behaving  like 
the  fool,  or  like  Job,  who  cursed  his  day,  and  fumed  and  fretted  against  his  misery. 
2.  But  by  patient  submission.  "  Humble  thyself  beneath  the  hand  of  God,  and  he 
shall  lift  thee  up." 

Vers,  12^21.' — MiphaztoJoh:  2,  A  message  from  the  spirit-world,  I,  The  dbvodt 
SEEBi  1.  Beposing  on  his  couch,  A  modern  poet  (Robert  Buchanan , '  Book  of  Orm.,'  i.), 
depicting  how  "  in  the  beginning,  ere  time  grew,"  the  beautiful  Maker  of  all  things  drew 
around  his  face,  which  has  ever  since  been  invisible  to  mortal  eye,  the  wondrous  veil 
of  the  firmament,  represents  that  face  as  closest  pressed  in  the  daytime,  when  the  isky 
is  cleaiest,  adding  that  at  nightfall,  when  the  darkness  deepens  and  the  stars  swim 
out,  and  the  evening  wind  begins  to  blow  like  the  breath  of  God,  that  veil  is  backward 
drawn.  It  more,  however,  accords  with  universal  experience  that  the  unseen  world 
seems  in  closest  proximity  to  the  hunian  soul  when  it  looks  down  through  "  the  star- 
inwrought  luminous  folds  of  the  wondrous  veil."  That  the  lij;ht  of  garish  day  has 
a  tendency,  by  shntlin^  man  into  his  own  little  vvorldj  to  shut  out  from  his  apprehen- 
sion the  infinitudes  above,  is  not  more  certain  than  it  is  that  the  finite  spirit  becomes 
more  quickly  conscious  of  the  supernatural  amidst  the  darkness  and  silence  of  night, 
than  when  these  have  been  succeeded  by  the  radiance  and  turmoil  of  day.  2.  Wrapt 
in  meditation.  If  day  be  the  season  for  labour,  unquestionably  night  is  the  time  most 
congenial  for  the  exercise  of  thought,  especially  for  revolving  the  great  problems  of 
religion.  As  David  meditated  on  God  in  the  night-watches  (Ps.  Ixiii.  6),  and  Asaph 
communed  with  his  heart  in  the  night,  his  wakeful  spirit  making  diligent  search  into 
tbose  brooding  mysteries  which  oppressed  his  waking  hours  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  6),  and  as  a 
Greater  than  either  spent  whole  nights  among  the  Galilsean  hills  in  prayer  to  Gtid 
(Luke  vL  12),  so  Eliphaz  had  "  thoughts  from  the  visions  of  the  night."  3.  liaised 
into  eestasg.  Disengaged  from  the  activities  and  disturbances  of  w  aking  existence,  and 
soothed  by  the  calming  influences  of  n^ht,  the  meditativfe  prophet  fell  into  a  deep 
sleep,  not  simply  such  a  profound  slumber  as  steeps  the  senses  in  oblivion  to  all  outward 
things,  but  such  a  supernatural  repose  as  Adam  was  cast  iu  before  the  creation  of  Eve 
(Gen.  ii.  21),  and  Abraham  at  the  making  of  the  covenant  (Gen.  xv.  12),  and  Daniel 
on  the  banks  of  the  Ulai  (Dan.  viii.  18),  in  which,  while  for  the  time  the  human  spirit 
is  severed  from  its  physically  conditioned  life,  it  is  yet  in  the  innermost  depths  of  its 
being  possessed  of  a  conscious  existence — a  mode  of  being  perhaps  as  nearly  approach- 
ing what  man's  disembodied  state  will  be  as  anything  we  can  think  of.  4.  Visited  by 
reveHations.  The  deep  sleep  just  described  having  been  that  into  which  prophets  and 
others  were  cast  when  about  to  receive  Divine  communications  (cf.  Abraham,  Gen.  xv. 
12;  Jacob,  Gen.  xxviii.  12;  Dan.  ii.  19;  Peter,  Acts  X.  10  j  Paul,  2  Cor.  xii.  2,  3), 
Eliphaz  the  entranceii  whs  honoured  by  a  visitation  from  the  unseen  world  of  ghosts. 

II.  The  fobmless  spectre.  1.  The  premonition  of  its  coming.  "  Fear  came  upon 
me,  iand  trembling"  (ver.  14).  Even  good  men  are  not  always  able  to  contemplate  the 
supernatural  with  self-possession  (cf.  Matt.  xiv.  26;  Luke  xxiv.  37).  That  man  should 
evince  a  horror  of  visitors  from  the  spirit-world  is  a  melancholy  proof  of  his  fall 
Innocence  would  not  be  discomposed  by  knowing  that "  millions  of  spirits  walk  this 
air,  both  when  we  wake  ami  when  we  sleep  "  (Milton).  But  sinful  man,  being  out  of 
harmony  with  the  Supreme  Spirit  and  the  entire  circle  of  creation,  universally  feels 
afraid  of  the  unseen  world  by  which  he  is  surrounded  (of. '  Macbeth,'  act  iii.  sc.  4). 
2.  The  manner  of  its  coming.  Gliding  suddenly  out  of  the  darkness  in  which  tha 
entranced  seer  lay,  flitting  softly  and  noiselessly  along  upon  the  still,  supernatural  atmo- 


74  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  iv.  1—21. 


sphere  with  which  the  chamber  was  filled,  moving  steadily  up  till  it  came  in  full  view 
ot  the  dreamer's  open  eye,  it  stood  I  The  sleeper  saw  and  was  perfectly  conscious  of 
its  presence,  could  discern  there  was  aa  image,  a  dim  shadowy  nebulous  appearance, 
but  felt  altogether  incompetent  to  analyze  its  features.  Yet  there  is  no  reason  to 
suppose  that,  like  Macbeth's  sword,  this  formless  spectre  was  "  a  false  creation,  proceed- 
ing from  the  heat-oppressed  braiu  "  ('  Macbeth,'  act  ii.  sc.  1).  The  Sadducees  denied 
the  existence  of  spirits  (Acts  xxiii.  8);  but  the  langunge  of  Christ  (Luke  xxiv.  39) 
implies  that  they  were  wrong,  though,  of  course,  it  does  not  sanction  either  the  ancient 
superstitious  belief  in  ghost-stories  or  the  modern  delusion  of  spirit-rapping.  3.  The 
effect  of  its  coming.  The  terror  of  anticipation  felt  by  Eliphaz  deepened  into  a  nameless 
horror,  in  which  "the  hair  of  his  flesh  stood  up"  (ver.  15),  "like  quills  upon  the 
fretful  poroupme "  ('  Hamlet,'  act  i.  sc.  5),  or  rather  like  nails  or  spikes  upon  a 
wall,  each  individual  bristle  stiffening  itself  into  a  cold  and  chilling  isolation.  4.  The 
accompaniment  of  its  coming.  A  still,  small  voice  fell  upon  his  ear,  like  a  dead  and 
stealthy  whisper  (of.  1  Kings  xix.  12). 

III.  The  shadowy  voice.  1.  A  clear  demonstration  of  the  sinfulnest  of  man,  (1) 
A  question  proposed :  "  Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just  than  God  ?  shall  a  man  be  more 
pure  than  his  Maker?"  (ver.  17).  A  great  question,  which,  read  as  it  stands  (Calvin, 
Davidson,  Cox,  etc.),  may  be  described  as  (o)  searching,  going  down  into  the  founda- 
tions of  man's  being,  inquiring  into  the  ideas  he  possesses  of  moral  excellence  and 
spiritual  integrity,  as  well  as  the  measures  and  degrees  in  which  those  ideas  have  been 
realized  in  his  own  personal  existence;  (6)  elevating,  lifting  man  up  into  the  serene 
altitudes  of  absolute  purity  in  which  God  dwells,  and  setting  him  dovra  with  tlie 
dimmed  lustre  of  his  imperfect  goodness  beside  the  clear  white  light  of  God's  ineffable 
rectitude ;  (c)  discriminating,  neither  confounding  the  two  things,  man's  righteousness 
and  God's,  as  if  they  were  one  and  the  same,  nor  mistaking  the  one  for  the  other,  as 
if  they  almost  rivalled  one  another  in  their  splendour,  but  distinguishing  each  from 
the  other  as  essentially  diverse  and  apart,  God's  righteousness  and  holiness  being 
inherent,  perfect,  eternal,  while  that  of  man  is  derived,  immature,  capable  of  increase 
and  diminution,  mutable,  and  subject  to  decay ;  and  (d)  challenging,  demanding  of 
sinful  man  whether  he  would  dare  to  exalt  himself,  in  respect  of  justice  and  purity, 
above  the  supreme  God,  his  Maker  ?  Formally,  perhaps,  no  one  would  be  guilty  of  the 
immeasurable  presumption  implied  in  asserting  that  he  was  equal  to  this;  yet  practically 
every  sinner  makes  the  claim  of  having  stricter  ideas  of  moral  and  spiritual  integrity 
than  God,  when  he  impeaches  either  the  equity  of  the  Divine  dealings  with,  or  the  just- 
ness of  the  Divine  sentence  of  condemnation  against,  himself.  (2)  A  premiss  stated : 
"  Behold,  he  puts  no  trust  in  his  servants,  and  his  angels  he  charges  with  folly  [or, 
'  imputeth  to  them  wrong ']  "  (ver.  18).  The  impious  assumption  that  the  creature  might 
surpass  the  Creator  in  moral  purity,  the  ghost  quickly  disposes  of  by  showing  that 
the  former  cannot  possibly  equal  the  latter,  and  this  he  does  by  establishing  the  moral 
inferiority  to  God  of  even  the  highest  intelligences,  the  unfallen  angels  who  serve  him 
day  and  night  in  his  celestial  temple.  Even  they,  beings  of  exalted  dignity  and  radiant 
goodness,  when  brought  up  alongside  of  the  light  inaccessible  and  full  of  glory  of  the 
Divine  character,  appear  to  have  their  lustre  tarnished.  Whence  the  next  step  is 
inevitable.  (3)  A  deduction  made ;  "  How  much  less  in  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of 
clay  1 "  (ver.  19).  If  man  is  inferior  to  the  angels,  then  much  more  is  he  inferior  to 
God ;  and  man's  inferiority  to  angels  the  spirit  next  proves.  2.  An  affecting  re/pre- 
sentation of  human  frailty.  Contrasted  with  the  angelic  race,  man  is  depicted  as  a 
creature  (1)  whose  origin  is  mean,  being  characterized  as  a  dweller  in  a  clay  house, 
whose  foundation  is  in  the  dust  (ver.  19),  the  allusion  being  to  bis  corporeal  frame, 
which,  being  composed  of  material  elements,  incontestably  proclaims  his  inferiority  ; 
(2)  whose  duration  is  short,  he  being  an  ephemerid  who  is  "  crushed  before  the  moth  " 
(ver.  19)  and  "  destroyed  from  morning  to  evening "  (ver.  20),  i.e.  in  the  course  of  a 
single  day  ;  (3)  whose  importance  is  small,  he  being  regarded  with  such  contempt,  not 
only  by  higher  orders  of  intelligence,  but  by  the  memlSrs  of  his  own  race,  that  he  is  allowed 
to  die  unheeded,  "  to  perish  lor  ever  without  any  regarding  it "  (ver.  20) ;  (4)  whose 
glory  is  evanescent,  whatever  grandeur  or  excellency  man  may  attain  on  earth  passing 
away  with  him  when  he  dies :  "  Doth  not  their  excellency  which  is  in  them  go  away?" 
(ver  21) ;  and  (5)  whose  fiiilure  is  conspicuous,  man  commonly  dying  as  he  ^as  born, 


OH.  IT.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  76 

"  without  wisdom,"  i.e.  without  having  attained  to  more  than  the  alphabet  of  know- 
ledge. Yet,  affecting  as  this  picture  of  man  is,  it  is  only  half  true.  It  exhibits  only  one 
aspect  of  man's  nature  and  condition.  If  a  dweller  in  a  house  of  clay,  man  is  yet  of 
Divine  origin,  being  the  breath  of  God's  Spirit,  and  an  immortal  whose  existence  shall 
not  be  counted  by  years,  and  of  such  importance  in  the  universe  that  God  parted  with 
his  Son  in  order  to  effect  his  redemption,  and  whose  true  glory  (Isa.  Ix.  19)  shall  never 
fade,  and  whose  ultimate  attainment  to  wisdom  sliall  be  made  good  in  a  brighter  and 
better  world. 

Learn :  1.  That  heaven  is  never  far  removed  from  the  pious.  2.  That  those  who 
think  most  about  God  obtain  most  communications  from  God.  3.  That  even  good 
men  may  .long  remain,  through  fear  of  death  and  the  unseen  world,  subject  to  bondage 
4.  That  Divine  voices  seldom  speak  in  tempests  and  hurricanes,  but  mostly  in  still, 
small  voices.  5.  That  God,  being  higher  than  the  highest,  should  be  regarded  by  all  his 
creatures  with  reverence  and  fear.  6.  That  man,  even  at  his  best  state,  is  altogether 
Tanity.  7.  That,  in  the  judgment  of  Heaven,  no  life  is  successful  that  terminates 
without  having  attained  to  wisdom. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Eliphaz  and  Job:  forgotten  truths  called  to  mind.  However  misap- 
plied to  his  particular  case  may  have  been  the  speeches  of  Job's  friends,  there  can  be  no 
dispute  concerning  the  purity  and  the  sublimity  of  the  great  truths  for  which  they  here 
appear  as  spokesmen.  If  not  well  directed  to  Job,  they  may  be  well  directed  to  us. 
Eacli  of  the  friends  represents  a  certain  aspect  of  the  truths  which  relate  man  to  God. 
In  the  speech  of  Eliphaz  the  main  position  taken  is  that  man,  in  his  ignorance  and 
sin  fulness,  must  be  silent  in  presence  of  the  all-just  and  all-holy  God. 

I.  Comparison  of  past  with  peesbnt  experience.  (Vers.  1 — 6.)  Job  is  reminded 
of  what  he  was,  and  asked  to  account  for  what  he  is.  1.  The  appeal  to  memory,  A 
bright,  a  radiant  memory  it  was.  He  had  been  the  director  of  many — "  guide,  philo- 
sopher, and  friend"  to  young  and  old  in  the  perplexities  of  life.  Again,  he  had  been 
the  comforter  of  the  sorrowful  and  the  weak ;  had  strengthened  the  hands  that  hung 
down  and  the  feeble  knees :  had  led  in  straight  paths  the  feet  of  those  who  erred.  It  is 
a  beautiful  picture  of  an  amiable,  benevolent,  God-like  career.  He  had  not,  like  many, 
to  look  back  upon  a  barren  waste,  a  selfish  and  misspent  life,  but  upon  one  filled  with 
"deeds  of  light."  Thanks  to  God  if  any  man  can  turn  in  the  hour  of  despondency  to 
memories  so  fair  and  green  I  2.  Expostulation  with  his  present  mood.  How  is  it, 
then,  now  that  pain  and  grief  have  touched  his  own  person,  that  he  is  so  utterly  cast 
down?  Why  not  apply  the  medicine  and  the  balm  for  your  own  disease  and  hurt 
which  were  found  so  healing  in  the  case  of  others?  If  the  remedy  was  ever  good  for 
them,  'tw.is  because  it  was  first  good  for  you.  If  the  counsel  and  the  comfort  you  were 
wont  to  offer  to  the  sick  and  sad  had  not  been  proved  by  you,  it  was  of  no  avaU  to  press 
them  upon  others.  But  if  they  accepted  it  and  were  blissed,  why  can  you  not  now  pre- 
scribe for  your  own  malady  ?  "  Physician,  heal  thyself."  "  Sink  in  thyself,  then  ask 
what  ails  thee  at  that  shrine !  "  3.  Appeal  to  thepower  of  religion  and  to  the  conscious- 
ness of  innocence.  The  sixth  verse  would  be  better  rendered,  "Is  thy  religion  [fear  of 
God]  not  thy  confidence?  thy  hope  the  innocence  of  thy  ways  ?"  Religion  is  a  great 
mainstay  in  all  the  stonns  of  the  soul.  So  long  as  a  man  can  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord :  let 
him  do  what  seemeth  him  good,"  he  has  a  support  which  nothing  can  move.  But 
so  also  is  conscious  integrity  a  grand  spring  of  comfort,  because  of  hope — "  hope  that 
reaps  not  shame."  To  sow  the  seeds  of  virtue  in  health  and  activity  is  to  reap  the 
harvest  of  hope  in  illness,  enforced  idleness,  in  weakness,  and  in  death.  Hope  is  the 
kind  nurse  of  the  ailing  and  the  old ;  and  why  is  Job  without  the  angelic  ministry  of 
her  presence  now?    Let  us  put  these  questions  of  Eliphaz  to  ourselves. 

II.  Inferences  from  sufferino.  (Vers.  7 — 11.)  These  Eliphaz  proceeds  to  draw. 
Job  still  remaining  silent  at  his  first  appeal.  The  inference  is  that  there  has  been  guilt 
to  account  for  these  great  troubles.  And  the  Inference  is  justified  by  an  appeal  to  the 
great  teacher,  experience.  1.  General  experience  proves  that  calamity  points  to  guilt. 
As  a  rule,  it  is  not  good  men  who  sink,  nor  upright  h'^^rts  that  are  utterly  overwhelmed 


7«  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  w.  1—21. 


There  are,  or  Beom  to  be,  exceptions  of  which  the  phUosophy  of  Eliphaa  takes  no 
account.  But,  indeed,  how  dight  are  upon  the  whole  these  seeming  eiceptionB  to  the 
grand  moral  rulel  As  in  grammar,  bo  in  life,  the  exceptions  may  be  found  on  closer 
examination,  only  to  enlarge  and  illustrate  our  conception  of  the  rule.  2.  The  teaching 
of  eaperience  is  euyported  by  that  of  nature.  (Ver.  8.)  The  laws  of  nature  are  constant. 
Every  reaping  implies  a  preyious  sowing,  every  harvest  is  the  offspring  of  the  early 
labour  of  the  year.  Therefore— this  is  the  rigid  reasoning  of  Eliphaz— this  trouble  of 
his  friend  implies  a  previous  sowing  in  the  fields  of  sin.  It  is  the  rough,  broad  state- 
meat  of  a  sublime  principle  in  the  government  of  God.  It  is  given  without  exceptions, 
but  it  will  be  time  enough  to  look  at  the  exceptions  when  we  have  first  mastered  the 
rule.  3.  Pictures  from  nature,  which  illustrate  this  morallaw.  (Vers.  9, 10, 11.)  Nature 
flashes  back  her  light  upon  those  truths  which  we  have  first  learned  from  experience 
and  conscience.  Two  such  pictures  are  here  sketched.  One  is  that  of  tlje  violent  blast 
from  heaven,  which  breaks  the  rotten  tree,  hurls  the  dry  leaves  into  the  stream, 
Boatters  the  worthless  chaff.  Such  is  the  fate  of  the  worthless  man,  the  mind  devoid  of 
principle  and  therefore  of  vitality  and  worth.  The  other  picture— and  it  is  less 
familiar,  and  perhaps  still  more  powerful— is  that  of  the  fierce  lion,  toothless,  vaiiily 
roaring,  perishing  at  last  for  lack  of  prey,  its  young  ones  all  dispersed  1  Such,  again, 
is  the  fate  of  the  bold,  bad  man.  To  this  end  his  devouring  lusts  have  brought  hiii. 
The  appetite  for  sin  continuing  to  the  last— the  food  of  appetite,  nay,  the  very  power 
to  enjoy,  at  last  withdrawn.  Where,  in  the  compass  of  so  few  lines,  can  we  find  so 
powerful  an  illustration  of  the  wages  and  the  end  of  sin  ?  Side  by  side  with  this 
powerful  image  we  may  place  some  other  pictures  in  which  Scripture  represents  the 
doom  of  the  unprincipled  and  godless  man.  He  is  like  the  chaff  before  the  breeze,  like 
the  juniper  in  the  desert,  unwetted  by  the  refreshing  dew  of  heaven,  like  the  tree  all 
flourishing  to-day,  to-morrow  feeling  the  stroke  of  the  woodman's  axe,  or  like  the 
dross  which  is  consumed  in  the  furnace  where  the  true  gold  brightens,  like  the  rapidly 
burning  tow,  or  like  a  dream  when  one  awakes — an  image,  the  unreality  of  which  is 
destined  to  be  discovered  and  scorned.^— J. 

Ver.  12 — ch.  v.  7. — 2%e  erode  in  a  dream  of  the  night.  Here  we  have  the  narration 
of  one  of  those  revelations  in  visions  of  the  night,  through  which  man  so  frequently 
learned  in  the  elder  time  to  know  the  will  of  the  Eternal.  Every  line  of  the  description 
is  significant  and  impressive. 

I.  The  associations  of  the  night.  1.  It  is  the  season  of  solitude.  In  the  daytime 
we  have  many  to  keep  us  company,  to  encourage  us,  it  may  be,  in  false  or  idle 
thoughts,  or  divert  us  from  those  that  are  serious.  Now  at  last  we  are  alone,  and  must 
stand  faoe  to  face  with  self,  with  truth,  with  God.  2.  It  is  the  season  of  silence.  There 
is  no  noise,  no  confusion,  drowning  the  still,  small  voices  which  otherwise  might  b« 
heard.  3.  It  is  the  time  of  darkness.  The  eye  is  no  longer  filled  with  sights  that  divert 
the  fancy  and  unbend  the  fixity  of  the  mind's  direction.  Pascal  says  that  the  reason 
why  men  pursue  field  sports  and  other  amusements  with  so  much  eagerness  is  that 
they  may  fly  from  themselves,  which  is  a  night  that  none  can  bear.  But  the  darkness, 
throwing  a  veil  above  the  bright  outer  world,  flings  the  man  back  upon  himself,  forces 
him  into  the  inner  chamber  of  conscience.  Happy  those  who  have  learned  to  employ 
the  wakeful  hours  in  self-communion  and  in  communion  with  God,  and  who  find  that 
"  night  visions  do  befriend,  while  waking  dreams  are  fatal." 

II.  The  BTILLNBB8  OF  God's  ^'OICB.  This  is  a  thought  made  very  prominent  in  the 
description,  as  in  the  revelation  to  Elijah  on  Horeb — the  calmness  and  gentleness  of 
the  voice  of  the  Unseen  and  the  Divine.  Eliphaz  says  the  word  "stole"  upon  Mm, 
and  it  was  a  "gentle  sound  "  his  ear  received  (ver.  12).  It  was  a  "whispering  voice" 
(ver.  16),  like  the  susurrus,  or  rustling  of  the  leaves  of  a  tree  in  the  quiet  air  of  night. 
For  all  who  willingly  listen,  the  voice  of  the  great  Father  of  spirits  is  calm,  quiet, 
gentle,  though  strong  and  awful.  Only  upon  the  stubborn  ear  and  obdurate  heart 
does  it  peal  in  the  end  with  thunder  and  menace. 

IK.  The  effect  upon  the  human  heart  of  God's  voice.  (Ver.  14.)  It  cannot  be 
heard  without  awe  and  without  terror.  One  tone  of  that  voice  vibrating  through  the 
whole  consciousness  awakens  instantly  all  the  sense  of  our  weakness,  our  ignorance,  and 
our  sin.    A.nd  here  we  have  all  the  physical  symptoms  faithiuUy  described  which  testif; 


UH.  IT.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  77 

to  the  agitation  of  the  bouI  in  presence  of  the  Unseen.  There  is  »  trembling  and 
quivering  of  the  whole  frame  in  every  limb.  The  hair  stands  on  end.  A  materialistic 
philosophy,  which  either  denies  or  ignores  man's  relation  to  the  Unseen,  can  never 
explain  away  these  phenomena.  They  are  involuntary  witnesses  to  the  reality  of  that 
power  which  besets  us  behind  and  before,  which  is  "  closer  to  us  than  our  breathing, 
nearer  than  hands  and  feet,"  from  which  we  cannot  flee. 

IV.  The  apparition.  (Vers.  15, 16.)  It  is  well  to  note  in  what  vague  and  awfvd 
touches  the  presence  of  the  Divine  is  hinted.  A  spirit  passes  before  the  sleeper — it 
stands  still — but  its  form,  its  features,  cannot  be  exactly  discerned.  There  is  the  like 
vagueness  in  Moses'  vision,  and  in  that  of  Isaiah  in  the  temple.  For  no  man  can  look 
upon  the  face  of  God,  no  man  can  receive  aught  but  the  dimmest  and  faintest  impres- 
sion of  that  inexpressible  form.  These  descriptions  yield  us  lessons  as  public  teachers. 
They  remind  us  that  a  tone  of  reserve,  a  simplicity  of  description,  not  overpassing  the 
reverential  bounds  of  Scripture,  the  suggestion  of  a  vast  background  of  mystery,  should 
accompany  all  that  we  venture  to  speak  to  men  concerning  God. 

V.  The  ORACLE.  (Vers.  17 — 21.)  It  is  a  solemn  rebuke  to  that  spirit  which  Eliphaz 
thought  he  discerned  in  his  friend — the  assumption  of  innocence  and  righteousness  in 
the  presence  of  God.  "  For  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth,  which  doeth  good  and 
sinneth  not "  (Eccles.  vii.  20).  Its  contents  may  be  summed  up  m  the  words  of  the 
psalm  (cxliii.  2),  "  In  thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justified."  Its  meaning  is 
echoed  in  such  words  as  these :  "  Bighteous,  0  God,  art  thou  in  thy  judgments " 
(Jer.  xii.  1) ;  "  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar,  as  it  is  written.  That  thou  mightest 
be  justified  in  thy  sayings,  and  mightest  overcome  when  thou  art  judged  "  (Bom.  iii.  4). 
There  is  no  privilege  of  question,  of  criticism,  of  reproach,  or  complaint  when  man 
approaches  the  works  of  God.  His  part  is  to  understand  and  to  Submit.  The  right  of 
criticism  implies  some  equality  of  knowledge ;  but  how  can  this  subsist  between  the 
creature  and  the  Creator  7  "  Who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God  ?  Shall  the  thing 
formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it.  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus?"  (Bom.  ix.  20). 
Criticism  is  silenced  in  the  presence  of  overwhelming  superiority.  There  are  a  few  great 
works  even  of  human  art  before  which  the  tongue  of  cavil  and  fault-finding  is  hushed. 
Who  dares  to  sit  in  jucigment  on  the  sculptures  of  a  Phidias,  or  the  paintings  of  a  Baphael, 
or  the  poems  of  a  Shakespeare  1  Admiration,  study,  have  here  alone  place.  At  least,  in 
these  mere  human  works,  the  presumption  ever  is  that  the  master  is  right  and  the  critic 
is  a  fool.  How  much  more  must  this  bo  so  in  the  relation  between  the  ignorant  creature 
and  the  omniscient  Creator  ?  But  in  the  oracle,  this  great  truth  is  supported,  not  by 
a  comparison  of  ignorant  man  with  great  geniuses,  but  by  a  comparison  of  men  with 
angels.  They  are  the  immediate  servants  of  the  Most  High ;  they  stand  nearer  to  him 
than  man.  Yet  they  are  imperfect,  unworthy  of  the  full  confidence  of  their  Divine 
Lord,  liable  to  error  and  mistake.  How  much  more  so  man,  who  is  conscious  of  sin  as 
they  are  not — sin  that  disturbs  his  judgment,  that  clouds  his  perceptions  I  Again,  the 
angels  enjoy  a  life  ever  vigorous  and  young,  that  knows  not  decay  nor  death  1  But 
man  inhabits  a  house  of  clay,  an  earthly  tabernacle ;  he  wears  a  "  muddy  vesture  of 
decay/'  and  lives  on  "  this  dim  spot  of  earth."  He  is  an  ephemeral  creature,  living 
from  dawn  to  sunset;  easily  crushed  like  a  moth;  living  in  dense  ignorance,  amid 
which  death  suddenly  surprises  him.  This,  it  is  true,  is  not  the  only  aspect  of  human 
life.  All  is  comparison.  If  man's  spiritual  nature  be  contrasted  with  the  shortness  of 
his  life  and  the  feebleness  of  his  powers,  it  rises  into  grandeur  by  the  comparison. 
But  if  his  mere  intellect  be  brought  into  contrast  with  the  Infinite  Intelligence,  then 
he  must  needs  sink  into  insignificance.  A  true  comparison  will  either  teach  us  faith 
and  hope,  or  humility ;  and  both  lessons  are  derived  from  the  nearer  view  of  the  pro- 
founder  knowledge  of  the  greatness  of  God. 

VI.  Inperenobs  feom  the  obaolb.  1.  The  idleness  of  complaints  against  Ood. 
(Ch.  V.  1.)  For  the  very  angels,  should  Job  apply  to  one  of  them,  would  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  their  relation  to  the  Supreme,  adopt  no  complaint  of  the  kind.  2.  Such  complain- 
ing spirit  is  the  sign  of  a  fatal  folly.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  'Tis  a  sin  which,  if  indulged,  will 
slay  the  sinner.  And  here  follows  another  powerful  picture  of  the  dread  fatality 
attending  upon  the  fool — upon  him  who  would  in  thought  and  life  nourish  a  quarrel 
with  Heaven.  He  may  for  a  time  appear  prosperpus  and  firmly  rooted,  but  the  doom 
will  fell  upon  him  and  his  house.     "  I  knew  such  a  case,"  says  Eliphaz,  with  emphaain. 


re  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  iv.  1—21. 

"Not  blinded  by  the  outward  dazzle  of  his  future,  I,  in  abhorrence  of  his  character, 
predicted  his  downfall ;  and  it  has  come  to  pass.  His  sons,  feeling  all  the  weight  of 
a  father's  guilt,  are  thrust  aside,  and  can  obtain  no  justice  at  the  hands  of  their  fellows 
(ver.  4).  Those  whom  the  father  had  oppressed  seize,  as  in  the  hunger  "and  thirst  of 
the  'wild  justice'  of  revenge,  upon  the  property  of  the  sons  ;  they  ravage  and  despoil, 
and  snatch  the  vainly  guarded  harvest  even  from  among  the  thorns  "  (ver.  5). 

CoNCLUDiNO  LESSON.  There  is  a  cause  of  every  human  suffering,  and  that  cause  is 
not  external,  but  internal  (vers.  6, 7).  Not  external.  Not  accidental.  Not  like  the 
weed  that  springs  from  the  earth,  and  which  can  be  rooted  out  at  will.  But  internal. 
The  cause  of  man's  sufferings  is  deeply  seated  in  his  nature.  He  is  born  to  suffer.  He  is 
a  native  of  the  territory  of  woe.  As  certain  this  as  any  physical  law— as  that  sparks 
should  fly  upward,  and  that  stones  should  fall.  Vain,  then,  these  murmurs  against  the 
course  and  constitution  of  things.  Whatever  is,  is  best.  If  sorrow  be  a  great  part  of 
our  destiny,  resignation  is  our  vrisdom  and  our  duty.  And  he  who  has  learned  calmly 
to  bow  before  the  inevitable,  and  to  submit  to  law,  is  prepared  to  listen  to  those  sweet  - 
consolations  which  Eliphaz  proceeds  to  unfold  from  the  nature  of  him  whose  will  is  to 
bless,  not  curse;  who  follows  out,  by  the  very  means  of  pain  and  sorrow,  the  eternal 
counsels  of  love. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — TTie  teacher  tested.  Throughout  the  words  of  Job's  friends  many  truths 
are  to  be  found  both  accurately  stated  and  beautifully  illustrated ;  but  in  many  cases — 
almost  generally — a  wrong  application  of  them  is  made.  The  friends  designing  to  be 
comforters  do,  through  imperfect  views  of  the  mystery  of  human  suffering,  indeed 
become  accusers,  and  make  the  burden  heavier  which  they  proposed  to  lighten.  But 
the  words  now  under  consideration  are  perfectly  true.  He  who  had  formerly  been  the 
instructor  of  many,  and  the  strengtheiier  of  them  of  feeble  knees,  is  now  himself 
smitten,  and  he  faints ;  he  is  touched  and  troubled.  The  lesson  is  therefore  to  the 
teacher  who  can  pour  out  words  of  instruction  to  others,  and  to  the  comforter  who  aims 
at  consoling  the  sorrowful.  His  principles  will  one  day  be  tested  in  his  own  experience, 
and  he  will  in  his  own  life  prove  their  truthfulness  or  their  falsity.  Eliphaz  insinuates, 
if  he  does  not  actually  affirm.  Job's  failure.  "  To  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed ; " 
and  the  wise  teacher  will  become  a  learner  in  presence  of  these  words.  We  may, 
then,  say — 

I.  Tbuth  makes  its  greatest  demands  on  its  expositobs.  They  ally  themselves 
with  it.  They  proclaim  it.  They  declare  their  faith  in  it.  They  vouch  for  it.  The 
more  really  a  man  is  a  teacher  the  more  is  he  a  disciple.  It  is  the  perfect  alliance  of 
the  teacher  with  the  truth  he  teaches  that  gives  him  power  over  others  in  its  exposition. 
Upon  him,  then,  the  greatest  demand  is  made  that  the  truth  he  has  affirmed  should  find 
its  highest  illustration  in  his  own  life — ^that  his  life  should  not  give  the  lie  to  his  lips. 
It  is  thus  that — 

II.  The  teaoheb  of  truth  has  the  best  opportunity  of  becoming  its  most 
effectual  expositor.  Eliphaz  could  not  yet  see  how  Job,  holding  fast  his  integrity, 
would  present  a  brilliant  example  of  the  truthfulness  of  his  doctrine.  To  expound 
truth  with  the  hps  is  possible  to  the  simulator  and  hypocrite.  He  may  say,  and  do 
not.  He  may  declare  the  authority  of  a  truth,  and  contradict  that  authority  and  his 
own  saying  by  disobedience.  Such  were  the  Pharisees  of  our  Lord's  time.  Prom  them 
truth  received  the  highest  homage  by  verbal  acknowledgment,  but  they  proved  them- 
selves untrue  and  unfaithful  disciples  of  truth  by  the  discredit  they  threw  upon  it  by 
their  disobedience  to  its  requirements.  The  teacher  of  truth,  making  the  truth  his  own 
by  a  thorou;^h  embrace  of  it,  and  a  real  and  unfeigned  sympathy  with  it,  teaches  more 
by  his  life  than  by  his  lips ;  for  the  one  men  discredit,  but  the  other  is  undeniable. 
Fidelity  in  the  teacher  is  the  highest  proof  of  his  faith  in  his  doctrine,  and  by  it  he 
pays  the  utmost  tribute  to  the  doctrine  that  he  is  able  to  pay. 

III.  The  bcphemb  duty  of  the  teacher  is  fidelity  to  his  doctrine.  By  his 
faithfulness  his  scholars  arc  confirmed  in  their  belief  and  steadfastness.  It  is  a  black 
crime  for  a  man  to  proclaim  a  truth  or  a  teaching  that  affects  the  life  and  hope  of  his 
fellow-men,  and  yet  prove  a  traitor  to  it  by  unfaithfulness.  The  foundations  of  the  hope 
of  many  have  been  shaken  and  even  uprooted  by  such  conduct.  By  how  much  the 
truth  «  man  proclaims  is  important,  by  so  much  is  the  responsibility  of  his  own  treat- 


OH.  IV.  1— 21.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  79 

ment  of  that  truth  great.     Job  was  a  bright  example  of  fidelity,  though  severely 
tried. 

IV.  The  honoukableness  of  a  faithful  adhesion  to  a  great  truth.  He  who 
links  himself  with  great  truths  is  exalted  by  them.  They  honour  him  who  honours 
them.    They  bring  him  to  glory  and  true  renown. — R.  G. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — The  contequenees  of  evil-doing.  The  New  Testament  teaching  is, 
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  It  is  precisely  as  the  present 
verses.  "  They  that  plough  iniquity,  and  sow  wickedness,  reap  the  same."  So  does  the 
testimony  of  the  ages  warn  evil-doers.  This  rule  is  inevitable ;  it  is  just ;  it  is  natural ; 
it  is  admonitory. 

I.  This  order  is  inevitable.  He  who  has  ordained  the  laws  of  nature,  fixed,  calm, 
indestructible,  has  also  ordained  that  the  doer  of  evil  shall  reap  the  fruit  of  his  ill-doing. 
An  inevitable  Nemesis  follows  the  steps  of  every  offender  against  Divine  laws.  Sooner 
or  later  judgment  is  passed.  No  skilfulness  can  evade  the  omnipotent  rule.  "  Though 
hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  Minutely  did  our  Lord  lay 
down  the  same  teaching :  "  Every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give 
account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment."  One  may  as  well  try  to  throw  off  the  law  of 
gravitation.  It  holds  us  all  fast  in  its  firm  grip.  So  does  this  Divine  law  framed  by 
the  same  hand. 

II.  This  law  is  just.  The  wise  and  holy  Ruler  of  all — "the  Creator  of  all 
worlds,  the  Judge  of  all  men  " — will  do  right,  does  do  right  in  the  administrations  of  his 
holy  laws.  He  is  not  vindictive.  His  anger  is  holy  anger ;  his  wrath  is  as  truly  just 
as  his  love  is  tender.  He  has  laid  the  foundations  of  human  life  in  righteousness.  He 
is  just;  for  he  rendereth  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds.  Without  doubt  he  takes 
note  of  all  the  circumstances  in  which  every  one  is  placed,  and  neither  accuses  the 
guiltless  nor  excuses  the  guilty.  Men  find  in  their  own  acts  the  cause  of  their  suffer- 
ings, and  the  justification  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God.  In  every  breast  the  most 
painfiil  conviction  will  be  the  assurance  of  the  perfect  righteousness  of  the  Divine 
ways,  and  the  justice  of  every  Divine  infliction.  The  inward  reflection  of  the  Divine 
judgment  of  condemnation  is  the  most  painful  of  all  judgments. 

III.  The  operation  of  this  law  is  perfectly  natural.  Consequences  follow 
causes  with  the  same  regularity  of  law  in  the  moral  as  in  the  material  world.  A  wrong 
thought  gives  a  wrong  bias  to  the  mind,  and  leaves  it  so  much  the  more  liable  to  be 
influenced  in  a  wrong  direction ;  so  of  every  word  or  deed  of  evil.  Bach  wrong  act  is 
a  seed  cast  into  the  ground,  and  it  bears  its  fruit  after  its  own  kind  to  him  who  sows 
it.  Of  evil,  good  cannot  spring  up.  So  every  man  by  his  wrong-doing  treasures  up 
for  himself  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath.  He  receives  his  reward  in  his  character, 
in  the  condition  of  mind  and  life  to  which  he  is  reduced  by  evil  or  elevated  by  goodness; 

IV.  This  law  is  admonitory  to  all.  There  is  no  escape  by  mere  law  from  the  ill 
consequences  of  any  bad  act.  The  inevitable  consequences  which  follow  all  wrong- 
doing should  wai-n  men  off  from  forbidden  paths.  "  By  the  blast  of  God  they  perish  " 
is  the  warning  threat  against  the  sowers  of  wickedness  and  them  that "  plough  iniquity.'' 
Though  men  rage  as  the  fierce  lions,  their  roaring  is  broken ;  they  perish,  and  their 
seed  is  scattered  abroad. — B.  G. 

Vers.  12 — 21. — Hie  condemnation  of  man  in  presence  of  the  Divine  holiness.  With  a 
figure  of  great  boldness  and  grandeur  Bliphaz  urges  his  words  upon  Job.  He  is  trying 
to  illustrate  the  great  principle  of  the  righteous  retributions  of  the  Divine  government. 
In  the  visions  of  the  night  there  appeared  a  spirit  to  pass  before  his  face,  and  in  the 
dead  silence  he  heard  a  voice  saying,  "  Shall  mortal  man  he  more  just  than  God  ?  shall 
a  man  be  more  pure  than  his  Maker  ?  "  It  cannot  be.  And  the  vision  of  Bliphaz  finds 
its  fulfilment  in  Job  himself,  who  in  the  end  is  bowed  down  to  the  earth  in  self-abasing 
shame  and  condemnation. 

I.  All  men  must  of  necessity  be  self-condemned  in  presence  or  the  Divinf 
holiness.  Alas  I  we  are  all  sinful ;  our  best  deeds  are  faulty,  and  the  element  of  sinful- 
ness mingles  with  all  our  acts  as  truly  as  the  element  of  imperfectness.  We  cannot 
stand  in  the  presence  of  the  absolutely  Perfect  One.  Even  the  rudest  vanity  must  be 
■ppalled  and  humbled  in  his  sight. 


80  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  iv.  1— 2L 

n.  Thk  contemplation  of  the  Divikb  holiness  a  saldtabt  check  to  self- 
confident  BOASTING.  In  the  absence  of  a  true  and  lofty  standard  of  right,  men  boast 
themselves  of  their  goodness.  Measuring  themselves  by  themselves,  and  comparing 
themselves  among  themselves,  they  are  led  to  the  proud  assumption  of  fancied  righteous- 
uess.  The  standards  are  faulty ;  even  the  faulty  ones,  therefore,  reach  them.  He  is 
wise  who  can  say,  "  But  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee,  wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent 
in  dust  and  ashes." 

III.  The  contemplation  of  the  Diyinb  holiness  a  stimulus  to  lowly,  humble, 
BELioious  FEAB.  Thls  fear  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom ;  and  the  highest  attainments 
of  wisdom  do  not  depart  from  this  fear.  It  is  the  beginning  and  the  consummation  of 
holy  wisdom. 

IV.  The  pubest  and  most  exalted  beinos  abb  abased  in  the  Divine  pbbsencb. 
"  His  angels  he  charged  with  folly."  How  much  more,  therefore,  the  children  of  the 
dust — "  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of  clay  "  I— B.  Q. 

Yer.  1. — Eliphaz  the  visionary.  After  Job  has  broken  the  seven  days'  silence,  each 
of  his  friends  assays  to  comfort  him,  with  that  most  irritating  form  of  consolation- 
unsolicited  advice.  Although,  perhaps,  some  of  the  critics  have  thought  they  detected 
greater  differences  between  the  three  friends  than  are  really  apparent  from  the  narrative, 
we  cannot  but  notice  certain  distinctive  features.  What  they  have  m  common  is  more 
pronounced  than  their  points  of  difference.  Thus  they  all  tliee  are  friends  of  Job,  who 
really  desire  to  show  their  sympathy  and  help  the  sufferer.  They  all  tender  unaslsed 
counsel.  They  all  assume  an  irritating  position  of  superiority.  They  all  adhere  to 
the  prevalent  dogma  that  great  calamity  is  to  be  accounted  for  as  the  punishment  of 
great  sin.  They  all  believe  in  the  justice  of  God  aud  his  readiness  tio  forgive  and 
restore  if  Job  will  but  confess  his  sins  and  humble  himself.  But  they  manifest  certain 
interesting  differences.  The  first  friend  to  speak  is  Eliphaz,  who  appears  as  a  seer  ot 
visions. 

I.  ThEEE   abb   men  who   seem  to  be  naturally  in  affinity  with   the   SPIBITUAIi 

woBLD.  All  men  are  not  able  to  see  the  sights  with  which  these  men  are  familiar. 
They  are  the  seers  of  visions.  Too  often  such  men  are  visionaries  and  nothing  else. 
They  are  so  wrapt  up  in  the  excitement  of  their  experiences  of  another  world  that  they 
have  no  interest  or  capacity  left  for  the  discharge  of  present  earthly  duties.  It  would 
go  ill  with  us  if  there  were  many  such  unpractical  people  among  us.  But  even  these 
men  have  their  sphere,  and  there  are  higher  visionaries  to  whom  we  should  be  pro- 
foundly grateful.  It  is  a  great  descent  from  Paul  the  apostle  in  the  third  heavens  to 
"Sludge  the  medium"  at  a  seance.  The  follies  of  spiritualism  should  not  blind  us 
to  the  revelations  of  true  seers.  Even  the  half-mad  visions  of  a  Blake  have  given  the 
world  some  wonderful  fruits  of  imagination,  that  would  never  have  grown  on  the  stock 
of  conventional  worldly  experience. 

II.  Truth  is  not  always  found  with  the  sbbb  op  visions.  God's  seer  will  see 
God's  truth.  If  the  veil  is  lifted  from  before  the  nnseen  wurld,  some  genuine  revelations 
must  appear.  God  has  given  us  truths  of  the  Bible  in  some  cases  through  the  visions 
of  his  prophets.  But  the  mere  afiBrmation  of  a  vision  is  no  voucher  for  the  truUi  of 
what  is  said.  The  seer  may  be  a  deceiver,  he  may  be  a  deluded  fanatic,  or  he  may 
see  a  vision  of  "  lying  spirits."  Therefore  what  he  says  must  be  tested,  and  should  not 
be  accepted  on  the  mere  authority  of  his  vision.  Here  was  the  mistake  of  Eliphaz,  who 
thought  to  overawe  and  silence  Job  by  the  recital  of  his  vision.  It  is  safer  to  turn 
from  all  such  pretensions  to  the  clear  "word  of  prophecy"  and  the  historical  re\elatioi» 
of  Christ.    Our  religion  is  based,  not  on  visions,  but  on  historical  facts. 

III.  It  is  most  important  to  cultivate  sympathy  with  the  unseen  world.  If 
we  are  not  visionaries,  we  need  not  be  materialists.  Though  we  do  not  iooK  for  spiri- 
tualistic manifestations,  we  need  not  be  Sadducees  who  believe  in  no  spirits.  There  is  a 
vision  of  God  for  the  pure  in  heart,  which  can  deceive  none,  and  which  Is  the  inspira- 
tion of  this  world's  highest  service. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  2.— Irrepressible  speech.  Eliphaz  says, "  Who  can  withhold  himself  from  speak- 
ing ?"  He  utters  his  own  sentiment,  but  It  is  a  very  common  one — far  more  common 
than  the  honest  admission  of  it  with  which  Eliphaz  justifies  his  address  to  Job. 


OH,nr.  1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  81 

I.  Tebbpressible  speech  springs  pbom  various  influences.  Sometimes  it  is 
difficult  to  find  worda,  What,  then,  are  the  things  that  break  open  the  fountains  of 
speech  ?  1.  Natural  Umperament.  Some  are  naturally  loquacious,  other?  as  naturally 
taciturn.  No  man  is  responsible  for  his  originai  constitntion  ;  his  responsibility  begins 
with  his  use  of  it.  ?.  Wsalth  of  ideas.  It  is  not  only  verl'al  flueiiioy  that  runs  into  a 
volume  of  speech.  One  who  thinks  much  will  have  the  materials  for  talking  much. 
Coleridge  meditated  deeply ;  Macaulay  read  enormously,  apd  remembered  all  he  read ; 
and  both  were  great  talkers,  3.  Depth  of  feeling.  Passion  gives  eloquence  to  the  least 
gifted  person.  Syinpathy  will  seek  for  words.  So  the  long  contemplation  of  Job's 
sufferings  urged  iSliphaz  to  apeak.  4.  Provocaiio9.  Eliphaz  was  shocked  at  Job's 
cursing  the  day  of  his  birth.  Unable  to  enter  into  the  ti-agic  depths  of  the  sufferer's 
grief,  he  could  easily  perceive  the  highly  improper  tone  of  the  language  nsed.  Contro- 
versy rouses  the  least  beautiful,  but  often  the  most  vigorous,  kind  of  eloquence.  $. 
Vanity.     To  many  people  there  is  a  strange  charnt  in  the  sound  of  their  own  voices, 

II,  Irrbpri;88I?lk  speech  may  be  a  sodbcb  op  great  evil.  The  talker  rarely  seems 
to  consider  how  keen  a  weapon  he  is  wielding.  He  does  not  appear  to  remember  that 
hia  words  are  like  arrows,  and  that  the  bow  drawn  at  a  venture  may  inflict  a  mortal 
wound ;  tha,t  they  are  as  seeds  which  may  spring  up  and  bear  bitter  fruit  long  after 
the  sower  has  forgotten  when  and  where  he  threw  them  broadcast  over  the  earth. 
Certain  points  in  particular  need  to  be  noticed.  1.  Irrepressible  speech  lacks  due 
reflection.  It  is  hasty  and  ill-judged.  Thus  it  may  say  far  more  than  the  speaker 
intended,  and  it  may  even  convey  a  very  false  impression.  Spoken  without  due  thought, 
the  hurried  word  may  make  a  suggestion  which  mature  consideration  would  utterly 
repudiate.  Words  lead  to  deeds,  ^nd  thus  irTepressible  speech  becomes  an  unalterable 
act.  "  "Volatility  of  words,"  says  Layater,  "  is  carelessness  in  actions ;  words  are  the 
wings  of  actions."  8.  Irrepressible  speech  is  likely  to  be  inconsiderate  of  the  feelings  of 
others.  Surely  Job's  three  comforters  could  not  have  known  what  cruel  barbs  their 
words  were,  or  they  would  scarcely  have  tormented  the  sufferer  as  they  did.  It  is  so 
easy  to  wound  with  the  tongue,  that  if  we  t^lk  hastily  and  without  thouglit,  it  is  most 
likely  that  we  shall  do  so  even  without  intending  it.  3.  Irrepressible  speech  is  a 
slight  on  the  ndssion  of  silence.  Those  seven  days  of  silence  seryed  as  a  healing  ministry, 
or  at  least  they  were  days  of  unadulterated  sympathy  on  the  part  of  the  three  friends. 
Why.  then, should  the  good  men  change  their  tactics?  Evidently  they  had  not  enough 
faith  in  silence.  4.  IneT[ixe>isih]e  speech  needs  the  preservation  of  Divine  grace.  Great 
talkers  should  especially  look  for  heip  from  above,  that  their  speech' may  be  "  seasoned 
with  salt."  He  who  spake  as  never  man  spake  is  a  model  of  wise,  laconic  utterance. 
To  be  safe  in  the  use  of  the  tongue  we  need  to  be  much  in  company  with  Christ,  (rften 
in  converse  with  Heaven. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  3—5. — The  teacher  at  faMlt.  After  one  brief  word  of  ?ipology  for  breaking  the 
seemly  silence  of  mourning,  Eliphaz  plunges  in  mediae  res,  and  at  once  commences  to 
reproach  Job  by  reminding  him  of  his  former  conduct,  and  contrasting  his  present  state 
with  it  as  an  evidence  of  glaring  inconsistency.  Job  could  teach  others  how  to  conduct 
themselves,  but  no  sooner  is  the  test  brought  home  tp  himself  than  he  fails.  The 
teacher  cannot  pa^s  the  examination  for  which  he  has  been  preparing  his  pupils. 

I.  The  mission  of  instructing  others  is  one  op  honour  and  usefulness.  No 
greater  work  can  be  conceived  than  that  of  forming  character,  Thomas  Carlyle  pointed 
out  the  absurdity  of  heaping  honours  on  the  soldier  which  we  deny  to  the  schoylm9,ster. 
He  thought  the  cane  was  a  token  of  greater  dignity  than  the  sword,  There  is  no 
happier  result  of  a  life's  work  than  to  see  those  one  h^s  influenced  growing  in  wisdom 
and  goodness  and  strength  of  character.  It  was  well,  indeed,  that  Job  was  one  who 
strengthened  the  we?,k,     This  was  whplly  good,  whatever  might  be  his  subsequent 

character. 

II,  He  who  instbuots  others  js  exphotbd  to  follow  his  own  peeo?:pt8,  ihe 
eyes' of  the  world  are  upon  him;  his  own  scholars  watch  him  narrowly.  Teaching 
which  is  not  backed  up  by  example  soon  becomes  quite  ineffective.  The  Christian 
minister  can  often  do  more  good  by  his  exempUry  life  than  by  his  most  excellent 
sermons.  If  his  walk  and  conversation  among  men  do  not  adorn  the  gospel  he  pro- 
claims, they  will  mar  and  mutilate  it.    The  world  refuses  to  separate  the  preacher  from 

JOB.  ^ 


62  THE  BOOK  OP  JOR  [ch.  iv.l— 21. 


the  man.  It  decliueB  to  believe  that  clerical  vestments  transform  a  slovenly,  shifty, 
self-indulgent  person,  whom  no  one  can  jespect,  into  a  herald  from  heaven.  The 
Sunday  school  teacher  whose  business  reputation  is  low  has  no  right  to  expect  that  his 
lofty  words  will  train  up  a  noble  life  in  the  young  people  whom  he  instructs. 

III.  It  is  possible  to  be  an  instructoe  of  others  and  tet  fail  one's  self. 
The  charge  of  Eliphaz  was  unfair,  for  it  took  no  account  of  the  unparalleled  troubles  of 
Job — none  had  been  tried  like  this  man — or  rather  it  assumed  that  he  must  have  been 
an  exceptionally  bad  man  or  he  would  not  have  suffered  such  a  tremendous  reverse  of 
fortune.  Thus  it  suggested  that  the  venerated  leader  and  teacher  had  been  a  hypocrite 
all  along.  This  was  doubly  unfair.  It  is  possible  to  have  been  in  earnest  while  teach- 
ing, and  yet  afterwards  to  fall  before  unexpected  temptations  without  having  been  a 
hypocrite;  for  good  men  are  fallible,  and  no  one  knows  how  weak  he  is  till  he  has  been 
tried.  Moreover,  in  the  present  case  the  teacher  had  not  fallen  as  his  censor  supposed. 
Still,  there  is  great  force  in  his  warning.  Unfortunately,  the  world  is  not  wanting  in 
men  to  whom  it  is  only  too  applicable.  There  is  a  great  danger  of  delusion  in  the 
faculty  of  teaching.  All  of  us  who  instruct  others  are  tempted  to  confuse  our  know- 
ledge with  our  attainments,  and  our  language  with  our  experience.  Thus  intellectual 
and  professional  familiarity  with  holy  things  may  be  mistaken  for  that  vital  communion 
with  them  which  perhaps  is  not  to  be  found  accompanying  it.  There  has  only  been  one 
perfect  Teacher  whose  conduct  was  as  lofty  as  his  instructions.  All  others  may  well 
learn  to  walk  humbly  while  teaching  the  most  exalted  lessons. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  8. — A  true  principle  falsely  applied.  We  have  now  reached  the  kernel  of  the 
controversy  with  which  Job  and  his  friends  are  to  be  engaged.  Wliile — as  the  pro- 
logue shows — the  primary  purpose  of  the  Book  of  Job  is  to  refute  Satan's  low,  sneering 
insinuation  implied  in  the  words,  "  Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought  ? "  and  to  prove 
that  God  can  and  does  inspire  disinterested  devotion,  the  long  discussion  amoT'g  the 
friends  is  concerned  with  the  problem  of  suffering,  and  the  old  orthodox  notion  that  it 
was  just  the  punishment  of  sin,  showing  the  inadequacy  of  that  notion,  and  the  deep 
mystery  of  the  whole  subject.  Now  we  are  introduced  to  this  perplexing  question. 
It  comes  before  us  in  the  form  of  a  principle  that  is  undoubtedly  true,  although  the 
application  of  it  by  Job's  friends  turned  out  to  he  egregiously  false. 

I.  The  tedth  of  the  peisciple.  1.  This  is  communicated  in  the  New  Testament 
by  St.  Paul,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap  "  (Gal.  vi.  7).  2. 
This  is  in  accordance  with,  experience.  Eliphaz  had  seen  it.  We  need  not  suppose 
that  he  had  been  deceived  by  some  strange  hallucination.  We  must  all  have  observed 
how  men  make  or  mar  their  own  fortunes.  We  know  what  will  be  the  end  of  the 
career  of  the  idle  and  dissipated.  We  are  constantly  watching  the  triumph  of  diligence 
and  prudence.  3.  TTiis  is  after  the  analogy  of  nature.  Then  the  harvest  is  according 
to  the  sowing,  and  it  is  determined  by  absolute  laws.  But  there  is  no  chaos  in  the 
human  sphere.  Moral  causation  works  there  as  strictly  as  physical  causation  in  the 
outer  world.  There  is  no  escaping  from  the  natural  consequences  of  our  deeds.  He 
who  sows  the  wind  will  most  assuredly  reap  the  whirlwind.  4.  This  is  just.  Job's 
friends  were  right  iu  feeling  that  the  wicked  ought  to  suffer  and  that  the  good  ought 
to  be  blessed.  The  attempt  to  evade  the  great  law  of  causation  in  the  spiritual  sphere 
is  as  immoral  as  it  is  futile.  Why  should  anyone  expect  to  be  saved  fiom  the  hai-vest 
which  he  has  himself  sown? 

II.  The  false  application  of  the  pbinciplb.  The  whole  Book  of  Job  demon- 
strates that  Job's  friends  were  wrong  in  applying  this  principle  to  the  case  of  the 
patriarch.  But  why  was  it  not  applicable  ?  1.  T/iey  anticipated  the  harvest.  The 
harvest  is  the  end  of  the  woild.  Some  flrstfruits  may  be  gathered  earlier ;  often  we 
see  the  evil  consequences  of  misdeeds  ripening  rapidly.  But  this  is  not  always  the 
case.  Meanwhile  we  can  judge  of  no  life  until  we  have  seen  the  whole  of  it.  In  the 
end  Job  reaped  an  abundant  harvest  of  blessings  (ch.  xl'i.  10 — 17).  2.  They  ignored 
the  variety  of  causes.  It  is  a  recognized  rule  of  logic  that  while  you  can  always  argue 
from  the  cause  to  the  eflf.;ot,  you  cannot  safely  reverse  the  process  and  reason  back  from 
the  effect  to  the  cause,  because  the  same  effect  may  come  from  any  one  of  a  number  of 
causes.  Job  might  bring  calamity  on  himself,  and  if  he  did  wrong  he  would  bring  it 
—in  the  long  run.    But  other  causes  might  produce  it.    In  this  case  it  was  not  Job, 


OH.  IV.  1— 21.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  83 

but  Satan,  who  brought  it.  It  was  not  the  husbandman,  but  an  enemy,  who  sowed 
tares  in  the  field.  3.  They  mistook  the  nature  of  the  harvest.  The  man  who  sows 
iniquity  will  not  necessarily  reap  temporal  calamity.  He  will  get  his  natural  harvest, 
which  is  corruption,  but  he  may  have  wealth  and  temporal,  external  prosperity  on 
earth.  And  the  man  who  sows  goodness  may  not  reap  money,  immunity  from 
trouble,  etc.;  for  these  things  are  not  the  natural  products  of  what  he  sows.  They  are 
not  "  after  its  kind."  But  he  will  reap  "  eternal  life."  Nothing  that  had  happened 
to  Job  indicated  that  he  would  not  gather  that  best  of  all  harvests. — W.  F.  A, 

Vers.  12 — 16. — An  apparition.  The  visionary  now  tells  the  thrilling  tale  of  his 
vision.  He  thinks  that  he  will  overawe  Job  with  a  message  from  one  who  was  no 
mortal  man.  All  the  details  and- circumstances  of  the  yision  are  graphically  narrated, 
that  the  horror  of  it  may  add  to  the  weight  of  its  authority. 

I.  The  reality  op  the  apparition.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  Eliphaz 
spoke  in  good  faith.  He  does  not  appear  before  us  as  a  deceiver,  though  he  is  certainly 
capable  ol  making  a  great  mistake.  Therefore  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  he  narrated 
his  genuine  experience.  But  then  we  may  naturally  ask — ^What  did  really  happen  ? 
1.  Possibly  a  subjective  illusion.  The  apparition  may  have  been  only  a  creature  of  the 
visionary's  excited  imagination.  "Seeing"  should  not  be  always  "  believing."  We 
are  not  justified  in  invariably  trusting  our  senses.  A  diseased  or  a  merely  disordered 
brain  will  evolve  visions.  Perhaps  without  derangement  the  brain's  very  exaltation 
may  help  it  to  creati;  phantasms.  2.  Possibly  a  real  spiritual  manifestation.  It  is  not 
scientific  to  deny  the  possibility  of  any  such  thing.  Science  is  growing  conscious  of 
the  endless  varieties  of  existence  and  of  the  boundless  potentialities  of  nature.  We 
cannot  say  that  there  are  no  spirits  but  our  own,  nor  can  we  say  that  no  other  spirits 
ever  do  make  themselves  manifest  to  men.  There  may  be  no  external,  material 
presence ;  the  spiritual  contact  may  be  internal,  and  the  vision  thrown  out  from  it 
through  the  brain  of  the  seer ;  and  yet  there  may  be  a  something  in  contact  with  the 
soul — a  real  spiritual  presence. 

II.  The  ciecdmstances  of  the  appakitiok.  1.  In  solitude.  The  thing  was 
"  secretly  brought  to  "  Elipliaz.  Some  may  say,  as  there  were  no  spectators  to  check 
the  accuracy  of  his  vision,  the  whole  scene  was  a  delusion.  But  on  the  other  hand, 
solitude  would  be  most  suitable  for  a  revelation  of  the  other  world.  The  pressure  of 
earthly  things  shuts  out  the  very  thought  of  the  unseen.  2.  In  the  night.  Here, 
again,  the  darkness  of  the  material  surroundings  might  give  an  opportunity  for  the 
appearance  of  the  immaterial.  3,  In  meditation.  "  In  thoughts  from  the  visions  of 
the  night."  This  shows  that  Elipha?  was  in  a  condition  to  receive  spiritual  impres- 
sions. The  extraordinary  writings  of  Lawrance  Oliphant  indicate  that  some  kind  of 
peculiar  experience  is  attained  by  those  who  think  themselves  into  the  preparation 
necessary  for  it.  This  may  only  lead  to  the  quagmire  of  "  Spiritualism."  But  it  is  too 
much  for  a  "  Philistine"  scepticism  to  say  mat  no  good  influences  have  ever  come  in 

this  way.  rn-  i_ 

III.  The  effect  of  the  apparition.  .  1.  A  shock  of  terror,  Bliphaz  describes 
most  graphically  the  horror  of  his  experience.  The  figure  was  vague,  shapeless,  name- 
less, impersonal,  and  described  by  the  visionary  as  "  It."  He  felt  something  pass 
■him,  his  limbs  trembled  beneath  him,  his  hair  stood  up  on  end !  Men  dread  the  super- 
natural. Some  attribute  this  dread  to  the  guilt  of  conscience ;  but  the  strange,  the 
inknown,  the  unnatural,  suggest  fearful  possibilities  of  danger.  It  is  happier  to  live 
in  the  sunshine  with  children  and  flowers  than  in  gloom  with  ghosts.  The  pursuit  of 
"  Spiritualism,"  even  if  it  is  not  following  a  delusion,  entails  an  unhealthy  and  melan- 
choly fascination.  2.  A  voice  of  truth.  "It"  gave  Eliphaz  a  message.  God  has  revealed 
truth  in  dream  and  vision.  The  message  of  the  apparition  was  great  and  important. 
Yet  that  message  was  not  new ;  and  it  was  liable  to  misapplication  by  Eliphaz.  We 
shall  be  very  fo..lish  if  we  forsake  Christ  and  the  Scriptures  for  spint-voices— which  now 
generally  appear  to  talk  nonsense  in  bad  grammar.  It  is  foolish  to  make  conscience 
and  reason  subject  to  any  unauthenticated  vision.— W.  F.  A. 

Vers  17— 2i.—^  message  from,  the  unseen.  The  apparition  spoke,  and  this  is  what 
"  It "  said.    No  one  can  gainsay  the  truth  of  the  wor^s  uttered.    The  only  ciuestion  ip 


84 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  V.  1—27 


how  they  applied  to  Job.  Eliphaz  assumed  that  Job's  position  was  thereby  condemned 
Leaving  this  out  of  account,  however,  we  may  see  how  lofty,  true,  and  important  the 
words  that  came  in  the  Temtiuite's  vision  were. 

L  The  obvious  facts.  One  would  have  thought  that  no  ghost  was  wanted  to 
make  such  self-evident  facts  as  are  here  narrated  clear  to  everybody.  As  we  look  at 
the  vision  of  Eliphaz  we  are  tempted  to  suspect  a  pompous  pretentiousness  in  it. 
And  yet,  though  the  facts  referred  to  are  obvious  and  unquestionable,  they  cannot 
be  too  impressively  insisted  on  or  too  profoundly  felt.  Therefore  it  may  be  well  that 
they  are  brought  before  us  shrouded  in  the  awe  of  an  apparition.  These  facts  con- 
cern the  littleness  of  man  compared  with  the  greatness  of  God.  At  the  end  of  the 
poem  God  himself  appears  and  brings  them  home  to  Job  with  a  force  that  is  not 
found  in  the  vision;  of  Eliphaz,  partly  because  God's  dealings  with  Job  himself  are 
wise  and  fair,  while  the  conduct  of  Eliphaz  is  unreasonable  and  unjust.  Note  throe 
regions  in  which  man's  littleness  is  contrasted  with  God's  greatness.  1.  Moral.  Due 
man  may  be  more  pure  or  more  just  than  another  man.  But  who  can  surpass  God  ? 
Before  him  the  best  men  shrink  and  own  their  utter  unworthiness.  2.  Intdlectudl. 
Some  men  are  more  discerning  and  wise  than  others,  but  the  height  of  humaa  capacity 
is  but  folly  before  God.  3.  -Vital.  Man's  life  is  frail  and  brief.  His  ephemeral 
existence  is  as  nothing  compared  to  the  eternity  of  God.  All  these  truths  are  trite  ; 
their  importance  lies  in  the  application  of  them. 

II.  Theib  just  effects.  The  tremendous  mistake  people  make  is  to  admit  the 
obvious  facts,  and  then  to  live  exactly  as  if  they  did  not  exist.  But  if  they  are  they 
should  have  great  effects  upon  conduct.  Note  some  of  the  results  they  should  work 
in  us.  1.  Humility.  We  may  not  understand  God,  but  we  should  not  venture  to 
judge  One  so  infinitely  greater  than  ourselves.  Reverence  is  our  right  attitude  before 
the  mysteries  of  Providence.  2.  Contrition.  We  may  defend  oursuives  among  men, 
but  we  cannot  do  so  in  the  presence  of  God.  Not  only  can  we  conceal  nothing  from 
God — we  should  not  wish  to  do  that — but  further,  we  see  a  higher  standard  in  God  than 
that  which  prevails  among  men,  and  judged  by  that  standard  the  saint  is  a  sinner.  3. 
Patience.  God  is  infinitely  just ;  he  knows  all ;  he  cannot  fail.  We  do  not  know 
what  he  is  doing,  nor  why  he  acts.  But  we  can  wait.  4.  Trust.  This  goes  beyond 
patience.  We  have  a  right  to  confide  in  so  just,  wise,  and  strong  a  God.  His  great- 
ness strikes  terror  in  the  rebellious  soul ;  but  when  one  is  reconciled  to  God,  that  very 
greatness  becomes  a  mighty,  invincible  rock  of  refuge.  5.  Obedience.  Our  duty  is  to 
do  more  than  submit  without  a  murmur,  and  wait  patiently  for  God.  He  is  our 
Master,  our  King,  and  our  business  is  to  follow  his  great  authority.  Sin  is  self-will, 
pride,  distrust,  disobedience.  The  Christian  life  is  one  of  active  service ;  it  is  treading 
humbly  in  the  way  which  our  infinite  God  assigns  to  us.  His  greatness  justly  commands 
implicit  obedience. — W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Vers.  1 — 27. — Eliphaz,  having  narrated 
his  vision,  and  rehearsed  the  words  which 
the  spirit  spoke  in  his  ear,  continues  in  his 
owu  person,  first  (vers.  1 — 7)  covertly  re- 
proaching Job,  and  then  (vers.  8 — 27)  seek- 
ing to  comfort  him  by  the  suggestion  that, 
if  he  will  place  himself  unreservedly  in  the 
hands  of  God,  it  is  still  possible  that  God 
may  relent,  remove  his  chastening  hand, 
deliver  him  from  his  troubles,  and  even  give 
him  back  all  his  former  prosperity.  The 
anticipation  is  in  remarkable  accordance 
with  the  ultimate  event  (oh.  xlii.  10—17), 
ftod  shows  that  Eliphaz,  if  not  a  prophet  in 


the  higher  sense,  is  at  least  a  sagacious  in- 
terpreter of  God's  ways  with  men,  aud  can 
very  happily  forecast  the  future. 

Ver.  1. — Call  now,  if  there  be  any  that 
will  answer  thee ;  rather,  call  now  ;  ia  there 
any  that  will  answer  thee  1  What  aid,  that 
is,  wilt  thou  invoke,  if  thou  turuest  away 
from  God,  ami  reproachest  him  ?  Thinkest 
thou  to  find  any  one  in  heaven  or  earth  to 
answer  to  the  call  and  come  to  thy  assist- 
aiioe  ?  Utterly  vain  is  any  such  hope.  And 
to  which  of  the  saints  wUt  thou  turn?  By 
"  the  saints  "  are  meant  in  this  place  "  the 
holy  angels  "  (oomp,  ch.  xv.  15  ;  Ps.  Ixxxix. 
7 ;  Zeoh.  xiv.  5).  The  question,  "  To  which 
wilt  thou  turn?"  seems  to  imply  that  there 
was  already  in  Job's  time  some  knowledg* 


OH.  T.  1—27.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB, 


8< 


of  individual  membeis  of  the  angelic  host, 
Buch  as  Michael,  Gabriel,  Baphael,  etc., 
though  we  have  no  meation  of  any  names 
of  angels  in  Scripture  until  the  time  of 
Daniel  (viil.  16;  ix,  21).  That  invocation 
of  angels  was  an  actual  practice  in  Job's 
age  is,  however,  scarcely  proved  by  this 
passage. 

Ver.  2. — Per  wrath  killeth  the  foolish 
man,  and  envy  slayeth  the  silly  one.  For 
"  wrath  "  and  "  envy  "  others  suggest  "  vexa- 
atiou"  and  " impatience " (Lee),  or  "vexa- 
tion" and  "jealousy"  (Revised  Version). 
The  connection  of  thought  seems  to  be, 
"  For  thou  art  quite  foolish  enough  to  let 
thy  vexation  and  impatience  prompt  thee  to 
such  a  course,  which  could  only  lead  to  thy 
destruction."  Eliphaz  is  quite  sure  that 
trust  in  any  other  beside.God,  and  appeal  to 
any  other  against  God,  is  utter  folly,  sinful 
iiifa.tuation,  and  must  lead  to  the  ruin  of 
whoever  indulges  in  it.  Thus  the  invoca- 
tion of  angels  receives  no  countenance  from 
him,  but  the  contrary. 

Ver.  3. — I  have  seen  the  foolish  taking 
root.  The  "I"  is  emphatic.  "J  myself 
have  seen,"  etc.  What  Eliphaz  had  seen 
was  that  folly,  i.e.  sinful  infatuation,  was 
always  punished.  It  might  seem  to  prosper : 
the  foolish  man  might  seem  to  be  taking 
ro"*;  but  Eliphaz  was  not  deceived  by 
appearances — he  saw  through  them,  he 
knew  that  there  was  a  curse  upon  the  man's 
house,  and  so  j)ronpunced  it  accursed.  And 
the  ruin  which  he  had  foreseen,  it  is  im- 
plied, followed.  But  suddenly ;  lathei',  im- 
medicdely,  without  Jiesitation.  I  cursed  his 
habitation;  i.e.  "pronounced  it  accursed, 
declared  that  the  curse  of  God  rested  upon 
it." 

Ver.  4. — His  children  are  far  from  safety. 
The  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  upon  the 
children.  Eliphaz  makes  covert  allusion  to 
the  death  of  Job's  children  (oh.  i.  19).  Feel- 
ing, however,  that  he  is  on  delicate  ground, 
he  goes  on  into  details  which  in  no  way  fit 
their  case.  And  (he  says)  they  are  crushed 
in  thcigate ;  i.e.  they  are  oppressed,  crushed, 
by  litigations.  The  house  once  smitten  of 
God,  human  beasts  of  prey  enter  in ;  claims 
are  made  against  the  children;  lawsuits 
commenced ;  all  the  arts  of  ohioaneiy  set  in 
motion ;  every  effort  made  to  strip  them  of 
their  last  penny.  (For  the  sense  here 
assigned  to  "  the  gate,"  see  ch.  xxix.  7  and 
xxxi.  21.)  Neither  is  there  any  to  deliver 
them.  No  one  intercedes  on  their  behalf, 
undertakes  tlieir  defence  in  the  courts,  or 
makes  any  eifort  to  avert  their  luin.  This 
picture  of  legal  oppression  accords  v«ry 
closely  with  what  we  know  of  the  East  in 
all  ages  (oomp.  laa.  i.  17,23;  iii.  14,  15; 
V.  23;  X.  2,  etc.).  Oriental  cowardice 
causes' men  to  shrink  from  casting  in  their 


lot  with  those  whom  Misfortune  has  marked 
as  her  own. 

Ver.  5. — Whose  harvest  the  hungry  eateth 
np.  Covetous  men  rush  in  and  "eat  up" 
all  that  the  family  possesses,  thus  bringing 
it  to  the  extreme  of  poverty  and  want.  And 
taketh  it  even  ont  of  the  tboms.  Vain  is 
any  protection  that  may  be  devised.  As 
hedges,'even  of  the  prickly  pear,  <lo  not  keep 
out  a  band  of  plunderers,  so  tliere  is  no 
obstacle  which  those  bent  on  robbing  them 
will  not  overcome.  A.nd  the  robber  swal- 
lowieth  up  their  substance ;  or,  the  thirsty ; 
i.e.  those  who  thirst  after  it. 

Ver.  6. — AlthCugh  affliction  cometh  not 
forth  of  the  dnst,  neither  doth  trouble  spring 
out  of  UiB  ground.  There  is  a  tacit  reference 
to  what  was  said  in  cb.  iv.  8.  AfSiction 
and  trouble  are  not  chance  products  of 
spontaneous  growth.  They  only  spring  up 
when  men  have  prepared  the  ground  for 
them,  and  planted  in  it  an  evil  seed. 

Ver.  7. — Yet  man  is  bom  unto  trouble. 
Yet  still,  in  point  of  fact,  man  is  born  to 
trouble.  He  has  a  corrupt  nature,  and 
always  sins  -more  or  less.  Bach  sin  brings 
him  into  trouble,  since  it  entails  on  him  a 
punishment.  As  the  sparks  fly  upward  ;  lite 
rally,  tlie  sons  of  flame.  Some  suppose  "  me- 
teoric flashes  "  to  be  meant :  others  suggest, 
"  ignited  arrows."  But  many  good  Hebraists 
maintain  tlie  rendering  of  the  Authorized 
Version  (see  Buxtorf,  '  Lexicon,'  p.  757 ; 
Eosenmuller, '  Scholia,'  vol.  v.  p.  165 ;  Canon 
Cook,  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  iv.  p. 
34). 

Ver.  8. — I  would  seek  unto  God ;  rather, 
as  in  the  Eevised  Ver.sion  ;  but  at  for  me,  I 
would  seek,  etc.;  i.e.  if  the  case  were  mine, 
if  I  were  afflicted  as  thou  art,  I  would  not 
betake  myself  to  any  of  the  angels  (see 
ver.  1),  but  would  cast  myself  wholly  upon 
God,  It  is  necessarily  implied  that  Job 
had  not  done  so.  And  unto  Ood  would  I 
commit  my  cause  (oomp.  Ps.  xxxvii.  5 ;  Prov. 
xvi.  3). 

Ver.  9. — Which  doeth  great  things  and 
unsearchable.  These  are  reasons  why  Job 
should  "  seA  unto  God."  '"  Great  things 
are  those  which  he  has  done."  Tliere  is  none 
like  unto  him.  His  ways  are  "ui^Seajch- 
able ; "  no  one  may  think  fully  to  search 
them  and  seek  them  out  (conip.  oh.  ix.  10; 
xxxvii.  5 ;  Ps.  cxlv.  3 ;  Rom.  xi.  33).  It 
may  be  that,  if  Job  will  appeal  to  him,  a 
result  will  follow  that  at  present  seeraa 
impossible.  For  he  doeth  marvellous  thinf  s 
without  number  (comp.  Ps.  xL  5 ;  Ixxii.  18 ; 
Ixxvii.  14 ;  cxxxvi.  4).  Eliphaz  proceeds  to 
mention  some  of  them. 

Ver.  10. — Who^veth  rain  upon  the  earth. 
To  the  dweller  in  the  parched  regions  of 
South-Westem  Asia  rain  is  the  gi'eatest  of 
all  blessings,  and  seems  the  greatust  of  al  I 


86 


THE   BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[CH.  V.  1—27. 


marvels.  When  for  months  and  months 
together  the  sun  has  blazed  all  day  long  out 
of  a  clou<lles3  sky,  when  the  heaven  that  is 
over  his  head  has  been  brass,  and  the  earth 
that  is  under  him  iron  (Deut.  xxviii.  33),  a 
great  despair  comes  upon  him,  and  that  it 
should  ever  rain  again  seema  almost  an 
impossibility.  Where  is  the  rain  to  come 
Irom?  From  that  cruel,  glaring  sky,  which 
has  pursued  him  with  its  hostility  week 
after  week,  and  month  after  mouth  ?  Or 
from  that  parched  earth  in  which,  as  it 
seems,  no  atom  of  moisture  is  left?  When 
God  at  lengtli  gives  rain,  he  scarcely 
believes  his  eyes.  What?  The  blessed 
moisture  is  once  more  descending  from  the 
sky,  and  watering  the  earth,  and  quickening 
what  seemed  dead,  and  turning  the  desert 
into  a  garden  I  All  Eastern  poetry  is  full 
of  the  praises  of  rain,  of  its  blessedness,  of 
its  mai-vellousness,  and  of  its  quickening 
power.  Very  naturally  Eliphaz,  in  speaking 
of  God's  marvellous  works  of  mercy,  men- 
tions rain  first,  as,  within  his  expezieuce, 
one  of  the  chief.  And  sendeth  waters  upon 
the  fields.  This  is  either  the  usual  pleo- 
nastic repetition  of  the  second  hemistich,  or 
(perhaps)  a  reference  to  the  fountains  and 
rills  of  water,  which  spring  into  being  as  a 
consequence  of  the  rain. 

Yer.  11. — To  set  up  on  high  those  that  be 
low.  God's  physical  blessings  are  intended 
to  subserve  moral  ends.  He  gives  his  rain, 
both  the  former  and  the  latter,  to  raise  up 
men  from  despair,  to  enable  them  to  see  in 
him  a  God  of  mercy  as  well  as  a  God  of 
vengeance ;  and  with  the  same  object,  after 
withholding  it  from  us  for  a  while,  he  pours 
into  our  parched  hearts  the  dew  of  his  Holy 
Spirit.  That  those  which  mourn  may  be 
exalted  to  safety;  or,  "raised  to  safety" 
(Lee). 

Yer.  12. — He  disappointeth  the  devices  of 
the  crafty;  or,  frustrateth — makes  them 
ef  no  effect  (comp.  Ps.  xxxiii.  10 ;  Isa.  viii. 
10).  Some  suppose  Eliphaz  to  insinuate 
here  that  Job's  apparent  wisdom  has  not 
been  true  wisdom,  but  cunning  or  craft,  and 
that  therefore  God  has  brought  it  to  nought. 
But  to  us  it  rather  seems  that  he  enunciates 
a  general  sentiment,  and  a  true  one.  He  is 
giving  examples  of  the  "  marvellous  tilings  " 
which  God  does  (ver.  9),  and  naturally 
enumerates  among  them  his  victories  over 
the  craft  and  cunning  of  his  adversaries 
(comp.  Isa.  xliv.  25).  So  that  their  hands 
cannot  perform  their  enterprise;  liteially, 
and  their  hands  accomplish  nothing  solid. 
No  substantial  result  is  eifeoted  by  all  their 
scheming. 

Ver.  13. — He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own 
craftiness.  Men  are,  as  Shakespeare  says, 
"  hoist  with  their  own  petard."  They  "  fall 
into  their  owu  nets  together  "  (Ps.  cxli.  11), 


while  the  godly,  their  intended  prey,  "escape 
them."  And  this  is  God's  doing — it  is  his 
providence  which  brings  it  to  pass.  And 
the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried  head- 
long ;  or,  "  put  to  confusion  "  (Lee). 

Ver.  14. — They  meet  with  darkness  in  the 
daytime  (comp  Deut.  xxviii.  29  and  Isa. 
lix.  10).  The  metaphor  expresses  the  be- 
wilderment of  the  crafty,  when  they  find 
their  schemes  foiled,  and  all  their  sabtlety 
of  no  avail.  Suddenly  their  light  goes  out ; 
they  know  not  what  to  do,  or  which  way 
to  turn  ;  "  their  way  is  hid  "  (oh.  iii.  23) ; 
they  are  baflSed,  perplexed,  confounded.  ABd 
grope  in  the  noonday  as  in  the  night  (comp. 
ch.  xii.  25).  A  variant  form  of  the  preced- 
ing hemistich. 

Ver.  15. — But  he  saveth  the  poor  from  the 
sword,  from  their  month ;  rather,  from  tlit 
sword  of  their  mouth;  i.e.  from  their  orael  and 
destructive  words  (Ps.  Ivii.  i;  Ixiv.  3;  Prov. 
xii.  18),  which  cut  "  like  a  sharp  razor " 
(Ps.  Iii.  2).  By  calumny,  innuendoes,  lies, 
fraudulent  representations,  and  the  like,  the 
ungodly  work,  perhaps,  more  injury  than  by 
their  actions.  And  from  the  hand  of  the 
mighty.  God  delivers  the  poor  both  from 
their  words  and  from  their  deeds. 

Ver.  16. — So  the  poor  hath  hope.  With 
the  fall  of  each  crafty  oppressor,  the  poor 
man's  hopes  revive.  He  feels  that  "God 
ruleth  in  Jacob,  and  unto  the  ends  of  the 
world  "  (Ps.  lix.  13).  He  recognizes  the  fact 
that  the  Almighty  "  maintains  the  cause  of 
the  afflicted,  and  the  right  of  the  poor" 
(Ps.  0x1. 12),  that  he  is  "  a  Eefuge  for  the  op- 
pressed, a  Eefuge  in  times  of  trouble  "  (Ps. 
ix.  9).  And  iniquity  stoppeth  her  month 
(comp.  Ps.  cvii.  42).  Either  "  the  oppres- 
sors themselves  are  struck  dumb,  recognizing 
the  fact  that  God  is  against  them;"  or 
"  those  who  perversely  question  God's  ways 
are  struck  dumb,  seeing  his  retributive 
justice."  If  we  understand  the  passage  in 
the  latter  sense,  we  may  see  in  it  a  reproof 
of  Job's  murmurs  against  his  treatment  by 
God(ch.  iii.  11—26). 

Ver.  17. — Behold,  happy  is  the  man  whom 
God  oorrecteth !  This  "  opens,"  as  Professor 
Lee  observes,  "  a  new  view  of  the  subject." 
Hitherto  Eliphaz  has  regarded  afflictions 
as  simply  punitive.  Now  it  occurs  to  him 
that  they  are  sometimes  chastisements. 
The  difference  is  that  punishment  has  regard 
only  to  tlie  past,  to  the  breach  of  the  moral 
law  committed,  and  the  retribution  which 
has  to  follow  it.  Chastisement  looks  to 
the  future.  It  aims  at  producing  an  effect 
in  the  mind  of  the  person  oliastised,  at 
benefiting  him,  and  raising  him  in  the  scale 
of  moral  being.  In  this  point  of  view 
afflictions  are  blessings  (see  Heb.  xii.  5 — 11). 
Recognizing  this,  Kliphaz  suddenly  bursts 
out  with  the  acknowledgment,  "Happy  ii 


OH.  ».  1—27.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


87 


the  rnnn  [or,  'blessings  on  the  man'] 
whom  God  correcteth  1 "  (comp.  Prov.  iii.  11, 
12;  Pa.  xoiv.  12;  1  Cor.  xi.  32).  He 
suggests  to  Job  the  idea  that  his  sufferings 
are  not  punishments,  but  chastisements — 
that  they  may  be  but  for  a  time.  Let  him 
receive  them  in  a  proper  spirit;  let  him 
humble  himself  under  them,  and  they  may 
work  altogether  for  his  good,  his  latter  end 
may  surpass  his  eaily  promise.  Therefore 
despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the 
Almighty.  Words  quoted  by  the  authors 
of  Proverbs  (iii.  11),  and  of  tlie  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews  (xii.  5),  and  well  deserving  to 
be  laid  up  in  the  recollection  of  all  faithful 
souls.  They  remind  us  that  God's  chasten- 
inga  are  blessings  or  the  contrary,  as  we 
make  them.  Accepted  humbly,  they  im- 
prove men,  exalt  the  moral  character,  purge 
it  of  its  dross,  and  bring  it  nearer  to  the 
perfection  at  which  God  would  have  us  aim 
(Matt.  V.  48).  Rejected,  chafed  against, 
received  with  discontent  and  murmurings, 
they  injure  us,  cause  our  characters  to 
deteriorate,  sink  us  instead  of  raising  us  in 
the  moral  scale.  Job  was  now  undergning 
the  ordeal — with  what  result  remained  to 
be  determined. 

Ver.  18. — For  he  maketh  sore,  and  bindeth 
up.  Metaphors  drawn  from  the  healing  art. 
He  "maketh  sore" — applies  the  scalpel 
and  the  cautery  when  and  where  they  are 
needed ;  and  then,  after  a  while,  "  bindeth 
up  " — employs  his  lint  and  bandages ;  in 
both  cases  alike  seeking  the  good  of  the 
Butferer.  He  woundeth,  and  his  hands  make 
whole  (comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  39  ;  Hos.  vi.  1). 

Ver.  19.— He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six 
troubles :  yea,  in  seven  (comp.  Amos  i.  3, 
6,  9,  11,  13,  "  For  three  transgressions  . .  . 
and  for  four").  An  idiomatio  way  of  ex- 
pressing an  indefinite  number.  There  shall 
no  evil  touch  thee;  i.e.  no  real  evil,  nothing 
calculated  to  do  thee  real  hurt.  All  affliction 
is  "for  the  present  grievous;"  but  if  it 
"afterward  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of 
righteousness  unto  them  that  are  exercised 
thereby"  (Heb.  xiL  11),  it  does  not  do  us 
harm,  but  good. 

Ver.  20. — In  famine  he  shall  redeem  thea 
from  death.  Famine  appears  throughout  the 
whole  of  Scripture  as  one  of  God's  severest 
chastisements  (see  Lev.  xxvi.  19,  20 ;  Deut. 
xxviii.  22—24;  2  Sam.  xxi.  1;  xxiv.  13;  2 
Kings  viii.  1 ;  Ps.  cv.  16;  Isa.  xiv.  30 ;  Jer. 
xxiv.  10;  Kev.  xviii.  8).  Ezekiel  speaks  of 
"the  sword,  the  famine,  the  noisome  beast, 
and  the  pestilence,"  as  God's  "four  sore 
judgments"  (Ezek.  xiv.  21).  Miraculous 
deliverances  from  famine  are  related  in  Gen. 
ill.  29—36 ;  1  Kings  xvii.  10—16 ;  2  Kings 
vii.  1—16.  And  in  war  from  the  power  of 
the  sword.  In  war  God  protects  whom  he 
trill,  and  they  seem  to  bave  dtarmed  lives. 


They  are  covered  with  his  feathers,  and  safe 
under  his  wings  (Ps.  xoi.  4). 

Ver.  21. — Thon  shalt  he  hid  from  the 
scourge  of  the  tongue  (comp.  Ps.  xxxi.  20). 
God  will  also  protect  his  own  from  "  the 
scourge  of  the  tongue,"  i.e.  from  calumny, 
from  abuse,  from  bitter  words  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ver.  15).  Neither  shalt  thou  be 
afraid  of  destruction  when  it  oometh ;  rather, 
of  devastation.  "  8h6d  (nits')  populationes, 
prsedfitiones,  calamltnsas  tempestates,  terra 
motus,  ruiiias,  incendia,  mala  omnia  vasti- 
tatem  inducentia,  amplectitur"  (Sohultens). 

Ver.  22. — ^At  destruction  (rather,  devai- 
tation)  and  famine;  rather,  dearth.  The 
word  is  not  the  same  as  that  used  in  ver. 
20,  but  a  weaker  one.  Thou  shalt  laugh; 
"  Thou  shalt  tmile "  (Lee).  Neither  shalt 
thou  he  afraid  of  the  beasts  of  the  earth. 
"  The  beasts  of  the  earth  " — i.e.  destructive 
aud  ferocious  wild  beasts,  like  the  Indian 
"  man-eaters" — are  enumerated  among  God's 
"  four  sore  plagues  "  (Ezek.  xiv.  21 ;  comp. 
2  Kings  xviL  25).  In  ancient  times  they 
were  sometimes  so  numerous  in  a  country 
that  men  were  afraid  to  occupy  it. 

Ver.  23. — For  thou  shalt  be  in  league  with 
the  stones  of  the  field;  i.e.  there  shall  lie 
peace  between  thee  and  all  the  rest  of  God's 
creation,  even  "the  stones  of  the  field," 
against  which  thou  shalt  not  dash  thy  foot 
(Ps.  xci.  12) ;  and  if  the  senseless  stones  are 
thus  in  league  with  thee,  aud  refrain  fr^ia 
doing  thee  hurt,  much  more  mayest  thou  be 
sure  that  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at 
peace  with  thee.  For  they  are  not  altogetli  er 
senseless,  and  will  in  some  sort  understand 
that  thou  art  under  God's  protection,  and 
not  to  be  molested  by  them  (comp.  Hos. 
ii.  18,  where  God  promises  to  make  a  cove- 
nant between  his  people  and  "  the  beasts  of 
the  field,  the  fowls  of  heaven,  aud  the  creep- 
ing things  of  the  ground,"  that  so  they  may 
"  lie  down  safely  ").  A  misplaced  ingenuily 
seeks  to  find  either  six  or  seven  forms  of 
calamity  in  the  enumeration  of  ver.i.  20— 
23 ;  but  there  appear  to  bo  really  only  five : 
(1)  famine ;  (2)  war ;  (3)  calumny ;  (4)  de- 
vastation; and  (5)  noisome  beasts.  The 
expression  used  in  ver.  19 — ''six,  yea, 
seven" — means,  as  already  explained,  an 
indefinite  number 

Ver.  24. — And  thou  shalt  know  that  thy 
tabernacle  shall  be  in  peace;  rather,  thij 
tent;  i.e.  thy  habitation,  whatever  it  may 
be.  Thou  shalt  feel  assured  of  peace  in 
thy  dwelling,  since  God's  peace  will  rest 
upon  it.  And  thou  shalt  visit  thy  habi- 
tation ;  or,  thy  fold  (see  the  Revised  Version). 
And  shalt  not  sin;  and  shalt  miss  nothing 
(Revised  Version).  The  exact  meaning  is 
very  uncertaiu.  Professor  Lee  renders, 
"Tliou  shalt  not  eiT;"  Schultens,  "Thou 
shalt  not  be  disappointed  of  thy  desires ; " 


88 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  v.  1—27, 


ftoscnmuller,  "  Thou  shalt  not  miBS  thy 
mark." 

Ver.  25. — Thon  shalt  know  also  that  thy 
eeed  shall  be  great.  Little  by  little  Eliphnz 
passes  from  a  general  description  of  the 
blesst'ilness  of  those  faithful  ones  who  "de- 
spise not  the  chastening  of  the  Almighty  " 
(ver.  17)  to  a  series  of  allusions  which  seem 
specially  to  touch  Job's  case.  Without 
claiming  prophetical  inspiration,  he  ventures 
to  promise  him  in  the  future  "the  exact 
reveise  of  all  that  he  had  experienced  "  in 
the  past — "  a  safe  home,  flocks  untouched, 
a  happy  and  prosperous  family,  a  peaoef^il 
old  age"  (Cook).  The  promises  may  have 
sounded  in  Job's  ears  as  "  a  mockery " 
(ibid.);  but  it  is  creditable  to  the  sagacity 
of  Eliphaz  that  he  ventured  to  make  them. 
And  thine  offspring  as  the  grass  of  the  earth. 
The  ordinary  symbols  for  multitudinous- 
ness — the  sand  of  the  sea,  and  the  stars  of 
heaven — are  here  superseded  by  an  entirely 
new  one,  "  the  grass  of  the  earth."  Un- 
doubtedly it  is  equally  appropriate,  and 
perhaps  more  natural  in  a  pastoral  com- 
munity. 

Ver.  26. — Thou  shalt  come  to  thy  grave 
in  a  full  age  (comp.  Gen.  xv.  15;  xxv. 
8 ;  XXXV.  29).  Professor  Lee  translates, 
"  Thou  shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  homour." 
But,  ou  the  whole,  the  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version  may  well  stand.  The 
expression  used  occurs  only  here  and  in 
oh.  XXX.  2.    Like  as  a  shock  of  corn  oometh 


in  in  Ms  season;  literally,  is  lifted  up.  The 
Bhocks  of  corn  were  lifted  up,  and  placed 
on  a  cart,  for  transfer  to  the  barn  or  the 
threshing-floor.  The  emphasis,  however,  is 
on  the  closing  words,  "in  his  season." 
Eliphaz  promises  Job  that  he  will  reach 
a  good  ripe  old  age,  and  not  die  untimely. 
(For  the  result,  see  ch.  xlii.  17.) 

Ver.  27 Lo  this,  we  have  searched  it,  so 

it  is.  Eliphaz  does  not  cla^m  to  be  deliver- 
ing a  Divine  message,  or  ia  any  way  stating 
results  which  he  has  learnt  from  reve- 
lation. Bather  is  he  declaring  what  he  has 
"  searched  out  j "  i.e.  gathered  with  much 
trouble  from  intjuiry,  observation,  and  ex- 
perience. He  ia,  however,  quite  confident 
that  he  has  arrived  at  a  true  conclusion, 
and  expects  Job  to  accept  it  and  act  upon 
it.  Hear  it,  and  know  thou  it  for  thy  good ; 
literally, /ar  thyself.  Make  the  knowledge, 
i.e.,  which  I  have  communicated  to  thee, 
thine  own.  Professor  Lee  observes,  "  There 
is  nothing  in  all  this  savouring  of  any 
asperity,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  beyond  the 
anxieties  of  true  friendship.  The  senti- 
ments delivered  from  ver.  17  to  the  end  of 
the  chapter  are  not  only  most  excellent  in 
themselves,  but  perfectly  applicable  to  Job's 
case ;  and  were,  in  the  event,  made  good  in 
every  reSpect.  It  is  true,  we  have  not  much 
sympathy  expressed  for  Job's  bereavements 
and  afSictions.  And,  in  this  respect,  Eli- 
phaz was,  no  doubt,  to  blame  "  ('  Book  of  the 
Patriarch  Job,'  p.  216). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Eliphaz  to  Job :  3. .  The  history  of  a  fool.  I.  The  fool's  charaoter. 
1.  An  impious  fool.  The  mental  and  moral  portrait  of  the  uevil  (ver.  2)  is  minutely 
outlined  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  as  distinguished  by  contempt  of  true  wisdom  (Prov. 
i.  7),  talkativeness  (Pfov.  x.  8),  self-conceit  (Prov.  xii.  15),  irritability  of  temper 
(Prov.  xii.  16),  pride  (Prov.  xiv.  3),  fretfulness  against  (Jod  (Prov.  xix.  3),  sinful- 
ness of  thought  (Prov.  xxiv.  9),  etc.,  most  of  which  qualities  were,  in  the  judgment  of 
Eliphaz,  possessed  by  the  aevil  whom  he  depicted,  who  was  probably  Job.  2.  A  moral 
simpleton.  The  potheh  is  also  sketched  in  Proverbs,  as  one  who  is  easily  seduced  by 
temjitation  (Prov.  ix.  14 — 18)  and  flattery  (Prov.  vii.  7);  who  is  destitute  of  any 
power  of  self-restraint,  credulous  of  what  he  hears  (Prov.  xiv.  15),  and  heedless  of 
danger  (Prov.  xxvii.  12).     According  to  Eliphaz,  he  is  also  marked  by  envy. 

II.  The  fool's  isolation.  1.  Unheeded  by  God.  "  Call  now,  if  there  be  any  that  will 
answer  thee  "  (ver.  1) ;  perhaps  meaning  ironically,  "  Yon  had  better  prepare  an  indict- 
meni  against  the  Deity."  Practically,  implies  Eliphaz,  this  is  what  the  sinner  does  who 
storms  at  the  Divine  dispensations  towards  him.  AH  sin  is  more  or  less  an  impeach- 
ment of  the  Divine  righteousness  and  equity  (Gen.  iii.  1).  Yet  so  utterly  wild  and 
extravagant  is  the  idea  of  a  puny,  sinful  creature  like  man  entering  the  lists  against 
God;  so  immeasurably  foolish  as  well  as  presumptuous  the  imagination  that  Infinite 
Purity  and  Wisdom  can  be  arraigned  with  any  hope  of  success,  that  the  speaker  repre- 
sents the  sinner's  clamorous  outcries  as  ringing  unheeded  and  unheard  through  the 
silent  heavens.  'I  he  Ineffable  Supreme  gives  no  indication  that  he  is  so  much  as  con- 
scious of  his  accuser's  presence;  neither  replying  himself  nor  commissioning'another 
to  appear  In  his  behalf.  The  silence  of  Heaven,  frequently  niiscon.-,ti  ued  by  the  sinner 
(Ps.  1.  21),  if  indicative  of  the  Divine  patience  and  clemency,  w  no  luss  eloquent  of  the 


OH.T.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  89 


Divine  security  against,  and  Divine  contempt  for,  the  sinner.  2.  Unassisted  hy  Ms 
fellow-creatwres.  "  To  wliich  of  the  holy  ones,"  saints  or  more  probably  angels,  "  wilt 
thou  turn  ?  "  i.e.  in  order  to  procure  help  in  thine  outrageous  suit  against  the  Almighty. 
Eliphaz  assumes  that  wicked  men  and  fallen  angels  could  not,  while  with  equal  con- 
fidence he  asserts  that  good  men  and  holy  angels  would  not,  assist  a  fool  in  any  such 
presumptuous  enterprise.  The  language  graphically  portrays  the  sinner's  impotence 
against  God  (Isa.  xxvii.  4). 

III.  The  fool's  misery.  1.  Consumed  with  chagrin.  "  Wrath  killeth  the  foolish 
man."  The  term  "  wrath  "  includes  in  its  signiflcation  inward  vexation  at  one's 
own  wretched  lot.  It  is  the  opposite  of  that  calm,  quiescent,  submissive  meekness 
which  a  good  man  strives  to  evince  in  adversity,  and  which  was  exemplified  by  David 
(Ps.  xxxix.  9),  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  vi.  9,  10),  and  Job  (ch.  i.  21).  2.  Eaten  up  of  envy. 
"  Envy  slayeth  the  silly  one."  Fretfulness  as  regards  one's  own  particular  condition 
is  commonly  associated  with  envy  at  the  good  (real  or  supposed)  of  others.  As  only 
a  sincerely  good  man  can  heartily  rejoice  in  the  prosperity  of  his  neighbour,  so  is  it 
only  a  bad  man,  a  moral  weakling,  who  allows  himself  to  be  irritated  thereby.  David 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  1),  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2),  and  St.  Paul  fRom.  xiii.  13;  Gal.  v.  21),  warn 
against  this  supreme  manifestation  of  folly.  3.  Devoured  by  rage.  "  Wrath  [passion] 
killeth  the  foolish  man."  The  prominent  idua  in  the  term  "  wrath  "  is  that  of  indigna- 
tion against  the  Arbiter  of  human  destiny.  It  is  the  object  of  Bli[ihaz  to  depict  at  once 
the  supreme  unhappiness  of  the  fool  as  the  victim  of  his  own  evil  passions,  and  the 
appalling  destiny  of  the  fool  which  is  that  of  a  moral  suicide ;  his  destruction,  when 
it  comes,  being  not  so  much  inflicted  by  the  stroke  of  God's  hand  as  wrought  out  by 
the  inward  violence  of  his  own  sinful  lusts — a  melancholy  illustration  of  the  auto- 
nemesis  of  sin. 

IV.  Thb  fool's  overthrow.  1.  Unea^ected.  Destruction  springs  upon  the  poor 
fool  when  least  anticipated,  when,  having  struck  down  his  roots  and  sent  forth  his 
branches,  he  appears  to  be  flourishing  like  a  green  bay  tree  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35),  and  to 
have  attained  to  a  position  of  conspicuous  prosperity,  of  great  power,  and  absolute 
security  (1  Sam.  xxv.  37  ;  Luke  xii.  20 ;  Acts  xii.  23).  2.  Sudden.  In  an  instant  the 
scene  changes,  and  the  fair  tree  of  his  prosperity  stands  scorched  and  blasted,  leafless 
and  bare.  "  Suddenly  I  cursed  his  habitatioo ; "  i.e.  I  beheld  it  cursed.  This  has 
sometimes  been  true,  as  Asaph  testifies  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  20),  and  as  facts  witness  (Nebuchad- 
nezzar, Haman,  Herod,  the  two  Napolecms),  though  not  always  (Ps.  itvii.  14 ;  Ixxiii.  4). 
3.  Visible.  The  approach  of  the  fool's  fall,  seldom  apprehended  by  himself,  is  commonly  ■ 
foreseen  by  others.  "Suddenly  I  cursed  his  habitation;"  meaning  that  the  moment 
Eliphaz  beheld  the  foolish  one  taking  root,  he  pronounced  his  homestead  cursed  j  he 
could  anticipate  nothing  for  him  but  a  speedy  and  swift  engulfment  in  dark  mis- 
fortune. So  in  the  moral,  no  less  than  in  the  material,  world,  "coming  events  cast 
their  shadows  before."  4.  Complete.  The  fool's  overthrow  extends  to :  (1)  His  family. 
"  His  children  are  far  from  safety."  Reduced  to  straitened  circumstances  in_  conse- 
quence of  their  father's  ruin,  they  mutually  "  crush  each  other  in  the  gate ; "  i.e.  con- 
sume each  other  in  vexatious  litigation,  thus  sharing  in  the  punishment,  while  they 
follow  in  the  steps,  of  their  wicked  parent.  Nor  does  their  misery  excite  the  sympathy, 
or  provoke  the  friendly  interference,  of  onlookers.  "  Neither  is  there  an/  to  deliver." 
If  it  is  prudent  not  to  meddle  with  the  strife  of  others  (Prov.  xxvi.  17),  it  is  still 
doubtful  if  good  men  should  be  indifferent  to  the  calamities  of  others,  even  though  they 
are  wicked  (Prov.  xxiv.  11).  (2)  His  possessions.  The  famished  thie^  prowling  about 
the  fool's  farmyard,  picks  up  whatever  he  can  lay  hands  on,  and,  emboldened  by  the 
desolation  he  beholds,  carries  off  the  well-stacked  grain.  Though  no  man's  property 
can  be  said  to  enjoy  an  absolute  immunity  from  thievish  depredations  (Matt.  vi.  19), 
yet  it  is  certain  that  wicked  men's  treasures  are  peculiarly  liable  to  decay  (Jas.  v.  3). 
Only  the  good  man's  treasures  in  the  heavens  are  permanently  safe.  Then  "  the  robber 
Bwallowet^h  up  [literally,  '  the  snare  gapeth  lor ']  his  substance ;  "  i.e.  wicked  schemers 
lie  ill  wait  to  pounce  upon  his  property,  concerting  measures  to  carry  off  what  httle  has 
been  left  by  the  hungry  thiev«s.  When  thief  robs  thief,  then  the  devil  gets  his  own. 
"  When  the  soul  of  the  wicked  desireth  evil,  then  his  neighbour  flndeth  no  favour  in 
his  eyes  "  (Prov.  xxi.  10).  5.  Righteous.  The  calamity  which  overtakes  the  fool  is 
Aot  an  accident  or  unfortunate  mischance,  net  the  production  of  earth  and  its  physical 


90  THE  BOOK   OF  JOB.  [oh.  v.  1—27. 

constitution  (ver.  6),  but  the  inevitable  result  of  a  law  under  which  man,  as  a  moral 
being,  has  been  placed,  viz.  that  if  he  sin,  he  shall  suffer  as  certainly  aa  the  sparks  fly 
upward. 

Learn :  1.  There  is  no  appeal  for  man  against  the  judgments  of  a  holy  God.  2. 
When  God  forsakes  a  sinner,  all  the  saints  on  earth  (as  well  as  acgels  in  heaven)  forsake 
him  too.  3.  The  greatest  enemy  a  sinner  has  is  himself.  4.  Rage  against  God's  judg- 
ments is  more  dangerous  to  a  soul  than  are  the  judgments  themselves.  5.  Neither  per- 
manence nor  prosperity  is  a  certain  mark  of  goodness,  since  foolish  men  may  take  root. 
6.  The  prosperity  of  fools  is  a  great  trial  to  saints.  7.  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the 
habitation  of  the  wicked.  8.  Outward  good  things  are  no  mark  of  the  Divine  favour. 
9.  When  fathers  eat  sour  grapes,  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge.  10.  Men 
frequently  fail  to  enjoy  that  upon  which  they  have  bestowed  much  labour.  11.  God 
often  uses  the  wicked  to  punish  the  wicked  in  this  life.  12.  Man's  sufferings  do  not 
spring  from  his  surroundings,  but  from  himsel£  13.  The  suffering  condition  of  man 
b  incontestable  evidence  of  a  fall. 

Vers.  8 — 16. — Eliphaz  to  Job :  4.  The  sainfa  confidence  in  God.  I.  TirB  saint's 
OHAEACTBB  DESCRIBED.  1.  Negatively.  By  way  of  contrast  to  the  ungodly,  who  are 
depicted  as  (1)  crafty,  i.e.  persons  who  cunningly  concoct  schemes  against  either  God, 
Christ,  or  their  neighbours  (Ps.  ii.  2 ;  Acts  iv.  25 — 28) ;  (2)  strong,  i.e.  violent,  ferocious 
sinners,  who  use  their  swords  as  wild  beasts  their  mouths,  for  devouring,  eating  up, 
God's  people  as  bread  (Ps.  xiv.  4).  2.  Positively.  Exhibiting  them  as  (1)  humble 
(ver.  11),  i.e,  depressed  or  cast  down,  prostrated  by  affliction  and,  in  consequence, 
dejected  in  spirit — a  common  experience  with  God's  people;  (2)  mourning  (ver.  11), 
t.e.  going  in  squalid  garments,  expressive  of  penitential  sorrow  and  self-abasement,  and 
wherever  grace  exists  it  excites  such  emotions  in  the  heart ;  (3)  poor  (ver.  16),  i.e. 
weak,  feeble,  thin,  slender,  too  destitute  of  strength  to  be  able,  and  too  gentle  and 
patient  to  care,  to  resist  the  assaults  of  the  ungodly.  The  three  above-mentioned 
characteristics  may  be  compared  with  the  persons  specified  in  the  first  three  Beatitudes 
— the  poor  in  spirit,  the  mourners,  the  meek  (Matt.  v.  3 — 5). 

II.  The  saint's  God  extolled.  1.  As  a  Qod  of  power.  (1)  Essentially  great ;  El 
(ver.  8)  denoting  God  as  the  Strong  or  Mighty  One,  and  suggesting  a  contrast  to  the 
feebleness  of  the  saint,  and  the  violence  of  the  saint's  oppressor  above  alluded  to.  (2) 
Perpetually  active;  the  omnipotence  of  God  being  not  merely  a  potential  ability 
residing  in  his  infinite  nature,  but  a  vital  energy  continually  proceeding  forth  in  active 
operation  (John  v.  17).  (3)  Endlessly  diversified ;  the  plural  Elohim  (ver.  8)  pointing 
out  the  totality  of  his  variously  maniffsted  nature,  and  his  wonders  being  declared  to 
be  beyond  computation — a  statement  whose  correctness  not  even  the  discoveries  of 
science  have  disproved.  (4)  Infinitely  marvellous  are  the  great  things  he  performs, 
transcending  the  highest  efforts  of  the  human  intellect  to  explain,  understand,  or  even 
compute  (ch.  ix.  10 ;  xi.  7 ;  xxxvi.  26 ;  Ps.  cxlv.  3).  2.  As  a  Qod  of  henevohnce. 
Operating :  (1)  In  the  realm  of  nature ;  e.g.  by  sending  rain  upon  the  earth — a  miracle 
of  Divine  power  and  wisdom  (ch.  xxviii.  26)— to  water  the  face  of  the  thirsty  soil, 
and  cause  the  rivers  to  overflow  their  banks  upon  the  pasture- grounds,  to  render  them 
fruitful — a  miracle  of  Divine  goodness  (Ps.  Ixviii.  9 ;  Jer.  v.  24 ;  Acts  xiv.  7)  ;  that  he 
might  deliver  men  from  dismal  apprehensions  as  to  prospective  failure  in  the  promised 

harvest,  and  convert  their  doleful  vaticinations  into  triumphant  hallelujahs a  miracle 

of  grace  and  compassion  (Ps.  cxlvii.  8).  (2)  In  the  sphere  of  humanity;  e.g.  by  (o) 
confounding  the  crafty, — exploding  their  schemes,  neutralizing  their  actions,  outwitting 
their  cunning,  precipitating  their  purposes,  so  causing  their  best-oonoocted  devices  to 
appear  structures  of  consummate  folly,  and  themselves  to  look  like  stupid  buliglers,  as 
helpless  and  periilexed  as  men  stumbling  in  the  darkness  of  night  (examples:  the 
tower-builders  of  Babel,  Gen.  xi.  1—9 ;  Potiphar'swife,  Gen.  xxxix.  1—23 ;  Ahithophel, 
2  Sam.  XV.  31 ;  Haman,  Esth.  vii.  10) ;  (6)  rescuing  the  poor, — delivering  them  from 
the  hands  of  their  enemies  (e.g.  the  Israelites  from  Egypt,  Exod.  xviii.  30;  St.  PeteT 
from  Herod,  Acts  xii.  11 ;  St.  Paul  from  Nero,  2  Tim.  Iv.  17),  inspiring  them  with 
hope,  and  not  only  silencing  their  calumniators  and  oppressors,  but  sometimes  striking 
them  dumb  with  horror  and  amazement  at  God'»  manifest  interposition  on  behalf  of 
his  suffering  servants. 


OH.  V.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  91 

III.  The  saint's  confidence  declared.  1.  Emphatically.  ",  Nevertheless  I  would  " 
do  so  and  so.  As  Eliphaz  delicately  insinuated  that  Job  was  a  fool,  so  here  he  dues 
not  hesitate  to  propose  himself  as  the  perfect  model  of  a  wise  man.  No  doubt  this 
resulted  from  want  of  modesty  on  the  part  of  Eliphaz ;  but  still,  overlooking  this,  the 
bold,  unhesitating  character  of  his  avowal  is  not  altogether  unworthy  of  imitation. 
God's  saints  and  Christ's  followers  should  never  be  ashamed  to  confess  their  confidence 
in  God,  or  avow  their  attachment  to  Christ  (Matt.  v.  16 ;  x.  32 ;  Rom.  i.  16).  2. 
Sincerely.  "  But  1 — I  would  seek  unto  God ;  unto  God  would  I  commit  my  cause."  The 
speaker  signifies  that  his  trust  in  God  was  no  mere  lipTprofession,  but  a  heart-emotion 
which  would  lead  him,  if  circumstanced  as  Job  was,  to  have  recourse  to  God,  and  ta 
eoiiimit  his  cause  to  the  Godhead  in  prayer  and  in  the  exercise  of  faith.  And  certainly, 
if  God  should  be  sought  for  at  all  times  (1  Cliron.  xvi.  11),  he  should  specially  be 
resorted  to  in  time  of  trouble  (Ps.  1.  15)—"  for  counsel  and  direction  in  it ;  for  comlort 
and  support  under  ii;  for  grace,  to  glorify  God  hy  it;  for  deliverance  in  God's  own  time 
and  way  out  of  it;  for  the  spiritual  benefit  and  improvement  intended  through  it" 
(Robinson).  3.  Hopefully.  Though  not  affirmed  at  the  outset,  it  is  clearly  expressed 
at  the  end.  "  So,"  i.e.  by  going  to  God  and  committing  one's  cause  to  him,  "  the  poor 
hath  hope ;  "  God  having  revealed  himself  as  the  Hearer,  and  therefore  as  the  Answerer, 
of  prayer  (Exod.  xxii.  27 ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9 ;  ch.  xii.  4 ;  xxii.  27  ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  17 ; 
xxxvii.  5  ;  Matt.  xxi.  22 ;  Phil.  iv.  6) ;  and  this  being  sufiScient  ground  fur  the  saint's 
confident  expect.ition  that  God  will  interpose  for  his  succour  and  salvation. 

Learn  :  1.  It  is  not  enough  to  simply  reprove  those  whom  we  believe  to  have  erred ; 
we  must  likewise  instruct  them  how  to  amend.  2.  The  best  thing  to  do  with  trouble  ot 
any  sort  is  to  carry  it  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  leave  it  there.  3.  There  is  no  God 
"like  the  saint's  God,  the  saint's  enemies  themselves  being  judges.  4.  God  has  given 
men  and  saints  the  highest  reason  to  trust  him:  the  first,  the  wonders  of  nature;  the 
second,  the  marvels  of  grace.  5.  The  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  thun  men,  while  the 
foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men.  6.  If  God  can  turn  the  daylight  into  darkness 
round  his  enemies,  he  can  also  turn  the  darkness  into  light  round  himself  and  his 
people.  7.  God  can  rescue  his  people  from  the  greatest  perils,  from  the  mouth  of  the 
grave,  and  from  the  jaws  of  hell.  8.  It  is  no  vain  thing  to  hope  in  God,  since  we  are 
saved  by  hope,  and  God  loveth  them  that  hope  in  his  mercy.  9.  The  tongues  of  wicked 
men,  however  they  may  now  blaspheme  the  Name  and  revile  the  children  of  God,  will 
yet  be  effectually  put  to  silence.  10.  When  Christ  comes  at  last  to  save  his  poor  ones, 
the  ungodly  world  will  stand  speechless  and  self-condemned. 

Ver.  8. — Seeking  unto  Ood.  I.  What  it  pebsupposes.  1.  Belief  in  the  existence 
of  God  (Heb.  xi.  6).  2.  Consciousness  of  need  (Jas.  i.  5).  3.  Desire  for  Divine  assist- 
ance (Ps.  Ixiii.  1). 

II.  What  it  implies.  1.  A  realization  of  God's  nearness  to  the  soul  (Ps.  cxlv.  18). 
2.  A  solicitation  of  God's  help  for  the  soul  (Matt.  vii.  7 ;  Heb.  iv.  16).  3.  An  accepta- 
tion of  God's  provisions  for  the  soul  (Malt.  v.  6). 

III.  What  IT  produces.  1.  Inward  coniposure  (Isa.xxvi.  3),  2.  Hopeful  expecta- 
tion (Ps.  xlii.  11).     3.  Ultimate  salvation  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5 ;  Prov.  xvi.  3 ;  ch.  xxii.  27). 

Learn :  1.  The  grace  of  God  in  permitting  men  to  seek  him.  2.  The  wisdom  of  men 
in  avaihng  themselves  of  this  permission. 

Ver.  9. — TJie  great  works  of  Ood.  I.  The  creation  or  the  universe.  A  signal 
display  oi"  Divine  power  and  wisdom. 

II.  The  government  of  the  world.  A  striking  evidence  of  the  Divine  omniscience 
and  omnipresence. 

III.  The  ebdemption  of  the  race.  A  sublime  revelation  of  Divine  grace  and 
compassion. 

Yer  10. Bain.     I.  God's  creature.    1.  Made  by  God  (ch.  xxviii.  26 ;  xxxviii. 

28;  Jer.  xiv.  22).  2.  Sent  by  God  (P.s.  Ixr.  10;  Ixviii.  9;  Jer.  v.  24).  3.  Withheld 
byGodh  Kingsxvii.  1;   Amosiv.  7;  Zech.  Kiv.  17). 

II.  Earth's  servant.  I  Cleansing  the  atmosphere.  2.  Fertilizing  the  soil.  3, 
FiUiiig  the  rivers.    4   Modi  i  •  'ing  the  heat 


B2  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  t.  1—27. 


III.  Man's  teacher.  1.  A  symbol  of  truth  (Dettt.  xxxji.  2  j  Isa.  ly.  10).  2.  An 
emblem  of  grace  (Ps.  ixviii.  9 ;  Hos.  vi.  3 ;  Ps.  Ixxii.  6).  3.  A  picture  of  prosperity 
(ch.  xxix.  23). 

Learn  s  1.  To  value  the  gift  (1  Kings  vUi.  36).    2.  To  fear  the  Giver  (Jer.  v.  24)  of 

rain. 

Ver.  16. — The  poor  man*$  hope.     I.  Great  w  its  expbotationb.     Looking  for 

salvation. 

II,  Divine  in  its  origin.    Being  implanted  by  God. 

II  r.  FiKM  IN  ITS  foundation.  Resting,  not  upon  his  own  piety  or  strength,  but 
upon  God's  i;racious  interposition  on  his  b^alf. 

IV.  Present  in  its  enjoyment.  The  poor  hath  hope ;  it  forms  a  principle  within 
them  now. 

V.  Sustaining  in  its  operation.    Upholding  in  trouble. 

VI.  Certain  in  its  end.    Arriving  at  ultimate  fulfilment. 

Vers.  17 — 27. — Eliphaz  to  Job  t  5.  The  blessedness  of  chastendng.  I.  Chastening — 
its  nature.  1.  Its  subject.  Man,  as  a  fallen  being;  for,  though  aflSiction  cannot 
always  be  connected  with  particular  transgressions  as  their  immediate  punishment,  it 
is  still  true  that  man's  sinfiilness  is  the  fundamental  reason  of  his  being  subjected  to 
correction.  2.  Its  AutJior.  God.  A  thought  full  of  comfort  to  the  chastened ;  since, 
God  being  just,  their  correction  will  never  be  allowed  to  exceed  their  deserts ;  being 
mtrciful,  it  will  never  be  administered  with  undue  severity  ;  being  wise,  it  will  never 
be  inflicted  without  an  adequate  design  ;  and  being  powerful,  it  will  never  fail,  where 
piously  accepted,  to  accomplish  its  end.  3.  Its  instrument.  Calamity,  trouble,  afflic- 
tion, such  as  Job  had  experienced,  and  such  as  men  undergo  on  earth.  Those  who 
suffer  may  derive  consolation  from  the  thought  tjiat  the  rod  which  smites  them  is 
not  in  the  devil's  hand  (except  by  Divine  permission)  or  in  the  hand  of  blind,  unfeeling 
fate,  but  in  the  hand  of  a  loving  and  sympathetic  God.  4.  Its  purpose.  Man's  refor- 
mation. It  is  doubtful  if  any  of  the  sufferings  of  this  life  are  purely  punitive  and 
judicial,  while  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  all  are  corrective  and  remedial  in  their 
design.  According  to  Eliphaz,  they  are  meant  to  chastise  man  for  his  iniquity,  to  bring 
him  to  repentance,  and  to  reduce  him  to  obedient  submission  under  God  (of.  ch.  xxxiii. 
17,  19;  Ps.  xciv.  12,  13;  Prov.  iii.  11;  Heb.  xii.  7—11). 

II.  Chastening — its  improvement.  1.  2!4e  wrong  use  of  afiietum.  To  despise 
it.  Men  do  so  when  they  (1)  turn  from  it  with  aversion,  loathing  it  as  a  nauseating 
physic,  and  evincing  repugnance  to  submit  themselves  to  its  iufiiction;  (2)  receive  it 
with  indignatioD,  raging  against  God  for  smiting  them,  challenging  his  goodness, 
impeaching  his  integrity,  and  questioning  his  wisdom  in  so  plunging  them  into  tribu- 
ladon ;  (3)  bear  it  with  impalaence,  murmuring  against  its  painfulness,  fretting  over 
its  continuance,  and  inordinately  longing  for  its  removal ;  (4)  regard  it  with  con- 
tempt, esteeming  it  as  useless  and  unprofitable,  and  making  no  attempt  to  either  find 
out  or  fall  in  with  God's  special  purpose  in  their  correction  ;  and  (5)  issue  from  it  in 
impenitence,  with  the  heart  no  softer  and  the  spirit  no  humbler  than  when  It  was  cast 
into  the  furnace.  Such  failure  to  improve  the  Divine  ohastisement,  while  common 
in  the  case  of  wicked  men,  is  also  not  impossible  to  good  men.  2.  The  right  use  of 
affliction.  To  receive  it  (1)  with  meek  submission,  recognizing  our  need  of  Divine 
chastisement  in  consequence  of  sin  still  remaining  in  us,  if  not  in  visitation  for  actual 
wickedness  performed  by  us,  and  acknowledging  the  sovereignty  and  righteousness  of 
God  in  laying  on  us  such  rebukes ;  (2)  with  patient  endurance,  remaining  dumb  a«id 
opening  not  our  mouths,  because  God  hfts  done  it  (Ps.  xxxix.  9),  or,  if  we  do  speak, 
adopting  the  language  of  Eli  (I  Sam.  iii.  18),  of  Job  (oh.  i.  21),  of  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxi.  14), 
or  of  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  39) ;  (3)  with  holy  gratitude,  remembering  the  graci.ms  pur- 
pose God  has  in.separably  connected  with  affliction  (Rom.  v.  3,  4 ;  viii.  28 ;  Heb.  xii. 
11),  and  the  represontation  he  has  given  of  affliction  as  a  token  of  his  love  (Rev.  iii. 
19;  Heb.  xii.  6);  and  (4)  with  intelligent  co-operation,  seeking,  so  far  as  in  us  lies,  by 
self-examination,  by  repentance  and  faith,  by  laying  aside  every  known  sin,  and  by 
praying  against  all  sin,  to  further  God's  gracious  designs  in  our  correction. 

III.  Chastening — its  consolation.    1.  Divim  healing.    (1)  The  wo.inds  requiring 


OH.  T.  1— 27.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  93 

to  be  bound  up  and  healed  are  those  lacerations  of  spirit,  painful  and  deep,  which  have 
been  previously  inflicted  by  the  hand  of  God  through  the  sharp  instrument  of  affliction. 
That  these  wounds,  however  keen  and  incisive,  are  not  designed  to  be  mortal  or  siiflfered 
to  continue  open,  but,  after  accomplishins;  their  purpose,  are  to  be  closed  should  prove 
a  source  of  comfort  to  the  saint.  (2)  The  Physician  by  whom  the  binding  up  and 
healing  are  to  be  effected  is  God,  as  Eliphaz  declares  (ver.  18),  and  David  testifies  (Ps. 
ciii.  3),  as  Jehovah  himself  promised  (Exod.  xv.  26),  and  as  Christ  taught  (Matt.  ix. 
12 ;  Luke  iv.  18,  23).  This  a  second  ground  of  comfort  for  the  chastened  spirit ;  since 
God,  having  caused  the  wounds,  will  best  understand  how  to  cure  them,  and  God  never 
makes  a  sore  that  he  cannot  heal,  or  inflicts  a  stroke  that  he  cannot  mend ;  and  since 
God  i-s  possessed  of  all  the  qualities  that  are  needful  to  constitute  a  successful  chirur- 
geon,  having  "  an  eagle's  eye, — ^an  all-seeing  eye,  seven  eyes  of  providence  and  wisdom 
to  look  through  our  sores,  and  into  all  our  distempers ;  a  lady's  hand,  soft  and  tender, 
to  dress  our  wounds  and  pain  us  little ;  and  a  lion's  heart, — infinite  courage  and  strength 
of  spirit,  to  undertake  the  most  ghastly  wounds  or  swollen,  putrified  sores  "  (Caryl). 
(3)  The  bandages  employed  in  the  operation  are  the  doctrines,  promises,  and  consola- 
tions of  the  gospel  (Ps.  ovii.  20).  2.  Divine  protection.  Generally,  from  whatever 
troubles  may  assail,  from  six,  ay,  from  seven,  i.e.  from  all  possibilities  of  trouble;  then 
particularly  from :  (1)  Public  calamity  (ver.  20).  Prom  famine,  by  causing  the  earth  to 
yield  its  increase  so  as  to  avert  famine  (Ps.  Ixvii.  6),  by  miraculous  interposition  so  as 
to  support  in  the  midst  of  famine  (Exod.  xvi.  15,  manna ;  1  Kings  xvii.  14,  the 
widow's  barrel ;  1  Kings  xix.  7,  Elijah's  feast),  by  spiritual  consolations  should  his 
people  die  of  famine  (Hah.  iii.  17) ;  and  from  the  sword,  by  removing  occasions  of  war, 
by  shielding  while  engaged  in  lawful  war  (if  he  so  please  in  his  wisdom),  and  by  con- 
ducting salely  out  of  war.  (2)  Private  wrong  (ver.  21).  From  slander,  by  enabling 
the  good  man  to  escape  it  through  blamelessness  of  character  and  life,  as  Daniel  (vi.  5); 
or  by  vindicating  him  against  it  through  some  favourable  turn  in  providence  (Ps. 
xxxvii.  6),  as  was  ihe  case  with  Jeremiah  (xx.  10,  11);  or  through  miraculous  inter- 
position, as  happened  to  the  three  Hebrew  children  (Dan.  iii.  25) ;  or  by  rewarding  him 
on  account  of  it  should  it  bring  him  hurt,  as  he  did  with  St.  Stephen  (Acts  vi.  11) ;  and 
from  violence,  i.e.  the  injuries  and  injustices  perpetrated  by  the  strong  against  the 
weak,  not  by  preventing  them  altogether,  for  it  is  implied  that  they  will  come,  but  by 
keeping  the  soul  from  sinking  under  them  through  terror.  (3)  From  personal  mis- 
fortune ;  such  as  hunger,  i.e.  private  destitution ;  and  violence,  i.e.  ravages  of  wild  beasts 
on  personal  property ;  God  enabling  the  saint,  instead  of  regarding  these  with  stoical 
indifference,  to  triumph  over  them  as  a  means  of  effecting  his  highest  good  (Rom.  v.  3), 
since  all  things,  even  the  stones  and  the  wild  beasts,  wiU  be  in  league  with  him,  and 
contribute  to  his  peace  (Kom.  viii.  28).  3.  Divine  hlessing.  (1)  Health.  "  Thou  shalt 
know  that  it  is  well  with  thy  tent; "  i.e.  the  inhabitants  of  thy  home_  will  be  in  safety 
from  others,  in  harmony  amongst  themselves,  and,  generally  speaking,  in  the  enjoyment 
of  peace  and  felicity.  Domestic  happiness — one  of  the  greatest  blessings  a  good  man 
can  enjoy.  (2)  Prosperity.  "  Thou  shalt  oversee  thy  household,  and  not  err,"  or 
"  count  thy  cattle,  and  miss  none."  The  success  attending  ordinary  avocations  comes 
from  God ;  yet  it  cannot  now,  as  then,  be  deemed  a  proof  of  Divine  favour,  though  it 
is  still  true  that  piety  tends  to  sharpen  the  mind's  faculties,  and  to  increase  the  hand's 
diligence,  thereby  making  godliness  profi  table  for  this  life  as  well  as  that  which  is  to  come. 
(3)  Posterity.  "  Thy  seed  will  be  many,"  and  "  thine  offspring  like  the  grass  of  the 
land."  A  numerous  family  one  of  tiie  blessings  of  the  old,  a  gracious  family  one  of 
the  blessings  of  the  new,  dispensation  (Isa.  xliv.  3—5).  (4)  Length  of  days.  "  Thou 
shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  a  full  [ripe]  age,"  indicating  many  years  of  living,  so  many 
as  to  fully  mature  the  graces  of  the  soul  (Ps.  xcii.  14)  and  to  satisfy  the  saint's 
desire  for  liTing  (Ps.  xoi.  16) — a  promise  first  made  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  15),  and 
afterwards  given  generally  to  the  godly  (Ps.  xoi.  16) ;  a  promise  also  whose  lulfilment 
is  promoted  by  holy  living  (Prov.  iii.  16;  Ps.  xxxiv.  12).  (5)  A  peaceful  death. 
«  Thou  shalt  come  to  thy  grave,"  willingly,  quietly,  peacefully,  feeling  dissolution  to  be 
no  curse.  (6)  An  honoured  burial.  "  As  the  shook  of  corn  is  carried  in  its  season  " 
so  shalt  thou  be  reverently  and  respectfully  consigned  to  the  tomb.  A  peaceful  grave 
and  a  decent  burial  esteemed  by  Orientals,  who  regarded  the  want  of  them  as  a  token 
of  Divine  anger,  which  it  sometimes  was  (Deut.  xxviiL  26 ;  Jer,  xxii.  18, 19 ;  xxxvL  80> 


W  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  v.  1—27. 

Learn :  1.  "  Happy  are  we  if  we  receive  chastening ;  for  then  God  dealeth  with  us  a3 
sons."  2.  "No  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  rather  grievous; 
nevertheless  afterwards  it  bringeth  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness."  3.  The 
soonest  way  to  escape  from  chastening  is  to  "  hear  the  rod  and  him  who  hath  appointed 
it."  4.  It  is  better  to  be  chastened  as  God's  children  than  condemned  as  God's 
enemies.  5.  "  Many  are  the  afdiotions  of  the  righteous,  but  God  delivereth  him  out  of 
them  all."  6.  The  best  alliance  against  the  ills  of  life  is  the  friendship  of  the  living 
God.     7.  If  God  be  for  his  people,  nothing  can  bo  really  against  them. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Vers.  8 — ^27. — Refuge  from  trouble  in  the  thought  of  Ood.  Conclusion  of  Eliphaz'g 
address.  His  language  suddenly  changes  into  a  gentler  strain.  It  is  like  the  clearing 
of  a  dark  sky,  revealing  once  more  the  deep  lilue;  or  the  bend  of  a  stream  which  has 
been  flowing  through  a  stem  gorge,  now  broadeuina  out  into  a  sunlit  lake. 

].  The  gkeatnbss  and  bbnbpicenob  op  God.  (Vers.  8—16.)  Let  men  turn  to  him 
for  comfort  and  for  strength.  It  is  a  bright  gem  of  description.  1.  God  is  the  Supreme. 
(Ver.  8.)  Let  men  look  no  lower  than  to  the  Highest.  With  him  is  the  final  appeal. 
He  is  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  him ;  but  justice 
and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his  throne.  2.  He  is  the  great  Worker.  His  scale 
and  sphere  of  operation  is  vast,  immeasurable,  unsearchable  (ver.  9).  His  mode  of 
operation  is  wonderful,  past  finding  out.  "  His  way  is  in  the  sea,  his  path  in  the  great 
waters,  his  footsteps  who  has  known?"  The  grandeur  and  marvel  of  his  deeds  are 
seen :  (1)  In  nature.  (Ver.  10.)  One  phenomenon  is  mentioned  only  as  typical,  in 
all  important  respects,  of  all  the  other  tokens  of  his  power  in  nature.  It  is  the  blessed 
gift  of  rain.  For  nothing  in  an  Oriental  clime  speaks  more  powerfully  to  the  senses 
and  the  feelings  than  this  inestimable  boon.  Many  other  Scriptures  witness  this. 
"  He  gives  the  early  and  the  latter  rain ; "  "  comes  down  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass," 
and  "  as  showers  that  water  the  earth."  'Tis  he  who  causes  the  refreshing  showers 
to  fall  upon  the  fields  of  both  the  just  and  the  unjust.  The  French  peasants  say,  as 
they  watch  the  rain  falling  on  their  vineyards,  "  Voici  le  vin  qui  descend  du  ciel!" 
"  Here  comes  down  the  wine  from  heaven ! "  But  what  good  things  do  not  come  down 
from  heaven  in  the  rain  from  the  ever-blessing  God  ?  (2)  In  hwman  life.  In  this 
broad  field,  common  experience  gains  many  a  lesson  of  the  same  kind.  Not  one  of 
the  traits  in  this  exquisite  description  of  which  the  intelligent  observer  cannot  say, 
"  This  is  true  to  life ! "  He  is  seen  to  be  the  Exalter  of  the  lowly  and  the  sorrowful 
(ver.  11).  Who  has  not  had  brought  home  to  him  in  many  an  instance  the  sense  of 
this  truth  in  the  course  of  life?  What  tales  of  obscure  and  lowly  worth  rising  into 
eminence;  of  deserted  widows  and  orphans  finding  springs  of  help  and  succour 
marvellously  opened  to  them  in  the  hour  of  need  can  we  not  all  tell?  And  we  take 
delight  in  these  narratives  because  they  convince  us  that  the  constitution  of  life  is  not 
the  mere  mindless  machinery  which  godlpss  thinkers  would  make  it  out  to  be.  We 
see  that  selfish  craft  and  cunning  are  in  the  end  disappointed  and  bafiled  (ver.  12). 
Lies  and  cheats  do  not  prosper  long.  The  proverbs  of  the  world  bear  their  witness ; 
common  experience  stamps  them  with  the  mark  of  truth.  And  this,  too,  is  no  accident, 
but  the  result  of  the  righteous  operation  of  God.  We  see  that  men  overreach  them- 
selves and  fall  by  their  own  snares  (ver.  13).  "  Vaulting  ambition  doth  o'erleap  itself, 
and  falls  on  t'other  side."  And  the  sight  gives  us  a  deep  pleasure,  whatever  pity  we 
may  feel  for  the  victim  of  his  conceit  and  folly,  because  here  again  we  receive  a  com- 
munication of  the  will  of  God.  We  see  self-confident  men  plunged  into  perplexity, 
infatuated,  unable  to  steer  their  path  aright,  though  the  light  is  full  and  clear  about 
them  (ver.  14).  There  is  a  judicial  blindness  to  be  observed  in  certain  cases;  so  that 
those  who,  in  the  pursuit  of  passion  or  interest,  have  extinguished  conscience,  become 
at  last  unable  to  see  even  their  own  interest,  anil  make  suicidal  mistakes.  Here,  too, 
is  the  finger  of  a  higher  Power.  3.  The  object  of  Divine  operation.  (Vers.  15,  16.)  In 
both  nature  and  human  life  it  is  one — to  lessen  suffering,  to  protect  innocence,  to  deliver 
■from  violence  and  persecution. 

il.  TpB  BiiESsiNO  OF  DtviNB  CHASTISEMENT.    (Vers,  17— ?7.)    From  the  gen?r»| 


CH.  V.  I— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  95 

evidences  of  the  beneficence  of  Qod,  we  come  down  to  one  special  and  peculiar  form  of 
it.  He  18  good  to  us  in  our  pains  as  well  as  in  our  pleasures.  His  power  is  exercised 
to  purify  and  chasten  as  well  as  to  destroy.  The  recognition  of  this  truth  is  one  of 
the  leading  features  of  Scripture  revelation.  How  different  from  the  gloomy  creed 
of  the  most  enlightened  heathen  concerning  suffering  sent  from  heaven  1  He  felt  the 
wrath  of  his  gods,  but  he  never  knew  their  blows  as  signs  of  a  secret  and  remedial 
love.  Where  there  is  no  belief  in  supreme  righteousness,  suffering  must  always  be 
without  relief.  The  blessedness  here  described  is  both  internal  and  external.  1. 
Internal.  The  man  is  blessed  (1)  who  recognizes  his  sufferings  as  corrections.  Then 
their  worst  bitterness  passes ;  despondency  is  cheered ;  hope  dawns  in  the  heart.  He 
8»  blessed  (2)  who  rejects  not  the  warnings  which  they  bring.  He  willingly  takes  the 
medicine,  and  submits  to  the  direction  of  the  heavenly  Physician.  But  they  aggravate 
their  sufferings  and  inflame  their  ills  who  know  they  are  being  corrected,  yet  refuse 
to  take  the  Divine  hint  for  amendment ;  who  are  like  the  stubborn  horse  or  ass 
chafing  at  the  bit,  resisting  the  guidance  of  the  rein.  He  is  blessed  (3)  who  yields 
himself  up  implicitly  to  the  Divine  treatment,  suffers  his  evils  to  be  expelled,  his 
follies  to  be  plucked  up  by  the  roots.  He  is  blessed  (4)  because  he  is  thus  brought 
into  the  deeper  knowledge  and  fellowship  of  God.  To  know  God  as  the  Almighty 
Benefactor  is  one  step  in  religion ;  to  know  him  as  the  Almighty  Cbastiser  is  another 
and  a  higher.  And  this  is  never  reached  except  through  suffering,  the  deeper  con- 
sciousness of  sin,  struggles  with  self,  a  higher  purity,  and  a  deeper  peatie.  2.  External. 
The  man  at  peace  with  himself  and  with  God  seems  to  bear  a  charmed  life  (ver.  19). 
(1)  Ee  is  defended  from  outward  evils.  (Vers.  20 — 22.)  He  passes  through  seas  of 
trouble,  and  rides  upon  the  crest  of  each  advancing  wave ;  passes  through  fire,  and  it 
hurts  -him  not.  The  greatest  outward  calamities  are  mentioned,  only  to  show  how 
he  rises  superior  to  them  all.  •'  Famine."  The  histories  of  Elijah,  of  the  widow  of 
Zarephath,  of  the  temptation  of  Jesus  Christ,  all  illustrate  the  grand  truth  that  man's 
strength  is  derived,  not  from  bread  alone,  but  directly  from  the  Word  and  will  of  God. 
The  truth  is  a  general  one.  It  is  that  expressed  by  St.  Paul  that,  though  the  outward 
man  perish,  the  inward  man  may  be  renewed  day  by  day.  "  The  power  of  the  sword," 
"  devastation,"  "  famine,"  "  wild  beasts,"  form  the  catalogue  of  the  ills  most  common 
and  most  dreaded  in  ancient  times.  None  of  these  can  harm  the  man  who  is  reconciled 
to  God.  The  truth  again  is  general,  and  admits  of  a  twofold  application.  In  the  urst 
place,  history  is  full  of  the  providential  escapes  of  good  men,  in  which  every  disceinir.g 
mind  will  see  the  hand  of  God.  But  there  are  exceptions.  No  law  of  nature  is  set 
aside.  The  sword  of  the  foe,  the  tooth  of  the  lion,  is  not  blunted,  nor  is  the  body 
hardened  against  hunger.  Good  men,  like  others,  perish  from  these  causes.  But  here 
the  truth  applies  in  another  way.  The  souls  of  the  martyrs  flee  to  the  altar  of 
heaven  (Kev.  vi.  9),  or  are  borne  from  the  scene  of  suffering  to  that  of  rest,  as  Lazarus 
to  the  bosom  of  Abraham.  In  either  case  they  are  unharmed  and  happy  in  God. 
But  another  evil,  more  keenly  felt  in  more  civilized  times,  is  the  "  scourge  of  the 
tongue."    Slander — 

"Whose  edge  is  sharper  than  the  sword ;  whose  tongue 

Outvenoms  all  the  worms  of  Nile ;  whose  breath 

Eides  on  the  posting  winds,  and  doth  belie 

All  corners  of  the  world — kings,  queens,  and  states, 

Maids,  matrons—  nay,  the  secrets  of  the  grave 

This  viperous  slander  enters." 
Prom  this  fearful  scourge  the  blessed  man  is  hidden,  protected.  Good  men  are  often 
attacked,  but  cannot  be  destroyed,  by  slander.  They  do  not  feel  it  as  do  the  consciously 
guilty.  They,  in  the  beautiful  words  of  the  psalm,  are  kept  "secretly  in  a  pavilion 
from  the  strife  of  tongues."  The  slanderer  does  service  to  the  upright  man  in  the  end 
by  forcing  him  into  a  position  of  self-defence,  or  of  silent  dignity,  which  brings  the  true 
qualities  of  his  character  into  a  clearer  li?lit.     (2)  He  is  favoured  with  outward  good. 

(Vers.  23 27.)   The  stones  that  afflict  the  fields  with  barrenness,  the  devouring  beasts, 

seem  to  be  in  secret  pact  with  him  and  refuse  to  do  him  harm.  This  is  poetry  wrapping 
up  urulh.  We  are  n  minded  of  the  beautiful  ode  of  the  Konian  poet  (Horace,  i.  22),  where, 
dwellin"-  on  tlie  theme  that  innocence  is  its  own  protection,  its  own  arms,  he  tells 
tjs  oi  tlw  woli  that  fled  from  him  all  unarmed  io  the  Sabine  wood.    The  whole  picture 


96  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  T.  1—27. 


Is  that  of  thequiet  pastoral  life  which  we  love  to  associate  with  innocence  and  the 
protection  of  Heaven.  There  is  comfort  in  bis  tent ;  when  he  visits  his  pastttres,  no 
head  of  cattle  is  missing  (for  tliis  is  perhaps  the  true  meaning  of  the  latter  clause 
of  ver.  24).  Children  and  children's  children  spring  up  around  hjm ;  till  he  comes 
to  his  end  crowned  with  silver  hair,  like  the  ripe  sheaf  carried  home  to  the  garner. 
With  this  description  compare  the  noble  ninety-first  psalm.  Eliphaz  emphatically 
di'clares  (ver.  27)  this  to  have  heen  his  experience.  It  was  a  picture  dravra  from  life. 
We  cannot  doubt  that  it  was  realized  in  numberless  instances  in  those  early  conditions 
of  life ;  nay,  it  is  so  still.  It  hardly  comes  within  the  scope  of  such  poetry  to  recognize 
the  actual  or  seeming  exceptions.  And  if  we  do  not  see  the  universal  truth  of  the 
description  of  the  good  man's  career,  we  must  recollect  that  life  is  a  far  more 
complicated  and  many-sided  affair  with  us.  It  is  far  more  difficult  to  trace  the 
connection  of  cause  and  effect  in  the  various  courses  of  men.  And  we  have  this 
immense  advantage  over  this  early  teacher — that  we  have  a  clearer  view,  a  firmer 
belief  of  the  extension  of  man's  career  into  eternity.  All  that  appears  exceptional  and 
opposed  to  the  laws  of  life  laid  down  by  Eliphaz,  we  doubt  not,  will  be  compensated 
and  redressed  in  a  future  state. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  lot  of  the  foolish.  By  a  skilful  turn  of  thought,  Eliphaz  exhibits  the 
consequences  of  human  folly — 

i.  Ab  they  affect  the  life  of  the  individual  foolish  one.  "  Wrath  killeth 
and  envy  slayeth  "  him.  By  his  folly  he  excites  the  wrath  or  tha  envy  of  others,  or 
his  folly  leads  him  into  deadly  courses. 

II.  As  THET  affect  HIS  LOT  AND  CONDITION.  His  prosperity,  even  if  it  begin,  is  but 
of  temporary  duration.    If  he  take  root,  suddenly  his  habitation  is  cursed. 

III.  As  THEY  AFFECT  HIS  FAMILY.  His  children  are  in  danger—"  far  from  safety." 
They  are  condemned  by  the  judge  sitting  in  the  gate ;  are  crushed,  and  are  not  found. 
"  The  seed  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off." 

IV.  As  THEY  AFFECT  HIS  SUBSTANCE.  He  soweth,  but  a  stranger  reapeth  his 
harvests;  his  toil  may  be  productive,  but  a  "robber  swalloweth"  his  substance.  Dark 
is  the  pictuie  thus  presented  of  the  judgments  which  fall  upon  the  ungodly,  the  foolish, 
and  the  vain.  If  Eliphaz  intended  this  to  be  a  reflection  upon  Job,  it  was  unmerited  and 
uncalled  for.  The  Divine  judgment  upon  Job  was,  "  My  servant  Job,  a  perlect  and  an 
upright  man."  Eliphaz  argued  from  the  particular  to  the  general.  However  true  it 
may  be  that  the  foolish  suffers,  it  is  not  equally  true  that  every  sufferer  is  foolish. 
This  was  the  error  in  Eliphaz's  mode  of  arguing.  It  is  a  common  error.  We  kuow  it 
may  be  said,  "  He  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick." — R.  G. 

Vers.  6,  7. —  The  common  lot.     "  Man  is  born  unto  trouble.* 

I.  It   18   AN  INEVITABLE   BESTTLT  OF   HIS   EXPOSED   CONDITION. 

II.  It   18   EVIDENTLY   A    PAET   OF    THE    PRESENT    ORDER    OF    THINGS.      But — 

III.  It   IB   DUE    TO   THE    DERANGEMENT   OF    THE    EIGHT   RELATIONS   OF   MAN   TO    HIS 

God,  TO  HIS  neighbour,  to  the  world  around.  "Affliction  oometh  not  forth  of 
the  dust ;  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  ol  the  ground." 

IV.  It  is  graciously  used  as  a  means  op  spiritual  discipline,  correction,  and 
development.  We  now  know  that  that  which  we  endure  is  for  chastening — for  that 
culture  which  every  wise  father  seeks  to  secure  for  his  sons.  And  when  the  afflictions 
are  "  not  joyous,  but  grievous,"  even  then  "  God  doaleth  with  us  as  with  sons."  He 
takes  up  the  sad  and  dark  and  painful  things  of  our  life,  and  uses  them  as  instruments 
for  our  discipline,  "  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  his  holiness."  Most  assuredly 
we  may  know  that  "  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness  "  are  yielded  to  them  who 
patiently  endure  these  afflictions  when  they  are  "exercised  thereby." 

Let  UB,  therefore,  leain :  1.  Not  to  be  surprised  if  "  trouble "  overtakes  us.  We  are 
born  in  a  land  where  it  is  very  plentiful.  8.  To  see  to  it  that  our  afflictions  come  of 
our  frailty,  not  of  our  folly.  3.  Patiently  to  await  the  end,  when  he  shall  have 
wrought  out  his  purpose,  who  maketh  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  him." — R.  G. 

Vers,  8 — 16.— God  the  true  Refuge  in  affliction.    "  I  would  seek  unto  God."  Wisely 


OH.  V.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  9T 

did  Elipbas  urge  Mb  friend  to  seek  refuge  in  the  only  true  and  safe  reiort.    "  UnHer 
his  feathers  shalt  thou  trust."    In  the  midst  of  all  sorrows — 

**  God  is  the  Befnge  of  his  saints, 

When  storms  of  sharp  distress  invade ; 
£re  we  can  offer  our  compMnts, 
Behold  him  present  with  his  aid." 

To  seek  this  Eefu^e  men  are  encouraged  by — 

I.  The  greatness  of  the  Divink  poweb.  He  "  doeth  great  things  and  unsearch- 
able; marvellous  things  without  number."  Of  these  beautiful  illustrations  are  to  be 
iound  on  every  hand — in  heaven,  earth,  the  deep  seas,  in  the  processes  of  nature,  in  the 
gcvernment  of  men. 

II.  The  Divike  bbnepicbkcb.  His  rich  gifts  made  freely  to  the  sons  of  men.  "  He 
giveth  rain  upon  the  earth,"  which  is  at  once  a  precious  gift  and  a  symbol  of  all 
blessings  in  its  abundance,  diffusion,  preciousness,  freeness  to  all.  "  He  is  kiud  to  the 
evil  and  the  unthankful,  and  sendeth  rain  upon  the  just  and  the  unjust." 

III.  The  Divxnb  contkol  over  men.  Especially  illustrated  in  his  dealing  with  the 
wicked.  He  takes  compassion  on  the  needy.  "  He  setteth  on  high  those  that  be  low." 
He  brings  down  the  haughtiness  of  the  foolish.  He  "  disappointeth  the  devices  of 
the  crafty  " — taketh  the  wicked  in  their  own  deceit. 

IV.  The  Divine  pitifulness  for  the  poor  is  a  further  encouragement  to  men  to 
find  their  Refuge  in  God.  He  guardeth  the  poor  and  the  feeble.  He  saveth  him  from 
the  sword  of  their  mouth,  their  cruel  words,  and  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty.  The 
Divine  Help  of  the  poor,  men  have  sung  in  all  ages.  "  So  the  poor  hath  hope ; "  "  The 
poor  committeth  himself  unto  thee."  In  this  Eefuge  he  is  safe.  The  day  of  his  trouble 
passes  away.  A  Divine  hand,  unseen,  upholds  him  while  the  pressure  is  heavy.  Of 
the  poor,  as  of  the  sparrows,  it  must  be  said,  "  God  feedeth  them."  If  men  knew  the 
loving-kindness  of  the  Lord,  and  his  great  pitifulness,  they  would  put  their  trust  in  him 
more  willingly,  and  would  find  help  and  comfort. — K.  G. 

Vers.  17 — ^23. — The  tlessednest  of  the  Divine  correction.  This  was  known  even  ia 
early  times,  but  only  fully  taught  in  New  Testament  times.  It  is  a  great  encourage- 
ment to  men  to  bear  pain  and  sorrow  to  know  that  the  Lord  afflicts.  "  He  maketh 
sore,"  but  "he  bindeth  up;"  "he  woundeth,"  but  his  "hands  make  whole  again." 
Being  a  Divine  correction,  a  chastisement  from  his  hand  will  be — 

L  A  WISE  CORRECTION.  A  good  purposo  will  always  be  held  in  view.  "  Not  willingly," 
"not  for  his  pleasure,"  does  he  afflict.  His  aim  is  to  promote  our  good — "  that  we  may 
be  partakers  of  his  holiness." 

II.'  A  GRACIOUS  CORRECTION.    Meroy  will  temper  it.    •'  He  remembereth  we  are  but 

dust." 

"  He  will  no  load  of  grief  impose 
Beyond  the  strength  that  he  bestows." 

If  he  hrings  low  in  affliction,  it  is  that  he  may  exalt  in  honour.  If  he  takes  away 
earthly  possessions,  it  is  that  he  may  supplant  them  with  heavenly.  He  weans  the 
heart  from  the  love  of  the  temporal,  that  he  may  fix  it  on  the  eternal.    It  is,  therefore — 

III.  A  BENIGN  CORRBOTION.  Happy  fruits  follow  it.  If  be  afflicts,  he  heals.  He 
delivers  in  six,  yea,  seven  trouhles.  He  redeems  the  famishing  from  death.  He  hides 
from  the  scourge  of  the  tongue.  He  screens  from  the  stroke  of  destruction.  He  draweth 
men  into  good  ways ;  then,  when  they  please  the  Lord,  he  maketh  even  their  enemies 
to  be  at  peace  with  them.  Beautifully  is  this  illustrated :  «'  Thou  shalt  be  in  league 
with  the  stones  of  the  field ;  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace  with  thee." 
He  who  keeps  the  commandments  of  God  is  in  harmony  with  the  whole  kingdom  of 

This  encourages  to  patience  under  trials.  1.  It  is  the  Lord's  chastisement.  2.  It  is 
controlled  and  regulated  by  a  Divine  hand.  3.  It  has  a  wise  and  worthy  end  in  view. 
4  It  oometh  to  its  blessed  fruition  in  the  sanctity  and  perfectness  of  human  character. 
—R.G. 

Vers.  24—27. The  final  consequences  of  the  Divine  chastisement.    He  who  in  mercy 


JOB. 


■ 


98  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  t.  1—27. 


afflicts,  or  in  equal  mercy  takes  up  the  evils  and  ills  of  life,  and,  using  them  as  his  own 
instruments,  transmutes  them  into  means  of  grace  and  blessing,  will,  after  he  has  tried 
his  servants  by  their  exposure  to  the  storms  and  pains  of  life,  give  them  "a  desired 
end."  Sooner  or  later  they  see  "  the  end  of  the  Lord  " — the  end  the  Lord  had  in  view 
In  these  verses  the  happiest  consequences  are  declared  to  follow  those  chastisements 
which  the  Lord  bestowed  during  the  process  of  suffering  and  exposure. 

I.  Contentment  and  peace  shall  reign  in  the  home.  God  quiets  the  hearts 
of  his  children,  and  though  heavy  trials  assail  them,  he  prepares  rest  and  peace  foi 
them.  In  how  many  instances  is  this  daily  seen  1  The  evil  exhausts  itself.  God  putb 
his  hand  up.m  it  and  arrests  it.  His  exposed  ones  he  leads  back  to  safety  and  repose, 
and,  as  was  fulfilled  in  Job's  case,  of  which  Elipbaz  unconsciously  predicts,  he  blesses 
them  at  last.  Like  worn  veterans,  they  return  at  last  to  receive  honour,  acknowledg- 
ment, and  rest.  Precious  are  the  final  days  of  the  truly  tried ;  the  life  is  matured,  the 
character  chastened  and  perfected,  the  experience  of  life  is  enlarged. 

II.  Blessing  shall  abide  upon  the  offspeing.  "  Thy  seed  shall  be  great ...  as 
the  grass  of  the  earth ; "  yea,  even  though  half  the  sorrow  were  caused  by  that  very  seed. 
The  Lord  will  lead  the  wanderers  back,  will  punish  and  correct  and  reclaim.  Many 
a  one  out  of  his  stony  griefs  raises  a  Bethel.  The  testimony  of  godly  fidelity  on  the 
part  of  the  parent  speaks  in  its  silence  to  the  offspring,  and  in  the  end  produces  its 
good  results.  Every  godly  man  has  the  best  ground  for  hoping  that  the  blessing  of 
the  Lord  will  be  also  upon  his  offspring. 

III.  In  the  folness  of  age  and  the  ripeness  of  ohabactbr,  life  shall  close. 
So  the  tried  one  receives  into  himself,  at  last,  the  whole  result  of  the  Divine  discipline. 
The  history  is  complete,  the  work  of  the  day  finished,  the  journey  ended,  the  character 
formed.  All  the  history  of  life  is  written  in  the  cultured,  matured  life ;  in  the  character 
gained ;  in  the  honour  won.  Faithful  unto  death,  the  struggling  one  receives  the  crown 
of  life.  In  ripeness  of  judgment  and  attainment  all  the  fruit  of  the  patiently  endured 
tribulation  is  found.  The  man  is  made.  His  pains,  his  perils,  his  watching  and 
prayer,  his  diligence  in  duty  and  patience  in  suffering,  all  go  to  make  up  the  perfected 
life  which  is  his  own  to  inherit.  The  exposed  grain  has  grown  through  all  dangers, 
has  grown  by  all  changes — in  the  heat  and  cold,  the  light  and  the  darkness,  the  rain 
and  the  shine.  "Thou  shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  a  full  age,  like  as  a  shock  of  corn 
Cometh  in  in  his  season."  Let  every  one  search  this  out,  hear  it  and  know  it  for  his 
good.— R.  Q. 

Ver.  3. — "  The  foolish  taking  root."  1.  It  is  possible  fob  the  foolish  to  take 
ROOT.  "  The  foolish,"  in  biblical  phraseology,  are  worse  than  people  of  weak  intellect ; 
they  are  always  regarded  as  morally  degenerate.  Their  folly  is  the  opposite  to  the 
wisdom  of  which  the  beginning  is  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  Though  lacking  in  moral 
fibre  as  well  as  in  mental  stamina,  such  people  still  often  contrive  to  achieve  an 
astonishing  amount  of  success  in  life.  1.  Th^  may  le  favoured  hy  circumstances, 
In  this  world  men  are  not  wlioUy  dependent  upon  their  own  character  and  conduct. 
There  is  a  general  tide  of  prosperity  that  sweeps  strong  on  its  flood  many  who  have  had 
no  hand  in  originating  it.  There  is  good  fortune  as  well  as  misfortune,  and  the  one  is 
often  as  little  deserved  as  the  other.  2.  Tliey  may  be  helped  by  Providence.  God's 
grace  is  always  greater  than  our  deserts.  He  would  win  us  by  his  goodness.  The  foolish 
man  should  see  that  this  goodness  of  God  is  designed  to  lead  him  to  repentance  (Eom. 
ii.  4).  Sometimes,  however,  the  Divine  temporal  favour  is  in  reality  a  method  of 
judgment,  a  sunshine  that  ripens  the  effects  of  folly,  so  that  they  may  appear  in  their 
fulness  at  the  hastening  harvest-time.  3.  They  may  assist  themselves.  There  is  a  kind 
of  prosperity  which  good  and  wise  men  scorn,  not  being  able  to  stoop  to  the  degradation 
which  leads  to  it.  Then  bad  and  foolish  men  step  in,  and,  though  grovelling  in  the 
dust,  succeed  in  grasping  some  of  the  so-called  good  things  of  life.  Much  outward 
prosperity  is  not  directly  dependent  on  moral  qualities.  A  man  may  be  ikilful  in 
money-making  without  being  either  a  saiut  or  a  philosopher. 

II.  Although  the  foolish  may  take  root,  thet  will  not  bear  good  fruit. 
We  may  be  surprised  at  their  temporal  prosperity,  but  it  is  only  temporal.  For  a 
while  they  live  and  grow,  not  simply  flourishing  a  moment  like  a  plucked  flowei 
that  must  soon  fade,  but  actually  striking  roots  into  the  ground,  and  thus  strengthen* 


OH.T.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  9J 

ing  tiieir  position  and  drawing  nourishment  to  themselves.  Still,  at  best,  it  is  only 
the  rooting  in  the  soil  that  is  thought  of.  This  is  but  the  first  stage.  Eliphaz  was 
qjiite  right  in  his  surmise  that  the  last  stage  would  be  very  different,  although  he  was 
in  error  as  to  the  time,  circumstances,  and  character  of  the  gieat  denouement,  1.  No 
goad  fruit  ivill  follow.  The  foolish  stock  can  only  bring  forth  fruit  of  fully ;  and  if  it 
grows  luxuriantly,  it  will  not  bear  any  better  products.  Its  size  will  only  multiply  and 
coarsen  its  natural  issue.  Let  bad  and  foolish  men  advance  unimpeded  as  far  as  possible 
in  their  earthly  prosperity,  yet  of  real  soul-prosperity  they  will  have  none,  for  they 
have  not  in  them  the  life  from  which  this  springs.  2.  The  flourishing  prosperity  will 
ccme  to  an  end.  These  noxious  plants  must  be  finally  rooted  np  if  they  are  not  struck 
down  earlier  by  the  thunderbolts  of  judgment.  Eapid  growth  is  no  promise  of  long 
endurance.  The  mistake  of  the  old  world  was  to  look  for  the  judgment  on  earth.  It 
may  come  here.  But  if  it  does  not,  it  is  certain  to  come  hereafter ;  for  God  is  wise  and 
good  and  almighty.  Therefore  beware  of  the  delusion  of  temporal  insanity.  Look 
to  the  end.  Look  to  the  quality  of  the  succiss  attained.  Let  this  be  what  Christ 
approves ;  i.e.  like  his  success,  which  was  victory  through  the  cross.  Then  a  fruitful 
root  will  sprout  out  of  a  "dry  ground"  (Isa.  liii.  2). — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Inevitable  trouble.  I.  Teoublb  does  not  comb  casuallt  and  withoot 
DtTE  CAUSE.  It  is  not  like  a  weed  that  springs  up  by  the  wayside.  This  might  seem 
to  be  the  case,  because  it  arrives  so  suddenly  and  so  unexpectedly,  and  because  there 
does  not  appear  to  be  any  rule  that  governs  its  advent  at  one  place  rather  than  another. 
But  Eliphaz  is  rightly  persuaded  that  it  is  not  the  effect  of  chance.  We  have  good 
reasons  for  agreeing  with  him  thus  far.  1.  All  things  are  subject  to  law.  Chance  is 
only  a  name  for  our  ignorance.  When  we  do  not  see  a  cause  we  imagine  that  the 
event  has  happened  casually.  But  as  we  pursue  our  inquiries  further  we  find  that 
there  are  no  stray  events  outside  the  great  bond  of  Divine  order.  2.  All  things  are 
arranged  by  Providence.  Heie  is  another  answer  to  the  doctrine  of  chance.  Not  only 
is  there  law ;  there  is  also  a  supreme  Administrator  of  law.  God's  hand  is  unseen, 
but  not  a  pawn  moves  unless  his  fingers  are  upon  it ;  or  if  it  be  said  that  this  leaves 
no  scope  for  man's  free-will,  still  it  may  be  asserted  that,  the  infinite  mind  of  God 
seeing  the  whole  game,  the  end  from  the  beginning,  he  can  always  so  arrange  that 
ultimately  his  designs  shall  be  fully  executed. 

II.  Teouble  comes  from  within,  not  from  without.  It  does  not  spring  out 
of  the  ground.  Man  is  bom  to  it.  There  is  something  in  human  nature  that  pre- 
disposes him  to  trouble.  Just  as  the  sparks  fly  up  by  nature,  so  the  soul  of  man 
suffers  by  nature.  It  is  an  attribute  of  the«human  constitution  to  be  subject  to  suffer- 
ing. 1.  Susceptibility  to  suffering  is  natural.  The  callous  are  the  unnatuial.  The  soul 
that  never  grieves  is  hard  and  dead.  We  are  made  to  be  sensitive  to  pain,  just  as  we 
are  made  to  hear  sounds  and  see  the  light.  2.  Trouble  is  born  with  us.  Sin  begets 
Bufferinc.  The  sin  of  the  parent  descends  in  calamities  on  his  children,  who  inherit 
the  harvest  of  his  misdeeds.  The  fall  of  man  and  the  general  sinfulness  of  the  race 
ensure  a  certain  amount  of  suffering  to  every  innocent  child  who  is  born  into  the  world. 
Nevertheless,  do  not  take  refuge  with  the  fatalist.    The  trouble  has  a  cause.    Seek  this 

and  master  it.  ,.,        ,  .i         i.i.  mi, 

III  Trouble  is  universal  and  inevitable.  Some  have  more  than  others,  ihere 
are  men  to  whom  the  lines  have  fallen  in  pleasant  places,  yea,  they  have  a  goodly 
heritage.  One  such  had  been  Job.  But  his  hour  of  trouble  came,  and  then  it  proved 
to  be  an  hour  of  unprecedented  calamity.  Though  men  suffer  difierently,  all  suffer— if 
not  in  body  or  estate,  yet  in  mind  and  soul;  if  not  in  sunny  youth,  yet  m  overcast  man- 
hood ;  if  not  in  visible  adversity,  yet  in  inward  distress.  This  does  not  mean  that  men 
are  always  suffering,  nor  that  there  is  more  pain  than  joy  m  life.  1.  We  should  not  be 
surprised  at  rmetimg  with  trouble.  Many  people  irrationally  imagine  that  they  are 
to  be  exceptions  to  the  universal  experience.  When  painful  facts  reveal  their  deusion 
they  are  overwhelmed  with  amazement  and  disappointment.  It  would  be  better  to 
be  prepared  to  expect  what  is  part  of  the  common  lot  of  man  2.  Trouble  which  cannot 
blaJded  may  yet  be  cured.  '^The  true  resort  should  be  neither  to  stoical  indifference 
nor  to  impotent  despair.  There  is  no  gospel  in  the  assertion  that  trouble  is  nmversal. 
Bat  there  is  a  gospel  which  deals  with  the  fact.    Christ  comes  to  give  us  power  to 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  [en.  t.  1—27. 

utilize  trouble  as  discipline,  and  ultimately  to  conquer  it,  so  that  "  our  light  aflaiolion, 
•which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).— W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  8 — 16. — Seeking  unto  Ood.  As  usual,  the  advice  of  Eliphaz  is  excellent  in  th« 
abstract.  The  error  is  in  the  particular  way  of  applying  it  to  Job.  Here  is  the  sting 
of  it.  But  its  general  truth  is  always  instructive.  This  is  certainly  the  case  with  the 
recommendation  to  "  seek  unto  God." 

I.  Inquibb  what  it  is  to  seek  dnto  God.  1.  It  begins  with  remoteness  from 
Ood.  We  have  lost  God  if  we  have  to  seek  him,  as  we  need  not  think  of  finding 
what  we  already  possess  and  enjoy.  God  is  lost  by  sin;  but  the  sense  of  God's 
presence  is  often  deadened  by  the  oppression  of  sorrow  and  by  the  intrusion  of  worldly 
scenes.  2.  It  means  an  earnest  effort  of  the  soul.  We  are  not  to  wait  for  God  to  come 
to  us,  but  to  "  seek  unto  "  him.  This  requires  the  mind  and  will.  We  have  to  be 
watchful  to  note  any  indications  of  his  presence,  and  active  in  pressing  forward  towards 
him.  3.  It  implies  that  Ood  can  he  found.  It  is  useless  to  seek  for  that  which  is 
hopelessly  lost  or  absolutely  unattainable.  If  we  seek,  we  must  expect  to  find.  This 
process  would  be  folly  in  the  eyes  of  the  Agnostic.  Now,  the  encouragement  is  that 
others  have  sought  and  found  God,  They  have  seen  him,  not  with  bodily  vision, 
indeed,  but  with  true  spiritual  experience.  Job  himself  did  seek  God,  and  he  found 
him  at  last ;  for  he  exclaimed,  in  a  magnificent  burst  of  thankful  gladness, "  I  have  heard 
of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear, 'but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee"  (ch.  xlii.  5),  4.  It 
leads  to  confidence.  It  is  useless  to  seek  God  out  of  mere  curiosity.  We  have  much 
to  do  with  him  when  we  find  him.  But  first  of  all  we  must  place  entire  confidence  in 
him,  confessing  to  him  our  sin  and  our  sore  need. 

II.  COKSIDEB    THE    ENCOUBAGEMENTS  THAT   INVITE   US  TO  SEEK   UNTO   GrOD.       The 

author  of  the  Book  of  Job  is  a  great  lover  of  nature.  Scenes  from  the  physical  world, 
more  especially  in  its  majesty  and  grandeur,  fill  his  spacious  canvass  in  later  stages. 
Here  we  come  upon  the  first  burst  of.  that  glory  of  nature  which  shines  out  with  ever- 
increasing  volume  as  we  proceed  through  the  book.  This  leads  on  to  the  wonderful  deeds 
of  providence.  Notice  some  of  the  points  to  which  Eliphaz  calls  attention.  1.  The 
(1)  gj  eatness — "  doeth  great  things ; "  (2)  the  mystery — "  and  unsearchable ; "  and  (3) 
the  variety  of  God's  works  in  nature — "  marvellous  things  without  number  "  (ver.  9). 
Therefore  he  must  be  able  to  help  us  all  in  all  kinds  of  trouble.  2.  The  graciousnest 
of  God  in  his  milder  works.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  pheriomenon  of  rain  (ver.  10). 
"  He  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass  "  (Ps.  Ixxii.  6).  Therefore  "  the 
bruised  reed  will  he  not  break,"  etc.  (Isa.  xUi.  3).  3.  God's  goodness  to  the  lowly.  He 
sets  up  on  high  those  that  be  low  (ver.  11).  Therefore  to  be  humiliated  is  to  have  a 
special  reason  for  expecting  his  help.  4.  His  judgments  in  defeating  the  crafty  (vers, 
12 — 14).  His  very  wrath  brings  mercy  to  the  oppressed.  The  poor  man  cannot 
escape  from  his  unjust  oppressor;  but  God  can  bring  deliverance.  With  him  is  the 
final  court  of  appeal,  and  there  right  is  always  rendered,  there  the  rich  have  no  favour 
and  the  cunning  no  opportunity  of  cheating  justice.  5.  God's  deliverance  of  the  poor 
and  helpless.  He  is  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour,"  and  he  delights  to  reveal  himself  in 
the  activity  of  grace  redeeming  and  recovering  his  suffering  children.  With  such 
manifestations  of  the  power  and  goodness  of  God  in  nature  and  providence  the  troubled 
soul  may  well  seek  unto  him  for  deliverance. — W,  P.  A. 

Ver.  17. — 2%e  happiness  of  chastisement.  I.  Thekb  is  a  happiness  m  ohastisb- 
MENT.  The  sentence  looks  paradoxical.  No  chastisement  can  be  pleasant  while  it  is 
being  endured,  or  it  would  cease  to  be  chastisement.  Where,  then,  does  its  happiness 
reside?  1.  Chastisement  is  a  proof  of  Ood's  care.  "Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he 
chasteneth  "  (Heb.  xii.  6).  Therefore  to  be  chastised  is  to  receive  a  token  of  Gtod's 
love.  Now,  surely  we  ought  to  be  willing  to  bear  a  good  deal  of  suffering  if  we  can 
only  obtain  so  valuable  a  token  as  this.  If  God  did  not  chastise  us  he  would  not 
be  treating  us  as  true  sons  (Heb.  xii.  8).  Our  very  immunity  would  thus  be  a  proof 
of  God's  desertion  of  us— a  most  miserable  and  hopeless  condition.  2.  Chastisement  is 
designed  to  effect  purification.  It  may  not  lead  to  this  end,  and  it  will  not  do  so 
unless  we  co-operate  submissively  and  penitently^    Eliphaz  saw  as  much,  and  there> 


OH.  V.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  101 


fore,  although  he  was  applying  these  truths  in  an  irritatingly  mistaken  way,  he,  rightly 
enough  from  his  standpoint,  urged  Job  to  seek  God's  mercy  in  peniteace  that  he  might 
thus  benefit  by  his  chastisement.  To  be  purged  from  sin  is  better  than  to  be  made 
rich,  comfortable,  externally  happy.  It  is  true  blessedness,  though  at  first  experienced 
amid  tears  of  sorrow. "  3.  Ghastisement  leads  to  Joy.  Afterwards  it  brings  forth  the 
"peaceable  frnit  of  righteousness."  We  count  a  man  happy  who  is  on  the  road  to  a 
great  good.  He  may  enjoy  it  already  by  anticipation.  At  all  events,  he  is  to  be 
congratulated  on  his  destiny,  as  one  congratulates  the  heir  of  great  estates.  The 
Christian  may  be  congratulated  if  he  can  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  For  I  reckon  that  the 
sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed  in  us  "  (Eom.  viii.  18). 

II.  It  is  thekefobk  both  wrong  and  foolish  to  despise  chastisement.  It  is 
wrong,  because  we  ought  to  submit  with  humility  to  whatever  comes  from  the  hand  of 
God ;  and  it  is  foolish,  because  contempt  will  destroy  the  efficacy  of  chastisement, 
which  needs  to  be  felt  if  it  is  to  be  effective,  and  which  blesses  us  through  our  humility 
and  contrition.  A  proud  and  haughty  bearing  under  chastisement  defeats  the  ends  of 
the  gracious  ordinance.  We  see  here  how  diametrically  opposite  the  enlightened 
Hebrew  view  of  suffering  is  to  that  of  the  Stoic.  Bijth  views  regarded  pain  as  not  the 
evil  thing  that  most  men  took  it  to  be ;  both  demanded  patience  and  courage  from  the 
sufferer.  But  Stoicism  inculcated  contempt  for  suffering.  Thus  it  engendered  Pharisaic 
pride.  The  scriptural  idea — in  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the  New — ^is  rather  to 
lead  us  to  attach  more  importance  to  suffering  than  the  thoughtless  give  to  it,  not  that 
we  may  magnify  the  sensations  of  distress,  but  that  we  may  let  the  trouble  have  its 
full  work  in  our  souls.  1.  We  may  despise  the  chastisement  when  we  make  light  of  it. 
2.  The  contempt  may  be  shown  by  denying  its  meaning  or  use.  3.  It  may  also  be 
experienced  by  rebelling  against  (Chastisement.  In  this  last  case  we  do  not  regard  the 
trouble  as  slight.  But  we  do  not  reverence  the  holy  purpose  with  which  it  is  sent. 
Our  wild  resistance  shows  contempt  for  the  character  of  our  afHiotion.  Christ  is  the 
model  Sufferer,  who  deserved  no  chastisement,  and  yet  who  was  "  led  as  a  lamb  to  the 
slaughter,"  and  was  thus  made  perfect  through  sufferings  (Heh.  ii.  10). — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  23. — In  league  with  nature.  Eliphaz  argues  that,  if  Job  will  but  submit  him- 
self to  the  ordinances  of  God,  nature  itself  will  be  his  ally,  and  the  very  stones  that 
obstruct  his  plough,  and  even  the  beasts  that  ravage  his  flocks,  will  become  his 
auxiliaries.  Here  the  seer  of  visions  has  touched  on  a  great  truth.  To  be  in  harmony 
with  the  Lord  of  nature  is  to  be  in  league  with  nature. 

I.  We  are  not  naturalli  in  league  with  nature.  This  is  a  paradox  in  form, 
yet  it  is  a  transcript  of  experience.  The  experience  is  peculiar  to  man.  All  other 
things  find  their  habitat  congenial  to  them.  Man  alone  discovers  himself  to  he  as  an 
alien  among  foes — stones,  weeds,  vermin,  beasts  of  prey,  cruel  winds,  tempests,  earth- 
quakes, frustrating  his  designs.  Two  very  different  causes  may  account  for  this  discord. 
1.  Ow  natural  greatness.  We  are  a  part  of  nature,  yet  we  are  above  nature.  In 
our  higher  self  we  cannot  be  content  to  take  our  share  with  the  beasts  that  perish. 
Our  aspirations  lift  us  out  of  agreement  with  the  life  that  is  lived  by  plants  and 
animals.  2.  Our  sinful  fall.  We  are  meant  to  be  above  nature,  ruling  over  it.  By 
sin  we  have  fallen  below  nature,  and  it  has  trampled  on  us.  The  master  has  become 
the  slave  and  victim  of  his  servant. 

II.  It  is  good  to  be  in  league  with  nature.  So  Eliphaz  implies  by  his  promise 
to  Job  of  this  condition  as  a  reward  for  contrite  submission.  The  Bible  nowhere 
teaches  a  Manichiean  horror  of  nature.  All  God's  works  are  good  and  deserve  to  be 
appreciated  by  us.  Neither  do  we  learn  from  Scripture  to  entertain  a  monkish  horror  of 
nature.  The  inherent  innocence  of  every  natural  power  and  action  is  suggested  by  the 
biblical  description  of  creation.  Therefore  we  shall  make  a  great  mistake  if  we  think 
we  are  to  escape  from  the  tyranny  of  nature  either  by  flight  or  by  warfare.  We  cannot 
escape  from  nature  if  we  would.  Though  we  crushed  our  nature,  it  would  arise  and 
reassert  itself.  But,  supposing  our  flight  or  our  warfare  were  successful,  that  we  could 
absolutely  leave  or  completely  extirpate  nature,  we  should  only  find  our  lives  maimed 
and  impoverished  ;  for  nature  is  part  of  us,  an<i  -is  intended  to  be  our  useful  servant. 

III.  We  cannot  form  a  successful  league  with  nature  bt  descending  to 


102  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  v.  1—27. 

THE  LIFE  OF  NAT0EB.  The  sophistiy  of  so-called  naturalism  tells  us  that  we  can. 
But  it  is  deceptive,  christening  bestiality  with  the  name  of  nature.  The  nature  to  be 
imitated  is  Wordsworth's  nature,  not  Zola's.  But  Wordsworth's  nature  is  the  type 
and  prophecy  of  the  spiritual  that  is  higher  than  nature.  Merely  to  follow  natural 
impulses  is  to  become  swinish,  not  human,  partly  because  the  lower  impulses  of  nature 
are  the  most  violent,  and  partly  because  we  have  aggravated  those  impulses  by  sin. 

IV.  Submission  to  God  makes  nature  in  lbaque  with  us.  God  is  the  Master 
of  nature,  and  as  we  learn  to  do  God's  will,  nature,  which  also  ultimately  does  his  will, 
turns  to  aid  us.  Physically,  the  forces  of  nature  work  for  those  who  obey  the  laws  of 
God  in  nature,  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  to  obey  those  laws  is  a  very  different  thin" 
from  being  a  slave  to  natural  impulses ;  e.g.  the  laws  of  health  do  not  agree  with  the 
indulgence  of  appetite.  Spiritually,  our  obedient  submission  to  God  compels  the  adverse 
forces  of  nature  to  work  for  our  good  as  instruments  of  discipline.  This  was  not  sufS- 
ciently  clear  to  Eliphaz,  who  made  too  much  of  temporal  prosperity,  and  thought  that 
to  be  the  invariable  lot  of  the  good  man.  But  the  Book  of  Job  reveals  it.  Thus 
nature  ministers  to  man  when  man  serves  God. — W.  F.  A. 
« 

Ver.  26. — Ood's  harvest  home.  We  have  here  a  characteristic  Old  Testament  picture 
of  the  completed  life  of  the  aged  servant  of  God.  He  is  rewarded  for  his  fidelity,  not 
merely  by  having  nature  as  a  minister  of  his  prosperity  during  Lis  active  days,  but  by 
having  his  time  prolonged  to  a  ripe  old  age,  and  his  whole  career  rounded  and  finished 
60  that  at  last  he  is  taken  up  like  a  shock  of  corn  to  God's  harvest  home. 

I.  Let  us  consideb  the  idea  op  a  complete  life.  1.  The  truth  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment idea.  The  Jews  were  no  pessimists.  They  were  far  from  the  sickly  Buddhist 
dream  of  Nirvana.  With  them  life  was  sweet,  and  long  life  a  blessing.  Was  not  this 
a  true  and  healthy  conception  ?  Life  is  a  gift  of  God ;  it  is  a  source  of  great  natural 
joy ;  it  is  a  precious  talent,  offering  rich  opportunities  for  service.  It  is  good  to  live. 
Though  it  may  please  God  to  pluck  the  bud  before  it  has  opened,  or  to  remove  the 
blossom  before  it  has  matured  the  fruit,  we  should  feel  that  there  is  a  great  blessing  in  his 
sparing  a  life  for  full,  ripe  fruit-bearing.  2.  The  supplement  of  New  Testament  revelation. 
The  gospel  has  enlarged  the  scope  and  value  of  life.  It  has  shown  us  that  no  human  Ufe 
can  be  complete  in  a  brief  earthly  existence.  It  has  promised  life  eternal  for  the  iul- 
ness  of  being  and- of  service.     Now  we  can  see  that  life  is  good  and  blessed  indeed. 

II.  Let  us  obsekve  the  blessedness  of  a  ripe  life.  Old  age  is  compared  to  a 
shock  of  corn.  We  have  "  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear." 
This  full  corn  ripens  into  the  gold  of  harvest.  In  the  perfect  old  age  we  see  the  corn 
come  to  maturity.  It  has  attained  all  that  it  can  attair  The  discipline  of  life  is  for 
the  maturing  of  souls.  Old  men  should  be  richer  in  grace  than  .young  men,  and  a 
certain  mellowness  should  mark  the  character  of  the  aged  Christian.     Unfortunately 


.  .  .  distinctly  wrong.     It  points  ..v,  ..  ...^„ 

mistake  and  failure.  But  the  possibility  of  so  unfortunate  an  issue  bids  us  all  be  on 
our  guard  against  it.  It  warns  us  to  avoid  the  danger,  und  it  urges  us  to  use  the 
grace  of  God  so  that  we  may  ripen  and  grow  mellow. 

m  J^^'i.  ^^"^  ^^  anticipate   THE  HAftVEST  INGATHERING  OF  A  COMPLETE  AND  RIPE  LIFE. 

Ihe  shock  of  corn  is  gathered  in.  This  is  necessary  to  preserve  it;  for  if  it  were  left 
on  the  field  it  would  rot  in  the  dank  autumn.  An  earthly  immortality  would  be  no 
blessing.  But  God  calls  his  aged  servants  out  of  the  world  in  which  their  service 
IS  complete  and  which  can  no  longer  minister  to  their  further  ripenin".  Yet  the 
ingathering  is  not  the  end.  The  wheat  is  not  heaped  up  to  be  burnt,  but  stored  in 
the  granary  for  food  and  for  seed.  God  gathers  his  servants  home  in  safety,  sheltered 
Irom  all  storms  and  frosts  of  winter.  Then  the  true  purpose  of  their  lives  begins  to 
be  seen.  All  the  rest  was  but  the  preparation  for  the  harvest ;  and  the  harvest  itself 
vyas  only  undertaken  m  view  of  future  usefulness.  The  old  man  has  not  finished  his 
life  when  he  lays  down  his  grey  head  to  die.  Then  he  is  about  to  begin  to  live ;  then 
tlie  largest  fruitfulness  of  his  soul's  experience  is  about  to  be  utilized.  The  harvest 
)oy  IS  the  joy  of  the  future.  Souls  are  gathered  home  to  God  that  they  may  minister 
to  life  and  blessedness  m  ages  yet  unseen. — W.  F.  A. 


ca.  TL 1—80.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


103 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VL 


Ch.  vi.  and  vii.  contain  Job's  reply  to 
Eliphaz.  In  oh.  vi.  he  confines  himself 
to  three  points:  (1)  a  justification  of  his 
"  grief" — i.e.  of  his  vexation  and  impatience 
(vers.  1—7) ;  (2)  a  declaration  that  the  de- 
struction with  which  he  has  been  threatened 
(ch.  iv.  9—11,  21;  v.  2),  is  exactly  the 
thing  which  he  most  longs  for  (vers.  8 — 
13) ;  and  (3)  a  retort  upon  his  friends,  whom 
he  regards  as  having  all  spoken  by  the 
mouth  of  Eliphaz,  and  whom  he  reproaches 
with  their  want  of  sympathy  (vers.  14 — 23), 
and  with  the  weakness  of  their  arguments 
(vers.  24—30). 

Vers.  1,  2. — But  Job  answered  and  said, 
Oh  that  my  grief  were  throughly  weighed ! 
rather,  my  anger,  or  my  vexation — the  same 
word  as  that  used  by  Eiiphaz  when  re- 
proaching Job,  in  ch.  v.  2.  Job  wishes  that, 
before  men  blame  him,  they  would  calmly 
weigh  the  force  of  his  feelings  and  expres- 
sions against  the  weight  of  the  calamity 
which  oppresses  him.  His  words  may  seem 
too  strong  and  too  violent;  but  are  they 
more  tlian  a  just  counterpoise  to  the  extreme 
character  of  his  afflictions  ?  The  weighing 
of  words  and  thoughts  was  an  essential 
element  in  the  Egyptian  conception  of  the 
judgment,  where  Thoth  held  the  balance, 
and  in  the  one  scale  were  placed  the  merits 
of  the  deceased,  in  the  other  the  image  of 
Ma,  or  Truth,  and  his  fate  was  determined 
by  the  side  to  which  the  balance  inclined 
('  Eitual  of  the  Dead,'  ch.  cxxv. ;  Wilkinson, 
*  Ancient  Egyptians,'  vol.  v.  p.  252).  And 
my  calamity  laid  in  the  balances  together. 
My  calamity  placed  in  one  scale,  and  my 
vexation  in  the  other,  and  so  weighed,  each 
against  each. 

Ver.  3. — ^For  now  it  would  he  heavier 
than  the  sand  of  the  sea  (comp.  Prov.  xxvii, 
3,  "  A  stone  is  heavy,  and  the  sand  weighty ; 
but  a  fool's  wrath  is  heavier  than  them 
both;"  see  also  Ecclus.  xxii.  15).  There- 
fore my  words  are  swallowed  np ;  rather,  as 
in  the  Revised  Version,  therefore  have  my 
wordi  teen  rash.  Job  here  excuses  without 
justifying  himself.  The  excessive  character 
of  his  sufferings  has,  he  declares,  forced  him 
to  utter  rash  and  violent  words,  as  tliose 
wherein  he  cursed  his  day  and  wished  that 
he  had  never  been  born  (ch.  iii.  1,  3 — 11). 
Some  allowance  ought  to  be  made  for  rash 
speech  uttered  under  such  circumstances. 

Ver.  4. — For  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty 
aro  within  me  (oomp.  Pa.  xxxviii.  2,  "  For 


thine  arrows  stick  fast  in  me  ").  So  Shake- 
speare speaks  of  "  the  slings  and  arrows  of 
outrageous  fortune"  for  calamities  generally. 
The  metaphor  is  a  very  common  one  (see 
Deut.  xxxii.  23,  42;  Ps.  vii.  13;  xxi.  12; 
xly.  5 ;  Lam.  iii.  13, 14).  The  poison  whereof. 
Poisoned  arrows,  suoii  as  are  now  employed 
by  the  savage  tribes  of  Central  Africa,  were 
common  in  antiquity,  though  seldom  used 
by  civilized  nations.  Ovid  declares  that 
the  Scythians  of  his  time  made  use  of  them 
('Tristia,'  i.,  2).  Drinketh  up  my  spirit; 
rather,  my  spirit  drinketh  up.  Job's  spirit 
absorbs  the  poison  that  festers  in  his 
wounds,  and  therefore  loses  control  over 
itself.  This  is  hia  apology  for  his  vehe- 
mence; he  is  well-nigh  distraught.  He 
adds.  The  terrors  of  Ood  do  set  themselves 
in  array  against  me.  Besides  actual  pains 
and  sufferings,  he  is  assailed  by  fears. 
God's  terrors,  i.e.  all  the  other  evils  that  he 
has  at  his  disposal,  are  drawn  up  against 
him,  as  it  were,  in  battle  array,  and  still 
further  agitate  and  distract  his  soul.  What 
further  troubles  may  not  God  bring  upon 
him? 

Ver.  5. — Doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he 
hath  grass!  literally,  over  grass;  i.e.  when 
he  has  grass  under  his  feet,  and  has  conse- 
quently no  cause  of  complaint.  Job  means  to 
say  that  his  own  complainings  aro  as  natural 
and  instinctive  as  those  of  animals.  (On 
the  species  of  wild  asses  known  to  Job,  see 
the  comment  on  ch.  xxxix.  5.)  Or  loweth 
the  ox  over  his  fodder  1  The  lowing  of  the 
ox,  like  the  braying  of  the  wild  ass,  is  a 
complaint — a  sign  of  distress  and  discomfort. 

Ver.  6. — Can  that  which  is  unsavoury  be 
eaten  without  salt  t  or,  that  which  is  insipid. 
Many  critics  suppose  that  in  this  and  the 
following  verse  Job  reproaches  Eliphaz  with 
the  insipidity  of  his  remarks,  and  declares 
that  his  soul  refuses  to  touch  such  loath- 
some food.  Others  regard  him  as  still 
speaking  in  bis  own  defence,  and  justifying 
his  expressions  of  disgust  by  the  nauseous 
character  of  the  food  which  had  been  put 
before  him ;  i.e.  of  the  treatment  which  he 
has  received.  Either  explanation  produces 
a  good  sense ;  but  perhaps  the  former  is  the 
more  natural.  Or  is  there  any  taste  in  the 
white  of  an  egg !  So  our  Revisers ;  and  so 
Dillmann  and  Canon  Cook.  Professor  Lee 
suggests  "tlie  whey  of  cheese"  for  "the 
white  of  an  egg;"  others,  "the  juice  of 
purslaine."  We  have  certainly  no  other 
evidence  that  eggs  were  eaten  in  primitive 
times. 

Ver.  7. — The  things  that  my  soul  refused 
to  touch  are  as  my  sorrowful  meat ;  rather, 
as  in  the  Retvt«ed  Version,  my  soul  refuseth 


104 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  VI.  1-  30. 


to  tmich  them ;  they  are  as  loatheome  meat  to 
me.  The  doubt  remains  wliether  Job  is 
speaking  of  the  arguments  of  Elipliaz,  or  of 
tlie  scries  of  afflictions  which  have  befallen 
him.    Either  explanation  is  possible. 

Ver.  8. — Oh  that  I  might  have  my  request  1 
Here  the  second  point  is  taken  up.  Eliphaz 
has  threatened  Job  with  death,  representing 
it  as  tlio  last  and  most  terrible  of  punish- 
ments (ch.  iv.  9,  20,  21 ;  v.  2).  Job's  reply 
is  that  there  is  nothing  he  desires  so  much 
as  death.  His  primary  wish  would  have 
been  never  to  have  been  born  (oh.  iii.  3 — 
10) ;  next  to  that,  he  would  have  desired  an 
early  death — the  earlier  the  more  acceptable 
(ch.  iii.  11 — 19).  As  both  tliese  have  been 
denied  him,  what  he  now  desires,  and  ear- 
nestly asks  foi-,  is  a  speedy  demise.  It  is  not 
as  yet  clear  what  he  thinks  death  to  be,  or 
whether  he  lias  any  hope  beyond  the  grave. 
Putting  aside  all  such  considerations,  he 
here  simply  balances  death  against  such  a 
life  as  he  now  leads,  and  must  expect  to 
lead,  since  his  disease  is  incurable,  and  de- 
cides in  favour  of  death.  It  is  not  only  hia 
desire,  but  his  "  request "  to  God,  that  death 
may  come  to  him  quickly.  And  that  God 
would  grant  me  the  thing  that  I  long  for ; 
literally,  my  expectation,  or  wish.  The  idea 
of  taking  his  own  life  does  not  seem  to  have 
occurred  to  Job,  as  it  would  to  a  Greek 
(Plato,  'Phsedo,'  §  16)  or  a  Boman  (Pliny, 
'  Epist.,'  i.  12).  He  is  too  genuine  a  child 
of  nature,  too  simple  and  unsophisticated, 
for  such  a  thought  to  occur,  and,  if  it  occur- 
red, would  be  too  religious  to  eutertaiu  it  for 
a  moment.  Like  Aristotle,  he  would  feel 
the  act  to  be  cowardly  (Aristotle,  'Eth. 
Nic.,'  ■r.fSiibfin.);  and,  like  Plato  (l.s.c),  he 
would  view  it  as  rebellion  against  the  will 
of  God. 

Ver.  9. — Even  that  it  would  please  God  to 
destroy  me ;  or,  to  crush  me  (Kevised  Version) 
— "  to  break  me  in  pieces  "  (Lee).  That  he 
would  let  loose  his  hand ;  or,  put  forth  Ms 
hand — "  stretch  it  out  against  me  threaten- 
ingly." And  out  me  off.  "  Cut  me  off  bit  hy 
hit"  (Lee) ;  comp.  Isa.  xxxviii.  12, where  the 
same  word  is  used  of  a  weaver,  who  cuts  the 
threads  of  his  loom  one  by  one,  until  the 
whole  is  liberated  and  comes  away. 

Ver.  10. — Then  should  I  yet  have  comfort. 
First,  the  comfort  tliat  the  end  was  come, 
and  that  he  would  be  spared  further  suffer- 
ings ;  and  further,  the  still  greater  comfort 
that  he  had  endured  to  the  end,  and  not 
denied  nor  renounced  his  trust  in  religion 
and  in  all  the  "words  of  the  Holy  One." 
Professor  Lee  sees  here  "  the  recognition  of 
a  future  life,  expressed  in  words  as  plain 
and  obvious  as  possible"  ('Book  of  the 
Patriarch  Job,'  p.  223).  But  to  na  it  seems 
that,  if  the  idea  is  present  at  all,  it  is  covered 
up,  latent ;  only  so  far  implied  as  it  m«y  be 


said  to  be  implied  in  all  willirigness  to  die, 
since  it  may  be  argued  that  aven  the  most 
wretched  life  possible  would  be  preferred 
by  any  man  to  no  life  at  all,  and  so  that 
when  men  are  content  to  die  they  must  be 
expecting,  whether  consciously  or  not,  a  life 
beyond  the  grave,  and  be  sustained  by  that 
expectation.  Yea,  I  would  harden  myself  in 
sorrow:  let  him  not  spare;  rather,  yea,  I 
would  exult  in  anguish  that  did  not  spare. 
However  great  the  pain  that  accompanied 
his  death,  Job  would  rejoice  and  exult  in  it, 
since  by  it  his  death  was  to  be  accomplished. 
?or  I  have  not  concealed  the  words  of  the 
Holy  One ;  rather,  for  I  have  not  denied,  or 
renounced.  It  would  be  a  part  of  Job's  satis- 
faction in  dying  that  he  had  not  let  go  his 
integrity.  Bather  he  had  held  it  fast,  and 
not  renounced  or  abandoned  his  trust  in  God 
and  in  religion.  "The  words  of  the  Holy 
One  are  the  commands  of  God,  however 
made  known  to  man  "  (Canon  Cook). 

Ver.  11. — ^What  is  my  strength,  that  I 
should  hope  1  Eliphaz  had  suggested  that 
Job  might  recover  and  be  restored  to  hia 
former  prosperity  (ch.  v.  18 — 26).  Job 
rejects  this  suggestion.  His  strength  is 
brought  too  low ;  it  is  not  conceivable  that 
he  should  be  restored ;  he  cannot  entertain 
any  such  hope.  And  what  is  mine  end,  that 
I  should  prolong  my  Ufe?  rather,  that  1 
should  stretch  out  my  spirit.  Job  cannot 
look  forward  to  such  an  "  end  "  as  Eliphai 
prophesies  for  him ;  therefore  he  cannot 
bring  himself  to  wait  on  with  patience. 

Ver.  12. — Is  my  strength  the  strength  of 
stones  ?  or  is  my  flesh  of  brass  ?  It  would 
require  a  man  to  have  a  body  of  brass,  and 
strength  like  that  of  rocks,  for  him  to  be 
able  to  endure  the  ravages  of  such  a  disease, 
and  yet  to  recover  from  it.  Job  cannot 
pretend  to  either. 

Ver.  13. — Is  not  my  help  in  me  ?  rather. 
Is  it  not  that  I  have  no  help  in  m«?  (Be  vised 
Version).  Job  feels  that,  instead  of  having 
exceptional  strength  of  constitution  to  enable 
him  to  bear  up  against  his  exhausting 
■  malady,  he  is  absolutely  without  strength. 
All  his  vital  power  is  used  up.  There  is  no 
help  in  him.  And  is  wisdom  driven  quite 
from  me  1  rather,  Is  not  soundness  driven 
quite  from  met  Tushiyah  seems  to  mean  here 
"strength  of  constitution" — that  internal 
soundness  which  resists  the  inroads  of  dis- 
ease, and  sometimes  triumphs  over  the  moat 
serious  maladies.  Whatever  reserve  of  this 
kind  he  may  have  possessed  by  nature,  it  is 
now.  Job  feels,  altogether  lost  and  gone  from 
him. 

Ver.  14.— To  him  that  is  afficted  pity 
should  be  showed  from  his  friend.  Job 
bogias  here  the  third  head  of  his  re^jly  to 
Eliphaz,  in  which  he  attacks  him  and  Iii* 
companions.    The  fiist  duty  of  a  comforter 


OH.  VI.  1 — 30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


105 


Is  to  oompasBionate  his  afflicted  friend,  to 
condole  with  liim,  and  show  his  sympathy 
with  his  sufferings.  This  is  what  every  one 
looks  for  and  expects  as  a  matter  of  course. 
Bat  Joh  has  looked  in  vain.  He  has  received 
no  pity,  no  sympathy.  Nothing  has  been 
offered  him  hut  arguments.  And  what  argu- 
ments! How  do  they  touch  the  point?  How 
are  they  anything  more  than  a  venting  of 
the  speaker's  own  self-iighteousness  7  Let 
them  fairly  consider  his  case,  and  point  out 
to  him  where  he  has  been  blamable.  But  he 
forsaketh  the  fear  of  the  Almighty;  rather, 
even  though  he  forsake  the  fear  of  the  Almighty, 
ox  else  mighthe  forsake  the  fear  of  the  Almighty. 
Job  certainly  does  not  mean  to  admit  that 
he  has  renounced  the  fear  of  God,  and  become 
an  apostate  from  religion ;  but  only  to  assert, 
either,  that,  even  had  he  done  so,  his  friends 
ought  still  to  have  shown  him  kindness,  or 
else  that  their  not  showing  him  kindness  is 
the  very  way  to  drive  him  to  apostasy. 

Ver.  15. — My  brethren ;  I'.e.  "  my  three 
friends,"  Eliphaz,  who  has  spoken ;  Bildad 
and  Zophar,  who  by  their  silence  have 
shown  their  agreement  with  him._  Have 
dealt  deceitfully  as  a  hibok;  t.e.  "a  winter 
torrent" — a  "wady,"  to  use  the  modern 
Arab  expression.  These  watercourses  are 
characteristic  of  Palestine  and  the  adjacent 
regions.  "  Daring  the  winter  months,"  says 
Dr.  Cunningham  Geikie,  "they  are  often 
foaming  rivers ;  but  in  the  hot  summer,  when 
they  would  be  of  priceless  value,  their  dry 
bed  is  generally  the  road  from  one  point  to 
another.  The  water  rushes  over  the  sheets 
of  rook  as  it  would  from  the  roof  of  a  house, 
and  converging,  as  it  descends,  into  minor 
streams  in  the  higher  wadies,  these  sweep 
on  to  a  common  channel  in  some  central 
valley,  and,  thus  united,  swell  in  an  in- 
credibly short  time  into  a  deep,  troubled, 
roaring  flood,  which  fills  the  whole  bottom 
of  the  wady  with  an  irresistible  torrent  .  .  . 
The  streams  from  Lebanon,  and  also  from 
the  high  mountains  of  the  Hauran,  send  down 
great  floods  of  dark  and  troubled  waters  in 
spring,  when  the  ice  and  snow  of  their 
summits  are  melted;  but  they  dry  up  under 
the  heat  of  summer,  and  the  track  of  the 
torrent,  with  its  chaos  of  boulders,  stones, 
and  gravel,  seems  as  if  it  had  not  known  a 
stream  for  ages.  So  Job's  friends  had  in 
former  times  seemed  as  if  they  would  be  true 
to  him  for  ever;  but  their  friendship  had 
vanished,  like  the  rush  of  the  toirent  that 
had  passed  away"  ('The  Holy  Land  and 
the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  pp.  123—125).  And  as 
Jhe  stream  of  brooks  they  pass  away;  or, 
the  channel ;  i.e.  the  wady  itself.  Canon  Cook 
well  says  on  this,  "  The  simile  is  remark- 
ably complete.  When  little  needed,  the 
torrent  overflows;  when  needed,  it  disap- 
neara.    In  winter  it  does  not  fertilize:  in 


summer  it  is  dried  up.  Nor  is  it  merely 
useless;  it  deceives,  alluring  the  travellei 
by  the  appearance  of  verdure,  promising  re- 
freshment, and  giving  none." 

Ver.  16. — Which  are  blackish  by  reason 
of  the  ice,  Job  seems  to  have  seen  wadys 
where,  in  the  winter-time,  the  water  was 
actually  frozen  into  hard  black  ice.  This 
scarcely  occurs  now  in  the  countries  border- 
ing on  Palestine;  but  may  have  occurred 
in  the  region  where  Job  dwelt,  formerly. 
"Dark,  turbid  water"  can  scarcely  be  in- 
tended. And  wherein  the  snow  is  hid. 
Some  suppose  melted  snow  to  be  meant ;  but 
the  deep  wadies  in  the  Hauran  and  elsewhere 
would  easily  conceal  snowdrifts. 

Ver.  17. — What  time  they  wax  warm, 
they  vanish :  when  it  is  hot,  they  are  con- 
sumed out  of  their  place  (see  the  passage 
quoted  from  Dr.  Geikie  in  the  comment  on 
ver.  15). 

Ver.  18. — The  paths  of  their  way  are  tnmed 
aside;  rather,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version, 
(he  caravans  that  travel  by  the  way  of  them 
turn  aside.  It  seems  impossible  that  the 
streams  can  be  intended,  since  their  paths 
are  never  "turned  aside" — ^they  simply 
shrink,  fail,  and  dry  up.  But  nothiug  is 
commoner  than  for  caravans  short  of  water 
to  go  out  of  their  way  in  order  to  reach  a 
wady,  where  they  expect  to  be  able  to  re- 
plenish their  water-skins.  If  they  are  dis- 
appointed, if  the  wady  is  dry,  they  may  be 
brought  into  great  straits,  and  may  even 
possibly  perish.  (For  a  probable  instance, 
where  dependence  on  a  wady  would,  but 
for  a  miracle,  have  led  to  a  great  disaster, 
see  2  Kings  iii.  9 — 20.)  They  go  to  nothing, 
and  perish ;  rather,  they  go  up  into  the  waste, 
and  perish.  Having  vainly  sought  water  iu 
the  dry  wady,  they  ascend  out  of  it,  and 
enter  the  broad  waste  of  the  desert,  where 
they  too  often  miserably  perish. 

Ver.  19.— The  troops  of  Tema  looked.  The 
Tema  were  an  Arab  tribe  descended  from 
Ishmael  (Gen.  xxv.  15).  They  are  generally 
conjoined  with  Dedan  (laa.  xxi.  13,14;  Jer. 
xxv.  23),  another  Ai'ab  tribe,  noted  for  carry- 
ing on  a  caravan  trade.  Both  tribes  pro- 
bably wandered,  and  ocoapieJ  at  different 
periods  different  portions  of  the  desert.  The 
name,  Tema,  may  linger  in  the  modern  city 
and  district  of  Taymd,  on  the  confines  of 
Syria,  and  upon  tlie  pilgrim-route  between 
Damascus  and  Mecca.  The  "troops  of 
Tema"  probably  looked  for  the  "caravans" 
of  ver.  18  to  arrive  in  their  country;  but 
they  looked  in  vain.  The  desert  had 
swallowed  them  up.  The  oompanies  of 
Sheha  waited  for  them.  (On  "  Sheba,"  see 
the  comment  upon  ch.  i.  15.) 

Ver.  20. — They  were  confounded  because 
they  had  hoped.  Shame  and  confuiion  of 
face  o»aie  upon  them  in  consequence  of  theii 


106 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  vfc  1—30. 


vain  hope.  In  the  same  way,  Job  unplies, 
he  is  asliamed  of  having  looked  for  compas- 
sion and  kindness  from  his  friends.  He 
sliould  have  been  wiser  and  have  known 
better.  They  came  thither,  and  were  ashamed. 
They  not  only  hoped,  but  acted  on  their 
hope— let  it  turn  them  aside  from  their  way 
(ver.  18)  and  bring  them  to  ruin. 

Ver.  21. — For  now  ye  are  nothing.  Like 
the  dried-up  torrents,  the  comforters  had 
come  to  nought;  were  wholly  useless  and 
unprofitable.  Another  reading  gives  the 
sense,  "Ye  are  like  to  them" — "ye  oom- 
forterg,"  i.e.,  "  are  like  the  winter  torrents, 
and  have  misled  me,  as  they  misled  the 
caravans."  Ye  see  my  casting  down,  and 
are  afraid.  Here  Job  penetrates  to  the 
motive  which  had  produced  the  conduct  of 
his  friends.  They  had  come  with  good  in- 
tentions, meaning  to  comfort  and  console 
him ;  but  when  they  came,  and  saw  what  a 
wreck  he  was,  how  utterly  "  broken  up " 
and  ruined,  they  began  to  be  afraid  of  show- 
ing too  much  friendliness.  They  thought 
him  an  object  of  the  Divine  vengeance,  and 
feared  lest,  if  they  showed  him  sympathy, 
they  might  involve  themselves  in  his  punish- 
ment. 

Ver.  22. — ^Did  I  say,  Bring  unto  me  1  The 
meaning  is  probably — If  this  be  the  case, 
if  ye  are  afraid  of  helping  me,  why  have 
ye  come  ?  Did  I  ask  for  your  aid  ?  No.  I 
neither  requested  you  to  bring  me  anything 
for  myself,  nor  to  make  a  present  to  auy  one 
on  my  behalf;  much  less  did  I  call  upon 
you  to  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  my 
enemies,  to  chastize  the  Chaldeans  and  the 
men  of  Sheba  (oh.  i.  15,  17),  and  recover 
from  them  my  property.  No;  I  asked 
nothing  at  all  of  you  ;  but  when  you  came 
voluntarily,  I  did  expect  your  pity  (ver.  14). 
Or,  Give  a  reward  foi^  me  of  your  substance  1 
I.e.  give  a  present  on  my  behalf  to  some 
influential  person,  who  might  thereupon 
take  up  my  cause  and  befriend  me.  There 
is  no  need  of  supposing  a  "  bribe "  to  be 
meant. 

Ver.  23. — Or,  Deliver  mo  from  the  enemy's 
hand  1  rather,  from  the  hand  of  the  violent 
man.  Or,  Bedecm  me  from  the  hand  of  the 
mighty  1  literally,  of  the  oppressor  (see  the 
Eevised  Version).  Job  had  not  called  on 
his  friends  to  do  any  of  these  things.  He 
had  not  worn  out  their  patience  by  asking 
now  for  this,  and  now  for  that.  But  he 
had  expected  their  compassion,  and  this  was 
denied  him. 

Ver.  24. — Teach  me,  and  I  will  hold  my 
tongue.  Job  is  willing  to  be  taught,  if  his 
friends  have  any  instruction  to  give.  He  is 
willing  to  be  reproved.  But  not  in  such 
sort  as  he  has  been  reproved  by  Eliphaz. 
Sis  words  were  not  "  words  of  uprightness." 
Cause  me  to  understand  wherein  I  have  erred. 


Point  out,  that  is,  in  what  my  assumed  g^lt 
consists.  You  maintain  that  my  afflictions 
are  deserved.  Point  out  what  in  my  con- 
duct has  deserved  them.  I  am  quite  ready 
to  be  convinced. 

Ver.  25. — How  forcible  are  right  words ! 
literally,  words  of  uprightness.  Such  words 
have  a  force  that  none  can  resist.  If  the 
charges  made  by  Eliphaz  had  been  right 
and  true,  and  his  arguments  sound  and  just, 
then  Job  must  have  yielded  to  them,  have 
confessed  himself  guilty,  and  bowed  down 
with  shame  before  his  judges.  But  they  had 
had  no  such  constraining  power.  There- 
fore they  were  not ''  words  of  uprightness." 
But  what  doth  your  arguing  reprove  ?  lite- 
rally. What  doth  your  reproving  reproved 
That  is — What  exactly  is  it  that  ye  think 
to  be  wrong  in  me?  At  what  is  your  In- 
vective aimed  1 

Ver.  26. — Do  ye  imagine  to  reprove  words  1 
or.  Bo  ye  propo-^e  ?  "  Is  it  your  intention  ?  " 
Am  I  to  understand  that  you  blame  nothing 
in  my  conduct,  but  only  the  words  that  I 
have  spoken?  i.e.  the  words  recorded  in 
eh.  iii.  And  the  speeches  of  one  that  is 
desperate,  which  sve  as  wind ;  or,  whereas 
the  speeches  of  one  that  is  desperate,  are  hut 
as  wind  ;  literally,  for  the  wind — spoken  to 
the  wind,  for  the  wind  to  take  hold  of  them 
and  bear  them  away.  Therefore  not  worth 
a  reproof. 

Ver.  27. — ^Yea,  ye  overwhelm  the  father- 
less ;  rather,  on  the  fatherless  would  ye  cast 
lots  (comp.  Joel  iii.  3;  Obad.  11 ;  Nah.  iii. 
10).  Job  means  to  say  they  are  so  pitiless 
that  they  would  cast  lots  for  the  children  of 
an  insolvent  debtor  condemned  to  become 
slaves  at  his  death  (see  2  Kings  Iv.  1 ;  Neh. 
V.  5).  And  ys  dig  a  pit  for  yonr  friend; 
or,  ye  woiM  make  merchandise  of  your  friend, 
as  in  the  Revised  Version.  Job  does  not 
speak  of  what  his  friends  had  done,  but  of 
what  he  deems  them  capable  of  doing. 

Ver.  28. — Now  therefore  be  content,  look 
upon  me ;  rather,  be  pleased  to  look  upon  me. 
Professor  Lee  translates,  "  Look  favourably 
upon  me."  But  this  addition  is  unnecessary. 
What  Job  desires  is  that  his  friends  would 
look  him  straight  in  the  face.  Then  they 
would  not  be  able  to  doubt  him.  They 
would  see  that  he  was  telling  the  truth. 
For  it  is  evident  unto  you  if  Ilie ;  rather,  it 
wiU  be  evident  unto  you,  etc.  Others  render 
the  passage,  "  For  surely  I  shall  not  lie  to 
your  face  "  (Sohultens,  Canon  Cook,  Kevised 
Version). 

Ver.  29. — Betorn,  I  pray  yon;  i.e.  "go 
back  upon  my  case :  reconsider  it."  And 
then,  let  it  not  be  inic[uity ;  or,  let  there  be  no 
iniquity;  i.e,  let  uo  injustice  be  done  mo. 
Yea,  return  again,  my  righteousness  is  in  it 
If  my  cause  be  well  considered,  it  will  1m 
seen  that  I  am  in  no  way  blameworthy. 


OH.  VI.  1—30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


107 


Ver.  30.— Is  there  iniquity  in  my  ton^e  ! 
(see  ver.  26).  Job  now  justifies  his  words, 
which  previously  he  had  admitted  to  have 
been  "  rash  "  (ver.  3).  Perhaps  he  intends 
to  distinguish  between  rashness  and  actual 
wickedness.  Cannot  my  taste  discern  per- 
verse things!  i.e.  I  see  no  perversity  or 
wickeduesB  in  what  I  have  said.    If  there 


were  any,  I  think  1  should  discern  it.  The 
reasoning  is  somewhat  dangerous,  since  men 
are  not  infallible  judges,  not  being  unpre- 
judiced judges,  in  their  own  case.  Job's 
ultimate  verdict  on  liimsolf  is  that  he  has 
"uttered  that  which  he  understood  not" 
(oh.  xlii.  3) — wherefore  he  "  abhors  himself, 
and  repents  in  dust  aad  ashes  "  (oh.  xlii.  6). 


nOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — Job  to  EUpTiaz :  1,  Apologies  and  prayers.  L  A  desperate  man's 
DEFENCE.  1.  Job's  Calamities  surveyed.  (1)  Their  weight.  Heavier  than  the  sand  of 
the  seas.  Employed  elsewhere  to  depict  what  is  innumerable  (Gen.  xxii.  17;  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  27)  and  immeasurable  (1  Kings  iv.  29 ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  22),  the  sand  upon  the 
seashore  is  here  selected  to  set  forth  the  notion  of  incomparable  weight  (Prov.  xxvii. 
3).  Like  the  ocean  beach  stretching  away  measureless  and  oppressive,  the  sorrow  of 
the  patriarch  was  intolerably  burdensome.  Scripture  designates  as  burdens  afflictions 
and  temporal  calamities  of  all  sorts,  whether  of  individuals  (Ps.  Iv.  22 ;  2  Kings  ix. 
25)  or  of  nations  (Isa.  xv.  1 ;  xvii.  1 ;  xix.  1).  Yet  more  cmshing  and  intolerable 
even  than  these  is  the  burden  laid  by  sin  upon  awakened  and  sensitive  souls  (Ps. 
xxxviii.  4).  (2)  Their  intensity.  Likened  to  the  wounds  of  poisoned  ariows,  with 
a  multitude  of  which  Job  describes  himself  as  transfixed,  not  in  body  only,  but  in 
spirit  too.  Arrows  are  put  in  Scripture  for  aflictions,  calamities,  judgments,  which, 
like  them,  are  often  swift  (Zech.  ix.  14),  unexpected  (Ps.  xci.  5),  sharp  (Ps.  xlv.  5), 
difficult  to  be  removed  (Ps.  xxxviii.  1,  2),  and  deadly,  especially  when  sent  in  wrath 
(Deut.  xxxii.  42).  (3)  Their  effect.  Exliausting;  the  venom  shot  into  Job's  veins 
setting  them  on  fire,  corrupting  his  blood,  inflaming  his  flesh,  enfeebling  his  spirit, 
and  generally  producing  a  sensation  of  constantly  increasing  weakness;  terrifying, 
inspiring  his  trembling  heart  with  ghostly  alarms  and  paralyzing  fears,  which  seemed 
to  gather  round  him  like  a  troop  of  pale  spectres  from  the  outlying  posts  of  God's 
dominions,  and  to  marshal  themselves  like  a  sable  host  against  him ;  nauseating, 
causing  his  soul  to  revolt  against  them  as  the  stomach  turns  sickly  at  the  sight  of 
loathsome  food.  (4)  Their  origin.  From  God.  This  was  the  principal  aggravation  of 
the  patriarch's  misery.  So  long  as  a  sufferer  can  see  God's  face,  the  heaviest  load 
of  calamity  will  not  crush  him  ;  but  when  God's  favour  appears  to  be  withdrawn,  the 
spirit  sinks  like  lead  in  the  mighty  waters  (ch.  ix.  13).  2.  Job's  grief  justified.  (1) 
Compared  with  his  calamities,  it  was  not  extravagant.  His  heated  words  (ver.  3) 
had  not  been  disproportioned  to  the  misery  which  had  given  them  expression.  Not 
balancing  the  two  things  his  friend  had  unjustly  accused  him  of— impatience  and  rage. 
Weighed  together,  the  overwhelming  character  of  his  sorrow  would  "  swallow  up  "  his 
words  as  a  wholly  inadequate  utterance  of  his  grief.  That  Eliphaz  failed  to  estimate 
accurately  the  intensity  of  Job's  sufferings  was  natural,  since  no  man  can  put  himself 
exactly  in  another's  place,  and  only  the  heart  that  suffers  can  know  its  own  bitterness 
(Prov.  xiv.  10).  Yet  charity  should  have  moved  him  to  judge  with  leniency,  and 
speak  with  tenderness  of,  a  grief  whose  cause  he  did  not  comprehend.  At  the  same 
time,  it  is  hardly  doubtful  that  Job's  misery  did  not  warrant  the  appalling  outburst 
of  oh.  iii. ;  but  men  at  all  times  (and  especially  in  affliction)  are  readier  to  excuse 
themselves  than  others.  (2)  Considered  in  itself,  it  was  not  unnatural.  It  was  not 
without  cause.  Even  the  senseless  ass  and  the  stupid  ox  were  wise  enough  to  hold 
their  tongues  when  placed  in  circumstances  of  asinine  and  bovine  felicity ;  i.e.  when 
they  had  plenty  of  food ;  and  surely  he  had  as  much  discernment  as  these  irrational 
creatures,  and  could  distinguish  whether  he  was  miserable  or  happy,  and  cry  out  or 
be  silent  accordingly.  Then  having  a  cause,  it  was  likewise  irrepressible,  it  being 
as  impossible  for  him  not  to  complain  as  it  was  for  a  person  to  eat  what  was  unsavoury 
or  tasteless  without  making  wry  faces  and  giving  vent  to  his  displeasure. 

II.  A  iciSEKABLB  man's  PRATER.  1.  JoVs  Urgent  request.  "  Oh  that  I  might  have 
my  request ;  and  that  God  would  grant  me  the  thing  that  I  long  for  1 "  (ver.  8) — that 
thing  being  death  (cf.  ch.  iii.  21).    Jeb  longed  for  death  as  a  release  itom  his  suiferings 


108  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  Ti.  1—30. 

(ch.  iii.  13) ;  Elijali,  under  a  sense  of  weariness  and  disappointment  (1  Kings  six.  4) ; 
Jonah,  in  a  fit  of  rage  and  self-conceit  (Jonah  iv.  8) ;  St.  Paul,  through  ardent  longing  for 
heaven  (Phil.  i.  23) ;  Christ,  through  vehement  desire  after  man's  salvation  (Luke  xii. 
50).  2.  JoVs  pitiful  entreaty.  "  Even  that  it  would  please  God  to  destroy  me ;  that 
he  would  let  loose  his  hand,  and  cut  me  off "  (ver.  9).  That  Job  does  not  think  of 
taking  his  own  life,  although  often  strongly  tempted  to  do  so  by  his  peculiar  malady 
(ch.  vii.  15,  16),  although  death  was  the  paramount  desire  of  his  heart,  and  although  he 
professed  himself  free  from  anxiety  about  the  future,  was  a  proof,  not  only  of  Job's 
regard  for  the  sanctity  of  life,  and  of  his  clear  recognition  of  God's  proprietorBhip  in 
that  life,  but  also  of  his  own  moral  integrity,  and  of  the  intensity  with  which  he  still 
shrank  from  the  perpetration  of  known  sin.  3.  t/bS's  melancholy  plea.  "  Then  should 
I  yet  have  comfort"  (ver.  10).  The  mere  anticipation  of  a  speedy  dissolution  would 
not  only  cause  him  to  forget  his  misery,  it  would  thrill  him  with  extreme  delight ; 
yea,  if  God  would  but  assure  him  that  every  stroke  was  hastening  his  end,  he  would 
bear  without  a  murmur  the  most  unsparing  affliction  that  might  be  laid  upon  him. 

4.  Job's  twofold  motive.  (1)  No  fear  of  death.  "  For  I  have  not  concealed  the 
words  of  the  Holy  One  "  (ver.  10).  Had  Job  been  apprehensive  of  meeting  God,  he 
would  not  so  earnestly  have  longed,  or  so  vehemently  entreated,  to  be  removed.  The 
only  thing  that  could  have  damped  his  exultation  in  tbf  prospect  of  death  would 
have  been  uncertainty  about  his  future.  But  of  this  he  was  devoid,  since  he  had  not 
concealed,  t.e.  had  not  denied  or  neglected,  but  openly  haa  practised,  the  words  of  the 
Holy  One.  (2)  No  hope  of  life.  "  What  is  my  strength,  that  I  should  hope  ?  and 
what  is  mine  end,  that  I  should  prolong  my  life  ?  "  (ver.  11).  It  was  impossible  that 
his  strength,  which  was  not  that  of  stones  or  of  brass  (ver.  12)  could  hold  out  much 
longer,  and  therefore  idle  in  Eliphaz  to  speak,  or  him  to  think,  of  restoration.  Nay, 
supposing  he  should  recover,  it  could  only  be  for  so  short  a  period  that  it  was  not 
worth  while  fostering  expectation  of  it.  But  in  point  of  fact,  all  natural  power  of 
rallying  had  departed  from  him,  and  nought  remained  that  could  be  matured  into 
health  again  (ver.  13),  Job  clearly  judged  in  this  matter  on  the  principles  of  sense 
and  reason,  forgetting  that  all  things  were  possible  with  God,  that  God  can  raise  a  feeble 
man  up  from  the  very  brink  of  the  grave  (Isa.  xxxviii.  10 — 20),  ay,  even  from  the 
dead  (contrast  the  faith  of  Abraham,  Eom.  iv.  19 ;  Heb.  xi.  19),  and  that  God  delights 
to  perfect  his  strength  in  human  weakness  (2  Cor.  xii.  9). 

Learn :  1.  Though  religion  requires  sufferers  to  submit  to  God's  chastisements,  it 
does  not  oblige  them  to  yield  to  man's  unjust  accusations.  Job  sinned  not  in  replying 
to  Bliphaz.  2.  It  is  extremely  hard  to  hold  the  balance  evenly  between  the  soul's 
calamities  and  the  heart's  griefs,  whether  in  ourselves  or  others.  Job  blamed  Eliphaz 
for  not  justly  weighing  his  sufferings  and  his  sorrow,  while  practically  EUphaz  censured 
Job  for  a  like  offence.  3.  Though  it  is  a  sore  trial  to  a  good  man  in  afifliction  to  miss  the 
sympathy  of  friends,  it  is  incomparably  more  painful  and  distressing  to  lose  the  sense 
of  God's  favour,  not  to  speak  of  experiencing  the  frowns  of  God's  anger.  Shaddai's 
arrows  and  Eloah's  terrors  were  infinitely  harder  for  Job  to  bear  than  Eliphaz's 
insinuations.  4.  The  best  of  men  are  "poore  sillie  creatures"  when  God  presseth 
them  with  judgments,  quite  incompetent  to  bear  the  shock  of  outward  calamity  unless 
God  shall  hold  them  up.  Job's  standing  upright  in  the  midst  of  such  a  tempest  of 
tribulation  as  swept  around  him  was  a  proof,  not  of  man's  strength,  but  of  God's  grace. 

5.  It  is  no  sin  to  long  for  death,  provided  we  wait  God's  time  for  its  coming.  Job, 
though  urgent  for  release  from  his  sufferings,  would  not  be  released  by  any  hand  but 
God's.  6.  The  best  way  to  overcome  the  fear  of  death  is  to  have  a  comfortable  outlook 
into  the  future.  Job  was  not  afraid  of  dying,  because  not  afraid  of  meeting  God. 
7.  The  best  preparation  for  both  death  and  eternity  is  not  to  conceal  from  our  vision, 
but  to  hide  within  our  hearts,  the  words  of  the  Holy  One. 

Vers.  14—30. — Job  to  EUphaz :  2.  Eeproofs  and  retorts.  I.  Unkindness  reproved. 
The  behaviour  of  Eliphaz  (and  his  friends)  was :  1.  Unnatural.  Compassion  for  a 
suffering  fellow-creature,  much  more  for  a  friend,  was  a  dicwte  of  hurwanity  (ver.  14). 
The  condition  of  Job  pre-eminently  claimed  pitiful  consideiation.  He  was  not  only 
melting  away,  bodily  and  mentally,  but  spiritually  he  was  in  danger  of  "  forsaking  the 
fear  of  the  Almighty,"  ».«.  losing  his  hold  on  God,  on  God'slov»  and  favour  towards  him- 


OH.  VI.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  109 

self,  and,  as  a  consequence,  on  his  integrity  before  and  confidence  in  God  (of.  Ps.  xxxviii. 
6 ;  Ixix.  2).  The  withholding  of  sympathy  from  one  in  his  condition  was  a  deplorable 
dereliction  of  duty  and  a  manifest  token  of  unfeeling  barbarity.  2.  Inconsistent. 
Besides  being  a  dictate  of  nature,  the  law  of  kindness  is  one  of  the  plainest  precepts 
of  religion  (Lev.  six.  18 ;  Zech.  vii.  9 ;  Luke  x.  37 ;  Eom.  xii.  10 — 15 ;  Jas.  i.  27), 
and  its  fulfilment  one  of  the  surest  marks  of  moral  and  spiritual  perfection  (Ps.  cxii. 
4;  Prov.  xxxi.  26;  Bom.  xiii.  8;  Col.  iii.  14;  1  Pet.  i.  22;  1  John  iv.  12).  The 
absence,  therefore,  of  pity  on  the  part  of  Bliphaz  and  his  friends  argued  them  destitute 
of  genuine  religion,  or,  according  to  another  reading  of  the  clause,  showed  them  to  be 
"forsaking  the  fear  of  Shaddai."  3.  Injurious.  A  third  interpretation  understands 
Job  to  say  that  Eliphaz's  lack  of  sympathy  had  rendered  it  more  difficult  for  him. 
Job,  to  believe  in  the  kindness  of  his  heavenly  Friend — was,  in  fact,  enough  to  cause 
him  to  forsake  the  fear  of  the  Almighty.  Earthly  relationships  were  undoubtedly 
designed  to  be  helpful  for  the  right  understanding  of  God's  relationship  towards  men ; 
a  father's  love  to  be  an  emblem  of  that  of  the  Divine  Father  (Deut.  viii.  5  ;  Ps.  ciii. 
13 ;  Matt.  vii.  11) ;  a  friend's  pity  to  interpret  that  of  the  Elder  Brother  (Prov.  xviii. 
24).  Hence  the  responsibility  of  so  fulfilling  these  relationships  that  men  shall  be 
assisted  rather  than  hindered  on  their  heavenward  way.  4.  Disappointing.  Eliphaz 
and  his  friends  had  decrived  Job  like  a  brook  (ver.  15),  like  the  dried-up  water  of  a 
mountain  wady.  The  image,  applied  by  Job  to  his  brethren  (ver.  21)  consists  of  four 
parts.  (1)  The  winter  torrent,  noisy  and  full,  turbid  and  swollen  by  thick  blocks 
of  floating  ice  and  fast-falling  flakes  of  snow,  rushing  down  the  precipitous  ravine, 
and  attracting  by  its  loud  roar  and  white  foam  the  attention  of  desert  travellers  as 
they  pass  (ver.  16), — an  emblem  of  the  loud  and  profuse  protestations  of  friendship 
which  were  made  by  Eliphaz  and  his  companions  at  a  time  when  Job  did  not  require 
them,  and  which  gave  promise  of  long  continuance,  like  the  waters  of  the  brook.  (2) 
The  dry  river-bed  in  summer-time,  from  which  the  streams  have  vanished,  leaving 
only  heaps  of  shingle  or  piles  of  boulders  (ver.  17), — an  emblem  of  the  quickness  and 
completeness  with  which  the  loud-mouthed  protestations  of  Job's  friends  had  disappeared, 
having  gone  to  nothing,  like  the  winter  torrent,  the  hot  sun  that  had  shrivelled  them 
up  being  Job's  deplorable  and  ghastly  condition  (ver.  21).  (3)  The  desert  caravans 
turning  aside  in  search  of  the  water  they  had  formerly  observed,  being  still  attracted 
by  the  unusual  brightness  and  verdure  of  the  wadys  (vers.  18, 19), — an  emblem  of 
the  eagerness  and  confidence  with  which  Job  had  anticipated  sympathy  and  succour 
from  his  friends.  (4)  The  consternation  of  the  travellers,  going  up  into  the  waste 
and  perishing,  being  confounded  at  the  miserable  disappointment  of  their  sanguine 
expectations,  and  ashamed  that  they  had  put  their  trust  in  what  was  so  proverbially 
treacherous  (ver.  20), — an  emblem  of  the  utter  collapse  of  Job's  hope  and  expectation 
from  the  coming  of  his  friends.  5.  Unreasonahle.  Job  had  not  asked  them  for  any 
great  evidence  of  friendship,  neither  to  relieve  his  sufferings  by  charitable  gifts,  nor 
to  repair  his  losses  by  munificent  contributions  from  their  personal  property,  nor  to 
restore  his  ruined  fortunes  by  recovering  them  from  the  Chaldeans  and  Sabeans,  as 
Abram  delivered  Lot  and  his  goods  from  the  hands  of  Chedorlaomer  (Gen.  xiv.  14). 
Simply  he  had  craved  their  sympathy — a  small  enough  boon,  which  would  not  liave 
much  impoverished  them;  and  yet  even  that  they  had  withheld.  Jonathan  dealt 
otherwise  with  David  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  16). 

IL  Insinuation  bbpelled.  The  imputation  which  underlay  the  whole  harangue 
of  Eliphaz,  Job  resented  as :  1.  Unproved.  "  Teach  me,  and  I  will  hold  my  tongue : 
and  cause  me  to  understand  wherein  I  have  erred."  A  perfectly  reasonable  demand, 
since  conviction  should  always  precede  condemnation.  So  Christ  challenged  his 
countrymen  first  to  convince  him  of  sin  (John  viii.  46).  And  it  is  manifestly  absurd 
to  expect  that  men  will  listen  to  admonitions  who  are  nnconscious  of  having  committed 
faults.  Even  God  does  not  exhort  to  repentance  without  having  first  demonstrated 
man's*  guilt.  The  first  function  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  convince  the  world  ofsin 
(John  xvi.  8).  Job's  language  also  indicative  of  an  honest  and  ingenuous  mind. 
Willingness  to  be  taught  is  a  sign  of  humility  and  a  token  of  sinoeiity.  "A  man  that 
is  willing  to  be  taught  is  in  a  better  condition  than  many  who  are  able  to  teach.  It 
argues  a  holier  temper  of  the  heart  to  be  willing  to  be  taught  than  to  be  able  to  teach. 
And  it  is  lar  worse  to  be  unwilling  to  learn  than  not  t^  be  knowing"  (Caryl).    2. 


110  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  vi.  1— 3Q 


Ungenerous.  While  words  of  uprightness,  i.e.  honest  speech,  plain  dealing,  eves 
reproof  when  necessary,  bad  a  force  which  Job  could  not  resist,  a  pertinency  he  could 
not  challenge,  and  a  pungency  he  could  not  fail  to  feel  and  acknowledge,  their  language 
had  been  wholly  mean  and  contemptible,  fastening  as  it  did  on  the  despairing  utter- 
ances of  a  poor  wretch  half-crazed  with  grief,  which  common  consent  allows  should  b« 
regarded  as  wind,  or  given  to  the  wind,  as  idle,  meaningless,  shifting,  and  therefore 
not  to  be  too  closely  criticized,  far  less  made  the  basis  of  a  charge  of  guilt.  And 
Job's  contention  was  substantially  correct.  Words  thrown  off  in  a  hasty  moment, 
under  the  influence  of  strong  passion,  are  not  always  a  perfectly  safe  and  reliable  index 
to  the  character  of  the  soul,  at  least  when  judged  by  man.  God  alone  is  competent 
to  estimate  man's  moral  and  spiritual  condition  by  his  words  (Matt.  xii.  37).  All 
others  should  be  guided  by  charity  in  interpreting  the  speech  of  agonized  men 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  5).  3.  SeartUss.  The  men  who  could  so  make  him  an  offender  for  a 
word  were  in  Job's  estimation  capable  of  any  baseness,  such  pitiless  and  inhuman 
ruffians  as  would  "  enslave  an  orphan  for  his  father's  debt,  and  then  cast  lots  whose 
he  should  be  "  (Cox),  or  barter  their  dearest  friend  for  pelf.  Probably  Job  overstrained 
the  case  against  Eliphaz  and  his  companions;  but  men  have  perpetrated  the  villainies 
described,  as  e.g.  the  brethren  of  Joseph  (Gen.  xxxvii.  28)  and  Judas  (Matt.  xxvi.  15). 
4.  Untrue.  Job  requests  his  friends  to  look  into  his  face  and  say  whether  he  did 
not  carry  the  refutation  of  theii-  slanders  in  his  countenance  (ver.  28).  The  face  is 
commonly  a  mirror  to  the  soul.  The  glory  of  a  pure  soul  shines  through  the  face, 
illuminating,  refining,  etherealizing  it;  just  as  the  moral  gloom  that  enshrouds  a 
wicked  soul  leaves  its  impress  on  the  countenance,  rendering  its  features  coarse,  brutal, 
sordid,  revolting.  There  are  faces  that  proclaim  the  depravity  of  the  soul  within  as 
certainly  as  there  are  noble  countenances  that  bear  their  own  certificate  of  truth, 
sincerity,  moral  honesty,  and  spiritual  refinement.  5.  Unfair.  The  friends  had 
started  with  a  prejudice  against  Job,  and,  as  a  consequence,  their  decision  had  not  been 
impartial.  Accordingly,  he  invites  them  to  renew  their  investigation,  but  on  other 
principles  and  presuppositions :  "  Return,  I  pray  you ;  let  there  be  no  unfairness,  and 
my  righteousness  will  be  found  to  stand  "  (ver.  29).  6.  Insulting.  Their  insinuation 
practically  charged  Job  with  being  a  moral  imbecile,  who  had  no  capacity  to  discriminate 
between  right  and  wrong — an  assumption  he  resented  with  the  utmost  vigour  (ver.  30), 
maintaining  that,  as  surely  as  his  palate  could  distinguish  meats,  his  moral  sense 
■could  discern  right  and  wrong  in  the  matter  of  his  sufferings,  and  generally  in  the 
providential  government  of  the  world  of  which  he  next  proceeds  to  speak.  The 
capacity  to  distinguish  between  right  and  wrong  is  the  highest  function  of  intelligence, 
and  is  as  certainly  capable  of  perversion  and  obscuration  through  wilful  ignorance  and 
sin  as  susceptible  of  education  and  refinement  through  Christian  instruction  and 
practical  holiness. 

Learn :  1.  The  duty  of  sympathizing  with  the  suffering  and  sorrowful.  Nature 
prompts  to  it ;  religion  enjoins  it ;  humanity  claims  it ;  the  afflicted  expect  it.  2.  The 
danger  of  putting  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way,  to  either  keep  men  or  withdraw  men 
from  the  fear  of  God.  3.  The  folly  of  trusting  in  either  princes  or  men's  sons,  seeing 
that  man's  goodness  is  commonly  (except  where  grace  intervenes)  as  transient  as  hi? 
greatness.  4.  The  painfulness  of  being  deceived  by  any,  but  especially  by  those  we 
trust.  5.  The  certain  disappointment  of  those  who  look  to  failing  brooks  for  the 
water  of  eternal  life.  6.  The  wickedness  of  censuring  for  sins  that  have  been  neither 
proved  nor  admitted.  7.  The  liability  of  man  to  error,  and  the  only  sure  and  certain 
pathway  to  truth,  viz.  a  spirit  of  humble  docility.  8.  Truth  is  less  dependent  on 
argumentation  than  men  are  apt  to  suppose,  being  generally  its  own  best  witness. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

"Vers.  1 — 13. — The  sufferer's  self-Justification.  (Ch.  vi.,  vii.)  We  have  seen  that 
Elipliaz's  counsels,  though  well-meanti,  were  ill-timed.  They  were  right  words,  but  not 
Atly  spoken  as  to  person,  time,  and  place.  They  cause  the  poor  sufferer  to  wince 
afresh  instead  of  soothing  his  pain.  The  tumult  of  his  spirit  is  now  aggravated  into 
a  very  tempest  of  woe.     The  human  spirit  is  a  thing  of  moods.     We  have  watched  the 


OH.  VI.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  Ill 

marvellous  changes  that  pass  over  the  surface  of  a  lake  beneath  a  tempestuous  sky. 
And  such  are  the  rapid  changes  of  pain  that  now  pass  over  the  mind  of  Job,  relieved 
here  and  there  by  flashes  of  calmer  reflection,  of  faith  and  hope.  The  picture  is 
instructive,  teaching  us  how  feeble  and  unstable  a  thing  is  the  human  mind,  and  how 
deeply  it  needs  to  look  out  from  itself  for  a  sure  support  in  the  Eternal.  Let  us  briefly 
take  note  of  these  moods.  Not  without  profit  shall  we  try  to  understand  them  if  we 
thereby  cultivate  that  deeper  sympathy  with  our  brethren  in  adversity  which  Job 
seemed  to  demand  at  the  hand  of  his  friends  in  vain. 

I.  The  expkeience  of  the  immenbitv  of  suFFERiNa.  (Vers.  1 — 14.)  There  are 
times  when  every  nerve  of  the  sensitive  organization  seems  to  be  turned  into  a  channel 
of  pain ;  when  the  creature,  instead  of  basking  in  the  brilliant  ether  of  unbounded  joy, 
is  submerged  in  a  boundless  ocean  of  misery.  "  All  thy  waves  and  billows  have  gone 
over  me."  It  is  with  this  feeling  that  Job  exclaims,  "  Would  that  a  term,  a  measure, 
a  weight,  might  be  applied  to  my  sufferings  1 "  A  day,  an  hour,  of  such  woe  seems  as 
an  eternity ! 

II.  The  I'BAB  OF  SINNING  VTiTH  THE  TONQ0B.  Vcr.  3,  which  appears  to  mean, 
"  Therefore  my  words  idly  bubbled,"  like  the  impatient  cries  and  reproaches  of  little 
children  against  the  parents  whom  they  love  1  But  this  is  the  only  definite  sin  of 
which  Job  is  conscious.  And  he  prays  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  it  in  this  trying 
hour.  So  said  the  psalmist,  "  I  vyill  take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  offend  not  with  my 
tongue."  Let  Christians  imitate  this  example.  Let  them  bridle  their  tongues  with 
holy  reverence,  and  cast  upon  them  as  a  spell  the  prayer  of  Jesus  in  the  garden. 

"  Forgive  these  wild  and  wandering  cries. 
Forgive  them  when  they  fail  in  truth. 
And  in  thy  wisdom  make  me  wise  I " 

III.  The  nature  and  obisin  of  his  suffbeinos  tbacbd  to  God.  (Ver.  4.)  It 
is  his  arrows  which  have  fastened  themselves  with  poisonous  inflammation  in  his 
breast ;  his  host  of  terrors  that  have  beleaguered  his  soul.  Though  in  such  extreme 
moments  it  is  hard  to  reconcile  our  sutferings  with  the  goodness  of  God,  it  is  well  to 
hold  firmly  to  the  clue  of  Divine  causation.  That  which  has  not  come  causelessly  will 
not  causelessly  remain.  This  is  the  one  crevice  through  which  light  steals  into  the 
dungeon  :  "  God  is  in  all  I  suffer." 

IV.  Apoloqt  fob  his  complaints.  (Vers.  5—7.)  They  are  true  to  nature.  God 
has  given  to  all  animals  their  natural  voice  of  pleasure  and  of  pain.  And  these  voices 
express  natural  tastes  and  repugnances.  The  ox  and  the  ass  are  silent  at  the  well- 
filled  stall.  It  is  only  when  unsavoury  food  is  offered  that  we  hear  the  cries  of  com- 
plaint. And  what  an  unsavoury  mess  is  this  which  his  friends  would  place  before 
him,  in  their  rigid  application  to  him  of  the  doctrine  that  his  suffering  witnesses  his 

guilt!  ,       ,       ,  . 

V.  Death  craved  as  a  boon.  (Vers.  8—13.)  The  very  thought  of  it  excites  a 
frantic  joy.  Whereas  Eliphaz  had  spoken  of  deliverance  from  death  as  one  of  the 
privileges  of  the  blessed  man,  and  of  its  lingering  approach  in  a  happy  old  age,  Job 
would  crave  a  speedy  dismissal  as  the  last  boon  which  he  feels  entitled,  in  a  clear 
conscience,  to  ask  of  God  1  "  I  have  not  denied  the  words  of  the  Holy  One ;  I  shall  not 
pass,  an  impenitent,  rejected  soul ;  grant  me  this  last,  this  speedy  favour,  to  die ! "  If 
such  a  state  of  mind  excites  our  keenest  pity,  what  shall  we  thmk  of  the  condition  of 
those  Buddhists  or  pessimists  among  the  heathen  and  ourselves,  who  have  built  a 
doctrine  upon  this  hoiTor-stricken  mood,  and  teach  that  the  highest  good  for  man  is 
absorption  in  some  Nirvana  of  dreamless,  unconscious  nothingness  ?  Truly,  the  gospel 
of  Christ  is  the  only  remedy  for  these  melancholy  aberrations.  M.  Naville  says  that 
the  impassioned  earnestness  of  Lacroix,  the  great  Indian  missionary,  which  he  had 
listened  to  in  earlier  years,  was  only  fully  understood  by  him  when  subsequent  study 
hadacquaintedhim  with  the  gloomy  beliefs  of  the  Oriental  world. 

VI.  Confession  of  utter  weakness  and  despokdency.  (Vers.  11—13.)  He  ha« 
neither  strength  nor  patience  to  look  forward  to  the  end  which  is  to  reward  endurance. 
Sooner  or  later  death  must  be  the  end ;  and  why  not  sooner  rather  than  later?  But 
weakness  cannot  wring  from  his  tortured  breast  the  confession  of  a  guilt  which  con- 
science refuges  to  own.     He  has  not  denied  the  words  of  the  Holy  One.    His  heait  has 


112  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  VL  1— 3a 

been  true  to  God.    This  consciousness  is  still  a  kind  of  strength  in  weaknesa,  and 
enables  him  to  ask  this  last  boon  at  God's  hands — a  speedy  death.— J. 

Vers.  14 — 21. — The  illusions  of  friendship.  Oh,  how  sweet  and  blessed  at  this  hour 
would  the  ministries  of  true  friendship  be  I  Job,  in  the  shipwreck  of  fortune  and  of 
health,  is  like  a  poor  swimmer  clinging  to  a  spar  or  fragment  of  rook  with  ebbing 
strength,  looking  vainly  for  the  lifeboat,  and  the  strong,  rescuing  arms  of  friends  and 
saviours.  Instead  of  this,  his  friends  stand  aloof,  and  lecture  and  lesson  him  on  the 
supposed  folly  which  has  steered  his  bark  upon  the  breakers.  Here  we  see  in  one 
glance  the  greatest  danger  to  which  a  human  soul  can  be  exposed,  and  the  greatest 
service  one  human  being  can  render  another. 

L  The  qbbatest  human  peril.  What  is  it  ?  The  loss  of  life  ?  Not  in  the 
common  sense  of  those  words.  For  the  loss  of  life  in  this  world  is  not  necessarily  the 
loss  of  the  soul.  The  loss  of  worldly  goods  ?  Still  less ;  for  a  man's  life  consisteth  not 
in  these.  The  loss  of  family,  of  reputation,  of  health?  All  these  may  be  repaired; 
but  the  loss  of  God  is  irreparable.  The  mangled  tree  may  sprout  again,  and  send  forth 
Tigorous  suckers  from  its  root;  but  how  if  that  root  itself  be  extirpated  from  its  hold- 
ing ?  It  is  the  horror  in  the  prospect  of  losing  reverence,  trust— of  losing  God — that 
now  looms  upon  the  patriarch's  soul.  We  need  only  refer  to  the  twenty-second  psalm — 
to  those  words  quoted  by  our  Saviour  in  the  agony  on  the  cross — to  remind  ourselves  of 
the  fearfulness  of  this  last  trial  to  every  godly  soul. 

II.  The  gbbatbst  human  ministry.  It  is  to  do  something  to  save  a  sinking 
brother  from  such  a  fate.  A  cheerful  faith  is  infectious.  A  noble  courage  will  thrill  in 
the  vibrations  of  sympathy  to  another's  soul.  And  this  is,  then,  the  best  ofBce  our  Mends 
can  discharge  for  us  in  our  greatest  troubles.  Let  them  remind  us  by  their  words, 
their  prayers,  their  looks,  their  tones,  of  God.  Let  them  not  throw  a  new  burden  upon 
our  drooping  consciousness  by  reminding  us  of  what  we  are  or  are  not,  but  relieve  us 
by  telling  us  of  what  he  is  and  ever  will  be — the  Befuge  and  Strength  of  them  that  seek 
him.     And  this  may  be  a  fitting  place  to  speak  generally  of — 

III.  The  QtTALiTiES  OF  FRIENDSHIP.  By  a  beautiful  image  Jpb  describes  the  failure 
of  friendship.  An  unfaithful  or  unintelligent  friend  is  like  a  brook  swollen  with  snow 
and  rain  in  spring-time,  but  dried  in  its  channel  under  the  scorching  heat  of  summer. 
The  poet  says  of  one  who  has  been  lost  to  his  sorrowing  companions  by  deatji— 

"  Hn  is  gone  from  the  mountain, 
He  is  lost  to  the  forest. 
Like  a  summer-dried  fountain, 
When  our  need  was  the  sorest  1 " 

The  pathos  of  those  words  is,  alas  1  applicable  to  living  but  absent  or  unsympathefio 
friends.  There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  or  more  useful  in  all  the  world  than  true 
friendship.  Perhaps  as  "  all  other  things  seem  to  be  symbols  of  love,  so  love  is  the 
highest  symbol  of  friendship."  But  for  the  service  of  friendship  there  must  be :  1. 
Constant  affection.  The  equal  flow  of  a  deep  river,  not  the  intermittent  gushings  of 
a  fickle  fountain.  2.  Habitual  sympathy.  We  must  feel  with  our  friend  so  long  as  he 
is  our  friend.  There  are  crimes  which  will  break  up  this  holy  tie.  Connivance  at 
guilt  can  be  no  part  of  this  sacred  covenant.  But  so  long  as  I  can  call  my  friend  my 
friend,  I  must  bear  with  his  infirmities,  "  not  make  them  greater  than  they  are." 
How  unhappy  the  knack  of  seeing  aU  that  can  be  said  against  our  friend,  with  blindness 
to  all  that  can  be  urged  in  his  favour  1  We  dread  the  coming  of  these  "  candid  friends," 
so  called.  If  there  are  unpleasant  truths,  let  him  hear  them  from  another's  lips  than 
ours.  Let  not  the  troubles  of  those  we  own  by  this  sacred  name  be  made  occasions 
for  airing  the  conceit  of  our  superior  wisdom,  or  indulging  a  vein  of  moralizing,  but  for 
unlocking  all  the  treasures  of  our  heart.  3.  Lively  imagination.  Want  of  imagi- 
nation, or,  in  other  words,  dulness  and  stupidity,  is  a  great  defect  for  general  socfal 
intercourse.  Men  quarrel  and  fly  asunder  because  they  do  not  understand  one  another. 
They  do  not  use  the  faculty  of  imagination  to  "  put  themselves  in  another's  place." 
And  what  may  hinder  general  intercourse  may  be  a  fatal  bar  to  friendship.  "  I  am  not 
understood : "  what  commoner  complaint  ?  Yet  what  is  this  high  faculty  given  us  for, 
but  that,  under  the  guidance  of  Christian  love,  we  may  identify  another  heart  with  our 


OH.  TL 1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  113 

own,  appropriate  all  Us  sorrowful  experiences,  and  think  and  speak  and  feel  towards 
others,  as  well  as  do  unto  them,  as  we  would  they  should  do  unto  us?  But  these 
demands  for  an  ideal  friendship  are  not,  after  all,  to  be  satisfied  by  frail  human  nature. 
Let  us,  then,  think  :  4.  These  qualities  of  friendship  can  be  only  fully  found  in  God. 
The  Divine  Friend! — he  whose  unfailing,  self-replenished  love  alone  is  equal  to  supply 
the  thirst  of  our  hearts,  whose  sympathy  is  that  of  One  who  knows  us  better  than  we 
know  ourselves ;  who  numbers  our  hairs,  and  gathers  our  tears  into  his  bottle ;  who 
needs  to  exercise  no  imagination  in  order  to  realize  our  condition,  because  he  knows  I 
0  God !  greater  than  our  hearts,  whose  knowledge  is  the  measure  of  thy  sympathy, 
whose  sympathy  is  fed  from  the  eternal  well-spring  of  thy  love ;  God  manifested  in 
Jesus  Christ ;  thou  only  art  the  Friend  of  our  soi  row,  the  Sustainer  of  our  help. 

Lessons.  May  we  listen  with  humble  obedience  to  the  voice  which  says  to  us, 
"  Henceforth  I  call  you  friends  " !  As  life  wears,  and  many  shallow  torrents  of  earthly 
kindness  are  dried,  may  we  experience  more  profoundly  thy  never-wasting  fulness ! — J. 

Vers.  22 — 27. — Friendship :  its  rights  and  its  disclaimers.  In  his  agonized  yearn- 
ing for  sympathy  and  tenderness.  Job  further  appeals  to  the  conscience  and  memory 
of  his  friends,  seeking  to  put  an  end  to  this  lacerating  contention,  and  to  be  reconciled 
to  them  in  pence. 

L  Disclaimers.  True  friendship  disclaims  the  right  to  be  exacting.  We  have  no 
right  to  lay  a  tax  on  the  property,  or  time,  or  energy  of  those  whom  we  desire  to  grapple 
to  us  as  with  hooks  of  steel.  AH  must  be  spontaneous,  voluntary,  free,  in  the  mutual 
oifices  of  friendship.  There  are  a  few  noble  hearts,  indeed,  with  whom  every  benefit  is 
a  reason  for  another.  Shakespeare  has  drawn  the  sublime  picture  of  such  a  one  in  his 
'  Merchant  of  Venice,'  who  stops  not  short  at  the  loan  of  goods,  but  pledges  his  very 
flesh  for  his  friend.  But  the  counterpart  is  not  to  be  found  in  actual  life.  God  is  he 
who  alone  invites  our  largest  asking,  wearies  not  of  our  urgency,  giveth  to  all  liberally, 
and  tipbraideth  not.  The  life  laid  down  for  us  is  the  pledge  that  we  cannot  claim  too 
much  from  him.  The  gospel  does  not  fail  to  point  us  to  the  frailty  of  human  nature, 
even  in  its  noblest  moods,  in  order  to  set  in  contrast  the  illustrious  sacrifices  of  Christ 
for  us.  Job  had  not  asked  for  gifts  of  substance  from  bis  friends  to  redeem  him  from 
durance,  or  for  any  other  purpose.  He  had  been  wiser  than  to  kill  the  tender  plant  of 
mutual  good  wiU  by  unseasonable  exactions.  And  let  us  read  ourselves  the  lesson  that 
nothing  will  more  surely  or  speedily  break  our  happiest  ties  than  to  allow  the  hand  we 
offer  in  affection  to  be  put  forth  to  buy,  to  traffic,  to  exact. 

II.  Claims.  But  we  have  great  rights  and  privileges  in  friendship.  These  the 
patriarch  insists  upon  now.  He  has  a  right  to  good  words,  which  are  worth  much  and 
cost  little.  He  has  a  right,  so  long  as  he  is  regarded  as  a  friend,  to  have  the  truth  of 
his  own  statements  .accepted.  He  has  a  right  to  confidence.  In  distress  he  is  entitled 
to  tenderness,  compassion,  and  efficient  guidance  by  those  whose  minds  are  calm  and 
unimpaired  by  woe.  And  above  all,  perhaps,  just  now,  the  right  of  self-defence  is  most 
precious,  which  these  advisers  seem  obstinately  to  deny.  How  often  is  this  tragedy 
enacted !  We  condemn  good  men,  honest  hearts,  unheard ;  we  refuse  them  a  fair 
bearing.  They  do  not  easily  explain  themselves,  or  we,  with  our  preoccupations  and 
prejiidices,  are  slow  to  understand.  There  may  be  greater  ability  to  defend  one|s  self 
against?  the  accusations  of  bitter  foes  than  against  the.misconceptions  of  intimate 
friends.  In  fact,  this  is  one  of  those  severe  trials  in  relation  to  our  equals  of  which  a 
recent  preacher  has  so  finely  discoursed  (Mozley,  'University  Sermons'). 

III.  Self-defence.  Against  what  fault  or  sin  are  these  monotonous  and  harsh 
reproofs  directed?  Is  it  against  Job's  evil  deeds?  But  they  are  not  specified,  and 
Job  denies  that  they  have  been  done.  There  is  no  keener  injustice  than  vague  attacks 
on  a  man  without  specification  of  the  exact  nature  of  the  charges.  Is  it  the  present 
language  of  Job?  True,  hasty  words  may  have  escaped  him;  he  fean  it;  but  is  the 
language  of  health  and  joy  to  be  tested  by  the  same  measures,  weighed  in  the  same 
scales  with  that  which  pain  and  intense  distress  extort  from  the  lips  ?  Job  knows 
his  heart  has  not  been  unfaithful  to  his  God,  whatever  cries  of  agony  and  despair  have 
been  borne  upon  the  wind.  The  whole  section  thus  contains  a  pathetic  appeal  to  the 
human  conscience  for  human  love ;  and  it  teaches  us  indirectly,  but  with  great  feeling, 
the  duties  of  friendly  ministry  to  others  in  their  distress. 

JOB.  ,  * 


114  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  tl  1—30. 

Lessons.  1.  Calm  guidance,  healthy  suggestions  for  the  morhid  intelligence.  2. 
The  "  sweetness  "  (ver.  25)  of  right  words  of  tender  sympathy.  3.  Ahstinence  from 
argument  in  such  circumstances  which  only  irritates  and  never  soothes.  4.  Considerate 
listening  to  ex|ilanations.  5.  Hearty  acceptance  of  honest  self-vindications.  In  all 
these  particulars  we  have  hright  examples  set  us  hy  our  blessed  Saviour,  who  never 
broke  the  bruised  reed  nor  quenched  the  smoking  flax.  By  such  methods  of  ministry 
we  are  to  earn  and  prove  the  holy  name  of  friend  to  our  brethren,  and  lead  men  to 
believe  that  God  lias  angels  of  blessing  in  human  shape  passing  about  the  worn  paths 
of  misery  in  this  world. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — A  true  estimate  of  grief  under  the  severities  of  affliction.  Even  the 
strong  man  cries  for  help  and  release.  Job,  in  his  extreme  sufferings,  desires  that  a 
fair  judgment  may  be  formed  of  them  and  of  his  complaint.  Put  this  into  one  scale, 
and  them  into  the  other,  and  behold  which  of  them  is  the  lighter.  Thus  he  describes 
them — 

I.  The  insufferable  weight  of  his  affliction.  It  is  as  the  unknown  weight 
of  the  sand  of  the  seashore.  Affliction  is  truly  as  the  pressure  of  a  great  weight 
upon  the  frail  body.  The  idea  of  patience  is  gained  from  bearing  up  under  a  load. 
Heavy  is  the  load,  indeed,  under  which  this  servant  of  the  Lord  is  bowed  down.  It  is 
not  to  be  estimated.  No  onlooker  can  determine  it.  Therefore  should  judgment  he 
withheld  when  from  the  life  of  the  sufferer  there  escapes  the  sigh  of  complaint.  He  only 
knows  his  sufferings ;  and  he  may  know  that  his  cry  does  not  fully  represent  them. 
The  untouched  observer  but  hears  the  cry,  and  cannot  put  that  into  comparison  with 
a  pain  that  he  feels  not,  and  the  measure  of  which  pain  the  cry  is  supposed  to  represent. 
How  shall  a  just  judgment,  therefore,  be  given? 

II.  The  keenness  of  the  pang  of  his  sdffekinqs.  They  pierce  as  doth  an  arrow ; 
and  are  as  poisoned  arrows  ;  and  as  arrows  shot  forth  by  no  feeble  arm,  but  by  the 
Almighty.  They  penetrate  to  the  inner  spirit.  The  strength  of  their  burning  poison 
drinks  up — bums  up  his  spirit.  He  does  not  encounter  a  feeble  foe.  "  The  terrors 
of  God  set  themselves  in  array  "  against  him.  Ig  it  wonderful  that  his  words  are 
hasty  ?    Is  there  not  a  cause  ?     "  Doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he  hath  grass  ?  " 

III.  The  abhoeeent  chabactee  of  the  things  with  which  he  has  to  do. 
"  That  which  my  soul  refused  " — from  which  I  turned  away  in  disgust — I  am  compelled 
to  take  as  my  daily  bread.  Yea,  that  which  should  give  me  comfort,  even  my  refreshing 
food,  is  loathsome  to  me.  Sadly  does  he  thus  represent  the  nature  of  the  foul  disease 
that  cleaveth  to  him.  The  onlookers  are  pained,  but  they  taste  it  not.  To  him  it  is 
as  his  food. 

IV.  He  fuetheb  desceibes  his  suffbring  condition  as  bo  sad  that  he  longs 
FOE  death.  "  That  it  would  please  God  to  destroy  me  1 "  How  low  is  life  reduced 
when  there  seems  to  be  no  release  but  in  the  grave  1  Worn  to  the  earth,  this  sufferer 
cries  for  an  end  to  be  put  to  his  pains.  He  has  not  strength  to  bear  up  patiently 
under  the  weight  of  them.  He  cannot  desire  prolonged  life ;  ior  what  shall  the  end 
of  it  be?  Weary,  indeed,  is  that  spirit  that  craves  rest  in  the  tomb.  Job  feels 
himself  so  utterly  powerless,  that  continued  endurance  is  impossible  to  him.  He 
little  knew  that  he  could  survive  all — that  he  could  yet  pass  through  all,  and  bear 
honour  to  God,  and  perceive  in  the  end  the  testimony  of  the  Divine  approbation.  To 
him  it  was  true,  and  he  would  prove  it,  though  the  words  had  not  fallen  on  his  ear, 
"  With  man  it  is  impossible,  but  not  with  Gud;  for  with  God  all  things  are  possible." 
Job's  history,  theiefore,  illustrates  the  sufficiency  of  the  Divine  grace  to  sustain  men 
beneath  the  uttermost  pressure  of  sorrow. — E.  G. 

Ver.  14. — The  claims  of  the  suffering  on  the  pity  of  friends.  Job's  friends  come  to 
condole  with  him.  They  are  staggered  by  tlie  severity  of  his  sufferings,  and  remain 
silenced  before  him.  When  they  open  their  lips  they  seem  not  only  to  try  to  account 
for  the  affliction,  but  they  also  appear  to  be  anxious  to  justify  their  own  inability 
to  comfort  their  suffering  friend.  Their- words  add  to  Job's  heavy  affliction  instea<' 
of  Hghtening  his  burden,  and  he  cries  out  in  his  bitterness,  "  To  him  that  is  afflicted 
pity  should  be  showed  from  his  friend."  To  whom  should  the  suffering  one  turn  if  not  to 
bis  friend  ?  We  see  at  once,  in  such  circumstances,  a  friend's  duty  and  a  friend's  demand. 


CH.  ▼1.1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  115 

I.  A  friend's  duty.  1.  The  true  office  of  fiiendship  is  to  enter  fully  into  the 
circumstances  of  the  friend ;  not  to  be  indifferent  to  them,  and  therefore  ignorant. 
True  affection  will  inquire  gently,  wisely,  anri  with  care  into  the  state,  and  the  need,  and 
the  sorrow,  and  the  hopes  of  the  object  of  its  attachnient.  Not  for  meddlesome  curiosity, 
but  from  loving  interest  the  friend's  heart  will  open  to  take  in  the  tale  of  sorrow,  even 
the  words  of  complaint.  2.  True  friendship  will  lovingly  sympathize.  The  eager 
pleading  of  the  casual  beggar  strikes  upon  the  closed  ear  of  the  stranger.  No  chord  of 
pitiful  sympathy  vibrates,  and  no  hand  of  help  is  outstretched.  But  to  the  appeals  of 
friendship  the  heart  opens ;  warm  sympathy  is  stirred.  The  fluttering  spirit  flnds  rest 
on  the  bosom  of  a  friend.  It  is  a  duty  one  friend  owes  to  another  to  show  the  utmost 
pitifulness  of  spirit — a  pitifulness  that  should  ripen  to  loving  synapathy.  No  harden- 
ing of  the  heart,  no  refusal  to  be  patient,  no  selflshness,  can  be  found  in  the  breast  of 
the  true  friend.  3.  True  friendship  will  be  ready  with  its  help,  springing  forth  with 
spontaneous  eagerness  to  aid  and  comfort.  It  is  possible  for  the  friend  to  stick  closer 
than  a  brother ;  and  he  shows  the  true  spirit  of  a  friend  who,  feeling  perfectly  at  one 
with  his  loved  companion,  renders  willing  help  to  him.  4.  The  friendship  which 
stimulates  to  pitiful  and  loving  help  in  need  rejoices  also  in  the  joy,  the  prosperity, 
and  well-being  of  him  to  whom  it  cleaves.  The  two  lives  are  one.  David  and  Jonathan 
illustrate  this,  and  happily  a  thousand  examples  are  around  us  daily.  He  that  findeth 
a  true  friend  flndeth  a  precious  possession — a  prize  whose  worth  cannot  be  estimated. 

II.  For  this  lovinq  sympatht  and  pitiful  helpfulness  evert  one  may  make 
HIS  JUST  and  reasonable  DEMAND  ON  HIS  FRIEND.  Friendship  has  its  duties  of 
fidelity, of  kindness,  and  help;  of  confidence,  trnst,  and  good  will.  It  has  also  its  claims. 
It  is  a  silent,  mutual  compact — each  preparing  to  give  that  which  it  demands  of  the  other ; 
each  expecting  that  which  it  knows  it  can  bestow.  It  is  the  supreme  satisfaction  of 
true  friendship  that  either  of  its  members  may  turn  to  other  in  the  confident,  unques- 
tioning assurance  of  meeting  with  true  sympathy,  with  an  open  hand  and  a  warm  heart. 
For  this  friendship  looks,  and  this  it  is  justified  in  expecting.  A  faithful  friend's  love 
faileth  not ;  for  "  a  friend  loveth  always."  Even  his  very  "  wounds  "  are  "  faithful." 
Happy  he  wlio  has  found  a  friend  in  whom  he  can  place  the  whole  faith  of  his  heart ; 
and  who  is  ready  to  reciprocate  the  same  fnll,  thorough,  and  trustworthy  affection ! 

1.  The  wisdom  of  seeking  a  friend.  2.  The  law :  "  He  that  would  have  friends  must 
show  himself  friendly." — R.  G. 

Ver.  25. — The  power  of  right  words  ;  or,  complaining  stayed  by  instruction.  Job 
has  hitherto  met  with  no  comfort  from  those  who  came  "  to  mourn  with  him,  and  to 
comfort  him."  From  the  inutility  of  their  powerless  words  he  turns  aside  with  the 
bitter  reflection  on  his  lips,  "  How  forcible  are  right  words  I "  Words  charged  with  truth, 
with  great  views  of  things,  with  tender  sympathy,  heal  and  guide  and  comfort  the 
perplexed  and  saddened  soul;  while  the  words  of  false  friends  pierce  as  goads.  Truth 
at  all  times  is  worthy  of  trust.  The  spirit,  worn  and  weary,  may  rest  in  it  and  find 
peace.     Consider  the  power  of  truth — the  force  of  right  words — 

I.  In  resolving  the  entanglements  op  error.  Truth  is  the  right,  the  straight, 
line  which  reveals  and  thereby  condemns  the  crooked  departures.  Its  own  clear,  calm 
utterance  resolves  the  confusion  of  tortuous  commingled  error.  It  is  by  the  simple 
statement  of  truth  that  the  wrong  of  error  is  discovered  and  rebuked.  Loudness  of 
denunciation  cannot  contradict  error,  or  unravel  it,  or  expose  it.  Nor  will  mere  logical 
demonstration  ;  noise  will  not  destroy  darkness ;  nor  will  the  gloom  be  illuminated  by 
proving  it  to  he  darkness.  But  the  quiet  shining  of  the  lamp  will  scatter  the  shades 
of  black  night.  So  truth  in  its  own  simplicity  and  realness  effectually  and  alone 
disperses  the  gloom  and  guides  the  feet  of  the  wanderer  through  the  tangled  path  of 
error.  Such  words  Job  had  not  yet  found.  But  the  good  Teacher  was  not  far  away ; 
and  finally  Job  was  led  to  the  open  plain  and  the  clear  light  and  the  straight  way. 

II.  Eight  words  are  forcible  in  the  presence  of  deep  sorrow.  So  Job 
thought.  It  was  for  such  words  he  pined.  He  longed  for  the  teaching  that  would 
bring  him  comfort,  and  not  for  the  accusations  that  would  make  his  burden  heavier 
and  his  heart  sadder.  There  is  a  deep  truth  relating  to  all  human  afiliction.  Looked 
at  only  as  a  derangement  of  human  happiness,  it  is  devoid  of  that  completeness  of  view 
that  would  constitute  it  »  trutMuJ  'tio.     But  looked  at  as  a  Divine  correction,  a 


116  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  tl.  1—80. 


discipline,  a  sharp  warning  oi  departure  from  law,  and  a  just  punishment  for  such 
departure ;  and  looked  at  as  under  the  control  of  the  Almighty  Father,  it  is  seen  to  he 
invested  with  a  momentous  character,  and  to  be  inflicted  for  the  wisest  and  best 
purposes.  Eight  words  on  it  bring  the  mind  to  peace.  They  are  forcible  to  counsel 
and  to  comfort ;  to  warn  of  danger,  to  guide  to  safety,  to  console  in  suffering.  Happy 
tlie  sufferer  who  has  an  interpreter  at  hand,  who  with  right  words  can  unveil  the 
mystery,  and  make  clear  the  ways  of  God  to  man  I 

III.  Bight  words  abb  forcible  in  the  adjustment  op  disturbed  belations 
OP  LIFE.  They  are  wise  words  aud  kind.  Evon  enemies  are  overcome  by  them.  The 
right  word  is  a  word  in  harmony  with  the  truth.  Spoken  with  lips  that  speak  truth 
habitually,  and  from  a  heart  where  truth  finds  its  home,  they  carry  conviction.  They 
win  the  ear  and  the  confidence  of  the  listener.  They  have  a  force  peculiar  to  them- 
selves. They  command.  They  are  strong  and  cannot  be  shaken.  They  pierce,  as 
doth  an  arrow,  when  they  are  words  of  condemnation  founded  on  truth ;  and  they 
comfort,  and  heal,  and  restore,  and  readjust,  when  they  are  spoken  in  kindness.  The 
wise  man  searches  for  right  words,  and,  having  found  them,  speaks  them  in  all 
simplicity.  And  the  seeker  after  truth,  or  rest,  or  comfort  welcomes  them.  They  bear 
help  on  their  wings,  and  are  as  reviving  as  the  beams  of  the  morning. — R.  Q. 

Ver.  2. — Scales  for  misery.  At  length  Job  has  an  opportunity  to  reply  to  his  friend's 
harangue,  and  he  at  once  touches  on  its  weak  point  by  implication.  Eliphaz  has  not 
been  sufficiently  sympathetic ;  he  has  not  duly  appreciated  Job's  "  abysmal  and  bound- 
less Diisery."  His  wise  precepts  may  apply  to  some  extent  to  the  afflictions  of  ordinary 
men,  but  they  are  vitiated  by  his  failure  to  enter  into  the  abnormal  distresses  of 
Job.  The  cursing  of  his  day,  which  has  been  wrung  out  of  Job  by  very  anguish  of  soul, 
is  misjudged  by  his  censor,  because  the  awful  depth  of  that  anguish  is  not  appreciated. 
Therefore  Job  longs  for  some  scales  by  which  his  misery  may  be  weighed,  that  the  lack 
of  appreciation  by  Eliphaz  may  be  corrected. 

I.  The  sufferer  naturally  dbsibes  an  appreciation  of  his  suffebinos.  1.  That 
he  may  be  understood.  You  cannot  understand  a  man  till  you  know  how  he  feels. 
Words  are  more  than  descriptions  of  bare  facts ;  they  may  be  utterances  of  the  heart. 
To  comprehend  their  import  we  must  enter  into  the  feelings  of  the  speaker.  We  should 
study  the  needs  and  tronbles  of  those  whom  we  desire  to  understand  in  order  to  help 
them.  2.  That  he  may  te  fairly  Judged.  Eliphaz  had  made  the  most  galling  charges 
against  Job,  partly  because  he  was  utterly  below  understanding  the  afflicted  man's 
overwhelming  grief.  We  are  unjust  with  those  who  are  incomprehensible  to  us. 
Christ's  executioners  did  not  know  him,  and  he  prayed,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do "  (Luke  xxiiL  34).  The  mob  that  yelled  at  him  and 
hounded  him  to  death  had  not  the  least  conception  of  his  Qethsemane  agony.  3.  Hiat 
he  may  receive  sympathy.  Sympathy  helps  us  to  understand  one  another.  But  with- 
out some  preliminary  knowledge  we  can  have  no  kind  of  sympathy.  Ignorant,  well- 
meant  attempts  at  sympathy  hurt  rather  than  heal,  and  chafe  the  very  wounds  they 
are  intended  to  soothe. 

II.  It  is  not  easy  to  find  soalbs  in  which  suffering  can  be  weighed.  Where 
shall  we  look  for  a  standard  of  measurement?  We  cannot  judge  by  outside  tokens  of 
grief;  for  some  are  reserved  and  self-restrained,  while  others  are  demonstrative  in  their 
abandonment  to  grief.  We  cannot  judge  by  the  measure  of  the  events  that  have 
caused  the  suffering ;  for  some  feel  the  same  calamity  much  more  keenly  than  it  would 
be  felt  by  others.  Each  sufferer  is  tempted  to  think  that  his  troubles  surpass  all 
others.  We  can  only  understand  a  man  in  so  far  as  we  can  succeed  in  putting  our- 
selves in  his  place.  But  only  Christ  can  do  this  perfectly.  His  incarnation  is  a 
guarantee  of  his  complete  comprehension  of  human  sin  and  sorrow;  so  that  the 
sufferer  who  is  misapprehended  by  his  most  intimate  earthly  friends  may  he  assured  of 
the  perfect  sympathy  of  his  Saviour.  Moreover,  with  his  own  thoughts  the  sufferer 
might  measure  his  grief  in  a  way  which  would  help  him  to  apprize  it  more  justly  than 
by  wild  conjectures.  Suppose  he  measured  it  against  his  blessings :  is  it  so  vastly 
greater  ?  Or  suppose  he  weighed  it  with  his  deserts ;  is  it  so  immensely  heavier  ?  Or  sup- 
pose he  compared  it  with  what  Christ  suffered  for  him :  is  there  really  any  comparison 
between  the  Christian's  roughest  cross  and  the  awful  cross  of  his  Saviour  ?— -W,  P.  A. 


OH.  VI.  1—80.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  Ill 


Ver.  4. — "  Tlie  arrows  of  the  Almighty.'"  The  first  thought  that  occurs  to  Job  when 
ha  attempts  tp  describe  his  trouble  to  his  misjudging  friend  is  that  that  trouble  has 
been  produced  by  shafts  from  heaven.  Here  is  the  exceeding  bitterness  of  his  grief. 
He  regards  his  calamities  as  more  than  natural  mischances ;  such  a  terrible  conjunc- 
tion of  disasters  points  to  a  superhuman  source.  Thus  Job  is  scourged  by  his  faith. 
EQs  theism  adds  an  agony  which  the  materialist  would  not  feel. 

I.  The  tbrbok  of  the  abrows  op  the  Almighty.  1.  They  are  impelled  hy  an 
irresistible  power.  They  are  shot  by  "El  Shaddai."  God  in  his  power  is  conceived  of 
as  the  Source  of  the  troubles.  But  none  can  resist  the  might  of  God.  No  wonder 
Job  is  prostrate  in  despair.  It  is  useless  for  him  to  stand  up  against  his  adversary. 
The  shield  of  faith  may  "  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  "  (Eph.  vi.  16) ;  but 
no  shield  can  keep  off  the  piercing  arrows  of  tha  Almighty  If  God  is  against  us,  we 
are  utterly  undone.  2.  They  come  from  the  Source  of  light  amd  blessing.  God  had 
been  showering  blessings  on  the  head  of  the  patriarch,  who  bad  learnt  to  honour  him 
as  his  Benefactor.  It  was  hard,  indeed,  to  find-  his  great  Friend  turned  into  a  Foe. 
This  fact  made  the  wounds  pain  as  with  deadly  venom.  It  is  feairful  to  think  that 
our  Father  in  heaven  is  shooting  wrath  against  his  children.  No  arrows  are  so  keen 
as  the  arrows  of  love.  3.  They  penetrate  to  the  heart.  Earthly  calamities  strike  the 
outer  life.  We  may  have  ramparts  and  bastions  that  keep  them  off  from  our  true 
self.  But  God's  arrows  penetrate  to  the  citadel  of  the  soul.  He  reaches  the  heart 
whenever  he  smites.  We  can  bear  outside  distresses  so  long  as  we  keep  up  a  stout 
heart ;  but  the  wounds  of  the  inner  man  are  deadly. 

n.  The  misapprehension  op  the  arrows  op  the  Almighty.  1.  3%e  error  of 
ascribing  to  God  what  he  has  not  sent.  Job  thinks  that  God  is  his  Adversary,  but  the 
prologue  shows  that  the  adversary  is  Satan,  Of  the  Satanic  cause  of  his  trouble  Job 
has  not  the  least  conception.  He  ascribes  it  all  to  God.  Thus  he  is  mistaken,  unjust, 
and  needlessly  dismayed.  If  he  had  but  known  that  he  was  suffering  from  the  arrows 
of  Satan,  he  would  have  been  more  courageous  and  hopeful.  May  we  not  be  in  error 
in  ascribing  to  God  what  he  never  sends?  The  evil  state  of  society  causes  many 
troubles  to  the  poor,  which  God  does  not  wish  them  to  suffer  from.  We  cannot  charge 
him  with  the  terrible  wrongs  of  a  corrupt  civilization  which  darken  the  slums  of  great 
cities.  Our  worst  woes  come  from  the  devil  within — from  our  own  heart  of  sin.  2. 
When  Ood  does  smite,  his  purpose  is  good.  Job  was  so  far  right  that  God  had  some 
hand  in  his  sufferings,  for  God  had  permitted  Satan  to  go  to  the  great  length  in  tor- 
menting Job  that  he  had  now  reached.  (1)  There  is  a  smiting  to  heal.  Grievous 
chastisement  is  a  discipline  of  love.  We  think  that  the  arrow  poisons  us ;  what  it 
really  brings  is  a  needed  astringent.  (2)  There  must  be  a  smiting  of  judgment.  God 
cannot  suffer  his  rebelHous  creatures  to  sin  with  impunity.  Though  Job  had  not  felt 
them,  God  has  terrible  arrows  of  judgment  for  the  impenitent.  It  is  well  if  we  learn 
the  lesson  of  the  milder  wounds  of  chastisement  before  those  terrors  burst  over  us. — 
W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  6,  6. — Satisfaction  and  discontent.  Job  proceeds  to  show  the  reasonableness 
of  his  grief,  and  with  it  the  unreasonableness  of  his  censor's  accusations.  Bliphaz 
had  been  wasting  his  eloquence  on  the  assumption  that  Job's  outburst  of  despairing 
grief  was  uncalled  for ;  or,  at  all  events,  he  had  not  appreciated  the  tremendous  distress 
of  which  it  was  the  result.  He  regarded  the  effect  as  preposterous,  because  he  had 
not  seen  the  greatness  of  the  cause. 

I.  The  satisfied  are  not  discontented.  We  have  illustrations  of  this  fact  in 
nature.  Among  the  wild  animals  ("  the  wild  ass  "),  and  also  among  the  domesticated 
("  the  ox  "),  we  see  that  sufGoienoy  produces  content.  If  the  wild  ass  brays,  or  if 
the  ox  lows,  something  is  ami«s.  Supply  them  with  all  they  need,  and  they  will  be 
quiet  and  contented.  If,  therefore,  Job  is  not  at  rest,  something  must  be  amiss  with 
him.  1.  The  discontent  of  society  makes  it  evident  that  some  wamt  is  unsvpplied. 
Men  do  not  rebel  for  the  sake  of  rebellion.  Political  and  social  upheavals  have  their 
sources  in  some  disorganized  condition  of  the  body  politic.  If  all  were  satisfied,  quiet 
would  reigu  universally.  2.  The  discontent  of  the  soul  proves  that  the  soul  is  not 
satisfied.  Man  has  deeper  needs  than  the  animals.  The  wild  ass  and  the  tame  ox  can  be 
satisfied,  while  man  is  still  possessed  by  a  "  Divine  discontent."     This  very  restlessness 


118  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  vi.  1—30. 

is  a  sign  of  bin  higher  nature.     His  thirst  reveals  the  depths  from  which  it  springs. 
Man  is 

"  Poor  in  abundance,  famish'd  at  a  feast " 

(Young.) 

because  "  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone  "  (Matt.  iv.  4). 

U.  The  UU8ATISFJED  MUST  BE  DISCONTENTED.  This  is  more  than  the  reverse  side 
of  the  previous  statement.  It  carries  with  it  the  idea  that  the  dissatisfaction  cannot 
be  stifled,  must  be  met,  if  it  is  to  he  set  at  rest.  The  truth  is  illustrated  from  natural 
things.  Unsavoury  food  cannot  be  made  savoury  without  the  salt,  the  needed  condiment. 
That  which  is  naturally  tasteless,  like  the  white  of  an  egg,  cannot  be  made  to  have 
delicious  flavours  by  any  conjuring  process,  unless  the  thing  itself  is  changed  or  receives 
additions.  So  no  jugglery  will  remove  the  dissatisfaction  of  society  or  of  the  soul. 
We  cannot  make  the  world  at  rest  by  wishing  it  to  be  peacefal,  or  by  declaring  it  to 
be  quiet.  A  theory  of  order  is  not  order,  nor  is  a  doctrine  of  optimism  a  quietus  for 
the  world's  distresses.  The  bitter  cry  of  the  outcast  will  not  be  allayed  because  some 
philosophers  believe  themselves  to  be  living  in  "  the  best  of  possible  worlds."  We  do 
not  make  peace  by  calling,  "  Peace,  peace  1 "  when  there  is  no  peace.  To  preach  to 
souls  of  rest  and  satisfaction  is  not  to  bestow  those  desired  boons.  It  is  as  much  a 
mockery  to  tell  miserable  men  to  be  contented  without  supplying  their  wants,  as  to 
tell  the  hungry  and  naked  to  be  fed  and  clothed  while  we  do  nothing  to  furnish  them 
with  what  they  lack.  Any  lulling  of  discontent  without  curing  its  cause  is  false 
and  unhealthy.  It  is  like  putting  a  weight  on  the  safety-valve.  It  is  no  better  than 
the  morphia  that  allays  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  it  cannot  cure.  The  discontent 
should  go  on  till  it  finds  its  remedy  in  a  true  satisfaction.  1.  Christ  gives  this  for 
society  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  if  we  followed  out  his  teaching  in  the  world  the 
wants  of  society  would  be  satisfied.  2.  He  gives  it  for  the  soul  in  his  body  aud  blood, 
and  the  life  eternal  that  comes  from  fellowship  with  him. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  8, 9. — The  prayer  of  despair.  This  is  an  awful  prayer.  Job  longs.for  death,  and 
prays  God  to  crush  him.  Then  there  will  be  an  end  to  his  agonies.  He  has  rejected 
his  wife's  temptation  to  suicide  (ch.  ii.  9) ;  but  he  begs  that  God  will  take  his  life. 

I.  It  is  well  to  bring  the  despair  of  the  soul  to  God.  The  despair  is  not 
utter  and  complete  if  it  has  not  stifled  the  fountains  of  prayer.  When  it  can  be  said 
of  any  one,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth,"  all  hope  is  not  yet  gone.  Although  for  the  time 
being  he  had  lost  sight  of  it,  still  there  is  a  point  on  which  hope  for  better  days  may 
lay  hold.  When  all  things  seem  to  be  rushing  to  ruin,  and  there  is  no  other  outlook 
for  the  soul,  the  outlook  to  heaven  is  still  open.  If  we  can  do  nothing  else,  the  way  is 
Btill  before  us  to  cast  our  burden  upon  the  Lord.  Though  the  very  prayer  be  one  of 
horror  and  despair,  like  Job's,  still  it  is  a  prayer.  There  is  the  saving  element.  The 
soul  is  looking  up  to  God.     It  is  not  quite  alone  in  its  desolation. 

II.  God  understands  the  prater  of  despair.  He  is  not  like  Job's  purblind 
censor  Eliphaz,  who  judged  in  ignorance  and  wounded  when  he  thought  to  heal. 
The  breaches  of  conventional  propriety  in  religion,  which  shook  the  more  precise  sort  of 
piety,  are  not  thus  misapprehended  by  God.  He  views  all  with  a  large  eye  of  charity, 
with  a  peuetrating  discernment  of  sympathy.  The  wild  utterance  that  only  scandalizes 
the  superficial  hearer  moves  the  compassion  of  the  Father  of  spirits.  He  knows  from 
what  depths  of  agony  it  has  been  forced,  and  he  pardons  the  extravagance  of  it  in  pity 
for  its  misery. 

III.  The  prater  of  despair  is  foolish  and  shokt-siqhted.  These  two  words 
"prayer"  and  "despair,"  are  quite  incongruous.  The  one  should  utterly  banish  the 
other.  ^  If  we  quite  understood  the  meaning  and  power  of  prayer,  despair  would  be 
impossible.  For  prayer  implies  that  God  has  not  forgotten  us ;  or  why  should  one  pray 
to  heedless  ears  ?  When  we  carry  our  grief  to  God  we  bring  it  to  Almighty  Love,  and 
such  a  haven  must  be  more  congenial  to  hope  than  to  despair. 

IV.  God  refuses  to  answer  the  prater  of  despair.  There  are  prayers  which 
God  will  not  answer,  and  that,  not  because  he  is  inexorable,  but  because  he  is  merciful ; 
and  as  the  mother  is  too  kind  to  give  her  infant  the  flaming  candles  for  which  it  cries, 
God  is  too  good  to  bestow  on  his  foolish  children  the  evil  things  which  they  sometimes 
crave  from  his  hand.    Thus  the  ver^  refusal  to  respond.to  the  prayer  ia  a  result,  not  o( 


OH.  VL  1— Sa]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOa  119 

disregarding  it,  but  of  giring  to  it  more  than  that  superficial  attention  which  would 
have  been  enough  for  an  unquestioning  response.  God  silts  and  weighs  our  prayers. 
We  cannot  present  them  as  cheques  on  the  bank  of  heaven,  expecting  immediate 
payment,  exactly  according  to  the  measure  of  what  we  have  set  down  in  them.  God 
is  far  better  than  our  prayers.  He  exceeds  our  fears  even  when  we  beg  him  to  act 
according  to  them.  His  sane  mind  corrects  the  wild  fancies  of  our  haste  and  passion. 
Therefore  we  need  not  shrink  from  the  utmost  freedom  in  prayer.  God  will  not  deal 
with  ua  according  to  our  words,  but  according  to  his  love  and  our  faith. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  14  (reading  the  last  clause  as  in  the  margin  of  the  Revised  Version,  "  Else  might 
he  forsake  the  fear  of  the  Almighty"). — The  redeeming  power  of  sympathy.  Job  tells 
his  friend  that  he  has  gone-to  work  in  a  wrong  way,  and  one  which  might  have  had 
most  disastrous  results,  the  opposite  of  those  he  aimed  at.  Bliphaz  honestly  intended  to 
biing  Job  to  God  in  contrite  submission,  but  his  harsh  and  unwise  conduct  was  only 
calculated  to  drive  the  troubled  man  from  God  in  wild  despair.  He  shonld  have 
chosen  the  "  more  excellent  way  "  of  sympathy. 

I;  The  secret  op  the  redeeming  power  or  sympathy.  1.  By  giving  strength  t» 
endure.  The  soul  that  stands  alone  may  sink  down  to  despair.  But  "  two  are  better 
than  one."  As  we  help  to  bear  one  another's  burdens,  we  lift  the  crushing  load  that 
drives  to  rebellion.  2.  By  softening  the  heart.  The  danger  of  great  calamity  is  that  it 
will  smite  the  heart  to  hardness.  The  most  fatal  effect  is  produced  when  all  traces  of 
suffering  are  passed,  because  the  very  faculty  of  feelinj?  is  frozen  to  death.  Now,  here 
sympathy  has  a  saving  efficacy.  The  tears  that  are  sealed  up  in  solitude  burst  forth  at 
the  sight  of  a  friend's  tears.  3.  By  revealing  the  love  of  God.  There  is  danger  Iqst 
great  trouble  should  make  men  doubt  God's  love,  and  even  come  to  regard  all  love  as  a 
pretence  and  a  delusion.  The  world  then  seems  veiy  black  and  cruel.  But  a  brother's 
kindness  begins  to  dispel  the  error.  It  shows  that  the  world  is  not  wholly  hard  and 
cruel  and  selfish.  This  kindness  is  but  a  spark  from  the  great  fire  of  God's  love. 
From  the  sympathy  of  our  brother  we  are  led  up  to  the  sympathy  of  our  Father,  out 
of  which  it  springs.  If  there  were  more  human  charity  in  the  world  there  would  be 
more  faith  in  God.     Atheism  is  a  product  of  the  despair  which  sympathy  would  cure. 

II.  The  exercise  op  the  redeeming  power  op  sympathy.  1.  In  God.  Our 
sympathy  is  but  a  copy  of  God's  sympathy.  His  method  is  to  save  by  love.  His 
goodness  leads  us  to  repentance.  While  we  scold,  God  pities ;  while  we  blame,  he 
forgives ;  while  we  reject,  he  invites.  He  saves  the  sinner  by  loving  him.  2.  In  Ghrist. 
Christ's  great  redemption  is  a  work  of  sympathy :  (1)  In  its  origin.  It  was  sympathy 
that  led  to  the  advent  of  Christ.  This  was  the  ruling  principle  of  his  life  on  earth. 
This,  too,  brought  him  to  the  cross.  He  could  not  save  himself,  because  he  would  not 
abandon  his  sinful,  sorrowing  brethren.  (2)  In  its  application.  Christ  saves  men  now 
individually  through  his  sympathy.  We  have  first  to  see  that  he  understands  us,  loves 
us,  feels  with  us.  Then  he  lays  hold  of  us  and  lifts  us  up.  3.  In  men.  We,  too,  have 
to  save  by  our  sympathy.  The  old  method  of  repression,  rebuke,  and  repudiation  has 
failed  miserably;  its  fruits  are  only  hatred  and  despair.  It  is  time  we  resorted  to  God's 
method,  to  Christ's  method.  We  must  understand  men  if  we  would  help  them,  feel 
with  them  if  we  would  restore  them.  So  long  as  we  will  not  show  sympathy  with 
our  brethren  in  their  trouble  and  temptation,  we  cannot  save  them  from  their  sin  and 
despair.    Lowell  says — 

"  Far  better  is  it  to  speak 

One  simple  word,  which  now  and  then 
Shall  waken  their  free  nature  in  the  weak 
And  friendless  sons  of  men." 

W.  F.  A. 

Ver  2b.  — The  force  of  right  words.  Job  is  not  so  unreasonable  as  he  appears  to  his 
friends.  He  will  admit  the  force  of  truth  and  reason.  Only  he  considers  the  arguments 
he  has  heard  false  and  fallacious. 

I  Reasonable  men  recognize  the  force  op  right  words.  Words  may  be  like 
arrows  that  pierce,  lilr«  swords  that  divide,  like  hammers  that  crush;  or  they  may  be 


120 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB, 


[oh.  VII,  1 — 2L 


like  seeds  that  grow  and  bear  fruit,  like  loaves  of  bread  to  feed  the  hungry,  and  streams 
of  living  water  flowing  by  the  dusty  highway,  from  which  all  thirsty  souls  may  drink. 
Thus  they  are  more  than  mere  sounds.  They  are  expressions  of  thought.  Giod's  words 
come  with  power.  All  right  words  are  forcible.  But  there  are  empty  words  that  fall 
without  any  weight,  and  vapid  words  that  are  dissipated  in  the  air  without  effect.  It  is 
not  the  number,  the  volume,  or  the  noise,  of  the  words  that  gives  them  force,  but  the 
rightness  of  them.  We  must,  therefore,  inquire  wherein  this  Tightness  resides,  1.  In 
truth.  False  words  may  seem  to  carry  great  weight.  But  in  the  end  all  lies  fail. 
The  truth,  simply  told,  has  a  force  which  no  rhetoric  can  equal.  2,  In  adaptability. 
There  are  truths  which  are  not  suitable  for  the  occasion  on  which  they  are  spoken. 
This  was  the  case  with  many  of  the  remarks  which  Eliphaz  had  made,  which  were 
right  enough  in  themselves,  but  which  did  not  apply  to  Job.  They  lost  force  by  being 
Irrelevant.  3.  In  moral  weight.  The  justice  of  what  we  say  adds  weight  to  it.  The 
most  forcible  words  are  those  that  find  their  way  to  our  conscience.  Others  may  be 
luminous ;  these  words  flame  out  with  startling  vividness.  4,  In  sympathy.  Truth 
spoken  in  love  comes  with  double  force. 

II,  It  is  rooiiisH  to  disregabd  the  force  of  eiqht  words,  1.  In  the  speaJcer. 
This  was  the  Temanite's  mistake.  He  was  not  sufficiently  considerate  of  the  rightness 
of  what  he  said.  He  meant  well,  but  he  spoilt  all  by  this  grievous  error.  We  need  to 
weigh  our  words.  They  may  have  many  excellent  qualities — clearness,  grace,  apparent 
vigour — ^yet  if  they  are  not  right  words  they  will  fail.  The  Christian  teacher  needs  to 
test  and  correct  his  words  by  standing  close  to  the  fountain  of  truth  and  right  in  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  and  by  keeping  his  heart  pure  and  sympathetic.  Otherwise  all  his 
eloquence  will  be  barren,  or  even  poisouous  as  raephitic  vapours.  2.  In  the  hearer.  It 
is  excessively  foolish  to  disregard  words  as  though  they  were  merely  "  sound  and  fury, 
signifying  nothing."  They  are  the  chariots  in  which  thoughts  ride ;  and  if  we  would 
but  open  our  gates  to  receive  them,  we  might  find  those  thoughts  most  welcome  guests. 
Even  if  the  words  are  unpopular  or  painful,  we  should  be  foolish  to  disregard  them 
when  we  know  them  to  be  right.  For  truth  does  not  cease  to  be  truth  by  being 
rejected.  Many  unpalatable  ideas  are  most  medicinal.  And  many  words,  rejected  at 
first,  when  once  they  are  received,  prove  to  be  as  the  very  bread  of  life.  The  words  of 
the  everlasting  gospel  are  right  words,  which  we  may  reject  at  our  peril ;  which  we 
may  receive  for  our  salvation. — W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTBB  Vir. 


Vers.  1 — 21. — In  this  chapter  Job  first 
bewails  his  miserable  fate,  of  which  he 
expects  no  alleviation  (vers.  1 — 10);  then 
claims  an  unlimited  right  of  complaint  (ver. 
11);  and  finally  enters  into  direct  expostu- 
lation with  God — an  expostulation  which 
continues  from  ver.  12  to  the  end  of  the 
chapter.  At  tlie  close,  he  admits  his  sinful- 
ness (ver.  20),  but  abka  impatiently  why 
God  does  not  pardon  it  instead  of  visiting 
it  with  such  extreme  vengeance  (ver.  21). 

Ver.  1 — Is  there  not  an  appointed  time 
to  man  upon  earth?  rather,  le  there  not  a 
warfare  (or,  a  time  of  service)  to  man  upon 
earthi  Has  not  eaih  man  a  certain  work 
appointed  for  him  to  do,  and  a  certain  limited 
time  assigned  him  within  which  to  do  it? 
And  thus,  Are  not  his  days  also  like  the 
days  of  an  hireling  1    Since  the  hireling  is 


engaged  to  do  a  certain  work  in  a  certain 
time. 

Ver.  2. — As  a  servant  (or,  o  elave)  panteth 
for  the  shadow ;  i.e.  longs  for  the  shades  of 
evening  to  descend  and  bring  the  day  to 
a  close.  The  slavery  of  Job's  time  was 
probably  not  unlike  that  of  captive  races 
in  Egypt,  so  graphically  portrayed  in  the 
early  chapters  of  Exodus.  The  captive, 
working  from  morning  to  night  at  exhaust- 
ing labour,  would  long  intensely  for  the 
night  to  arrive,  when  his  toil  would  come  to 
an  end.  The  inference  is  not  drawn,  but 
clearly  is — so  Job  may  be  excused  if  he 
longs  for  death,  now  that  he  has  reached 
old  age,  and  that  the  work  of  his  life  is 
manifestly  ended.  And  as  an  hireling 
looketh  for  the  reward  of  his  work;  rather, 
for  his  wages.  The  word  used  (^j;a)  has  the 
two  meanings  of  "work"  and  "the  wages 
of  work"  (see  Jer.  xxii.  13). 

Ver.  3. — So  am  I  made  to  possess  months  of 
vanity.  "  Months  of  vanity  "  are  "  months  of 
which  he  can  make  no  use  " — "months  which 


vn.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


121 


are  no  good  to  him."  It  has  heen  concluded 
from  this  thnt  some  considerahle  time  had 
elapsed  -since  Job  was  stricken  by  his  dis- 
ease. Bnt  he  is  perhai^s  looking  to  the 
future  as  mnch  as  to  the  past,  anticipating 
a  long,  lingering  illness.  Elephantiasis  is  a 
disease  which  often  lasts  for  years.  And 
wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me.  To 
one  stretched  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  the  night 
is  always  more  wearisome  than  the  day.  It 
has  no  changes,  nothing  to  mark  its  flight. 
It  seems  almost  interminable.  In  elephan- 
tiasis, however,  it  is  a  special  feature  of  the 
disease  that  the  sufferings  of  the  patient 
are  greatest  at  night.  "In  elephantiami 
aiixsthetioa,"  says  Dr.  Erasmus  Wilson,  "  a 
sense  of  dulness  and  heat  pervades  the  sur- 
face, and  there  are  sensations  of  tingling 
and  prickling,  and  of  burning  heat.  While 
the  integument  is  insensible,  there  are  deep- 
seated  burning  pains,  sometimes  of  a  bone 
or  joint,  sometimes  of  the  vertebral  column. 
Thete  pains  are  greatest  at  night ;  they  prevent 
deep,  and  give  rise  to  resHessneis  and  frightful 
dreams"  (Quain's  'Dictionary  of  Medicine,' 
vol.  i.  p.  817). 

Ver.  4. — When  I  lie  down,  I  say,  When 
shall  I  arise,  and  the  night  be  goaet  So 
Gesenius,  Bosenmiiller,  and  Delitzsch. 
Others  translate,  "  the  night  is  long"  (Dill- 
manii,  Benau),  or  "the  night  seems  end- 
less "  (Merx) ;  comp.  Deut.  xxviii.  67,  "  At 
evening  thou  shalt  say.  Would  God  it  were 
morning  I "  And  I  am  fnll  of  tossings  to  and 
fro.  Professor  Lee  understands  "tossings 
of  the  mind,"  or  "distracting  thoughts;" 
but  it  is  more  probable  that  tossings  of  the 
body  are  meant.  These  are  familiar  to  every 
bad  sleeper.  Unto  the  dawning  of  the  day, 
A  little  rest  sometimes  visits  the  tired  eye- 
lids after  a  long,  sleepless  night.  Job  may 
refer  to  tliis,  or  he  may  simply  mean  that 
he  lay  tossing  on  his  bod  all  through  the 
night,  till  morning  came,  when  he  arose. 

Ver.  5. — My  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms, 
The/on«  et  origo  mali  in  elephantiasis  is  a 
worm  called  filaria  sanguinis  hominis.  It 
is  a  long,  fine,  thread-like  creature,  of  a 
white  colour,  smooth,  and  devoid  of  mark- 
ings (Quain's  '  Dictionary  of  Medicine,'  vol. 
i.  pp.  512,  513).  And  clods  of  dust.  This  is 
rather  poetical  than  strictly  medical.  The 
special  characteristic  of  elephantiasis,  from 
which  it  derives  its  name,  is  that  the  integu- 
ment, or  outer  skin,  is  "  formed  into  large 
masses  or  folds,  with  a  rugose  condition  of 
the  surface,  not  unlike  the  appearance  of  an 
elephant's  leg"  (Quain,  vol  i.  p.  431).  But 
the  swellings  do  not  contain  "clods  of  dust.' 
My  skin  is  broken,  and  become  loathsome. 
A  common  feature  in  elephantiasis  is  the 
development  and  gradual  growth  of  solid 
papules  or  tubercles  in  the  skin.  These 
enlarge  aB  tlie  disease  progresses,  and  after 


a  time  soften  and  break  np;  an  ulcer  ii 
then  formed,  and  a  discharge  foUowd  of  a 
virulent  and  loathsome  cliaracter.  Presently 
the  discharge  stops;  the  ulcer  heals;  but 
only  to  break  out  again  in  another  place. 
In  the  Bevised  Version  the  passage  is 
rendered,  My  shin  closeth  up,  and  breaheth 
out  afresh. 

Ver.  6. — My  days  are  swifter  than  a 
weaver's  shuttle.  Though  each  day  is  a 
weariness,  yet,  on  looking  back  upon  my 
whole  life,  it  seems  to  have  come  and  gone 
in  a  moment  (comp.  ch.  is.  25).  And  are 
spent  without  hope.  Job  does  not  share  in 
the  hopes  which  Eliphaz  has  held  out  (see 
ch.  V.  17 — 27).  He  has  no  hope  but  in 
death. 

Ver.  7. — 0  remember  that  my  life  is  wind ! 
(comp.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  39).  The  wind  is  an 
image  of  all  that  is  vain,  shifting,  unstable, 
ready  to  pass  away  (ch.  vi.  86 ;  Prov.  xi.  29 ; 
Ecoles.  V.  16;  Isa.  xxvi.  18;  xli.  9;  Jer.  v. 
13,  etc.).  Mine  eye  shall  no  more  see  good. 
Another  protest  against  the  hopes  that 
Eliphaz  has  held  out  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  6 ;  and  comp.  ch.  ix.  25).  Job  is  still 
speaking  of  this  life  only,  and  not  touching 
the  question  of  another. 

Ver.  8. — ^Ihe  eye  of  him  that  hath  seen 
me  shall  see  me  no  more ;  that  is,  I  shall 
go  down  to  the  grave,  and  be  no  more  seen 
upon  earth.  Neither  iriend  nor  enemy 
shall  behold  me  after  that.  Thine  eyes. 
God's  eyes.  God  still  sees  liim  and  watches 
him ;  this  is  a  certain  consolation ;  but  will 
it  last  ?  Are  upon  me,  and  I  am  not.  I  am 
on  the  point  of  disappearing.  Even  now  I 
scarcely  exist. 

Ver.  9. — As  the  cloud  is  consumed  and 
vanisheth  away.  In  mountainous  countries 
one  sees  clouds  clinging  to  a  mountain-side, 
which  do  not  float  away,  but  gradually 
shrink,  and  at  last  wholly  disappear.  They 
are  "consumed"  in  the  strictest  sense  of 
the  word — the  hot  rays  of  the  sun  drink 
them  up.  So  he  that  goeth  down  to  the 
grave;  rather,  to  Sheol;  i.e.  to  the  lower 
world,  the  abode  of  the  departed.  What 
exactly  was  Job's  idea  of  this  world  it  is 
impossible  to  say,  or  whether  it  involved 
tlie  continued  separate  identity  of  indi- 
vidual souls  and  their  continued  conscious- 
ness. In  Isaiah's  conception  both  seem 
certainly  to  have  been  involved  (Isa.  xiv. 
9 — 18),  and  perhaps  in  Jacob's  (Gen.  xxxviL 
35) ;  but  Job's  creed  on  the  subject  can  only 
be  conjectured.  It  is  certain,  however,  that 
both  the  Egyptians  and  the  early  Babylon- 
ians held  the  continuance  after  death  of 
individual  souls,  their  separate  existence, 
and  their  consciousness  (see  the  author's 
•History  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  pp.  317 
— 319;  and  'Eeligions  of  the  Ancient 
World,'    pit.   £2— ^>.    Shbll  oome  up  no 


122 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[CH.  VII.  1 — 21. 


more.  The  Egyptian  beliaf  was  that  the 
soul  icould  ultimately  roturn  to  the  body 
from  which  death  separated  it,  and  roin- 
habit  it.  But  this  belief  was  certainly  not 
general  among  the  nations  of  antiquity. 

Ver.  10. — He  shall  return  no  more  to  his 
house.  This  is  best  taken  literally.  Men 
do  not,  after  death,  return  to  their  houses 
and  resume  their  old  occupations.  From 
the  life  in  tbis  world  they  disappear  for 
ever.  Neither  shall  his  place  know  him  any 
more  (comp.  Ps.  ciii.  16). 

Ver.  11. — ^Therefore  I  will  not  refrain  my 
mouth ;  rather,  /,  moreover,  will  not  refrain 
my  lips ;  that  is,  "  Tou  may  do  as  you  like 
under  affliction,  1  claim  the  right  of  com- 
plaining." Job  has  already  pointed  out 
that  nature  teaches  the  animals  to  complain 
when  they  snffer  (ch.  vi.  5).  Why,  then, 
should  not  he  ?  Complaint  is  not  necessarily 
murmuring;  it  is  sometimes  merely  expos- 
tulation, which  God  allows  (comp.  Ps.  Iv. 
2;  Ixxvii.  3;  cxlii.  2,  etc.).  I  will  speak 
in  the  anguish  of  my  spirit;  I  will  complain 
in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul.  Extreme 
•'  anguish  "  and  "  bitter "  suffering  excuse 
complaints  that  would  otherwise  be  blam- 
able  (comp.  ch.  vi.  2 — 4). 

Ver.  12. — Job  now  begins  his  complaint, 
which  is  wholly  addressed  to  God.  The 
heads  of  it  are :  (1)  that  he  is  confined  and 
restrained,  allowed  no  liberty  (ver.  12);  (2) 
that  he  is  terrified  by  visions  in  the  night 
(vers.  13,  14);  (3)  that  he  is  not  "letah.ne" 
(ver.  16);  (4)  that  so  much  attention  is  paid 
to  him  (vers.  17 — 19) ;  (5)  that  he  is  made 
a  butt  for  God's  arrows  (ver.  20);  and  (6) 
that  he  is  not  pardoned,  but  relentlessly 
persecuted  (ver.  21).  Am  I  a  sea,  or  a 
•jvhale  1  rather.  Am  la  sea,  or  a  sea-monsteri 
Am  1  as  wild  and  uncontrollable  as  the 
ocean,  as  fierce  and  savage  as  a  crocodile 
or  other  monster  of  the  deep?  Do  I  not 
possess  reason  and  conscience,  by  which  I 
might  be  directed  and  guided?  Why,  then, 
am  I  treated  as  if  I  were  without  them  ?  The 
sea  must  be  watched,  lest  it  break  in  upon 
the  land;  in  Egypt  there  had  been  many 
such  breaches,  as  the  configuration  of  the 
coast,  with  its  narrow  belts  of  sand  and  its 
vast  lagoons,  shows;  and  crocodiles  must  be 
watched,  lest  they  destroy  human  life ;  but 
is  there  any  need  that  I  should  be  watched, 
restrained,  coerced,  hedged  in  on  every  side 
(cli.  iii.  23)?  Am  I  so  dangerous  ?  Surely 
not.  Some  liberty  therefore  might  have 
been  safely  given  to  me,  instead  of  this 
irksome  restraint.  That  thou  settest  a 
watch  over  me ;  or,  a  guard ;  ie.  a  set  of 
physical  impediments,  which  leave  me  no 
freedom  of  action. 

Vers.  13,  14.— When  I  say,  My  hed  shall 
comfort  me,  my  couch  shall  ease  my  com- 
plaint Sometimes, notwithstanding  his  many 


"wearisome  nights"  (ver.  5),  Job  would 
entertain  a  hope  of  a  few,  hours'  rest  and 
tranquillity,  as,  wearied  and  exhausted,  he 
sought  his  couch,  and  laid  himself  down 
upon  it,  but  only  to  be  disappciated.  Then 
thou  scarest  me  with  dreams,  and  terrifiest 
me  through  visions.  Unpleasant  dreams 
are  said  to  be  a  symptom,  or  at  any  rate  a 
frequent  concomitant,  of  elephantiasis ;  but 
Job  seems  to  speak  of  something  worse  than 
these.  Hori'ible  visions  came  upon  him, 
which  he  believed  to  be  sent  directly  from 
the  Almighty,  and  which  effectually  dis- 
turbed his  rest,  making  night  hideous. 
Probably  this  was  one  of  the  modes  in 
which  Satan  was  permitted  to  try  and  test 
him. 

Ver.  15. — So  that  my  soul  chooseth  stran- 
gling ;  i.e.  "  so  that  I  would  prefer  stran- 
gling to  such  horrid  dreams,"  which  are 
worse  than  any  physical  suflFirings.  Some 
see  here  a  reference  to  suicide :  but  this  is  a 
very  forced  explanation.  Suicide,  as  already 
observed,  seems  never  even  to  have  occurred 
to  the  thoughts  of  Job  (see  the  comment  on 
ch.  vi.  8).  And  death  rather  than  my  life; 
literally,  rather  than  my  hones.  Death, 
that  is,  would  be  preferable  to  sich  a  life 
as  he  leads,  which  is  that  of  a  living 
skeleton. 

Ver.  16. — I  loathe  it ;  rather,  1  am  wasted 
away — "  ulceratus  tabesco  "  (Schultons).  I 
would  not  live  alway ;  rather,  I  shall  not 
live  alway.  Let  me  alone;  for  my  days 
are  vanity;  literally,  cease  from  me;  i.e. 
"cease  to  trouble  me" — with,  perhaps,  the 
further  meaning,  "cease  to  trouble  thyself 
about  me  ; "  for  I  am  sufficiently  reduced  to 
nothingness— my  life  is  mere  vanity. 

Ver.  17. — ^What  is  man,  that  thou  shouldest 
magnify  him  t  or,  maJte  so  much  of  him — re- 
gard him  as  of  sucl  i  great  importance  (comp. 
Ps.  viii.  4).  It  seems,  at  first  sight,  au 
exalted  idea  of  God  to  regard  him  as  too 
lofty,  too  great,  to  be  really  concerned  about 
so  mean  a  creature,  so  poor  a  being,  as  man. 
Hence,  among  the  Gjeeks,  the  Epicureans 
maintained  thiit  God  paid  no  attention  at 
all  to  this  world,  or  to  anything  that  hap- 
pened in  it,  but  dwelt  secure  and  tranquil 
in  the  empyrean,  with  nothing  to  disturb, 
displease,  or  vex  him.  And  the  holy  men 
of  old  sometimes  fell  into  this  same  phase  of 
thought,  and  expressed  surprise  and  wonder 
that  God,  who  dwelt  on  high,  should  "hum- 
ble himself  to  consider  the  things  in  heaven 
and  earth."  "  Lord,"  says  David,  or  who- 
ever was  the  author  of  the  hundred  and 
forty-fourth  psalm,  "  what  is  man,  that  thou 
takest  knowledge  of  him  ?  or  the  sou  of  man, 
that  thou  makest  account  of  him  ?  Man  it 
like  to  vanity ;  his  days  are  as  a  shadow 
that  passeth  away"  (Fs.  oxliv.  3,4).  But 
all,  except  Epicureans,  agree  that  God  does, 


CH.  vn.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


123 


in  fact,  so  conoem  himself,  and  a  little  re> 
flection  is  enough  to  show  us  that  the  op- 
posite view,  instead  of  exalting,  really  de- 
grades God.  To  bring  conscious,  sentient 
boings  into  the  world — ^beings  capable  of 
the  intensest  happiness  or  misery,  and  then 
to  leave  them  wholly  to  themselves,  to  have  ' 
no  further  care  or  thought  of  them,  would 
be  the  part,  not  of  a  grand,  glorious,  and 
adorable  Being,  but  of  one  destitute  of  any 
claim  to  our  admiration.  And  that  thou, 
shouldest  set  thine  heart  upon  him  t  This 
strong  expression  is  not  used  of  God  else- 
where. But  it  well  expresses  the  extreme 
tenderness  and  consideration  that  God  has 
for  man,  and  the  deep  love  from  which  that 
tenilerness  and  consideration  spring. 

Ver.  18. — And  that  thou  shonldest  visit 
him  every  morning,  and  try  him  every  mo- 
ment 1  Our  whole  life  is  a  probation,  not 
merely  particular  parts  of  it.  God  "tries 
us  every  moment"  if  not  with  aflSiotions, 
then  with  blessings  ;  if  not  with  pains,  then 
with  pleasures.  He  ia  with  us  all  the  day 
long,  and  all  our  life  long,  equally  in  his 
mercies  and  in  his  chastisements.  But  Job 
was  probably  thinking  only  of  the  latter. 

Ver.  19. — How  long  wilt  thou  not  depart 
from  mel  rather,  Witt  thou  not  look  away 
from  me  i  (see  the  Eevised  Version).  Job 
does  not  go  so  far  as  to  ask  that  God  should 
"depart  from"  him.  He  knows,  doubtless, 
that  that  would  be  the  extreme  of  calamity. 
But  he  would  have  God  sometimes  turn 
away  his  eyes  from  him,  and  not  always  re- 
gard him  S9  intently.  There  is  something 
of  the  same  tone  of  complaint  in  the  psalm- 
ist's utterance,  "  Thou  art  about  my  path, 
and  about  my  bed,  and  epiest  out  aU  my 
wayi  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  3,  Prayer-book  Version). 
Nor  let  me  alone  till  I  swallow  down  my 
spittle  1  Even,  i.e„  for  the  shortest  space  of 
time  possible.     A  proverbial  expression. 

Ver.  20. — I  have  sinned.  This  is  not  so 
much  a  confession  as  a  concession,  equiva- 
lent to  "  Granting  that  I  have  sinned,"  or, 
"  Suppose  tliat  I  have  sinned."  In  that 
caso,  What  shall  I  do  unto  thee  1  or.  What 
can  I  do  for  thee  i  How  is  it  in  my  power 
to  do  anything?     Can  I   uudo  the  past? 


Or  can  I  make  compensation  in  the  future  ? 
Neither  seems  to  Job  to  be  possible.  0  thou 
Preserver  of  men;  rather,  fhoii  Observer  of 
men.  A  continuation  of  the  complaint  that 
God's  eye  is  always  upon  him.  Why  hast 
thou  set  me  as  a  mark  against  thee ?  "A 
mark  "  (v:sn)  is  either  "  a  butt,"  "  a  target 
for  arrows,"  or  else  "  an  obstacle,"  "  a 
stumbling-block,"  which  God,  by  repeated 
blows,  ia  removing  out  of  his  way.  The  latter 
meaning  is  preferred  by  Schultens  and  Pro- 
fessor Lee ;  the  former  by  Eosonmiiller  and 
our  Eeviaers.  So  that  I  am  a  burden  to 
myself  (comp.  Ps.  xxxviii.  4). 

Ver.  21. — And  why  dost  thou  not  pardon 
my  transgression,  and  take  away  mine  ini- 
quity 1  Job  feels  that,  if  he  has  sinned, 
which  he  is  ready  to  admit  as  possible, 
though  he  has  certainly  no  deep  conviction 
of  sin  (ch.  vi.  24,  29,  30 ;  vii.  19),  at  any 
rate  be  has  not  sinned  greatly,  heinously; 
and  therefore  he  cannot  understand  why  lie 
has  not  been  forgiven.  The  idea  that  the 
Almighty  cannot  forgive  sin  except  upoo 
conditions,  is  unknown  to  him.  Believing 
God  to  be  a  God  of  mercy,  he  regards  him 
also,  just  as  Nehemiah  did,  as  a  "  God  of 
pardons"  (Neb.  ix.  17)— a  belief  which 
seems  to  have  been  instinctive  with  men  of 
all  nations.  And  it  appears  to  him  unac- 
countable that  pardon  has  not  been  ex- 
tended to  himself  Like  his  "comforters," 
he  makes  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  all 
his  afQictions  have  been  penal,  are  signs  of 
God's  displeasure,  and  intended  to  crush  and 
destroy  him.  He  has  not  woke  up  to  the 
difference  between  God's  puiiisliments  and 
his  chastisements.  Apparently,  he  does  not 
know  that  "  whom  the  Ijord  lovcth  he  olias- 
teneth,"  or  that  men  are  "made  perfect 
through  sufferings"  (Heb.  ii.  10).  For  now 
shall  I  sleep  in  the  dust.  Now  it  is  too  late 
for  pardon  to  avail  anything.  Death  is  nigh 
at  hand.  The  final  blow  must  soon  be 
struck.  And  thou  shalt  seek  me  in  the 
morning,  but  I  shall  not  be.  The  idea 
seems  to  be — God  will  relent  at  last ;  he 
will  seek  to  alleviate  my  sufferings  ;  he  will 
search  for  me  diligently — but  I  shall  have 
ceased  to  be. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 10.— fToB  to  Ood :  1.  The  soliloquy  of  sorrow.    I.  A  patubtjo  bepbesenta- 
TION  OP  HUMAN  LIFE.      In  Contrast  to  the  fascinating  picture  sketched  by  Eliphaz 

(ch.  v.  17 27),  Job  depicts  human  life  in  general,  and  his  own  sorrowful  existence  in 

particular,  as :  1.  A  term  of  hard  service.  "  Is  there  not  an  appointed  time  [literally, 
'a  warfare,  a  term  of  hard  service']  on  the  earth?"  like  that  of  a  mercenary  soldier  hired 
out  for  military  purposes  to  a  foreign  despot ;  and  "  are  not  his  days  like  the  days  of 
an  hireling?"  i.e.  a  hired  slave  who  has  been  let  out  to  some  pitiless  taskmaster;  both 
of  whom,  the  soldier  and  the  slave,  "  pant  for  the  shadow  "  on  the  dial,  and  "  long  for 
their  wages,"  to  give  them  a  release  from  their  heavy  toils.  The  language  suggests : 
(1)  That  the  period  of  human  life  is  in  every  instance  fixed,  the  Almighty  having  not 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  vu.  1—21. 

only  determined  the  bounds  of  our  habitation  (Acts  xvii.  26),  but  the  numTier  of  our 
months  (ch.'xiv.  5),  retaining  in  his  own  hand  our  times  (Ps.  zxxi.  15),  and  measuring 
out  our  days  (Ps.  xxxix.  4).  (2)  That  the  allotted  space  of  human  life  is  in  every 
instance  designed  to  be  a  season  of  service,  not  of  ease,  enjoyment,  or  indulgence,  but 
of  labour,  endurance,  and  fatigue ;  not  always  hard  in  the  sense  alluded  to  by  Job,  viz. 
exacting,  oppressive,  exhausting,  pitiless,  but  ever  hard  in  the  sense  of  being  earnest, 
arduous,  and  continuous.  Life  was  never  meant  for  idleness.  If  God  promises  strength 
for  the  day,  he  first  assigns  work  to  the  day  (Deut.  xxxiii.  25).  Christ  recognized  thut 
the  day  of  life  was  designed  for  toil  (John  ix.  4).  (3)  That  faithful  work  performed  in 
time  will  in  every  instance  meet  with  a  just  xeward.  As  the  hired  soldier  received  his 
pay,  and  the  slave  obtained  his  wages,  so  will  every  one  on  earth  be  recompensed  at  last 
according  to  his  works  (Prov.  xxiv.  12 ;  Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  14).  In  particular 
every  faithful  labourer  in  Christ's  vineyard  will  receive  his  "  penny "  (Matt.  xx.  9). 
The  doctrine  of  heavenly  rewards  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  free  grace  (Heb.  xi. 
26 ;  xii.  2).  (4)  That  good  men  may  sometimes  long  to  be  released  from  their  labours, 
not,  however,  like  the  bondman  or  the  mercenary  soldier,  because  they  serve  an  exacting 
and  alien  taskmaster,  who  grinds  them  to  the  dust  with  oppression,  but  because,  though 
not  weary  of  their  labours,  they  are  weary  in  them,  and  would  fain  he  at  rest  (cf.  Paul, 
Phil.  i.  23 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6).  2.  A  heritage  of  incessant  misery.  As  realized  in  the 
experience  of  Job,  this  misery  was :  (1)  Heaven-imposed  in  its  origin  ;  he  having  been 
made  to  possess  (literally,  "  caused  to  inherit ")  it  by  compulsion,  through  the  stern 
will  of  an  uuseen  but  relentless  taskmaster,  without  himself  having  done  anything  to 
either  originate  or  merit  it  (ver.  3) — a  mode  of  representing  human  life  which  has  a 
superficial  truthfulness  about  it  in  BO  far  as  it  asserts  that  afSiction  is  the  almost 
uniform  experience  of  man  on  earth,  that  nothing  enters  into  the  composition  of  human 
history,  either  collectively  or  individually,  without  the  expressly  given  sanction  of  God, 
and  that  no  amount  of  wisdom  or  endeavour  on  the  part  of  man  will  enable  him  to 
escape  that  particular  earth-experience  which  by  Divine  wisdom  and  love  has  been 
assigned  him  as  his  inheritance,  but  is  radically  false  in  insinuating  that  Gtod  acts 
capriciously  and  tyrannically,  and  alleging  that  man  neither  shapes  nor  deserves  his 
particular  lot,  since  no  fact  is  more  apparent  than  that  man,  as  a  sinful  being,  deserves 
more  affliction  than  he  gets,  and  that,  to  a  large  extent  at  least,  every  individual  is 
the  master  of  his  own  destiny.  (2)  Tedious  in  its  continunnce;  Job  characterizing 
his  days  of  affliction  as  months  of  vanity  ;  i.e.  months  which  come  without  bringing 
relief  to  the  sufferer,  and  go  leaving  nothing  in  their  trail  but  disappointed  hopes, 
each  day  seeming  like  a  month  in  duration,  and  his  sleepless  nights  as  "nights  of 
weariness,"  measured  out  to  him  one  by  one  in  slow  and  solemn  regularity,  each  one 
appearing  to  interminably  lengthen  itself  out  as  if  it  would  never  come  to  an  end. 
Behold  the  subtle  alchemy  of  grief,  which  can  change  the  pace  of  time,  and  make  that 
go  with  leaden  feet  which  mostly  flies  with  lightning  wing.  (3)  Painful  in  its 
character;  arising  from  a  combination  of  troubles  not  often  meeting  in  the  same 
individual,  (a)  Extinction  of  hope  by  day ;  the  absolute  expiry  of  everything  like 
expectation  of  betterment,  which  must  have  been  a  greater  burden  to  the  heart  of  Job 
than  ever  the  elephantiasis  was  to  his  body :  "  We  are  kept  alive  by  hope"  (Eom.  viii. 
24) ;  but  within  the  soul  of  Job  the  principle  of  life  was  gone.  (6)  Want  of  sleep 
by  night.  As  sleep  is  one  of  God's  best  gifts  to  man  (Ps.  cxxvii.  2),  restoring  nature's 
exhausted  powers,  refreshing  mind  and  body  both  (Eccles.  v.  12  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  26 ;  cf. 
Shakespeare, '  Henry  IV.,'  Part  II.  act  iii.  bc.  1),  so  is  the  want  of  it  one  of  the  heaviest 
afflictions  that  can  befall  a  sufferer,  arising  sometimes  from  excessive  labour,  as  with 
Jacob  (Gen.  xxxi.  40);  sometimes  from  intense  bodily  pain,  as  in  the  case  of  Job  (ver. 
5) ;  sometimes  from  disturbed  thoughts,  as  with  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  ii.  1),  Ahasuerus 
(Bsth.  vi.  1),  and  vricked  men  (Prov.  iv.  16) ;  the  restless  tossings  to  and  fro  of  the 
body  keeping  time  with  the  inward  agitations  of  the  mind,  (c)  Bodily  pain  both 
day  and  night,  springing  from  a  loathsome  malady,  detailed  (ver.  5)  as  breeding 
worms  in  his  flesh,  covering  his  skin  with  earth-coloured  scales,  causing  it  to  stiffen 
and  emit  a  purulent  discharge,  and  commonly  believed  to  be  elephantiasis  (see  homiletics 
on  oh.  ii.  7).  3.  A  period  of  exceeding  brevity.  "  My  days  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's 
shuttle,  and  vanish  without  hope"  (ver.  6);  i.e.  they  flee  more  rapidly  than  the  shuttle 
passes  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  warp  of  the  weaver's  web,  and  vanish  without 


OH.  VII.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB."  126 


hope  of  any  to  succeed  them — i.e.  of  any  days  of  happiness  on  earth — an  affecting 
emblem  of  the  vanity  and  shortness  of  life. 

II.  A  piTiFui,  suppLiOATtON  FROM  HUMAN  80EE0W.    1.  The  Being  addressed.    "  Oh, 
remember  1"    Though  not  named,. God  is  meant.    It  is  well,  though  not  always 
necessary,  to  invoke  Gcd  by  name  in  our  prayers ;  but  certainly  it  is  better  to  leave 
God's  name  out  altogether  than  to  introduce  it  too  frequently  into  our  devotions. 
That  Job  called  on  God  in  his  calamity  was  a  sign  that  his  faith  was  not  yet  extin- 
guished, and  that  he  still  retained  his  hold  upon  the  God  whom  he  had  formerly 
professed  to  serve.     It  was  likewise  a  more  hopeful  way  of  obtaining  relief  from,  or 
support  under,  his  troubles,  since  it  is  always  better  in  our  distresses  "  to  cry  to  God 
than  to  complain  to  creatures  "  (Caryl).     2.  The  prayer  presented.    "Ob,  remember!" 
As  applied  to  God,  the  word  signifies  (1)  to  take  notice,  to  observe,  to  bear  in  mind 
(Psi  Ixxviii.  39) ;  hence  (2)  to  regard  with  pity  (Ps.  cxxxii.  1) ;  and  (3)  to  interpose 
with  lielp  (Gen.  viii.  1).    God  remembers  when,  so  to  speak,  he  allows  an  object  to 
remain  in  the  contemplation  of  his  infinite  mind  so  as  to  be  suitably  affected  thereby. 
Job  desires  that  God  would  (1)  consider  his  case;  (2)  commiserate  his  person;  and  (3) 
commute  his  sorrow.     This,  however,  does  not  imply  that  God  ever  forgets  his  people 
(Isa.  xlix.  15),  though  he  may  sometimes  appear  to  do  so  (Ps.  xiii.  1) ;  or  fails  to 
sympathize  with  them  in  trouble  (Ps.  ciii.  13 ;  Isa.  Levi.  13),  though  afflicted  saints 
may  sometimes  imagine  so  (Ps.  xliv.  24;  Isa.  xlix.  14);  or  is  indisposed  to  succour 
them  (1  Sam.  ii.  9 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  23 ;  xci.  1),  though  he  frequently,  for  wise  and  good 
reasons,  delays  his  intervention  (Bxod.  xiv.  13 ;  Matt.  xiv.  25 ;  xv.  23).    3.  2%e  plea 
offered.     The  irrevocableness  of  life  which  Job  depicts  by  means  of  two  impressive 
images,  comparing  his  sorrowful  existence  to :  (1)  A  passing  wind.   "  Oh,  remember  that 
my  life  is  wind ! "  a  breath,  a  puff  of  air  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  39 ;  ciii.  16) — an  emblem  suggestive 
of  the  frailty,  the  rapidity,  and  (more  especially  here)  the  irrevocability  of  life.    Job 
interprets  the  metaphor  with  regard  to  himself  by  saying  that  when  once  he  had 
departed  this  life :  (a)  His  eye  should  never  more  see  good  (ver.  7) ;  i.e.  it  should  never 
more  return  to  enjoy  the  things  that  constitute  (or  are  supposed  to  constitute)  earthly 
felicity  (of.  the  language  of  Hezekiah,  Isa.  xxxviii.  11).  Life's  pleasures,  opportunities, 
privileges,  can  only  be  enjoyed  once.    Yet  good  in  the  highest  sense  does  not  terminate 
with  death.    When  a  saint  departs  from  this  mortal  scene  he  enters  upon  the  chief 
good,  the  experience  of  nobler  pleasures  and  loftier  privileges  than  ever  he  possessed 
on  earth  (ch.  xix.  27 ;  Phil.  i.  21).    (6)  Men's  eyes  should  never  see  him  (ver.  8) ; 
i.e.  he  should  never  more  mingle  in  the  society  of  the  living,  never  more  participate 
in  the  friendships  and  associations  of  time,  having  bid  farewell  to  all  companions  and 
loved  ones  (cf.  Eccles.  ix.  9, 10) — an  argument  for  living  peacefully  and  lovingly  amongst 
friends,  companions,  and  neighbours,  since  we  must  soon  be  parted  from  them  and 
they  from  us.     (a)  Even  God's  eye  should  fail  to  see  liim  (ver.  8) ;  i.e.  God  would  not 
be  able  to  do  him  good  after  he  was  dead,  the  present  life  being  the  only  season  in 
which  man  has  an  opportunity  of  receiving  "  gracious "  visitation  from  God.     It  is 
too  late  to  give  a  man  a  cordial  when  he  is  in  his  grave ;  and  much  more  is  it  post  horam 
to  look  for  salvation  when  life  is  ended  (2  Cor.  vi.  2).     (2)  A  vanishing  cloud.     "  The 
cloud  dissolves  and  disappears "  (ver.  9).     The  metaphor  is  appropriate,  as   setting 
forth  the  unsubstantial,  transitory,  and  irrevocable  character  of  human  life  (cf.  Jas.  iv. 
14).    Like  the  cloud  which  is  quickly  dispersed  (often  by  a  gentle  puff  of  wind), 
vanishing  into  a  realm  where  human  vision  cannot  follow  it,  so  man  goeth  down  into 
Sheol,  the  unseen  abode  of  departed  spirits.     And  as  the  scattered  cloud  never  again 
gathers  itself  upon  the  face  of  heaven,  so  never  more  does  man  revisit  the  upper  air 
when  once  he  has  descended  into  "  that  undiscovered  country  from  whose  bourne  no 
traveller  returns."     In  particular,  he  never  again  returns  to  his  house,  neither  shall 
his  place  in  the  family  circle,  at  the  social  banquet,  on  change,  and  in  the  public 
assembly,  know  him  any  moie  (ver.  10).     Though  the  doctrine  of  immortality  and 
the  hope  of  a  resurrection  are  not  here  insisted  on,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  were 
unknown  to  either  Eliphaz  or  Job  (ch.  xix.  26). 

Learn :  1.  Since  life,  and  especially  the  Christian  life,  is  a  war-service  (1  Tim.  vi. 
12),  it  becomes  saints  not  unnecessarily  to  entangle  themselves  with  the  affairs  of  this 
world  (2  Tim.  ii.  4),  but  to  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ  (2  Tim.  ii. 
3).     2.  Since  God  will  faithfully  recompense  his  servants  (Prov.  xiL  14 ;  Rom.  ii.  10 ; 


126  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  vn.  1— 2L 

1  Cor.  iii.  8),  they  whom  he  has  hired  should  be  faithful  in  the  rendering  of  service  to 
liim  (Rom.  xii.  11 ;  Bph.  vi.  6,  7).  3.  Since  the  natural  life  of  man,  even  when  taken 
at  its  best  estate,  is  altogether  vanity  (Ps.  xxxix.  5,  11),  it  is  the  part  of  wisdom  to 
aspire  after  that  life  which  will  never  disappoint  (John  iv.  14),  never  know  affliction 
(Kev.  vii.  16,  17),  and  never  pass  away  (1  John  ii.  17).  4.  Since  it  is  certain  that  we 
must  all  go  down  into  the  grave  (ch.  xxx.  23;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  48;  John  ix.  4;  Heb.  ix. 
27),  it  becomes  us  to  prepare  for  that  event  (Ps.  xxxix.  4 ;  2  Kings  xx.  1 ;  Phil.  i.  21 : 
1  Pet.  i.  17).  5.  Since  it  is  equally  certain  that  we  shall  all  come  up  again  out  oj 
our  graves  (oh.  xix.  26  ;  Dan.  xii.  2 ;  John  xi.  23,  24 ;  Acts  xxiv.  15),  it  is  folly  not 
to  stek  before  we  die  the  sure  and  certain  hope  of  a  glorious  resurrection  (PhU.  iii.  11). 

Vers.  11 — 16. — Job  to  Qod:  2.  The  opening  of  the  third  controversy.  I.  A 
DANGEH0U8  KBSOLUTION.  1.  The  purport  of  it.  To  complain,  not  merely  to  repine 
against  the  misery  of  his  lot,  but  to  express  his  sense  of  Jehovah's  cruelty  in  first 
afflicting  him  and  then  vouchsafing  him  no  response  to  his  solemn  and  pathetic  appeal. 
If  murmurings  against  one's  outward  estate  are  sometimes  natural  and  even  excusable, 
they  are  always  perilous,  even  where  not  actually  sinful.  Those  who  begin  by  finding 
fault  with  their  portion,  generally  end  by  reflecting  ou  him  by  whom  their  portion  has 
been  bestowed.  That  Job  did  not  curse  God  to  his  face,  as  the  devil  predicted,  was  a 
wonder,  and  was  due  more  to  grace  than  to  himself.  When  the  soul  is  in  anguish  it 
is  better  to  be  silent  than  to  speak,  to  imitate  David  (Ps.  xxxix.  9)  than  to  copy  Job, 
2.  The  spirit,  ol  it.  With  vehemence :  "  I  will  speak ;."  the  tense  expressing  energy 
of  language  with  passion  :  "  In  the  anguish  of  my  spirit ;  "  with  bitterness :  "  I  will 
complain  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul ; " — all  which  were  unwarrantable  aggravations 
of  his  original  offence,  although  Job,  by  comn  encing,  "I  also,"  "I  for  my  part," 
appeared  to  think  he  was  not  transgressing  the  bounds  of  right.  And  certainly 
language  as  vehement,  extraordinary,  and  audacious  can  be  quoted  from  other  lips 
than  Job's,  language  not  usually  blamed  as  sinful ;  e.g.  Jeremiah's  (xv.  18).  Still,  men 
are  prone  to  forget  that,  in  contending  with  God,  they  have  absolutely  no  "right," 
80  called,  and  certainly  lione  to  address  him  with  irreverent  presumption  or  insinuate 
aught  against  his  loving-kindness  or  justice.  3.  The  reason  of  it.  "  Therefore ; "  i.e. 
partly  because  his  sufferings  were  great,  and  partly  because  his  life  was  vanity,  but 
chiefly  because  God  was  silent  and  did  not  condescend  to  listen  to  his  prayer ;  not  one  of 
whicli  reasons.nor  even  all  of  them  together,  were  sufflcient  to  justify  his  violent  proposal. 
Great  sufferings  are  no  excuse  for  great  complainings,  since  they  are  in  themselves 
no  more  than  man  deserves,  are  always  sent  in  love,  and  are  capable,  if  accepted  with 
meek  submission,  of  jielding  the  highest  good.  So  far  from  the  transient  and  irre- 
vocable character  of  life  inducing  querulous  behaviour,  it  should  prompt  man  to  turn 
its  golden  moments  to  the  best  account;  while  God's  silence  cannot  give  man  the 
right  to  murmur,  since  God  ever  knows  the  best  time  to  speak,  whether  in  vindication 
of  himself  or  in  answering  his  people  (Ps.  1.  3). 

II.  An  ihonical  interbogation.  1.  The  comparison  made.  Almost  impertinently, 
surely  unbecomingly,  Job  asks  whether  God  regarded  him  as  a  sea  or  a  whale ;  i.e. 
as  a  mighty  conflux  of  waters,  a  fierce,  heaven-assaulting  ocean,  or  as  a  huge  aquatic 
monster,  a  great  and  terrible  dragon  of  the  prime,  of  which  he  was  afraid  "and  upon 
which  accordingly  he  required  to  set  a  watch.  Job's  intention  was  to  say  that  surely 
God  did  entertain  such  a  notion  of  the  poor  emaciated  skeleton  upon  whom  he  was 
heapiug  such  gigantic  calamities.  It  was  strangely  irreverent,  on  Job's  part,  so  to 
speak,  and  wholly  untrue  besides.  God  esteemed  neither  him  nor  any  of  his  intelligent 
creatures  as  a  sea  or  a  monster.  God  never  speaks  depreciatingly  of  man,  and  man 
never  should  of  himself.  Nor  does  God  ever  treat  man  like  a  sea  or  a  whale,  but 
always  with  a  due  regard  to  his  intelligent  and  moral  nature,  in  which  respect  man 
should  copy  God  in  dealing  with  himself.  Least  of  all  can  it  be  said  that  God  is  ever 
afraid  of  man ;  the  only  being,  that  man  can  really  injure  by  his  insubordination  and 
wickedness  is  himself.  Yet,  though  incorrect  in  the  sense  intended  by  Job,  it  is  some- 
times sadly  true  that  the  heart  of  man  is  as  restless  (Isa.  Ivii.  20),  insatiable  (Bccles. 
i.  7),  violent  (Jude  13),  destructive  (Josh.  xxiv.  7),  noisy  (Jer.  vi.  23),  as  the  sea,  and  as 
ferocious  and  ungovernable  as  the  great  monsters  it  contains.  2.  The  proof  given.  Aa 
the  turbulent  ocean  requires  to  be  bounded  and  restrained,  and  leviathan  to  be  held  in 


0H.VIL1— 21,J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  1157 

chains,  so,  says  the  patriarch,  with  grim  irony,  "  thou  settest  a  watch  on  me."  Job 
was  right  in  still  recognizing  God's  hand  in  his  afflictions.  Whatever  he  the  second 
causes,  the  First  Cause  in  all  calamity  that  befalls  a  saint,  as  indeed  in  everything  that 
happens,. is  God  (ch.  ii.  10 ;  Lsa.  xlv.  7  ;  Amos  iii.  6).  Yet  he  erred  in  his  interpre- 
tation of  God's  purpose  in  these  afflictions.  God  watches  over  seas  and  whales,  and 
over  suffering  men  and  siiints  at  the  same  time,  i.e.  always,  and  by  the  same  right  — 
the  right  of  his  Divine  sovereignty;  and  in  the  same  way,  by  sending  his  umuisoient 
glance  into  every  corner  of  the  universe ;  but  not  in  the  same  spirit,  watching  ever 
against  seas  and  whales,  but  always  over  men  and  saints ;  or  for  the  same  purpose, 
in  the  case  of  seas  and  whales  to  restrain  them  from  doing  damage  in  his  world,  in 
the  case  of  men  and  saints  to  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good. 

III.  An  unjust  accusation.  1.  The  charge.  "Thou  .--carest  mo  with  dreamt, 
and  terriflest  me  through  visions"  (ver.  14).  These  dreams  and  visions,  horrible 
sliadows  cast  upon  the  background  of  his  wakeful  and  excited  imagination  by  the 
terrible  disease  fjom  which  he  was  suffering,  were  of  a  character  entirely  ditfeient 
from  the  dreams  and  visions  depicted  by  Bliphaz  (ch.  iv.  13)  as  visiting  the  good  man 
fronv  God.  In  the  distemper  of  his  spirit,  Job  imputes  them  to  God,  whereas  they 
ought  to  have  been  properly  ascribed  to  Satan.  Had  he  simply  desired  to  recognize 
tlie  Divine  hand  in  his  sufferings,  his  language  would  have  been  becoming  and  worthy 
of  imitation ;  but  if,  as  is  more  probable,  he  actually  meant  to  charge  God  with  being 
the  immediate  Author  of  those  pale  phantoms  and  shadowy  apparitions  which  banished 
sleep  from  his  pillow  and  made  him  shiver  with  ghostly  fear,  he  was  surely  verging 
on  the  borders  of  blasphemy.  If  not  so  heinous  an  offence  as  ascribing  God's  work  to 
the  devil  (Matt.  xii.  24),  imputing  Satan's  work  to  God  is  wholly  without  excuse.  2. 
The  time.  "  When  I  say,  My  bed  shall  comfort  me,  my  couch  shall  ease  my  com- 
plaint ;  then  thou  scarest  me  with  dreams."  The  best-founded  expectations  of  man 
are  not  unfrequently  ditappointed.  Even  couches,  formed  for  ease  and  comfort,  often 
fail  to  impart  them.  They  who  most  long  for  sleep's  refreshment  have  sometimes 
the  greatest  difficulty  in  obtaining  it.  It  is  vain  to  look  for  comfort  in  affliction,  or  ease 
in  the  midst  of  pain,  to  either  beds  or  conches,  or  any  instrument  whatever  apart  from 
the  Divine  blessing.  The  true  Source  of  consolation  for  diseased  bodies,  distressed 
minds,  and  disturbed  spirits,  is  God  (Ps.  xlii.  5  ;  cxlvii.  3 ;  lsa.  xxv.  4 ;  li.  3 ;  Ixvi.  5 ; 
2  Cor.  i.  3,  4  J  vii.  6).  And  as  God  delights  to  visit  his  suffering  people  on  their  beds 
(ch,  XXXV.  10 ;  Ps.  xli.  3 ;  xlii.  8 ;  Ixxvii.  6),  so  the  devil  seldom  fails  to  shoot  his 
sharpest  arrows  and  muster  his  fiercest  terrors  during  the  night.  3.  The  result.  (1) 
A  desire  for  immediate  death.  "  So  that  my  soul  chooseth  strangling,"  i.e.  suffocation, 
a  sensation  of  choking  being  frequently  experienced  in  elephantiasis;  "and  death 
rather  than  my  life,"  literally,  "  than  my  bones,"  ».e.  than  the  emaciated  skeleton  I 
have  become.  Life  in  itself  is  not  necessarily  joyous  and  desirable.  The  amount  of 
pleasure  derivable  from  existence  in  large  measure  depends  on  its  circumstances  and 
conditions ;  and  these  may  be  so  changed  as  to  render  existence  a  burden.  Yet  sufferers 
should  rather  bear  their  burdens  than  inordinately  long  for  release  (ch.  xiv.  14 ;  Matt. 
xxvi.  39),  since  it  is  "better  to  bear  those  ills  we  have  than  fly  to  others  that  we 
know  not  of;  "  since  whatever  be  the  weight  of  our  affliction,  it  is  God's  will  that  we 
should  bear  it ;  and  since  God  is  able  to  bring  even  an  emaciated  skeleton  back  from 
the  brink  of  the  grave.  (2)  A  temptation  to  suicide,  as  some  think.  "  So  that  my 
soul  chooseth  strangling  "  by  external  violence  (cf.  Nah.  ii.  12),  yea,  by  a  snicidal  act 
(cf.  2  Sam.  xvii.  23) ;  to  which  the  next  words,  "  and  death  by  these  bones,"  are  sup- 
posed to  allude.  Even  if  this  were  the  correct  interpretation  (which  is  doubtful),  it  is 
satisfactory  that  those  who  adopt  it  understand  the  suicidal  temptation  to  have  been 
rejected  by  the  patriarch,  who  exclaims,  "  I  loathe  it ; "  i.e.  I  detest  and  repudiate  with 
horror  the  idea  of  taking  my  own  life.  Suicide  is  an  act  of  supreme  cowardice,  spring- 
ing, except  where  reason  is  overthrown,  from  inability  to  endure  suffering  or  shame ; 
an  act  of  supreme  folly,  since  it  can  only  plunge  its  deluded  perpetrator  into  deeper 
suffering  and  more  public  shame ;  an  act  of  supreme  impiety,  inasmuch  as  it  arrogatei 
to  man  a  power  that  belongs  to  God  alone.  (3)  A  prayer  for  at  least  temporary  respite. 
"  Let  me  alone ;  for  my  days  are  vanity ;  "  meaning,  '*  My  life  must  soon  be  ended ; 
therefore  cease  to  harass  me  with  dreams  and  visions ;  but  vouchsafe  to  me  a  period 
of  ease  and  comfort  before  I  depart "  (cf.  ch.  x.  20,  and  vide  homilctics). 


128  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  vn.  1— 2L 


Leam :  1.  The  clanger  of  too  exclusive  meditation  on  the  vanity  of  life.  It  is  apt, 
as  in  Job's  case,  to  foster  sinful  thoughts  concerning  God.  2.  The  propriety  of  always 
keeping  a  bridle  on  the  lips  (Ps.  xxxix.  2),  When  Job  removed  restraint  from  his 
mouth^he  spoke  in  anguish,  complained  in  bitterness,  questioned  with  irreverence, 
accused  with  rashness,  desired  with  vehemence,  entreated  with  impatience.  3.  The 
tendency  of  the  human  heart,  especially  when  blinded  by  grief  and  agitated  by  passion, 
to  misconptrue  God's  providential  dealings  with  ■  itself.  4.  The  certainty  that  good 
men  may  have  much  of  the  old  unrenewed  nature  in  them,  lying  unsuspected  till 
occasion  calls  it  forth.  One  would  hardly  have  anticipated  the  outburst  of  temper  which 
Job  here  displays.  5.  The  duty  of  thanking  Gcid  for  such  common  mercies  as  beds  to 
sleep  on  and  ability  to  use  them.  Many  have  beds  who  cannot  sleep,  and  some  would 
sleep  who  cannot  find  the  beds.  6.  The  wickedness  of,  in  any  circumstances,  under- 
valuing God's  great  gift  of  life.  Life  in  the  midst  of  suffering  may  often  more  glorify 
God  than  existence  in  the  midst  of  ease.  7.  The  inexpediency  of  rashly  concluding 
that  one's  days  are  vanity,  since  a  man  may  be  most  useful  when  he  least  suspects  it. 
Probably  Job  never  served  his  age  and  generation  so  well  as  when  passing  through 
this  terrible  baptism  of  pain,  sorrow,  and  temptation. 

Ver.  16. — "  I  would  not  live  alway."  I.  The  cbt  of  bittbb  dibappointment. 
Exemplified  in  the  case  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  4)  and  of  Jonah  (iv.  3). 

II.  The  wail  of  gebat  soekow.    Illustrated  by  the  experience  of  Job. 

III.  The  voice  of  eemobsbful  despair.  As  with  Ahithophel  (2  Sam.  xvii.  23) 
and  Judas  (Matt,  xxvii.  5). 

IV.  The  lanouags  op  an  awakened  conscience.  Witness  the  jailor  of  Philippi 
(Acts  xvi.  27). 

V.  The  uttekancb  of  faith.    As  employed  by  St.  Paul  (Phil,  i.  23). 

Leam  :  1.  The  necessity  of  departing  from  this  life  (Heb.  ix.  27).  2.  The  importmce 
of  preparing  for  another  (Heb.  xi.  10). 

Vers.  17 — 21. — Job  to  God:  1.  A  remonstrance  with  Heaven.  I.  The  DrvraB 
CONDUCT  DEPICTED.  As  that  of:  1.  ^  Man-watcher.  (Ver.  20;  cf.  ver.  12.)  Con- 
cerning this  Divine  espionage  may  be  noted :  (1)  The  object  of  it.  Man  (ver.  17).  Not 
some  formidable  opponent  or  powerful  adversary,  of  whose  movements  the  Almighty 
might  reasonably  be  apprehensive,  not  some  all-devouring  ocean,  or  fierce  ungovernable 
sea-monster  (ver.  12),  but  a  poor,  feeble,  insignificant  creature  (enosK),  a  dull  and  spirit- 
less hireling  (soldier  or  slave),  dragging  out  a  term  of  hard  service  on  the  earth  (ver.  1), 
burdened  with  intolerable  miseries  (ver.  3),  whose  days  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shuttle 
(ver.  6),  are  even  vanity  (ver.  16),  and  whose  whole  term  of  existence  in  this  sublunary 
sphere  is  like  a  passing  wind  or  vanishing  cloud  (vers.  7—9),  that  melts  away  and 
never  more  returns.  (2)  The  character  of  it.  Job  supposes  that  this  great  Man- 
watcher  whom  he  describes  first  attributes  an  extravagant  importance  to  the  feeble 
and  insignificant  creature  whose  portrait  has  just  been  sketched :  "  What  is  man,  that 
thou  shouldest  magnify  him  ?  "  (cf.  David's  language  to  Saul,  1  Sam.  xxiv.  14) ;  then 
constitutes  him  an  object  of  special,  close,  earnest,  vigilant  observation :  "  And  that 
thou  shouldest  sot  thine  heart  upon  him  ?  "  (cf.  Ps.  viii.  4 ;  cxliv.  3  ;  Heb.  ii.  6);  next 
treats  him  like  a  prisoner  subjected  to  regular  inspection,  in  case  he  should  either 
escape  from  confinement  or  he  guilty  of  hatching  plots  against  his  keeper :  "  And  that 
thou  shouldest  visit  him  every  morning ; "  and  finally  puts  him  severely  to  the 
proof,  i.e.  by  the  thumbscrews  and  stocks  of  affliction  :  "  And  try  him  every  moment." 
(3)  The  constancy  of  it.  This  terrible  inspection  Job  represents,  not  as  occasional  or 
exceptional,  which  might  have  been  tolerable,  but  as  i^erpetnal,  without  interruption 
and  without  cessation — "  every  morning"  and  "  every  moment,"  the  Divine  eye  never 
leaving  him  so  long  as  to  permit  him  to  swallow  down  his  spittle.  (4)  The  purpose 
of  it.  Not  to  bless  man,  as  David  liked  to  think  of  the  Divine  guardianship  (Ps.  viii. 
4),  but  to  curse  him,  to  find  out  his  faults,  to  detect  his  failings,  to  discover  his  sins. 
This  horrible  picture  of  the  all-seeing,  silent,  never-sleeping  eye  of  the  Eternal  always 
fixed  on  man  with  its  cold,  clear,  cruel,  calculating  gaze,  never  seeming  to  move,  but 
ever  there,  in  the  daytime  and  in  the  night  season,  dogging  him  at  every  turn,  is 
happily  not  true  of  the  saint  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15 ;  xxxvii.  32. 33 ;  cxxi.  1 — 8),  though,  alas  I 


CH.  vn.  1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  129 


It  affords  a  fearfully  vivid  representation  of  the  misery  of  the  lost  (Rev.  vi.  16, 17). 
2.  A  Man-shonter.  "  Why  hast  thou  set  me  as  a  mark  against  thee  ?"  i.e.  as  a  target 
to  shoot  at  (of.  ch.  vi.  4).  Another  outrageous  impeachment  of  the  Deity,  implying 
that  God,  in  afflicting  Job,  had  been  guilty  of :  (1)  Manifest  favouritism,  in  passing 
by  others  and  seleoticg  him  as  the  object  of  his  attacks.  (2)  Deliberate  cruelty,  in 
not  merely  sending  a  random  or  occasional  shaft  against  Job,  but  in,  so  to  speak, 
setting  him  up  like  a  target,  and  taking  calm  and  deliberate  aim  at  his  bosom.  (3) 
Deep  malevolence,  as  if  God  took  the  same  delight  in  directing  his  arrows  against  him, 
Job,  that  an  archer  might  do  in  practising  at  a  butt,  or  a  soldier  in  sending  a  shaft 
against  a  foe.  (4)  Unjustifiable  hostility,  since  Job  at  least  was  quite  unable  to  dis- 
cern any  cause  for  such  extraordinary  procedure.  3.  A  Man-oppressor.  "  Why  hast 
thou  made  me  an  obstacle  in  thy  way  ? "  (according  to  another  and  perhaps  a  more 
exact  translation) ;  the  idea  being  that  Job  was  perpetually  in  God's  path,  and  that 
God,  hating  him  and  feeling  him  a  burden  (according  to  another  reading  of  the  next 
clause),  rushed  against  him  as  if  to  destroy  him,  and  so  get  rid  of  him.  But  God  never 
80  feels  toward  any  man.  He  may  hate  man's  sin,  but  man  himself  he  never  hates. 
He  may  often  find  man,  through  sin,  an  obstacle  in  his  path,  but  he  never  sets  man 
np  before  him  as  an  object  of  hostile  assault. 

II.  The  Divine  CONDUCT  CHARACTERIZED.  As i  1.  Unworthy.  Job  designs  to  hint 
that  man's  insignificance  makes  it  wholly  unbecoming,  if  not  mean,  on  God's  part  to 
visit  him  with  afHiotion ;  that  such  incessant  vigilance  as  God  exercises  over  man  is 
altogether  to  attribute  to  him  too  much  importance,  that  man,  being  so  utterly  frail 
and  short-lived,  it  were  nobler  in  God  to  permit  him  to  enjoy  his  brief  span  of  life  in 
ease  and  comfort.  A  fallacious  argument,  since :  (1)  No  being  that  God  has  made  is  too 
insignificant  for  God  to  care  for.  He  cares  for  sparrows  (Matt.  i.  29),  and  for  oxen  (1 
Cor.  ix.  9),  and  why  not  for  man  (Matt.  x.  31)?  (2)  If  man  is  not  too  insignificant 
to  sin,  he  cannot  be  too  insignificant  for  God  to  keep  his  eye  upon.  The  capacity  of 
sinning  gives  man  an  innportanoe  in  God's  universe  that  he  would  not  otherwise  have 
possessed.  (3)  Though  man's  life  on  earth  be  short,  the  consequences  of  his  evil  deeds 
may  live  behind  him ;  hence  the  impossibility  of  God  withdrawing  his  control  of  mun- 
dane things.  (4)'The  charge  completely  falls  to  the  ground,  since  God  watches  over 
man,  not  in  an  evil  sense,  but  in  a  good.  2,  Unkind.  Job's  language  sets  forth  the 
Divine  conduct  in  a  most  offensive  light,  as  never  for  a  solitary  instant  looking  away 
from  man,  or  allowing  him  a  moment's  ease ;  but  harassing  him  so  incessantly  that  life 
becomes  a  burden,  pursuing  him  so  remorselessly  that,  do  what  he  will,  he  can  never 
get  out  of  the  Creator's  way.  Thank  God,  such  a  picture  is  only  true  of  the  impenitent. 
"  The  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil,  to  cut  off  the  remembrance  of  them 
from  the  earth "  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16).  3.  Unyradoua.  Granting  that  he  had  committed 
faults,  and  that  the  great  Man-watcher  had  detected  sin  in  his  past  life.  "  Why  dost 
thou  not  pardon  my  transgression  ? "  asks  Job,  "and  take  away  mine  iniquity?''  An 
exceedingly  natural  question,  not,  however,  because  man  is  so  insignificant  a  creature, 
and  human  life  so  evanescent,  and  sin  so  comparatively  trifling,  but  because  (1)  God 
is  essentially  merciful  and  gracious  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6) ;  (2)  in  the  exercise  of  mercy 
God  specially  delights  (Jer.  ix.  24 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25;  Ezek,  xxxiii.  11;  Micah  vii.  18) ; 
(3)  the  exercise  of  mercy  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  other  nttributes  of  his  Divine 
nature  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26) ;  (4)  mercy  more  than  justice  redounds  to  the  glory  of  God 
(Eom.  ix.  23  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  15 ;  Eph.  i.  6 ;  Jas.  ii.  13) ;  (5)  mercy  is  more  calculated  to 
soften  and  subdue  man  than  punishment ;  (6)  no  one  but  God  can  pardon  transgres- 
sion or  take  away  sin  (Ps.  xxxii.  5 ;  ciii.  3 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25 ;  Luke  v.  21) ;  and  (7)  God 
has  distinctly  promised  to  pardon  them  that  cast  themselves  upon  his  mercy  (Rom.  x. 
12,  13 ;  1  John  i.  9).  Yet  in  perfect  harmony  with  all  this,  the  awakened  sinner  may, 
like  Job,  he  denied  the  sense  or  the  outward  sign  of  forgiveness  (in  Job's  case  the 
removal  of  trouble),  because  (1)  he  does  not  ask  in  the  right  spirit,  with  humility  and 
self-abasement  (Ps.  xxxii.  5 ;  Ii.  4,  11),  asking  that  as  a  matter  of  right  which  can 
only  be  obtained  as  a  gift  of  grace, — men  who  think  they  have  a  claim  on  God  cannot 
be  forgiven  (Luke  xviii.  14) ;  (2)  he  does  not  ask  with  the  right  plea,  viz.  in  the  Name 
of  God  (Ps.,cvi.  8 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25)  or  of  Christ  (John  xiv.  13),  but  comes  expecting  to 
find  favour  on  the  ground  of  his  own  righteousness  (Rom.  ix.  32) ;  (3)  he  does  not  ask 
for  the  right  purpose,  his  object  being  escape  from  sin's  punishment  rather  than  from  sin 

JOB.  * 


130  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB,  [oh.  vii.  1— 21 


itself  (Jas.  iv.  3) ;  (4)  he  does  not  ask  with  sincere  faith,  but  staggprs  at  the  promise 
through  unbelief— ever  an  insuperable  barrier  to  forgiveness  (Jas.  i.  6) ;  and  sometimes 
(5),  though  he  asks,  God  may  have  reasons  for  delay  in  granting  the  soul's  request,  as 
e.g.  to  test  the  soul's  sincerity  or  earnestness,  to  complete  the  soul's  penitential  sub- 
mission, to  quicken  and  intensify  the  soul's  faith,  to  heighten  the  soul's  appreciation 
of  Divine  mercy  when  it  comes.  4.  Unwise.  "  For  how  shall  I  sleep  in  the  dust," 
etc.  Job  meant  to  say  that,  if  God  had  any  thoughts  of  mercy  toward  him  at  all,  it 
was  unwise  to  delay  putting  them  into  execution.  Burdened  with  misery  and  unpar- 
doned sin  as  he  was,  he  would  soon  be  gone.  The  pressure  of  such  calamities  as  he 
endured  must  soon  crush  him  into  his  grave ;  and  then,  should  God,  relenting,  seek  him 
to  extend  to  him  kindness,  lo  I  he  should  not  be.  A  beautiful  picture,  that  of  the 
Deity  relenting  towards  man  (cf.  Isa.  liv.  6—10;  Jer.  xxxi.  18—20);  an  impressive 
sermon,  th&t  now  is  the  day  of  grace  for  both  God  and  man — for  man  to  seek  (2  Cor. 
vi.  2),  and  for  God  to  grant  salvation  (John  ix.  4). 

Learn :  1.  That  the  most  maligned  Being  in  the  universe  is  God,  even  his  own 
people  not  always  speaking  him  fair.  2.  1'hat,  however  mean  and  insignificant  in 
himself,  man  has  been  more  magnified  by  God  than  any  other  of  his  creatures.  3. 
That  even  iifSictions  are  a  token  of  God's  desire  to  exalt  man,  since  only  through  them 
can  he  attain  to  purity.  4.  That  if  man's  miseries  are  a  heavy  burden  to  himself, 
man's  sins  are  a  heavier  to  God.  5.  That  if  man's  iniquities  are  not  removed,  the 
reason  lies  with  man,  and  not  with  God.  6.  That  God's  love  to  his  people  is  unchang- 
ing ;  since,  however  he  may  seem  to  be  angry  with  them,  he  is  certain  in  the  end  to 
relent.  7.  That  God  is  grieved  when  men  pass  away  from  earth  without  experiencing 
his  favour. 

Ver.  17. — "Lord,  what  is  manf"  I.  Thk  insignipioanoe  op  man.  1.  In  origin, 
allied  to  the  dust.  2.  In  character,  defiled  by  sin.  3.  In  experience,  weighted  with 
misery.  4.  In  duration,  short-lived  and  evanescent.  5.  In  destiny,  doomed  to 
dissolution. 

n.  The  greatness  or  man.  1.  Created  in  the  Divine  image.  2.  Preserved  by 
Divine  care.  3.  Redeemed  by  Divine  love.  4.  Benewed  (or  may  be)  by  Divine  grace. 
5.  Immortalized  (or  may  be)  by  Divine  life.  6.  Crowned  with  Divine  glory,  already 
in  Ciirist  Jesus,  and  afterwards  in  them  that  are  his. 

Lessons.  1.  Since  man  is  so  insignificant,  be  humble.  2.  Since  man  is  so  great 
be  good. 

Ver.  21. — A  sinner's  inquiry.    L  A  confession.    My  transgression,  mine  iniquity. 

II.  A  RECOGNITION.  Of :  1.  The  possibility  of  pardon.  2.  The  meaning  of  pardon 
— to  take  away  sin. 

III.  An  interrogation.  "  Why  dost  thou  not  take  away  mine  iniquity  ? "  1.  A 
question  natural  to  ask.    2.  A  question  easy  to  answer  (see  preceding  homiletics). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  weakness  of  man  ;  appeal  to  the  clemency  of  God.  I.  General 
VIEW  OF  man's  misery  AND  HIS  OWN.  (Vors.  1 — 5.)  Man  is  compared  to  a  hireling 
witli  an  appointed  time  of  service,  the  end  of  which  is  wearily  and  wistfully  looked  for; 
The  ideas  suggested  are  (1)  toilsomeness ;  (2)  fatigue  and  exhaustion ;  (3)  intense 
longing  for  rest.  As  the  slave  longs  for  the  lenglhening  shadows  of  evening,  the  hired 
labourer  for  pay-time,  so  the  oppressed  sufl'erer,  toiling  beneath  a  load  of  pain,  longs  for 
the  welcome  end  of  death.  He  "  would  'twere  bedtime,  and  all  well."  Voluntary  anc 
moderate  labour  is  one  of  the  keenest  delights  of  life ;  but  forced  and  prolongud  loii 
exhausts  the  very  springs  of  enjoyment.  Rest  is  the  reward  of  moderate  exertion,  bui 
to  the  excessive  toiler  or  sufferer  it  is  denied.  We  have  a  picture  here  of  the  extreme 
misery  of  sleeplessness,  than  which  none  can  be  more  acute ;  the  tossing  through  tho 
wakeful  hours  of  darkness,  the  mind  travelling  over  and  over  again  the  same  weai\ 
track  of  its  melancholy  contemplations.  It  may  be  appropriate  here  to  think  of  the 
freat  blessing  of  sleep.    Homer  termed  it  "  ambrosiaL"     It  was  one  of  the  great  boons 


CH.  VU.1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  131 

of  HeaTen  to  suffering  mortald.  It  is  "the  season  of  all  natures,"  as  Shakespeare 
beautifully  says.  It  is  the  preservation  of  sanity.  Connected  with  this,  the  lesson  of 
moderate  exertion  is  one  needed  by  many  in  these  busy,  striving  days ;  and  no  less 
the  fault  of  over-anxiety,  and  the  duty  of  casting  care  upon  God,  ou  which  the  gospel 
insists  so  strongly.  It  is  the  life  according  to  our  true  nature,  and  according  to  simple 
piety,  which  brings  sound  sleep  by  night,  and  healthy  thought  by  day. 

II.  Reflection  on  the  bbbvitt  of  life,  and  peateb.  (Vers.  6 — 10.)  The  mood 
of  self-pity  continues.  Then  follows  a  lament  on  the  shortness  of  life.  It  is  compared 
to  a  weaver's  shuttle,  to  smoke,  to  the  vanishing  of  a  cloud,  as  it  is  elsewhere 
compared  (ch.  ix.  25)  to  the  hasty  passage  of  a  courier,  or,  in  the  well-known 
old  story  of  English  history,  to  the  flight  of  a  bird  through  a  hall  and  out  into  the 
darkness  again.  We  may  compare  the  following  plaintive  passage  liom  the  Greek  poet 
.^schylus : — 

•  Ah  I  friend,  behold  and  see 

What's  all  the  beauty  of  hnmanity  ? 

Can  it  be  fair? 

What's  all  the  strength  ?  can  it  be  strong  1 

And  what  hope  can  they  bear. 

These  dying  livers — living  one  day  long  ? 

Ah  1  seest  thou  not,  my  friend. 

How  feeble  and  slow 

And  like  a  dream  doth  go 

Tliis  poor  blind  manhood, drifted  from  its  end?" 

(Mrs.  B.  B.  Browning's  translation.) 

We  may  draw  from  this  passage  the  following  lessons :  1.  There  is  a  constant  sense 
of  infirmity  in  human  nature,  and  of  the  inexorable  law  of  death,  2.  The  mind  cannot 
submit  patiently  to  this  doom.  Dear  earthly  affections  (ver.  8)  cry  out  against  it,  and 
unconsciously  witness  for  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  3.  The  thought  of  utter 
extinction  cannot  be  endured  by  an  awakened  and  elevated  spirit  (ver.  10),  These 
impotences  and  reluctances  in  the  presence  of  decay  and  death  are  really  tokens  of 
immortality.  We  see  them  to  be  so  in  this  instance,  in  an  age  when  life  and  immor- 
tality were  not  brought  to  light.  4.  The  natural  relief  from  all  such  sorrows  and 
perplexities  is  in  prayer  (ver,  7),  The  cry,  "  Oh,  remember  I  "  is  not  unheard  by  him 
who  knows  our  frame  and  remembers  that  we  are  dust.  There  may  be  the  clear 
consciousness  of  God  where  there  is  not  the  definite  assurance  of  immortality.  But  a 
firm  faith  in  him,  when  cherished  and  educated,  leads  ultimately  to  the  conviction  that 
the  soul  cannot  perish. — J. 

Vers.  11 — 16.— Fresh  recourse  to  the  relief  of  words.  The  prayer  seems,  in  this  dark 
state  of  despondency,  in  vain ;  and  Job's  despair  overflows  all  bounds  and  pours  itself 
forth  in  a  dark  stream  of  thoughts  and  words, 

L  Sufferings  misdndebstood.  One  might  suppose,  he  argues,  from  these  intense 
oppressions,  that  he  was  some  dangerous  creature,  who  could  not  be  chained  down  too 
closely  nor  be  watched  too  narrowly  (ver.  12) — one  to  whom  not  a  moment's  rest  must 
be  given,  that  he  may  not  in  his  freedom  commit  some  terrible  injury.  But  is  he  such 
a  being?  is  he  a  sea,  or  a  living  monster  of  the  deep,  to  be  so  sharply  tormented  and 
guarded  by  God  ?  Just  so,  he  says  (ch.  xiii.  27),  "  Thou  puttest  my  feet  in  the  stocks, 
and  watchest  narrowly  all  my  paths ;  thou  settest  a  print  upon  the  heels  of  my  feet." 
Not  even  in  sleep  can  he  find  rest — weakest  and  least  dangerous  of  creatures  though  he 

II.  Bash  ebsolves  of  dbspaib.  (Vers,  16, 16.)  He  will  rather  be  stifled,  or  in  any 
way  court  death,  than  longer  carry  about  this  living  skeleton,  this  wretched  body 
which  consists  only  of  bones  (comp.  ch.  xix.  20).  He  has  a  disgust  for  life,  will  not 
live  for  ever,  for  he  has  already  lived  too  long.  ,,„,.»-,  ,       , 

III  Appeal  to  the  jtrsTioB  of  God.  (Vers.  17 — 21.)  After  a  renewed  and 
passionate  demand  (ver.  16)  that  God  may  give  him  at  least  a  moment's  rest,  since  his 
Me  is  already  as  good  as  vanished,  and  cannot  abide,  his  language  becomes  somewhat 
more  tranquil  and  contemplative.  1.  Questionings  :  the  insignificance  of  mam,  as  an 
Oieet  of  Divine  regard.     (Vers,  17—19.)     We  may  compare  the  question  of  the 


132  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [en.  vii- 1— 21. 


paalmist  (Ps.  viil.  4).  It  is  there  snggested  hy  the  magDificence  of  the  mighty  heavens : 
what  is  man  in  comparison  with  that  vast  and  hrilliant  aggregate  of  constellations  ? 
Here  the  question  is  suggested  by  the  greatness  of  the  sufferer's  misery.  What 
worth  can  he  possess  either  for  good  or  for  evil,  that  be  should  be  made  the  object  of 
this  incessant  Divine  attention?  The  answer  to  these  obstinate  questionings  is  found 
in  the  gospel.  There  man  learns  that  it  is  the  greatness  and  the  value  of  the  soul  which 
makes  him  the  object  of  the  Divine  pursuit ;  and  then  he  learns,  above  all,  that  that 
pursuit  is  not  inspired  by  the  vengeance  of  an  irritated  adversary,  or  the  caprice  of  an 
unjust  tormentor,  but  by  the  love  of  an  eternal  Father,  who  chastises  men  for  their 
profit,  that  they  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness.  2.  Consciousness  of  guilt.  (Vers. 
20,  21.)  For  the  first  time  there  is  a  reference  on  the  part  of  Job  to  the  concealed 
cause  of  suSering — sin.  But  it  is  only  a  general  consciousness  of  infirmity,  and  an 
admission  that  possibly  there  may  have  been  unwitting  error  on  his  part.  He  cannot 
confess  a  special  sin  of  which  his  friends  suppose  him  guilty,  but  of  which  his  con- 
science is  free.  The  words  are  rendered  by  some,  "  If  I  failed  in  that  which  I  do 
unto  thee,  Preserver  of  men,  why,"  etc.  ?  Thus  deeper  than  the  sense  of  sin,  deepest 
conviction  of' all  in  his  heart,  is:  3.  Instinctive  trust  in  the  goodness  of  Ood,  fiia 
reasoning  is  as  follows :  It  may  be  necessary  that  God  should  punish  man  for  g'jilt ; 
but  is  thin  to  hold  so  strictly  that  every  slightest  omission  is  severely  scrutinized  and 
sorely  punished  by  God?  Surely  man  is  neither  so  strong  for  resistance  to  error,  noi 
BO  dangerous,  that  he  should  be  treated  so  harshly  and  jealously  ?  Why,  if  there  has 
been  some  fault  ia  the  conduct  of  Job,  as  seen  by  those  all-penetrating  eyes,  does  God 
loose  all  his  arrows  against  him  like  a  hunter  aiming  at  a  fixed  mark  (oomp.  oh.  vL  4 ; 
xvi.  12),  shooting  at  him  the  poisonous  darts  of  disease  and  suffering  till  he  can  no 
longer  endure  himself?  Why  does  not  God  rather  pardon  him  before  it  is  too  late,  as, 
alas  1  according  to  all  appearance,  it  now  is,  as  Job  sees  nothing  before  him  but  the 
grave  ?  This  is  no  conflict  of  an  infidel  or  rebellious  spirit  against  its  Maker.  It  is  the 
pleading  of  a  true  child  with  its  Father  in  heaven.  It  is  the  struggle  of  the  soul 
against  the  iron  pressure  of  that  which  we  have  learned  to  call  natural  law.  The 
individual  suffers,  is  sometimes  crushed  by  natural  law,  while  the  mass  are  benefited. 
But  above  law  is  God.  And  out  of  this  long  picture  of  troubled  thought  the  truth 
will  presently  flash  into  splendour,  that  in  that  loving  and  holy  will  of  a  Father  the 
soul,  emancipated  &om  the  troubles  of  time,  shall  find  its  eternal  rest.— J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — 2%e  days  of  the  hireling.  Job  speaks  from  the  depth  of  suffering,  and 
as  yet  he  has  no  clear  light  upon  the  Divine  purpose  concerning  him.  God,  who  ia 
his  true  Refuge,  appears  to  be  his  Enemy;  and  he  likens  his  miserable  days  to  those  ol 
the  oppressed  slave.  This  he  urges  as  a  justification  of  the  longing  for  rest  which  ha 
has  expressed.  For  him  there  is  no  prospect  of  that  rest  but  in  the  grave.  It  ia  the 
cry  of  bitter  subjection. 

1.  The  comparison  of  human  life  to  that  of  the  hireling.  It  is  an  appointed 
lot.  It  is  a  lot  of  subjection.  It  is  a  life  of  toil  and  weariness.  In  Job's  case  the 
comparison  is  most  apt.  But  his  thought  is  especially  upon  the  longing  of  the  hireling 
for  the  close  of  the  day.  For  this  the  toil,  the  heat,  the  weariness,  prepare  him.  Job's 
condition  is  one  of  hard  toil.  He  is  weary  even  of  his  life.  And  his  longing  for  the 
rest  which  death  alone  can  bring  is  the  precise  point  of  his  comparison.  How  often 
does  life  present  no  brighter  or  more  beauteous  aspect  I  Its  many  cares,  its  disappoint- 
ments, its  multiplied  sorrows  and  keen,  penetrating  pains  make  lifo  to  many  to  be  as 
the  hard  drudgery  of  the  hireling.  How  many  long  for  death  as  the  hireling  for  night  I 
In  a  true  sense  life  is  the  life  of  a  hireling,  and  the  good  Master  who  has  sent  us  into 
his  vineyard  to  toil  will  reward  the  faithful  labourer  with  his  sufficient  hire. 
_  II.  The  AoaBAVATioNS  of  Job's  lot.  He  is  to  his  own  view  as  one  whose  toil 
IS  a  grievous  one.  He  is  more  than  weary;  and  his  longing  for  the  shadows  of 
evenmg  is  justified  by  what  seems  to  him  to  be  the  hardness  of  his  taskmaster. 
Earnestly  he  "desireth  the  shadow;"  for  long  "months  of  vanity"  he  is  "made  to 
possess,"  and  "wearisome  nights  are  appointed"  to  him.  When  the  tired  labourer 
lies  down  to  rest  in  unconscious  sleep,  and  to  gain  strength  for  the  toil  of  the  morrow. 
Job  IS  "full  of  tossings  to  and  fro."  The  dawn  brings  him  no  refreshment.  The 
farered  night  leaves  him  to  encounter  unprepared  the  enemy  of  the  day.    His  poor 


OH.  vn.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  138 

afflicted  body  presents  the  saddest  picture ;  "  worms  and  clods  of  dast "  clothe  it.  His 
"  skin  is  broken ; "  his  sores  make  his  flesh  "  loathsome  "  to  him,  aud  his  "  days  are 
spent  without  hope."  From  such  a  sufferer  comes  the  word  of  complaining.  It  is 
little  to  be  wondered  at  by  one  who  remembers  his  own  frailty.  The  picture  of  Job 
is  a  lesson  for  us,  and,  turning  our  thoughts  from  our  own  healthy  life  to  the  sufferings 
of  the  afflicted,  let  us  Jearn  our  duty,  and  cherish  :  1.  The  pitifulness  of  spirit  which 
is  due  to  all  sufferers.  2.  Their  claim  upon  our  help  and  sympathy.  3.  The  forbear- 
ance with  which  we  should  hear  their  complainings.  4.  We  also  may,  in  our  turn, 
become  the  sufferers,  and  need  the  comfort  we  now  give  to  others.  Thus  may  each 
man  see  himself  in  every  sufferer,  and  learn  to  give  that  consolation  he  himself  so  soon 
may  need.— B.  G. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  wearinets  of  sorrow.    Expressing  Itself — 

I.  In   A   DESIEK   FOB   THE   GLOBE   OF   LIFE.      (Ver.  2.) 

II.  Ab  a  continuous  disappointment.    (Ver.  3.) 

III.  As   A   CEASELESS  RESTLESSNESS.      (Ver.  4.) 

lY.   As   A  BEVOLT   FBOU  THE   FAINFULNESS  OF   ITS  OIRCnilSTANOlSS.      (Ver.  6.) 

V.  As  A  CONDITION  OF  HOPELESSNESS.     (Ver.  6.) B.  G. 

Vers.  6 — 9.— 2%e  epeedy  flight  of  life.  In  the  multitude  of  his  thoughts  within 
him.  Job  glances  at  many  of  the  painful  aspects  of  life.  His  view  is  influenced  by  the 
condition  of  his  spirit.  With  a  longing  for  the  grave,  he  nevertheless  mourns  over  the 
rapid  flight  of  his  few  days  upon  earth.  Such  a  reflection  every  one  may  wisely  make. 
Consider  the  expressive  similes  in  which  Job  sees  his  hasty  life  represented.  1.  His 
days  are  swifter  than  the  weaver's  shuttle  (ver.  6).  2.  They  are  as  the  wind  (ver.  7). 
3.  They  are  as  the  glance  of  the  eye  (ver.  8).  4.  They  are  as  the  cloud  which  is  con- 
sumed, and  which  vanisheth  away  (ver.  9).  To  what  course  of  conduct  should  such  a 
reflection  lead  ?  If  life  be  so  swiltly  passed,  can  anything  be  done  to  abate  its  apparent 
evil?  What  is  becoming  to  him  whose  days  thus  flee  away?  1.  A  diligent  and 
careful  use  and  husbanding  of  time.  2.  A  concentration  of  attention  on  life's  essential 
work,  avoiding  all  frivolous  occupations  of  time  which  rob  the  soul  of  its  days  and 
leave  no  residuum  of  blessing  or  benefit.  3.  A  careful  guard  against  confining  the 
pursuits  of  life  to  those  things  which  can  be  attMned  only  in  this  present  world,  4. 
A  just  estimate  of  the  value  of  immortality,  and  a  due  attention  to  the  interests  that 
relate  to  it.  5.  A  patient  endurance  of  life's  sorrows,  seeing  they  will  soon  close ;  and 
a  moderate  absorption  in  life's  pleasures,  for  they  speedily  pass  away.  Life  is  very 
brief,  but  it  is  long  enough  to  enable  every  one  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  to  prepare 
himself  for  that  eternal  life,  and  to  do  work  that  hereafter  may  be  reflected  upon  with 
pleasure. — B.  Q. 

Vers,  11 — 16. — The  cry  of  despair.  Job  is  in  the  depth  of  his  suffering.  His  heart 
is  sore  broken.  He  bursts  forth  with  his  loud  complaint,  which  he  can  no  longer 
restrain.  His  spirit  seeks  relief  in  its  cry.  Every  cry  is  supposed  to  give  relief.  But 
the  bitter  cry  of  despair,  coming  up  from  the  depths  of  excruciating  sorrow,  often 
marks  the  turning-point  in  the  history  of  suffering.  Its  vanity  aud  uselessness  being 
made  apparent,  the  soul  returns  to  a  calmer  and  more  collected  state. 

I.  The  cbt  op  despaib  is  weung  from  the  heaet  only  nst  its  extbemest  suffeb- 
INQS.  Brave  aud  strong  as  the  human  spirit  may  be  under  suffering,  there  comes  a 
moment  when  its  strength  fails.  It  reaches  a  climax  of  pain  and  anguish.  It  can 
hold  out  no  more ;  and,  in  the  passionate  haste  for  relief,  seeks  it  in  its  wild  cry  of 
despair.    "  I  will  speak  in  the  anguish  of  my  spirit." 

II.  The  cey  of  despaib  ib  vain.  It  fails  to  give  ease  to  the  suffering  flesh;  and, 
though  an  expression  of  the  soul's  anguish,  in  itself  it  is  powerless  to  relieve  that 
anguish.  It  is  liable  to  exoite  but  to  rebelliousness.  It  is  as  the  struggle  of  one 
enclosed  in  a  strong  net ;  or  as  the  folly  of  a  child,  in  wild  passion,  kicking  with  bare 
foot  against  the  stony  rock. 

III.  The  cby  of  despair,  being  often,  ab  herb,  a  cry  of  defiant  complaint, 
TBNPS  to  rouse  the  soul  to  wicked  rebelliousness.  There  is  no  restraint  put 
VOOk  the  agitated  soul.    It  is  let  loose  in  unrestricted  freedom  to  declare,  not  its  calm 


184  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [CH.  to.  1—21. 


judgment,  but  its  uttermost  complaint,  goaded  on  by  the  severities  of  acute  suffering. 
"  I  will  not  refrain  my  mouth." 

IV.  The  cby  of  despair  springs  from,  and  at  the  same  time  promotes, 
ERRONEOUS  VIEWS  OF  LIFE  AND  ITS  ISSUES.  .Tob  is  SO  far  led  astray  that  he  chooses 
"strangling  and  death  rather  than  l:fe."  So  completely  is  his  judgment  in  abeyance 
that  he  knows  no  other  alternative.  Possibly  it  is  the  aim  of  the  poet  to  show  that 
Job's  knowledge  of  the  future  is  insufficient  to  counteract  the  sorrows  and  evils  of  the 
present. 

V.  The  CRT  of  despair  is  deservin&  of  pitt.  When  the  soul  is  driven  by  fierce 
affliction  to  such  an  extremity,  it  is  a  proper  object  for  the  most  tender  compassion 
and  patient  forbearance.  As  men  are  patient  with  the  demented,  so  they  have  need 
to  be  with  him  who,  by  despair,  is  driven  off  from  the  balanced,  calm  judgment  and  just 
thought. 

"VI.  It  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  the  cry  of  human  despair  pierces  to  the 
KAB  OF  THE  ALMIGHTY,  THE  All-hblpfol  Onk.  Even  the  sigh  of  a  contrite  heart 
is  beard ;  so  also  the  wail  of  despair.  The  human  extremity  is  the  Divine  oppor- 
tunity.   Job  will  ultimately  prove  that  God  has  not  forgotten  him. — ^B.  G. 

Ver.  17. — "  What  is  man  f  "  The  answer  to  this  question  must  come  from  afar. 
No  sudden  or  hasty  conclusion  must  be  made.  The  whole  conditions  under  irhich 
life  is  held,  the  influence  which  life  exerts,  the  final  issue  of  life  with  all  other  con- 
siderations, must  be  regarded.  Here  frail,  perishing  man  is  seen  to  be  magnified  by 
God,  who  sets  his  heart  upon  him  and  visits  him  every  moment.  Why  is  so  much 
made  of  life  ?  "  What  must  man  he  that  thou  takest  such  knowledge  of  him  ?  "  The 
answer  is  only  to  be  found  in  a  just  view  of  the  real  greatness  of  human  life.  The 
human  greatness  is  seen — 

I.  In  the  capabilities  of  the  human  mind.  All  truth  may  be  stored  in  it. 
It  is  exalted  by  its  great  capacities  for  knowledge,  memoiy,  reason,  judgment,  etc. 

II.  In  the  capacity  of  the  human  spirit  foe  righteousness.  Every  holy 
emotion  may  find  a  home  in  the  human  soul.  Every  lofty  sentiment  sweep  across  it 
as  any  strain  across  a  lyre.  All  holy  affections  may  be  cherished.  Man  may  know 
and  love  the  highest  objects  of  knowledge  and  affection.  He  may  illustrate  nobleness, 
patience,  charity,  faith,  hope,  gentleness — every  grace. 

III.  Human  greatness  is  further  seen  in  the  widespread  influence  of 
human  action.  To-day  the  world  is  living  in  the  light  of  the  deeds  ot  Job's  life.  The 
impulses  of  the  deeds  of  past  millenniums  are  felt  to-day.  A  wide  illustration 
possible. 

IV.  In  the  skilfulness  of  the  human  hand. 

V.  In  the  supremacy  of  man  in  the  earth. 

VI.  In  the  destiny  of  man,  and  especially  in  his  endowment  of  immortality. 
Although  of  earth,  he  aspires  to  heaven;  though  a  child  of  time,  he  rises  to  eternity ; 
though  sinful,  he  can  illustrate  all  holiness. 

Vn.  The  highest  evidence  of  the  greatness  of  the  human  life  seen  in  the 
Incarnation,  wherein  the  Divine  life  could  manifest  itself  through  the  medium  of  the 
human.  When  life  is  thus  duly  estimated,  and  when  it  is  known  that  the  sorrows 
of  life  are  used  for  its  chastening  and  perfecting,  then  the  answer  is  found  to  the  ques- 
tion— Why  dost  thou  "  try  him  every  moment "  ?  It  is  because  life  is  so  precious 
and  so  capable  of  culture  and  deserving  of  it,  that  he  thus  seeks  to  discipline,  refine, 
instruct,  and  perfect  it. — E.  G. 

Vers.  1-^3. — The  days  of  a  hireling..    Job  compares  himself  to  a  mercenary  in  war 

and  to  a  hired  servant  at  work.  As  these  men  have  little  interest  in  what  they  are 
doing,  partly  because  the  masters  who  hire  them  take  little  interest  in  them.  Job  feels 
his  life  but  a  weariness,  and  longs  for  the  term  of  his  service  to  expire. 

I.  Life  may  appear  like  the  days  of  a  hireling.  1.  It  involves  hard  toil.  The 
lot  of  most  men  is  not  easy ;  but  some  find  life  a  grinding  servitude.  2.  Its  labour  is 
often  weary  and  unattractive.  Many  people  have  to  work  at  uninteresting  tasks,  and 
only  regard  their  labour  as  drudgery.  There  is  neither  pleasure  iu  the  woik  nor  pride 
in  the  result  of  it.    If  men  could  all  choose  their  lots,  many  of  the  most  necessary 


OB.  TO.  1—21,]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  135 

iodustries  would  be  entirely  abandoned.  3.  It  is  only  undertaken  for  the  sake  of  its 
rewards.  Men  work  for  wages,  and,  needing  the  wages,  they  endure  the  toil  which 
they  detest.  This  is  not  only  true  of  what  is  called  the  wage-earning  portion  of  the 
community.  It  applies  also  to  many  who  seem  to  be  their  own  masters,  but  whose 
work  is  undertaken  solely  for  the  remuneration  which  it  brings  in.  4.  I'he  supreme 
Master  is  not  seen  to  take  interest  in  his  servants.  The  laws  of  life  are  inexorable. 
There  is  no  evading  the  rules  of  God's  great  factory  in  which  we  are  all  set  to  work. 
Men  fall  and  die  at  their  tasks  without  visible  signs  of  compassion  from  their  Lord. 
Th  us  faith  is  severely  tried,  and  some  weakly  ones  sink  to  low  views  of  life  and  of  man's 
relations  to  God. 

II.  It  is  neither  HELPPOTi  nor  bight  to  regard  life  as  the  DATS  Oir  A  HIRE- 
LING. 1.  It  is  not  helpful.  Hireling  service  is  never  of  any  great  value.  The  work  that 
is  only  done  for  pay  is  apt  to  be  done  hastily  if  by  the  piece,  and  in  a  wastefully  slow 
and  slovenly  fashion  if  by  the  hour.  Until  a  man  puts  his  heart  into  his  task,  he  cannot 
put  good  work  into  it.  No  one  can  live  a  worthy  life  chiefly  in  the  hope  of  its  rewards. 
The  service  of  God  which  is  only  undertaken  that  good  things  may  be  obtained  from 
God  is  degrading  and  Of  little  worth.  The  Christian  who  lives  solely  on  the  hope  of 
heaven  is  spending  a  poor  life  on  earth.  We  have  to  discover  higher  motives  and  to 
serve  God  joyfully  and  lovingly,  because  his  service  is  delightful,  and  because  we  love 
him.  2.  It  is  not  right.  The  hireling  idea  of  life  is  delusively  suggested  to  us  by  a 
superficial  view  of  facts  and  by  a  low  tone  in  our  own  minds.  But  it  is  completely 
false,  for  God  does  not  treat  us  as  hirelings.  He  knows  our  frame,  and  remembers  that 
we  are  dust.  He  is  our  Father,  and  he  pities  us  as  his  children.  And  therefore  we 
owe  to  him  more  than  a  hired  servant's  drudgery — we  owe  filial  obedience  and  the  rich 
service  of  love.  Now,  when  we  have  learnt  to  take  right  views  of  God  and  his  service, 
the  miserable,  degrading  idea  of  the  hireling's  lot  drops  off,  and  a  much  nobler  and 
happier  conceptiou  of  life  dawns  upon  us.  Then  the  most  common  task  ceases  to  be  a 
piece  of  drudgery  and  becomes  a  labour  of  love.  By  a  gracious  law  of  providence  it 
seems  to  be  ordered  that  any  duty  which  is  undertaken  conscientiously  and  heartily 
becomes  interesting  and  even  a  source  of  pleasure.  So  while  the  hireling  longs  for  the 
shadow  that  tells  of  the  declining  day  and  of  the  end  of  his  task,  the  faithful  Christian 
makes  the  most  of  bis  day  of  service,  knowing  "  that  the  night  cometh,  wherein  no 
man  can  work." — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. —  The  weaver's  shuttle.  This  is  one  of  the  many  emblems  of  the  brevity  of 
life  which  carry  a  certain  subtle  suggestiveness  of  deeper  meanings  in  spite  of  the 
minimizing  pessimism  that  seems  to  be  their  sole  prompting  cause.  The  shuttle  flies 
swiftly  across  the  web.    What  does  this  fact  suggest  ? 

I.  The  melancholy  brevity  op  life.  "  The  velocity  of  time,"  says  Seneca,  "  is 
infinite,  and  is  most  apparent  to  those  who  look  back."  This  is  one  of  the  most  trite 
topics  of  conventional  moralists.  Yet  it  is  one  which  each  individual  man  feels  wiih 
a  startled  shock  of  surprise  when  it  comes  directly  home  to  him  in  experience.  Wo 
say  that  life  is  short,  but  we  do  not  believe  it  till  we  are  reminded  of  the  fact  by  ugly 
surprises.  Then  we  feel  that  the  flying  shuttle,  the  melting  shadow,  the  tale  hastening 
to  a  close,  are  not  more  transitory  than  life.  We  are  but  creatures  of  a  day  In  the 
light  of  God's  eternity. 

II.  The  vanity  of  earthly  ambitions.  We  lay  our  foundations,  but  we  have 
not  time  to  put  the  corner-stone  on  our  cherished  design  before  we  are  called  hence. 
The  tools  drop  from  our  hands  ere  we  have  accomplished  our  purposes.  The  mirage 
of  life  fades  before  its  paradise  has  been  attained.  We  start  with  great  hopes,  but  our 
hairs  are  gray  before  we  have  begun  to  realize  them,  and  we  are  in  our  graves  before 
they  are  fulfilled. 

III.  The  folly  of  impatience.  Let  us  be  fair.  If  the  joys  of  life  are  fleeting,  so 
also  are  its  pains.  Though  our  lot  be  hard,  the  hardship  will  not  be  long.  Job  seems 
to  complain  that,  if  life  is  so  short,  it  is  cruel  to  spoil  it  with  trouble.  It  seems  sad 
that  so  little  a  day  should  be  robbed  of  its  brief  sunshine.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
if  the  day  is  one  of  pain  and  bitterness,  may  we  not  be  thankful  that  the  evening 
hasteneth  on  ? 

IV.  The  duty  of  unselfishnkss.    We  make  too  much  of  our  own  individual  lives, 


138  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  vn.  1—21. 

as  though  the  world  existed  for  ourselves.  This  is  like  the  shuttle  fancying  that  the 
loom  belongs  to  It,  and  was  made  entirely  to  suit  its  convenience.  Nay,  it  is  worse; 
it  is  like  the  shuttle  thinking  the  loom  was  made  for  one  throw,  one  thread.  We  must 
learQ  to  understand  that  we  exist  for  a  larger  purpose.  Slowly  enough  the  great  web 
of  time  is  woven,  though  each  throw  of  the  shuttle  is  so  swift.  God  is  thinking  of 
the  whole. 

V.  The  mtstebt  of  a  Divinb  purpose.  The  shuttle  knows  not  why  it  is  flung 
across  the  threads.  But  it  is  working  out  an  unseen  design.  The  seemingly  aimless 
and  wasted  throw  is  essential  to  the  weaving  of  the  jjattein  of  the  whole  fabric. 
God  has  a  purpose  with  each  of  our  lives.  Even  the  briefest  life  which  is  lived  in 
obedience  to  Gk)d  cannot  be  wasted.  God's  great  loom  will  work  it  into  his  eternal 
design. 

VI.  The  necebsitt  of  a  future  life.  The  animals  are  satisfied  with  their 
ephemeral  existence.  They  have  no  melancholy  reflections  on  the  brevity  of  life.  It 
is  only  to  man  that  this  earthly  existence  seems  to  be  contemptibly  short.  Why? 
Because  in  his  breast  there  dwells  the  instinct  of  immortality — an  instinct  whose  very 
existence  is  a  mute  prophecy  of  its  future  satisfaction,  since  he  who  planted  it  will  not 
disappoint  it.  The  shuttle  is  not  destroyed  after  its  swift  flight.  This  brief  life  carries 
us  on  to  the  endless  ages  of  the  Divine  future, — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  vanishing  doud.  Job  conceives  of  life  as  even  more  transient 
than  the  weaver's  shuttle.  It  does  not  only  pass  swiftly  away ;  it  melts  into  nothing- 
ness, and  ceases  to  be  like  the  cloud  that  evaporates  in  the  heiit  of  the  rising  son.  The 
journey  to  the  grave  knows  no  return.  Here  we  have  the  limited,  melancholy  view  of 
death  which  was  prevalent  in  Old  Testament  times,  but  which  should  be  dispelled 
by  the  glorious  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  which  Christ  has  brought  to  light. 

I.  Lost  time  is  iubkcotebable.  We  can  never  overtake  the  days  that  we  have 
let  slip  by  us  in  heedless  idleness.  A  wasted  youth  is  an  irretrievable  disaster;  man- 
hood cannot  possibly  go  back  and  make  up  for  the  deficiencies  of  youth.  At  best 
we  can  but  do  the  duties  of  to-day;  it  will  be  foolish  to  neglect  these  in  attempting  to 
pick  up  those  of  yesterday.  A  misused  opportunity  will  never  return.  The  memoriea 
of  a  happy  and  long-lost  past  may  dwell  with  us  as  sweetest  dreams,  but  they  can 
never  bring  back  the  days  of  old.  Joy,  sorrows,  busy  scenes,  quiet  scenes, — all  have 
melted  away  like  the  mountains  and  palaces  of  cloudland. 

II.  Babthlt  life  will  hevbb  betubn.  The  pagan  doctrine  of  metempsychosis 
finds  no  support  in  Scripture.  We  live  but  once  on  earth.  Let  us,  then,  make  the 
best  of  this  one  earthly  life ;  it  is  the  only  one  we  have.  We  might  think  we  could 
afford  to  squander  it  a  little  recklessly  if  we  had  a  dozen  more  lives  to  fall  back  upon. 
But  we  have  no  reserves.  All  our  forces  are  in  the  field.  We  must  win  the  battle  at 
once  or  we  shall  be  utterly  undone.  The  duties,  joys,  sorrows,  of  life  are  with  us 
this  once.  Let  us  use  them  in  the  highest  possible  service,  that  our  one  life  may  be 
a  good  life.  Our  dear  ones  are  with  us  for  one  life  only.  Let  us  be  patient  with  them 
and  kind  to  them.  When  we  have  lost  them  we  can  never  have  them  back  to  atone 
for  our  ungenerous  treatment  of  them. 

III.  We  have  this  one  oppobtunity  of  prbpabing  fob  the  futubb.  We  now 
know  that  death  does  not  end  all.  But  it  ends  the  sowing-time.  After  death  there  is 
the  harvest.  What  is  sown  in  the  present  Ufe  must  be  reaped  in  the  great  coming  s^e. 
If  this  life  is  misspent,  it  will  go  for  ever,  and  we  shall  have  no  opportunity  to  come 
back  to  the  world  and  make  a  better  preparation  for  the  great  day  of  reckoning.  We 
cannot  buy  oil  for  our  vessels  when  the  cry  of  the  bridegroom's  coming  awakes  the 
night. 

IV.  Wk  can  look  foewabd  to  Bisraa  to  a  better  life.  It  is  foolish  to  take 
01(1  Testament  texts  as  giving  us  a  finality  of  truth.  In  their  limitation  they  some- 
times show  us  only  the  imperfection  of  the  earlier  knowledge.  Job  did  not  know  the 
Christian  revelation  of  redemption,  though  sometimes  he  seems  to  have  caught  glimpses 
of  it.  But  we,  knowing  more,  should  have  brighter  hopes.  Our  guide  is  not  Job  in 
his  despair,  but  Christ  in  his  victory.  We  shall  not  rise  on  earth.  But  we  can  look 
forward  to  a  resurrection-life  in  heaven,  when  we  shall  meet  those  long-lost  but  never- 
forgotten  friends  who  have  gone  on  before  ub. — W.  F.  A. 


OH.  vn.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  137 

Ver.  14. — Scared  mth  dreams.  This  seems  to  be  one  of  the  symptoms  of  Job's 
terrible  disease,  elephantiasis.  Sleep  even  does  not  give  him  rest  from  his  sufferings. 
The  bodily  torments  of  the  day  only  give  place  to  horrible  dreams  and  alarming  visions 
at  night. 

I.  Dream-tekrobs  arb  real  in  experienck  Look  at  the  man  in  a  nightmare, 
how  he  groans  and  shrieks !  We  smile  at  his  fancied  troubles.  Yet  to  him,  while  h« 
endures  them,  they  are  very  real.  We  feel  according  to  our  subjective  state,  not 
according  to  our  objective  circumstances.  Souls  are  tortured  by  "day-dreams  which 
have  no  better  foundation  than  those  of  the  night,  yet  are  not  their  distresses  the  less 
acute.  Superstition  peoples  the  heavens  with  dream-fancies  of  horror.  There  are  no 
corresponding  realities.  Yet  the  victims  of  supi  rstition  are  in  real  agony.  An  enormous 
amount  of  terrible  mental  suffering  seems  to  be  experienced  by  the  heathen  in  their 
superstitious  terrors  of  malignant  divinities.  One  happy  result  of  Christian  missionary 
work  is  to  sweep  away  those  gloomy  dreams,  and  bring  the  peace  and  confidence  of 
Christian  dajlight  to  the  benighted  regions  of  the  world. 

II.  Some  of  gob  worst  distresses  have  no  better  foundation  than  idle 
DREAMS.  Tliey  are  terrible  so  long  as  we  are  under  their  spell ;  but  if  wc  only  knew 
they  were  but  fancies  of  the  diseased  mind,  we  should  be  relieved  of  their  incubus. 
Note  some  of  these.  1  I%e  idea  that  God  is  opposed  to  us.  This  was  Job's  thought. 
He  thought  that  even  his  ill  dreams  came  from  God,  and  that  it  was  God  who  was  scaring 
him.  The  too  common  notion  in  religion  was  and  is  that  God  is  averse  to  us,  and  that 
we  have  to  do  something  to  win  his  favour,  whereas  the  Scriptures  tell  us  that  he 
loves  us  and  seeks  us  to  be  reconciled  to  him,  and  that,  instead  of  our  needing  to  do 
something  to  make  him  gracious,  he  has  given  his  Son  to  redeem  us  to  himself.  2. 
The  notion  that  our  sins  are  incurable.  People  will  not  believe  that  holiness  is  pos- 
sible ;  therefore  of  course  they  do  not  have  it,  because  they  have  not  the  heart  of  hope 
to  seek  it.  We  scare  ourselves  with  ugly  dreanas  of  our  own  irretrievably  ruined  con- 
dition. Our  sin  is  not  a  dream,  but  our  despair  is  one.  3.  The  terror  of  death.  To 
tie  Christian  this  is  but  an  idle  dream.  Death  is  no  hideous  Miltonio  monster,  but 
the  servant  of  Christ.  Dying  is  the  advent  of  Christ  to  the  soul  that  lives  in  Christ's 
service. 

III.  Christ  has  comb  to  oispbl  idle  dbbams.  We  are  troubled  aboflt  God's 
dealings  with  us  because  we  do  not  know  him.  We  have  but  to  acquaint  ourselves 
with  him  in  order  to  be  at  peace  (ch.  xxii.  21).  Christ  reveals  God  in  his  Fatherhood. 
There  are  reasonable  fears  that  are  no  dreams,  but  which  spring  from  our  consciousness 
of  guilt.  Often  the  dream  is  found  in  the  illusion  that  ignores  or  excuses  sin.  Christ 
dispels  that  dream  by  revealing  a  dread  reality,  but  only  that  he  may  lead  us  through 
repentance  to  pardon.  Then  Si  terrors  of  the  night  flee  away  in  the  glad  daylight  of 
God's  love.— W .  F.  A. 

Vers.  17,  18. — The  littleness  of  man.  These  verses  have  been  characterized  as  a 
parody  on  Ps.  viii.  5.  While  following  the  form  of  the  psalmist's  language,  and  pro- 
ceeding on  the  same  general  thesis,  they  suggest  a  very  different  inference.  The 
psalmist  was  amazed  at  the  condescension  of  God  in  noticing  man,  and  filled  with 
wonder  at  the  honour  that  is  put  on  so  puny  a  creature.  But  Job  is  here  represented 
as  expressing  his  dismay  that  God  should  stoop  to  try  and  trouble  so  small  a  being. 
There  is  no  equality  in  the  contest,  and  it  appears  to  Job  as  though  God  were  taking 
advantage  of  the  weakness  of  his  victim.  In  spite  of  Job's  perplexity  and  short- 
sighted complaints,  there  are  truths  behind  what  he  says.  We  must  endeavour  to  dis- 
entangle these  truths,  and  separate  them  from  the  illusions  unworthy  of  the  goodness 
of  God  with  which  they  are  confused. 

I.  God  is  wkongly  charged  with  what  he  does  not  do.  We  know  from  the  pro- 
logue that  it  is  not  God,  but  Satan,  who  is  the  "  watcher  of  men,"  in  the  sense  of  the 
spy  who  delights  to  pounce  on  a  fault  and  to  worry  the  miserable  in  their  helplessness. 
Most  of  the  sufferings  of  life  do  not  come  directly  from  the  Divine  will,  but  proceed 
fi:om  the  injustice  of  other  men,  from  our  own  faults  and  mistakes,  and  from  "  spiritual 
wickedness  in  high  places."  We  mast  beware  of  the  dualism  which  would  give  this 
evil  an  independent  power  over  against  God.  Satan  can  only  go  as  far  as  God  permits 
him.    Still,  the  evil  is  from  Satan,  not  from  God.    It  is  an,  not  providence,  that 


138  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  [oh.  to.  1—21. 

brings  the  greatest  trouble  of  life,  and  yet  providence  overrules  that  trouble  for  ultimate 
good. 

II.  The  8DFFEBBB  IS  TEMPTED  TO   MAGNIFY  HIS  OWN  UTPOBTANOB.      Job's   trOuWeS 

were  unique.  But  every  sufferer  is  tempted  to  think  that  no  one  was  ever  troubled  as 
he  is.  Peeling  his  own  pain  most  intensely,  he  is  inclined  to  make  this  the  central 
experience  of  the  universe,  and  to  fancy  that  he  is  singled  out  for  peculiar  attacks  of 
adversity.  Job,  however,  generalizes,  and  regards  himself  as  a  specimen  of  mankiad. 
Man  himself  seems  unduly  marked  out  for  affliction.  But  no  one  is  justified  in  coming 
to  this  conclusion  till  he  knows  how  other  beings  are  treated.  It  may  be  that  man's 
hardships  are  but  a  part,  and  a  fair  part,  of  the  hardships  of  the  universe. 

III.  To   BE    SPECIALLY   TEODBLBD    18  TO  BE   UAGNIFIED    IN   IMPOBTANCB.       If  it  be 

so  tl:iat  man  is  specially  singled  out  for  affliction,  no  doubt  a  peculiar,  though  a  most 
painful,  importance  is  attached  to  him.  Job  becomes  a  great  figure  in  Scripture 
through  his  troubles.  Christ,  crowned  with  thorns,  is  most  significant  on  his  cross. 
The  sublimity  of  supreme  sorrow  is  the  inspiration  of  tragedy.  Man  is  sometimes 
called  out  of  his  littleness  by  being  made  to  suffer  greatly.  If  GJod  has  a  hand  in  all 
human  sufferings — as  God  had  in  Job's,  behind  Satan — he  is  honouring  man  by  con- 
descending to  permit  him  to  receive  exceptional  trials. 

IV.  G-EEAT  SUFFBKINa  18  PBBMITTBD  FOB  THE  SAKE  OF  OBBAT  GOOD.      This  IB  Seen  in 

the  final  outcome  of  Job's  sufferings.  They  throw  light  on  the  higher  life,  and  demon- 
strate the  existence  of  disinterested  devotion.  The  parody  in  Job  is  not  so  far  from  the 
original  in  the  psalm.  It  is  wonderful  that  God  should  permit  human  life  to  be  honoured 
as  the  theatre  in  which  the  great  tragedy  of  the  conflict  between  evil  and  good  is 
displayed.  God  is  not  stooping  to  torment  men — ^like  a  giant  torturing  an  insect — as 
to  Job  he  appears  to  be  doing  with  surprising  effort.  He  is  condescending  to  lead  man 
on  to  greatness  through  suffering. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  21. — Limiti  to  forgiveness.  If  he  has  done  wrong,  and  deserves  to  suffer,  yet 
Job  wonders  why  God  does  not  pardon  him.  Is  his  Master  altogether  implacable  ? 
Will  Be  exact  the  last  farthing  ?  Taking  Job's  question  in  a  wider  sense,  we  may  ask — 
Why  is  not  God's  forgiveness  unlimited  and  immediate  ? 

I.  ThI;  expectation  of  unlimited  forgiveness.  This  is  based  on  the  power  and 
on  the  goodness  of  God.  1.  Hii  power.  The  leper  prayed,  "  If  thou  wilt,  thou  canst 
make  me  clean  "  (Mark  i.  40).  Does  not  the  saying  apply  to  the  cleansing  from  sin  ? 
Is  God  not  able  to  purge  sin  completely  out  of  the  universe  ?  For  if  he  cannot  do 
so,  must  we  not  say  that  God  is  limited,  and  therefore  not  Almighty,  t.e.  not  God  ? 
2.  Eis  goodness.  He  cannot  wish  to  see  evil  continuing.  His  name  is  Love,  and 
therefore  he  must  desire  the  salvation  of  all.  He  is  our  Father,  and  it  must  be  a  pain 
to  him  to  be  separated  from  his  children.  Surely  his  goodness  must  incline  him  to 
universal  pardon.  His  power  would  seem  to  make  that  possible.  Therefore  does  it 
not  seem  reasonable  to  expect  it? 

IL  The  bxpebibnoe  of  limited  forgiveness.  The  expectation  is  not  realized. 
1.  ITie  forgiveness  is  limited  in  extent.  God's  forgiveness  is  not  freely  bestowed  on 
every  sinner.  There  are  multitudes  who  are  still  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the 
bond  of  iniquity."  Whilst  the  gospel  is  offered  to  all,  very  many  people  still  perish  in 
their  sins.  The  universalism  which  would  seem  to  spring  from  infinite  power  and 
love  is  not  witnessed  in  actual  life.  2.  Tlie  forgiveness  is  limited  intensively ;  i.e. 
those  who  are  not  forgiven  are  not  freed  from  all  trouble,  neither  do  they  find  that  sin 
no  longer  belongs  to  them.  The  first  sense  of  Divine  pardon  is  like  a  glimpse  of 
hoaven ;  but  before  long  the  joy  gives  place  to  disappointment,  as  evil  consequences  of 
old  sins  are  found  to  follow  us  still,  and  even  those  sins  themselves  do  not  appear  to  be 
utterly  slain. 

III.  The  explanation  of  the  limits  of  forgiveness.  God  treats  us  as  moral 
agents.  Forgiveness  is  not  simply  the  relaxation  of  penalties ;  it  is  personal  recon- 
ciliation. Punishment  is  not  vengeance,  but  chastisement  required  by  love  as  much  as 
by  justice.  Hence  we  may  deduce  the  explanation :  1.  Men  have  free-mils.  God 
desires  to  save  all,  and  can  save  all,  yet  some  do  not  wish  to  be  saved.  Then  God 
respects  the  liberty  which  he  has  conferred.  It  must  be  observed  that,  as  pardon  is 
personal  reconciliation  to  God,  many  -who  would  be  glad  of  r«lease  from  sufferings,  but 


OS.  Tin.  1—21,] 


THB  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


IS9 


who  do  not  desire  reconciliation,  do  not  really  wish  for  pardon.  2.  Repentance  it 
essential  to  forgiveness.  It  would  be  bad  in  every  way — hurtful  to  the  sinner,  as  well  as 
unjust — to  forgive  a  man  who  did  not  repent  of  his  sin.  Indeed,  the  pardon  would  be 
a  moral  contradiction.  3.  Forgiveness  does  not  involve  a  removal  of  ail  the  consequences 
of  sin.  The  man  who  has  wrecked  health  and  fortune  in  sin  does  not  become  strong 
and  rich  by  pardon.  Natural  consequences  continue.  Healing  chastisements  continue. 
Perhaps  the  penitent  suffers  because  he  is  forgiven.  God  has  not  deserted  him.  He 
'has  visited  him  in  love.  Therefore  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose,  with  Job,  that  great 
trouble  is  a  proof  that  God  does  not  pardon  transgression.  4.  Sin  needs  an  atonement. 
It  cannot  be  forgiven  without  a  wicrificfl — ^which  we  have  in  Christ  (Heb  x.  12).— 
W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VUI. 


Ver.  1. — ^Then  answered  Biidad  the  Shu- 
hite,  and  said.  Biidad  the  Shuhite  has  the 
second  place  in  the  passage  where  Job's 
friends  are  first  mentioned  (ch.  ii.  11),  and 
occupies  the  sume  relative  position  in  the 
dialogue.  We  may  suppose  him  to  have 
been  younger  than  Eliphaz  and  older  than 
Zophar.  He  does  little  more  than  repeat 
the  arguments  of  Eliphaz,  stating  them, 
however,  more  bluntly,  and  with  less  of  tact 
and  consideration.  The  chief  novelties  of 
his  discourse  are  an  appeal  to  the  teaching 
of  past  ages  (vers.  8 — 10),  and  the  employ- 
ment of  new  and  forcible  metaphors  (vers. 
U— 19). 

Ver.  2.— How  long  wilt  thou  speak  these 
things  ?  An  exclamation  like  that  of  Cicero, 
"Quousqiie  tandem?"  One  or  two  out- 
breaks might  be  pardoned;  but  to  persist 
was  to  abuse  the  patience  of  his  hearers. 
And  how  long  shall  the  words  of  thy  mouth 
be  like  a  strong  wind  1  literally,  be  a  strong 
wind;  i.e.  have  all  the  bluster  and  vehe- 
mence of  a  tempest,  which  seeks  to  carry 
everything  before  it  by  sheer  force  and  fury. 
The  address  is  rude  and  unsympathetic. 

Ver.  3. — Doth  God  pervert  judgment  t 
This  was,  no  doubt,  what  Job's  words  of 
expostulation  might  seem  to  imply.  But 
he  had  never  gone  so  far  as  to  make  the 
direct  charge,  and  a  true  friend  would  have 
shrunk  from  taxing  him  with  an  impiety, 
which  could  only  be  deduced  from  his  speech 
by  way  of  inference.  It  is  our  duty  to  put 
the  best  construction  that  we  can  on  our 
friends'  words,  no  less  than  upon  their 
actions.  Or  doth  the  Ahnighty  pervert 
justice  1  "Justice"  is  not  altogether  the 
same  thing  with  "judgment."  Judgment 
is  the  act,  justice  the  principle  which  under- 
lies or  ought  to  underlie  the  act.  It  is,  of 
course,  impossible  for  God  to  pervert  either. 
"  Sliall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do 
right i"  (Gen.  xviii.  25). 

Ver.  4. — If  thy  children  have  sinned 
against  him.     Biidad  assumes  this  abso- 


lutely ;  Eliphaz  had  only  hinted  at  it  (ch. 
V.  4).  Both  presume  to  know  what  rould 
be  known  only  to  the  Searcher  of  hearts. 
And  he  have  oast  them  away  for  their  trans- 
gression ;  literally,  and  he  liave  delivered 
them  into  the  hand  of  their  transgressions 
— abaudoLicd  them,  that  is,  to  the  conse- 
quences of  their  wrong-doing.  The  allu- 
sion is,  of  course,  to  &e  fact  recorded  in 
oh.  i.  19. 

Ver.  5. — If  thou  wonldeBt  seek  unto  God 
betimes.  Here  we  have  again  an  echo  of 
the  words  of  Eliphaz  (ch.  v.  8).  There  is 
a  tacit  assumption  that  Job  has  not  had 
recourse  to  God,  lias  not  pleaded  his  cause 
with  him  or  taken  him  into  counsel ;  where- 
as all  the  evidence  was  the  other  way.  Both 
when  tho  first  batch  of  calamities  was  re- 
ported to  him  (ch.  i.  14—19),  and  when  the 
stroke  of  disease  came  (oh.  ii.  10),  Job  cast 
his  care  on  God,  fell  back  on  him,  submitted 
himself  to  him  unreservedly.  "The  Lord 
gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed 
be  the  Name  of  the  Lord,"  he  said  in  the 
one  case ;  in  the  other,  "  What  ?  shall  we 
receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall 
we  not  receive  evil  ?  "  And  make  thy  suppli- 
cation to  the  Almighty ;  literally,  make  the 
Almighty  gracious  to  thee." 

Ver.  6. — If  thou  wert  pure  and  upright. 
Job  had  asserted  this,  not  in  so  many  words, 
but  substantially  (oh.  vi.  29,  30).  We  have 
God's  testimony  that  it  was  true  (ch.  i.  8 ; 
ii.  3) ;  not,  of  course,  in  the  sense  that  he 
was  absolutely  free  from  sin,  but  in  that 
qualified  sense  in  which  "just,"  and  "right- 
eous," and  "  pure,"  and  "  holy  "  can  be  pro- 
perly used  of  men.  Biidad  implies,  without 
boldly  asserting  it,  that  he  does  not  believe 
Job  to  deserve  the  epithets,  either  absolutely 
or  in  a  qualified  sense.  If  he  were  so, 
Surely  now  he  (i.e.  God)  would  awake  for 
thee.  This  is  a  common  anthropomorphism 
(see  Ps.  vii.  6 ;  xxxv.  25 ;  xliv.  23 ;  lix.  4, 
5 ;  Isa.  Ii.  9).  And  make  the  habitation  of 
thy  righteousness  prosperous ;  or,  malce  peace- 
ful the  habitation  wherein  thy  righteousness 
dtoeUeth}  i.e.  make  peaceful  the  habitation 


140 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  viii.  1 — 2 


wherein  thon,  a  righteous  man  ex  hypotheti, 
dwellest. 

Ver.  7. — Though  thy  beginning  was  small; 
rather,  were  email.  Bildad  does  not  refer 
to  the  past,  but  to  the  present.  Though, 
if  God  were  now  to  set  to  work  to  prosper 
Job,  his  beginning  would  be  slender  indeed, 
yet  what  the  outcome  might  be  none  could 
know.  God  might  prosper  him  greatly.  Yet 
thy  latter  end  should  greatly  increase.  Here, 
once  more,  Bildad  does  but  follow  in  the 
•  steps  of  Eliphaz  (see  ch.  v.  18—26),  pro- 
phesying smooth  things,  as  he  had  done.  It 
is  difficult  to  believe  that  either  comforter 
put  any  faith  in  the  piospect  which  he  held 
out,  or  imagined  that  Job  would  really  be 
restored  to  prosperity.  Bather  there  is  a 
covert  sai'oaam  in  their  woids.  If  thou  wert 
indeed  so  free  from  guilt  as  thou  claimest 
to  be,  then  thou  wouldst  be  confident  of  a 
happy  issue  out  of  thy  afflictions.  If  thou 
art  not  confident  of  such  an  issue,  it  is  be- 
cause thou  art  conscious  of  guUt. 

Ver.  8. — For  inquire  ...  of  the  former 
age.  Put  the  matter  to  the  test  of  experi- 
ence— not  the  short-lived  experience  of  living 
men,  but  the  treasure  of  experience  which 
has  been  handed  down  from  generation  to 
generation  since  the  remotest  times,  and 
whioli  is  embodied  in  proverbs — the  expres- 
sion of  the  concentrated  wisdom  of  antiquity. 
Search  out  and  see  what  has  in  former  ages 
been  thought  concerning  prosperous  men, 
like  thyself,  when  suddenly  cast  down  and 
afflicted.  And  prepare  thyself  to  the  search 
of  theii  fathers.  Go  back,  is.,  to  the  past 
age,  but  do  not  stop  there — pursue  thy  re- 
searches further  and  further  to  their  remote 
ancestors.  Bildad  implies  that  the  records 
of  these  remote  times  have  been,  in  some 
way  or  other,  preserved,  either  in  writings 
or  by  oral  tradition.  Writing  was  certainly 
known  in  Egypt  and  Babylonia  from  a  time 
anterior  to  Abraham,  and  to  the  Hittites  at 
a  date  not  very  much  later.  Books  of  advice 
and  instruction  embodied  in  proverbs,  or 
moral  precepts,  were  among  the  earliest,  in 
Egypt  certainly.  See  the  "  Instructions  of 
Anien-em-hat,"  in  the  '  Records  of  the  Past,' 
vol.  ii.  pp.  11 — 16,  and  the  'Proverbs  of 
Aphobis,'  published  by  the  Eev.  Dunbar 
Heath.  Bildad's  speech  is  thought  to  indi- 
cate "  special  familiarity  with  Egypt." 

Ver.  9. — For  we  are  but  of  yesterday. 
"We,"  i.e.  "of  the  present  generation,  old 
men  though  we  may  bo,  are  but  of  yester- 
day ;  our  experience  is  as  nothing  compared 
with  the  long,  long  experience  of  the  past 
centuries,  wherein  the  men  of  old  "hived 
wisdom  with  each  studious  year,"  not,  like 
ourselves,  hurried  and  pressed  by  the  short- 
ness of  the  term  to  which  life  is  now  re- 
duced, but  having  ample  time  for  reflection 
and  consideration  in  their  long  lives  of  ^ve, 


six,  seven,  centuries  (Gen.  xi.  10 — 17),  which 
enabled  them  to  give  their  attention  to 
everything  in  its  turn,  and  to  exhaust  all 
the  experiences  that  human  life  has  to  offer. 
And  know  nothing ;  i.e.  comparatively.  Sir 
Isaac  Newton  said  that  he  felt  like  a  child 
gathering  shells  upon  the  seashore,  while 
the  great  ocean  of  truth  lay  unexplored  • 
before  him.  Because  our  days  upon  earth 
are  a  shadow  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  2;  Fs.  cii. 
11 ;  Isa.  xl.  6).  So  brief  and  fleeting  that 
they  can  scarcely  be  called  a  reality. 

Ver.  10.— Shall  not  they  teach  thee,  and 
tell  thee,  and  utter  words  out  of  their  heart ) 
(see  the  comment  on  ver.  8). 

Ver.  11. — Can  the  rush  grow  up  without 
miret  The  word  translated  "rush"  ((«DJ) 
is  that  which  occurs  also  in  Exod.  ii.  3; 
Isa.  xviii.  2  and  xxxv.  7,  as  designating  a 
plant  common  in  Egypt,  and  which  is  only 
found  in  these  four  places.  It  is  generally 
admitted  that  the  "  papyrus  "  is  meant  "  a 
plant  of  the  Cyperacem,  or  sedge  family, 
which  was  formerly  common  in  Egypt" 
(Hooker,  in  Smith's  'Diet,  of  the  Bible," 
voL  iii.  p.  1019).  The  chief  peculiarity  of 
the  papyrus  is  its  triangular  stem,  which 
rises  to  the  height  of  six  or  seven,  some- 
times even  of  thirteen  or  fourteen,  feet,  and 
terminates  in  a  bunch  of  thread-like  flower- 
ing branohlets.  The  pith  of  these  stems 
was  the  lAaterial  of  which  the  ancient 
Egyptians  made  their  paper.  The  papyrus 
is  a  water-plant,  and  needs  an  abundant 
supply,  but  would  often  spring  up  out  of 
any  small  pool  which  the  Nile  left  as  it 
retired,  and,  when  the  water  failed  from  the 
pool,  would  rapidly  wither  away.  A  fine 
papyrus  plant  was  on  view,  with  other 
water-]  ilants,  in  the  circular  greenhouse  in 
Kew  Gardens,  towards  the  end  of  the  seasoa 
of  1890.  Can  the  flag  grow  without  water  1 
*'  The  flag  "  (ins)  seems  to  be  the  ordinary 
sedge,  or  marsh-plant.  Like  the  papyrus,  it 
would  often  spring  up  in  all  its  greenness 
from  a  pool  or  pond  left  by  the  retbing 
river,  and  then  in  a  few  days,  when  the 
water  was  dried  up,  would  wither  away. 
Both  images  represent  the  prosperity  of  the 
wicked,  and  were  probably  proverbial. 

Ver.  12. — ^Whilst  it  is  yet  in  his  green- 
ness, and  not  out  down.  It  grows  and 
flourishes  in  a  rich  greenness  up  to  a  certain 
point;  no  one  touches  it;  but  the  waler 
fails  from  the  root,  and  it  fades,  collapses, 
and  is  gone.  It  withereth  before  any  othfer 
herb,  The  ground  may  be  all  green  around 
it  with  ordinary  grass  and  other  herbs,  since 
they  only  need  a  little  moisture — tbn  water- 
plant  will  collapse  unless  it  has  its  full 
supply. 

Ver.  13. —  So  are  the  paths  of  all  that 
forget  God.  So,  that  is,  do  those  proceed  on 
their  way  by  whom  God  has  been  forgottea 


OH.  rm.  1 — 22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


141 


Tbey  spring  np  in  apparent  strength  and 
lusty  force ;  they  flourish  for  a  brief  space ; 
then,  untouched  by  man's  band,  they  sud- 
denly fade,  fall,  and  disappear,  before  the 
mass  of  their  contemporaries.  Job  is,  of 
course,  glanced  at  in  the  expression,  "all 
that  forget  God,"  though  it  is  the  last  thing 
that  he  had  done.  And  the  hypocrite's  hope 
shall  perish;  or,  the  hope  of  the  ungodly 
man  shall  perish  (oomp.  ch.  xiii.  16  ;  xv.  34; 
xvii.  8,  where  the  LXX.  translates  by  iurtPijs 
or  7rapc£j/ojuos). 

Ver.  14. — ^Whose  hope  shall  be  cutoff;  or, 
break  in  sunder  (Revised  Version^.  Here 
the  second  metaphor  begins  to  come  in.  The 
ungodly,  who  has  built  up  around  him  a 
house,  and  a  body  of  dependants  and  friends, 
is  like  a  spider  which  has  spun  itself  a 
magnificent  web,  and  thinks  to  find  a  defence 
in  it.  The  moment  it  is  put  to  the  proof  it 
"  breaks  in  sunder ; "  its  deUoate  tracery  is 
shattered ;  its  fabric  goes  to  nought.  Job's 
house  had  gone  to  nought  before  his  person 
was  smitten,  and,  though  it  had  once  been 
so  strong,  in  the  hour  of  trial  had  lent  him 
no  support  at  all.  And  whose  trust  shall  be 
a  spider's  weh;  literally,  a  spider's  house. 
All  the  trust  of  the  ungodly,  in  whatever  it 
consists,  shall  be  as  fragile,  as  frail,  as  un- 
substantial, as  the  filmy  structure  that  a 
spider  spins  with  suoli  care  and  skill,  but 
which  a  wind,  or  a  wasp,  or  an  inconsiderate 
movement  of  its  own  may  shatter  to  bits. 

Ver.  15. — He  shall  lean  upon  his  house, 
bat  it  shall  not  stand:  he  shall  hold  it  fast, 
but  it  shall  not  endure.  A  spider's  web, 
once  damaged,  rapidly  goes  to  pieces.  It 
cannot  be  patched  up.  To  "lean  upon  it" 
is  to  put  its  structure  to  a  test  wliich  it  is 
unable  to  bear.  It  cannot  "  stand  "  or  "  en- 
'dure."  The  case  is  the  same  with  all  the 
-  supports  of  the  ungodly. 

Ver.  16.— He  is  green  before  the  sun. 
Bildad  here  introduces  a  third  and  more 
elaborate  simile.  The  hypocrite,  or  ungodly 
man  (ver.  13),  is  as  a  gourd  (Jonah  iv.  6),  or 
other  rapidly  growing  plant,  which  shoots 
forth  at  sunrise  with  a  wealth  of  greenery, 
spreading  itself  over  a  whole  garden,  and 
even  sending  forth  its  sprays  and  tendrils 
b.  yond  it  (comp.  Gen.  xlix.  22)— lovely  to 
look  at,  and  full,  aijparently,  of  life  and 
Tigour.  And  his  branch  shooteth  forth  in 
his  garden ;  rather,  over  his  garden,  or  6e- 
yond  his  garden. 

Ver.  17.— His  roots  are  wrapped  about 
the  heap,  and  seeth  (rather,  he  seeth)  the 
place  (literally,  house)  of  stones.  This 
passage  is  very  obscure.  The  word  gal, 
translated  "heap,"  means  sometimes  a 
spring  or  stream  of  water  (Cant.  iv.  12); 
and  many  of  the  best  Hebraists  regard  it 
as  having  that  meaning  here  (Buxtorf,  I-ee, 
Stanley    Leathes,    Revised  Version).      '" 


In 


this  case  we  hftve  to  regard  the  rapidly 
growing  plant  as  having  its  roots  wrapped 
about  the  perennial  spring,  which  was  a 
not  uncommon,  and  always  a  muoh-desired, 
feature  of  an  Kastem  garden.  Thus  nour- 
ished, it  naturally  increased  and  spread 
itself,  and  "was  green  before  the  sun." 
May  we  suppose  that  it  "  saw  the  house  of 
stones,"  because  the  spring  which  nourished 
it  gushed  forth  from  the  native  rook  so  that 
its  roots  were  in  contact  with  both  7 

Ver,  18. — If  he*  destroy  him  from  Ms 
place;  or,  if  he  be  destroyed.  The  rerb 
seems  to  be  best  taken  as  impersonal.  If 
he  be  destroyed  in  any  way,  suddenly  or 
gradually,  by  a  Divine  stroke,  or  by  human 
agency,  or  by  the  comparatively  slow 
process  of  nature,  in  any  case  the  result 
is  one,  the  fiouiishing  plant  is  clean  swept 
away,  and  the  place  of  it  knows  it  no  more. 
Bildad's  words  are  very  dramatic  and  ex- 
pressive. Then  it  shall  deny  him,  saying, 
I  have  not  seen  thee.  The  place  shall  be 
ashamed  of  having  ever  nurtured  anything 
so  vile,  and  shall  declare  that  it  never  held 
such  a  growth. 

Ver.  19.— Behold,  this  is  the  joy  of  his 
way.  Bitterly  ironical — This  is  what  his 
rapid  and  rampant  greenery  comes  to ;  this 
is  how  his  triumphant  career  ends  I  Utter 
destruction,  disappearance,  obliteration  I 
And  out  of  the  earth  shall  others  grow. 
The  destruction  leaves  room  for  something 
better  to  follow — a  sounder,  healthier,  and 
less  short-lived  growth. 

Ver.  20. — Eehold,  God  will  not  cast  away 
a  perfect  man.  Bildad  winds  up  with 
words  of  apparent  trust  in,  and  good  will 
towards.  Job.  God  is  absolutely  juat,  and 
will  neither  forsake  the  righteous  man  nor 
uphold  the  wicked  one.  If  Job  is,  as  he 
says,  true  to  God,  upright,  and  (humanly 
speaking)  "  perfect,"  then  he  has  only  to  go 
on  trusting  God;  God  will  not  leave  him 
"  till  he  fill  his  mouth  with  laughing,  and 
his  lips  with  rejoicing"  (ver.  21);  then 
"  they  that  hate  him  shall  be  clothed  with 
shame,  and  their  dwelling-place  shall  come 
to  nought "  (ver.  22) ;  but  if,  as  we  feel 
instinctively  that  Bildad  believes.  Job  is 
not  "  perfect,"  but  "  an  evil-doer,"  then  he 
must  expect  no  relief,  no  lull  in  his  suffer- 
ing!; he  is  obnoxious  to  all  the  threatenings 
which  have  formed  the  bulk  of  Bildad's 
discourse  (vers.  8 — 20)— he  may  look  to 
being  cut  off,  like  the  rush  and  the  flag  (vers. 
11, 12),  crushed  like  the  spider's  web  (ver. 
14),  destroyed,  and  forgotten,  like  the 
rapidly  growing  gourd  (vers.  16 — 19);  he 
must  look  for  no  help  from  God  (ver.  20); 
but  must  be  contented  to  pass  away  and 
make  room  for  men  of  a  better  stamp  (ver. 
19).  Neither  will  he  help  the  evil-doers; 
literally,  neither  will  he  grasp  the  hand  oj 


la 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[on.  vni.  1—22. 


evil-cloer$ ;  l.e.  though  he  may  support 
them  for  a  while,  he  \7iU  not  maintain 
them  flrmly  and  constantly. 

Var.  21.— Till  he  fill  thy  mouth  with 
laughing,  and  thy  lips  with  rejoicing.  This 
is  very  elliptical.  The  full  phrase  would 
be,  "God  will  not  cast  away  a  perfect 
man;  therefore,  if  thou  be  such,  he  will 
not  cast  away  thee,  till  be  fill  thy  mouth 
with  laughter,  and  thy  lips  with  rejoicing," 
or  "  with  shouting  for  joy." 


Ver.  22.— They  that  hate  thee  shall  ha 
clothed  with  shame  (oomp.  Pa.  xxxv.  26); 
and  the  dwelling-place  (literally,  tent,  or 
tabernacle)  of  the  wioked  shall  come  to 
nought  (literally,  ehall  not  he).  The  words 
are  involved  and  obscnre,  because  Bildad 
does  not  wish  to  make  his  meaning  plain. 
Ho  has  to  invent  phrases  which  may  cut 
both  ways,  and,  while  they  seem  directed 
against  Job's  enemies,  may  pain  and  wound 
Job  himself. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — SUdad  to  Job :  1.  A  bundle  of  mistakes.  I.  UNJtrsTnriABLis  BEBtrKB. 
"  Then  answered  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and  said."  Even  if  on  Job's  part  wholly  deserved 
the  admonition  of  Bildad  was  in  itself  worthy  of  censure,  as  bdng :  1.  Impatient.  "  How 
Ions  wilt  thou  speak  these  things  ?  "  It  is  due  to  every  man  who  speaks  in  his  defence, 
as  Job  did,  to  hear  him  patiently  (Acts  xxvi.  3) ;  much  more  if  he  speaks  in  affliction. 
Nay,  patience  towards  all  men  is  an  eminent  token  of  sincere  religion  (1  Thess.  v.  14  ; 
1  Tim.  vi.  11;  2  Tim.  ii.  24;  Titus  iiu  2).  Besides,  they  who  rebuke  others  for 
impatience  should  not  themselves  be  guilty  of  the  same  (Kom.  ii.  21).  2.  Unsympa- 
thetic. Throughout  its  entire  length  not  a  word  indicates  that  Bildad  cherished  kindly 
feeling  towards  Job  or  pity  for  his  deep  distress.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  an  amount 
of  brutal  plainness  of  speech  that  is  hard  to  account  for  in  a  good  man.  Into  whateTer 
faults  men  may  fall  by  their  words  or  acts,  their  sufferings  and  sorrows  should  neyer 
fail  to  elicit  our  compassion  (ch.  vi.  14 ;  Rom.  xiL  15 ;  Heb.  xiii.  3).  Least  of  all 
should  they  rebuke  other's  sins  who  cannot  feel  for  others'  woes  (Gal.  vi.  1 ;  Titus  iii. 
2,  3).  3.  Uncharitable.  Bildad  made  no  allowance  for  che  anguish  of  spirit  which 
had  impelled  Job  to  speak,  but,  like  Eliphaz  (ch.  vi.  26),  putting  the  worst  possible 
construction  on  his  words,  contemptuously  designated  them  as  "  these  things,"  and 
characterized  them  as  boisterous  winds,  vehement  nothings,  meaningless,  but  tem- 
pestuous, defying  all  restraints,  overleaping  all  barriers,  destroying  all  law  and  order  in 
their  course.  "  If  sound  speech  that  cannot  be  condemned  "  (Titus  ii.  8)  be  excellent  in 
all,  "  speech  always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt "  (Col.  iv,  6),  is  a  special  ornament 
of  Christians ;  and  "  if  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect  man,  and 
able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body  "  (Jas.  iii.  2) ;  yet,  equally  on  the  other  hand,  a 
charity  that  never  faileth,  that  is  not  easily  provoked,  that  "  beareth  all  things,  believeth 
all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4 — 8),  becometh  them 
that  hear. 

II.  DouBTFTJi,  THEOLOGY.  "  Doth  God  (fil)  pervert  judgment?  or  doth  the  Almighty 
(Shaddai)  pervert  justice  ?  "  1.  Absolutely,  no  J  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  that  the 
Divine  Being,  in  his  moral  government  of  the  universe,  could  even  by  a  hair's  breadth 
transgress  the  bounds  of  rectitude.  (1)  If  he  did,  he  could  not  be  El-Shaddai,  the 
All-powerful  and  All-sufficient  Deity ;  since  sin  is  essentially  weakness  and  imperfec- 
tion, and  Omnipotence  inconceivable  except  in  alliance  with  immaculate  purity  and 
absolute  integrity.  Hence  (2)  because  of  being  El-Shaddai,  not  only  has  he  no  tempta- 
tion to  resort  to  inequitable  dealings  with  his  creatures,  but  the  bare  idea  of  "  perverting 
justice"  is  impossible,  is  wholly  unthinkable  in  connection  with  him,  and  even  the 
faintest  insinuation  thereof  infinitely  false.  (In  this  sense  it  is  not  clear  that  Job,  as 
Bildad  suggests,  had  charged  God  with  perversion.)  Only  the  equity  of  God's  dealings 
is  not  always  discernible  by  man.  Though  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  cannot  do  other- 
wise than  right  (Gen.  xviii.  25),  the  judged  do  not  always  perceive  the  justness  of  his 
decisions.  _  Hereafter  the  entire  course  of  the  Divine  procedure  on  earth  will  be 
vindicated  in  the  presence  of  an  assembled  universe.  Meantime  that  it  is  in  perfect 
harmony  with  the  eternal  principles  of  truth  and  right  is  an  article  of  faith  and  a 
fundamental  axiom  of  reason.  2.  Seemingly,  yes.  As  understood  by  Bildad,  it  is 
doubtful  if  justice  can  be  claimed  for  all  God's  dealings  with  his  intelligent  creatures 
on  earth.     By  justice  Bildad  meant  the  principle  of  rewarding  good  men  with  good 


OH.  Tm.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  148 


things,  and  bad  men  with  e\il  things,  upon  the  earth  and  in  time.  He  contended 
that  God  could  by  no  possible  consideration  be  induced  to  depart  from  administering 
mundane  affairs  on  this  plain  and  simple  principle.  Accordingly,  he  argued  that,  if 
men  sinned,  God  was  shut  up  by  the  aforesaid  principle  to  punish  them  in  time ;  and, 
vice  versa,  that  if  men  were  seen  to  be  afflicted,  the  inference  was  irresistible  that 
they  had  transgressed — otherwise  God  would  be  guilty  of  perverting  justice  in  visiting 
them  with  tribulation.  Similarly,  he  reasoned  that  God  was  bound  to  crown  righteous 
men  with  prosperity;  and  that  they  who  enjoyed  good  things  in  this  life  were  only 
reaping  the  reward  of  virtue ;  although  he  likewise  contended  that  if  a  good  man 
relapsed  into  wickedness,  he  could  not  escape  retribution  in  the  shape  of  temporal 
calamity,  while,  if  he  repented,  he  would  as  surely  be  conducted  back  to  his  former 
prosperity.  Now  not  one  of  these  dogmatic  positions  of  the  ancient  sage  was  coirect ; 
ani  against  them  all  Job  vehemently  protested.  The  theory  that  connects  all  suffering 
with  sin,  though  popular  (John  ix.  2 ;  Luke  xiii.  1 — 5),  is  fallaoiouB.  The  doctrine 
that  good  things  are  invariably  a  reward  of  goodness  will  not  stand  the  test  of  facts 
(Luke  xvi.  25). 

III.  Inapt  illttstkations.  1.  The  case  of  Jol's  children.  (1)  The  assumption. 
"If  thy  children  have  sinned  against  him."  Outrageously  unfeeling  was  it,  even  if  it 
had  been  true,  so  to  lacerate  the  heart  of  a  bereaved  parent.  "  The  words  of  the  wise  may 
be  as  goads  "  (Bccles.  xii.  11),  but  the  words  of  the  good  should  be  as  "an  honeycomb, 
sweet  to  the  soul  and  health  to  the  bones  "  (Prov.  xvi.  24).  "  The  tongue  of  the  wise 
useth  knowledge  aright"  (Prov.  xv.  2),  and  "a  prudent  man  covereth  shame"  (Prov. 
xii.  16).  Entirely  unwarranted,  it  was  likewise  atrociously  cruel.  Bildad  had  no  reason 
whatever  to  assume  that  Job's  children  had  been  guilty  (in  his  sense)  of  wickedness 
against  God.  Job's  "it  may  be  "  (ch.  i.  5)  was  not  proof  that  "it  was."  In  the  general 
sense  in  which  "  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (Bom.  iii.  23), 
they  had  doubtless  transgressed;  in  the  particular  sense  that  they  had  perpetrated 
positive  offence  against  God  evidence  was  completely  awantiug.  Hence,  because  un- 
warranted, it  was  also  heinously  sinful.  Bildad's  imputation  was  an  offence  against  the 
dead,  against  the  living,  against  God.  (2)  The  inference.  "  So  hath  he  cast  them  away  for 
[or,  'delivered  thrra  over  into  the  hand  of  their']  transgression."  Superficially  correct  to 
the  extent  that  all  sin  has  a  tendency  to  autonemesis — sooner  or  later  it  will  avenge  itself 
upon  the  perpetrator  thereof  (cf.  oh.  v.  2),  and  that  Job's  children  had  been  suddenly 
cut  off  by  God  (oh.  i.  19) ;  but  radically  vicious  in  attempting  to  connect  these  two— 
the  principle  and  the  fact — as  cause  and  effect,  since  the  history  explicitly  discovers 
(ch.  i.  12)  that  the  wickedness  of  Job's  children  was  not  the  occasion  of  their  destruction. 
They  were  out  off  in  pursuance  of  a  divinely  formed  purpose  to  try  Job.  Yet  this 
was  no  contravention  of  God's  absolute  justice,  though  on  Bildad's  principles  it  was 
quite  inexplicable.  2.  Vie  case  of  Job  himself.  (1)  The  underlying  hypothesis,  which 
was  false,  viz.  that  Job  was  not  pure  and  upright,  even  in  the  sense  meant  by  Bildad 
(ver.  6),  which  Job  was,  having,  like  St.  Paul,  a  conscience  void  of  offence  both  toward 
God  and  toward  men  (Acts  xxiv.  16),  and  like  St,  Peter  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience 
toward  God  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  (2)  The  proffered  counsel,  which  was  good.  Whaif  To 
seek  unto  God ;  i.e.  to  make  supplication  unto  him,  to  address  him  in  prayer.  Why  ? 
To  make  God  gracious  unto  him,  this  beautiful  idea  being  conveyed  by  the  force  of  the 
reflex,  hithpael  of  the  verb  (Davidson).  When  f  Betimes ;  'the  verb  signifying  "  to  seek 
early,"  i.e'.  first  in  time  and  first  in  importance  (cf.  Prov.  vii.  15  ;  viii.  17 ;  ch.  xxiv. 
5).  Jlowf  Earnestly ;  this  also  being  implied  in  the  verb  "  to  seek."  (3)  The  promised 
blessing,  which  was  doubtful.  This  was :  (a)  Protection.  The  cause  :  "  He  will  watch 
over  thee,"  instead  of  "  watching  against  thee"  (ch.  vii.  12).  The  effect :  "And  make 
thy  habitation  secure;"  salute  it  with  peace,  and  preserve  it  in  safety  (cf,  Bliphaz's 
picture  of  the  good,  man's  house,  ch.  v.  24;  and  contrast  his  cursing  of  the  wicked 
man's  abode,  ch.  v.  3).  The  condition :  "  thy  righteous  haHt  ition ;  "  i.e.  when  thy 
habitation  became  the  abode  of  a  righteous  man,  God  would  pronounce  it  blessed  and 
preserve  it  in  peace,  (b)  Prosperity.  "Though  thy  beginning  was  small,  yet  thy 
latter  end  should  greatly  increase."  Bildad  had  no  guarantee  beyond  his  own  theory 
for  the  prediction  that  a  return  on  Job's  part  to  piety  would  be  followed  by  a  restoration 
to  material  prosperity.  . 

LESsoNSk   1.  "  A  soft  answer  tumeth  away  wrath,  but  gnevous  words  stir  up  anger  " 


144 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  vra.  1— 22. 


f  ProT  XT  1\  BiUad'B  success  would  have  been  greater  had  his  language  been  milder, 
2  Th'osT;ho  undertake  the  work  of  teaching  others  should  both  see  that  what  they 
Lch  is  tme  and  study  to  speak  the  truth  in  love  (Eph.  iv.  15).  B.ldad  was  wanting 
rbothof&ese  respects.  sl^A  balf-truth  is  sometimes  as  dangerous  as  a  whole  he 
Bildad'B  theology  was  of  this  sort.  4.  Saints  who  are  vebemently  jealous  for  the 
D  vine  honour  Z  often  intensely  unkind  as  well  as  .^^^f^ir  to  their  feUow-men  Bildad 
was  as  cruel  towards  Job  as  he  was  courageous  in  behalf  of  God._  5.  Beware  of 
sentencing  those  to  perdition  concerning  whom  God  has  not  declared  his  ni.nd.  Bildad 
roanifestly  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  fate  of  Job's  children.  6.  It  is  man's  duty  to  seek 
God  betimes,  whether  the  habitation  of  their  righteousness  prosper  or  no.  Bildwls 
prediction  must  not  be  accepted  as  equivalent.to  God's  promise.  7.  The  latter  end  ol 
pious  men,  if  not  on  earth,  at  least  in  heaven,  will  be  one  of  greatness  and  glory 
combined.     In  this  sense  alone  is  Bildad's  statement  certainly  correct. 

Vers.  5,  6. — The  picture  of  a  good  man's  home.  I.  A  pbayino  homb.  Where  by  both 
parents  and  children  private  and  family  devotion  is  observed. 

II.  A  PIOUS  HOME.  Where  such  devotion  is  the  outcome  and  expression  of  inward 
spiritual  life. 

III.  A  PEAOErnL  HOME.  Where  the  inmates  enjoy  the  blessed  calm  of  forgiveness, 
and  dwell  in  love  towards  one  another.  _  , 

IV.  A  PROTECTED  HOME.  Where  the  eye  of  God  continually  rests  upon  the  habita- 
tion and  all  who  dwell  therein. 

V.  A  PEOsPBEous  HOME.  Where  true  spiritual  riches  are  possessed,  and  as  much 
temporal  fortune  is  enjoyed  as  God's  wisdom  appoints. 

Vers.  8 — 22. — Bildad  to  Job :  2.  Wisdom  from  the  ancients.  I.  The  teacheks. 
The  world's  gray  fathers,  not  the  immediate  predecessors  of  Job,  Bildad,  and  theii 
contemporaries,  but  the  progenitors  of  these — their  remote  ancestors,  who  are  here 
described  as :  1.  Early  horn.  In  contrast  to  the  men  of  Job's  time,  who  are  charac- 
terized as  being  late  born,  literally,  "  yesterday ; "  t.e.  of  yesterday,  as  if  ascending  the 
stream  of  time  meant  the  same  thing  as  approaching  the  primal  fountains  of  truth—* 
popular  fallacy  which  the  royal  Preacher  corrects  (Eccles.  vii.  10).  Antiquity  is  no  sure 
test  of  truth  ;  novelty  is  no  sure  mark  of  error.  Bather  error  has  a  tendency  to  array 
itself  in  a  guasi-sanctity  derived  from  age.  Many  respectable  fallacies  and  popular  delu- 
sions have  descended  Irom  remote  times.  Yet  truth  that  bears  the  stamp  of  successive 
generations  is  all  the  more  valuable  on  that  account.  2.  Long-lived.  In  comparison 
with  their  successors,  who  are  here  depicted  as  a  short-lived  generation :  "  Our  days  upon 
earth  are  a  shadow"  (ver.9)  ;  the  probability  being  that  Bildad  alluded  to  the  remark- 
able longevity  uf  aotediluvian  times,  and  of  the  patriarchal  era  immediately  succeeding, 
as  affording  greater  opportunity  for  making  and  collecting  the  results  of  observation, 
than  the  brief  span  of  human  life  at  the  period  when  Jub  and  he  flourished.  Yet  the 
long  leisure  enjoyed  by  the  Macrobii  is  now  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  appli- 
ances of  modem  civilization.  So  that  the  results  gathered  in  an  ephemeral  and 
shadowy  life  may  rest  upon  a  broader  basis  of  experience  than  those  collected  by 
prinjeval  sages  in  the  course  of  centuries.  Still,  were  each  age  dependent  on  the 
amount  of  knowledge  it  could  accumulate  for  itself,  the  world's  advancement  would 
be  tedious,  if  not  practically  at  a  standstill.  Hence  the  duty  of  recognizing  our 
obligations  to  the  past,  and  of  transmitting  to  posterity,  not  diminished,  but  if  possible 
augmented,  the  gathered  stores  of  matured  wisdom  inherited  from  bygone  generations. 
3.  Deep-thinJmg.  As  men  who  with  powers  fully  exercised  employed  the  leisure  of 
centuries  in  observing  the  phenomena  of  Divine  providence,  in  comparing  their  a  priori 
theories  with  life's  fads;  in  investigating  the  profound  problems  of  religion,  and,  after 
carefully  elaborating  the  results,  crystallized  them  in  brief,  sententious  maxims, 
apothegms,  parables,  "  bearing  the  impress  of  deep  thought,  and  often  deeply  trying 
experience  "  (Davidson),  which  were  passed  along  from  age  to  age  for  the  instruction 
of  succeeding  generations,  in  contrast  with  whom  the  contemporaries  of  Bildad  and 
Job,  and  indeed  the  short-lived  sages  of  modern  times  "  know  nothing."  Bildad's 
estimate  of  the  relative  values  of  ancient  and  modern  thought  subject  to  correction  on 
the  grounds  above  indicated. 


OH.  vm.  1-22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOa  148 


II.  The  teaohtno.  1.  The  proverb  of  the  papyrui.  (1)  The  imago.  A  papyrus 
plant  {Cyperus papyrm,  L.)  a ^gome,  so  named  from  absorbing  water,  or  a  reed,  an  achu, 
like  the  Nile  grass  in  Egypt  (Gen.  xli.  2),  springing  up  suddenly,  not  upon  dry  ground, 
but  on  river-banks,  in  marshes,  upon  the  margin  of  canals,  wherever  there  is  water 
(ver.  H),  attaining  to  remarkable  luxuriance  even  before  it  is  ripe  for  the  sickle,  being 
the  finest  of  all  natural  grasses  (ver.  12),  then  quickly  disappearing,  withering  before 
any  other  herb,  when  once  the  fierce  summer  heats  have  licked  up  the  scanty  moisture 
which  caused  it  to  flourish  (ver.  12).  (2)  The  interpretation,  (a)  The  plant,  an 
emblem  of  the  ungodly  man  who  lives  in  forgetfulness  of  God  (ver.  13).  Forgetfulness 
of  God,  of  God's  existence  (Ps.  xiv.  1),  of  God's  omniscience  (Ps.  1.  22),  of  God's 
character  (Isa.  li.  13 ;  Ixiv.  5),  of  God's  works  (Deut.  vi.  12 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  11),  of  God's 
Word  (Eccles.  xii.  1 ;  Hos.  iv.  6),  the  essence  of  ungodliness  (Ps.  ix.  17 ;  Bzek.  xxiL 
12).  (6)  The  water,  a  symbol  of  that  outward  prosperity  without  which  the  hope  of 
the  ungodly  cannot  spring.  A  melancholy  truth  that  wicked  men,  in  whose  thoughts 
God  never  is  (Ps.  x.  4),  have  sometimes  a  hope  of  eternal  life.  This  not  founded  on  a 
sure  basis ;  on  their  own  morality,  ability,  formality,  or  on  some  mistaken  view  they 
possess  of  the  character  of  God,  instead  of  on  God's  mercy,  Christ's  work,  and  the  Spirit's 
grace.  Commonly  dependent  on  outward  circumstances,  and  not  derived  from  an 
inherent  principle  of  spiritual  life,  (c)  The  luxuriant  verdure  while  the  water  lasts,  a 
picture  of  the  hypocrite's  display  of  religion  while  things  continue  prosperous,  (d)  The 
speedy  withering  when  the  water  fails,  a  representation  of  the  swift  and  utter  collapse 
of  the  hypocrite's  religion  and  its  hope  when,  in  the  providence  of  God,  the  fostering 
element  of  material  prosperity  is  withdrawn.'  2.  The  proverb  of  the  spider's  web. 
(Vers.  14,  15.)  Changing  the  simile,  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients  likens  the  hypocrite 
to  a  spider,  and  his  hope  to  a  spider's  web,  in  respect  of  (1)  its  construction,  being 
deftly  and  dexterously,  with  much  care  and  infinite  elaboration,  built  up  and  fashioned; 
(2)  its  intention,  being  designed,  like  the  spider's  web,  for  a  habitation,  a  house  for  the 
soul  in  the  day  of  trial  and  the  day  of  death ;  (3)  its  attenuation,  being  as  unsubstantial 
as  a  thin  cobweb  spun  from  the  insect's  bowels,  and  like  that  fabricated  mostly  from 
the  hypocrite's  own  imagination ;  (4)  its  destruction,  being  easily  cut  asunder  or 
detached  from  its  main  support,  as  the  cobweb  is  by  the  lightest  touch  of  broom  or 
breath  of  wind;  and  (5)  its  deception,  as  miserably  disappointing  the  sinner  who  trusts 
in  it,  leans  upon  it,  expects  to  find  support  from  it,  as  the  cobweb  does  the  spider  who 
clings  to  it  in  vain,  finding  no  safety  in  the  threads  of  bis  gossamer  palace,  but  along 
with  them  being  precipitated  into  dark  and  dreary  overthrow.  3.  The  proverb  of  the 
climbing  plant.  (Vers.  16 — 19.)  Disentangling  the  moral  from  the  fable,  we  have 
here  presented,  under  the  similitude  of  a  creeping  plant,  the  fortunes  of  an  ungodly  man 
in  five  stages.  (1)  Luxuriant  prosperity;  like  the  succulent  plant  swelling  with  sap  in 
the  sunshine,  shooting  forth  leaves  and  branches  over  all  the  garden  (ver.  16),  twining 
its  roots  about  the  heap  of  stone,  "  seeing  the  inside  of  stones  "  (Carey),  i.e.  penetrating 
into  the  smallest  interstices  thereof,  "  living  iu  the  midst  of  fiints  "  (LXX.),  clasping 
and  en)bracing  the  stony  structure, — a  striking  image  of  exuberant  and  seemingly  stable 
prosperity.  (2)  Complacent  satisfaction;  looking  down  proudly  upon  his  material  fortune, 
as  the  plant  upon  its  house  of  stones,  regarding  it  as  a  solid  structure  which  he  has 
reared  and  in  which  he  anticipates  finding,  repose.  (3)  Sudden  destruction;  being 
unexpectedly  swallowed  up,  i.e.  violently  stricken  down  either  by  God  (Delitzsoh)  or 
by  it,  the  house  of  stones  (Davidson);  in  the  one  case  a  monument  of  Divine  retribu- 
tion, in  the  other  an  example  of  the  self-destroying  character  of  worldly  prosperity — 
as  the  plant  is,  in  an  evil  moment,  torn  up  from  its  place  among  the  stones.  (4) 
Public  contempt;  the  former  boon  companions  of  the  hypocrite  in  his  prosperous  days 
ignoring  him,  feeling  ashamed  of  .him,  denying  all  acquaintance  with  him,  as  if  the 
very  ground  where  the  uprooted  plant  grew  were  to  disown  it  (of.  ch.  xviii.  18 ;  xx.  27). 
"Behold,  thus  endeth  his  blissful  course" — a  grimly  ironical  expression.  (5)  Utter 
oblivion ;  the  place  left  vacant  by  him  in  society  being  immediately  filled,  and  himself 
completely  forgotten;  "others  in  succession  springing  up  from  the  dust."  What  a 
sermon  on  the  vanity  of  human  greatness  I  The  disappearance  from  the  stage  of 
time  of  one  who  has  lived  in  affluence,  grandeur,  fame,  but  a  momentary  wonder,  like 
the  dropping  of  a  stone  into  the  calm  bosom  of  a  lake — a  noise,  a  ripple,  and  then  the 
stillness  resumes  its  sway — 

JOB.  I< 


14e  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  vni.  1—22, 

*  Or  like  the  snowfall  in  the  river, 
A  momeat  white — then  melta  for  ever," 

(Biimi.) 

in.  The  hobal.  1.  A  general  principle.  God  will  neither  reject  a  righteous  nor 
assist  a  wicked  man  (ver.  20).  A  good  man  may  be  cast  down,  but  he  cannot  be 
cast  off  (Ps.  xciv.  14;  2  Cor.  iv.  9).  The  character  (1  Sam.  xii.  22";  xv.  29;  Job 
xxiii.  13 ;  Mai.  ii.  16 ;  iii.  6),  the  covenant  (Deut.  iv.  31 ;  1  Kings  viii.  23 ;  2  Kings 
xiii.  23 ;  Ps.  cxi.  5),  the  promise  (Lev.  xxvi.  44 ;  Isa.  liv.  9 ;  Hos.  ii.  19 ;  Bom.  xi.  29 ; 
2  Cor.  i.  20;  Heb.x.  23),  the  people  (Gen.  xxiv.  27;  Josh,  xxiii.  14;  1  Sam.  xii.  22; 
2  Sam.  xxiii.  5 ;  Bom.  xi.  2),  of  God,  all  combine  to  testify  the  impossibility  of  God's 
turning  his  back  upon  a  truly  pious  man, — a  thought  full  of  comfort  for  the  Christian 
(John  X.  28).  Equally  do  they  proclaim  the  doctrine  that  God  cannot  really,  however 
appearances  may  declare  the  contrary,  take  a  bad  man  by  the  hand.  Otherwise  his 
Word  would  be  falsified  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16),  his  purity  tarnished  (Hab.  L  13),  his  Godhead 
forfeited  (1  John  i.  5), — an  idea  fraught  with  warning  for  the  wicked.  2.  A  particular 
application.  This  being  so,  ou  the  hypothesis  of  Job's  integrity.  Job  might  with 
certitude  reckon  that  God  would  not  cast  him  off,  but  interpose  in  his  behalf,  till 
prosperity  once  more  dawned  upon  him,  and  his  mouth  was  filled  with  laughing,  and 
his  tongue  with  rejoicing  (ver.  21) ;  while  the  contrary  portion  would  be  allotted  to  all 
Job's  enemies  and  God's,  viz.  shame  and  everlasting  destruction  (ver.  22).  What 
Bildad  here  affirms  of  the  respective  fortunes  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  is  only 
true  when  we  take  into  reckoning:  the  eternal  futures  of  both,  the  everlasting  happiness 
(Ps.  Ixxiii.  24 ;  Isa.  xxxv.  10 ;  Dan.  xii.  3 ;  Luke  x.  20 ;  xii.  32  ;  Eom.  ii.  7,  10 ;  viii. 
18)  of  the  saint,  and  the  everlasting  perdition  of  the  ungodly  (Matt.  xxv.  46 ;  2  T'hess, 
i  9;  Bev.  xxl.  8). 

Learn  :  1.  If  it  is  wrong  to  over-estimate,  it  is  also  wrong  to  depreciate,  the  men  and 
things  of  bygone  days.  2.  It  is  much  safer  in  our  reasonings  to  rest  upon  the  results 
of  experience  than  to  build  upon  the  speculations  of  fancy.  3.  The  brevity  of  life 
should  stimulate  to  diligence  in  pursuit  of  knowledge.  4.  The  teachings  of  tradition, 
though  not  infallible,  have  a  place  and  value  of  their  own.  5.  It  is  well  that  the 
tongue  should  only  speak  what  the  mind  and  heart  have  meditated  and  prepared.  6. 
Covet  not  material  prosperity,  which  may  exist  without  inward  piety.  7.  Beware  of 
an  appearance  of  religion  which  has  no  corresponding  reality  beneath.  8.  The  secret 
of  soul-prosperity,  as  the  source  of  spiritual  vitality,  is  frequent  meditation  upon  God. 
9.  The  entire  world  of  common  things  is  full  of  parables  of  heavenly  truth  to  them 
who  can  interpret  the  same.  10.  It  is  possible  to  make  a  fair  promise  at  the  outset  of 
a  Christian  profession,  and  yet  eventually  fall  away.  11.  The  wicked  man's  joy  must 
ultimately  be  exchanged  for  sorrow.  12.  The  sorrows  of  earth  in  the  case  of  God's 
saints  will  be  succeeded  by  the  hallelujahs  of  heaven. 

Ver.  13. — The  hypocrite's  hope.  L  A  startlino  definition.  The  hypocrite  is : 
1.  An  ungodly  person.  He  has  an  outward  pretence  of  piety,  but  in  reality  he  is 
destitute  of  true  religion.  2.  A  forgetter  of  God.  It  is  not  necessary  that  his  impiety 
should  take  the  form  of  flagrant  wickedness.  That  might  be  easily  detected,  and 
would  be  altogether  inconsistent  with  ah  appearance  of  godliness.  It  is  enough  that 
he  simply  forgets  God. 

IL  An  amazing  revelation.  The  hypocrite  finds  himself  possessed  of  a  hope,  i.e. 
of  God's  favour  and  of  eternal  life ;  which  hope  is :  1.  Like  the  papyrus,  the  fruit  of 
his  prosperity,  wholly  dependent  on  external  circumstances.  2.  Like  the  spider's  web, 
a  flimsy,  unsubstantial  edifice,  deftly  fashioned  out  of  his  own  imagination.  3.  Like 
the  gourd,  complacently  self-satisfying. 

III.  A  FBARFUL  PREDICTION.  The  hypocrltc's  hope  shall  perish:  1.  Like  the 
papyrus,  it  may  droop  suddenly.  2.  Like  the  spider's  web,  it  may  be  destroyed  violently. 
3.  Like  the  chmbing  plant,  it  will  be  blasted  shamefully. 

LE880N8.  1.  Examine  well  the  grounds  on  which  our  hope  of  heaven  reats.  2. 
Seek  to  be  possessed  of  that  good  hope  which  comes  through  graco. 


CH.  vm,  1— 22.]         THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  U1 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  ...  do  right  t "  The  supposed  attack 
of  Job,  by  implication,  upon  the  justice  of  God  gives  an  opening  for  renewed  admoni- 
tions and  rebukes  on  the  part  of  his  friends.  Bildad  now  comes  forward  and  delivers 
a  discourse  full  of  noble  faith,  however  its  principles  may  be  in  this  case  misapplied. 
Rebuking  the  grievous  complaints  of  Job  as  a  wind,  full  of  noise  and  emptiness  (ver. 
2),  he  proceeds — 

I.  To  INSIST  ON  TKE  BIGHTB0U8NESS  OF  QoD.  This  is  an  axiom  of  his  faith.  God 
cannot  do  unrighteousness.  It  is  impious  to  admit  the  thought  for  a  single  moment 
into  the  mind.  He  insists  on  the  inflexibility  of  God's  rectitude.  He  will  not  bend 
right  and  duty  (ver.  3).  There  can  be  no  twisting,  deviation,  compromise,  with  God. 
His  path  is  ever  a  straight  line.  Bildad  will  therefore  rather  draw  an  unfavourable 
conclusion  about  his  friend  than  allow  the  slightest  shadow  to  be  cast  on  the  splendour 
of  the  Supreme.  Job  may  be  guilty,  nay,  probably  is  so;  but  there  caa  be  no 
probability  of  any  failure  of  right  in  God.  The  principle  may  appear  somewhat  harshly 
and  rigidly  stated ;  and  yet  from  the  sincere,  even  if  narrow  and  limited,  point  of  view 
of  Bildad  no  doubt  he  is  in  the  right.  Rather  seek  any  explanation  of  suffering,  or 
leave  it  in  mystery,  than  bring  a  charge  against  the  unbending  righteousness  of  God, 
1.  Application  to  the  past  and  present.  Following  out  this  reasoning,  the  fate  of  Jub'g 
sons  would  seem  to  point  to  the  fact  that  they  had  committed  a  deadly  sin.  And  so, 
too.  Job's  present  sufferings  lead  to  the  inference  that  he  is  very  far  from  pure.  The 
terrilile  example  of  his  sons  should  be  his  warning.  Tet  this  is  expressed  with  some 
kindliness  and  forbearance.  It  is  put  hypothetically :  "  if  thy  sons  "  (ver.  4).  Bildad, 
though  rigid  in  doctrine,  is  not  untender  at  heart — a  kind  of  character  we  often  see 
exemplified  in  life.  But  we  have  the  lesson  again  and  again  from  the  conduct  of  these 
friends  that  friendship  demands  intelligence  as  well  as  heart.  There  is  a  missing  link  in 
Bildad's  reasoning,  which  destroys  its  power  in  the  present  case.  2.  Application  to  the 
future.  There  is  hope  for  the  sufferer  if  he  will  but  betake  himself  in  humility  and 
repentance  to  God.  (1)  There  must  be  the  seeking,  striving,  straining,  agonizing  effort 
of  the  whole  soul  to  recover  its  lost  treasure — peace  with  him.  (2)  There  must  be 
prayer,  the  sincere  expression  of  this  desire  (ver.  5).  In  life  and  in  thought  there 
must  be  conversion  from  evil  and  towards  him,  the  Good  and  the  Holy,  the  Gracious, 
and  the  Forgiving.  The  result  vdll  be  the  recovery  of  the  lost  happiness,  (a)  Innocence 
will  be  restored  (ver.  6) ;  grand  hope  and  promise  of  the  eternal  gospel — the  crimson 
■tain  may  be  removed  from  the  heart  and  the  hand,  past  sins  and  iniquities  may  be 
remembered  no  more.  The  possibility  of  a  renovation  of  which  men  are  tempted  in 
themselves  to  despair.  (6)  Divine  protection  will  be  feltt  God  will  watch  over  him 
(ver.  6)  or  "  awake  for  him."  The  Shepherd  of  Israel,  who  slumbers  not,  will  guard 
him  from  evil  by  night  and  by  day,  in  his  going  out  and  his  coming  in.  (c)  Peace 
will  be  in  his  homestead — the  peace  which  dwells  with  right  and  innocence.  Over 
garden  and  orchard,  on  fields  and  bams,  and  around  the  hearth,  will  be  felt  brooding 
the  nameless  presence  of  the  favour  of  God.  (d)  There  will  be  increase  of  prosperity 
(ver.  7).  The  little  one  will  become  a  thousand.  The  seed  of  right,  germinating  and 
producing,  will  grow  to  waving  harvests  of  internal  joy,  of  external  good.  Such  are 
the  cheering  deductions  from  Bildad's  high  principles,  the  suggestions  of  his  profound 
faith.  The  righteous  God  will  be  true  to  the  righteous  man.  Sin  is  the  only  root  ol 
sorrow,  virtue  and  godliness  the  only  secret  of  abiding  and  eternal  bliss. 

II.  Appeal  to  ancient  tbadition.  1.  The  wisdom  of  the  primeval  fathers  the 
guide  of  to-day.  Bildad  founds  this  upon  the  fact  that :  (1)  They  lived  to  a  greater  age, 
aocording  to  the  accepted  tradition,  than  present  men.  They  therefore  knew  better  the 
abiding  laws  of  life  than  we  of  lesser  insight,  who  are  of  yesterday  and  brief-lived  like 
shadows  (vers.  8,  9).  (2)  Their  wisdom  was  that  of  ripe  conviction  (ver.  10).  They 
did  not  speak  at  second-hand  nor  repeat  by  rote  what  they  had  learnt.  Theirs  was  the 
wisdom  of  the  heart.  Contempt  is  expressed  in  several  places  in  this  book  for  mere 
Up-wisdom,  the  froth  of  the  n)outh  as  opposed  to  the  genuine  utterances  of  the  mind 
(ch.  xi.  2 ;  xv.  3 ;  xviii.  2).  (3)  There  was  therefore  tlie  stamp  of  sincerity  on  their 
wisdom.  It  came  from  men  who  had  seen  through  life's  illusions  and  cheats,  and  who 
had  touched  the  foundation  of  things.   2.  Specimens  of  ancient  wisdom.  (Ver.  11,  sej.) 


148  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB,  [oh.  vni.  1— 23. 


Here  Bildad  passeB  into  citation  of  some  old  sayings,  which  condense  the  truths  of  life. 
(1)  The  papyrus  and  the  grass  of  the  Nile  (vers.  11, 12  ).  They  cannot  live  without 
their  proper  element  and  nutriment  of  water ;  they  quickly  wither  in  its  ahssnoe.  So 
must  it  be  with  man  where  he  is  devoid  of  Divine  grace  (ver.  13).  A  new  figure  is 
introduced  in  the  "paths"  of  the  forgetters  of  God — ^they  are  lost  like  a  WEid-swept 
tract  in  the  desert  (comp.  Ps.  i.)  j  and  the  hope  of  the  unholy  "  goes  under,"  disappears 
like  the  sun  below  the  horizon's  verge,  to  be  seen  no  more.  (2)  The  spider's  web  (ver. 
14).  He  who  trusts  in  his  own  strength  or  resources,  without  God,  will  have  his  con- 
fidence rent  from  him  as  the  spider's  web  gives  way  at  a  slight  touch  or  at  the  breath 
of  the  wind.  The  habitation  which  he  thinks  secure  is  but  a  gossamer  thing;  it  cannot 
stand  (ver.  15).  (3)  The  creeping  plant  in  its  pride  (vers.  16, 17).  Before  the  burning 
glow  of  the  sun,  full  of  sap,  it  spreads  over  the  garden,  fixing  itself  firmly  among  the 
stones,  and  proudly  lording  it,  as  it  were,  over  them.  But  when  God  withdraws  the 
water,  it  perishes,  unpitied  by  the  home  which  it  adorned.  The  wicked  is  thus  denied 
and  forsaken  by  his  own  connections,  when  he  would  rely  upon  them.  Such  is  the 
pleasure  of  his  way,  turned  into  the  deepest  misery.  Others  spring  from  his  remains, 
like  suckers  fi:om  the  overthrown  tree ;  let  them  take  warning  by  his  fate  (vers.  18, 
19).  What  powerful  images  of  the  nonentity  of  evill  It  never  really  was— and,  its 
semblance  passing  away,  not  a  trace  is  loft  behind- 
Ill.  EECAPixniiATiON.  (Vers.  20 — 22.)  1.  In  the  way  of  solace.  God  does  not 
despise  the  innocent.  This  is  a  meiosis,  a  saying  less  than  is  meant.  He  regards,  he 
tends,  he  loves  them,  feeds  them  with  water  in  the  desert,  keeps  them  as  the  apple 
of  his  eye.  His  will  is  to  make  them  happy — to  bring  smiles  to  the  dejected  lines  of 
the  mouth,  and  to  fill  it  with  the  fruits  of  praise.  2.  In  the  way  of  warning.  He 
"  holds  not  fast  the  evil-doers'  hand,"  and  therefore  when  they  stumble  they  are  helpless. 
The  enemies  of  the  good  man  will  see  with  shame  that  he  is  raised  up  from  every  fall 
(ver.  22) ;  and  once  more,  in  final  reverberation  of  the  thunder  of  menace,  the  tent  of 
the  wicked  shall  vanish  and  be  no  more  1 

Lessons.  1.  The  distinction  between  seeming  and  real  prosperity — that  which  is  for 
a  time  and  that  which  is  for  ever.  2.  Life  by  Divine  grace,  and  recovery  from  seeming 
ruin.    Death  without  Divine  grace,  and  overthrow  of  seeming  prosperity.— J. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  Divine  justice.  The  words  of  Bildad,  as  of  Job's  other  friends, 
are  often  marked  by  great  beauty,  and  often  embody  principles  of  the  highest  practical 
value ;  but  they  frequently  err  in  their  application.  The  judgment  of  the  friends  upon 
Job  is  based  upon  an  error  which  the  entire  course  of  the  book  is  designed  to  expose. 
Here  a  true  principle  is  enunciated  respecting  the  Divine  justice;  which  is  shown  to 
manifest  itself — 

I.  In  A  STRICT  INTEGRITY.    (Ver,  3.)    "Doth  God  pervert  judgment?" 

II.  In  a  vigorous  punishment  of  iniquity.  God  gives  the  sinful  up  to  the  fruits 
of  their  wickedness  (ver.  4).     But  he  shows  both  mercy  and  judgment. 

III.  In  a  compassionate  forgiveness  of  the  penitent.  And  he  exalts  his  just 
judgment— 

IV.  By  a  gbaoioub  interposition  on  behalf  of  the  pxtre.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  So  that 
no  cause  of  complaint  could  remain.  The  Divine  justice  is  (1)  unimpeachable ;  (2)  it 
is  displayed  in  the  punishment  of  vice ;  and  (3)  in  the  certain  reward  of  virtue,  even 
if  long  delayed;  (4)  therefore  may  men  without  hesitation  commit  themselves  (o)  to 
its  present  treatment,  and  (6)  to  its  final  decisions. — E.  O. 

Vers.  1—7. — The  unimpeachable  character  of  the  Divine  Judgment.  He  rcndereth 
to  every  man  according  to  his  works.     His  ways  are  equal 

I.  He  that  sinneth  is  punished.    (Ver.  4.) 

II.  He  mercifully  heabbth  the  prayer  of  the  contritb,  ■  (Ver.  5.) 

III.  HS   BLES8ETH  THE  RIGHTEOUS.      (Ver.  6.) 

IV.  Though  hb  chastise,  he  finally  kewaedbth  the  upeight.    (Ver.  7.) 

To  this  all  the  former  ages  bear  testimony,  as  the  recorded  or  traditional  sayings  of 
the  ancients  bear  witness. — B.  G. 

Vers,  8 — 19. — The  hypocrite's  hope.    Back  to  the  teitlmony  of  the  ages  (vers.  8 — 10) 


OH.  nn.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  14J 


Bildad  refers  his  suffering  friend,  to  find  there  evidences  of  the  security  of  the  perfect 
man  and  the  worthlessoess  of  the  expectation  of  the  hypocrite.  With  beautiful  figu- 
rativeness  he  illustrates  these  truths,  and  only  errs  in  the  covert  implication  that  in 
hypocrisy  ia  to  be  found  the  cause  of  Job's  present  sufferings.  The  hypocrite's  hope 
vain  and  deceitful. 

I.  It  is  tbmporabv.  Passing  away  as  the  "  rush  without  mire,  or  the  reed  without 
water."  Quickly  it  grows  up,  but  as  quickly  withers.  The  promise  of  it  is  vain. 
"  While  it  is  yet  in  its  greenness,  and  not  cut  down,  it  withereth  before  any  other 
herb." 

II.  It  is  unbubstantiai,  and  nuTKUSTWOKTHT.  As  "  the  spider's  web."  It  is 
weak,  unworthy  of  any  confidence.  As  the  gossamer  thread  is  broken  by  a  touch  or 
even  a  breath  of  wind,  so  his  expectation  is  cut  off  by  the  most  trivial  incident.  It 
has  no  firmness,  no  endurance,  no  permanence. 

III.  It  is  immatuke  and  never  comes  to  peefeotion.  "  It  is  green  before  the 
sun."  With  rapid  haste  it  strides  forth,  but  only  with  equal  haste  to  fait.  In  its  own 
judgment  it  is  firm  and  enduring  as  a  stone  structure.  With  proud  self-confidenoe  so 
he  prides  himself.  But  it  is  that  all  may  fall  to  ruin.  The  destroyer  is  at  hanri,  even 
he  who  casts  away. 

IV.  It  is  foeootten  and  disappointino,  and  passes  out  of  mind.  Its  very  place 
denies  it,  "I  have  not  seen  thee."  No  greater  joy  or  reward  can  the  hypocrite's  hope 
afford  him.  Disappointment  is  his  lot.  He  sows  the  seeds  of  vanity ;  vanity  he  reaps. 
He  leans  upon  a  thread  which  a  breath  may  break.  Deceitful  himuelf,  his  hopes  are 
as  the  heart  which  gave  them  birth.  They  return  to  their  own.  He  created  them ; 
they  are  as  their  maker.  From  this  rude  disappointment  men  may  guard  (1)  by  sincerity 
of  spirit,  (2)  by  basing  their  hopes  upon  a  true  foundation,  for  which  nothing  prepares 
them  but  (3)  a  thorough  honesty  and  cherished  truthfulness. — B.  G. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — GocCs  care  of  the  perfect  man.  To  the  Book  of  Job  may  all  sufferers 
turn  for  consolation ;  for  though  Job  is  both  covertly  and  openly  reproached  by  his 
friends,  yet  through  their  words  there  shine  many  clear  statements  of  truth,  and  many 
just  reflections  on  the  wisdom,  the  goodness,  and  the  wise  government  of  God.  The 
Divine  care  of  the  upright  is  very  strikingly  affirmed.  God's  care  of  the  perftot 
man  is — 

I.  Tendbe.  God  does  not  "  cast  away  "  nor  despise  him,  but  gently  leads  him  by 
the  hand,  as  he  will  not  the  evil-doers,  helping  him  as  none  other  can  help.  To  that 
care  we  have  learnt  that  we  may  commit  ourselves,  forasmuch  as  he  careth  for  us. 
The  Divine,  pitiful,  compassionate  aid  is  given  to  meet  the  need  of  the  frail  man. 
Not  therefore,  rudely,  or  with  rough  and  harsh,  but  with  tender,  treatment  does  God 
help  the  perfect  man.     The  Divine  care  for  the  upright  is^ 

II.  CoKTiNuoirs.  He  is  faithful  to  them  who  put  their  trust  in  him.  He  disappoints 
the  hope  of  the  ungodly,  but  not  that  of  the  righteous.  As  the  hypocrite  trusted  to 
a  spider's  web  which  had  no  strength,  and  to  the  unwatered  flag  which  withered,  so 
the  perfect  man  finds  in  God  a  Bock  of  refuge,  steadfast  and  unchangeable.  He  ever 
abides.  The  immutability  of  the  Divine  Name  is  one  of  the  truest  sources  of  consolation 
to  the  weary,  the  troubled,  and  sad  at  heart. 

III.  The  Divine  care  for  the  perfect  man  is  further  a  tbtje  cause  of  jot  and  olad- 
NESS.  He  fills  the  "  mouth  with  laughing  "  and  the  "  lips  with  rejoicing."  God  gives 
gongs  iu  the  dark  night  of  afSiction,  and  brings  the  true  consolation  to  the  sufferer, 
causing  him  to  shout  abud  for  very  joy.  He  is  a  Hiding-place  and  a  Refuge.  He  is 
a  Spring  of  water  and  a  Shadow  from  the  heat  of  the  day.  He  inspires  strength  to  the 
sou1,'as  with  bread  he  nourishes  the  body;  and  comfort  to  the  spirit,  as  with  wine  ha 
revives  the  drooping. 

rV.  The  Divine  care  for  the  perfect  man,  in  its  retributive  judgments,  oasts  shame 
UPON  HIS  ENEMIES.  Vindicating  the  character  of  his  faithful  one  against  the  aspersion 
of  his  wicked  foes,  he  causes  "  the  dwelling-place  "  of  that  wicked  one  to  "  come  to 
nought,"  and  the  wicked  one  himself  to  "  be  clothed  with  shame."  Thus  the  Divine 
care  is  tender  towards  his  befriended  one — the  poor,  frail,  but  faithful  son  of  man- 
crowning  him  with  honour  and  glory,  making  his  crown  to  flourish,  while  clothing  his 
enemies  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face. — E.  G, 


150  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  vra.  1—22. 

Ver.  1. — Bildad  the  pedant.  Job's  second  friend  appears  as  a  pedant,  quoting  the 
authority  of  aatiquity,  and  relying  on  the  tradition  of  the  ancients.  His  character  is 
not  extinct,  and  the  mischief  of  his  blunders  is  with  us  to-day. 

I.  The  power  or  the  pedant.  This  man  bases  his  Influence  on  certain  good 
qualities.  1.  Experience.  It  is  to  be  supposed  that  this  is  of  some  value.  The 
garnered  wealth  of  experience  should  be  a  great  test  of  truth.  The  rule  that  has  stood 
the  strain  of  time  appears  to  be  conflrmed  in  value.  Ideas  may  be  very  captivating 
when  they  first  flash  out  in  their  novelty,  but  some  hidden  flaw  may  make  them  utterly 
worthless.  But  the  mellow  maxim,  ripened  by  years,  and  enriched  with  the  juices  of 
manifold  experiences,  comes  to  us  with  great  claims  on  our  confidence.  2.  ffumiUty. 
It  seems  to  be  more  humble  to  trust  to  those  who  are  older  than  ourselves,  than  to  set 
up  our  own  wisdom  as  a  rival  of  theirs.  Who  are  we  that  we  should  pretend  to  ques- 
tion the  wisdom  of  the  ages  ?  3.  Reverence.  On  the  other  hand,  the  associations  of 
antiquity  command  our  reverence.  We  show  respect  to  grey  hairs,  and  we  are  moved 
to  similar  feelings  in  view  of  all  signs  of  age.  Coming  out  of  a  dim  past,  hoary  with 
the  years,  ancient  things  acquire  a  certain  sanctity.  The  grand  minster,  the  ruined 
castle,  the  worm-eaten  cabinet,  the  rare  old  book, — these  things  stifle  our  impertinent 
modem  presumptions  by  the  silent  weight  of  their  years.  "  I  love  everything  that's 
old,"  says  Goldsmith  ;  "  old  friends,  old  times,  old  manners,  old  books,  old  wine." 

II.  The  folly  of  the  pedant.  This  reverence  for  antiquity  may  be  abused,  and 
it  is  abused  by  the  pedant,  who  assumes  that  all  modern  requirements  are  to  be  settled 
by  some  musty  rule  of  the  ancientSi  There  are  many  errors  in  such  a  position.  1.  Lack 
qf  diiorimination.    Pope  writes— 

"With  sharpen'd  sight  pale  antiquaries  pore; 
Th'  inscriptions  value,  but  the  rust  adore  : 
This  the  blue  varnish,  that  the  green  endears— 
The  sacred  rust  of  twice  ten  hundred  years." 

Time  has  brought  down  loads  of  rubbish  on  its  stream  as  well  as  some  precious  cargoes 
of  ancient  experience.  Pedants  mistake  scum  for  cream.  2.  Misinterpretation  of  the 
value  of  at^tiguity.  The  earlier  times,  as  Bacon  tells  us,  were  really  the  childhood  of 
our  race,  and  we  are  the  true  ancients.  It  is  absurd  to  bind  the  practice  of  the  adult 
age  by  the  tentative  ideas  of  infancy.  What  has  been  tried  through  the  centuries, 
and  being  in  frequent  use  has  stood  the  test  of  time,  has  thereby  acquired  a  certain 
value.  But  mere  antiquity  only  means  an  origin  in  more  primitive  and  less  advanced 
times.  3.  The  superstition  of  forms.  The  pedant  delights  in  forms  and  rules  and  exact 
precedents.  But  there  are  no  true  precedents  for  scores  of  things.  Indeed,  no  two 
occasions  are  exactly  alike.  Therefore  no  human  maxims  can  be  large  enough  to 
embrace  all  circurustances.  Life  cannot  be  bound  by  formal  rules.  We  must  learn 
to  look  facts  in  the  face,  and  dare  to  discard  ancient  maxims  when  they  are  proved  to 
be  false.  Antiquity  is  venerable,  but  truth  is  more  venerable.  God  has  given  us 
consciences,  and  he  has  promised  us  the  help  of  his  Spirit.  Our  best  guide  is  not  an 
•ncient  rule,  but  the  living  Christ,  who  is  ever  in  the  midst  of  his  people. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  3. — The  justice  of  Ood.  Bildad  asks  if  it  can  be  right  for  Job  to  complain  as 
he  does.  Such  conduct  is  an  arraignment  of  the  Divine  justice.  Human  judges  have 
been  known  to  twist  justice  to  suit  their  own  purposes ;  this  conduct  was  and  is  only 
too  common  in  the  Bast.  But  is  it  to  be  thought  that  God  would  act  in  this  way? 
Surely  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  do  right  (Gen.  xviii.  25). 
_  I.  God's  justice  is  good  and  desibable.  It  is  the  mistake  of  narrow,  one-sided 
views  to  confine  the  idea  of  God's  justice  to  his  relations  with  sin  and  punishment,  and 
to  regard  it  solely  as  that  which  provokes  his  wrath.  This  mistake  leads  people  to  have 
a  horror  of  the  very  notion  of  God's  justice.  They  would  be  profoundly  thankful  if  it 
could  be  blotted  out  of  the  list  of  his  attributes.  They  regard  it  as  solely  inimical  to 
them.     Their  supreme  desire  is  to  escape  from  its  clutches.     It  is  to  them  a  most 


good  and  desirable, 


OH.  vin.  1-22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  15] 

II.  The  justice  or  God  la  not  always  apparent.  Sometimeg  he  seems  to  show 
himself  in  the  same  light  as  the  unjust  judges  of  imperfect  human  society.  We  cannot 
see  the  equity  of  his  dealings.  He  even  seems  to  he  perverting  judgment.  Good  men 
suffer,  and  evil  men  prosper.  This  is  the  common  complaint  of  the  Old  Testament 
saints  in  their  trouble  (e.g.  Fs.  Ixxiii.  3).  But  how  is  it  possible  if  God  is  just  ?  There 
is  not  only  an  apparent  negligence  that  lets  wrong  be  done  among  men  unchecked. 
Qoi  himself  appears  to  pervert  justice  in  his  own  providential  dealings,  sending  calami- 
ties to  the  innocent,  and  heaping  favours  on  the  guilty.  This  obvious  fact  was  forced 
on  the  notice  of  men,  and  it  raised  most  perplexing  doubts  at  a  time  when  temporal 
good  was  assumed  to  be  the  right  reward  of  moral  good. 

III.  We  have  good  reason  to  trust  the  justice  of  GkiD.  1.  Ee  it  almighty. 
He  has  not  the  inducement  to  act  unjustly  that  tempts  the  weak.  Deceit  and  injustice 
are  the  refuges  of  feebleness.  Cowards  are  unjust.  Strength  can  afford  to  be  mag- 
nanimous. 2.  jHis  M  perfectly  wise.  He  will  not  blunder  into  injustice,  as  the  most 
immaculate  human  judge  may  do.  3.  Se  is  absolutely  good.  Our  revelations  of  God's 
character  should  assure  us  that  his  justice  must  be  without  a  flaw,  even  though  all 
appearances  are  against  it.  The  faith  that  will  not  bear  a  strain  is  worthless.  If  we 
cannot  trust  God  when  he  seems  to  be  acting  hardly  and  unfairly,  it  is  little  that  we  trust 
him  when  we  can  see  that  all  is  going  well.  The  goodness  of  God  is  our  security  ;  we 
must  judge  of  events  by  what  we  know  of  God  in  Christ,  not  of  God  by  what  we 
appear  to  discover  in  events.  4.  Justice  is  not  always  what  we  should  expect.  The 
principle  must  be  simple  and  intelligible.  We  must  believe  that  justice  in  God  must 
be  what  we  know  as  justice — only  infinitely  exalted.  But  the  application  of  this 
justice  may  be  beyond  our  conceptions.  It  may  be  just  for  God  to  do, what  looks  to  ua 
now  as  unfair.    Here  we  must  trust  and  wait  for  the  end. — W.  F,  A. 

Ver.  7. — A  small  beginning  and  a  great  increase.  With  irritating  ■dmonitions— 
most  galling  in  the  cruel  insinuation  that  Job's  children  had  died  on  account  of  their 
sins — Bildad  presumes  to  assure  Job  that  if  only  he  is  pure  God  will  be  just,  and  will 
awake  to  deliver  him,  so  that,  though  he  has  a  small  beginning,  his  end  shall  be  very 
great.  This  was  all  based  on  a  very  false  and  unjust  idea  of  Job,  his  past  conduct, 
and  his  present  duty.  Nevertheless  in  itself  it  opened  up  a  true  view  of  the  course  of 
one  who  is  restored  to  right  relations  with  God. 

I.  The  Christian  must  have  a  small  bboinnino.  1.  In  penitence.  He  must  first 
humble  himself  in  the  very  dust.  No  boasting  can  be  admitted  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  2.  In  childlikeness.  We  have  to  turn  and  become  as  little  children  if  we  are 
to  enter  God's  kingdom.  This  implies  humility,  simplicity  of  heart,  and  the  utter 
self-abandonment  of  faith.  3.  In  spiritual  experience.  We  can  but  begin  the  Christian 
life  as  babes  in  Christ.  Our  knowledge  is  small,  our  strength  slight,  our  spiritual 
attainment  most  imperfect.  4.  In  enjoyment  of  llessings.  We  may  begin  in  temporal 
adversity.  There  is  no  promise  that  the  Christian  shall  be  a  rich  and  prosperous  man  in 
the  world.  But  whatever  the  external  condition  may  be,  the  enjoyment  of  the  real 
fruits  of  Divine  grace  will  be  but  small  until  the  soul  has  grown  into  the  capacity  to 
receive  more  of  the  blessings  they  bring. 

II.  The  Christian  will  have  a  obbat  increase.  1.  On  earth.  The  Christian  life 
should  be  one  of  progress,  and  it  will  be  if  it  is  healthy.  Growth  is  a  law  of  life,  and 
it  is  a  law  that  applies  to  the  Divine  life  in  the  soul.  The  healthy  Christian  will  grow 
in  grace ;  his  knowledge  will  expand ;  his  spirituality  will  deepen ;  his  capacity  for 
service  vrill  widen;  his  enjoyment  of  the  blessedness  of  the  vision  of  God  will  become 
richer  and  more  intense.  2.  In  heaven.  The  best  comes  last.  The  great  increase  is 
in  the  "  latter  end."  This  is  different  from  the  experience  of  natural  life,  which  reaches 
a  climax  in  middle  life,  and  then  turns  towards  the  decrepitude  of  senile  decay.  But 
there  is  no  such  decline  for  the  spiritual  life  so  long  as  it  is  healthy.  That  life  knows 
no  old  age:  it  partakes  of  the  unfading  glory  of  the  Eternal.  For  the  aged  Christian 
there  shall  be  "  light  at  eventide; "  mad  when  his  sun  has  set  on  earth,  it;  shall  rise  in 
heaven  in  the  larger  glory  of  God's  eternal  day. 

Ill  God  leads  the  race  from  a  small  BBOiNNiNa  TO  a  great  inobbase.  J  his 
Is  the  case  naturally  in  the  population  which  has  sprung  from  one  pair  of  parents,  until 
it  hM  filled  the  earth  with  nsore  than  a  thousand  million  souls,  and  which  continues  t« 


162  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  vin.  1—22, 

incretige  at  an  unprecedented  rate.  The  same  is  true  of  civilization  and  human  progress. 
The  law  of  human  life  on  earth  is  one  of  advance  and  enlargement.  Thus  we  are 
encouragpd  to  look  forward  to  the  golden  age.  God  is  educating  the  race  hy  the  process 
of  the  centuries,  and  preparing  it  for  great  increase  at  the  latter  end.  There  was  a  grand 
advance  beyond  these  Old  Testament  time^  when  Christ  brought  in  his  gospel ;  the 
triumphs  of  the  gospel  speak  of  an  enlarged  increase.  But  the  best  is  in  store  in  the 
full  coming  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Therefore  let  us  press  forward  in  hope  and  an 
eager  desire  to  do  our  part  towards  hastening  the  happy  advent  of  the  promised 
future.— W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  8. — Lessons  from  history.  Bildad  invites  Job  to  consult  antiquity  and  to  attend 
to  that  which  the  fathers  have  se^irchcd  out.  Even  this  pedant  may  remind  us  that 
wholesome  lessons  are  to  be  culled  from  the  gardens  of  the  past. 

I.  HiSTOBY  TEACHES  BY  EXAMPLE.  Here  We  Can  gee  truth  in  the  concrete.  The 
ideas  which  we  discuss  in  the  abstract  are  embodied  and  at  work  in  the  living  facta 
of  history.  We  can  study  republicanism  in  ancient  Greece,  and  monarchy  in  the  Eoman 
empire;  the  consequences  of  heathenism  in  the  pagan  world,  and  the  fruits  of  Chris- 
tianity in  the  story  of  the  gospel  and  its  triumphs;  the  power  of  the  gospel  in  the 
romance  of  missions,  and  the  weakness  of  man  in  the  failure  and  ruin  of  ancient 
Chnrches.  Here  we  see  not  lifeless  arguments,  but  living  men.  Therefore  much  of 
the  Bible  is  history ;  God's  Word  comes  to  us  through  man's  life.  We  should  pay 
more  attention  to  men  and  fads. 

II.  HiSTOBY  EEVKALB  THE  OKIMN  OF  INSTITUTIONS  AND  MOVEMENTS.      Most  of  tboSB 

which  we  have  to  do  with  took  their  rise  in  a  more  or  less  remote  past.  If  we  can 
trace  them  back  to  their  source,  we  can  better  judge  of  their  whole  characters.  Much 
attention  is  given  to  the  childhood  and  youth  of  a  great  man  by  his  biographer,  for 
therein  lies  the  secret  of  his  after-life.  It  is  well  to  trace  back  the  Christian  story,  and 
see  how  God  has  been  shaping  his  Church  through  the  ages.  Our  religion  is  emphati- 
cally historical.  It  springs  from  facts,  things  done  in  the  past.  In  this  respect  it  is 
unique  among  the  religions  of  the  world.  AH  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  are  lessons 
of  history ;  they  all  take  their  rise  in  the  story  of  Christ  and  his  cross.  Yet  we  are 
not  bound  by  pedantic  rules  and  frivolous  precedents.  We  find  the  origin  of  our  faith 
in  certain  facts.  The  interpretation  of  those  facts  must  grow  with  our  advancing 
knowledge,  and  the  application  of  their  lessons  must  vary  with  changing  circum- 
stances. 

IIL  HiSTOBY  HELPS  TO  MATURITY  OP  JUDGMENT.  If  WO  are  Weak  and  lack  indepen- 
dence of  mind,  it  may  weigh  us  down  with  the  incubus  of  its  precedents.  This  is  how 
it  affected  Bildad  with  his  veneration  for  the  fathers,  and  this  is  how  it  affects  those 
good  Christian  people  who  make  the.Church  Fathers  absolute  authorities,  when  they 
should  dare  to  trust  a  careful  and  devout  interpretation  of  Scripture  and  the  ultimate 
judgments  of  the  Christian  consciousness.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  good  use 
of  the  Fathers.  The  very  variety  of  explanations  of  Christian  doctrines  in  the  past 
should  teach  us  caution  and  a  large  wisdom  in  treating  difficult  subjects.  The  student 
of  history  will  often  know  that  some  pretentious  notion,  flashed  out  on  the  world  as 
a  magnificent  discovery,  is  but  a  thrice-slain  error  of  ancient  controversies.  Old  truth 
will  endure  the  test  of  time.  But  standing  on  the  experience  of  the  ages,  we  should 
be  able  to  reach  forth  to  higher  truth  in  the  future,  the  more  readily  because  we  thus 
use  the  past. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  11, 12.— The  rush  and  the  papyrus.  Prom  history  Bildad  turns  to  nature,  or 
rather  to  a  traditional  saying  about  nature — to  an  old  proverb;  possibly  it  has  been 
suggested  from  Egyptian  lore. 

I.  The  plants  bpeino  from  wateb.  Both  of  these  plants  grow  in  marshes  or 
pools,  and  by  the  banks  of  rivers  and  canals.  They  both  need  an  abundance  of  water. 
Man  can  only  live  when  nourished  by  the  goodness  of  God.  The  Christian  can  only 
grow  to  maturity  when  planted  by  the  unfailing  streams  of  the  river  of  life. 

IL  The  plants  flourish  luxuriantly.  This  is  one  of  the  characteristics  ol 
succulent  plants  in  moist  soil.  They  grow  rapidly  and  flourish  greatly.  So,  as  the 
goodness  of  God  Ib  no  mere  sprinkling  of  refreshmeut,  but  a  great  river  with  abundance 


OH.  Tm.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  15? 

of  water,  tliey  who  lire  upon  it  will  not  be  in  a  meagre  and  gtunted  state,  but  will 
make  great  progress  and  will  grow  in  grace. 

III.  The  floubishino  condition  of  the  plants  is  proof  of  thb  pbesenoe  of 
NOURISHING  STREAMS.  They  may  be  bo  abuudant  and  so  rank  in  their  growth  as 
to  hide  the  water  from  which  they  spring ;  but  their  very  splendour  of  health  and 
development  is  a  certain  sign  that  they  are  surrounded  by  plenteous  streams.  We 
know  that  their  roots  must  be  in  the  water  because  their  stems  and  upper  growth  are  so 
green  and  vigorous.  So  the  existence  of  prosperity  is  a  sign  of  Divine  goodness.  We 
cannot  go  so  far  as  Bildad,  and  take  it  as  a  proof  of  Qod's  approval,  for  God  is  gracious 
to  bad  men ;  but  it  is  a  proof  of  God's  kindness.  The  spiritual  flourishing  of  Christian 
people  is  a  certain  sign  that  they  are  drinking  of  the  living  waters.  They  may  Tie 
reserved,  and  may  not  reveal  to  us  the  springs  from  which  they  draw,  hiding  the  roots 
of  their  spiritual  life.  Still  by  their  fruits  shall  we  know  them,  and  learn  that  they 
must  be  in  vital  relations  with  the  Divine  source  of  all  spiritual  experience. 

IV.  The  PLANTS  flourish  fob  useful  end.  The  reed  referred  to  by  Bildad  is  an 
edible  plant;  and  the  papyrus  is  the  material  from  which  paper  wns  anciently  made. 
The  prosperity  which  God  gives  to  man  is  a  talent  to  be  used  in  the  service  of  life. 
Spiritual  growth  should  lead  to  spiritual  productiveness.  We  receive  grace  from  God 
in  order  that  we  may  minister  to  the  work  of  God. . 

V.  When  the  water  dries  up  the  plants  wither.  These  plants  are  not  like 
the  thorns  of  the  desert,  which  can  endure  a  terrible  drought  without  suffering  seriously. 
They  are  distinctly  denizens  of  watery  places,  and  without  water  they  must  perish. 
Man's  prosperity  must  cease  when  God  ceases  to  bless  him.  He  may  ignore  the  Divine 
source  of  his  good  things,  but  he  must  fail  if  that  source  is  stopped.  The  Christian 
more  especially  will  suffer  in  his  better  life  if  he  is  deprived  of  the  streams  of  grace. 
He  is  like  the  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water.  He  in  particular  needs  streams  of 
grace  if  he  is  to  flourish.  He  cannot  thrive  on  his  own  goodly  proportions.  The  most 
advanced  Christian  must  go  back  and  even  utterly  perish  if  he  loses  the  constant 
supply  of  grace.    We  must  be  in  Christ  to  live  the  Christian  life. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  14. — The  spider's  web.  Bildad  compares  the  hope  of  the  impious  to  a  spider's 
web,  or  rather,  recalling  sayings  of  antiquity,  he  quotes  an  old  proverb  to  that  effect. 
Let  us  consider  the  wisdom  of  this  ancient  saying  by  noting  characteristics  of  the 
spider's  web. 

I.  It  is  quickly  woven.  It  is  one  of  the  most  rapidly  made  fabrics  in  nature.  It 
puts  Jonah's  gourd  to  the  shame.  Some  men  are  very  hasty  in  forming  foolish  hopes. 
With  them  the  wish  is  father  to  the  thought.  They  jump  to  conclusions  that  are 
favourable  to  themselves.  But  the  sanguine  temperament  is  no  guarantee  for  permanent 
security.     Because  we  believe  readily,  we  do  not  believe  the  more  safely. 

II.  It  18  delicate  and  beautiful  to  look  at.  We  cannot  but  admire  the  spider's 
web  on  a  l)right  September  morning,  when  it  is  spangled  with  dewdrops.  Its  very 
delicacy- of  structure  adds  to  the  beauty  of  it.  There  is  nothing  coarse  about  it.  Some 
people  have  a  religion  that  is  refined  and  delicate  and  beautiful.  They  despise  the 
vulgar  ideas  of  other  people.  Their  spider's  web  is  much  more  suitable  to  their 
superfine  culture  than  the  coarse  hemp  ropes  of  the  religion  of  less  cultivated  people. 

III.  It  is  usefijl  fob  its  natural  end.  We  have  no  right  to  complain  that  the 
spider's  web  does  not  sustain  our  weight  when  we  lean  upon  it.  It  was  not  spun  for 
such  a  purpose.  But  yet  it  serves  its  own  proper  end.  It  is  an  excellent  ladder  foi 
its  maker,  and  a  perfect  trap  for  his  victims.  Some  of  those  grounds  of  hope  to  which 
foolish  people  trust  are  not  utterly  false  and  useless.  For  example,  jesthetioism  taken 
for  a  religion  is  as  a  spider's  web.  Yet  it  is  useful  as  a  form  of  culture.  Intellectualism 
is  like  another  spider's  web.  While  the  superfine  thinker  is  spinning  his  fanciful 
threads  of  thought,  he  is  doing  little  for  the  business  of  life.  Yet  what  he  does  may 
be  good  and  true  in  itself,  if  only  he  would  keep  it  in  its  right  place. 

IV.  It  is  excessively  fraoilb.  It  is  just  the  type  of  fragility.  Therefore  all  its 
good  points  are  useless  when  a  man  thinks  of  trusting  his  weight  to  it.  You  but 
mock  the  drowning  man  if  you  toss  him  the  spider's  web.  .He  must  grasp  a  substantial 
rope  if  he  is  to  be  saved.  Now,  Bildad  rightly  compares  the  hope  of  the  impious  to  this 
web.    It  is  fragile  in  the  extrome.    1.  It  has  »»o  subitance     The  man  trusts  (1)  to  hia 


164 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  Et  1 — SSi 


own  wisdom,  which  is  folly  in  the  eyes  of  God ;  (2)  to  his  goodneBS,  which  under  God'a 
searching  glance  is  full  of  sin ;  (3)  to  his  prosperity,  which  cannot  endure  when  the 
favour  of  God  is  withdrawn ;  (4)  to  God's  goodness,  which  indeed  is  a  rock  of  refuge, 
only  it  is  out  of  the  reach  of  the  impious,  who  only  clutch  at  a  shadow  of  it  in  their 
own  fancy.  2.  It  is  heavily  tried.  Here  is  a  question  of  life  and  death.  A  man  has 
to  seek  a  security  for  his  own  soul  and  his  eternal  interests.  The  spider's  web  may 
stand  slight  tests,  but  not  the  strain  those  awful  requirements  put  upon  it.  Esthetics, 
intellcctualism,  and  all  other  human  ideas  fail  here.  We  want  a  strong  means  of 
deliverance.  1'he  gospel  shows  us  that  this  i«  to  be  had  ia  Christ  for  those  who  repent 
and  trust  him. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Vers.  1 — 85. — Job,  in  answer  to  Bildad, 
admits  thu  trutli  of  his  arguments,  but 
declines  to  attempt  tlie  justlficatiou'  which 
can  alone  entitle  him  to  accept  the  favour- 
able side  of  Bildad's  alternative.  Man  can- 
not absolutely  justify  himself  before  God. 
It  is  in  vain  to  attempt  to  do  so.  The  contest 
is  too  unequal.  On  tlie  one  side  perfect 
wisdom  and  absolute  strength  (ver.  4) ;  on 
the  other,  weakness,  imperfection,  ignorance, 
guilt  (vers.  17 — 20).  And  no  "daysman," 
or  umpire,  between  them ;  no  third  party  to 
hold  the  balance  even,  and  preside  authori- 
tatively over  the  controversy,  and  see  tliat 
justice  is  done  (vers.  33 — 35).  Were  it  other- 
wise. Job  would  not  shrink  from  the  contro- 
versy; but  he  thinks  it  ill  arguing  with 
omnipotent  power.  What  he  seems  to  lack 
is  the  absolute  conviction  expressed  by 
Abraham  in  the  emphatic  words, "  Shall  not 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right i" 
(Gen.  xviii.  2d). 

Vers.  1,  2. — And  Job  answered  and  said, 
I  know  it  is  so  of  a  truth.  "  I  freely  admit," 
te.,  "all  that  has  been  said."  God  would 
not  oast  away  a  perfectly  righteous  man  (ch. 
viii.  20) ;  and,  of  course,  he  punishes  evil- 
doers. But,  applied  practically,  what  is  the 
result  ?  How  should  man  be  just  with  God  t 
or,  before  Ood  1  Apart  from  any  knowledge 
of  the  doctrine  of  original  or  inherited  sin, 
eath  man  feels,  deep  in  his  heart,  that  he  is 
sinful — "a  chief  of  sinners."  Bradford  looks 
upon  the  murderer  as  he  mounts  the  scaffold, 
and  says,  "  But  for  the  grace  of  God,  there 
goes  John  Bradford  1 "  Job  has  a  similar 
conviction,  that  in  the  sight  of  God,  right- 
eousness, suoli  as  it  is,  shrinks  away  into 
insignificance,  and  is  as  nothing,  cannot 
anyhow  be  relied  upon.  Such  must  be  the 
attitude  before  God  of  every  human  loal 


that  is  not  puffed  np  with  pride  or  utterly 
insensate  and  sunk  in  apathy. 

Ver.  3. — If  he  will  contend  with  him; 
rather,  if  he  should  desire  to  contend  with 
hint ;  i.e.  if,  notwithstanding  his  knowledge 
of  his  own  weakness  and  guilt,  he  should 
nevertheless  be  mad  enough  to  desire  to 
contend  with  God,  then  he  will  find  that 
he  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand. 
Of  the  charges  which  God  might  in  his 
omniscience  bring  against  him,  he  oould  not 
make  a  satisfactory  reply  to  one  in  a  thou- 
sand. It  is  not  that  Job  admits  any  special 
guilt  in  himself;  but  such  be  feels  to  be  the 
universal  condition  of  humanity.  "  All  have 
sinned,"  in  ten  thousand  ways,  "  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (Eom.  iiL  23). 

Ver.  4. — He  is  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty 
in  strength.  The  sense  is  strengthened  if 
we  omit  "  he  is,"  and  render.  Wise  in  heart, 
and  mighty  in  strength,  who  hath  hardened, 
etc.  ?  God's  combination  of  perfect  wisdom 
with  infinite  strength  renders  it  hopeless 
for  any  man  to  contend  with  him.  Who 
hath  hardened  himself  against  him,  and 
hath  prospered?  Job  fully  admits  the 
wisdom  of  all  that  Eliphaz  (ch.  iv.  17)  and 
Bildad  (ch.  viii.  3—6)  have  said,  or  hinted, 
with  respect  to  his  inability  wholly  to  justify 
himself.  No  one  has  ever  taken  this  line  of 
absolute  self-justification,  and  prospered. 

Vers.  5 — 13. — A  magnificent  desoriptioa 
of  the  might  and  majesty  of  God,  transcend- 
ing anything  in  the  Psalms,  and  comparable 
to  the  grandest  passages  of  Isaiah  (see  esp^ 
cially  Isa.  xl.  21—24  ;  xlili.  15—20), 

Ver  5. — Which  removeth  the  mountains, 
and  they  know  not;  which  overtumeth 
them  in  his  anger.  Earthquakes  are  com- 
mon in  all  the  countries  adjoining  Syria 
and  Palestine,  and  must  always  have  been 
among  the  most  striking  manifestations  of 
God's  power.  There  are  several  allusions 
to  them  in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  viii.  8 ;  civ.  32), 
and  historical  mention  of  them  in  Knmh. 
xvi.  82 ;  1  Kings  xix.  11 ;  Amos  1. 1 ;  Zeob 


CH.  II.  1 — 35.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


155 


liv.  4,  5 ;  Matt,  xxiv,  7.  Josephus  speaks 
of  one  which  desolated  Judsea  in  the  reign 
of  Herod  the  Great,  and  destroyed  ten 
thousand  people  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  xv.  5.  §  2). 
There  was  another  in  1181,  which  ,was  felt 
over  the  whole  of  the  Hauran,  and  did  great 
damage.  A  still  more  violent  convulsion 
occurred  in  1837,  when  the  area  affected 
extended  five  hundred  miles  from  north  to 
south,  and  from  eighty  to  a  hundred  miles 
east  and  west.  Tiberias  and  Safed  were 
overthrown.  The  earth  gaped  in  various 
places,  and  closed  again.  Feaiful  oscilla- 
tions were  felt.  The  hot  springs  of  Tibe- 
rias mounted  up  to  a  temperature  that 
oidinary  thermometers  could  not  mark,  and 
the  loss  of  life  was  considerable  (see  the 
account  given  by  Dr.  Cunningham  Geikie, 
in  '  Tlie  Holy  Land  and  the  Bible,'  vol.  ii. 
pp.  317, 318).  The  phrases  used  by  Job  are, 
of  course,  poetical.  Earthquakes  do  not 
literally  "remove"  mountains,  nor  "over- 
turn "  them.  They  produce  fissures,  eleva- 
tions, depressions,  and  the  like;  but  they 
rarely  much  alter  local  features  or  the 
general  configuration  of  a  district. 

Ver.  6. — Which  shaketh  the  earth  out  of 
her  place.  This  is  a  still  more  startling  figure 
of  speech  ;  but  comp.  Fs.  xlvi.  2 ;  Ixviii,  16 ; 
cxiv.  4,  6.  And  the  pillars  thereof  tremble. 
The  earth  is  conceived  of,  poetically,  as  a 
huge  edifice,  supported  on  pillars  (comp. 
Ps.  Ixxv.  3),  which  in  an  earthquake  are 
shaken,  and  impart  their  motion  to  the 
entire  building.  Hosenmiiller's  quotation  of 
Seneca, '  Nat.  Quaest.,'  vi.  20 — "Fortasse  ex 
aliqna  parte  terra  veluti  columnia  quibusdam 
et  pilis  sustinetur,  quibus  vitiatis  et  rece- 
dentibus  tremit  pondus  impositum"  —  is 
apposite. 

Yer.  7. — Which  commandeth  the  sun,  and 
it  riseth  not.  A  magnificent  idea  of  God's 
power,  and,  of  course,  quite  true.  All  the 
movements  of  the  earth  and  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  are  movements  which  God  causes,  and 
could  at  any  moment  suspend.  The  sun 
only  rises  upon  the  earth  each  day  because 
God  causes  it  to  rise.  If  he  were  once  to 
intermit  his  hand,  the  whole  universe  would 
fall  into  confusion.  And  sealeth  up  the  stars. 
Either  covers  them  with  a  thick  darkness, 
which  their  rays  cannot  penetrate,  or  other- 
wise renders  them  invisible.  The  idea  is  that 
God,  if  he  pleases,  can  remove  the  stars  out 
of  man's  sight,  hide  them  away,  seal  them  up. 

Ver.  8. — WTiich  alone  spreadeth  out  the 
heavens  (comp.  Ps.  civ.  2 ;  Isa.  xl.  22).  The 
heavens  are  regarded  as  spread  out  over  the 
whole  earth,  like  a  curtain  or  awning  over 
a  tent,  everywhere  overshadowing  and  pro- 
tecting it.  This  "  stretching  "  or  "  spreading 
out "  is  felt  to  be  one  of  the  mightiest  and 
most  marvellous  of  the  Creator's  works,  and 
is  cooscantly  put  forward  is  Scripture  as  a 


special  evidence  of  his  omnipotence  (see, 
besides  the  passages  above  quoted,  I>ta.  xlii. 
5;  xliv.24;  xlv.  12;  li.  13;  Jer.  x.  12).  It 
adds  to  the  marvellousness  that  God  did  it 
all  "alone,"  or  "by  himself"  (comp.  Isa. 
xliv.  24).  And  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of 
the  sea ;  literally,  tlie  heights  of  the  sea ;  i.e. 
the  waves,  which  run  mountain-high.  God 
plants  his  feet  upon  these,  to  crush  them  in 
their  proud  might  (comp.  Ps.  xciii.  5). 

Ver.  9. — Which  maketh  Arctnrus,  Orion, 
and  Pleiades;  literally,  whieh  maketh  'Ash, 
Kgsil,andKimah.  The  rendering  of  the  LXX. 
(6  woiav  n\fidSa,Kai"Z(rTepov,  Kci  'ApKTovpov), 
supported,  as  it  is,  by  most  of  the  other 
ancient  versions  and  by  the  Targuma,  has 
caused  the  stellar  character  of  these  names 
to  be  generally  recognized;  but  the  exact 
meaning  of  each  term  is,  to  some  extent,  still 
a  matter  of  dispute.  On  the  whole,  it  seems 
most  probable  that  'Ash,  or  'Aish  (oh.  xxxviii. 
32),  designates  "  the  Great  Boar,"  called  by 
the  Arabs  Nahsh,  while  Kgsil  is  the  name 
of  the  constellation  of  Orion,  and  Kimdh  of 
that  of  the  Pleiades.  The  word  'Ash  means 
"  a  litter,"  and  may  be  compared  with  the 
Greek  Sjuaf  a  and  our  own  "  Charles's  Wain," 
both  of  them  names  given  to  the  Great 
Bear,  from  a  fancied  resemblance  of  its  form 
to  that  of  a  vehicle.  KSdl  means  "  an  in- 
solent;  rich  man"  (Lee);  and  is  often  trans- 
lated by  "fool"  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs 
(xiv.  16;  XV.  20;  xix.  1;  xxi.  20,  etc.).  It 
seems  to  have  been  an  epitheton  usitattim  of 
Nimrod,  who,  according  to  Oriental  tradition, 
made  war  upon  the  gods,  and  was  bound 
in  the  sky  for  his  impiety — the  constella- 
tion beilig  thenceforth  called  "  the  Giant " 
(G«66or), or  "the  insolent  one"  (KisiT),  and 
later  by  the  Greeks  "  Orion  "  (comp.  Amos 
V.  8 ;  and  infra,  cli.  xxxviii.  31).  Kimah  un- 
douhtedly  designates  "the  Pleiades."  It 
occurs  again,  in  connection  with  Klsil,  in  ch. 
xxxviii.  31,  and  in  Amos  v.  8.  The  meaning 
is  probably  "a  heap,"  "a  cluster"  (Lee); 
which  was  also  the  Greek  idea:  IIAeii^Ses, 
'6ri  vKeiovs  Sfiov  Karct  filav  ffufaytayfiv  elfft 
(Eustath.,  '(jomment.  in  Horn.  II.,'  xviii. 
488);  and  which  has  been  also  inimitably 
expressed  by  Tennyson  in  the  line,  "  Like 
a  swarm  of  dazzling  fireflies  tangled  in  a 
silver  braid."  And  the  chambers  of  the 
Bonth.  The  Chaldeans  called  the  zodiacal 
constellations  "  mansions  of  the  sun  "  and 
"of  the  moon"  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol. 
ii.  p.  575) ;  but  these  do  not  seem  to  be  here 
intended.  Rather  Job  has  in  his  mind  those 
immense  spaces  of  the  sky  which  lie  behind 
his  southern  horizon  ;  how  far  extending,  he 
knows  not.  Though  the  circumnavigation  ■ 
of  Africa  was  not  effected  until  about  B.o.  600, 
yet  it  is  not  improbable  that  he  may  have 
derived  from  travellers  or  merchanti  some 
knc^ledijit  of  the  Southern  hemisphere. 


156 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  DC  1 — SSL 


Ver.  10.— WMcli  doeth  great  thingB  past 
finding  out ;  yea,  and  wonders  without  num- 
ber. An  almost  exact  repetition  of  the  words 
of  Eliphaz  in  oh.  t.  9.  The  repetition  may 
have  been  oonsclous  or  nnoonscious.  Job 
may  have  meant  to  Bay,  "  My  view  of  God 
embraces  all  that  you  can  tell  me  of  him, 
and  goes  further ;  "  or  he  may  simply  have 
used  words  conoerning  the  Divine  unaearch- 
ableness  which  were  common  in  the  mouths 
of  religious  men  in  his  time  (comp.  Ps.  Izxii 
18 ;  and  infra,  ch.  xi.  7). 

Ver.  11. — lo,  he  goeth  by  me,  and  I  see 
him  not.  Kear  as  tiod  is  to  ne,  close  as  he 
comes  to  us,  we  cannot  directly  see  him,  or 
feel  him,  or  perceive  his  presence.  Wo  know 
it  by  faith,  we  may  feel  it  in  our  inmost 
spirits;  but  there  is  no  manifestation  of  it 
to  our  senses.  A  sharp  line  divides  the 
visible  and  invisible  worlds ;  and  this  line, 
if  it  is  ever  crossed,  is  very  rarely  crossed. 
Job  possibly  reflects  upon  the  pretension  of 
Eliphaz  to  have  had  a  physical  conscious- 
ness  of  the  visitation  of  a  spirit  (ch.  iv.  15, 
16),  and  asserts,  with  a  tinge  of  sarcasm, 
that  it  is  otherwise  with  him — the  spirit- 
world  passes  him  by,  and  he  receives  no 
light,  no  illumination,  no  miraculous  direc- 
tion from  it.  He  passeth  on  also.  The  same 
verb  is  used  by  Kliphaz  (oh.  iv.  15)  in  speak- 
ing of  his  spiritual  visitation.  Bat  I  peroeive 
him  not.  Eliphaz  perceived  the  presence  of 
tlie  spirit  (ch.  iv.  15, 16)  and  heard  its  voice 
(ch.  iv.  16 — 21).  Job  seems  to  mean  that  he 
is  not  so  favoured. 

Ver.  12. — Behold,  he  taketh  away ;  rather, 
he  leizeth  the  prey  (see  the  Bevised  Version). 
The  expression  is  much  stronger  than  that 
used  in  ch.  i.  21.  Job  seems  to  be  smarting 
under  the  recollection  of  all  that  he  has  los^ 
and  takes  an  aggrieved  tone.  Who  can  hinder 
him  1  (comp.  Isa.  xlv.  9 ;  Jer.  xviiL  6  ;  Eom. 
xix.  20).  Who  will  say  unto  him.  What 
doest  thoat  To  have  to  do  with  such  an 
irresistible  Being,  alone  in  his  might,  would 
indeed  bo  terrible  if,  while  absolutely  power- 
ful, unchecked  and  uncontrolled  from  with- 
out, he  were  not  also  absolutely  good,  and 
therefore  controlled  and  checked  oy  a  law 
from  within.  This,  however.  Job,  in  his 
present  mood,  does  not  seem  clearly  to  see. 

Ver.  13.— If  God  will  not  withdraw  his 
anger,  the  proud  helpers  do  stoop  under  him. 
There  is  no  "if"  in  the  original;  and  the 
passage  is  best  taken  categorically:  "God 
does  not  withdraw  his  anger;  "  i.e.  the  auger 
which  he  feels  against  those  who  resist  him. 
"  The  helpers  of  Bahab  do  stoop  [or,  '  are 
prostrate']  under  liim."  Eahab  in  this 
_  passage,  and  also  in  oh.  xxvi.  12,  as  well  as 
in  Isa.  11.  9,  seems  to  be  used  as  the  proper 
name  of  some  great  power  of  evil.  Such  a 
power  was  recognized  in  the  mythology  of 
Egypt,  under  the  names  of  Bet  for  Typhon) 


and  of  Apophls,  the  great  serpent,  con- 
tinually represented  as  pierced  by  Horus 
(Bawlinson's  'Herodotus,'  vol.  iL  p.  257; 
•  History  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  895). 
In  the  earlier  Aryan  myths  there-  is  a 
similar  personification  of  evil  in  Vitra, 
called  Dasiya,  "  the  Destroyer,"  and  at  per- 
petual enmity  with  Indra  and  Agni  ('  Be- 
ligions  of  the  Ancient  World,'  p.  114).  The 
Babylonians  and  Assyrians  had  a  tradition 
of  a  great  "  war  in  heaven "  (•  Becords  of 
the  Paat,'Tol  v.  pp.  133 — 136),  carried  on  by 
seven  spirits,  who  were  finally  reduoed  to 
subjeotion.  All  these  seem  to  be  distorted 
reminiscences  of  that  great  conflict,  whereof 
the  only  trustworthy  account  is  the  one 
contained  in  the  Bevelation  of  St.  John, 
"There  was  war  in  heaven:  Michael  and 
his  angela  fought  against  the  dragon ;  and 
the  dragon  fought  and  his  angels" — the 
"  helpers "  of  the  present  passage — "  and 
prevailed  not ;  neither  was  their  place  found 
any  more  iu  heaven  "  (Eev.  xii.  7,  8).  Job, 
it  seems,  had  inherited  one  of  such  traditions, 
one  in  which  the  power  of  evil  was  known 
as  Bahab, "  the  Proud  One ; "  and  he  means 
here  to  say  that  God  not  only  holds  men 
in  snbjection,  but  also  beings  much  more 
powerful  than  man,  as  Bahab  and  his 
helpers,  who  had  rebelled  and  made  war  on 
God,  and  been  cast  down  from  heaven,  and 
were  now  prostrate  under  God's  feet. 

Ver.  14. — How  much  less  shall  I  answer 
him  1  If  he  be  the  Lord  of  earth  and  heaven, 
if  he  rule  the  sun  and  the  stars,  if  he  tread 
down  the  sea,  if  he  be  impalpable  and  irre- 
sistible, if  he  hold  the  evil  power  and  his 
helpers  nnder  restraint,  how  should  I  dare 
to  answer  him  7  How  should  any  mere  man 
do  so  ?  And  choose  out  my  words  to  reason 
with  him  1  Job  feels  that  he  would  be  too 
much  overwhelmed  to  choose  his  terms 
carefully,  and  yet  a  careless  word  might  ba 
an  unpardonable  ofirenoe. 

Ver.  15.— Whom,  though  I  were  righteous, 
yet  would  I  not  answer.  Even  perfect 
righteousness,  so  far  as  possible  in  acreature, 
would  not  enable  a  man  to  stand  up  in 
controversy  with  him  who  "charges  hii 
angels  with  folly  "  (oh.  iv.  18) ;  and,  more- 
over, to  such  righteousness  Job  does  not 
pretend  (see  ch.  vii.  20,  21).  But  I  would 
make  supplication  to  my  Judge;  rather,  to 
mine  adversary  (see  the  Bevised  Version). 
Prayer  is  the  only  rightful  attitude  of  even 
the  best  man  before  his  Maker — prayer  for 
meroy,  prayer  for  pardon,  prayer  for  grace, 
prayer  for  advance  in  holiness. 

ver.  16.— If  I  had  called,  and  he  had 
answered  me.  "  If,"  that  is,  "  I  had  chal- 
lenged God  to  a  controversy,  and  he  had 
granted  it,  and  bidden  me  to  plead  my  cans* 
at  his  bar,  yet  could  I  not  suppose  that  he 
had  really  Hearkened  to  me,  and  woul4 


OH.  IX.  1 — 35.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


167 


allow  me  boldly  to  stand  up  before  him  and 
freely  to  challenge  his  doings.  Saoh  con- 
descension on  his  part,  such  an  abnegation 
of  his  supremacy,  is  inconceivable,  and  I 
oould  not  have  acted  on  it."  Yet  would  I 
not  believe  that  he  had  hearkened  unto  my 
voioe ;  rather,  yet  eauld  I  not  believe.  It 
was  not  tliat  he  would  not  have  wished,  but 
that  he  would  not  have  been  able,  to  believe. 

Ver.  17. — For  he  breaketh  me  with  a 
tempest.  "God,"  that  is,  "would  not  be 
likely  patiently  to  hear  my  justification,  and 
calmly  to  weigh  it,  when  he  is  already  over- 
whelming me  with  his  wrath,  breaking  and 
crushing  me  (comp.  Gen.  iii.  15,  where  the 
same  word  cjiei  is  used)  with  a  very  storm  of 
calamity."  The  sentiment  can  scarcely  be 
justified,  since  it  breathes  something  of  a 
contumacious  spirit.  But  this  only  shows 
that  Job  was  not  yet  "  made  perfect  through 
sufferings"  (Heb.  ii.  10).  And  multiplieth 
my  wonuds  without  cause,  A  further  asser- 
tion, not  of  absolute  sinlessness,  but  of  com- 
parative innocence — of  the  belief  that  he 
had  done  nothing  to  deserve  such  a  terrible 
punishment  as  he  is  suffering  (comp.  ch.  vi. 
24,  29). 

Ver.  18. — He  will  not  suffer  me  to  take 
my  breath.  "  He  gives  me  no  breathing- 
space,"  that  is,  "  no  time  of  relaxation  or 
refreshment.  My  existence  is  one  continual 
misery  "  (comp.  ch.  vii.  3 — 6,  13 — 19).  But 
filleth  me  with  bitterness;  literally,  with 
bitter  things,  or  bittemeises  (Hebrew,  oninBD). 

Ver.  19.— If  I  speak  of  strength,  lo,  he  is 
strong.  Still  the  idea  is,  "  How  can  I  con- 
tend with  God?  If  it  is  to  be  a  trial  of 
strength,  it  is  he  who  is  strong,  not  I;  if  it 
is  to  be  a  suit,  or  pleading  for  justice,  who 
will  appoint  me  a  day?"  And  if  of  judgment, 
who  shall  set  me  a  time  to  plead  7  (comp. 
below,  ver.  3ii). 

Ver.  20.— If  I  justify  myself,  mine  own 
month  shall  condemn  me.  Since  he  could 
not  wlinlhj  justify  himself.  "  All  men  have 
sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  " 
(Bom.  iii.  23).  Job  has  already  admitted 
the  utterance  of  ""rash  words"  (ch.  vi.  3), 
and,  at  least  hypothetieally,  that  he  "has 
sinned  "  (ch.  vii.  20),  and  needs  "  pardon  " 
for  his  "  transgression  "  (ch.  vii.  24).  Job, 
if  he  tried  to"  justify  himself,"  would  have 
to  acknowledge  such  sliortoomings,  such 
imperfections,  such  sins — at  any  rate,  of 
infirmity — as  would  make  his  attempted 
justification  a  real  self-condemnation.  If  I 
say,  I  am  perfect,  it  shall  also  prove  me 
perverse;  rather,  even  wer«  I  perfect,  it  (i.e. 
my  month)  would  prove  me  perverse;  i.e. 
supposing  I  were  aotualfy  perfect,  and  tried 
to  prove  it,  my  speech  would  be  so  hesitating 
and  confused,  that  I  should  only  seem  to  be 
perveree. 

Vef.  21. — Though    I   were    p<»Teot,  yet 


would  I  not  know  my  soul :  I  would  despise 
my  life.  The  original  is  very  elliptical 
and  very  obscure.  The  words  run,  I  perfect 
— I  know  not  myself — I  abhor  my  life,  which 
some  explain  as  meaning,  "  Were  I  perfect, 
I  should  not  know  it  myself;  I  despise 
my  life  nndur  such  conditions"  (Stanley 
Leathes);  others,  "I  am  perfect"  (i.e. 
guiltless  of  any  plain  offence),  "  but  do  not 
understand  myself,  and  care  not  what  be- 
comes of  me  "  (Canon  Coot) ;  others  again, 
"  Were  I  perfect,  should  I  not  know  myself, 
and,  knowing  myself,  despise  my  own  life  ?  " 
(Professor  Lee).  The  Septnagint  gives  us  no 
help,  OS  it  plainly  follows  a  different  reading. 
Probably  our  present  text  is  a  corrupt  one. 

Ver.  22. — Hiis  is  One  thing;  rather,  the 
matter  is  one,  or  it  is  all  one.  There  is  no 
difference,  that  is,  between  the  case  of  tlie 
rigliteous  and  the  wicked;  all  are  alike 
sinful  in  God's  sight,  all  equally  "concluded 
under  sin"  (Gal.  iii.  22),  and  all  conse- 
quently obnoxious  to  punishment  at  his 
hands  (comp.  Ecoles.  ix.  2).  In  a  certain 
sense  the  statement  is  true,  and  correspouds 
with  the  argument  of  Bom.  i. — iii. ;  but  no 
account  is  taken  here  of  God's  gracious 
forgiveness  of  sin,  much  less  of  the  general 
scheme  of  redemption,  or  the  compensation 
for  earthly  sufferings  in  an  eternity  of  hap- 
piness, on  which  the  hope  of  the  Christian 
rests.  Therefore  I  said  it ;  rather,  therefore 
I  say,  with  the  Bevised  Version.  He  de- 
stroyeth  the  perfect  and  the  wicked.  As 
far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  it  is  un- 
doubtedly true  that  calamities  fall  alike 
upon  the  just  and  upon  the  unjust.  Death 
is  the  lot  of  all;  trouble,  suffering,  grief, 
the  lot  of  all  (ch.  vi.  7).  Nor  can  it  even  be 
said  that  the  wicked  in  this  world  suffer 
more  than  the  good  (comp.  1  Cor  xv.  29). 
Their  sufferings  are  more  the  natural  con- 
sequence of  their  actions,  but  do  not  seem 
to  exceed  in  amount  or  severity  the  suffer- 
ings of  the  good.  But  this  only  shows  that 
there  must  be  a  futme  life  to  redress  the 
apparent  injustice  of  the  present  one,  and 
set  the  balance  right. 

Ver.  23. — If  the  scourge  slay  suddenly. 
Such  a  "  scourge  "  as  war,  or  pestilence,  or 
famine,  is  probably  meant.  If  one  of  these 
be  let  loose  upon  a  land,  and  slay,  as  it 
always  does  slay,  indifferently  the  good  and 
the  bad,  the  innocent  and  the  guilty,  what 
is  God's  attitude?  Does  he  interpose  to 
save  the  righteous?  By  no  means.  He 
looks  on  passively,  indifferently.  Job  even 
goes  further,  and  says,  with  an  audacity 
that  borders  on  irreverence,  if  it  does  not 
even  overstep  the  border,  He  will  laugh  at 
the  trial  of  the  innocent.  St.  Jerome  says, 
"  There  is  nothing  in  the  whole  book  harsher 
than  this."  It  may,  perhaps,  be  exonsed, 
partly  as  rhetorical,  partly  as  needful  fo> 


158 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  IX.  1 — 85. 


the  tail  expanBion  of  Job's  argument.  But 
it  is  a  fearful  utterance.  (Professor  Lee's 
attempt  to  explain  the  whole  passage  differ- 
ently is  scarcely  a  successful  one.) 

Ver.  24. — The  earth  is  given  into  the  hand 
of  the  wicked.  As  a  further  proof  of  God's 
indifference  to  the  sufferings  of  the  innocent, 
Job  adduces  the  fact  that,  in  the  high 
places  of  the  earth,  are  mostly  set  wicked 
persons,  who  oppress  and  persecute  the 
righteous.  This  bag  probably  been  true,  in 
the  East  at  any  rate,  at  all  times.  He 
oovereth  the  faces  of  the  judges  thereof. 
God  covers  up  the  eyes  of  those  who  have 
to  judge  between  tlie  oppressors  and  the 
oppressed,  so  that  they  pervert  judgment, 
and  side  with  the  oppressors.  He  does  this, 
since  he  permits  it  to  be  done.  Corrupt 
judges  are  among  the  perennial  curses  of 
the  Ea,st.  If  not,  where,  and  who  is  he? 
rather,  If  it  he  not  he,  who  then  is  it  f  (see 
the  Kevised  Version).  Job  argues  that  the 
established  condition  of  things  in  human 
society  must  be  ascribed  to  God,  since  (at 
least)  he  allows  it.  There  is  no  one  else  to 
whom  it  can  be  ascribed. 

Ver.  25.— Now  my  days  are  swifter  than 
a  post.  Life  slips  away  so  fast  that  before 
it  is  well  begun,  it  is  ended.  Job  compares 
it  to  the  swift  passage  of  the  trained  runner, 
or  messenger,  who  carried  despatches  for 
kings  and  other  great  personages  in  the 
olden  times  (see  2  Ghron.  xxx.  6 ;  Esth.  iii. 
13;  viii.  10,  14).  Herodotus  says  of  the 
trained  runners  employed  by  the  Persians, 
"Nolhing  mortal  travels  so  fast  as  these 
Persian  messengers"  (Herod.,  viii.  98). 
There  is  abundant  evidence  of  the  employ- 
ment of  such  persons  in  ancient  Egypt. 
They  flee  away,  they  see  no  good.  It  seems 
to  Job  that  his  prosperity  (cb.  i.  2 — 5)  was 
only  for  a  moment.  He  scarcely  could  look 
on  it  before  it  was  gone. 

Ver.  26. — They  are  passed  away  as  the 
swift  ships ;  literally,  like  the  ships  of  reed. 
The  allusion  is  probably  to  the  frail  reed 
vessels  of  the  Egyptians,  of  which  many 
ancient  writers  speak  (see  Theophrastus, 
'  Hist.  Plant.,'  iv.  9;  Pliny,  'Hist.  Nat.,'  vi. 
56 ;  xiii.  11 ;  Luoan, '  Pharsalia,'  iv.  36,  etc.). 
They  were  long,  light  canoes,  formed  gene- 
rally of  the  papyrus  plant,  and  propelled 
either  by  a  single  paddle  or  by  a  punting- 
pole.  They  were  flat-bottomed  and  broad^ 
like  punta,  with  a  stem  and  stern  rising  con- 
siderably above  the  level  of  the  water  (ae* 
the  author's  '  History  of  Ancient  Egypt,' 
vol.  i.  pp.  507, 508).  Isaiah  speaks  of  them 
as  "  vessels  of  bnlrushes,"  in  which  "  swift 
messengers"  were  sent  by  the  nations 
peopling  the  banks  of  the  Nile  (Isa.  xviii.  1, 
2).  The  Euphrates  boats  desoiibed  by 
Herodotus  (i.  194)  were  of  an  entirely  dif- 
feteut  construction,   and  cannot   be   here 


intended.  They  consisted  of  a  framework 
of  wood,  which  was  covered  with  skins,  and 
then  coated  with  bitumen,  and  resembled 
the  Welsh  "coracles."  As  the  eagle  that 
hasteth  to  the  prey;  or,  as  the  eagle  that 
swoopeth  on  the  prey  (Revised  Version). 
Job's  observation  presents  to  him  three  types 
of  swiftness — the  trained  runner  upon  the 
earth,  the  swift  ships  upon  the  waters,  and 
the  hungry  eagle  in  the  air.  It  seems  to 
him  that  his  life  passes  away  as  swiftly  as 
any  of  these. 

Ver.  27. — If  I  say,  I  will  forget  my  com- 
plaint (comp.  above,  ch.  vii.  13).  Job  repre- 
sents himself  as  sometimes,  for  a  moment, 
imagiuiug  that  he  might  put  aside  his  load 
of  sorrow  by  not  thinking  of  it.  He  tries, 
and  says  to  himself,  "  I  will  forget,"  etc. ; 
but  in  vain.  The  whole  mass  of  his  soffer- 
ings  seems  to  rise  up  against  him,  and  make 
even  momentary  forgetfulness  impossible. 
I  will  leave  off  my  heaviness ;  or,  my  llach 
looks.  And  oomfort  myself  (comp.  ch.  x.  20 
and  Ps.  xxxix,  13,  where  the  same  verb  is 
rendered  "recover  strength"). 

Ver.  28. — I  am  afraid  of  all  my  sorrowi 
(see  the  comment  on  ver.  27).  I  tmow  that 
thou  wilt  not  hold  me  innocent.  The  worst 
of  all  Job's  sorrows  is  the  sense  of  alienation 
from  God,  which  his  unexampled  sufferings 
have  wrought  in  him.  Though  unconscious 
of  having  deserved  them,  he  still,  not  un- 
naturally, looks  upon  them  as  marks  of  God's 
displeasure,  proofs  that  God  does  not  regard 
him  as  innocent. 

Ver.  29. — If  I  be  wicked ;  rather,  I  am 
wicked ;  i.e.  I  am  accounted  so— I  am  already 
condemned.  The  extreme  afflictions  under 
which  I  suffer  indicate  that  God  has  passed 
sentence  upon  me,  and  awarded  me  my 
punishment.  Why  then  labonr  I  in  vaini 
t.e.  Why  argue?  Why  seek  to  justify  my- 
self,  since  no  result  is  likely  to  follow? 
Nothing  that  I  can  say  will  alter  God's  fore- 
gone conclusion. 

Ver.  30. — If  I  wash  myself  with  snow- 
water (comp.  Ps.  li.  7).  If  I  should  succeed 
in  purging  myself  of  all  guilt,  and  establish- 
ing, so  far  as  words  can  do  it,  my  spotless 
innocence,  even  then  what  advantage  should 
I  gain  ?  Snow-water  does  not  really  cleanse 
what  is  defiled  better  than  any  other  water, 
but  a  lively  fancy  might  suppose  it  to  do  so. 
Job  indulges  in  this  fancy,  but  then  checks 
himself,  and  adds  a  prosaic  alternative.  And 
make  my  hands  never  so  clean;  rather, arti 
make  my  hands  olean  with  lye.  Lye,  or  pot- 
ash, is  the  principal  and  most  essential 
ingredient  in  soap,  and  the  readiest  and  best 
detergent.  If  Job  cleanses  himself  to  the 
very  utmost,  "  Cui  bono  ?  "  he  asks. 

Ver.  31. — Tet  shalt  thou  plunge  me  in  tht 
ditch.  Yet  would  God  with  ease  undo  his 
work,  «how  his  purity  to  be  impure,  bis 


OH.  IX.  1—85.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


169 


Tigbteoameea  to  be  filthy  rags,  and  thna,  na 
it  were,  replunge  him  in  the  mire  and  clay 
from  which  be  had  sought  to  free  himself, 
and  hold  him  forth  a  more  loathsome  wretch 
than  ever.  And  mine  own  olothes  shall 
abhor  me.  So  loathsome  would  he  be  that 
bis  very  garments,  stained  and  fouled  by  his 
disease,  would  shrink  away  from  him  and 
hate  to  touch  him. 

Ver.  32. — For  he  is  not  a  man,  as  I  am, 
that  I  should  answer  him,  and  we  should 
come  together  in  judgment  (comp.  vers.  2 — 
14).  On  one  of  two  conditions  only,  Job 
thinks,  could  the  contest  be  even  between 
himself  and  God.  (1)  If  God,  divesting 
himself  of  all  his  Divine  attributes,  be- 
came man ;  (2)  if  some  thirdsman  could 
be  found,  some  umpire  or  arbitrator,  to 
preside  over  the  contest,  and  decide  it. 
Neither  condition,  however,  was  (he  thought) 
possible;  and  therefore  no  satisfactory 
judgment  could  take  place.  Recent  com- 
mentators observe  that  the  Christian  scheme, 
which  Job  could  not  anticipate,  provides 
almost  a  literal  fulfilment  of  both  conditions, 
since  the  God  who  is  to  judge  us  is  "  true 
Man,"  and  is  also  a  Mediator,  or  •«  Thirds- 
man,"  between  us  and  the  offended  Father, 
with  authority  to  make  the  final  decision, 
"the  Father  having  committed  all  judg- 
ment unto  the  Son  "  (John  v.  22),  and  "  given 
him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also,"  for 
the  very  reasou  that  he  is  "  the  Son  of  man  " 
(John  v.  27). 

Yer.  33. — Neither  is  there  any  daysman 
betwixt  us;  literally,  judge,  or  arbitrator. 


called  a^dayaman,**  since  he  appoints  the 
day  on  which  the  arbitration  is  to  come  off. 
The  LXX.  renders  by  /lefflTtis,  "mediator." 
That  might  lay  his  hand  upon  us  both. 
Moderate  between  ns,  that  is ;  keep  us  both 
in  check ;  assert  an  authority  to  which  we 
must  both  submit, 

Ver.  34. — Let  him  take  his  rod  away  from 
me ;  rather,  wlio  would  remove  his  rod  from 
me.  Job  means  that  it  would  be  a  part  of 
the  duty  of  the  "  day-sman  "  to  see  that  God's 
rod  was  removed  from  him  before  he  was 
called  upon  to  plead,  so  that  he  might  not 
labour  under  so  great  a  disadvantage  as  his 
sufferings  would  place  him  under.  And  let 
not  his  fear  terrify  me;  or,  and  would  not 
mffer  his  fear  to  terrify  me ;  i.e.  would  not 
allow  Job  to  be  placed  under  the  disadvan- 
tage, either  of  pain  or  of  fear,  either  of  actual 
or  prospective  suffering, 

Yer,  35. — Then  would  I  speak,  and  not 
fear  him.  Job  has  imagined  conditions 
which  are  impossible  (though  they  may,  to 
some  extent,  be  compensated  for  in  the 
actual  scheme  of  man's  redemption) ;  and 
says  that,  under  the  circumstances  which 
he  has  imagined,  he  would  not  fear  to 
justify  himself  before  God.  The  assertion 
is  over-daring,  and,  as  Schultens  says,  shows 
the  patriarch  to  be  no  longer  master  of  him- 
self, but  carried  away  by  the  force  of  over- 
wrought feeling.  But  it  is  not  so  with  me ; 
i.e.  "  I  am  not  in  such  a  position  as  to  enter 
on  my  justification."  I  am  weighted  by  my 
sufferings,  and  also  by  my  fears.  I  therefore 
decline  the  contest. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 4.— «7bS  to  BSdad:  1.  Bildad'a  theology  refuted.  I.  An  ironioaIi  oonobs- 
BION.  "  I  know  that  it  is  so  of  a  truth."  The  doctrine  propounded  by  Bildad  (oh,  viii. 
3),  that  in  God's  dealings  with  mankind  such  a  thing  as  either  a  perversion  or  mis- 
carriage of  justice  was  impossible.  Job  in  a  certain  sense  allows.  Abstractly  considered, 
the  sentiment  was  one  which  Job  cheerfully  admitted.  As  expounded  by  Bildnd, 
that  the  Divine  government  of  the  world  was  one  of  visible  retributive  justice,  he 
expressly  impugned  its  truth.  Yet,  in  order  to  expose  its  fallacious  character  as  well 
as  to  demonstrate  its  wortblessness,  he  is  willing  to  proceed  on  the  assumption  of 
its  truth. 

II.  A  PEBTnrBNT  INTEBKOOATION,  "  How  should  man  [literally,  '  frail,  perishable 
man*]  be  just,"  i.e.  maintain  his  righteousness,  establish  his  innocence,  "  with  God?" 
Supposing,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  such  a  sufferer  possessed  the  inward,  ineradi- 
cable conviction  that  he  was  innocent  (t.e,  free  from  notorious  transgression) :  by  what 
process  could  he  vindicate  his  personal  integrity  so  as  to  arrest  the  punitive  hand  of  the 
Almighty  ?  By  none  that  would  be  availing,  Job  proceeds  to  show.  In  a  profounder 
sense  than  is  here  employed,  tlie  question  of  the  patriarch  possesses  a  momentous  signi- 
ficance for  man.  How  shall  man,  the  frail,  sinful,  and  perishing,  establish  his  righteous- 
ness before  (jod  ?  As  in  Job's  case,  so  in  every  man's,  the  attempt  to  do  so  is  a  wild 
ima'^ination,  and  can  only  result  in  failure.  Not,  however,  because  of  the  impossibility 
of  establishing  what  really  exists,  as  in  Job's  view,  but  because  the  thing,  the  righteous- 
ness,  is  not  there  to  be  maintained :  all  the  world  being  in  inv^ard  consciousness,  as  well 
a»  iu  outward  t»ot,  guilty  before  Qod. 


160  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  ix.  1—35. 

III.  Ak  bxtkaoedihaet  supposition.  "  If  he  will  contend  with  him ;  "i.e.  if  the 
individual  arraigned  by  Divine  providence  should  propose  to  impeach  the  Divine  equity, 
and  even  undertake  to  demonstrate  hia  own  innocence;  or,  as  others  interpret  the  pro- 
nouns, if  God  should  he  willing  to  enter  into  ootitroveray  with  him,  ».e.  weak  and 
imperfect  man.  According  to  the  former  explanation,  the  language  is  suggestive  of 
sinful  presumption ;  according  to  the  latter,  of  gracious  condescension ;  according  to 
either,  the  subject  of  debate  is  not  the  question  of  man's  sinfulness  in  general,  but  of 
man's  guiltiness  in  respect  of  particular  offences. 

IV.  A  HOPELESS  coKTENTioN.  Oo  two  grounds  Job  protests  that  any  such  litigation 
with  the  Almighty  as  to  man's  innocence  of  individual  transgressions  (much  more, 
therefore,  as  to  the  question  of  man's  sinful  condition)  would  be  unavailing.  1.  Man'g 
ignorance  and  frailty  would  disqualify  him  from  replying  to  God's  accusations.  Infinite 
in  subtlety  and  endless  in  succession,  the  charges  that  by  such  an  assailant  might  he 
brought  against  him  would  simply  confound  and  paralyze  him.  Overpowered  by  terror 
at  the  ineffable  majesty  of  his  Divine  opponent,  he  would  entirely  lose  command  of  his 
poor  faculties,  such  as  they  were,  and  would  be  utterly  unable  to  repel  so  much  as  one 
charge  in  a  thousand,  even  were  they  all  untrue  (ver.  3 ;  cf.  Ps.  cxxx,  3).  2.  Ood'$ 
wisdom  and  strength  would  render  it  impossible  for  any  one  engaging  in  such  an  enter- 
prise to  escape  unhurt.  "  Wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  strength,  who  haf  h  braved  him 
and  been  successful  ?  "  (ver.  4).  The  wisdom  of  the  Almighty,  which  enables  him  to 
search  the  heart  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9 ;  Ps.  viL  9),  to  understand  the  thoughts  (Pg. 
cxxxix.  2),  to  know  the  works  (ch.  xxxiv.  25),  to  consider  the  ways  (oh.  xxxiv.  21), 
of  men ;  and  the  power  of  the  Omniscient,  which  secures  that  his  counsel  shall  stand 
(Isa.  xlvi.  10)  and  his  purpose  shall  he  fulfilled  (ch.  xxiii.  13, 14),  clearly  present  a 
combination  (ch.  xxxvL  5 ;  xxxvii.  23 ;  Dan.  ii.  20),  against  which  it  is  not  only 
needless,  but  must  for  ever  be  positively  ruinous,  to  strive. 

Learn  :  1.  It  becomes  good  men  to  acknowledge  and  confide  in  the  righteousness  of 
God.  2.  The  higher  man's  ideas  rise  of  God's  holiness  and  equity,  the  lower  fall 
his  thoughts  concerning  his  own  impurity  and  iniquity.  3.  As  there  can  be  no 
unrighteousness  with  God,  so  neither  can  there  be  any  righteousness  with  man. 
4.  Though  it  is  hopeless  to  contend  with  God  in  argument,  it  is  not  so  to  wrestle  with 
him  in  prayer.  6.  The  best  attitude  for  a  frail  and  sinful  man  to  assume  before  God 
is  that  of  self-ahasement  and  penitence.  6.  Man's  ignorance  and  weakness  are  no 
match  for  God's  wisdom  and  might.  7.  God's  wisdom  and  might  have,  for  man's 
advantage,  been  deposited  in  Christ,  who  is  the  Power  and  the  Wisdom  of  God. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — A  gospel  outline.  I.  A  sublime  truth.  There  is  no  unrighteousness 
with  God  (ver.  1),  in  either :  1.  Permitting  sin.  (Ps.  xoii.  5.)  2.  Afflicting  man. 
(Deut.  vili.  5.)  3.  Saving  the  penitent.  (Bom.  iii.  26 ;  1  John  L  9.)  4.  Punishing 
the  wicked.    (Bom.  iii.  5  ;  2  Thess,  i.  6.) 

II.  A  MELANCHOLY  FACT.  It  Is  impossible  for  man  to  establish  his  righteousness 
before  God  (ver.  2),  his  guiltiness  being :  1.  Declared  hy  Scripture.  (Ps.  cxliii.  2 ; 
Prov.  XX.  9 ;  Eccles.  vii.  20 ;  Isa.  liii.  6  ;  Bom.  iii.  19,  23.)  2.  Attested  hy  conscience. 
(Bom.  ii.  15.)    3.  Confirmed  by  experience.    (Ps.  Iviii.  3 ;  Eph.  iv.  17,  18 ;  Jas.  iii.  2.) 

ill.  An  HUMiLiATmo  DISCOVERY.  That  man  is  utterly  unable  to  answer  God's  accu- 
sations against  him  (ver.  3),  in  respect  of  either :  (1)  their  number,  man's  sins  being  as 
numerous  as  the  hairs  of  his  head  (Ps.  xl.  12) ;  or  (2)  their  character,  being  infinitely 
heinous  in  the  sight  of  God  (Prov.  xv.  9 ;  Isa.  x  I  iii.  24 ;  Jer.  xliv.  4) ;  or  (3)  their  proof, 
the  evidence  m  support  of  God's  charges  bemg  clear  and  overwhelming  (Gen.  xviii.  21; 
Jer.  xvii.  10). 

IV.  A  CHEERING  EVANGBi,.  That  salvation  may  be  found  by  yielding  to  God  (ver.  4). 
1.  Nothing  but  hurt  can  arise  from  braving  and  opposing  God  (Isa.  xxvii.  4).  2.  Certain 
salvation  springs  from  humble  submission  to  God  (ch.  xxxiiL  27 ;  Ps.  IxxvL  9 ;  Isa. 
xxvii.  5). 

Vers.  6— 10.— Job  to  Bildad:  2.  The  majesty  of  Ood  depicted.  L  Ih  tebreb- 
TRIAL  PHENOMENA.  1.  Overturning  mountains.  "Which  removeth,"  i.e.  uprooteth  or 
overtuineth,  "  the  mountains,  and  they  know  not:  which  overturneth  them  in  lus 
angei  "  (vei.  6),    Whatever  be  the  allusion  intended,  whether  to  the  couvulsiona  of 


.IX.1-SS.]  THE  BOOK  Of  JOB.  IM 


natur*  whioh  ooonired  at  the  Flood,  or  to  thoM  nmuSij  auoohted  with  authquakeg, 
the  language  luggestB  the  abwlutenen  of  Ood's  control  over  nature,  and  in  particular: 
(1)  The  greatness  of  hli  power,  which,  being  able  to  nproot  and  overthrow  mighty  hilla 
through  its  resistless  force,  mnst  be  competent  to  do  the  most  stupendous  works — ^most, 
in  fact,  be  an  agency  to  which  there  can  be  no  impossibilities.  The  only  power  resembling 
it  on  earth  is  that  of  faith  (Hark  ix.  23),  to  which  also  is  ascribed  the  ability  to  remoTe 
mountains  (Mark  zi,  23).  (2)  The  suddenness  of  his  power,  the  mountains  being 
represented  as  overturned  unexpectedly,  in  a  moment,  "  without  their  knowing,"  which 
again  reflects  upon  the  vastness  of  that  power  which  can  effect  so  gigantic  a  feat  with- 
out effort  and  without  labour,  so  easily  and  naturally  ("  He  toucheth  the  hills,  and 
they  smoke,"  Ps.  civ'.  82)  that  it  is  done  instantaneously.  (3)  The  fierceness  of  his 
power,  especially  when  it  is  put  forth  in  Judgment,  the  uprooting  of  the  mountains 
beiug  depicted  as  a  terrible  manifestation  of  the  Almighty's  wrath,  concerning  which 
the  overturned  hills  seem  to  say,  "  Who  can  stand  before  his  indignation  ?  and  who  can 
abide  in  the  fierceness  of  his  anger?  his  fury  is  poured  out  like  fire,  and  the  rocks  are 
thrown  down  by  him  "  (Nah.  i.  6 ;  cf.  Hab.  iiL  6).  2.  Convulsing  the  earth.  "  WMoh 
shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place,  and  the  pillars,"  i.e.  the  internal  foundations, 
"  thereof  tremble  "  (ver.  6).  Nothing  is  more  seemingly  stable  than  the  solid  globe  (Fa. 
cxix.  90).  Its  original  establishment  was  a  sublime  witness  to  the  power  and  wisdom 
of  its  Creator  (1  Sam.  iL  8 ;  Ps.  xiiv.  1,  2 ;  Ps.  cxxxvi.  6 ;  Jer.  li.  15).  Yet,  by  the 
mysterious  forces  treasured  up  within  its  dark  retreats,  the  Almighty  can  make  it 
tremble  as  if  about  to  be  dissolved  (Ps.  civ.  32 ;  cxiv.  7),  as  he  did  at  Sinai  (Exod.  xix. 
18 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  8),  and  as  once  again  he  will  do  at  the  end  of  time  (Heb.  i.  10 ;  2  Pet. 
lii.  10).    The  shaking  of  the  earth  is  an  emblem  of  Divine  judgments  (Isa.  xiii.  13), 

IL  In  thk  W0NDEB8  OF  THE  BKT.  1.  Obscuring  th«  tun,  "  Who  commandeth  the 
sun,  itlid  it  riseth  [or, '  shineth ']  not "  (jot,  7),  Alluding  to  both  natural  and  super- 
natural obscurations  of  the  solar  light,  of  the  former  of  which  ordinary  eclipses  may  be 
taken  as  illustrations,  while  the  Egyptian  darkness  will  constitute  a  sample  of  the 
latter.  (1)  The  sun  is  the  most  resplendent  object  in  heaveil.  Here  styled  charem, 
probably  from  its  brilliant  appearance  (Delitzsch),  or  perhaps  from  its  heat-giving 
properties  (Gresenius).  As  such  it  is  a  silent  witness  to  the  great  power  of  God  (Gen. 
L  16  ;  Ps.  Ixxiv.  16 ;  cxxxvi.  7, 8 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  35).  (2)  The  sun  is  ever  obedient  to  the 
will  of  its  Creator.  There  is  no  part  of  God's  universe  that  is  not  under  law.  The 
greatest  suns  as  well  as  the  smallest  atoms  continually  recognize  his  authority.  The 
orb  of  day  is  equally  obedient  in  rising  and  in  setting  (Eccles.  L  S).  As  such,  it  is  an 
eloquent  teacher  of  obedience  to  man  (Ps.  cxlviii.  8).  (3)  The  sun  is  never  wearied  of 
its  beneficent  mission  to  shine.  And  it  always  shines,  except  when  commanded  not. 
As  such,  it  is  a  preacher  of  diligence  to  the  Christian,  Who  is  commanded  to  let  his  light 
shine  (Matt.  v.  16).  (4)  When  the  sun  is  obscured  or  commanded  not  to  shine^  it  is 
in  judgment  on  the  sins  of  man  (Joel  ii.  31 ;  Amos  viii.  9 ;  Luke  xxi.  25 ;  Acts  ii.  20), 
as  during  the  Egyptian  darkness  (Exod.  x.  22)  and  at  the  time  of  the  Crucifixion  (Matt, 
xxvii.  45).  The  darkened  sun  is  an  impressive  and  instructive  emblem  of  the  judgments 
Gk)d  sends  upon  men  and  nations  who  neither  value  nor  improve  the  light  of  truth 
and  salvation  they  possess.  2.  GonceaKng  the  stare.  "And  sealeth  up  the  stars" 
(ver.  7).  The  stars  also  are  God's  creatures  (Gen.  i.  16),  and  as  such  are  obedient  to 
his  control.  The  vast  number,  immense  magnitudes,  and  incredible  velocities  pf  the 
heavenly  bodies,  as  unfolded  by  modem  astronomy,  impart  to  us  loftier  conceptions  of 
the  Creator's  power  than  were  possessed  by  devout  Hebrews.  ITie  Divine  wisdom  also 
is  significantly  displayed  in  the  regularity  pf  their  movements,  which  secures  that  they 
never  fail  to  swim  out  into  the  Hue  sea  of  the  celestial  firmament  when  the  light  of 
day  has  departed.  Yet  the  ease  with  which  the  splendour  of  the  midnight  sky  can  bo 
extinguished,  by  pouring  over  it  the  brilliance  of  day,  or  drawing  round  it  the  thick 
gloom  of  clouds,  is  no  less  striking  as  a  visible  display  of  almighty  wisdom  and  power, 
and  one  which  must  have  appeared  to  an  Oriental,  looking  up  into  a  Syrian  sky, 
infinitely  more  solemnizing  than  it  does  to  an  Occidental,  who  only  sees  the  stars  shining 
with  a  dimmer  lustre.  3.  Bringing  down  the  clouds.  "  Which  alone  spreadeth  out  the 
heavens  "  (ver,  8).  The  reference  is  probably  not  to  the  original  creation  of  the  firmament 
(Gen.  L  6),  but  to  the  visible  descent  of  storm-clouds  upon  the  sea  (Ps.  xviii.  9---11). 
The  poet  represents  the  striking  phenomena  of  cloud-land  as  another  exhibition  of 


JOB. 


162 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  nc.  1—35. 


almighty  power.  The  modern  scientist  imagines,  when  he  has  predicted  the  advent 
and  mi^aaured  the  velocity  of  •  tempest,  he  has  effectually  disposed  of  the  Hebrew 
poet's  notion  of  supernatural! sm  in  connection  with  the  marvels  of  the  sky.  But  the 
laws  by  which  storm-clouds  are  built  up  and  let  down,  swept  along  and  finally  dispersed, 
have  not  been  spontaneously  developed,  or  inherently  possessed  by,  but  externally 
imposed  on,  nature  by  him  whose  strength  is  in  the  clouds  (Ps.  Ixviii.  34),  who  employs 
them  as  his  chariot  (Ps.  civ.  3),  and  who  when  he  pleases  draws  them  across  the  face 
of  heaven  (Ps.  oxlvii.  8).  4.  Walking  on  the  UUows.  "  And  treadeth  upon  the  waves 
[literally,  'the  heights']  of  the  sea"  (ver.  8);  t.«.  upon  the  fierce  mountainous  billows. 
The  two  clauses  are  descriptive  of  a  storm  at  sea,  in  which  sea  aud  sky  appear  to  inter- 
mingle (Ps.  cvii.  25,  26).  As  the  wind,  so  the  water;  as  the  sky,  so  the  sea;  as  the 
cloud,  so  the  wave,  recognizes  the  authority  of  God.  The  Divine  power  is  usually 
exhibited  as  calming  the  troubled  billows  (Ps.  Ixv.  7;  lixxix.'9, 13).  Here  Jehovah 
is  portrayed  as  exciting  a  tempest,  bringing  down  his  clouds,  sending  forth  his  hurri- 
canes, raising  the  still  waters  into  gigantic  billows,  lashing  the  quiet  sea  into  a  wild 
and  tumultuous  commotion,  and  then  going  forth  in  sublime  sovereignty  amidst  the 
hurricane  he  has  produced,  walking  calmly  upon  the  crested  heights  of  the  oceai, 
causing  his  voice  to  be  heard  above  the  loudest  roar  of  the  storm,  and  at  length  saying, 
"Peace,  be  still! "  So  Christ  visibly  walked  upon  the  Sea  of  Galilee  (Matt.  xiv.  26). 
Another  picture  of  God's  sovereignty  over  creation,  another  lesson  of  God's  ability  to 
be  the  confidence  of  them  that  are  afar  off  upon  the  sea  (Ps.  Ixv.  8). 

III.  In  the  cbbation  of  the  stellab  world.  1.  The  constellations  of  the  northern 
hemisphere.  "  Wljich  maketh  Arcturus,  Orion,  and  the  Pleiades  [literally, '  who  made']." 

(1)  ^Ash ;  identified  with  Ursa  Major,  the  Wain,  the  Bear,  an  exceedingly  bright  con- 
stellation in  the  northern  sky,  the  Hebrew  term  signifying  (according  to  son^)  "  the 
Nightly  Watcher,"  because  of  its  never  setting  (Schultens),  or  perhaps  with  greater 
probability  being  contracted  from  an  Arabic  root  n'ash,  meaning  "bier,"  the  three  stars 
in  the  tail  being  designated  "Daughters  of  the  Bier"(GeBenius);  cf.  oh.  xxxviii.  32, 

(2)  Chesil;  literally,  '^ool,"  regarded  by  the  Assyrians  as  the  famous  hunter  Nimrod, 
styled  by  the  Arabs  "the  Hero,"  and  by  the  Chaldeans,  "the  Giant;"  commonly 
allowed  to  be  the  splendid  constellation  Orion,  which  "  stands  like  a  great  giant  in  the 
heavens  south  of  Taurus  and  Gemini"  (Carey).  (3)  Chimah;  literally,  "Heap;"  the 
•well-known  cluster  of  stars  named  "the  Pleiades,"  a  sparkling  group  compared  by 
Persian  poets  to  a  bouquet  formed  of  jewels  (Delitzsoh).  2.  Ths  constellations  of  the 
southern  hemisphere,  "  And  the  chambers  of  the  south ; "  i.e.  the  regions  of  the 
southern  sky,  which  are  completely  veiled  from  view  to  ns,  and  only  occasionally 
discovered  to  Arabian  spectators. 

IV.  In  the  pkovidbntial  government  of  the  univbese.  The  sentiment  of  ver. 
10,  which  almost  verbatim  repeats  the  utterance  of  Eliphaz  (ch.  v.  10),  may  be  viewed 
as  a  geueral  det<cription  of  the  mighty  power  of  God  in  upholding,  as  well  as  creating, 
the  stupendous  fabric  he  has  summoned  into  being.  Regarded  in  this  light,  it  describes 
the  operations  of  Divine  energy  as :  1.  Great.  He  "  doeth  great  things "  (ver.  10). 
Everything  that  Gid  does  (in  creation  and  providence)  may  be  characterized  as  great 
(Ps.  xcii.  5;  cxi.  2),  as  being  the  production  of  infinite  power.  The  distinction 
between  great  and  little,  when  applied  to  Divine  acts,  exists  only  in  the  human  under- 
standing. The  creation  of  a  solar  system  is  as  easy  to  Omnipotence  as  the  construction 
of  an  atom,  and  the  formation  of  the  latter  as  much  dependent  on  Divine  power  as  the 
production  of  the  former.  2.  Wonderfvl.  "  He  doeth  wondrous  things."  The  wisdom 
displayed  in  the  Divine  works  is  conspicuous  to  every  intelligent  observer  (Ps.  civ.  24). 
The  marvels  of  creation  are  fully  equalled  by  the  wonders  of  providence.  The  formation 
of  a  crystal,  the  structure  of  a  flower,  the  organization  of  an  animal,  are  examples  of 
the  former;  the  Deluge,  the  Exodus  from  Egypt,  the  Babylonish  exile,  the  incarnation 
and  death  of  Christ,  illustrations  of  the  ktter.  3.  Unsearchable.  He  doeth  things 
"  past  finding  out."  Much  as  modern  science  has  discovered  of  the  secrets  of  Nature, 
there  are  vast  realms  lying  unexplored  around  and  beyond  her,  into  some  of  which  it 
is  doubtful  if  she  will  ever  be  able  to  penetrate.  Her  ascertained  results  also  make  it 
probable  that  there  are  works  of  God  into  which  she  cannot  sink  the  plummet  of  her 
finite  understanding;  as  e,g.  the  nature  of  electricity  and  magnetism,  the  mystery 
of  life  in  all  ita  forms  and  gradations,  the  mode  in  whieh  matter  and  mind  act  oiul 


Of.  IX.  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB  168 

react  upon  one  another.  4.  Numerotis.  He  doeth  "  wondera  without  number."  The 
exquisite  variety  and  the  apparently  limitless  number  of  God's  works  are  ImpressiTe 
testimonies  to  the  infinite  power  and  matchless  wisdom  of  the  Creator. 

Learn :  1.  There  is  no  God  like  unto  the  God  of  the  Christian  (Bxod.  xv.  11 ;  Deut. 
xxxiii.  26)^  2.  Nothing  can  transcend  the  power  of  God  (Gen.  xviii.  14;  Jer.  xxxii. 
17).  3.  God  is  infinitely  worthy  of  the  reverence,  confidence,  affection,  and  obedience 
of  his  intelligent  creatures  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  7 ;  Rev.  iv.  11).  4.  It  cannot  but  be  dangerous 
to  resist  God's  will  (Nah.  i.  6 ;  Isa.  xl.  24;  Heb.  xiL  29).  6.  "If  God  be  for  us,  who 
can  be  against  us  ?"  (Fs.  xxvii.  1 ;  Bom.  viiL  31)* 

Vers.  11 — 20. — Job  to  Bildad :  3.  Creator  and  ereatwe  in  conflict.  I.  The  Divim 
Assailant.  1.  His  mystenous  movements.  "Lo  I  he  goeth  by  me,  and  I  see  him  not: 
he  passeth  on  also,  but  I  perceive  him  not "  (vor.  11).  The  language,  recalling  Bliphaz's 
description  of  the  shadowy  spectre  (ch.  iv.  15),  recognizes :  (1)  The  personality  of  God. 
The  Divine  Being  is  not  an  impalpable  abstraction  or  a  dead  unintelligent  force,  but  a 
living,  thinking,  self-conscious  Intelligence.  Such  a  Deity  is  as  much  a  necessity  of 
reason  as  a  postulate  of  revelation.  (2),  The  activity  of  God.  Not  confounding  the 
Creator  and  the  creature  as  modem  pantheism  does,  but  ever  maintaining  a  separation 
between  the  almighty  Artificer  of  the  universe  and  his  works,  biblical  theology  (both 
Hebrew  and  Christian)  is  also  careful  to  avoid  the  error  of  deism,  which,  while 
believing  in  a  Deity,  reoaovcs  him  to  a  distance  from  his  creation,  setting  him  apart  in 
cold,  chilling  isolation,  amid  the  radiant  splendours  of  a  metaphysical  perfection,  and 
in  particular  interjecting  between  him  and  the  realm  of  this  sublunary  sphere  a  gulf 
impassable  by  either  him  or  man.  Contrary  lo  this,  scriptural  theism  conceives  God 
as  an  omnipotent,  omniscient,  and  omnipresent  Intelligence,  continually  superintending 
the  universe  he  has  made,  as  being  ever  present  and  ever  active  in  all  parts  and  places 
of  his  dominion  (Ps.  cxxx.  1—10;  Jer.  xxiii.  23,  24;  Eph.  1.  23;  John  v.  17).  (3) 
The  nearness  of  God.  In  a  sense  that  is  very  real,  God  is  never  far  from  any  one  of 
us  (Acts  xvii.  27).  Behind  the  veil  which  hides  the  unseen  Eternities  from  mortal 
vision  he  continually  sits,  beholding  all  that  transpires  on  earth ;  seeing  all  things  and 
all  persons,  but  ever  remaining  himself  unseen.  The  besetting  God  of  the  Hebrew 
psalmist  (Fs.  cxxxix.  6)  is  the  God  of  all  men.  Were  the  veil  to  be  uplifted,  it  would 
at  once  be  seen  that  God  is  always  at  baud.  Sometimes  it  is  lifted ;  as  e.g.  to  Abraham 
(Gen.  XV.  1),  to  Hagar  (Gen.  xvL  13),  to  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviiL  13).  And  sometimes  it 
is  lifted  to  the  soul  when  it  remains  closed  to  the  bodily  eye.  God's  nearness  to  man 
received  its  highest .  and  truest  expression  when  the  Eternal  Word  became  incarnate 
and  dwelt  among  us.  (4)  The  invisibility  of  God.  Absolutely,  ije.  in  his  uncreated 
essence,  the  supreme  Deity  must  always  remain  invisible  to  and  incomprehensible  by 
man  (ch.  xxiii.  8 ;  John  L  18 ;  vi.  46 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  16 ;  1  John  iv.  12),  if  not  also  by 
all  finite  beings  (ch.  xL  7 ;  xxxvii.  28 ;  Isa.  xiv.  15).  Belatively,  he  may  be  said  to  be 
visible  when  the  spirit  can  recognize  the  working  of  his  almighty  finger,  and  invisible 
when  that  working  or  the  reason  of  it  is  hid.  Job  complains  that,  while  he  can 
distinctly  apprehend  God  to  be  passing  by  him  in  the  events  of  providence  and  the 
phenomena  of  his  individual  experience,  he  is  quite  unable  to  discern  God  himself,  «.«. 
to  understand  either  the  mode  or  the  purpose  of  his  mysterious  movements  (cf.  ch.  xi. 
7—9 ;  xxxvii.  5,  23  ;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  19 ;  Nah.  i.  3 ;  Matt.  xi.  25).  2.  His  resistless  power. 
(1)  Invincible.  "  Behold,  he  taketh  away  [or,  •  he  assails '],  who  can  hinder  him  [or, '  who 
shall  repel  him  *]  ?  "  (ver.  12).  Impossible  for  the  human  soul  not  to  feel  overpowered 
with  a  sense  of  weakness  and  utter  defencelessness  when  God,  by  the  hand  of  providence, 
or  by  the  inward  stroke  of  his  Spirit,  collides  with  it.  It  is,  however,  some  initigation 
to  the  soul's  distress,  when  it  is  able  to  recognize  that  the  hand  which  strikes  it  is 
really  God's  (1  Sam.  iii.  18  ;  Ps.  xxxix.  9).  (2)  Unchallengeable.  »  Who  will  say  unto 
him.  What  doest  thou?"  (ver.  12).  The  sovereignty  of  Grod  in  removing,  as  well  as  in 
bestowing,  creature  comforts,  such  as  possessions,  children,  etc.,  ia  as  plainly  demon- 
strated by  experience  as  emphatically  asserted  in  Scripture ;  and  should  be  as  cheerfully 
admitted  by  all  as  it  was  by  Job  (ch.  i.  21 ;  ii.  10)  and  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.  85> 
God's  sovereignty,  however,  does  not  mean  mere  arbitrary  and  imperious  behaviour. 
When  God  takes  away  (as  also  when  he  gives),  he  not  only  does  what  he  has  a  perfect 
right  to  do,  but  the  reasons  present  to  his  mind  for  doing  it  are  such  as  cannot  be 


IM  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  a.  1— 3S. 


impeached.  God's  power  always  acts  for  the  best,  being  allied  with  infinite  wisdom ; 
only  God  explains  not  his  motives  to  creatures ;  but  saints  are  ever  satisfied  that  he 
doeth  all  things  well  (Ps.  cxix.  65 ;  Mark  viL  37  j  Bom.  viii.  28).  (3)  Implacable. 
"  Eloah  restraineth  not  his  anger  "  (ver.  13) ;  i.e.  he  never  recalls  it,  never  holds  it  in 
or  turns  it  back  until  it  has  accomplished  its  purpose ;  but  permits  it,  like  a  rising  tide 
or  sweeping  hurricane,  to  carry  all  before  it,  so  that  "  the  proud  helpers  "  (literally, "  the 
helpers  of  Eahab,"  i.e.  "  the  helpers  of  pride,"  meaning  probably  either  combinations  of 
proud  rebels,  such  as  the  antediluvians,  or, "  associates  of  the  proud  one,"  viz.  the  devil, 
or  perhaps  simply  wicked  men  who,  inspired  by  pride,  think  to  interpose  between  the 
Almighty  and  the  objects  of  his  displeasure;  suoh  perssOns  as  are  described  in  Fs.lxxiii. 
6 — 9;  but  vide  Exposition)  "stoop  under  him."  The  mightiest  combinations  and 
confederacies  of  wicked  men  and  devils  are  utterly  helpless  against  God  (Ps.  ii.  1 — 8 ; 
Ixxxiii.  5,  8 ;  Jude  6).  Their  source,  pride  (Ps.  x.  2 — i) ;  their  purpose,  opposition  to 
God  (Ps.  xii.  3,4:);  their  end,  destruption  (Ps.  xviii.  27;  Prov.  xvii.  19;  Isa.  ii.  11; 
xiii.  11).  3.  His  vnanswerahle  cltarges.  (1)  Because  of  man's  weakness.  "  How 
much  less  shall  I  answer  him,  and  choose  out  my  words  to  reason  with  him  ?  "  (ver.  14). 
A  blessed  thought  that  man  is  permitted  to  reason  with  God  (Isa.  i.  16 ;  xliiL  26),  if 
not  about  his  innocence,  at  least  about  his  pardon  and  salvation.  Persons  who  avail 
themselves  of  such  permission  should  study  to  find  appropriate  language  in  which  to 
state  their  case.  Well-chosen  words,  if  required  in  adi-essing  man  (Eccles.  xiL  10),  are 
much  more  indispensable  in  wrestling  with  God.  Yet  they  who  stand  forth  to  plead 
with  God  should  be  profoundly  impressed  with  a  sense  of  their  own  unworthiness  and 
insufficient  (Gen.  xxxiL  10;  Isa.  vL  6),  and  should  accordingly  be  clothed  with 
humility  (2  Sam.  vii.  18).  (2)  Because  of  God's  greatness.  "  Whom,  though  I  were 
righteous,  I  would  not  answer,  but  I  would  make  supplication  to  my  Judge"  (ver. 
15).  A  glimpse  into  the  better  nature  of  Job.  Though  repudiating  the  calumnies  of 
his  friends,  and  sometimes  defending  his  own  innocence  with  language  indicating  an 
approach  at  least  to  self-righttous  presumption,  he  here  appears  overpowered  with  such 
a  sense  of  the  Divine  majesty  as  to  lay  him  prostrate  in  silence  and  self-abaaement 
before  him.  Note  the  solemn  relation  in  which  God  stands  to  all  men — that  of  Judge ; 
the  character  which  the  best  of  men  bear  in  his  sight — ^unrighteous ;  the  summons 
which  shall  one  day  be  addressed  to  all^— to  stand  forth  and  answer  for  their  sins ;  the 
attitude  which  all  men  should  take  towards  God  in  view  of  that  event — the  attitude  of 
supplication. 

II.  The  human  complainant.  1.  Mistrusting  the  Divine  condeacermon.  Putting 
the  case  that  he  had  summoned  God  into  court,  and  tliat  God  had  appeared.  Job  appears 
to  conceive  that  a  Being  so  infinitely  exalted  as  he  would  not  listen  to  the  complaint 
of  a  frail  mortal,  pr,  if  for  a  moment  he  did,  would  immediately  break  off  in  impatience 
and  decline  to  listen  further  (ver.  16).  A  total  misrepresentation  of  the  Divine 
character,  contradicted  alike  by  God's  descriptions  of  himself  (Isa.  Ivii.  15,  16 ;  Ps. 
xci.  15),  and  by  the  saints'  experience  of  his  grace  (Ps.  xxxiv.  6 ;  xl.  17  ;  Ixxxvi.  13). 
2.  Imp!  aching  the  Divine  goodness.  Describing  the  treatment  he  would  meet  at  God's 
hands.  Job  insinuates  that  it  would  be  the  opposite  of  kind;  that  God  would  "break 
him  with  a  tempest,"  "multiply  his  wounds  without  cause,"  "  not  suffer  him  to  take 
his  breath,"  "  fill  him  with  bitterness  "  (vers.  17, 18).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  words 
present  a  literal  acpount  of  Job's  sufferings,  and  the  aspect  in  which  they  were  beginning 
to  look  to  himself.  Conscious  that  his  calamities  were  causeless  so  far  ais  any  wickedness 
on  his  part  was  concerned,  which  God  also  testified  (ch.  ii.  3),  and  unable  to  discern 
the  secret  purpose  for  which  he  was  being  subjected  to  such  excruciating  tortures,  he 
can  only  fall  back  upon  the  hypothesis  that  God  has  turned  to  be  bis  enemy.  Faith 
would  have  kept  him  right;  but  Job's  faith,  though  not  extinguished,  was  at  this  time 
sufferingan  eclipse.  Sense  and  reason  always  misinterpret  God.  God  never  treats 
either  saint  or  sinner  as  Job  describes,  aimlessly  or  maliciously,  but  always  with  tender 
love  and  for  the  loftiest  ends  (Heb.  xii.  6,  10).  3.  Challenging  the  Divine  equity. 
Practically  he  represents  God  as  stifling  the  creature's  attempt  to  maintain  his  integrity 
by  overpowering  him  with  the  dazzling  magnificence  of  his  Godhead ;  by  rushing  as 
it  were  into  the  open  court  of  justice,  and  shouting  to  the  poor  bewildered  appellant, 
"Is  it  a  question  of  strength?  Here  am  I.  [s  it  a  matter  of  right?  Who  will 
challenge  me?  "  (ver,  19).   But  this,  again,  was  a  distorted  view  of  the  Divine  cliaracter. 


oa.il.l-«6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOE  165 


God  has  no  need  to  be  afndd  of  any  Investigation  into  hi*  conduct,  and  just  as  little 
to  apprehend  that  pnny  man  could  outv\it  his  infinite  wisdom  or  overreach  his 
almighty  power.  4.  Despairing  iff  Divine  acceptance.  So  hopeless  does  the  contest 
seem  lo  Job  between  a  poor  suffering  creature  like  himself  and  a  Being  of  infinite 
majesty  like  God,  that  he  confesses  the  dire  impossibility  of  l>eing  able  to  establish 
his  innocence  before  the  tribunal  of  the  skies.  God's  insufferable  glory  would  so 
confound  and  stupefy  him,  that  even  if  he  were  innocent,  his  own  mouth  would  condemn 
him ;  were  he  guiltless,  it  would  betray  him  (ver.  20) ;  t.e.  he  would,  through  sheer 
terror  and  amazement  (1  Pet.  iii.  6),  stumble  out  his  own  condeumation,  and,  conscious 
of  his  integrity,  would  yet  confess  himself  guilty.  What  Job  here  asserts  concerning 
his  integrity  or  freedom  from  such  transgression  as  Eliphas  and  Bildad  charged  against 
him  is  certainly  correct  in  the  case  of  every  one  who  would  dare  to  maintain  his  moral 
purity  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  clear  revelation  of  God's  majesty  and  holiness  imparted 
to  the  awakened  sonl,  when  it  appears  as  if  standing  face  to  face  with  God,  renders  it 
a  hard  task  for  man  to  uphold  his  sinlessness.  If  he  attempted  it,  he  would  only 
stultify  and  condemn  himself.  Nay,  be  should  not  know  his  own  soul  (ver.  21),  but 
only  thereby  demonstrate  his  ignorance  of  himself  (cf.  1  John  L  8). 

Learn :  1.  It  is  impossible  to  entertain  too  exalted  a  conception  of  the  great  and 
holy.  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  2.  It  is  quite  possible,  even  for  the  best  of  men, 
to  misconstrue  God's  dealings  with  the  soul,  and  to  regard  him  as  an  adversary  who 
is  really  a  Friend.  3.  It  is  well  to  remember,  in  every  appearance  of  conflict  between 
the  Creator  and  the  creature,  that  all  the  right  lies  upon  the  side  of  the  former.  4. 
The  nearer  saints  advance  towards  perfection,  the  readier  they  are  to  acknowledge  their 
imperfection.  6.  A  humble  and  self-abased  spirit  before  God  is  quite  compatible  with 
the  maintenance  of  one's  blamelessness  before  men. 

Vers.  21 — 36. — Job  to  Bildad  s  4,  Z7i«  eriea  of  a  despairing  lotil.  I.  MAiMTAiMiKa 
HIS  INNOOENOB.  1.  Attested  by  his  conscience.  "  Though  I  were  perfect ; "  or,  better, 
"  I  am  guiltless  "  (ver.  21).  Before  God  Job  did  not  claim  to  be  absolutely  spotless,  but 
merely  to  be  free  from  such  transgressions  of  the  moral  law  as  his  friends  insinuated 
he  must  have  committed  to  render  him  obnoxious  to  those  palpable  tokens  of  Divine 
displeasure  which  had  overtaken  him.  Against  this,  however,  he  protested  as  a  wholly 
baseless  aspersion  of  his  character,  declaring  his  determination  to  maintain  his  integrity 
at  all  hazards,  ay,  even  shotild  it  cost  him  his  life.  "  Yet  wotdd  I  not  know  [literally, 
'  I  know  hot,'  i.e. '  I  value  not,  care  not  for ']  my  soul :  I  would  despise  [or, '  I  despise '] 
my  life  "  (ver.  21).  Vehement  asseveration  such  as  this  would,  of  course,  have  been 
out  of  place,  and  altogether  unjustifiable,  unless  Job  had  had  the  clearest  and  most  irre- 
fragable evidence  of  his  own  innocence  behind  it.  But  this  Job  professed  to  have  in 
the  inner  testimony  of  his  conscience,  which  declared  him  to  be  what  Jehovah  himself 
had  already  affirmed  him  to  be—"  a  perfect  man  and  an  upright,  one  that  feared  God 
and  eschewed  evil "  (ch.  i.  8).  It  is  by  no  means  impossible  for  a  good  man  to  have 
a  conscience  void  of  offence  both  towards  God  and  towards  men  (Acts  xiiii.  1 ;  xxiv. 
16).  Decisions  registered  before  the  court  of  conscience  are  always  in  accordance  with 
truth.  Conscience  may  be  stupefied  through  sin,  and  prevented  from  delivering  its 
testimony  (Eph.  iv.  19).  It  may  even  be  perverted  and  constrained  to  call  evil  good 
(Acts  xxvi.  9).  But  where  enlightened  and  free,  it  never  fails  to  indicate  the  moral 
standing  of  the  soul.  Scripture  distinctly  recognizes  the  validity  of  the  inner  witness 
of  conscience  (Rom.  viii.  16).  And  not  unfrequently  this  witness  is  all  that  a  good 
man  can  lean  upon  in  times  of  adversity  (e.g.  Joseph,  Gen.  ixxix.  21;  Daniel,  i.  8; 
SS.  Peter  and  John,  Acts  iv.  19;  St.  Paul,  Titus  ii.  17 ;  cf.  Shakespeare,  'Henry  VIII.,' 
act  iii.  sc.  2).  When  it  is  so,  the  evidence  of  circumstance  and  appearance  being  all 
against  him,  he  is  fully  warranted  to  rest  upon  it.  If  he  trust  it,  it  will  support  him.  2. 
Not  disproved  bg  his  sufferings.  The  sole  ground  possessed  by  Eliphaz  and  Bildad  for 
their  calumnies  was  that  Job  had  been  overtaken  by  evil  fortunes.  But,  besides  repel- 
ling the  charges  themselves  as  contradicted  by  the  clear  veniict  of  his  own  conscience,  he 
likewise  repudiates  the  foundation  on  which  they  were  based  as  diametrically  opposed 
to  the  plain  facts  of  history.  So  far  from  appearances  being  against  Job,  rightly  inter- 
rogated they  were  rather  in  his  favour.  So  far  from  God's  dealings  with  men  being 
itnctly  retributive,  so  that  Job's  guilt  might  wanantiibly  be  inferred  from  his  misery, 


169  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  rr.  1— S6. 

they  were  as  nearly  as  possible  the  opposite.  All  experience  showed :  (1)  That  God 
frequently  confounded  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  in  one  indiscriminate  overthrow. 
"  This  is  one  thing  QiteraUy, '  it  ia  all  one "],  therefore  I  said  [or, '  will  say ']  it,  he 
desLroyeth  the  perfect  and  the  wicked "  (ver.  22).  An  incontrovertible  fact,  which 
wars,  famines,  pestilences,  earthquakes,  tempests,  and  other  disastrous  occurrences, 
sufficiently  attest,  which  thoughtful  observers  in  all  ages  have  noted  (Eccles.  ix.  23), 
and  which  has  frequently  perplexed  the  good  (Gen.  zviii.  24) ;  but  which,  while  it  is 
not  au  injustice  to  the  creature,  even  the  righteous  themselves  being  sinful,  is  as  little 
ail  inequality  on  the  part  of  the  Creator,  who,  though  not  bound  to  justify  his  ways 
to  sinful  man,  may  yet  have  adopted  this  method  of  Divine  government  as  best  suited 
to  meet  the  moral  and  spiritual  improvement  of  mankind  generally,  to  exercise  the 
faith  and  develop  the  graces  of  the  righteous,  and  to  awaken  within  the  soul  a 
conviction  of  the  necessity  and  certainty  of  a  fiiture  state  (MaL  iiL  18 ;  of.  Butler's 
'  Analogy,'  ch.  iii.).  (2)  That  God  was  indifferent  to  the  miseries  of  the  righteous. 
"  I  f  the  scourge  slay  suddenly,  he  will  laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  righteous "  (ver.  23) ; 
first  at  their  sufferings,  and  then  at  the  inward  temptations  to  unbelief  and  despair 
that  these  sufferings  occasion.  This,  however,  is  inconceivable.  God  cautions  men 
against  judgmg  one  another  simply  by  appearances.  Much  more  is  it  necessary  to 
avoid  this  mistake  in  judging  of  God.  "God  doth  not  a£9ict  the  children  of  men," 
much  less  his  own  children,  "  willingly  "  (Lam.  iii.  33). 

"  Behind  a  frowning  providence 
He  hides  a  smiling  face." 

God  laughs  at  the  wicked  and  their  machinations  (Ps.  ii.  4);  never  at  his  people  and 
their  sorrows  (Exod.  iii.  7 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  37 ;  John  xi.  35).  (3)  That  God  seemiiigly 
extended  favour  to  the  wicked ;  first,  generally,  by  promoting  wicked  men  to  positions 
of  worldly  influence  and  power:  "The  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked" 
(ver.  24) ;  and  second,  particularly,  by  committing  the  administration  of  justice  to  the 
ungodly :  "  He  covereth  the  faces  of  the  j  iidges  thereof  "  (ver.  24) ;  t.e.  so  that,  through 
ignorance  and  corruption,  being  unable  to  discern  between  right  and  wrong,  they 
legalize  oppression  and  robbery,  "  framing  mischief  by  a  law."  That  such  anomalies 
exist  is  undeniable  (Ps.  xii.  8).  And  Job  means  to  say  that  he  holds  God  responsible 
for  them.  "  if  it  is  not  he  that  is  the  Author  of  them,  then  who  is  it  ?  "  God  is 
the  moral  Governor  of  the  universe  (Exod.  ix.  29;  Ps.  xlvii.  2,  7;  Ixxxiii.  18).  The 
civil  magistracy  is  a  Divine  institution  (Prov.  viii.  15,  16).  God  alone  has  power  to 
prevent  the  perversion  of  his  ovm  ordinance  (Ps.  Ixxv.  7 ;  Dan.  ii.  21).  God  is  not 
in  ignorance  that  his  people  are  oppressed  (Eccles.  v.  8).  And  God  has  distinctly 
promised  to  exercise  righteousness  and  judgment  for  all  that  are  oppressed  (Ps.  ciiL  6). 
Hence  nobody  is  to  blame  but  God,  says  Job.  The  logic  is  good,  but  the  theology  is  bad. 
n.  Bemoaning  his  lot.  1.  The  impossibility  of  attaining  to  happiness.  (1)  The 
fleetness  of  his  days  had  rendered  this  beyond  his  ability.  bL  past  life  had  vanished 
with  incredible  velocity:  (o)  like  a  quick-footed  courier:  "My  days  are  [literally, 
'were"]  swifter  than  a  post"  (ver.  25),  or  state-runner  carrying  letters  and  despatches, 
sometimes  able,  when  mounted  on  dromedaries,  to  travel  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  a 
day ;  (5)  like  a  fast-sailing  ship,  literally,  "  ships  of  reed,"  skiffs  constructed  of  the 
papyrus  NUotica,  and  celebrated  for  their  swiftness,  "a  little  pinnace  that  may  serve 
to  make  sport  and  pastime  on  the  water,  which  turneth  nimbly  here  and  there,  and 
goetli  away  apace "  (Calvin) ;  and  (c)  like  a  swift-flying  eagle :  "  As  the  eagle  that 
hasteth  to  the  prey  "  (ver.  26) ; — three  images  conveying  an  impressive  picture  of  the 
brevity  of  man's  existence  on  the  earth.  (2)  The  vanity  of  his  life  was  another  cause 
of  failure  in  reaching  mundane  felicity.  His  days  had  rushed  by  "without  seeing 
good  "  (ver.  25),  or, "  having  seen  no  good ; "  which  in  Job's  case  was  not  correct,  as  prior 
to  his  aMction  he  had  attained  to  a  high  degree  of  both  temporal  and  spiritual  pros- 
perity. Men  are  prone  to  forget  past  mercies.  "  Out  of  sight,  out  of  mind,"  is  frequently 
exemplified  among  saints.  Perhaps  no  lives  exist  that  never  see  good.  Tet  the 
noblest  thing  in  God's  world  is  not  to  see,  but  to  do,  good.  A  life  that  does  good  may 
be  short ;  it  can  never  be  whoLy  vain.  2.  The  impossibility  of  twrmounting  }is  sorrow. 
This  also  had  a  double  cause.  (1)  The  immovability  of  his  misery.  However 
frequently  he  might  resolve  to  brighten  up,  the  recollection  of  nis  pains  made  him 


OH.n  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  167 


^         j»    * 


shudd  r  (ver.  28).  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  the  burden  of  sorrow  cannot  be 
remo-v  .d  by  simple  resolution.  No  man  can  really  brighten  up  in  the  midst  of  afliction 
unles!  he  casts  his  burden  on  the  Lord.  But  to  the  doing  of  this  in  Job's  case  there 
seemei  an  insuperable. barrier,  viz. :  (2)  The  unchangeable  determination  of  God  to 
count  him  guilty.  Reasoning  from  the  standpoint  of  sense,  Job  regarded  this  as  the 
naturnl  deduction  from  his  continued  sufferings.  Hence  the  hopelessness  of  trying  to 
look  bright.  Had  Job  adopted  David's  resolution  (Ps.  xlii.  5, 11 ;  xliii.  5),  he  might 
have  cvercome  this  tremendous  heart-sinking  of  which  he  was  consciou*.  How 
immenaely  more  advantageous  the  position  of  Christians  than  that  of  Job  or  even 
David !  Not  only  have  they  the  clear  consciousness  of  acceptance  with  God  for  Christ's 
sake  to  support  them,  but  they  have  the  plainest  Scripture  declarations  that  affliction 
is  a  proof  of  love  and  friendship  rather  than  of  hatred  and  enmity  and  the  most 
earnest  exhortations  to  rejoice  in  tribulation  ;  yea,  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always  (Phil, 
iv.  4 ;  Jas.  i.  2).  3.  Hie  impossibiliti/ of  establishing  hit  innocence.  Because  of:  (1) 
God's  determination  to_  make  him  out  guilty :  "  I  have  to  be  guilty  "  (ver.  29).  Same 
thought  as  above.  It  is  certain  that  God  is  shut  up  by  the  necessities  of  his  Godhead, 
His  immaculate  purity  and  incorruptible  justice,  to  hold  every  man  on  earth,  even  the 
purest  and  most  upright  saint  that  lives,  as  guilty  (Rom.  iii.  19),  but  not  in  the  sense 
here  intended  by  Job.  It  is  no  pleasure  to  God  to  find  men  guilty.  Certainly,  he 
never  makes  an  innocent  man  guilty  j  though,  thanks  to  his  mercy,  he  often  treats 
a  guilty  man  as  innocent.  (2)  Job's  inability  to  overcome  this  determination.  Plaints 
were  useless :  "  Why  do  I  labdur  in  vain  "  (ver.  29),  in  protesting  my  innocence,  or 
trying  to  make  it  good  ?  "  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow-water,"  supposed  to  be  purer 
than  common  water,  "  and  make  my  hands  never  so  clean  [literally, '  clean  with  lye 
or  potash '],  yet  shalt  thou  plunge  me  in  the  ditch,  and  mine  own  clothes  should  abhor 
me  "  (vers.  30,  31) ;  f.e.  the  best  attempts  at  self-justification  would  be  useless. 

IIL  Ybaenino  fob  a  daysman.  1.  TTie  necessity  of  such  a  daysman.  Job  craved 
an  arbiter  or  umpire  between  himself  and  God,  because  of  the  unequal  terms  on  which 
they  stood.  "  He  is  not  a  man,  as  I  am,  that  I  should  answer  him,  and  we  should  come 
together  in  judgment "  (ver.  32).  For  the  same  reason  man  requires  a  Mediator  between 
t<'mself,  the  feeble,  sinning  creature,  and  Jehovah,  the  infinitely  powerful  and  immacu- 
lately pure  Creator.  And  this  want  which  Job  so  powerfully  felt  has  been  supplied 
by  Christ,  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man  (1  Tim.  ii.  6).  2.  The  work  of  svch 
a  daysman.  Described  as  twofold  :  (1)  To  act  authoritatively  for  both  parties  in  the 
contest.  "There  is  not  a  daysman,"  or  arbiter  between  us,  "  that  might  lay  hia  hand 
upon  us  both  "  (ver.  33) ;  i.e.  that  might  impose  conditions  upon  both  by  the  imposition 
of  hands.  This  Christ  is  able  to  do  in  virtue  of  his  twofold  nature,  being  the  Fellow 
of  the  Most  High  as  well  as  the  Son  of  man.  Thus  representing  both  parties,  he  can 
lay  his  hands  on  both.  He  can  speak  and  act  with  authority  for  both.  (2)  To  remove 
the  obstacles  to  man's  coming  into  converse  with  God.  These  were,  in  Job's  case, 
two — the  terror  of  GWs  rod,  and  the  terror  of  God's  face :  "  Let  him  take  away  his 
rod  from  me,  and  let  not  his  fear  [i.e.  his  terrible  majesty]  terrify  me  "  (ver.  34).  The 
same  things  prevent  the  free  access,  of  sinful  man  to  God,  viz.  God's  rod — not  his 
providential  afflictions,  but  his  legal  condemnations ;  and  God's  majesty,  or  the  inefiable 
glory,of  his  holy  Godhead.  And  these  have  been  removed  by  Christ ;  the  latter  by  his 
incarnation,  the  former  by  his  sacrifice.  3.  Th«  henefit  of  such  a  daysman.  (1)  Man 
is  able  to  approach  God — not  perhaps  as  Job,  with  conscious  integrity :  "  Then  would 
I  speak,  and  not  fear  him ;  for  not  thus  do  I  stand  with  myself,"  i.e.  I  am  not  conscious 
of  anything  to  make  me  afraid  (ver.  35) ;  but  certainly,  without  alarm  and  with  hopeful 
confidence ;  and  (2)  God  is  able  to  enter  into  treaty  with  man. 

Learn :  1.  There  is  a  clear  difference  between  maintaining  one's  blamelessness  before 
men  and  asserting  one's  righteousness  before  God.  2.  The  character  of  God's  heart 
is  not  always  to  be  inferred  from  the  dealings  of  God's  hand.  3.  Many  things  are 
permitted  to  occur  in  God's  universe  of  which  he  does  not  approve.  4.  The  science 
of  numbering  our  days  is  one  that  all  mortals  should  learn.  5.  The  true  value  of  a 
life  is  not  to  be  estimated  by  its  length.  6.  The  best  consolation  in  human  sorrow 
is  the  enjoyment  of  Divine  favour.  7.  The  finest  and  purest  morality  will  not  enabl* 
a  man  to  do  without  a  mediator.  8.  No  man  can  come  to  God  except  through  Jesus 
Christ    0.  But  in  him  and  through  him  we  have  acc«BS  by  one  Spirit  to  the  Father. 


168  THB  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  ix.  1—85, 


HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1 — ch.  x.  22. — Second  re^ly  of  Job.  The  fearfvAnesa  of  Oof  I  powtr.  Now, 
for  the  first  time,  Job- admits  the  great  principle  for  which  Eliphaz  and  Bildad  have 
contended,  but  in  a  bitter  and  sarcastic  sense.  True,  he  says,  it  is  not  for  man  to 
contend  against  God.  But  why  ?  Because  he  is  absolute  Power,  and  hence  there  is 
no  possibility  of  a  fiail  mortal  prevailing  in  his  plea.  His  might  is  his  right.  It  is 
•  dark  conception  of  God  to  which  Job's  despair  now  drives  him.  He  looks  upon  God 
simply  as  omnipotent  Force,  arbitrary  and  irresistible  Will.  Take  the  thought  of 
power,  and  separate  it  from  that  of  justice  and  of  com|ias8ion,  and  we  have  the  idea  of 
an  almighty  Fiend  rather  than  of  a  good  and  gracious  Father.  Yet  the  spark  of  true 
faith  still  lives,  as  we  shall  see,  In  the  recesses  of  his  awakened  heart. — J. 

Vers.  2 — 20. — Ood  viewed  as  ahsolute  and  arhitrary  Power.  I.  The  helplessness 
01  MAN  INPRE8BN0K  OF  HIS  OMNIPOTENCE.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  What  avails  right  on  one's 
side  against  him  who  has  all  heaven's  artillery  at  his  commaud  ?  "  It  is  idle  to  argue 
with  the  Master  of  thirty  legions."  Out  of  a  thousand  questions  with  which  the 
Almighty  might  overwhelm  my  mind,  there  is  not  one  which  I  could  answer  with  the 
chance  of  a  fair  hearing.  Indeed,  this  in  a  sense  is  true,  as  the  thirty-eighth  chapter 
will  presently  show.  It  is  idle  to  argue  with  God  concerning  the  constitution  of  things. 
But  it  is  never  idle  to  plead  the  right.  This,  God,  by  the  very  nature  of  his  Being,  by 
his  promises,  is  bound  to  attend  to.  Job  thinks  of  God  as  the  Almighty  and  the  All- 
wise  (ver.  4),  and  he  finds  in  this  combination  of  attributes  only  reason  for  despair. 
He  leaves  out  his  justice ;  his  faith  in  his  love  is  suspended  for  a  time.  Hence  be  sees 
him  only  through  the  distorted  dream  of  suffering,  and  his  dark  inferences  are  wrong. 

II.  Desoriptionb  of  the  absolutb  powke  of  God.  1.  In  nature's  destructive  forces. 
Here  he  would  rival  and  outvie  Eliphaz  in  the  sublimity  of  his  pictures.  The  more 
terrible  phenomena  of  nature  are  produced  as  evidences  of  a  blind,  tyrannic  might :  the 
earthquake  (ver.  5),  which  topples  over  the  giant  mountains  like  a  child's  plaything, 
and  rocks  the  solid  foundations  of  the  earth  (ver.  6) ;  the  eclipse  of  sun  and  stars,  the 
universal  darkness  of  the  heavens  (ver.  7).  Here  is  the  origin,  according  to  some 
philosophers,  of  religion — ^man's  terror  in  the  presence  of  the  vast  destructive  forces  of 
nature.  But  it  is  the  origin  only  of  apart  of  religious  feeling — of  awe  and  reverence. 
And  when  man  learns  more  of  nature  as  a  whole,  and  more  of  his  own  heart,  he  rises 
into  loftier  and  happier  moods  than  that  of  slavish  fear.  2.  In  natures  splendour  and 
general  effect.  The  vastness  of  the  "  immea.surable  heavens,"  and  the  great  sea  of  clouds 
(ver.  8),  the  splendid  constellations  of  the  noi  them  and  the  southern  sky  (ver,  9),  lead 
the  mind  out  in  wonder,  stretch  the  imagination' to  its  limits,  fill  the  soul  with  the  sense 
of  the  unutterable,  the  innumeraMe,  the  iuflnite  (ver.  10).  This  mood  is  happier  than 
the  former.  It  is  one  of  elevation,  wonder,  delighted  joy  in  the  communion  of  the 
mind  with  Mind.  It  is  stamped  upon  the  glowing  lines  of  the  nineteenth  psalm.  But 
Job  draws  from  these  sublime  spectacles  at  present  only  the  inference  of  God's  dread 
and  irresistible  power. 

in.  Mankind  itself  in  bblation  to  this  absolute  poweb.  1.  It  is  inviaible  and  ' 
swift  in  its  errand  of  terror  (ver.  11).  Sudden  death  by  lightning,  or  by  a  hasty 
malady,  naturnlly  produces  an  appalling  effect.  Hence  the  prayer  of  the  Litany.  2. 
It  is  irresistible.  (Vers.  12,  13.)  No  human  hand  can  stay,  no  human  prayer  avert, 
its  overpowering  onset.  The  monsters,  or  Titans  ("  helpers  of  Rahab  "),  were  overcome^ 
according  to  some  well-known  legend;  how  much  less,  then,  can  /resist  with  success 
(ver.  14)  ?  3.  Th«  consciousness  of  innocence  is  therefore  of  no  avail.  Supplication 
alone  is  in  place  before  a  Disputant  who  knows  no  law  but  his  will  (ver.  15).  I  cannot 
believe  that  he,  from  his  height,  would  give  attention  to  my  cry  (ver.  16).  He  is 
Force,  crushing  Force  alone,  guided  only  by  causeless  caprice  (ver.  17) ;  stifling  the  cry 
of  the  pleader  in  his  mouth,  and  filling  him  with  bitterness  (ver.  18).  i.  The  hurrtan 
dilemma.  Man  in  presence  of  an  absolute  Tyrant  must  always  be  in  the  wrong.  If 
he  stands  on  might,  he  is  a  fool ;  if  he  appeals  to  right,  he  has  no  court  of  all  Kyppeal 
—for  who  can  challenge  the  Judge  of  heaven  and  earth?  Bight  will  be  set  down  as 
wrong,  innocence  wUl  be  pronounced  guilt  (vers.  19,  20).  We  »oe,  from  this  picture 
of  Job's  state  of  mind,  that  there  is  no  extremity  of  "ioubt  so  dire  as  when  man  is 


Ctt.  tt,l— 36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  169 

tempted  to  disbelieve  in  the  principle  of  justice  as  the  law  of  the  oniverge,  which 
cannot  be  broken.  The  thought  of  God  turns  then  only  into  one  of  unmitigated 
horror  and  despair. — J. 

Vers.  21 — 24. — Rebellion  of  the  conscience  againit  thit  picture  of  terror.  A  reaction 
comes ;  for  the  clear  testimony  of  consciousness  may  be  obscured  fur  a  time,  but  cannot 
be  denied.  In  that  clear  consciousness,  it  seems  that  Job  will  turn  against  the  injustice 
(as  he  thinks)  of  God,  and  boldly  denounce  it. 

I.  A  GOOD  coKsoiENCE  LIFTS  THE  MIND  ABOVE  A.BJKOT  WKA*.  (Wo  take  ver.  21  as 
a  declaration  of  innocence  renewed.) 

II.  It  imparts  contempt  of  death.    (Ycv.  21.) 

IIL  It  stimulates  to  boldness  in  pleading  one's  oaubb.  We  must  think  of 
Job,  according  to  a  leading  conception  of  the  book,  as  within  his  right  in  pleading 
against  his  (supposed)  adversary  as  in  a  court.  He  argues,  as  again  showing  that  Gud 
is  merely  an  absolute  Tyrant,  that  the  innocent  are  puuished  along  with  the  guilty 
(ver.  22).  There  are  two  examples  of  this:  1.  The  scourge,  or  pest,  which  quickly 
sweeps  away  whole  populations,  making  no  discrimination  between  the  good  and  evil, 
the  hoary  sinner  and  the  helpless  babe  (ver.  23).  2.  The  dominion  of  the  wicked  in 
the  world.  Their  faces  are  covered ;  they  do  not  distinc;uish  between  right  and  wrong. 
And  who  else  can  be  the  Cause  of  this  but  God  (ver.  24)  ? — J. 

Vers.  26 — 35. — Melancholy  reflectionB.  I.  Self-contemplation  m  bekerenoe  to 
the  past.  His  life  has  sped  swiftly — like  a  courier,  or  the  swift  boat  of  the  Euphrates 
or  the  Nile,  or  the  swooping  eagle  (vers.  25,  26),  and  without  seeming  prosperity. 
Here  he  perverts  the  history  of  the  past ;  but  memory  as  well  as  reason  is  poisoned. 

II.  In  rbferbnob  to  the  fctuee.  (Vers.  27,  28.)  Hope  has  broken  its  wing. 
The  effort  to  remove  the  gloom  from  his  brow  is  useless,  unless  he  could  remove  the 
weight  from  his  heart.  That — ^the  sense  of  the  disfavour  of  God — comes  rolling  back 
from  every  effort,  like  the  stone  of  Sisyphus. 

III.  The  vanitt  of  mobal  endeavoub.  (Vers.  29 — 31.)  He  feels  himself  as 
under  an  absolute  decree  of  guilt  which  no  earthly  power  cau  possibly  remove.  Should 
he  use  snow-water  and  lye,  t.«.  employ  all  means  to  justify  himself,  still  his  absolute 
Judge  would  plunge  him  back  into  a  state  of  horrible  pollution. 

IV.  The  ineqtjality  of  tub  strife  between  man  and  God.  Were  it  between 
man  and  man,  he  has  no  doubt  of  the  success  of  his  cause. 

V.  The  want  of  a  court  of  appeal.  (Vers.  32,  33.)  There  is  no  '•  daysman,"  or 
arbitrator,  who  can  lay  the  hand  of  authority  upon  both  of  ua,  and,  by  determining  the 
cause,  bring  the  strife  to  an  end. 

VI.  Passionate  appeal  and  resolve.  The  appeal  is  for  freedom  of  speech  (vers. 
84,  36 ;  ch.  x.  1,  2).  The  last,  or  one  of  the  last,  boons  that  honourable  men  can  be 
disposed  to  deny  to  the  oppressed ;  one  that  God  will  never  deny  to  his  intelligent 
creatures.  Yet  Job,  overcome  by  the  dogmatism  of  his  friends,  seems  to  think  it  is 
now  denied  him.  The  resolve  is  that  since  life  has  now  become  a  weariness  and  a 
disgust,  he  will  give  free  way  to  words,  regardless  of  consequences.  In  reviewing 
this  wild  complaint  of  an  unhinged  intelligence,  we  may  learn  the  following  lessons : 
1.  God  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  absolute  Power,  but  rather  as  absolute  Justice  and 
Love.  The  former  is  the  conception  of  a  demon,  the  latter  that  of  the  Father  of 
spirits.  2.  All  sides  and  aspects  of  nature  must  be  viewed  as  equally  revelations  of 
God.  8.  Man  is  never  weak  when  he  has  right  on  his  side,  and,  though  he  seems  to 
be  crushed,  he  will  be  exalted  fur  ever.  4.  Darkness  in  the  reason  is  no  proof  of  the 
withdrawal' of  God's  favour.  Our  subjection  and  personal  sufferings  do  not  affect  the 
eternal  objective  realities.  The  clouds  may  hide,  but  cannot  efface,  the  sun.  5.  God 
is  merciful  to  our  misunderstandings,  and  detects  the  spark  of  faith  in  the  heart  of 
sufferers  who  may  be  unconscious  of  it  themselves. — J. 

y^ta,  1 4. IHan  unable  to  answer  to  Ood.    Job  resumes.    He  knows,  as  truly  as 

does  Bildad,  that  God  doth  not  pervert  justice.  His  work  is  always  right,  while  man 
is  erring  vain  and  smful.  How  shall  the  creature  "answer"  to  the  Creator?  Were  the 
Holy  One  to  condescend  to  enter  Into  controversy  with  his  fraU  creature  man,  the  poor 


170  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  ix.  1—86. 

sianer  would  be  dumb.  Out  of  the  mouth,  even  of  the  guilty,  God  would  extort  the 
confession  of  his  own  righteousness,  and  by  his  manifested  glory  compel  the  proud  and 
self-couceited  one  to  acknowledge  his  own  sinfulness  and  error.  This  confession  finally 
comes  from  the  lips  of  his  faithful "  servant  Job."  The  present  words  are  the  first  notes 
of  that  final  triumphant  confession.     The  inability  of  man  to  answer  God  arises — 

L  From  thb  fact  of  thb  absolute  biqhteousnbss  of  the  Divine  ways.  Job 
acknowledges  this;  and  this  makes  his  own  suffering  lot,  as  the  servant  of  God,  so 
inexplicable  both  to  himself  and  to  his  mistaken  friends,  who  are  bent,  at  all  hazards, 
on  finding  an  answer.  It  is  possible  for  man  to  pretend  an  answer  to  God  ;  and,  with 
wicked  boldness,  to  enter  into  contention  with  him.  But,  in  presence  of  the  perfectly 
holy  work  of  the  Most  High,  he  must  ultimately  be  silenced. 

II.  But  man  is  equally  unable  to  answek  to  God  by  reason  of  the  sinful- 
ness OF  HIS  DOINGS.  Even  Job,  commended  of  God,  does  not  hide  his  sinfulness.  On 
the  lowest  ground,  it  must  be  complained  of  man's  work  that  it  is  imperfect.  His  best 
deeds,  done  with  his  utmost  strength  and  with  an  intention  as  pure  as  he  can  summon, 
are  but  imperfectly  done.  The  strength  is  but  feebleness,  the  motive  lacking  in  the 
highest  qualities,  and  the  performance  but  irregular.  The  unsteadiness  of  the  human 
hand  may  be  traced  through  all.    Therefore — 

III.  It  IS   IMPOSSIBLE  FOE  MAN  TO   MAINTAIN  HIS  0W»  BIOHTEOUSNBBS  BEFORE    GOD. 

The  measure  of  moral  apprehension  left  even  in  the  most  faulty  is  sufficient  to  con- 
vince every  one  in  presence  of  the  Divine  holiness — the  true  standard — that  he  is 
verily  guilty.  Even  Job,  when  he  saw  God,  ab'iorred  himself,  repenting  "in  dust  and 
ashes."  In  humility  he  confesses,  "How  should  man  be  just  with  God?"  If  vain 
man,  who  is  foolish  enough  at  times  to  attempt  any  presumptuous  work,  should  dare 
to  "  contend  "  with  the  eternal  Buler,  it  must  only  end  in  his  utter  defeat ;  for  "  he  is 
wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  strength." 

IV.  The  hardenino  of  the  heart  to  appear  in  contention  must  only  end  in 
SHAME  AND  DISGRACE  TO  HIM.  To  this  all  experience  bears  witness ;  for  who  hath  done 
60  "and  hath  prospered"?  Man  Is  puny,  ignorant,  weak,  Tain,  and  sinful.  How 
shall  he  appear  in  thr  presence  of  the  Almighty,  the  All-wise,  the  Eternal  ?  Lowli- 
ness ami  contrition  describe  the  true  attitude  for  man  to  assume  before  God.  Then 
will  he  be  gracious,  and  lift  up  him  that  is  bowed  down.  But  "  if  he  withdraw  not 
his  anger,  the  proud  helpers  stoop  under  him." — E.  G. 

Vers.  15,  16. — The  true  attitude  of  the  afflicted.  Job  makes  a  suitable  reflection 
on  the  almightiness  of  Jehovah,  seen  in  his  control  over  the  visible  world.  The  lofty 
and  deep-seated  mountains,  the  very  types  of  might  and  stability,  he  "  removeth  "  with- 
out their  knowing,  and  "  overturneth  in  his  wrath."  He  "  shaketh  "  the  whole  "  earth 
out  of  her  place,"  and  maketh  the  "  pillars  thereof  to  tremble."  In  the  high  heavens 
"  he  commandeth  the  sun,  and  it  riseth  not ; "  and  "  the  stars  "  he  "sealeth  up"  in  dark- 
ness. The  earth  and  the  heavens  obey  him  ;  and  he  "  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the 
sea."  He  doeth  hidden  and  numberless  things,  and  none  can  hinder  him.  Job,  in  view 
of  this,  and  with  a  lowly  recognition  of  his  own  powerlessness  before  the  Loii  of  all, 
bows  himself  down  in  the  attitude  most  becoming  to  the  feeble,  afHicted,  and  sinful 
child  of  man.     It  is — 

I.  An  attitude  OF  LOWLY  HUMILITY.  How  becoming  I  How  just!  Let  the  creature 
how  low  before  the  Creator.  Let  the  feeble  thing  of  a  day  humble  himself  before  the 
Eternal  and  the  Almighty.  Let  him  who  is  powerless  before  the  mountains  and  the 
sea,  who  cannot  touch  the  stars,  take  his  place  in  the  dust,  whence  he  is,  in  presence 
of  him  who  by  his  power  setteth  fast  the  mountains;  who  by  his  word  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  and  upholdeth  all  by  his  own  unaided  strength.  Lowliness  will 
be  followed  by — 

II.  An  attitude  of  self-distrust.  Knowing  himself  as  he  only  can  who  reflects 
on  the  greatness  of  the  Most  High,  the  wise,  afflicted  one  will  not  trust  to  an  arm  of 
strength ;  but,  in  the  jiainful  consciousness  of  his  own  weakness,  will  commit  himself 
to  the  strong  Lord  who  is  over  all.  Job  knows,  as  every  afflicted  one,  that  his  suffering 
holds  him  as  in  a  net,  from  which  he  cannot  break  loose.  He  has  no  power.  He  is 
chained,  held  down.  His  own  flesh  triumphs  over  him.  He  is  a  prisoner  to  diseaseu 
In  his  helplessness,  with  self-distnutfulness  he  casts  himself  into  the  arms  of  God. 


CH.  IX.  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  171 


He  would  not  pretend  to  make  answer,  or  to  "  choose  out  words  to  reason  with  him." 
His  self-distrust  is  followed  by — 

III.  Penitence— the  one  attitude  of  all  the  most  becoming  to  man.  In  penitence 
he  acknowledges  his  unrighteousness.  And  so  deep  is  that  penitence,  that  he  declares, 
"  Though  I  were  able  to  establish  my  righteousness,  yet  I  could  not  presume  to  answer." 
Penitence  is  the  pathway  to  heaven's  gate.  He  who  lowly  walks,  walks  surely.  Ami 
God  lifteth  up  them  who  thus  bow  themselves  down.    But  he  rises — 

IV.  To  THE  ATTITUDE  OF  PRATER.  He  lifts  his  voice  to  God.  He  makes  his 
"  supplication."  He  who  is  led  to  pray  is  led  to  the  feet  of  him  who  casts  away  no 
needy  suppliant.  It  is  his  high  prerogative  to  hear  prayer.  Therefore  all  flesh,  in 
their  want,  their  sorrow,  their  sin,  or  with  their  songs  of  praise,  come  to  him-  Maa'a 
safety  is  here.  The  lowly,  self-distrustful,  humble  penitent  cannot  raise  his  voice  on 
high  without  the  gracious  response  of  the  Divine  mercy  reaching  him.  To  this  men 
are  driven  (1)  by  their  sense  of  impotence ;  (2)  by  the  consciousness  of  sin ;  (3)  by 
the  assurance  of  the  Divine  mercy.     Happy  he  who  thus  learns  I — R.  G. 

Ver.  33. — Th«  Mediator.  The  object  desired  by  Job — and  here  he  speaks  for  all 
sinful  ones — ^is  to  obtain  reconciliation  with  Jehovah,  against  whom  he  acknowledges 
himself  to  have  sinned.  He  cries  for  a  mediator,  an  arbiter,  an  umpire ;  one  able  to 
"  lay  his  hand  upon  us  both" — to  bring  us  together,  mediating  between  us. 

I.  The  necessity  for  this  arises  :  1.  From  Job's  consciousness  of  sin.  In  his 
prayer  (ver.  28)  he  confesses  to  God,  "I  know  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  innocent."  "I 
am  not  innocent,"  is  the  first  confession  of  guilt.  "If  I  justify  myself,  my  own  mouth 
shall  condemn  me."  2.  From  Job's  inability  to  "answer"  to  God.  Of  this  he  has 
made  both  complaint  and  confession.  "  Whom,  though  I  were  righteous,  yet  would  I 
not  answer  "  (ver.  15).  Fear  and  just  humility  seize  him.  "  How  much  less  shall  I 
answer  him?"  (ver.  14:).  Man  cannot  order  his  own  cause  before  the  eternal  Judge. 
"  He  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand"  (ver.  3).  3.  From  their  utter  inequality. 
"  He  is  not  a  man,  as  I  am  "  (ver.  32).  They  could  not  therefore  "come  together  in 
judgment."  How  vain  of  poor,  ignorant,  feeble,  sinful  man  to  suppose  that  he  can 
answer  to  God — that  he  can  "appear  before  him  I "  How  vain  even  to  imagine  himself 
justified  and  pure  before  him  I  Yet  many  "  appear  before  "  God  in  the  presumptuous, 
self-excusing,  self-justifying  thoughts  of  their  minds.  All  such  self-justification  con- 
demned by  Job's  wise  words  and  just  views  of  things. 

II.  Job's  cry  is  the  unconscious  oky  of  the  universal  heart  of  man  fob  a 
Mediator.  Seen  in  all  religious  systems — the  faith  in  the  priest — the  conscinus 
ignorance  of  hidden  spiritual  verities.  The  uninterpreted  apprehension  of  a  spiritual 
world  and  government  and  future,  and  yet  the  inability  to  deal  with  these  and  to  put 
one's  self  in  a  right  attitude  respecting  them.  This  cry  is  heard  in  all  lands,  languages, 
and  times.  "  Oh  that  there  were  a  daysman  1"  This  cry  prepares  for  and  anticipates 
the  true  Mediator. 

III.  The  response  to  the  universal  need  m  the  "one  Mediator  between 
God  and  men."  Happily  "himself  Man."  God  "hath  spoken  unto  us  in  his  Son  " — 
no  longer  in  prophets,  but  in  a  Son,  who  is  at  the  same  time  "  the  effulgence  of  his 
glory,  and  the  very  image  of  his  substance ; "  and  yet  "  Man  " — "  bone  of  our  bone." 
"  God  manifested  in  the  flesh,"  and  yet  "  in  all  things  "  "  made  like  unto  his  brethren." 
Speaking  with  Divine  authority  to  us  in  our  language,  and  of  heavenly  things  on  our 
level.  And  revealing  within  the  compass  of  a  human  life,  and  by  means  of  human 
acts  and  human  sentiments,  the  thought  and  love  and  pitiful  mercy  of  God.  And 
representing  us-r-doing  what  Job  felt  (and  all  have  felt  whose  views  were  just)  he 
could  not  do,  "appear  before  the  face  of  God  for  us."  Now  we  "  have  our  access  through 
him  in  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father."  If  we  cannot  order  our  speech  or  our  cause,  ho 
can.  If  we  cannot  answer  one  of  a  thousand,  he  can.  For  he  is  able,  indeed,  to  "  put 
his  hand  upon  both." — B.  O. 

Ver.  2. — The  problem  of  justification.  It  is  very  doubtful  how  far  Job  conceived 
of  this  great  problem  as  it  has  presented  itself  to  us  since  the  time  of  St.  Paul.  The 
whole  question  was  confused  to  his  apprehension  by  the  inexplicable  perplexity  of  his 
situation  and  the  grossly  unfair  insiouationa  of  \m  friendft.    It  appeared  as  though  God 


tit  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  ^  a.  1—38, 


were  Mb  Adversary,  and  it  seemed  hopeless  to  attempt  to  set  himself  right  with  One 
whose  power  was  so  vastly  greater  than  his  own.  We  have  not  Job's  peculiar  difficul- 
ties in  regard  to  Divine  providence.  Yet  to  us  the  problem  of  justification  is  not  less 
serious  because  we  have  been  made  to  see  the  moral  difficulties  more  closely.  Let  us, 
then,  consider  the  Christian  view  of  the  problem  of  justification  and  its  solution. 

L  The  pboblbm.  The  question  which  Job  propounds  is  of  a  universal  character. 
He  does  not  ask  how  he,  as  one  individual  in  special  circntnstances,  can  be  justified; 
but  his  own  case  leads  him  to  think  of  man  generally.  He  feels  that  his  difficulty  is 
his  share  of  a  general  difficulty  of  the  race.  What  is  this?  1.  To  be  Just  with  Ood  i» 
to  stand  right  with  Ood,  The  expression  implies  a  certain  relationship.  It  goes 
beyond  subjective  righteousness ;  it  is  more  than  internal  holiness.  It  is  a  standing  in 
right  relations  to  God,  in  such  relations  as  admit  of  his  treating  us  as  just  men.  2. 
2%«  character  of  the,  relations  depends  on  OocFs  view  of  «s.  We  may  appear  just  in  the 
eyes  of  men  and  yet  not  be  just  with  God.  He  knows  us  as  we  are,  and  he  can  be 
deceived  by  no  cloak  of  hypocrisy.  Therefore  we  have  to  lay  aside  all  shams  and 
appearances  when  we  come  to  consider  the  question  of  our  justification  before  God. 
3.  Sin  puts  us  all  in  wrong  relations  with  Ood.  We  start  with  the  fact  that  we  need 
to  be  'justified.  The  justification  cannot  be  a  clearing  of  our  character  from  false 
imputations,  as  Job's  was  largely ;  for  many  accusations  are  true — we  are  guilty.  Hence 
the  tremendous  difficulty  of  the  problem.  4.  It  is  imspeakdbly  important  that  we  should 
be  in  right  relations  tuith  Ood.  This  is  not  a  question  of  abstract  dogmatics,  but  one 
of  personal  experience.  It  does  not  merely  touch  o\ir  feelings,  and  concern  Itself  with 
our  peace  of  mind ;  it  is  vital  to  our  soul's  salvation. 

II.  Its  bolution.  Job  propounds  the  question  as  though  no  answer  could  be  given. 
Witk  him  it  is  a  case  of  despair.  But  Christ  has  brought  an  answer,  which  St. 
Paul  nas  expounded  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  1.  We  cannot  Justify  ourselves  with 
Ood.  It  is  necessary  to  see  this  first  of  all.  The  Jews  made  the  experiment  with  their 
Law,  and  failed.  Many  now  make  it,  either  by  attempting  to  excuse  themselves  or  by 
trying  to  better  themselves.  But  they  always  fail.  2.  Ood  has  made  a  method  of 
Justification.  This  is  the  great  wonder  of  redemption,  that  our  Judge  provides  our 
Advocate ;  that  he  who  might  condemn  us  finds  a  way  by  which  we  may  be  forgiven. 
3.  This  Justification  is  in  Christ.  (Bom.  iii.  22.)  Christ  brings  forgiveness  of  past  sin 
and  recovery  to  God.  Thus  he  puts  us  in  right  relations  with  our  Father.  4.  It  is  realized 
by  means  of  faith.  (Bom.  iii.  28.)  When  we  put  our  trust  in  Christ,  we  receive  from 
him  the  grace  of  pardon  and  renewaL  The  condition  of  faith  is  absolutely  necessary. 
We  must  avoid  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  this  is  faith  in  our  own  state  of  justifica- 
tion, «.«.  a  believing  ourselves  to  be  justified.  It  is  not  that ;  but  it  is  a  personal  trust 
and  loyalty  in  relation  to  Christ  himself.  5.  Tliis  condition  results  in  a  real  state  of 
right  relations  with  Ood.  Justification  is  not  a  legal  judgment,  a  mere  pretence,  affirm- 
ing that  we  are  what  we  are  not.  That  would  be  a  lie.  It  is  an  actual  fact ;  a  putting 
5ns  in  right  relations  with  God.  Thus  it  is  the  root  and  promise  of  righteousness. — 
W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  20. — Self-justification.  I.  Thb  need  to  be  justified.  The  burning  necessity 
of  justification  lies  at  the  root  of  Job's  terrible  agony.  Yet  even  he  does  not  feel  it  in 
its  deep  moral  and  spiritual  significance,  as  it  would  have  been  felt  by  one  who  was 
conscious  of  sin  rather  than  of  undeserved  suffering  and  unjust  accusations.  We  can- 
not endure  to  be  out  of  right  relations  with  QoA.  Though  our  lost  state  may  not 
trouble  us  as  yet,  the  time  will  come  when  we  shall  see  its  terrible  and  fatal  character. 

II.  Wk  abb  tempted  to  justify  ourselves.  The  very  need  causes  the  tempta- 
tion. Moreover,  a_  self-flattering  vanity  urges  us  in  the  same  direction.  It  is  most 
painful  and  humiliating  to  have  to  own  that  we  are  sinners,  deserving  nothing  but 
wrath  and  condemnation.  When  we  feel  ourself  in  danger,  we  are  at  once  wged  by 
very  instinct  to  put  ourselves  in  an  attitude  of  self-defence. 

III.  Wk   may   be   deluded  into  a  mistaken  belief  that  we  are  JUSTIFUtD.      No 

delusions  are  so  powerful  as  those  which  flatter  us.  It  is  so  easy  to  put  things  in  a 
favourable  light  to  ourselvts.  While  we  are  our  own  judges,  every  motive  of  self- 
esteem  urges  us  to  a  favourable  judgment.  Then  there  comes  in  the  terrible  mistake 
of  determining  according  to  our  feelings  rtther  than  accordii^  to  objective  reality,  m 


OH.  IX.  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  173 

that  when  we  have  argued  or  soothed  ourselves  into  a  comfortable  assurance  that  all  is 
well,  that  very  assurance  is  regarded  as  a  proof  of  the  fact  on  which  it  is  supposed  to  be 
grounded.  But  this  may  be  a  pure  hallucination.  It  is  possible  to  be  Justified  before 
God  and  yet  to  he  tormented  with  needless  fears  of  condemnation,  and  it  is  equally 
possible  td  be  still  under  condemnation  while  we  fancy  ourselves  in  s^  itate  of  justification. 
IV.  Sblf-justifioation  must  fail.  We  cannot  get  outside  ourselves  or  transcend 
our  own  experience.  No  lever  by  which  a  man  can  lift  himself  has  ever  been  invented. 
We  may  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh,  but  we  catmot  change  our  own  hearts.  We 
have  sinned  against  God ;  it  is  useless  for  us  merely  to  forgive  ourselves ;  we  need  God's 
pardon.  If  sin  were  not  real,  wo  might  find  a  defence  which  would  clear  our  reputa- 
tion. But  it  is  real,  most  terribly  and  unquestionably  real.  This  fact  makes  self- 
justification  impossible. 

v..  OUB  OWN  CONDUCT   DEM0N8TBATB8  THK   DELUSION   OF  BBLF-JUSTIFICATION.      Job 

seems  to  think  he  is  so  hardly  dealt  with,  and  God  so  much  greater  than  he  is,  that 
whatever  he  says  in  self-justification  will  be  turned  against  him.  That  is  a  mistake, 
for  God  is  just  and  merciful.  But  in  a  deeper  sense  God's  words  are  true.  We  may 
•ay  we  are  just,  but  our  deeds  belie  our  words.  Nay,  our  very  mouth,  that  proclaims 
our  justice,  denies  it;  for  our  words  are  often  sinful,  ungenerous  when  they  are  not 
untrue. 

VL  Thk  failube  of  bklf-justification  should  dbive  db  to  God's  justification 
IN  Chbibt.  We  need  not  despair  like  Job,  for  we  have  a  gospel  to  the  unrighteous. 
Christ  has  brought  a  perfect  justification,  in  pardon  and  renewal,  for  all  who  own  their 
sin  and  trust  his  grace. — ^W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  22. — 7%e  injustice  of  equality.  Job  complains  that  the  same  doom  is  meted 
out  to  the  perfect  and  the  wicked  5  this  seems  to  be  unjust.  Our  modern  complaints 
are  of  the  injustice  of  the  terrible  inequalities  of  life.  But  Job's  position  suggests  to  us 
that  justice  is  not  simple  equality.  Equal  dealing  may  be  unjust  dealing.  To  be  fair 
to  ^1,  we  must  not  treat  all  alike.  Yet  the  inj  ustice  of  equality  is  aj  iparently  a  common 
thing  in  the  experience  of  life,  and  even  in  the  dispensations  of  Providence.  Thus 
special  providence  seems  to  be  lost,  and  one  broad,  rough  treatment  appears  to  serve  for 
the  greatest  variety  of  people. 

I.  It  would  be  unjust  to  treat  all  alike.  This  much  may  be  conceded  if  we 
think  of  the  whole  of  life,  not  of  external  experience  alone,  nor  only  of  this  temporal  and 
limited  sphere  of  existence.  To  look  for  absolute  equality  is  to  ignore  variations  of 
requirements  and  distinctions  of  character.  But  if  this  be  so,  what  are  we  to  under- 
stand by  the  apparent  disregard  of  those  differences  ?  The  world  is  governed  by  general 
laws.  Events  have  widespread  influences.  Calamities  come  in  a  swelling  tide,  not  in 
a  meandering  streajm,  and  when  they  sweep  over  the  land,  weeds  and  fruitful  plants 
suffer  from  the  same  devastation. 

II.  Nevertheless,  God  ib  not  thus  unjust.  Job  is  mistaken.  1.  We  only  see 
the  outside  of  life.  The  events  whicli  are  common  to  all  alike  are  external.  They  are 
visible  objects  of  superficial  observation.  But  these  events  do  not  constitute  the  whole 
of  experience.  The  blow  that  breaks  stone  only  toughens  iron.  The  calamity  that  is 
a  crushing  judgment  to  one  man  is  a  healing  tonic  to  another.  When  a  flood  sweeps 
over  a  district  it  leaves  behind  very  different  effects ;  for  while  it  only  brings  ruin  to 
houses,  it  brings  fertility  to  fields.  So  the  trouble  is  only  equal  externally.  If  only 
we  could  follow  it  into  the  experience  of  different  men,  we  should  discover  that  the 
inequality  has  ceased,  and  that  a  different  effect  is  produced  according  to  character  and 
condition.  While  it  is  a  curse  to  one  life,  it  is  a  blessing  to  another.  2.  We  only  see  the 
present  experience.  Now,  and  on  earth,  there  seems  to  be  a  rough,  indiscriminate  treat- 
ment of  men.  Here  the  injustice  of  equality  is  too  often  seen.  But  we  must  wait  for 
the  eni  In  Job's  case  the  end  brought  about  a  complete  reversal  of  the  whole  course 
of  events.  Now  God  makes  his  sun  to  shine  and  his  rain  to  fall  on  good  and  bad  alike 
—favouring  equally,  as  he  sometimes  chastises  equally.  But  this  equality  will  not 
continue  after  death.  Wheat  and  tares  grow  together,  but  only  until  the  harvest. 
There  will  be  a  great  inequality  of  treatment,  when  the  one  is  gathered  into  the 
barns  and  the  other  is  burned.  Surely  men  should  learn  to  bear  the  common  troubles 
•f  life  patiently,  if  they  know  that  beyond  them  all  there  «  more  than  compensation; 


174  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  ix.  1—35. 


there  is  fruitful  increase,  with  richest  blessings,  for  the  true  servants  of  God  who  endure 
patiently.— W.  F.  A- 

Vers.  25, 26. — The  svnft  day*.  Job  compares  his  days  to  what  is  swiftest — on  earth, 
the  running  messenger;  in  the  sea,  the  boat  of  reeds ;  in  the  air,  the  eagle  dafting  down 
on  its  prey.  We  must  not  look  for  a  difference  in  the  suggestiveness  of  these  several 
illustrations.  Gathered  from  every  region  of  existence,  they  give  great  emphasis  to  the 
one  significant  fact  of  the  brevity  of  life. 

I.  OuB  DATS  ABE  SWIFT  IN  COMPARISON  WITH  NATURE.  The  course  of  nature 
moves  on  slowly.  Geology  tells  of  innumerable  vast  ages  of  antiquity.  Evolution 
presupposes  an  even  longer  stretch  of  time.  By  the  side  of  the  gra<lual  movements  of 
nature,  our  little  days  are  swift  and  brief.  Each  man's  life  registers  bat  a  moment  on 
the  great  dial  of  time.  The  old  world  rolls  on,  while  we  children  of  a  day  come  and  go 
in  a  rapid  march  of  succeeding  generations. 

II.  OuE  DATS  ABB  SWIFT  IN  RELATION  TO  OUB  DESIRES.  Ws  cravc  for  long  expe- 
rience. Extinction  of  being  is  a  horror  to  us.  There  are  within  us  great  instincts  of 
immortality.  Thus,  while  we  live  our  little  earthly  day,  we  are  reaching  forward  to 
God's  great  eternity.    We  cannot  be  satisfied  with  an  ephemeral  existence. 

III.  Cue  DATS  ABE  SWIFT  IN  EEGABD  TO  OUK  POWERS.  It  takes  US  loug  to  train 
those  powers.  Half  a  lifetime  is  not  enough  to  perfect  them.  But  before  they  are 
perfected,  the  shadows  begin  to  lengthen  and  the  melancholy  afternoon  is  upon  us. 
Surely,  if  God  has  given  us  faculties  that  take  so  long  to  develop,  and  that  seem 
capable  of  great  achievements  if  only  they  had  full  scope,  it  is  sad  that  they  should 
begin  to  wither  as  soon  as  they  have  reached  maturity. 

IV.  OuB  DATS  ABB   SWIFT  IN  CONNECTION   WITH  OUB   DUTIES.      There  is  SO  mUCh  tO 

be  done  and  so  little  time  to  do  it  in.  Our  tasks  grow  upon  us,  and  our  opportunities 
are  cramped  and  cut  short.  Do  we  not  all  plan  out  more  work  than  we  can  ever 
accomplish?  Thus  we  labour  with  a  sad  consciousness  that  we  can  never  overtake 
our  intentions. 

V.  OuB  DATS  ARE  SWIFT  BT  THE  SIDE  OF  OUB  EXPECTATIONS.  A  child  sees  eternity 
before  him.  In  his  estimation,  one  year — a  whole  year — is  a  vast  epoch.  Even  in  later 
youth  time  seems  to  be  an  abundant  commodity.  There  is  little  need  to  economize 
it,  for  have  we  not  enough  and  to  spare?  Presently  we  are  surprised  to  see  how 
quickly  its  unheeded  moments  are  slipping  away  from  us.  Every  year  it  goes  faster, 
till  the  silent  stream  has  become  a  headlong  torrent,  and  days  fly  past  us  with  terrible 
speed. 

VI.  OuB  DATS  ARE  SWIFT  IN  THE  LIGHT  OP  ETEBNiTT.  Here  IS  the  explanation  of 
the  whole  mystery.  We  are  not  creatures  of  a  day,  although  our  earthly  life  is  so 
short.  God  has  given  us  a  spark  of  his  own  immortality.  In  view  of  that  the  largest 
earthly  life  is  a  fleeting  shadow.  Yet  the  ample  leisure  of  eternity  must  not  make 
us  careless  of  the  work  of  the  day,  for  this  day  will  never  return.  How  valuable  is 
time  in  the  outer  world  1  The  messenger  runs  with  swiftest  paces,  the  little  skiff 
darts  about  on  the  waters,  the  fierce  eagle  drops  on  its  prey  like  a  thunderbolt.  Though 
eternity  is  long,  let  us  hasten  to  use  our  glorious  prospects  as  an  inspiration  for  a  like 
eagerness  in  making  the  most  of  our  brief  earthly  days. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  30,  31. — Despair  of  purification.  Job  is  possessed  by  a  terrible  thought.  He 
imagines  that  God  is  so  determined  to  have  him  as  an  object  of  condemnation  that 
nothing  he  can  do  can  set  him  right ;  even  if  he  makes  himself  ever  so  clean,  God  will 
plunge  him  back  in  the  mire,  God  will  overwhelm  him  with  guilt.  This  is,  of  course, 
a  H  holly  false  view  of  God,  though  it  is  not  altogether  inexcusable  with  Job  in  his 
ignorance  and  awful  distress. 

I.  God  onlt  dbbiees  our  purification.  We  may  not  be  tempted  to  fall  into  Job's 
mistake,  for  we  have  more  light,  and  our  circumstances  are  far  more  hopeful  than  his 
were.  Still,  it  is  difiScult  for  us  to  conceive  how  entirely  averse  to  making  the  worst 
of  us  God  is.  _  He  cannot  ignore  sin,  for  his  searching  glance  always  reveals  it  to  him, 
and  his  jtist  judgment  always  estimates  it  rightly.  He  must  bring  our  sin  home  to 
us  ;  for  this  is  for  our  own  good,  as  well  as  necessary  in  regard  to  the  claims  of  righteous- 
ness.   Thus  he  seems  to  be  forcing  out  our  guilt.    But  in  doing  so  he  is  not  plunging 


OH.IX.  1— 35,]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  175 


us  into  the  mire,  but  only  making  apparent  tbe  hidden  evil  of  our  heart.  The  process 
is  like  that  of  a  photographer  developing  a  picture,  like  that  of  a  physician  bringing 
a  disease  to  the  surface.  Tbe  result  makes  apparent  what  existed  before^  unseen  but 
dangerously  powerful. 

II.  It  IB  HOPELESS  TO  ATTEMPT  ouE  OWN  PDKiPiOATioN.  Here  Job  was  right.  We 
may  wash  ourselves,  but  we  shall  not  be  clean.  Siu  is  more  than  a  defilement ;  it  is 
a  stain,  a  dye,  an  ingrained  evil.  It  is  like  the  Ethiopian's  skin  and  the  leopard's 
spots;  sin  has  become  a  part  of  the  sinner's  very  constitution.  Tears  of ,  repentance 
will  not  wash  it  out.  Blood  of  sacrificed  victims  will  not  cleanse  it  away.  Penance 
and  good  deeds  will  not  remove  it.  We  cannot  undo  the  past,  cannot  do  away  with 
the  fact  that  sin  was  committed.  Therefore  we  cannot  remove  the  guilt  of  our  sin, 
nor  its  contaminating,  corrupting  influence  from  our  consciences, 

III.  Gk)D  PBOViDES  PUElFicATiON  FROM  SIN.  We  need  not  despair.  Job  is  not  only 
mistaken ;  the  truth  is  the  very  opposite  to  what  he  imagines  it  to  be,  God  himself, 
instead  of  aggravating  guilt,  has  provided  the  only  efficacious  means  for  its  removal. 
This  was  promised  in  the  Old  Testament :  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together, 
saith  the  Lord,"  etc.  (Isa.  i.  18).  It  is  accomplished  in  the  New  Testament.  Christ 
offered  forgiveness  of  sin  (Matt.  ii.  2).  By  his  death  on  the  cross  he  made  that  for- 
giveness sure  to  us.  What  no  tears  or  works  of  ours  can  do  is  effected  by  the  blood 
of  Christ,  which  "cleanseth  us  from  all  sin"  (1  John  i.  7).  That  is  to  say,  Christ's 
death  is  the  great  purifying  sacrifice.  When  we  trust  in  him  the  cleansing  of  guilt 
that  is  given,  on  condition  of  the  perfect  sacrifice,  is  ours.  Our  despair  of  purification 
outside  Christ  should  only  drive  us  to  Christ  that  we  may  receive  it, — W,  F,  A, 

Ver,  33.— Z%«  Daysman.  Job  regarded  it  as  unfair  that  his  Judge  and  his  Accuser 
should  be  one  and  the  same  Person,  and  he  craved  an  umpire  to  come  between.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  he  was  mistaken.  His  accuser  was  not  his  Judge,  Satan  was  his 
accuser,  and  God  was  the  great  and  just  Umpire  of  the  contest.  Still,  men  have  ever 
felt  the  need  of  one  who  should  come  between  them  and  God,  and  assist  them  in 
coming  to  a  right  understanding  with  God.  The  feeling  has  arisen  in  part  from  a 
similar  mislake  to  Job's,  but  also  in  part  from  a  spiritual  instinct.  Leaving  Job's 
misconception,  what  may  we  regard  as  the  truth  about  this  idea  of  the  Daysman? 

L  Wb  are  at  FEUD  WITH  QoD  IN  ouE  SIN,  There  is  an  ancient  quarrel  between 
the  race  and  its  Maker,  Sin  is  more  than  disease ;  it  is  rebellion.  It  is  more  than  a 
stain  on  our  character;  it  is  an  oflfence  against  God.  It  is  worse  than  a  disarrangement 
of  earthly  relations;  it  is  a  wrong  attitude  towards  Heaven,  These  unearthly  charac- 
teristics of  siu  give  to  it  a  peculiar  horror  and  make  it  a  deadly  danger.  So  long  as 
we  are  living  in  sin  we  are  God's  enemies. 

II,  It  is  time  THIS  feud  were  bbouoht  to  an  end.  It  only  widens  while  il  is 
left  unchecked.  The  longer  we  sin,  the  deeper  our  antagonism  to  God  becomes.  Tlius 
we  "  treasure  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath."  This  is  no  matter  of  mere  unseemli- 
ness and  impropriety.  It  is  a  fearful  wrong  that  the  child  should  be  fighting  against 
his  Father.    It  must  bring  ruin  on  the  child  and  grief  to  the  Father. 

III,  Wk  need  a  Daysman  to  set  us  eight  with  God,  The  Daysman  is  our 
Mediator.  Now,  the  doctrine  of  mediation  is  not  so  popular  as  once  it  was.  People  say, 
"  We  want  to  go  straight  to  God,  He  is  our  Father,  we  are  his  children.  We  want  no  one 
to  come  between  us.  We  simply  want  to  go  straight  home  to  God."  There  is  much 
truth  and  rightness  of  feeling  in  this  desire.  If  anything  came  between  us  and  God,  so 
as  to  hinder  us,  that  would  be  a  stumbling-block,  an  idol,  and  it  would  be  our  duty  to 
remove  it  out  of  our  way.  Any  abuse  of  sacraments,  any  tyranny  of  priestism,  any 
person  the  most  exalted,  if  even  an  angel  from  heaven,  who  came  between  so  as  to 
obstruct  the  way  to  God,  would  be  an  evil  to  be  deplored  and  avoided.  If  even  Clirist 
stood  in  this  position  it  would  be  our  duty  to  forsake  him.  If  Christianity  nie  in',  a 
more  difficult  and  roundabout  way  to  God,  it  would  be  right  to  renounce  Christianity, 
and  to  revert  to  a  simpler  theism.  But  the  question  is— What  is  the  nearest  way  back 
to  God?  The  exile  desires  to  go  straight  home.  You  offer  to  show  him  on  the  route 
fine  mountains,  ancient  cities,  picturesque  ruins.  He  will  have  none  of  thL-m.  He 
only  wants  to  go  home  by  the  most  direct  way.  But  alas !  he  is  far  from  home,  and 
between  him  and  his  home  there  is  the  broad  ocean.    How  shall  he  cross  it?    Now, 


176 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CB.  1. 1—22, 


the  Mediator  is  to  help  us  over  the  ocean  that  separates  us  from  God.  He  u  between 
us  and  God,  not  as  a  wall  that  divides,  but  as  a  door  in  the  already  existing  wall, 
or  as  the  bridge  that  crosses  a  chasm— not  to  separate,  but  to  unite.  We  hare  • 
Daysman— Christ.  Our  nearest  Way  to  God,  our  only  Way,  la  through  Urn  (JohB 
xiv,  6).— W,  F.  A, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 


Vers.  1 — 22. — Having  answered  Bildad, 
Job  piooeeds  to  pour  out  the  hitterness  of 
his  soul  iu  a  pathetic  complaint,  which  he 
addresses  directly  to  God.  There  is  not 
much  that  is  novel  in  the  long  expostulation, 
which  mainly  goes  over  ground  covered  in 
ch.  ill.,  vi.,  and  vii. ;  but  some  new  grounds 
are  alleged  as  pleas  for  mercy,  If  not  for 
justice.  These  are  (1)  that  he  is  God's  crea- 
ture, and  in  the  past  (at  any  rate)  has  been 
the  object  of  his  care  (vers,  3,  8—12) ;  (2) 
that  God  mnst  be  above  judging  as  man 
judges  (vers.  4,  6);  (3)  that  God  knows 
his  innocence  (ver.  7);  and  (4)  that  he 
(Job)  is  entiiely  in  God's  power  (ver.  7).  In 
conclusion.  Job  begs  for  a  little  respite,  a 
little  time  of  comfort  (ver.  20),  before  he 
descends  into  the  darkness  of  the  grave 
(vers.  21,  22). 

Ver.  1. — My  Bonl  Is  weary  of  my  life. 
This  is  better  than  the  marginal  rendering, 
and  well  expresses  the  original.  It  strikes 
the  key-note  of  the  chapter.  I  will  leave  my 
complaint  upon  myself;  rather,  I  leill  give 
free  course  to  my  complaint  over  myself,  or 
I  will  allow  myself  in  the  expression  of  it 
(see  the  Revised  Version).  Job  implies 
that  hitherto  he  has  put  some  restraint  upon 
himself,  but  now  he  will  give  full  and  free 
expression  to  his  feelings.  I  will  speak  in 
the  bitterness  of  my  soul  (comp.  ch.  vii.  11). 

Ver.  2. — I  vrill  say  unto  God,  Bo  not  con- 
demn me ;  literally,  do  not  pronounce  me 
mcked.  My  friends,  as  they  call  themselves, 
have,  one  and  all,  ocmdemned  me:  do  not 
tliou  also  condemn  me.  A  touching  appeal  I 
Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me. 
One  of  Job's  principal  trials  is  the  perplexity 
into  wliic'h  his  unexampled  sufferings  have 
thrown  him.  He  cannot  understand  why  he 
has  been  singled  out  for  such  tremendous 
puniebment,  when  he  is  not  conscious  to 
hinistlf  of  any  impiety  or  other  heinous  sin 
against  God.  So  now,  when  lie  has  resolved 
to  vent  all  the  bitterness  of  liis  soul,  he  ven- 
tures to  ask  the  question — Why  is  he  bo 
tried?  What  has  he  done  to  make  God  his 
enemy  ?  Wherefore  does  God  fight  against 
him  continually  ? 


Ver.  S.— Is  it  good  into  thee  that  thou 
shonldest  oppress?  Job  assumes  that  he  is 
oppves^ed.  He  has  no  conception  that  his 
puflForings  are  a  purification  (John  xt.  2X 
intended  to  lead  to  the  elevation  and  im- 
provement of  his  moral  character.  He  there- 
fore asks — Is  it  worthy  of  God,  is  it  good  in 
him,  is  it  compatihle  with  bis  perfect  excel- 
lence, to  be  an  oppressor?  It  la  a  sort  of 
argvmeintum  ad  vereeundiam,  well  enough 
between  man  and  man,  but  quite  oat  of 
place  between  a  man  and  his  Maker.  That 
thoa  shonldest  despise  the  work  of  thine 
hands  (comp,  Ps.  cxxxviiL  8).  Tbii  ar- 
gument i^  more  legitimate.  Ch>d  may  be 
expected,  not  to  despise,  but  to  eare  for,  the 
work  of  his  own  hands  (comp.  ba.  xix.  25 ; 
xxix.  23 ;  xli  v.  21 ;  Ixiv.  8 ;  Eph.  ii  10).  Every 
maker  of  a  tiling,  as  Aristotle  says,  lovei 
his  work,  and  naturally  guards  it,  caret 
for  it,  and  cherishes  it.  And  shine  upon  the 
counsel  of  the  wicked  (comp.  ch.  ix.  24). 
The  prosperity  of  evil-doers  must  arise.  Job 
thinks,  Irom  Ood  allowing  his  oonntenanoe 
to  shine  upon  them. 

Ver.  4. — Hast  then  eyu  of  flesh  T  or  seest 
thou  as  man  seetht  Notwithstanding  the 
anthropomorphism  of  their  language,  the 
sacred  writera  are  as  fully  aware  ag  their 
modern  critics  of  the  immateriality  of  God, 
and  the  immense  gap  that  separatee  his 
nature  from  human  nature.  It  is  on  thii 
th&t  Job  now  dwells.  God,  being  so  much 
above  man,  having  eyes  that  are  not  of  fleah, 
and  seeing  not  as  niHi  seeth,  ought  not  to 
judL;e  as  man  judges,  with  partiality,  or 
prejudlco,  or  even  with  extreme  aevetlty 
(ver.  6). 

Ver.  5. — Are  thy  days  as  man's  d^yi  t  In 
short-lived  man,  short-sightedness  and  pre- 
judice are  excusable,  but  not  in  one  whose 
days  are  unlike  man's  days — whose  "  years 
endure  throughout  all  generations"  (P*. 
cii.  24).  Such  a  one  ought  to  be  above  all 
human  infirmity.  Or  thy  years  as  man's 
days  ?  We  should  have  expected  "  as  man's 
years."  But  it  marks  the  disparity  mora 
strongly  to  say,  "  Are  thy  years  not  greater 
in  numher  even  than  man's  [literally,  *• 
strong  man's ']  day$  f  " 

Ver.  6. — ^Ihat  tiion  inquirest  after  mine 
iniquity,  and  searchest  after  my  gi^  It 
seems  to  Job  that  God  must  hav^  been 
"  extreme  to  mark  what  he  has  done  amiss" 
(Ps.  cxxx.  8),   must   have  searched   inte 


OH.  z.  1 — ^22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


177 


every  oomer  of  Un  life,  and  hnnted  out  all 
his  sins  and  Bboitcomings,  to  have  been 
able  to  bring  together  against  him  a  total 
commensurate,  or  even  approximately  oom- 
meusurate,  with  the  punishment  wherewith 
he  has  yiaited  him. 

Yer.  7. — Thou  knowest  that  I  am  not 
wioked;  rather,  although  thou  Imowett  (see 
tlie  Kevised  Version).  Conscious  of  his  own 
integrity  and  faithfulness.  Job  feels  that 
Ood  too  must  know  them;  wherefore  it 
seems  to  him  all  the  harder  that  he  should 
be  made  to  suffer  aa  if  lie  were  a  "chief 
sinner."  And  there  is  none  that  can  deliver 
out  of  thine  hand. 

"  'Tis  excellent  to  have  a  giant's  strength ; 
But  tyrannous  to  use  it  like  a  giant." 

Job's  last  ground  of  appeal  is,  that  he  is 
wholly  at  God's  mercy,  can  look  for  no  other 
deliverer,  no  other  support  or  stay.  Will 
not  God,  then,  have  pity,  and  "  spare  him  a 
little,  that  he  may  recover  his  strength 
before  he  goes  hence,  and  is  no  more  seen  "  ? 
(see  Ps.  xxxix.  15 ;  and  oomp.  below,  ver. 
20). 

Vers.  8 — 12. — Here  we  have  an  expansion 
of  the  plea  in  ver.  3,  "  Is  it  good  unto  thee 
that  thou  shouldest  despise  the  work  of 
thine  own  hands?"  Job  appeals  to  God, 
not  only  as  his  Oreator,  but  as,  up  to  a 
certain  time,  his  Supporter  and  Sustainer. 

Ver.  8. — Thine  hands  have  made  me  and 
fashioned  me  together  round  about  (oomp. 
Ps.  cxxxix.  12 — 16,  "  My  reins  are  thine ; 
thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  mother's  womb. 
I' will  give  thanks  unto  thee,  for  I  am  fear- 
fully and  wonderfully  made  ;  marvellous  are 
thy  works,  and  that  my  soul  knoweth  right 
welL  My  bones  are  not  hid  from  thee, 
though  I  be  made  secretly,  and  fashioned 
beneath  in  the  earth.  Thine  eyes  did  see 
my  substance,  yet  being  imperfect ;  and  in 
thy  book  were  all  my  members  written, 
which  day  by  day  were  fashioned,  when  as 
yet  there  was  none  of  them  ").  Canon  Cook 
observes  with  much  truth,  "  The  processes 
of  nature  are  always  attributed  in  Scripture 
to  the  immediate  action  of  God.  The  for- 
mation of  every  individual  stands,  in  the 
language  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  precisely  on 
the  same  footing  as  that  of  the  first  man  " 
('Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  iv.  p.  50). 
Yet  thou  dost  destroy  me ;  literally,  devour 
me  (comp.  ch.  ix.  17,  22). 

Ver.  9. — Bememher,  I  beseech  thee,  that 
thou  hast  made  me  as  the  clay;  rather, 
that  thou  haat  fathioned  me  as  day ;  i.e. 
"  Thou  hast  formed  me,  as  a  potter  liashions 
a  pot  out  of  clay."  This  is  scarcely  a  re- 
ference to  Gen.  iii.  19,  but  rather  an  early 
use  of  what  became  a  stock  metaphor  (comp. 


Isa.  zxix.  16;  xxx.  14;  xlv.  9;  Izir.  8; 
Jer.  xviiL  8 ;  Bom.  ix.  21—23,  eto.).    And 

wilt  thou  bring  me  into  dust  again  1  After 
having  fashioned  me  out  of  clay  into  a 
human  form,  wilt  thou  undo  thine  own 
work,  crumble  me  into  powder,  and  make 
me  mere  dust  once  more  ? 

Ver.  10. — East  thou  not  poured  me  out 
as  milk,  and  curdled  me  like  cheese  1  "  Didst 
not  thou,"  i.e.,  "  form  me  as  an  embryo  in 
the  womb,  gradually  solidifying  my  sub- 
stance, and  changing  soft  juices  into  a  firm 
though  tender  mass  ?  " 

Ver.  11.— Thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin 
and  flesh.  "  To  thee,"  that  is,  "  I  owe  the 
delicate  skin,  which  euuloses  my  frame,  and 
keeps  it  compact;  to  thee  I  owe  the  flesh 
whereof  my  frame  chiefly  cousists."  And 
hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  sinews; 
rather,  and  hast  woven  me,  or  knit  me  to- 
gether (see  the  Revised  Version,  and  comp. 
Ps.  cxxxix.  13,  where  the  same  verb  is  used 
in  the  same  sense).  The  idea  is  that  the 
body  altogether  is  woven  and  compacted  of 
skin,  bone,  flesh,  sinews,  etc.,  into  a  deli- 
cate and  elaborate  garment  (comp.  2  Oor.  v. 
2—4). 

Ver.  12. — Thou  hast  granted  me  life  and 
favour.  God,  besides  providing  Job  with  a 
body  so  delicately  and  marvellously  con- 
structed, had  added  the  gift  of  "  life  "  (Gen. 
ii.  7),  and  also  that  of  "favour,"  or  loving 
providential  care,  whereby  his  life  was  pre- 
served from  infancy  to  manhood,  and  from 
manhood  to  a  ripe  age,  in  peace  and  pros- 
perity. Job  has  not  forgotten  his  former 
state  of  ten^poral  happiness  (ch.  i.  2 — 5),  nor 
ceased  to  feel  gratitude  to  God  for  it  (oomp. 
eh.  ii.  10).  And  thy  visitation  hath  pre- 
served my  spirit ;  or,  thy  jprovidence — "  thy 
continual  care." 

Ver.  13. — And  these  things  hast  thou  hid 
in  thine  heart ;  rather,  ye<  these  things  didst 
thou  hide  in  thine  heart;  i.e.  "Yet  all  the 
while,  notwithstanding  thy  protecting  care 
and  gracious  favour,  thou  wert  hiding  in 
thy  heart  the  intention  to  bring  all  these 
evils  upon  me ;  thim  couldst  not  but  have 
known  what  thou  wert  about  to  do,  thougli 
thou  didst  conceal  thy  intention,  and  allow 
no  sign  of  it  to  escape  thee,"  I  know  that 
this  is  with  thee ;  rather,  I  know  that  this  was 
with  thee ;  i.e.  this  intention  to  destroy  my 
happiness  was  "  with  thee" — present  to  thy 
thought— even  while  thou  wert  loading  me 
with  favour.  Job's  statement  cannot  be 
gainsaid ;  but  it  involves  no  real  charge 
against  God,  who  assigns  men  prosperity 
or  suffering  as  is  best  for  them  at  the  time. 

Ver.  14. — If  I  sin,  then  thou  markest  me ; 
rather,  (/  /  tinned,  then  thou  didst  observe 
me.  Thou  tookest  note  of  all  my  sins  as  I 
committed  them,  and  laidest  them  up  in 
thy  memoi^.    And  thou  wilt  not  acquit  me 


178 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOR 


[oh.  X.  1—2 


from  mine  Iniqnitx.  This  leooid  of  my 
offences  then  still  hast  against  me,  and  I 
cannot  expect  that  thoa  wilt  acquit  me  of 
ttiem.  Witliout  some  one  to  atone  for  tliem, 
men  cannot  be  acquitted  of  their  offences. 

Ver.  15.— If  I  be  wicked,  woe  nnto  me  I 
If,  on  the  whole,  this  record  of  my  sins  be 
such  that  I  am  pronounced  guilty  before 
Qod,  then  I  accept  my  doom.  Woe  unto 
me  I  I  must  submit  to  suffer.  And  if  I  be 
righteous,  yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my  head. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  it  be  admitted  that  I 
hare  not  sinned  so  grievously  as  to  be  pro- 
nounced unrighteous,  even  then  I  will  not 
boast;  I  will  not  exalt  myself;  I  will  not 
hold  up  my  head  as  if  I  were  sinless.  I  am 
ftill  of  oorifasion.  This  clause  should  not 
be  separated  from  the  last.  The  sense  runs 
on :  "  I  will  not  lift  up  my  head  (being,  as  I 
am),  full  of  confusion,"  or  "of  shame," 
through  consciousness  of  my  own  imperfec- 
tions (see  the  Bevised  Version).  Therefore 
see  then  mine  affliction ;  rather,  and  eseing 
my  affiiotions.  The  sense  given  in  the 
Authorized  Version  is  maintained  by  Bosen- 
miiller,  De  Wette,  Stanley  Leathes,  and 
Merx,  and  defended  by  Canon  Cook;  but 
opposed  by  Sohultens,  Professor  Lee,  and 
our  Bevisers.  If  we  accept  the  views  of 
these  last,  the  whole  passage  will  run  thus : 
"If  I  be  [pronounced]  wicked,  woe  unto 
me  I  bat  if  righteous,  yet  will  I  not  lift  up 
my  head,  being  [as  I  am]  full  of  confusion, 
and  seeing  my  af&ictions."  Job  still  views 
his  afflictions  as  signs  of  God's  disfavour, 
and  therefore  proofs  of  his  sinfulnpss. 

Ver.  16. — ?or  it  inoreaseth.  Thou  hnntest 
me.  This  passage  is  very  obscure,  and  has 
been  taken  in  several  quite  different  senses. 
On  the  whole,  it  is  not  clear  that  any  better 
meaning  can  be  assigned  to  it  than  that  of 
the  Authorized  Version,  "  For  my  affliction 
inoreaseth,"  or  "is  ever  increasing.  Thou 
huntest  me ; "  t.«.  thou  art  continually  pur- 
suing me  with  thy  plagues,  thy  "arrows" 
(ch.  vi.  4),  thy  "  wounds  "  (ch.  ii.  17),  thy 
poisoned  shafts  (ch.  vi.  4).  Thou  givest  me 
no  rest,  therefore  I  am  ever  conscious  of  my 
afflictions.  As  a  fierce  lion.  Schultens  re- 
gards Job  as  the  lion,  and  so  Jarchi  and 
others.  But  most  commentators  take  the 
view  that  the  lion  is  Qod  (comp.  Isa.  xxxi. 
4;  xxxviii.  13;  Jer.  xxv.  38;  Lam.  iii.  10; 
Hos.  V.  14;  xiii.  7,  8).  And  again  thou 
showest  thyself  marvellous  upon  me;  or, 
thou  dealeet  nutrvellously  unth  mej  te.  "  in- 
fliotest  on  me  strange  and  marvellous  suf- 
ferings." 

Ver.  17. — ^Thon  renewest  thy  witnesses 
against  me.  Each  fresh  calamitv  that  Job 
suffers  is  a  aew  witness  that  God  is  dis- 
pleased with  him,  both  in  his  own  eyes,  and 
in  those  of  his  "  oomforters."  His  disease 
was  BO  doubt  «ontinu«Uy  progressing,  and 


&om  bad  to  worse,  so  that  every  day 
a  new  calamity  seemed  to  befall  him.  And 
inoreasest  thine  indignation  upon  me;  i.d. 
"makest  It  more  and  more  evidently  to 
appear,  that  then  art  angry  with  me." 
Changes  and  war  are  against  me;  rather, 
changes  and  a  holt;  i.e.  attacks  that  are  con- 
tinually changing — a  whole  host  of  them, 
or  "  host  after  ho^"  (Bevised  Version  mar- 
gin), come  against  me. 

Ver.  18. — Wherefore  then  hast  thoubronght 
me  forth  ont  of  the  womb  1  A  recurrence 
to  his  original  complaint  (ch.  UL  3 — 10); 
as  if,  after  full  consideration,  he  returned  to 
the  conviction  that  the  root  of  the  whole 
matter — the  real  thing  of  which  he  might 
justly  complain — ^was  that  he  had  ever  been 
bom  into  the  world  alive  I  Oh  that  I  had 
given  up  the  ghost  I  Before  birth,  or  in  the 
act  of  birth  (so  ch.  iii  11).  And  no  eye 
had  seen  me  I  "No  eye,"  t'.e.,  " had  looked 
upon  my  living  face."    For  then — 

Ver.  19. — ^I  should  have  been  as  though 
I  had  not  been;  I  shoold  have  been  carried 
from  the  womb  to  the  grave.  So  short  an 
existence  would  have  been  the  next  thing 
to  no  existence  at  all,  and  would  have 
equally  satisfied  my  wishes. 

Ver.  20. — Are  not  my  days  few!  Cease 
then,  and  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  take 
comfort  a  little.  Job  here  returns  &om 
vague  longings  and  idle  aspirations  to  actual 
realities — the  facts  of  the  case — and  asks, 
"  Is  not  the  time  that  I  now  have  to  live 
short?  Must  not  my  disease  make  an  end 
of  me  in  a  very  brief  space?  If  so,  then 
may  I  not  make  a  request  ?  My  petition  is 
that  God  will '  cease '  from  me,  grant  me  a 
respite,  'let  me  alone'  for  a  short  time, 
remove  his  heavy  hand,  and  allow  me  to 
•  take  comfort  a  little,'  recover  my  strength, 
and  obtain  a  breathing-space,  before  my 
actual  end,  before  the  time  comes  for  my 
descent  to  Sheol,"  which  is  then  (vers.  21, 
22)  described.  The  parallel  with  Ps.  xxxix. 
13  is  striking. 

Ver.  21.— Before  I  go  whence  I  shall  not 
return  (comp,  ch.  vii.  9;  and  see  2  Sam. 
xiL  23).  Even  to  the  land  of  darkness  and 
the  shadow  of  death.  Job's  idea  of  the  re- 
ceptacle of  the  dead,  while  it  haa  some 
analogies  with  the  Egyptian  under-world, 
and  even  more  with  the  Greek  and  Boman 
conceptions  of  Hades  or  Orcus,  was  pro- 
bably derived  from  Babylonia,  or  Chaldea, 
on  which  the  land  that  he  inhabited  bor- 
dered (oh.  i  17).  It  was  within  the  earth, 
consequently  dark  and  sunless  (compare  the 
Umbrx  of  the  Bomans,  and  Euripides's 
viKfiav  KeuSiuiya  Koi  itkStov  wi\ca\  deep 
(oh.  xi.  8),  dreary,  fastened  with  bolts  and 
bars  (oh.  xvli  16).  The  Babylonians  spoke 
of  It  as  "the  abode  of  darkness  and  famine, 
whcM  earth   was  nra's   food,   and   theif 


OH.  X.  1— 21] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB, 


179 


nourishment  day;  where  light  was  not 
Been,  but  in  darkness  they  dwelt;  where 
ghosts,  like  birds,  fluttered  their  wings ;  and 
where,  on  the  doors  and  on  the  door-posts, 
the  dust  lay  undisturbed  "  (Transaotions  of 
the  Society  of  Biblioal  Aroh»ology,  voL  L 
p.  118).  . 

Ver.  22.— A  land  of  darkaesB,  ai  darkness 
itself;  or,  a  land  o/Aick  darknet$  Quo  the 


Bevised  Version).  And  of  the  sliadow  ef 
death,  withont  any  order.  The  absence  of 
order  ig  •  new  and  peonliar  featore.  Wa 
do  not  find  it  in  the  other  acoounts  of  Hades. 
But  it  lends  additional  horror  and  weirdness 
to  the  scene.  And  where  the  light  is  as 
darkness.  Not,  therefore,  absolutely  with> 
out  light,  but  with  suoh  •  light  •«  Milton 
oalla  "  darkness  visible." 


HOMILETICa. 

Vers.  1 — ^7. — Job  to  God  :  th«  progrts$  of  the  third  eontrovmny :  1.  7%e  pathetie  wail 
of  a  crushed  heart.  L  Sobbino  ik  the  bab  of  God.  1.  The  moan  of  a  desponding 
heart.  "  My  soul  is  weary  of  [literally,  '  loathes  ']  my  life  "  (ver.  ij.  That  which 
had  rendered  existence  a  disgust  to  Job  was  partly  his  intense  bodi^  affliction,  but 
chiefly  the  overwhelming  strangeness  of  the  Divine  conduct  towards  him.  K  only 
he  had  been  able  to  realize  that,  notwithstanding  all  contrary  appearances,  he  was 
still  an  object  of  God's  compassionate  regard,  he  would  have  doubtless  been  able  to 
sndure  with  continued  patience  and  exemplary  submission  the  appalling  calamities 
which  had  overtaken  him.  But  the  heavenward  outlook  of  Job's  spirit  was  obscured 
by  gloomy  clouds  of  doubt  and  fear.  The  conviction  was  beginning  to  force  itself 
inward  upon  his  soul  that  God  was  indeed  turned  to  be  his  Adversary ;  and  if  that  were 
really  so.  Job  felt  that  life  would  not  be  worth  living.  So  David  estimated  God's 
favour  as  life,  and  God's  loving-kindness  as  better  than  life  (Fs.  xxx.  6 ;  IxiiL  3 ;  cf. 
homiletios  on  ch.  vi.  1 — 13).  2.  The  utterance  of  a  fainting  spirit.  "  I  will  leave 
my  comphunt  upon  myself"  (ver.  1);  i^e.  I  will  give  it  free  scope,  yield  myself  up  to 
it,  and  permit  it  to  take  full  possession  of  me.  Job's  complaint  was  that  God  was 
treating  him  as  guilty  whUe  he  was  inwardly  conscious  of  being  innocent.  Had  this 
been  really  so.  Job  would  have  had  reason  on  his  side.  But  as  yet  the  Divine 
antagonism  to  which  he  alluded  was  only  an  inference  from  his  great  sufferings.  Hence 
the  attitude  assumed  by  Job  was  indefensible.  Much  more  was  it  inexcusable  to  give 
way  to  a  spirit  of  railing  against  God,  If  angry  feelings  rose  within  him,  it  was  his 
paramount  duty  to  repress  them.  The  absence  of  gospel  light,  however,  may  serve  in 
part  to  extenuate  Job's  offence.  The  Divine  philosophy  of  affliction,  as  expounded  by 
Christianity,  was  not  understood  by  him.  If,  then,  fainting  under  tribulation  was 
wrong  in  the  old  Arabian  patriarch,  much  more  is  it  indefensible  in  a  New  Testament 
believer.  3.  Hie  resolve  of  an  embittered  soul.  "  I  will  speak  in  the  bitterness  of  my 
soul "  (ver.  1).  Job  was  at  this  time  intensely  miserable.  Life  was  a  burden.  God  was 
(or  seemed  to  be)  against  him.  His  own  spirit  was  stung  with  a  keen  sense  of  injustice. 
The  result  was  that  wild  indignation  against  the  Almighty  was  beginning  to  steal  like 
a  poison  through  his  veins.  His  soul  was  fast  getting  set  on  fire  of  hell.  In  circum- 
stances such  as  these,  it  was  extremely  unwise  in  Job  to  resolve  to  speak.  Safety 
would  have  been  better  secured  by  silence.  The  only  favourable  feature  in  the  case 
was  that  Job  meant  not  to  fling  abroad  his  impassioned  outcries  on  the  wild  winds,  but 
to  breathe  them  into  the  ear  of  God.  If  a  saint  or  sinner  should  feel  aggrieved  with 
God,  it  is  infinitely  wiser  to  go  direct  with  his  complaint  to  God  himself  than  to  either 
brood  over  it  in  secret  or  tell  it  to  the  world. 

II.  PtBADma  BEFOBB  THE  THRONE  OF  GoD.  1,  Deprecating  condemnation.  "I 
will  say  imto  God,  Do  not  condemn  me  [literally,  'do  not  fasten  guilt  upon  me']" 
(ver,  2),  The  worcU  may  be  regarded  either  as  the  cry  of  a  saint  who  is  conscious  of  his 
own  inward  moral  and  spiritual  integrity,  but  who,  through  bodily  affliction  or  Satanic 
temptation,  or  both  combined,  has  become  suddenly  apprehensive  of  having  forfeited 
or  lost  the  Divine  favour;  or  ■■  the  prayer  of  a  sinful  soul  awakened  for  the  first  time 
to  a  conviction  of  its  guiltiness  before  God,  which,  in  an  agony  of  fear,  it  implores  God 
not  to  fasten  on  it,  but  to  cancel  and  forgive.  In  the  first  of  these  two  senses  it  was 
used  by  Job,  and  by  saints  similarly  situated  it  may  still  be  employed.  No  greater 
consternation  can  seize  upon  the  mind  of  a  child  of  God  than  that  produced  by  the 
fear  that  God  istesds  to  condemn  Maa.    But  eucb  a  fear  is  groundless.    Whom  God 


180  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  1. 1—22 

JuBtifiei,  them  he  also  glorifies  (Bom.  rllL  30).  "The  gifts  snd  railing  of  Ood  are 
without  repeotuice  "  (Bom.  zL  29).  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in 
Christ  JeiQS  (Bom.  viii.  1).  Ood  may  sometimes  hide  his  face  from  a  saint  (Lsa.  Ut.8), 
but  he  never  finally  turns  his  back  upon  him  (Heb.  ziii.  5).  In  the  second  sense  it  is  a 
prayer  appropriate  to  all  awakened  sinners.  And,  thanks  to  Divine  mercy,  God  never 
fastens  guilt  upon  a  soul  tiiat  fastens  it  upon  itself,  never  condemns  those  who  sincerely 
condemn  themselves  (Iia.  L  16 ;  xliii.  26 ;  1  John  L  9).  2.  Desiring  iUumination. 
"  Show  me  wherefore  thou  oontendest  with  me."  God  contends  with  men  when  in  his 
providence  he  a£9icta,  and  by  his  Spirit  convicts,  them.  He  contends  with  sinoets  on 
account  of  their  unbelief  (John  xvi.  8,  9)  and  wickedness  generally  ;  he  may  contend 
with  his  people  on  account  of  their  backsliding  (Micah  vi.  2 ;  Bev.  iL  4,  6),  their 
formality  (Bev.  iii.  1),  their  spiritual  indifference  (Bev.  iii.  15, 16),  or  simply  to  advance 
their  individual  improvement  (Gen.  xxxii.  24).  Yet  when  God  does  so  contend  with 
a  sunt  the  reason  is  not  always  patent  (ch.  xxxvii.  21).  Hence  the  prayer  to  be 
divinely  instructed  as  to  the  grounds  of  God's  controversy  with  the  soul  is  not  only 
not  sinful,  but  highly  proper  and  advantageous.  Only  it  should  be  presented  with 
reverence,  with  huJmility,  with  docility. 

III.  AFPEALma  TO  TEE  HEABT  OF  GoD.  Job  remoustrates  with  Qoi.  against  the 
treatment  accorded  to  him  on  two  maiu  grounds.  1.  It  is  derogatory  to  the  Divine 
character.  "  Is  it  good  unto  thee  [literally,  '  is  it  becoming ']  that  thou  shouldest 
oppress,  that  thou  shouldest  despise  the  work  of  thine  hands,  and  shine  upon  the 
counsel  of  the  wicked  ?  "  (ver.  3).  Three  considerations,  according  to  Job,  ought  to  have 
prevented  God  from  inQicting  upon  him  such  tremendous  calamities.  (1)  His  personal 
greatness.  It  was  not  becoming  in  a  Being  so  transcendently  glorious  and  powerful  as 
he  was  to  be  guilty  of  oppression.  (2)  His  pi  rsonal  interest.  What  proprietor  ever 
destroyed  his  own  property?  What  potter  ever  dashed  to  the  ground  the  ezqviisitd 
vessel  which  his  hands  had  just  fashioned?  But  Job  was  God's. handiwork,  and  yet 
Gk>d  despised  him,  and  treated  him  as  of  no  value  I  (3)  His  personal  integrity.  If 
God  was  a  Being  of  absolute  holiness  and  incorruptible  justice,  then  it  was  clearly 
impossible  that  he  could  shine  upon  the  counsel  of  the  wicked,  or  favour  bad  men. 
But  this,  as  it  appeared  to  Job,  was  what  God  was  doing  iu  afflicting  him.  The  three- 
fold argument  was  good  if  Job's  premiss  was  correct.  But' Job's  description  of  the 
Divine  conduct  towards  him  was  in  all  its  particulars  falladous.  The  Almighty  never 
oppresses  any  of  his  creatures,  least  of  all  man.  The  Creator  never  despises  anything 
he  has  made,  least  of  all  his  own  children.  The  Governor  of  the  universe  cannot 
wrong  the  just,  least  of  all  can  he  favour  the  ungodly.  Job's  argument  therefore 
should  have  led  him  to  seek  another  solution  for  the  dark  problem  that  perplexed  him. 
It  could  not  be  that  God  was  treating  him  as  above  depicted :  God's  character  for- 
bade that.  Neither  could  it  be  that  he,  Job,  was  guilty:  the  testimony  of  his  own 
conscience  protested  against  that.  (It  is  not  certain  that  a  Christian  would  have  been 
as  tenacious  of  his  own  personal  innocence  as  Job  was.)  Might  it  not,  therefore,  be 
that  Job  was  putting  a  wrong  construction  on  his  suflferings?  2.  It  is  inconsistent  with 
the  Divine  perfections.  (1)  With  his  omniscience.  "Hast  thou  eyes  of  flesh?  or  seest 
thou  as  man  seeth  ?  "  (ver.  4).  If  God  were  like  man,  a  being  of  limited  capacity  in 
respect  of  knowledge,  if  he  could  only  judge  by  apjiearance,  then  he  might  be  acting 
in  the  present  instance  under  a  mistaken  idea  of  the  patriarch's  guilt.  But  against 
that  rose  the  transcendent  objection  that  God's  eyes  were  not  "  eyes  of  flesh  "  at  all, 
but  eyes  "  like  a  flame  of  Are  "  (Rev.  i.  14),  from  which  no  thought  can  be  withholden 
(ch.  xlii.  2),  and  which  seeth  every  precious  thing  (ch.  xxviii.  10).  (2)  With  his 
eternity.  "  Are  thy  days  as  the  days  of  man?-  are  thy  years  as  man's  days,  that  thou 
inquirest  after  mine  iniquity,  and  searchest  after  my  sin?"  (vers.  5,  6).  Job  professes 
he  could  have  understood  the  Almighty's  hot  pursuit  of  him  had  the  Almighty  been  a 
short-lived  being  like  himself,  and  afraid  that  his  creature  might  die  before  he  had  it 
out  with  him.    But',  then,  God  was  not  like  man.    There  was  no  fear  of  God  dying. 


OH.  X.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOR  181 


perfectly  intelligible  to  Job  on  the  hypothesis  that  God,  like  some  petty  tyrant,  had 
resorted  to  the  thurobacrewa  of  afBiction  to  extort  confession  from  a  prisoner  whom  he 
knew  to  be  ianoceot,  simply  because  he  had  the  power  so  to  do.  But  such  a  supposition 
was,  of  course,  untenable.  Therefore  Job  felt  hemmed  in  on  every  side  by  inextricable 
difiBculty,  and  was  obliged  to  cry,  "  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me." 

LxuoiTB.  1.  The  best  thing  for  burdened  souls  to  do  is  to  cast  themselves  and  their 
burdeni  into  God's  lap;  not  angrily,  but  humbly ;  not  compiainingly,  but  confidingly. 
2.  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  Gktd's  contending  with  his  people,  and  God's 
eondemning  them ;  this  he  never,  that  he  often,  does.  3.  When  God's  character  and 
God's  conduct  appear  in  conflict,  it  becomes  us  to  question  our  interpretations  of  tbe 
latter  rather  than  renounce  our  trust  in  the  former. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — Job  to  God :  ike  progress  of  the  third  controversy :  2.  An  inexpKcaUe 
contradiction.  I.  God's  fobuer  loving  oabb.  1.  Minutely  detailed.  (1)  In  Job's 
creation.  This  is  first  stated  generally,  the  patriarch  describing  himself  as  having 
been  made  directly,  by  God's  hand:  "  Thine  hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned  me ;  " 
perhaps  in  allusion  to  Gen.  L  26  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  32 ;  ch.  xii.  10 ;  xxxiv.  19 ;  Ps.  xxxiii. 
15 ;  Isa.  xlv.  12) ;  completely,  in  all  his  parts  :  "  together  ['  literally, '  all  of  me ']  round 
about"  (cf.  Ps.  cxxxis.  15, 16;  Bxod.  iv.  11;  ch.  xxvii,  3;  Ps.  iciv.  9);  carefully, 
with  exquisite  skill :  "  Thou  hast  made  me  as  the  clay,"— possibly  an  echo  of  G«n.  ii. 
7,  though  most  probably  the  image  is  that  of  a  potter  moulding  an  exquisite  vessel. 
And  certainly  man  is  God's  noblest  handiwork,  whether  we  have  regard  to  his  physical 
structure  or  to  his  mental  and  moral  organization,  and  much  more  if  we  include  both 
in  our  contemplation  (cf.  '  Hamlet,'  act  ii.  sc.  2).  The  process  of  man's  formation  is 
then  sketched  in  four  particulars,  showing  a  remarkable  acquaintance  with  the  phy- 
siological phenomena  connected  with  this  mysterious  subject :  the  generation  of  the 
child;  the  production  of  the  embryo;  the  gradual  development  of  the  foetus;  and  the 
actual  birth  of  the  chUd  (vers.  10— -12);  for  further  information  on  which  points  the 
Exposition  may  be  consulted.  (2)  In  Job's  preservation.  "  Thy  visitation  [literally, 
'  thy  providence ']  hath  preserved  my  spirit "  (ver.  12).  Man's  continued  existence 
en  earth  is  as  much  a  miracle  of  Divine  power  as  his  first  introduction  into  life.  Only 
Divine  care  constantly  exercised  could  keep  a  delicate  organism  like  the  human  body, 
and  mneh  more  a  complicated  instrument  like  the  human  mind,  from  falling  into 
disrepair,  and  eventually  into  dissolution.  Man,  too,  has  so  many  wants,  that  unless 
Divine  goodness  waited  on  him  daily,  he  would  speedily  succumb  beneath  the  stroke 
of  death.  Hence  Scripture  assigns  our  sustenance  no  less  than  our  formation  to  God 
(Deut.  viii.  3 ;  Ps.  xxxvi.  6 ;  Acts  xvii.  28).  2.  Skilfully  employed.  As  Job  recalls 
the -time  when  he  was  thus  an  object  of  God's  paternal  solicitude,  he  cannot  help 
lingering  over  the  sweet  memories  with  which  it  floods  his  souL  Setting  up,  too, 
these  tender  reminiscences  against  the  dark  background  of  his  present  sorrow,  he  feels 
melted  and  softened.  The  thought  of  that  Divine  love  which  had  fashioned  him  and 
favonrad  him  .enkindles  in  his  soul  a  strange  yearning  for  its  return,  which  makes  him 
trj,  as  it  were,  by  recalling  old  times  to  God,  to  excite  a  touch  of  pity  in  the  Divine 
heart.  "  lldne  hands  have  made  me ;  and  yet  thou  destroyest  me  I "  "  Thou  hast 
made  me  as  clay ;  and  yet  thou  reducest  me  to  dust  again  1 "  There  are  few  arguments 
that  touch  the  heart  of  God  so  powerfully  as  the  remembrance  of  former  mercies. 
"  Put  me  in  remembrance,"  says  God  (Isa.  xliii.  26).  "  Forget  not  all  his  beneflts," 
says  David  (Ps.  ciii.  2;  cf.  xlii.  6;  Ixxvii.  10;  cxliii.  5). 

II.  God's  present  OBtraL  tkeatment.  1.  JTie  Divine  plot.  "  And  these  things 
hast  thou  hid  in  thine  heart :  I  know  that  this  is  with  thee'"  (ver.  13).  Job  con- 
ceived that  his  terrible  nfiBictions  were  the  outcome  of  a  dark  and  deep  design  which 
God  had  formed  concerning  him  before  he  was  born ;  that,  in  fact,  God  had  summoned 
him  into  existence  precisely  in  order  to  persecute  him  in  the  way  about  to  be  described. 
That  Gk)d  worketh  all  things  on  earth  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  will,  that  every 
event  in  history,  as  well  as  every  incident  in  individual  experience,  has  its  place  in  an 
eternally  existing  and  universe-embracing  plan,  is  a  truth  of  natural  religion  no  Ibss 
than  of  Divine  revelation  (Acts  xv.  18 ;  Eph.  i.  11).  But  that  God  created  any  soul 
expressly  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  it  miserable,  either  in  time  or  eternity,  is  a 
simple  perrersMHi  of  truth,  iaaonsistent  alike  with  man's  fundamental  notiwu  of  the 


Tfifi  fioo^  OP  ^os.  i(m.t.i-n 


Deity  and  Scripture's  explicit  teachings  as  to  the  import  of  predestination.  God 
never  plots  against  either  saint  or  sinner ;  but  he  never  fails  to  plan  for  both — in  which 
there  should  be  comfort  for  the  one  (Bom.  viii,  28),  and  a  caution  for  the  other  (Prov. 
XV.  3, 11 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  15).  2.  2R«  /our/old  net.  Job  unfolds  the  nature  of  that  plot 
which  he  conceives  God  to  have  devised  against  him.  (1)  On  the  supposition  of  his 
sinning,  God  had  determined  to  mark  it  against  him :  "  If  I  sin,  then  thou  markest 
me,  and  thou  wilt  not  acquit  me  from  mine  iniquity  "  (ver.  14).  The  hypothesis  was 
natural,  since  "  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth  that  doeth  good  and  sinneth  not " 
(Ps.  xiv.  3 ;  1  Kings  viii.  46 ;  Bom.  iiL  12).  The  inference  was  also  correct  in  the 
sense  that  God  observeth  all  men's  sins  (Ps.  xxxiii.  13 — 15  j  Ixix.  5 ;  Prov.  xv.  3 ; 
Heb.  iv.  13),  and  can  by  no  means  acquit  the  guilty  (Nah.  i.  3;  Exod.  xx.  5; 
Bom.  vi.  23) ;  but  as  insinuating  that  God  lay  in  wait  to  catch  men  in  transgression, 
or  that  he  was  swift  to  note  and  punish  sin,  it  was  decidedly  incorrect  (Ps.  cxxx. 
3 ;  Neh.  ix.  17 ;  Exod.  xxxiv.  6 ;  PsI  IxxviiL  38).  It  is  God's  highest  glory  that, 
though  he  sees,  he  is  now  able  not  to  mark,  iniquity ;  that  he  can  both  remit  the  tres- 
pass and  acquit  the  sinner  in  consequence  of  Christ's  propitiation  (Bom.  iiL  25,  26). 
(2)  On  the  assumption  of  his  perpetrating  heinous  wickedness,  then  his  punishment 
would  simply  he  unspeakable :  "  If  I  be  wicked,  woe  unto  me  I "  It  is  still  true  that 
obstinate  and  impenitent  transgressors  will  not  escape  the  just  judgment  of  Almighty 
Gx>d  (Isa.  iii,  11 ;  xlv.  9 ;  Prov.  xi.  21 ;  ch.  xxxi.  3 ;  Matt.  xxi.  41 ;  xxiv.  51 ;  Bom.  i. 
18;  ii.  8),  but  it  is  likewise  a  blessed  truth  that  the  most  notorious  offender  may  be 
forgiven  (Isa.  i.  18 ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  8 ;  1  John  i.  7,  9 ;  1  Tim.  L  15).  (3)  If  he  should 
prove  to  be  forensically  guiltless,  he  must  still  demean  himself  as  if  he  were  a 
criminal :  "  If  I  be  righteous,  yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my  head."  Job's  language  here 
sr^gests  two  important  truths — ^that  no  man,  however  conscious  of  innocence,  can  really 
lift  up  his  head  before  God  as  if  he  were  spotless ;  and  that  even  those  who  can  lift 
up  their  heads,  through  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  have  no  room  for  self- 
exaltation  (Bom.  iii.  27).  (4)  Should  he  venture  to  indulge  in  such  a  feeling,  then 
God  would  redouble  his  attempts  to  abase  him;  hunting  him  like  a  wild  beast, — 
"  Thou  huntest  [literally, '  wouldst  hunt ']  me  as  a  fierce  lion :  and  again  thou  showest 
thyself  marvellous  upon  me  [or, '  thou  wouldst  repeat  thy  miracles  upon  me ']  " — ^prose- 
cuting him  like  a  culprit, — "  Thou  renewest  thy  witnesses  against  me ; "  besieging  him 
like  a  fortress, — "Thou  increasest  [or,  'wouldst  increase']  thine  indignation  against 
me,  with  host  succeeding  host  against  me."  The  imagery  may  set  forth  the  intensity 
and  variety  of  Job's  sufferings ;  but  it  is  likewise  fitted  to  suggest  the  vehement, 
relentless,  and  unceasing  opposition  which  God  offers  to  all  attempts  on  man's  part  to 
vindicate  his  own  righteousness.  It  is  God's  paramount  aim,  in  providence  and  grace, 
to  reduce  man  to  a  position  of  self-abasement  and  self-condemnation;  and  for  this  end 
he  employs  all  the  supernatural  power  of  his  Word  and  Spirit,  all  the  evidence  and 
testimony  of  the  sinner's  own  heart  and  life,  all  the  vicissitudes  and  trials  of  his 
ordinary  providence.  God's  object  in  doing  so  is  that  he  may  be  able  to  lift  up  the 
sinner's  head. 

Learn :  1.  That  if  God  uses  rigour  towards  man,  he  doth  it  not  of  any  cruelty,  since 
man  is  God's  handiwork.  2.  That  man,  being  God's  handiwork,  should  never  cease 
to  praise  his  Maker.  3.  That  man's  lowly  origin  should  both  keep  him  humble  and 
remind  him  of  his  latter  end.  4.  That  God's  power  and  grace  should  he  recognized  in 
man's  preservation  as  much  as  in  man's  formation.  5.  That  '•  all  things  are  naked  and 
manifest  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  6.  That  God,  if  swift  to  note, 
is  still  swifter  to  forgive,  iniquity.  7.  That  the  roytd  road  to  Heaven's  favour  and  for- 
giveness is  through  humility  and  self-abasement.  8,  That  the  end  of  all  Divine 
discipline  on  earth  is  to  humble  man  in  preparation  for  eternal  exaltation. 

Vers.  18 — 22. — Job  to  God:  theprogrest  of  the  third  eontroveny  :  3.  An  old  com- 
plaint renewed.  I.  A  oebat  mebot  despised.  Life.  "Wherefore  then  hast  thou 
brought  me  forth  out  pf  the  womb  ?  "  (ver.  18).  Job  here  announces  an  important 
truth,  that  the  extraction  of  an  infant  from  the  womb  is  practically  God's  work  (Ps. 
xxii.  9 ;  Ixxi.  6),  but  likewise  commits  a  sin  in  regarding  as  a.i  evil  fortune  what, 
rightly  pondered,  should  have  been  esteemed  a  valuable  blessing.  Life,  as  God 
bestows  it,  ii  a  precious  gift;  though  frequently,  as  man  njsJ'^s  it,  it  proves  a  dreadfttl 


m.  X.  1—22.3  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  183 


curse.  Job's  ingratitude  was  all  the  more  reprehensible  that  in  his  case  life  had  been 
crowned  with  mercies— with  great  material  wealth,  with  true  domestic  enjoyment,  with 
immenoe  Bocial  influence,  with  rich  spiritual  grace,  with  palpable  Divine  faTonr. 

II.  A  SINFUL  EKQRET  INDULGED.  That  he  had  not  been  carried  from  the  womb  to 
the  grave.  "  Oh  that  I  had  given  up  the  ghost,  and  no  eye  had  seen  me  I "  (ver.  18). 
Job's  regret  was :  1.  Sinful ;  inasmuch  as  it  undervalued  a  Divine  gift.  2.  Unnatural ; 
since  it  contradicted  the  instinct  of  love  of  life  which  the  Creator  has  implanted  in  all 
his  creatures.  3,  Foolish  ;  for  though  Job  might  have  thereby  escaped  bodily  pain,  he 
would  also  have  missed  much  happiness  and  many  opportunities  of  glorifying  God  by 
doing  good  and  enduring  affliction.  4.  Mistaken ;  as,  though  Job  had  been  carried 
from  the  womb  to  the  grave,  his  expectation, "  I  should  have  been  as  though  I  had 
not  been,"  would  not  have  proved  correct.  The  child  who  opens  its  eyes  on  esirth 
simply  to  shut  them  again  does  not  return  to  the  wide  womb  of  nothingness  when  its 
tiny  form  is  deposited  in  the  dust.  The  fact  of  its  being  born  into  Adam's  race  con- 
stitutes it  an  immortaL  The  doctrine  of  annihilation,  if  not  absolutely  unphilosophical, 
is  certainly  unnatural  and  unscriptural. 

III.  A  PASSIONATE  ENTREATY  OFFERED.  For  a  brief  respite  in  the  midst  of  his 
lufferings.  _  "  Are  not  my  days  few  ?  cease  then,  and  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  take 
comfort  a  little."  1.  TAe  prayer.  "  Let  me  alone."  Job  craved  a  momentary  allevi- 
ation in  his  troubles.  Few  sufferers  are  without  such  interludes  of  ease.  God  mercifully 
mitigates  human  sorrow  by  granting  brief  periods  of  relief;  otherwise  men  would  be 
crushed,  and  the  end  of  affliction  defeated.  2.  TIte  purpose.  "  That  I  may  be  cheerful 
a  little."  Job  could  not  brighten  up  while  tormented  by  incessant  pain  and  haunted 
by  continual  fear  (ch.  ix.  27).  Only  the  lifting  of  God's  hand  would  remove  the  load 
from  his  heart  and  the  cloud  from  his  brow.  And  this  he  felt  was  desirable  before  he 
went  to  the  under  world.  Most  men  will  sympathize  with  Job  in  desiring  a  brief 
period  of  freedom  from  pain  before  passing  into  the  eternal  world,  to  enable  them  to 
calm  their  spirits,  to  collect  their  thoughts,  to  prepare  their  souls  for  the  last  conflict 
and  the  great  hereafter.  3.  The  plea.  "  Are  not  my  days  few  ?  "  Job  thought  him- 
self upon  the  brink  of  the  grave.  In  this,  however,  he  was  mistaken.  'Most  men  deem 
themselves  further  from  the  unseen  world  than  they  really  are  (1  Sam.  xx.  3),  but 
occasionally  sufferers  judge  themselves  nearer  the  close  of  life  than  they  eventually 
prove  to  be.  If  the  first  is  a  sin  of  presumption,  the  second  is  an  error  caused  by  feeble 
faith.  If  the  first  is  peculiar  to  youth  and  health,  the  second  is  not  infrequent  to 
suffering  and  age. 

IV.  A  DISMAL  FUTURE  DEPICTED.  Hades.  The  melancholy  region,  into  which 
Job  anticipated  almost  instantaneous  departure,  was  not  the  grave,  which  was,  properly 
speaking,  only  the  receptacle  of  the  dead  body ;  but  Sheol,  the  abode  of  departed  spirits. 
As  conceived  by  Job  and  other  Old  Testament  saints,  this  was  not  a  place  where  the 
disembodied  spirit  either  found  annihilation  or  sank  into  unconsciousness,  but  a  realm 
in  which  the  spirit,  existing  apart  from  the  body,  retained  its  self-cunsciousness.  Yet 
the  gloom  which  overhung  this  silent  and  impenetrable  land  was  such  as  to  render  it 
unattractive  in  the  extreme.  It  was  a  land  of:  1.  Perpetual  exile.  "Before  I  go 
wAeMcelshall  not  return"  (ver.  21);  "the  undiscovered  country,  from  whose  bourn  n9 
traveller  returns  "  ('  Hamlet,'  act  iii.  sc.  1).  2.  Thick  darkness.  "  A  land  of  darkness, 
as  darkness  itself"  (ver.  22).  Four  different  terms  are  employed  to  depict  the  gloom  of 
this  dismal  world ;  the  first  (used  in  Gen.  i.  2)  probably  depicting  a  condition  of  thingi 
upon  which  light  has  not  yet  arisen ;  the  second  representing  this  lightless  region  as 
death's  shade,  ».e.  the  veil  which  death  draws  around  the  eyes  of  men ;  the  third  setting 
forth  this  darkness  as  that  which  covers  up  or  encodes  all  things;  and  the  fourth 
pointing  to  the  complete  shutting  off  of  light,  the  deepest  and  thickest  gloom.  This 
horrible  picture  the  poet  finishes  by  adding,  "  and  the  light  is  as  the  thick  darkness," 
meaning  that  in  that  doleful  region  the  daylight  or  the  noontide  is  like  the  midnight 
gloom  of  earth :  "  not  light,  but  darkness  visible  "  (Milton,  •  Paradise  Lost,'  bk.  i.). 
3.  C(ym,p!ete  disorder.  A  land  "  without  any  order  "  (ver.  22) ;  meaning  either  without 
form  or  outline,  every  object  being  so  wrapt  in  gloom  that  it  appears  devoid  of  shape,  or 
without  regular  succession,  as  of  day  and  night ;  a  realm  without  light,  without  beauty, 
without  form,  without  order ;  a  dark  subterranean  chaos  filled  with  pale  ghosts,  waiting 
ii^  oomparative  inactivity  during  that  "  night  in  which  no  man  can  work,"  for  the 


IM  THB  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  x,  1— 2t 

dawning  of  the  resmrection  morn.  Contrast  with  all  this  the  CJhristian  Paradise,  wbsre 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  are  now  for  ever  with  the  Lord ;  not  a  land  of 
exile  from  which  one  shall  no  more  return,  but  a  better  country,  even  an  heavenly, 
from  which  one  shall  go  no  more  out  (Rev.  iii.  12) ;  not  a  region  of  darkness,  but  a 
bright  realm  of  light  (Rev.  xxi.  23);  not  a  chaos  of  confusion,  but  a  glorious  cosmos  of 
life,  order,  and  beauty  (Rev.  xxi.  1). 

Learn :  1.  The  danger  of  unsanctified  affliction.  2.  The  power  of  Satan  over  the 
human  heart.  3.  The  short-sighteduess  of  sense  alid  reason.  4.  The  propriety  of  ever 
being  ready  for  our  departure  into  the  unseen  world.  5.  The  value  of  the  gospel,  which 
has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  6.  The  advantage  possessed  by  those  who 
live  under  the  gospel  dispensation.  7.  The  greater  responsibility  of  those  who  enjoy 
greater  light  than  Job  did. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Appeal  to  the  Justice,  knowledge,  and  goodness  of  Ood.  In  hii 
extremity  of  maddening  pain  and  in  his  contempt  of  life.  Job  resolves  to  give  full  way 
once  more  to  words  (ver.  1).  And  as  they  pour  forth  in  full  flood  from  the  bottom  of 
his  heart,  we  perceive  that  he  has  in  reality  truer  and  juster  thoughts  about  God  than 
those  expressed  in  the  preceding  chapter.  He  proceeds  to  appeal  one  by  one  to  the 
highest  perfection  which  can  be  associated  with  the  Divine  Name. 

I.  Appeal  to  the  goodness  and  greatness  of  God.  (Vers.  2 — 7.)  1.  To  hi§ 
reasonableness  and  justice.  (Ver.  2.)  "Condemn  me  not  unheard,  without  cause 
assigned ;  make  clear  to  my  mind,  which  cannot  deny  its  convictions,  my  guilt  and  its 
nature."  Taking  the  analogy  of  our  Lord's  reasoning  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  if  to 
condemn  a  man  without  cause  is  felt  to  be  an  odious  injustice — if  it  is  a  cardinal  point 
in  a  just  earthly  constitution  (e.g.  as  expressed  in  our  Habeas  Corpus  Act)  that  no  man 
be  seized  and  kept  in  prison  without  speedy  opportunity  of  being  confronted  with  his 
accusers — how  can  we  ascribe  such  conduct  to  him  who  sits  on  the  eternal  throne  ? 

2.  To  his  equity.  (Ver.  3.)  Can  it  be  right  that  God  should,  on  the  one  hand,  cast 
down  the  weak  and  innocent,  and,  on  the  other,  exalt  and  favour  the  unprincipled  and 
the  wicked?  This  would  not  be  to  hold  even  the  scales,  the  eternal  emblem  of  justice.' 
The  true  solution  to  the  question  is  given  by  Christ.  God  is  good  to  all  alike.  The 
great  gifts  of  nature — sunshine  and  rain — are  common  to  good  and  evil,  just  and  unjust. 
And  as  to  spiritual  blessings,  which  are  of  their  nature  conditional  on  huiuan  will  and 
seeking,  God  is  as  good  to  all  as  their  own  state  and  disposition  will  suffer  him  to  be. 
Are,  then,  the  sufferings  of  the  good  contrary  to  his  justice?  Not  so;  but  they  come 
under  that  higher  law  which  Job  and  his  friends  have  yet  to  learn,  that  suffering  is  one 
of  the  forms  and  manifestations  of  Divine  goodness  in  the  education  of  human  beings. 

3.  Appeal  to  his  omniscience.  (Ver,  4.)  God  sees  all  things,  from  all  beginnings,  to  all 
ends.  He  is  not  a  short-sighted  tyrant  who  is  tempted  to  force  by  torture  a  confession 
of  guilt  from  an  unhappy  prisoner  against  whom  he  has  only  a  suspicion  but  no 
evidence.  God  knows  that  Job  is  innocent.  But  this  fact  should  put  an  end  to  his 
murmurs,  could  he  be  wholly  true  to  his  higher  faith  in  God.  The  right  which  God  knows 
he  will  in  the  end  declare,  and  will  be  seen  to  have  throughout  defended  and  protected. 

4.  Appeal  to  hit  eternal  duration.  (Vers.  6,  6.)  The  calm  and  ever-abiding  existence 
of  God  must  surely  free  him  from  those  temptations  to  which  short-lived  man  is 
subject.  Hurry,  impatience,  haste,  impetuosity,  are  characteristics  of  humanity, 
because  men  know  they  have  much  to  do,  and  but  a  short  time  in  which  to  do  it. 
Therefore  the  tyrant  will  snatch  quickly  at  revenge  for  any  affront  or  injury  he  may 
have  suffered.  But  who  can  escape  the  power  and  the  penalties^of  the  Eternal  ?  Once 
more :  God  knows  he  is  innocent  (ver.  7)  1 

II.  The  belation  between  the  Cbeatob  and  the  obbattjbk.  (Vers.  8 — 17.)  1. 
Comparison  of  the  Creator  and  the  creature  to  the  potter  and  his  work.  (Ver.  8.)  The 
potter's  artistic  work  is  a  work  on  which  care,  thought,  elaboration,  have  been  spent ;  it 
is  a  "  thing  of  beauty,"  and  he  designs  it  to  be  a  "  joy  for  ever."  He  will  not  wantonly 
destroy  it,  will  not  bear  to  see  it  so  destroyed.  Can  we  believe  otherwise  of  God  and 
bia  work?    A  most  true  and  telling  analogy,  and  on  which  may  b«  foundsd  an  argu- 


on.  X.  1—22.]  The  book  op  job.  188 


ment  for  the  immortality  of  the  BonL  Had  that  idea  come  within  the  horizon  of  Job's 
vision,  his  analogy  would  have  afforded  him  profound  comfort.  2.  Contrast  between 
the  careful  production  and  preservation,  and  the  seeming  reckless  destruction  of  the 
creature.  (Vers.  10 — 17.)  On  the  one  hand  we  see  (vers.  10,  11)  the  marvellous  pro- 
duction and  development  of  the  bodily  life  from  the  embryo  to  the  distinct  and  fully 
developed  form,  arranged  with  all  the  apparatus  and  mechanism  of  nutrition  and  of 
movement.  What  dazzling  evidences  of  the  thought  which  God  has  lavished  upon  his 
chief  work  do  all  the  discoveries  of  physiology  unfold !  We  may  read  side  by  side  with 
this  passage  Ps.  cxxzix.,  and  Addison's  noble  hymn,  "When  all  thy  mercies,  O  my  God."  » 
Then  there  is  tha  endowment  of  this  marvellous  framework  with  the  great  gift  of  life, 
and  manifold  rich  enjoyments,  and  its  preservation  through  all  the  dangers  of  youth 
to  the  present  moment  (ver.  12).  But  how  dread  the  other  side  of  the  contrast! 
Behind  this  elaborate  design  there  was  concealed  from  the  first,  as  it  seems  to  Job's 
gloomy  reflection,  a  deliberate  purpose  of  destruction — the  reckless  annihilation  of  this 
splendid  work  of  Divine  art  (ver.  13).  Bather,  if  we  do  but  rectify  these  perverted 
reasonings  of  a  morbid  and  distressed  mood,  what  noble  and  irresistible  arguments  do 
we  derive  from  experience  and  from  the  science  of  our  physical  life  for  God's  eternal 
Interest  in  that  which  is  here  contained  in  it — the  soiu  which  partakes  of  him,  and 
cannot  perish  !  Then  follows  a  terrible  picture  of  the  relation  in  which  the  patriarch, 
in  his  misery,  supposes  himself  to  stand  to  God.  He  is  in  a  "  tetralemma,"  or  net, 
from  which  he  can  see  no  escape.  (1)  If  he  commits  the  smallest  error  (ver,  14),  those 
all-searching  eyes  follow  him  with  their  ceaseless  watch,  and  will  exact  the  penalty  of 
every  fault.  (2)  If  he  should  commit  iniquity  (ver.  5) — ^that  he  has  done  so,  however, 
before  these  sufferings,  he  must  most  solemnly  deny — then  he  will  be  justly  chastened. 
(3)  But  even  if  he  were  in  the  right,  he  must  appear  as  a  guilty  one ;  cannot  dare, 
Ireely  and  proudly,  to  raise  his  head — because  full  of  ignominy,  and  vdth  his  own  eye« 
beholding  his  humiliation  (ver.  15).  (4)  And  should  this  innocent  and  insulted  head, 
unable  longer  to  endure  the  ignominy,  rise  in  freedom  and  in  pride — as  Job  is  now 
doing,  in  fact,  by  the  tone  of  his  speech — then  God,  wroth  with  his  resistance,  will  send 
afresh  the  severest  sufferings  upon  him ;  will  hunt  him  like  a  lion ;  will  reveal  himself 
in  fresh  marvels  of  woe  and  judgment  (ver.  16) ;  will  produce  fresh  witnesses,  in  the 
shape  of  new  pains,  as  accusers  against  him.  Like  hosts  pouring  one  after  another 
against  one  beleaguered  city,  so  will  these  troubles  thickly  come  on  (ver,  17). 

III.  Renewed  burst  of  despondency,  imprecations  on  life,  craving  roa  best. 
(Vers.  18 — 22.)  Ouce  more  he  wishes  that  he  had  never  been  (vers.  18,  19,  repeated 
from  ch.  iii.  11,  etc.).  Once  more  he  urges  his  strong  petition  that  he  may  enjoy  one 
brief  respite  during  these  few  short  days  that  remain,  free  from  the  unceasing  torment 
(ver.  20),  before  he  sinks  for  ever  into  the  lower  world. 

IV.  PioTUBB  or  Hades,  ob  thb  loweb  wobld.  1.  It  is  the  "land  of  darkness  and 
of  gloom,  like  to  midnight"  (vers.  21,  22).  2.  Therefore  it  is  the  land  of  disorder  and 
of  confusion,  where  none  who  is  accustomed  to  light  and  order  can  feel  himself  at  home, 
3.  Though  there  be  even  there  a  slight  change  of  day  and  night,  yet  even  if  it  be  bright 
there,  it  is  as  gloomy  as  midnight  upon  earth.  We  may  compare  those  impressive 
pictures  of  the  lower  world  and  the  state  of  the  departed  which  we  find  in  the 
•  Odyssey '  (xi.) — 

"  Kever  the  sun,  that  giveth  light  to  man. 
Looks  down  upon  them  with  his  golden  eye. 
Or  when  he  climbs  the  starry  arch,  or  whon 
Slope  toward  the  earth,  he  wheels  adowu  the  sky ; 
But  sad  night  weighs  upon  them  wearily." 

"  In  bondage  through  ft  ar  of  death."  The  knowledge  of  another  and  a  better  life — 
denied  to  Job — is  evidently  the  one  thing  needed  to  satisfy  an  honest  mind,  cast  down 
in  extreme  suffering,  overwhelmed  in  mystery,  yet  unable  to  renounce  its  faith  in  the 
justice  and  goodness  of  God.  Christianity,  by  bringing  life  and  immortality  to  light, 
spreads  a  great  radiance  over  the  world.  It  is  tlie  firm  grasp  of  this  Divine  idea  which 
enables  man  to  support  suffering  with  calmness  and  patience.  Let  this  idea  be  taken 
away,  and — as  we  see  from  the  painful  tone  of  those  in  our  day  who  seriously  put 
the  question,  "  1$  life  teorth  living  t  "—even  ordinary  suffering  may  ba  resented  aa 
ki  tolerable. 


m  ME  fiOOS:  Of  JOB.  [cH.t.l-g2. 

Lbssohb.  1.  Oonfldenoe  founded  on  our  relation -to  God  as  a  "  faithful  Creator."  Ho 
cannot  desert  the  work  of  his  own  hands.  2.  His  goodness  in  the  past  is  an  argument 
for  trust  for  the  time  to  come.  3.  Insoluble  perplexities  are  due  to  our  own  ignorance 
of  the  complete  conditions  of  life.  God  is  the  most  misunderstood  of  beings.  4.  Every 
revelation  is  to  be  eagerly  received,  every  habit  of  mind  encouraged,  which  induces  us 
to  look  on  life  as  a  good,  death  as  a  gain,  and  the  scene  beyond  as  one  of  eternal 
brightness  for  all  faithful  souls. — J 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  supplicatory  cry  of  deep  sorrow.  This  is  the  cry  of  one  who 
declares,  "  My  soul  is  weary  of  my  life."  He  opens  his  lips  that  the  stream  of  his 
"  complaint "  may  flow  forth  unchecked.  Yet  is  he  humble  and  subdued,  though  he 
adopts  almost  the  tone  of  expostulation.  He  has  confessed  himself  to  be  unequal  to  the 
contention.  He  cannot  give  answer  to  God ;  he  has  acknowledged  his  guilt  and  impo- 
tence. Now  he  would  know  "  wherefore  "  God  contends  with  him.  This  is  the  desire 
of  even  the  most  resigned  sufferer.  Certainly  the  cry  which  comes  oft  from  the  lips  of 
the  deeply  afSicted  is,  "  Why  am  I  thus  made  to  suffer  ?  "  If  Christian  principle  and 
calm  faith  keep  back  the  demand,  "  Show  me  wherefore,"  yet  it  is  heard  in  the  under- 
tones of  amazement  and  surprise  at  the  unexplained  and  even  severe  dealings  of  a  loving 
God — "  Ah,  it  is  mysterious  I "  The  confession  of  the  mysteriousness  of  human  suffer- 
ing is  a  suppressed  cry  for  the  mystery  to  be  cleared  up.    Job's  cry  takes  the  form  of— 

I.  A  DESiBE  TO  BE  FEBBD  FROM  CONDEMNATION.  "  I  wiU  Say  unto  God,  Do  uot  Con- 
demn me."  This  the  first  desire  of  the  resigned  sufferer.  Let  it  not  be  as  a  punish- 
ment for  my  transgression.  "  Condemn  me  not "  is  another  form  of  urging,  "  Pardon 
my  offence  which  I  confess."  It  is  a  prayer  for  forgiveness.  Up  to  this,  the  previous 
confession  of  unworthiness  and  even  of  sin  has  properly  led.  It  is  the  first  rest  of 
the  soul.  While  the  unconfessed  condemnations  of  guilt  are  upon  it  there  can  be  no 
peace.'  Happy  he  who  in  the  depth  of  his  suffering  makes  bis  confession;  happier 
still  he  who  hears  the  word  of  gracious  forgiveness.     This  is  followed  by — 

II.  The  UNBUPPEB8SED  LONGING  TO  KNOW  THE  REASON  FOE  THE  DiVINB  AFFLICTIONS, 

"  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me."  How  natural  to  desire  this  I  But 
the  Divine  ways  are  "past  finding  out."  "He  giveth  none  account  of  his  ways" 
Certainly  to  Job  came  no  sufficient  answer.  It  remained  for  later  days  to  learn, 
"  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."  To  all  Job's  suggestions  a  negative  reply 
may  be  given.  1.  It  is  not  "  good  "  (».e.  pleasing)  to  God  "  to  oppress,"  to  (appear  to) 
"  despise  "  his  creatures ;  or,  as  it  would  seem, "  to  shine  upon  the  counsel  of  the  wicked," 
2.  He  has  not  "  eyes  of  flesh."  He  does  not  see  "  as  man  seeth  " — ^looking  only  on  the 
outward  appearance,  and  judging  by  that  alone.  Gud  looketh  on  the  heart,  and  estimates 
the  human  act  by  the  motive  which  impels  it.  He  makes  allowance  for  human  frailty 
more  than  even  frail,  erring  man  makes  for  his  own  brother.  He  is  just  in  his  view, 
and  not  warped  as  is  the  judgment  of  feeble  flesh.  3.  His  days  are  not  "as  the  days 
of  man."  His  are  the  days  of  eternity.  He  can  wait  until  the  future  for  s  justifica- 
tion of  Job's  conduct.  He  has  not  to  make  haste  to  bring  about  a  crisis  in  Job's 
history.  He  needs  not  to  hurry  to  put  Job  to  the  proof.  Our  reflections  on  the 
Divine  dealings  may  be  justly  corrected  by  duly  pondering  this  history.  In  our  assured 
integrity  we  may  wait.  In  our  conscious  sinfulness  we  are  safest  in  the  Lord's  hands; 
from  which,  indeed,  we  cannot  escape.  "  There  is  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  thine 
hand."— R.  G. 

Vers.  8 — 12.— Jlfon  the  creature  of  God.  Job  now  seeks  consolation  in  other 
courses  of  reflection,  although  arising  out  of  the  foregoing.  He  would  fain  draw  what 
comfort  he  can  from  the  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  he  is  the  creature  of  God.  "  Thy 
hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned  me  together  round  about."  Thy  skill  and  patience, 
thy  thought  and  attention,  have  been  bestowed  on  me.  Wilt  thou  forsake  the  work 
of  thine  hands  ?  Is  it  solely  for  this  time  of  trouble  thou  hast  brought  me  forth  ? 
A  calm  meditation  on  the  truth,  "  I  am  the  creature  of  God,  created  by  the  Divine 
hands,  the  product  of  his  activity,"  is  calculated  to  bring  consolation,  for 

I.  It  IB  A  PLEDGE  OF  BLESSING.  Even  erring  man  is  thoughtful  of  his  own  work. 
God's  work  is  perfect.  But  it  is  ec>  because  he  momentaTSy  guards  it.  He  catriea 
forward  kU  the  processei  which  we  modemi  call "  laws  of  nature."  Job  saw  tb*  "  hud" 


eat.  1-22.3  fSfi  BOOK  Off  ^OS.  18? 


of  Gud  in  all  the  changes  of  the  earth  and  heavens  and  of  human  life.  Therefore  to 
know  I  am  a  creature  of  God  is  to  know  my  life  is  in  his  hands.  I  serve  his  purpose. 
Uu  is  Lord  of  all.  Every  act  of  his  hand  is  pure  blessing.  He  can  do  no  evil. .  My 
creatureship  is  a  sufficient  pledge  to  me  of  certain  blessing.  He  worketh  for  the  good 
of  all  the  creatures  of  his  hands — sheep  and  oxen,  birds  of  air  and  fish  of  sea.  So  his 
work  in  my  life  is  the  truest  warrant  of  good  to  me. 

II.  It  IB  A  souBOE  OF  couFOBT.  No  One  can  calmly  reflect  on  the  fact  of  his 
creatureship  without  finding  cause  for  comfort.  Each  may  leave  himself  in  the  hands 
of  his  Owner.  It  is  the  basis  of  the  truest  consolation.  "  I  am  thine  "  must  warrant 
the  prayer,  "  Save  me."  The  human  life  may  be  left  in  the  Divine  hands.  The  poor, 
frail,  helpless  one  may  commit  himself  unto  God.  There  is  rich  comfort  in  the  know- 
ledge of  the  fact  that  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  is  my  Creator.  That  he  should 
"  destroy,"  or  appear  to  destroy,  the  poor  sufferer  is  at  once  acknowledged  to  be  matter 
of  surprise.  Under  the  shadow  of  the  wings  of  the  Almighty  Creator  every  creature 
may  find  refuge. 

in.  It  is  an  assubanob  of  Divinb  cakb.  *'  Wilt  thou  then  bring  me  into  dust 
again  ?  "  This  is  the  inevitable  thought  in  the  heart  of  him  who  recognizes  himself  as 
the  creature  of  God — who  says,  "Thou  hast  made  me  as  the  clay."  It  is  the  instinct 
of  frail  man  to  care  for  his  own.  How  much  more  is  it  the  Divine  method!  Already 
Job  has  declared  his  faith  when  saying,  "  Dost  thou  despise  the  work  of  thine  own 
hands?"  Thou  hast  raised  me  from  the  dust;  wilt  thou  bring  me  into  dust  again? 
Wilt  thou  frustrate  thine  own  purpose?  Thus  Job  reasons,  and  wisely.  It  is  the 
assurance  of  calm  wisdom,  the  faith  which  has  firm  foundation.  He  who  hag  brought 
me  into  life,  will  care  for  me,  will  sustain  me,  will  defend  me. 

IV.  Such  an  assueanoe  is  a  sufpioibnt  obound  op  confident  and  oalm  bepose. 
Bestful  is  the  spirit  of  faith ;  and  the  more  simple  faith  is  in  its  reasonings,  the  mure 
assured  is  its  peace.  Consciousness  of  sin  would  lead  to  distress  of  mind  and  to  fear 
when  it  is  remembered,  "  Thine  hands  have  fashioned  me ;  "  but  to  the  heart  assured 
of  its  integrity,  this  tmth  is  the  ground  of  calm  repose.  Prayer  may  be  based  upon 
this.  Faith  here  may  find  its  support ;  love,  its  inspiiation. — B.  G. 

Vers.  13 — 17,— TJie  hidden pm-poses  (^affliction.  Job  has  reasoned  much,  and  he 
has  asked  for  an  explanation  of  the  Divine  purpose.  "  Wherefore  contendest  thou  with 
me  ?  "  Doubtless  he  judges,  as  do  his  friends,  that  suffering  is  the  natural  consequence 
and  certain  punishment  of  wrong-doing.  But  he  is  conscientious  in  affirming  his 
innocence  of  transgression,  and  the  Divine  testimony  to  his  goodness  agrees  with  this 
(ch.  ii.  3).  What,  then,  is  the  explanation  of  the  whole?  Can  we  ever  hope  to  know- 
in  this  world  what  are  the  deep  purposes  of  God  in  the  afflictions  of  which  the  human 
life  is  capable,  and  especially  in  the  sufierings  of  the  godly  ?  No.  The  purposes,  though 
partially  revealed,  are  still  to  a  great  extent "  hidden  " — hidden  in  the  "  heart "  of  God. 
Job  feels  himself  hedged  in.  He  is  "  full  of  confusion."  We  must  remember  Job  had 
not  the  clear  light  in  which  we  view  the  Divine  work.  Yet  even  from  us  his  ways  are 
hidden.    We  must  say,  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  him." 

I.  Wb  must  see  it  to  bb  pbbfeotlt  natubal  that  the  Divine  ways  should 
BE  hidden  fbom  MEN.  How  should  man  be  able  to  trace  the  Divine  purpose  ?  It  is 
high ;  he  cannot  attain  unto  it.  Hidden  in  the  Divine  mind — not  always  revealed  by 
the  incidents  of  afiOiiction.    "  These  things  hast  thou  hid  in  thine  heart." 

II.  The  hidino  of  the  Divine  pubposes  is  a  salutary  test  to  faith.  Faith 
in  God  needful  in  order  to  a  right  relation  of  the  human  soul  towards  God.  It  is  the 
basis  of  peace;  encouragement  to  obedience;  ground  of  holy  fear;  help  to  holy 
love.  But  the  testing  of  faith  leads  to  a  more  spiritual  dependence  upon  God,  to  a 
more  frequent  reference  of  the  heart  to  him.  Walking  by  faith  honours  God.  Faith 
needed  by  the  very  conditions  of  human  life.    Its  exercise  promotes  its  growth. 

III.  The  hiding  of  thb  Divine  pubposb  ib  a  (Jracious  design  on  the  pabt  of 
God  mobe  effectually  to  wobk  out  his  will  coNOEBNiNa  MAN.  The  rebellious, 
not  knowing  it,  cannot  frustrate  it.  Secretly  the  Divine  will  is  wrought  out  in  the 
experience  and  history  of  the  suflTerer.  The  entire  dependence  of  the  soul  on  God 
is  encouraged.  This  must  leod  to  submission,  and  submission  in  faith.  The  reliance  of 
the  soul  must  be  on  the  chMacter  of  God,  and  not  on  oiroumstances  and  incident*. 


188  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.x.1— 24 

rv.  Thb  hidino  op  the  Divine  pcbposes  isstjes   in   the  pkrfectino  of  thb 

BUFBEUB  EXOBLI^KOB  OF  THB  HUMAN  CHABACWBB — PATIBNOK.     ThUB  it  haS  itg  "perfect 

work,"  and  the  soul  is  left  "  entire,  lacking  nothing."  He  who  can  patiently  and  trust- 
fully wait  upon  God,  bearing  up  under  pressure  of  afflictive  circumstances,  gains  a 
vigour  and  beauty  of  character.  If  patience  be  wanting,  all  other  qualities  of  the 
character  are  impaired.  Man's  wisdom  is  to  be  satisfied  with  committing  himself  to 
the  hidden  purposes  of  God.  In  faith  to  confide  in  them  as  wise  and  good.  In  patience 
to  await  their  exposition  when  it  shall  please  God  to  reveal  them  to  him. — B.  G. 

Ver.  1. —  WeaHnatoflift.  We  need  not  wonder  that  Job  was  weary  of  his  life. 
Beggared,  bereft  of  his  family,  smitten  with  a  painful  and  loathsome  disease,  tormented 
by  the  cruel  comfort  of  his  fiiends,  he  could  see  nothing  but  misery  around  and  before 
him.  Few,  if  any,  have  been  in  his  sore  plight.  Yet  others  have  felt  the  same  weari- 
ness of  life  that  the  patriarch  so  naturally  experienced.  Let  us  look  at  the  torrowful 
condition  and  its  Divine  remedy. 

I.  The  bobrowfdIi  condition.  1.  The  misery  of  it.  Life  is  naturally  sweet.  It 
is  a  most  merciful  arrangement  of  Providence  that  the  hard  lot  which  would  seem  to  be 
unbearable  when  regarded  from  the  outside  has  many  alleviations  and  consolations  for 
those  to  whose  portion  it  has  fallen.  There  are  few  lives  on  which  no  gleam  of  sun- 
shine ever  falls.  But  to  be  weary  of  life  is  to  have  lost  all  the  sunshine,  and  to  be  in 
dark  despair.    Like  "  Mariana  of  the  moated  grange,"  the  desolate  one  cries— 

<*  I  am  aweary,  aweary ;  O  God  that  I  were  dead  I  * 

2.  The  dangers  of  it,  (1)  It  tempts  to  suicide,  and  that  is  sin.  (2)  It  leads  to  the 
neglect  of  duty ;  for  if  a  man  has  no  hope  or  heart  in  life,  it  is  difficult  for  him  to 
take  up  its  tasks.  When  life  itself  is  no  longer  worth  living,  it  is  hard  to  summon 
any  energy  for  work.  (3)  It  blinds  us  to  remedies.  Like  Hagar  in  her  despair,  we  do 
not  lift  up  our  eyes  to  see  the  fountain.  Despair  justifies  itself  by  blinding  us  to 
hope.  8.  T!ie  causes  of  it.  This  weariness  of  life  may  spring  from  a  terrible  conjunc- 
tion of  external  circumstances,  as  it  did  in  part  with  Job.  But  internal  causes  usually 
co-operate.  Sometimes  the  despair  is  a  result  of  bodily  or  brain  disease,  and  the 
sufferer  must  be  pitied  and  treated  accordingly.  But  it  may  come  from  brooding  too 
much  over  the  dark  side  of  life,  from  distrust  of  God,  from  a  consciousness  of  sin,  or 
from  impenitent  and  rebellious  thoughts.  Ennui  is  the  product  of  indolence.  Weari- 
ness of  life  is  often  a  result  of  idle  sentimentality. 

II.  The  Divine  beuei>t.  This  evil  is  not  incurable.  For  the  despair  is  a  delusion. 
No  one  would  be  weary  of  life  if  he  knew  all  its  future  possibilities.  If  the  despair  is  a 
result  of  brain  disorder,  the  remedy  is  in  medicine,  not  theology.  Here  is  a  burder-land 
where  tht  two  faculties  touch ;  therefore  a  man  who  practises  either  should  not  be  a 
stranger  to  the  other.  Despair  may  give  way  to  a  change  of  scene  and  a  bracing 
regimen  without  any  arguments.  But  when  the  causes  are  deeper  and  more  spiritual, 
a  corresponding  remedy  must  be  looked  for.  This  will  not  be  found  in  any  worldly 
philosophy  of  life.  The  wonder  is  not  that  some  people  are  weary  of  life,  but  that  aU 
who  are  "  without  God  in  the  world  "  are  not  also  "  without  hope."  Pessimism  is  the 
natural  goal  of  the  Epicurean.  Life  is  not  worth  living  without  God.  The  great 
remedy  for  weariness  of  life  is  the  discovery  of  the  true  worth  of  life  when  it  is 
redeemed  by  Christ  and  consecrated  to  God.  Then  it  is  not  dependent  on  pleasure  for 
its  motives,  nor  driven  to  despair  by  pain.  It  has  a  higher  blessedness  than  any  earthly 
possession  can  give,  in  doing  God's  will  on  earth  with  the  prospect  of  enjoying  him  for 
ever  in  heaven.  But  even  the  unselfish  service  of  our  brother  man  will  help  to  conquer 
weariness  of  life.  If  Mariana  had  been  well  occupied  she  might  have  overcome  her 
misery.  There  is  a  healing  grace  in  the  discharge  of  duty,  and  more  of  it  in  losing 
ourselves  while  serving  others. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  4. — God's  vi$ion  of  man.  How  does  God  see  ua?  Ii  he  so  far  above  ns  that  he 
cannot  quite  see  us  as  we  are  ?  Is  he  so  great  that  he  cannot  conceive  of  our  little- 
ness? Are  his  ideas  so  different  from  our  own  that  he  cannot  understand  our  life  and 
sympathize  with  it  ?  Or  is  not  God  so  supreme  in  his  vision  of  man  that  he  cannot 
make  the  mistakes  we  make,  and  must  see  us  truly  just  m  we  are?    If  so,  why  dow 


«H.z.l— 2X]  THB  BOOK  OF  JOB.  180 


Gt)d  seem  to  act  aa  though  he  had  man'i  limited  yision  1   Queitioui  of  this  sort  seem  to 
be  perplexing  Job.    How  can  they  be  met  ? 

L  God  bees  us  tbuly  as  wb  aeb.  It  is  no  attribute  of  infinity  to  be  above  seeing 
what  ia  small.  Because  Qod  is  infinite  he  can  descend  to  the  infinitely  little  as  well 
as  comprehend  the  infinitely  great.  Moreover,  he  does  not  treat  ua  as  insignificant 
beings  unworthy  of  his  notice,  but  he  regards  us  as  his  children.  The  very  hairs  of  our 
head  are  numbered  by  God.  flis  greatness  is  seen  in  the  truth  and  thoroughnesa  of  his 
vision.  He  does  not  look  through  distorting  media,  nor  does  he  only  see  one  aspect  of 
things,  as  is  the  case  with  us.  He  sees  all  round  everything,  and  he  looks  through  all 
things.  There  is  no  secret  hidden  from  God.  He  understands  what  he  sees,  for  his 
infinite  vision  is  accompanied  by  an  infinite  comprehension. 

II.  God  jxtdges  vb  bt  a  hiqheb  standabd  than  oubb.  We  are  hampered  by 
narrow  ideas ;  our  judgment  is  warped,  and  cramped  by  prejudice  and  error.  Our 
ignorance,  folly,  and  sin  even  mar  the  very  standards  by  which  we  judge.  God's 
estimate  is  supremely  fair,  and  it  is  after  the  very  highest  and  purest  ideas  of  judgment. 

III.  God's  stakdabd  of  judgment  is  not  alien  to  ours.  We  might  be  dismayed 
by  the  very  elevation  and  perfection  of  God's  method  of  judgment,  thinking  it  totally 
dififerent  from  our  own.  If  this  were  the  case  conscience  would  be  a  delusion.  But 
God  is  the  Creator  of  conscience,  and  though  this  is  limited,  and  in  a  measure  perverted, 
still  it  retains  the  essential  character  given  to  it  by  God.  "  God  made  man  in  his  own 
image  "  (Gen.  i.  26).  Therefore  man's  honest  judgment  must  be  a  reflection  of  God's 
judgment.  God  sees  as  we  see,  so  far  as  we  see  truly.  His  judgment  is  just  the  correc- 
tion and  perfection  of  our  judgment. 

lY.  God  has  entered  into  our  lifk  that  he  mat  bee  ua  with  oub  own  bteb. 
This  seems  to  be  part  of  the  purpose  of  the  Incarnati«n.  Christ  is  a  brother-Man.  He 
looks  at  us  with  human  eyes.  One  with  us  by  nature,  he  can  perfectly  understand 
us.  We  cannot  even  understand  our  favonrite  do^  when  he  turns  to  us  his  dumb, 
pathetic  gaze,  for  he  is  of  a  different  species.  Christ  became  one  with  us,  one  of  our 
species.  Thus  we  can  understand  him,  and  he  can  perfectly  sympathize  with  us. 
Apart  from  Christ,  God  .seems  to  be  di.staut  and  altogether  different  from  ourselves.  In 
Christ  he  is  one  with  vis,  near  to  us,  and  able  to  regard  us  with  the  eyes  of  a  Brother. 
— W.  F.  A. 

Yer.  8. — Creation  and  its  consequences.  Job  appeals  to  GK>d  as  his  Maker.  He 
remonstrates  with  the  Creator  for  apparently  destroying  his  own  work.  If  God  had 
first  made  man,  why  should  God  turn  on  his  creature  to  "swallow  him  up"?  This 
is  not  so  much  an  appeal  to  pity  or  justice,  as  one  to  reason  and  consistency. 

L  God  ib  the  Ceeatoe  of  evert  individual  man.  Theologians  were  once  divided 
between  two  theories  of  the  origin  of  human  souls,  called  respectively  "  Creationist " 
and  "  Traducianist."  The  Creationists  held  that  each  soul  was  created  by  God ;  the 
Traduoianists  that  souls  were  derived  by  descent,  were  transmitted  by  birth  from 
ancestral  souls,  and  originally  from  Adam  and  Eve,  just  like  the  bodies  they  inhabit. 
Was  it  not  unfair  to  confine  the  name  "  Creationist "  to  the  former  school  ?  The  idea 
of  descent  from  parents  does  not  exclude  Divine  action.  The  parent  is  not  the  creator. 
The  original  great  Cause  must  be  the  Source  of  all  that  follows.  If  God  only  created 
once  for^all  at  the  beginning  of  the  world,  still  he  created  each  individual,  because  each 
individual  simply  comes  from  that  original  creation.  If  it  could  be  shown  that  man 
was  not  separately  created,  but  that  he  derived  his  origin  from  lower  creatures  by 
evolution,  he  would  be  not  the  less  created  by  God ;  for  how  could  the  marvellous 
process  of  evolution  originate  or  progress,  unless  the  Almighty  and  All-wise  had 
started  it  ?  Nay,  it  is  only  reasonable  to  believe  that  God  is  ever  creating.  Not  once 
for  all,  but  in  every  stage  of  evolution,  the  Divine  hand  is  working  out  the  eternal 
plan.  '  So  also  each  individual  life  is  moulded  by  that  same  Creative  hand.  God  is 
working  eternally,  for  the  laws  of  nature  are  but  the  ways  of  God.  He  was  as  tiiUy 
the  Creator  of  Job  as  of  Adam;  and  he  makes  each  man  now  by  means  of  birth  aa 
really  as  he  made  the  first  life  out  of  inorganic  matter. 

II.  The  fact  that  Gtod  ib  the  Cbeator  of  evert  man  must  affect  his  tbiat- 
MENT  of  all  his  cbbatuebs.  1.  He  cannot  have  predestined  them  to  ruin.  To 
Affirm  th**  h?  WnJd  do  »o  is  to  say  that  the  Cr^tor  is  not  God,  but  the  ^evil.    A  ^od 


190  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  X.  1—22. 


who  was  merely  indifferent  to  his  creatures  would  not  from  the  first  plan  their  destruc- 
tion. If  it  is  suggested  that  God  might  do  this  to  display  his  own  glory,  the  reply  is 
that  such  an  action  could  display  no  glory,  but  the  reverse.  To  say  that  God  may  do 
as  he  will  with  his  own  is  irrelevant.  His  absolute  rights  over  his  creatures  do  not 
exclude  moral  considerations.  Further,  the  holy,  righteous,  and  loving  character  of 
God  makes  it  absolutely  certain  that  he  could  not  have  planned  their  ruin.  2.  Se  eon 
never  consent  that  they  shovid  he  ruined.  "He  hateth  nothing  that  he  hath  made." 
The  very  fact  of  creation  gives  God  an  interest  in  his  creatures.  The  artist  cannot 
be  indifiereut  to  the  fate  of  his  works.  But  God  is  more  than  an  artist;  he  is  a 
Father,  and  a  father  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  fate  of  his  children.  It  may  be 
necessary  for  the  parent  to  chastise,  but  no  true  and  worthy  parent  will  ever  really 
wish  to  hurt  his  offspring.  Can  we  think  that  God  is  less  strong  in  parental  love  than 
we  are  ?  It  is  necessary  for  God  to  be  angry  with  the  wicked — and  there  is  a  terror 
in  God's  anger  which  men  can  only  despise  at  their  peril — but  behind  that  anger  there 
can  be  no  vindictive  temper,  much  less  can  there  be  »  spiteful  malignity.  God  only 
desires  the  welfare  of  his  children. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  12. — Life  and  favour  from  Ood.  L  God  thk  obioinal  Soubcb.  Job  appeals 
to  his  Creator,  and  recognizes  the  Divine  Source  of  all  he  is  and  all  la.6  has.  The 
prologue  shows  that  Job  had  always  been  a  devout  man,  not  forgetful  of  God.  But 
bis  frightful  losses  and  troubles  brought  home  to  him  the  thought  of  his  relations 
to  God  with  a  vividness  never  before  experienced.  Job  is  now  face  to  face  with  God. 
Huge  calamities  have  swept  away  all  intermediate  interests,  and  over  the  wreck  of  his 
wasted  life  he  looks  straight  to  God  his  Maker.  Terrible  hours  of  distress  reveal  the 
deeper  facts  of  life,  as  the  earthquake  exposes  the  granite  foundations  of  the  hills. 
Tragedy  destroys  superficiality.  Those  who  have  been  through  the  raging  waters  of 
trouble  are  best  able  to  perceive  the  Divine  Source  of  all  things. 

II.  God's  primal  gifts.  1.  Life.  (1)  This  can  only  come  from  God.  The  chemist 
may  analyze  the  component  elements  of  our  bodily  frame,  but  the  subtle  life-principle 
can  never  be  caught  in  his  erucible.  The  engineer  may  construct  a  most  delicate 
machine,  but  he  can  never  breathe  life  into  it.  God  is  the  one  Source  of  life.  (2) 
This  is  essential  to  all  else.  Here  we  are  at  the  first  and  most  fundamental  gift.  Men 
may  bury  treasures  with  the  dead,  but  the  silent  sleepers  in  the  tomb  can  never  touch 
one  of  the  gifts  that  rust  and  moulder  by  their  side.  We  must  live  if  we  are  to  own 
or  use  anything.  We  must  have  the  spiritual  life  in  order  to  enjoy  the  gospel  blessings. 
2.  Fav<mr.  Life  is  itself  a  favour.  It  is  never  deserved ;  yet  it  is  good  to  live.  But 
with  life  God  gives  other  favours.  Even  Job  in  his  desolation  did  not  forget  this  fact, 
as  some  seem  to  forget  it  when  they  murmur  against  Providence,  and  complain  of  the 
world  as  though  everything  were  working  for  the  misery  of  man.  Greater  than  all 
earthly  favour  is  the  grace  of  Christ,  the  favour  shown  to  fallen  man  in  the  redemption 
of  the  race  by  the  sacrifice  of  God's  Son. 

III.  God's  continubd  goodness.  Job  acknowledges  that  his  very  breath  is  con- 
tinued by  God's  cara.  God  does  not  merely  create  once  for  all;  he  preserves  hil 
creatures.  If  he  were  to  withdraw  his  hand  for  one  moment,  they  would  cease  to  be. 
That  we  are  alive  now  is  a  sign  that  God  is  now  good  to  us.  Present  existence  is  a 
proof  of  present  providence.  Therefore  our  thanksgivings  should  be  fresh ;  not  the 
withered  flowers  of  yesterday,  but  the  new  blossoms  of  to-day,  with  the  dew  still  upon 
them.  Daily  renewed  mercies  call  for  daily  renewed  praises.  We  have  not  to  look 
far  for  God,  searching  the  annals  of  antiquity,  inquiring  of  the  deeds  uf  old-world  history, 
or  scraping  together  the  geologic  records  of  the  rocks.  God  is  with  us  in  the  new 
sunrise,  in  each  day's  life  and  blessing. 

IV.  God'i  abbubed  care.  It  cannot  be  as  Job  supposes.  His  remonstrance  is 
natural  to  him,  but  it  is  needless.  If  God  has  made  and  preserved  us,  it  is  impossible 
that  he  should  be  turned  against  us.  His  past  and  present  favours  are  proofs  of  hil 
unchanging  love.  Though  he  smites,  he  cannot  hate.  Though  he  withdraws  his 
smiling  countenance,  he  does  not  remove  his  supporting  hand.  Creation  and  preserva- 
tion are  prophecies  (^  redemption  and  salvation. — ^W.  V.  A. 

Ter,  18. — Hm  thingi  that  ore  hidden  in  God'i  heart.    Job  ie  possessed  by  •  fearful 


cnuxl— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  191 

thought.  Hia  tremendous  troubles,  and  the  oniel  aocusations  of  Us  fiiendi^  have 
driven  him  to  the  conclusion  that  God  must  have  conceived  the  idea  of  thus  tormenting 
him  long  before  Job  knew  anything  of  it ;  that  Qod  must  have  hidden  the  dreadful 
purpose  in  his  heart ;  that  all  the  while  Job  was  complacently  enjoying  hii  prosperity, 
God  was  nursing  the  secret  design  of  scattering  it  to  the  winds,  and  plun^g  his 
servant  into  the  depths  of  misery, 

L  God's  fubfobeb  abb  HiDDXir  ntou  uan.  They  are  more  hidden  than  Job 
supposed.  He  thought  that  the  Divine  plan  had  just  appeared.  But  it  was  deeper 
than  he  imagined.  Not  only  was  it  hidden  in  the  sunny  days  of  prosperity ;  it  was 
also  hidden  in  the  dark  and  dreadful  days  of  misery.    Had  Job  known  the  Divine 

Eurpose,  his  suspicions  would  have  been  dissipated,  and  he  would  have  seen  how  unjust 
is  arraignment  of  Providence  was.  We  cannot  yet  see  the  Divine  thought.  If  it 
were  revealed  to  us,  the  discipline  of  trial  would  be  frustrated.  Moreover,  it  la  too  deep 
and  wide  for  us  to  grasp  it.    Therefore  we  must  walk  by  faith  (2  Cor,  v.  7), 

n.  God  AFFSAB3  TO  HiDB  DARE  DESIGNS.  So  Job  thought,  and  so  the  events  of  his 
life  seemed  to  show.  As  the  curtain  slowly  lifted,  dreadful  things  were  discovered 
behind.  God  was  always  in  the  future,  preparing  it  for  its  advent;  yet  when  it  came  it 
appeared  in  thunder  and  ruin.  Was  God  secretly  planning  all  this  misery  in  the  quiet, 
old  peaceful  days  when  Job  suspected  no  danger  ?  The  unrolling  of  many  a  life-story 
has  seemed  to  tell  the  same  tale  of  God's  secret  thoughts  made  manifest  in  calamity. 

III.  God  bballt  hidbb  pdbfobgs  of  lovb  im  bis  heart.  1.  He  must  do  so  because 
he  is  love.  We  cannot  understand  his  plans,  but  we  can  understand  his  nature  as 
far  as  it  is  revealed  to  us.  Now  the  revelation  of  God  is  wholly  of  goodness.  This 
includes  wrath  against  sin,  but  no  injustice,  no  harshness,  no  delight  in  inflicting 
misery.  Therefore,  though  we  do  not  see  the  Divine  intention,  we  may  be  sure  that 
it  is  gracious.  2.  He  is  seen  to  do  so  at  far  as  his  purposes  are  revealed.  (1)  In 
Scripture.  Ancient  prophecy  and  the  New  Testament  gospel  concur  in  setting  forth 
the  Divine  plan,  and  although  this  includes  judgment  and  the  punishment  of  sin,  its 
main  design  is  the  redemption  of  man.  (2)  In  experience.  Some  of  God's  purposes 
are  ripened  and  fulfilled  during  our  earthly  life.  These  are  seen  to  be  good  and 
gracious.    It  is  only  the  unaccomplished  purpose  that  wears  a  threatening  aspect. 

IV.  Thb  hidden  purposes  of  God's  heart  will  bb  ultimately  revealed.  God 
does  not  delight  in  secrecy,  much  less  does  he  designedly  tantalize  his  creatures  by 
perplexing  them  with  needless  mysteries  and  alarming  them  with  bogus  fears.  What 
we  know  not  now  we  shall  know  hereafter  (John  xiii.  7).  The  great  apocalypse  of 
futurity  will  answer  many  a  dark  riddle  of  providence  in  the  light  of  eternal  love. 
We  have  but  to  possess  our  souls  in  patience,  and  all  will  be  clear.  Job's  life-problem 
was  solved  at  last.  When  ours  is  made  dear  it  will  only  enlarge  our  wondering 
gratitude  for  the  depth  of  the  love  which  God  had  hidden  in  his  heart. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  21,  22. — 77ie  land  of  darkness.  L  Death  appears  to  lead  to  a  land  of 
bareness.  1.  We  cannot  see  what  lies  beyond.  Science  cannot  penetrate  this  mystery 
of  mysteries.  At  best  she  can  but  dimly  surmise  the  existence  of  an  "unseen 
universe."  Philosophy  may  reason  of  the  soul's  immortality,  but  can  throw  no  light 
into  the  tomb.  The  mind  dashes  itself  in  vain  against  the  awful  wall  that  separates 
it  from  the  world  beyond.  One  by  one  our  most  intimate  friends  leave  us,  and  the 
dark  doors  open  to  receive  them,  but  never  a  ray  of  light  comes  out,  and  "  the  rest  is 
silence."  2.  We  shrink  hy  natural  instinct  from  death.  Reason  as  we  may,  the  grave 
is  a  horror  to  us.  We  people  the  land  of  the  dead  with  terrors  of  the  imagination. 
La  Eochefaucauld  says,  "  Neither  the  sun  nor  death  can  be  looked  at  steadily." 

<•  Death  is  a  fearful  thing. 
'  .  .  To  die,  and  go  we  know  not  where; 
To  lie  in  cold  obstruotion,  and  to  lot; 
This  tenaible  warm  motion  to  become 
A  kneaded  olod ;  and  the  delighted  spirit 
To  bathe  in  fiery  floods,  or  to  reside^ 
In  thrilling  regions  of  thiek-ribbed  ioe; 
To  be  imprison'd  in  the  viewless  winds, 
XnA  blown  witb  restless  violenoe  round  about 


m 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xt  1— 2a 


The  pendent  world,  or  to  be  wone  than  worst 

Of  those,  that  lawless  and  inoertain  thoughts 

Imagine  howling  I — ^"tis  too  horrible  1 

Tlie  weariest  and  most  loathed  worldly  life 

That  age,  ache,  penury,  and  imprisonment 

Can  lay  on  nature,  is  a  paradise 

To  what  we  fear  of  death." 

(Shakespeare.) 

n.    WhBTHKB   death  will  lead  to  a  IiAHD  of  DABENG8B   DEFENDS  O;^  OUB  XIBJi  OT 

LIFE.  Nature,  science,  philosophy,  all  leave  the  future  obscure.  But  God  has  lifted 
the  veil  in  the  gospel  enough  to  give  us  guidance,  warning,  and  consolation.  We 
learn  from  the  revelation  of  Christ  that  the  unseen  land  need  be  no  place  of  terror  and 
darkness.  What  it  will  be  depends  on  our  present  conduct.  1.  Death  lead$  tht 
impenitent  tinner  into  a  land  of  darkness.  For  him  the  horrors  of  imagination  cannot 
be  too  black.  No  one  can  conceive  the  chill  desolation  of  the  "  outer  darkness,"  the 
dread  despair  of  seeing  the  "  door  shut"  on  a  rejected  souL  The  darkness  will  consist 
in  sei)aration  from  God,  from  blessed  companionship,  from  joy,  from  life — for  the  future 
existence  of  the  lost  is  never  called  a  future  life.  The  dolorous  words  of  Job  are  not 
too  strong  for  the  fate  of  lost  souls.  2.  Death  leads  the  people  of  Ood  into  a  land  of 
light.  The  old-world  gloom  of  the  grave  is  dissipated  by  Christ,  who  Ma  "  brought 
life  and  immortality'  to  light  through  the  gospel "  (2  Tim.  L  10).  Here  we  have  a 
great  advance  from  the  Old  Testament  standpoint.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  hag 
thrown  a  flood  of  light  into  the  regions  beyond.  It  has  shown  us  a  "  land  of  the  leal," 
where  the  blessed  dwell  in  light  eternal.  St.  Paul  could  even  desire  to  depart  and  be 
with  Christ,  counting  it  gain  to  die  (Phil.  i.  21 — 23).  All  who  have  turned  from  sin 
to  Christ  may  despise  the  darkness  of  death,  for  this  is  but  the  portal  to  the  home  of 
eternal  life.— W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  XL 


Vers.  1—20.— Zophar,  the  Xaamathlte,  the 
third  of  Job's  comforters  (oh.  ii.  11),  and 
probably  the  youngest  of  them,  now  at  last 
takes  the  word,  and  delivers  an  angry  and 
violent  speech.  He  begins  by  accusing  Job 
of  having  spoken  at  undue  length,  and  at 
the  same  time,  boastfully  and  mockingly 
(vers.  2 — 4).  He  then  expresses  a  wish 
that  God  would  take  Job  at  his  word,  and 
really  answer  him,  since  he  is  sure  that  the 
result  would  be  to  show  that  Job  had  been 
punished  much  less  than  he  deserved  to  be 
(vers.  5,  6).  Job's  complaints  against  the 
justice  of  God's  dealings  he  meets  by  an 
assertion  of  God's  unsearchablcness  and 
perfect  wisdom,  which  he  contrasts  with 
tlie  folly  of  man  (vers.  7—12).  Finally,  he 
suggests  that  a  stricken  man,  being  guilty, 
should  humble  himself,  put  away  his  ini- 
quity, and  turn  to  God,  in  which  case  he 
may  expect  a  restoration  to  favour.  Other- 
wise, he  lias  only  to  look  for  wretchedness, 
failure,  and  despair  (vers.  13 — 20). 

Ver.  I.— Tliea  answered  Zophar  the  Ka- 


amathlte,  and  said  (see  the  comment  on  oh. 
ii.  11). 

Ver.  2.— Should  not  the  multitude  of  words 
be  answered  T  A  "  multitude  of  words  "  is 
often  reproved  in  Scripture,  and  taken  as  a 
sign  of  either  folly  (Eccles.  v.  3)  or  sin 
(Prov.  X.  19).  Job  had  certainly  been  some- 
what unduly  verbose,  and  laid  himself  open 
to  the  taunt  here  launched  against  him; 
but  neither  had  brevity  been  studied  by  his 
other  friends  in  their  previous  answers  (oh. 
iv.,  v.,  and  viii.),  nor  is  it  greatly  studied  by 
Zophar  here.  And  should  a  man  ftill  of  talk 
be  justified!  literally,  o  man  of  Ups,  which 
may  mean  either  "a  great  talker"  or  "a 
inan  who  makes  many  professions."  There 
is  a  widespread  prejudice  against  a  great 
orator,  and  a  widespread  notion  that  a  good 
cause  does  net  need  many  words. 

Ver.  3.— Should  thy  lies  make  men  hold 
their  peace  ?  or,  thy  boastings  (see  the  Be- 
vised  Version;  and  comp.  Isa.  xvi.  5;  Jer. 
xlviii.  80).  Zophar  probably  refers  to  such 
puBSages  as  ch.  ix.  20,  35 ;  i.  7,  15,  where 
Job  might  seem  to  have  justified  himself 
altogether.  And  when  thou  mockest,  shall 
no  man  make  thee  ashamed  I  It  is  not  quite 
easy  to  see  what  in  Job's  speeches  up  to 
this  point  oould  be  regarded  as  "  mocking." 
But  perhaps  Zophar  would  have  thus  cha- 
racterized the  following  passages :  ch  vi  13. 
14,  25-27 :  viL  12 :  i^!  22-2! 


OH.  XI.  1 — ^20.J 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


193 


Ver.  4. — For  thou  haat  said,  Uy  dootiine 
is  pare.  Job  had  certainly  not  said  this  in 
so  many  words.  In  fact,  be  had  not  spoken 
of  his  "doctrine"  (np^),  nor  had  he  called 
either  his  doctrine  or  his  conduct  absolutely 
pure  (11).  But,  no  doubt,  he  had  main- 
tained, in  a  certain  sense,  his  innocency ; 
not,  indeed,  his  entire  freedom  from  sin  or 
guilt,  but  his  honest  endeavour  to  serve  God 
and  lead  a  good  life.  This  was  the  real 
point  disputed  between  him  and  his  "  com- 
forters ;  "  they  argued,  from  his  sufferings, 
that  he  m.uat  be  a  "  chief  sinner ; "  he  main- 
tained, from  the  testimony  of  his  conscience, 
that  he  was  free  from  all  heinous  sins.  And 
I  am  clean  in  thine  eyes  (see  above,  ch.  ix. 
30;  X.  7). 

Ver.  5. — But  oh  that  Sod  would  speak, 
and  open  his  lips  against  thee !  "  Oh  that 
God  would  do,"  ie.  "  what  thou  hast  chal- 
lenged him  to  do" — show  thee  wherein  he 
oontends  with  thee  I  (comp.  oh.  x.  2). 
Then  how  would  thy  reasonings  be  con- 
futed, and  thy  boastings  be  brought  low  I 

Ver.  6. — And  that  be  would  show  thee 
the  secrets  of  wisdom !  In  God  are  "  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hid 
away"  {iwiKpvipai,  Col.  ii.  3).  Zophar 
wishes  that  he  would  reveal  to  Job  this 
wisdom,  or  a  portion  of  it,  as,  in  that  case, 
all  his  pride  and  self-confidence  would  be 
confounded  and  fall  away.  That  they  are 
double  to  that  which  is !  This  phrase  is 
Tery  obscure.  Some  translate, "  For  h«  (i.e, 
God)  is  twice  as  wise  as  thou ; "  others, 
"  That  it  (»'.«.  wisdom)  is  manifold  in  effec- 
tual working;"  others,  again,  "That  they 
(t.B.  the  treasures  of  wisdom)  are  double  (or 
manifold)  in  substance."  Perhaps  this  last 
rendering  is  to  be  preferred.  The  treasures 
of  wisdom  that  are  hid  away  in  God  have 
many  depths,  secret  and  unexplored ;  they 
"  lie,  as  it  were,  fold  over  fold,  in  unex- 
pected complexities,  defying  the  shallow 
and  imscrutinizing  gaze"  (Professor  Stanley 
Leathes).  If  they  were  revealed  to  Job, 
they  would  astonish,  confound,  silence,  him. 
Enow  therefore  that  God  exacteth  of  thee 
less  than  thine  iniquity  deserveth.  "Be 
sure,"  i.e.,  "  that  God,  so  far  from  inflicting 
on  thee  a  more  severe  punishment  than  thou 
deservest,  in  reality  excuses  much  of  thy 
guilt,  and  punishes  thee  less  than  is  thy 
due."  This  is  Zophar's  conclusion  from  hia 
general  knowledge  of  God's  dealings  with 
man  (comp.  Ezra  ix.  13). 

Ver.  7. Canst  thou  by  searohing  find  out 

Godi  literally,  Canst  thou  attain  to  the 
tearehing  out  of  God  i  Canst  thou  suppose, 
that  is,  that,  whatever  thy  wisdom,  learning, 
subtlety,  sagacity,  power  of  insight,  thou 
wilt  be  able  to  search  out  and  fully  know 
the  character,  attributes,  modes  of  thought 
and   action,  of  the  Most  High?    No.    In 


one  sense,  all  men  do  well  to  profess  them- 
selves "  Agnostics  " — not  that  they  can  know 
nothing  of  God,  but  that  they  can  never 
know  him  fully,  never  exhaust  the  know- 
ledge of  him.  As  the  apostle  says,  "  O  the 
depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  of  God  I  how  unsearchable  are 
his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding 
out!  For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of 
the  Lord  ?  or  who  hath  been  his  counsel- 
lor?" (Eom.  xi.  33,  34).  Canst  thou  find 
out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection?  rather. 
Canst  thou  attain  to  the  perfection  of  the  Al- 
mighty ?  understand,  t'.s.,  his  inconceivable 


Ver.  8. — ^It  is  as  high  as  heaven ;  what 
oanst  thou  dol  literally,  heights  of  the 
heavens;  what  canst  thou  dot  But  the 
meaning  is  probably  that  expressed  La  the 
Authorized  Version.  God's  perfeetness  is 
unattainable  by  man's  thought,  as  the 
heights  of  the  heavens  are  by  his  feet. 
Deeper  than  hell ;  literally,  than  Shed,  or  thu 
receptacle  of  the  dead  (see  the  comment  on 
oh.  x.  21).  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  »  deep 
things,"  or  rather,  "  the  depths  "  (tA  fidBri) 
of  Qoi  (see  1  Cor.  ii.  10).  What  canst  thou 
know)  How  small  a  part  of  the  Divine 
nature  can  any  man  thoroughly  comprehend 
and  know  I 

Ver.  9. — ^The  measure  thereof  is  longer 
than  the  earth,  and  broader  than  the  sea. 
Zophar's  metaphors  are  drawn  from  the 
objects  which,  to  his  mind,  exceed  in  extent 
aU  others.  "The  earth"  and  "the  sea" 
represent  to  hisi  the  illimitable. 

Ver.  10.— If  hb  ent  off;  rather,  if  ht 
advance  (comp.  ch.  ix.  11).  And  shut  up; 
or,  imprison.^  Or  gather  together;  rather, 
and  call  <o  judgment  (see  the  Bevised  Ver- 
sion). If  God,  that  is,  advance  against  a 
man  in  hostile  fashion,  seize  and  imprison 
him,  and  then  call  him  to  judgment,  wliat 
is  to  be  said  or  done?  who  can  interfere 
with  him  ?  Matters  must  take  their  coursL'. 
There  is  no  ground  for  complaint.  It  is 
simply  God's  mode  of  administering  justice 
on  the  earth.  Who  can  hinder  him  1  literally, 
who  can  turn  him  away  1  i.e.  interfere  with 
his  action,  interrupt  it,  divert  it. 

Ver.  11. — Tor  he  knoweth  vain  men 
God  is  justified  in  these  his  judgments, 
even  though  he  does  not  implead  the  man 
or  bring  him  to  account,  or  hear  what  he 
has  got  to  say  (ch.  ix.  39),  since  he  intui- 
tively and  at  once  "  knoweth  vain  men ; " 
seeth,  that  is,  into  the  ground  of  the  heart, 
and  recognizes  vanity,  pretence,  false 
seeming,  so  that  he  can  judge  infallibly 
without  the  forensic  apparatus  wherewith 
human  tribunals  are  rightly  surrounded,  on 
account  of  the  weakness  and  fallibility  of 
human  judges.  He  seeth  wickedness  also. 
If  God  can  detect  in  a  moment  vanity, 

o 


194 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  XI.  1—20. 


pretence,  false  iieeming,  much  more  oan  he 
detect  actual  wickedness;  which  Zophar 
aBsnmes  to  have  been  detected  in  Job's  case. 
Will  he  not  then  consider  it  ?  rather,  even 
though  he  ameider  it  not  (see  the  Bevised 
Version).  God  does  not  need  to  pause  and 
ponder  and  "consider"  each  case.  He 
knows,  without  any  such  lengthened  con- 
sideration, whether  s  man  is  true  to  him  or 
not. 

Ver.  12. — For  vain  man  would  be  wife, 
though  man  be  bom  like  a  wild  ass'a  oolt; 
rather,  and  a  vain  man  may  get  underitand- 
ing,  and  the  eoU  of  a  wild  ait  become  a  man 
(compare  the  Kevised  Version,  marginal 
rendering).  Zophar  seems  to  mean  that, 
through  Divine  discipline,  such  as  that 
described  in  ver.  10,  a  vain,  foolish,  pnffed- 
up  man  may  be  reclaimed  and  become  a 
man  of  understanding — a  stubborn  and 
untamed  one,  wild  as  the  colt  of  a  wild 
ass,  grow  into  a  real  man,  i.e.  acquire  sense 
and  discretion.  If  this  is  the  meaning, 
undoubtedly  Job  is  glanced  at  (so  Schulteus, 
Dillmann,  and  Canon  Cook). 

Ver.  13. — ^If  thou  prepare  thine  heart. 
Having  indicated  God's  righteousness  by 
these  general  remarks  (vers.  7 — 12),  and 
implied  that  Job's  complaints  are  vain  and 
futile,  Zophar,  in  conclusion,  addresses 
Job  once  more  directly :  **  If  thou  (nriK) 
prepare  thine  heart,"  cleanse  it,  that  is,  of 
all  defilement,  direct  it,  and  set  it  straight 
(see  Ps.  Ixxviii.  8)  before  God,  then  such 
and  such  results  (set  forth  in  ven.  16 — 19) 
will  follow.  And  stretch  out  thin*  hands 
toward  him.  The  outward  act  of  worship 
must  follow  the  inward  movement  of  the 
heart,  for  the  turning  to  God  to  be  complete. 

Ver.  14. — If  iniquity  be  in  thine  hand. 
Zophar  assumes  this  to  be  probable,  nay, 
almost  certain.  He  has  already  told  Job 
that  God  has  exacted  from  him  less  than 
his  iniquity  (|ik,  the  same  word)  deserves 
(ver.  6).  Conformably  with  this  view,  he 
now  suggests  that  it  would  not  do  for  Job 
to  stretch  out  to  God  in  prayer  a  hand  full 
of  iniquity,  and  that  therefore,  previously 
to  making  his  supplication,  he  would  do 
well  to  lay  his  iniquity  aside.  In  a  general 
way,  the  advice  is  excellent;  but  it  was 
insulting  to  Job,  who  denied  that  he  had 
any  definite  act  of  sin  on  his  conscience. 
Put  it  far  away;  i.e.  repent  of  it,  confess 
it  to  God ;  If  the  case  admits  of  it,  make 
reparation  or  restitution.  And  let  not 
wickedness  dwell  in  thy  tabernacles;  or, 
tn  thy  tents.  The  insinuation  seems  to  be 
that  Job  is  a  robber  chief,  and  that  his  tent 
and  the  tents  of  his  followers  are  full  of 
ill-gotten  spoils,  the  fruit  of  his  raids  upon 
the  defenceless. 

Ver.  15. — Pop  then;  rather,  $urely  then 
(see  the  Bevised  Version).    Shalt  thou  lUt 


up  thy  face  without  spot.  At  present, 
Zophar  implies,  he  could  not  do  so.  The 
stain  of  many  sins  was  on  him  (vers.  6,  IX, 
14).  Tea,  thou  shalt  be  steadfast ;  literally, 
molten — perhaps  "pure  as  refined  metal" 
(see  Isa.  L  25),  perhaps  "  bright  as  a  metallic 
mass."  And  shalt  not  fear.  "Shalt  be 
freed,"  {.e., "  from  all  the  fears  that  disturb 
thee  now"  (see  oh.  iii.  26;  vi  4;  vii.  14; 
ix.  28,  etc.). 

Ver.  16. — Beoavse  then  thalt  forget  thy 
misery.  All  thy  past  misery  shall  be  clean 
swept  away  from  thy  remembrance,  because 
of  the  happy  condition  whereto  thou  shalt 
be  raised  (see  vers.  18,  19).  "Sorrow's 
memory"  is  not  always  "a  sorrow  still." 
And  remember  it  as  waters  that  pass  away; 
i.e.  remember  it  no  more  than  a  man  remem- 
bers the  shower  that  has  passed  away  or 
the  pool  that  is  dried  ap. 

Ver.  17. — ^And  thine  age  shall  be  clearer 
than  the  noonday ;  literally,  ihall  arise  above 
the  noonday ;  i.e.  "  exceed  it  in  splendour." 
Instead  of  the  "thick  darkness"  to  which 
Job  is  looking  forward  (oh.  z.  21,  22),  he 
shall  bask  in  a  light  brighter  than  that  of 
the  sun  at  noon.  Ihon  shalt  shine  forth. 
The  Hebrew  cannot  possibly  bear  this 
moaning.  The  nncommon  word  used  is 
allied  with  nj'J,  "  obscurity,"  and,  if  a  verb^ 
should  mean  "then  shalt  be  obscnre," 
rather  than  "  thou  shalt  shine  forth."  Bat 
it  is  perhaps  a  substantive,  meaning  "  dark- 
ness;" and  the  translation  of  the  Bevised 
Version  is  perhaps  correct :  "  Though  there 
be  darkness."  Thou  shalt  be  as  the  morn- 
ing. "Thy  light,"  as  Professor  Lee  ex- 
plains, "shall  gradually  rise  and  expand 
itself  far  and  wide."  It  shall  dispel  the 
darkness,  and  take  its  place, "  shining  more 
and  more  unto  the  perfect  day"  (Frov.  iv. 
18). 

Ver.  18. — And  then  shalt  be  secure, 
because  there  is  hope.  Job,  entering  on 
this  second  period  of  prosperity,  would  be 
and  feel  secure ;  safe,  i.e.,  from  any  return 
of  calamity,  because  hope  would  once  more 
animate  him  and  be  his  predominant  feel- 
ing. No  doubt  "  hope  springs  eternal  in 
the  human  breast;"  and  when  Job's  pros- 
perity was  actually  restored  (ch.  xlii.  12 — 
16),  these  anticipations  bad  their  fulfil- 
ment ;  but,  as  uttered  by  Zophar,  there  is 
a  ring  of  insincerity  aliout  them,  and  we 
cannot  but  feel  that  his  object  in  expatiating 
at  length  on  the  details  of  Job's  coming 
happiness  is  not  to  console  and  encourage 
his  friend,  but  rather  to  annoy  and  exas- 
perate him,  since  the  entire  basis  on  which 
he  builds  is  the  assumption  of  Job's  heinous 
guilt  (vers.  3,  6,11, 14),  and  the  prosperity 
which  he  promises  is  to  follow  upon  an 
acknowledgment  of  guilt  and  a  putting 
away  of  iniquity  (vers.  18,  14),  w&oh  h« 


OH.  XI.  1—20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


195 


knew  that  Job  wholly  te|.uduted.  Tea, 
fhon  Bhalt  dig  about  wee.  So  Schaltens, 
who  understands  it  to  mean  that  Job  sliall 
dig  a  moat  around  his  habitation,  to  make 
himself  peifeo  ly  secure.  The  verb  has, 
howeyer,  two  other  meanings — "to  inves- 
tigate "  or  *•  search  out,"  and  "  to  blush ; " 
and  it  is  taken  here  in  each  of  these  mean- 
ings by  some  critics.  Onr  Bevisers  trans- 
late, **  Yea,  thou  shalt  search  about  thee ; " 
and  so  Oanon  Oook  and  Professor  Stanley 
Leathes.  Boeeumuller,  on  the  other  hand, 
and  Professor  Lee  render  the  words  by 
"Though  thou  shouldst  blush,"  or  "be 
ashamed."  It  is  difficult  to  decide  between 
•noh  high  authorities;  but  the  fact  that 
Job  uses  the  verb  in  the  sense  of  "  search," 
"  lOok  t^ter,"  in  ch.  xzxiz.  29,  and  does  not 
elsewhere  use  it  in  either  of  the  other  senses, 
should  incline  us  to  accept  the  rendering  of 
the  Bevlsed  Version.  And  thou  shalt  take 
thy  rest  in  safety ;  or,  ieearely ;  i.e.  with  a 
sense  of  being  in  perfect  security. 

Yer.  19. — Also  thou  shalt  lie  dovm,  and 
none  shall  make  thee  afraid;  i.e.  there 
shall  be  no  more  raids  on  the  part  of 
Sabeans  (ch.  i.  15)  or  Chaldeans  (oh.  i.  17) 
to  affright  and  iiyuM  thee.     Ted,  many 


shall  mdke  suit  unto  thee.  On  the  contrary, 
thy  aid  shall  be  invoked,  thy  interference 
on  their  behalf  prayed  for,  by  many. 

Ver.  20. — Had  Zophar  ended  with  ver.  19 
Job  might  possibly  have  taken  some  comfort 
from  his  speech,  holding  out,  as  it  did,  a 
hope  of  restoration  to  Ood's  favour  and  a 
return  to  happiness.  But,  as  if  to  accentuate 
the  unfavourable  view  which  he  takes  of 
Job's  conduct  and  character,  he  will  not 
end  with  words  of  good  omen,  but  appends 
a  passage  which  has  a  ring  of  malice, 
menace,  and  condemnation.  But  the  eyes 
of  the  wicked  shall  fail ;  or,  wasU  away, 
grow  weary,  i.e.,  of  looking  for  a  help  that 
does  not  come,  and  a  deliverer  who  does  not 
make  his  appearance.  And  they  shall  not 
escape;  literally,  their  refuge  is  perithed 
from  them.  And  their  hope  shall  be  as  the 
giving  up  of  the  ghost;'  rathpr,  thall  be 
the  giving  up  of  the  ghost.  They  shall 
have  no  other  hope  but  death — a  manifest 
allusion  to  Job's  repeated  declarations  that 
be  looks  for  death,  longs  for  it,  and  has  no 
expectation  of  any  other  deliverance  (see 
oh.  iii.  21,  22;  vi.  7,  8;  vii.  15;  i.  1,  18, 
etc.).  Such,  says  Zophar,  is  alwayi  the 
final  condition  of  the  wicked. 


HOMILETICa 

Yen.  1 — 6. — Zophar  to  Job :  1.  The  opinions  of  <•  dogmatitt.  I.  Zophab'b 
OPINIONS  OONOEBNINO  JoB.  A  Severe  but  wholly  unfounded  indictment.  1.  Loquacity. 
Job's  previous  orations,  so  full  of  lofty  sentiment  and  fervent  emotion,  he  characterizes 
as  "a  multitude  of  words,"  and  Job  himself  as  "a  man  full  of  talk  [literally,  'a 
man  of  lips ']."  Prolixity  in  speech,  though  not  a  violation  of  God's  Law,  is  certainly 
a  breach  of  good  taste.  Words  should  never  be  employed  except  to  represent  thoughts, 
and  should  always  be  carefully  selected  and  skilfully  compacted.  If  brevity  be  the 
soul  of  wit,  it  is  also  the  heart  of  wisdom.  Mere  talkativeness  is  a  fool's  gift  (Eccles. 
V.  3),  and  a  frequent  occasion  of  sin  (Prov.  x.  19).  On  the  other  hand,  "  even  a  fool, 
when  he  holdeth  his  peace,  is  counted  wise';  and  he  that  shutteth  bis  lips  is  esteemed 
a  man  ot  understanding"  (Prov.  xvii.  28).  A  wise  man,  also,  is  never  so  much  in 
danger  of  being  mistaken  for  a  fool  as  when  he  forgets  to  put  a  bridle  on  his  tongue. 
God's  people  should  be  "  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak."  2.  Boasting.  Job's  vehement 
language  Zophar  describes  as  "  big  talk  " — the  noisy  declamation  of  a  loud-mouthed 
controversialist,  who  talks  his  opponents  down  by  sheer  force  of  clamour,  foolishly 
supposing  he  has  thereby  overcome  them  in  argument.  Words  of  truth  and  soberness 
ahould  be  used  by  all  (Acts  xxvi.  25).  Keligious  men  especially  should  be  careful, 
particularly  in  the  hearing  of  weak  brethren,  of  extravagant  assertions  as  to  either 
their  own  piety  or  their  thoughts  about  God.  Job's  asseverations  came  near  over- 
stepping the  limits  of  a  just  moderation ;  yet  they  appeared  worse  than  they  were 
because  of  Zophar's  failure  to  understand  themj  or  sympathize  with  their  speaker.  3. 
Mockery.  Job's  sentiments  Zophar  pronounced  to  be  wholly  of  an  infidel  tendency. 
But  what  Job  scoffed  at  was  only  the  representation  of  the  Divine  character  and 
government  which  had  been  given  by  Eliphaz  and  Bildad.  It  may  argue  audacity  and 
self-conceit  to  arraign  the  popular  dogmas  of  the  day ;  but  one  may  do  so,  it  is  hoped, 
without  being  justly  chargeable  with  impiety  and  unbelief.  4.  Hypocrisy.  Job's 
steadfast  assertion  of  personal  integrity  seemed  to  Zophar  mere  religious  pretence. 
But  if  a  man,  who  is  at  heart  insincere,  may  yet  be  esteemed  righteous  by  bia  fellows 
(Matt.  vi.  1—6),  it  ia  not  impossible  that  one,  who  seems  •  hypocrite  in  man's  eyes, 
may  in  dod's  sight  be  "  perfect  and  en^e," 


19fl  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xi.  1— 20, 

n.  Zofhar'b  opinions  coMCEfiNiNa  God.  Zophar  suggests  that,  if  God  appeared  to 
Job,  he  would  be  found:  1.  Irresistible  in  teaching.  "Oh  that  God  would  speak, 
and  open  his  lips  against  [or,  '  with  thee ']  "  (ver.  5).  Thy  complaints  would  then  be 
silenced  by  the  convincing  light  of  God's  revelations  1  What  Zophar  here  desiderated 
for  his  friend  has  been  practically  granted  to  all,  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  "  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus,"  who  appeared  in  the  fulness  of  the  times,  is  God's  Answer  to  all 
preceding  and  subsequent  centuries  perplexed  with  the  dark  problem  of  existence.  Jfo 
solution  of  life's  enigma  but  God's  ever  satisfies  a  soul.  God  can  accomplish  what  no 
human  teacher  can  (ch.  xxxvi.  22) ;  he  can  exhibit  to  the  soul  truth  in  its  naked  parity, 
causing  it  to  commend  itself  to  every  man's  conscience,  and,  whether  accepted  or 
rejected,  putting  to  silence  all  doubts  and  questionings  as  to  its  import  (1  Cor.  iL 
4 — 13 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2 ;  1  Thess.  i.  5).  2.  Unsearchable  in  wisdom.  "  And  that  he 
would  show  thee  the  secrets  of  wisdom,  that  they  are  double  to  tiiat  which  is  [or  perhaps, 
'  that  it  is  fold  upon  fold ']."  True  wisdom  lies  deep.  Its  secrets  are  seldom  patent 
to  superficial  observation.  Hidden  fold  over  fold,  their  discovery  is  a  work  of  labour, 
the  fruit  of  profound  reflection,  the  result  of  Heaven's  revelation.  Even  that  wisdom 
which  is  purely  mundane  requires  patient,  painful,  persevering  study  (Prov,  ii.'3,  4); 
much  more  "  that  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above"  (Jas.  iii.  17).  Most  of  all  tha 
wisdom  of  the  Divine  mind  lies  fold  upon  fold,  deep,  intricate,  unfathomable,  unsearch- 
able, and  therefore  undiscoverable  by  man  except  through  Divine  revelation  (sea 
homileticB  on  next  paragraph).  3.  Merciful  in  judgment.  "Know  therefore  that  God 
exacteth  of  thee  less  than  thine  iniquity  [literally,  'forgets  for  thee  of  thy  guilt']" 
(ver.  6).  Designed  for  Job's  humiliation,  the  exhortation,  nevertheless,  contains 
precious  truths.  (1)  That  God  can  forget  a  man's  guilt,  suffer  it  to  drop  out  of  his 
mind  in  such  a  way  that  it  shall  never  plead  against  him  for  pimishment  (Isa.  xliii. 
25 ;  r.om.  iii.  26).  (2)  That  God,  in  point  of  fact,  forgets  a  portion  of  every  man's 
guilt,  since  otherwise  no  man  could  stand  before  him  (Ps.  cxxx.  3).  Zophar  failed  to 
see  (3)  that  God  can  forget  all  a  sinner's  trespass,  and  exact  from  him  nothing  of 
what  he  deserves. 

Learn :  1.  That  all  the  opinions  of  a  good  man  are  not  necessarily  correct.  2.  That 
it  is  sometimes  harder  to  be  just  to  one's  fellow-men  than  it  is  to  be  fair  to  God.  3. 
That  man's  ideas  of  God  and  truth  may  be  arraigned  without  incurring  the  charge  of 
infidelity.  4.  .That  men  often  behold  sins  in  others  which  they  cannot,  though  they 
should,  see  in  themselves.  5.  That  good  teaching  should  not  be  rejected,  even  though 
rudely  proffered.  6.  That  even  vulgar  dogmatists  may  sometimes  utter  lofty  truths. 
7.  That  God  is  more  merciful  than  even  the  best  of  men  think. 

Ver,  6. — A  sermon  on  the  Divine  forbearance.  I.  The  dbsbbt  op  bin.  1.  Tha 
nature  of  it.  The  punishment  of  death — temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal.  2.  The 
teverity  of  it.  Were  this  penalty  exacted  from  each  transgressor  to  the  full,  it  would 
mean  the  extinction  of  every  spark  of  terrestrial  happiness,  the  withdrawal  from 
the  sinful  soul  of  every  gracious  influence,  the  absolute  cessation  of  hope  of  eternal 
felicity  beyond  the  grave,  with  all  the  misery  which  such  a  melancholy  state  of  being 
would  entail.  3.  The  certainty  of  it.  That  is,  unless  the  execution  of  this  awful 
penalty  can  be  delayed.  That  it  can,  constitutes  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel.  But 
where  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  is  not  permitted  to  interpose  for  the  sinner's 
rescue,  the  infliction  of  this  appalling  retribution  is  inevitable.  4.  "Hhe  juatn'cas  oi  it. 
To  some  minds  it  seems  scarcely  consistent  with  absolute  equity  to  inflict  so  tremendous 
a  chastisement  upon  feeble  men  for  the  trifling  defalcations  of  a  short  lifetime.  But 
this  objection  springs  from  imperfect  notions  of  the  heinousness  of  sin  as  committed 
against  an  infinite  God  and  a  holy  Law.  Besides,  the  penalty  is  that  of  the  Divine 
Law,  and  we  know  that  the  Law  is  holy  (Rom.  vii.  12). 

n.  The  roBBEARANOE  op  God.     1.  The  proof  of  it.     (1)  Our  own  live*  attest  this. 

S2)  God's  Word  aflirms  this,     (3)  God's  providential  dealings  with  men  in  general 
isoover  this.     2.  The  reason  of  it.    (1)  In  mercy  to  man,  brcause  he  willeth  not  that 
any  should  perish.     (2)  In  justice  to  Christ,  from  whom  the  full  penalty  hath  already 
been  exacted.     (3)  For  the  honour  of  himself,  the  glory  of  his  grace  being  the  highest 
motive  by  which  God  can  be  actuated. 
in.  Thb  imbtbdotiom  op  majj.    "Know  thouj"  meaning  that  precious  lewona 


ea.  XL  1—20.]  ThK  book  OP  JOB.  m 

should  be  derived  from  the  study  of  so  grand  a  truth.  1.  Submiision.  It  should 
silence  all  murmuringa  against  afflictive  dispensations.  2.  Bepentance.  It  ought  to 
fill  the  human  spirit  with  devout  contrition.  3.  Hope.  It  should  teach  man  to 
"  account  the  long-sufEering  of  our  Gt)d  salvation." 

Vers.  7 — 12. — Zophar  to  Job :  2.  OocPs  wisdom  and  man's  folly.  I.  The  pbbfkotioh 
OP  DrviNB  wiSDOU.  1.  Unsearchable.  Zophar's  interrogations  (ver.  7)  may  signify 
either  that  man  can  never  fully  understand  God,  or  that  man's  wisdom  can  never  fully 
equal  GSod's.  Taken  either  way,  they  mean  that  the  Divine  wisdom,  already  described 
as  "  fold  upon  fold  "  (ver.  6),  transcends  the  comprehension  of  a  finite  mind.  Whether 
the  knowledge  of  God  attainable  by  the  speculative  reason  is  a  real  and  immediate 
knowledge  of  Qod  as  he  is,  or  "  nothing  more  than  a  tissue  of  ambitious  self-contradic- 
tions which  only  indicate  what  he  is  not "  (Mansbl, '  Limits  of  Beligious  Thought,' 
lect.  iv.),  may  be  relegated  to  philosophers  and  n:.etaphysician3  to  determine.  It  is 
certain  the  Divine  Being  is  unsearchable  by  man  in  his  esssence  (ch.  zxxvi.  26; 
zxxvii.  23),  in  his  Person  (Gen.  xxxii.  29 ;  Judg.  xiii.  18 ;  John  i.  1 ;  x.  30),  in  his 
attributes  (Ps.  cxlvii.  5),  e.g.  In  his  wisdom  (Isa.  xl.  28 ;  Rom.  xi.  33),  in  his  works 
(ch.  v.  9  J  ix.  10),  and  in  his  ways  (Nah.  L  3 ;  Rom.  xi.  33).  Hence  man's  wisdom 
can  never  equal  God's.  Man's  wisdom  at  the  best  can  be  fmly  comprehended ;  God's 
cannot.  2.  Infinite,  That  which  renders  the  Divine  wisdom  unsearchable  is  its 
-infinitude  (vers.  8,  9).  The  wisdom  displayed  by  Deity  in  the  creation,  decoration, 
and  preservation  of  the  universe  does  not  exhaust  the  fulness  that  his  Godhead 
contains.  Could  the  human  mind  explore  the  former  in  every  possible  direction,  there 
would  still  remain  in  each  an  infinitude  beyond,  .representing  the  deep  things  of 
Eloah,  and  the  perfection  of  Shaddai.  Most  impressively  does  the  language  convey 
the  thought  of  man's  inferiority  to  God  in  respect  of  wisdom.  For  if  man  by  his 
utmost  efforts  cannot  reach  unto  the  perfection  of  the  creatures — if  there  be  heights  in 
heaven  which  he  cannot  scale,  and  depths  in  Sheol  to  which  he  cannot  penetrate,  if 
even  the  wide-rolling,  far-resounding  sea  baffles  him  with  its  mystery — how  much  less 
should  he  hope  to  reach  unto  the  perfection  of  the  Creator  ?  3.  Irresistible.  "  If  he," 
4x.  the  Almighty,  acting  under  the  guidance  of  his  wisdom,  "cut  off  [literally, 
'should  arrest']  and  shut  up,"  or  imprison,  "and  gather  together,"  i.e.  a  court  to  try 
man  his  prisoner,  "then  who  can  hinder  him?"  (ver.  10).  A  graphic  picture 
representing  (1)  God's  ability  to  pursue,  arrest,  and  shut  up  in  prison  those  who 
offend  against  his  holy  Law,  as  he  did  with  Adam  and  Eve  (Geo.  iii.  8,  9),  with 
Pharaoh  (Exod.  xiv.  23),  with  Jonah  (i.  4) ;  as  h?  still  does  with  wicked  men, 
pursuing  them  with  the  hot  foot  of  an  avenging  providence  (Prov.  xiii.  21),  appre- 
hending them  with  the  strong  hand  of  an  awakened  conscience  (Acts  ii.  37 ;  xvi.  30), 
and  as  he  will  yet  do  with  the  finally  impenitent  who  despise  his  uffered  grace  (Matt. 
X.  28 ;  xiii.  42 ;  2  Thess.  i.  9).  (2)  The  certainty  that  God  will  yet  bring  the  ungodly 
into  judgment  at  the  last  day  (ch.  xxi.  30;  Eccles.  iii.  17;  Matt.  xxiv.  30;  xxv.  31; 
Rom.  xiv.  10;  Heb.  ix.  27),  since  he  often  does  so  prelusively  and  premonitorily  on 
earth  (Prov.  xi.  31 ;  Ps.  Iviii.  11).  And  (3)  the  impossibility  of  any  one  being  able  to 
either  contend  with  him  in  argument  or  outwit  him  with  chicanery  (ch.  Ix.  4,  12, 14). 
Men  may  seem  at  present  to  reply  successfully  against  God,  denying  his  existence, 
ignoring  his  providence,  impeaching  his  justice,  vindicating  themselves  and  repudiating 
the  charges  of  his  Law;  but  when  God  holds  the  great  assize  it  will  be  seen  how 
utterly  vain  as  well  as  preposterously  foolish  have  all  their  endeavours  been.  4. 
Omniscient.  God  knows  yain  men,  and  thoroughly  comprehends  their  wickedness, 
without  requiring  to  reflect  upon  either  them  or  it  His  knowledge  of  men  is  (1) 
universal :  "  He  knoweth  men,"  t.e.  he  knows  them  all ;  (2^  particular :  "  He  knoweth 
vain  men,"  he  knows  their  characters  and  their  works ;  (3)  continuous,  he  constantly 
observes  them;  and  (4)  Intuitive,  he  knows  them  at  once  and  thoroughly,  with  all- 
seeing,  all-searching  glance.  And  this  omniscience  lays  the  basis  for  God's  invincibility 
in  judgment.  j  .  . 

II.  The  consuhuation  of  huhan  folly.  In  contrast  to  the  transcendent  wisdom 
of  Eloah,  Zophar  depicts  men,  and  in  particular  Job,  as:  1.  Morally  worthless. 
"Vain  men,"  literally,  "men  of  nothingness,"  men  devoid  of  principle,  and  "hollow 
mm,"  he  styles  them.    The  appellation  is  by  no  means  incorrect,  as  descriptive  of 


193  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xi.  1— 2a 


man's  natuHil  condition ;  man  being  now,  in  consequence  of  sin,  emptied  of  all  goodnes* 
and  spiritual  understaning.  2.  Natwrtdly  witless.  Prone  to  entertain  exalted  notions 
of  liiJ  own  wisdom,  man  is  naturally  senseless  as  a  wild  ass's  colt— which  also  is  not 
wholly  astray  from  the  truth,  the  estate  of  man  from  his  birth  being  one  of  much 
ignorance,  especially  with  regard  to  things  Divine.  3.  Essentially  heartless.  Zophar 
designs  to  say  that  hollow-hearted  man  can  only  be  humanized  by  the  salutary 
discipline  of  affliction.  The  change  wrought  upon  him  by  the  fierce  discipline  of  life 
is  as  great  as  it  would  be  for  a  wild  ass's  colt  to  become  a  man.  But  this  implies  that 
man  is  by  sin  dehumanized  and  without  a  heart.  4.  Absolutely  hopdess.  Delitzsch 
reads,  "  But  before  an  empty  head  gaineth  understanding,  a  wild  ass  would  become  a 
man ; "  thus  teaching  that  man's  folly  is  irremediable.  This  blaclt  picture,  however,  is 
not  in  all  points  according  to  truth.  Sinful  man  may  be  born  again,  may  obtain  a  new 
heart,  may  acquire  an  enlightened  understanding,  and  may  eventually  be  arrayed  in 
stainless  moral  purity. 

Learn  :  1.  To  revere  the  transcendent  majesty  of  him  who  is  infinite  and  unsearch- 
able in  wisdom.  2.  To  trust  the  providential  government  of  him  who  is  "  wonderful 
in  counsel  and  excellent  in  working."  3.  To  believe  the  gracious  revelations  of  him 
"in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  4.  To  accept  the 
heavenly  gifts  of  him  who  "  hath  abounded  towards  us  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence." 
5.  To  cherish  deep  humility  before  him  "  whose  foolishness  is  wiser  than  men,"  and 
before  whom  man's  highest  wisdom  is  but  folly,  6.  To  be  thankful  to  him  whose 
"manifold  wisdom"  hath  been  revealed  for  the  enlightenment  and  salvation  of  foolish 
men. 

Vers.  13 — ^20. — Zopkar  to  Job :  3.  An  exhortation  to  repentanot.  I.  The  actings  o» 
PENITENCE.  1.  Preparation  of  the  heart.  "If  thou  prepare  [literally, 'direct']  thy 
heart,"  i.e.  towards  God.  True  penitence  is  a  heart-work,  beginning  in  the  heart,  relating 
to  the  heart,  and  cariied  on  by  the  heart,  though  not  without  Divine  assistance  (Prov. 
xvi.  1).  (1)  An  arduous  work;  the  verb  implying  serious  purpose,  fixed  resolution, 
continuous  effort ;  and  the  concentration  of  the  heart  upoii  anything,  much  more  upon 
what  is  spiritually  good,  being  ever  a  task  of  supreme  difficulty  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  (2)  A 
complex  work;  the  right  setting  or  directing  of  the  hpart  involving  self-examinaticn, 
to  discover  where  the  heart  is  wrong;  self-humiliation,  or  sincere  sorrow  on  account  of 
that  wrongness  of  heart  which  is  discovered ;  and  self-rectification,  or  the  immediate, 
conscious,  and  deliberate  reversal  of  that  state  of  wrong  (Ps.  cxix.  59  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  18, 19 ; 
Hos.  vi.  1).  (3)  A  necessary  work ;  Scripture  invariably  representing  this  Godward 
direction  of  the  heart  as  a  constituent  element  in  true  repentance  (1  Sam.  vii.  3 ; 
2  Ohron.  xx.  33),  as  the  want  of  it  is  no  less  strongly  stigmntized  as  a  mark  of  impeni- 
tence and  sin  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  8).  (4)  A  personal  work ;  sinful  man  having  many  aids  in 
the  task  expected  of  him,  such  as  the  external  teaching  of  the  Word,  and  the  internal 
illumination  of  the  Spirit,  but  still  being  himself  held  responsible  for  its  actual  per- 
formance. 2.  Elevation  of  the  sovl.  "  If  thou  stretch  out  thine  hands  towards  him," 
i.e.  God ;  the  lifting  up  and  stretching  forth  of  the  hands  being  a  common  devotional 
attitude  (Exod.  ix.  33 ;  Ezra  ix.  5 ;  1  Kings  viii.  22),  and  hence  a  frequent  biblical 
symbol  of  the  outgoing  and  ascending  of  the  soul  to  God  in  prayer  (Ps.  Ixiii.  4 ;  cxliii. 
6 ;  Isa.  i.  15).  Such  exercise  implies  a  sense  of  the  soul's  need  of  God,  a  yearning  of 
the  soul  after  God,  a  perception  of  the  soul's  distance  from  God,  an  inward  persuasion 
that  this  distance  may  be  diminished,  if  not  entirely  removed,  and  the  human  soul 
again  be  at  peace  with  God, and  a  fervent  application  that  such  confidential  and  loving 
relationship  between  the  two  may  again  be  restored.  3.  Reformation,  of  the  life.  "  If 
iniquity  be  in  thine  hand,  put  it  far  away,  and  let  not  wickedness  dwell  in  thy 
tabernacles."  This,  no  less  than  the  two  preceding,  is  indispensable  to  a  complete  work 
of  penitence.  Mere  amendment  of  the  external  walk  and  conversation  does  not  amount 
to,  and  will  certainly  not  serve  as  a  substitute  for,  the  cleansing  of  the  heart.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  work  of  inward  purification,  though  it  could  stand  alone,  would  not 
suffice  without  a  corresponding  rectification  of  the  daily  life.  True  repentance  consists 
in  sorrowful  acknowledgment  of  sin,  and  tearful  supplication  of  mercy,  followed  by  a 
steadfast  resolution  after  new  obedience.  Beginning  in  the  heart  with  the  detection 
of  Bin,  and  proceeding  to  the  lip  with  the  confession  of  sin,  it  terminates  in  the  life  with 


OH.XI.  1— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  199 

the  renunciation  of  sin  (1  Sam.  vii.  3 ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  14 ;  laa.  i.  16 ;  Iv.  7 ;  Jer.  vii.  6 ;  Matt. 
iiL  8).  And  this  renunciation  must  be  complete,  (1)  The  sin  itself  must  be  put 
away ;  all  kind  of  it — open  wickednes.'!,  secret  iniquity,  personal  transgression,  domestic 
wrong-doing,  so  far  as  this  latter  lies  within  one's  power  (G-en.  xviii.  19 ;  1  Sam.  ii. 
12, 17;  iii.  11, 14;  Fs.  oL  2,7).  (2)  The  separation  effected  must  be  thorough  and 
final ;  sin  being  required  to  be  not  merely  put  away,  but  put  far  away — cast  forth, 
like  Hagar  and  Ishmael;  like  the  scapegoat,  into  a  land  not  inhabited,  never  to  return. 

TI.  Thk  blessedness  of  thb  pbnitbnt.  1.  ChearftA  confidence  before  Ood.  (Ver.  15.) 
Instead  of  cowering  sorrow-stricken  and  shame-covered,  like  a  trembling  criminal, 
before  his  judge,  filled  with  confusion  and  unable  to  lift  up  his  head  (oh.  z.  15),  Job 
would  be  able  to  stand  erect  and  firm,  like  a  molten  statue  sitting  squarely  on  its  base, 
with  no  trace  of  tears  upon  his  countenance,  and  no  stain  of  punishable  guilt  upon  his 
conscience.  Nothing  fills  the  sonl  with  trembling  and  apprehension,  or  relaxes  the 
oords  and  sinews  of  the  heart,  like  a  sense  of  unpardoned  sin  CFs.  xxxviii.  8).  Nothing 
sooner  shades  the  brow  with  gloom,  or  banishes  the  light  of  joy  from  the  countenance 
(Gen.  iv.  5,  6;  Luke  xviii.  13),  than  the  loss  of  Divine  favour.  On  the  contrary, 
nothing  so  effectually  restores  serenity  of  aspect  and  courageousness  of  soul  to  the 
individual  as  a  consciousness  of  pardon.  When  the  spot  of  guilt  is  removed  from  the 
conscience,  the  tear  of  sorrow  is  soon  wiped  from  the  face.  A  forgiven  penitent  may 
afterwards  encounter  affliction;  but,  sustained  by  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth 
understanding,  he  can  even  joy  In  tribulation  (Bom.  v.  3).  2.  Penfect  happiness  in 
kimself.  (Ver.  16.)  That  complete  exemption  from  adversity  would  infallibly  attend 
the  repenting  transgressor,  was  incorrect ;  that  the  inward  comforts  and  enjoyments  of 
the  pardoned  sinner  would  lo  surpass  his  former  anguish  as  to  cause  it  to  be  entirely 
forgotten,  was  as  precious  and  consoling  as  it  was  true.  The  greatest  happiness  attain- 
able or  conceivable  on  earth  is  the  joy  of  salvation,  the  joy  which  no  man  taketh  from 
its  possessor,  the  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glo^y,  which  springs  from  a  sense  of 
acceptance  with  God.  However  deep  the  iron  of  conviction  may  have  been  driven  into 
the  penitent's  soul,  however  bitter  the  anguish  that  may  have  racked  his  spirit,  the 
moment  the  stricken  heart  is  visited  with  a  sense  of  Heaven's  favour,  it  "  remembereth 
no  more  the  anguish  for  joy "  that  it  has  been  forgiven.  The  only  thing  that  can 
effectually  drive  out  sorrow  from  the  soul  is  the  entrance  of  Heaven's  joy.  3.  Radiant 
prosperity  in  life.  (Ver.  17.)  Job's  after-career  should  be  one  of  unclouded  prosperity, 
which  should  shine  around  him  with  a  brilliance  outdazzling  the  noonday  sun,  and 
should  never  know  decline  or  diminution;  if  it  did,  that  decline  would  only  be  a 
gentle  shading  down  as  from  meridian  splendour  to  morning  brightness,  that  diminu- 
tion but  a  temporary  obscuration,  to  be  followed  by  the  breaking  forth  of  dawn.  All 
this  is,  of  course,  true  of  the  path  of  the  just,  only  when  spiritually  considered.  4. 
Complete  teearity  on  earth.  "  And  thou  shalt  be  secure,  because  there  is  hope."  This 
marks  the  ground  of  the  good  man's  confidence.  Assurance  of  God's  favour  to  an 
Old  Testament  saint  was  equivalent  to  a  guarantee  of  permanent  prosperity ;  to  a 
New  Testament  believer  it  is  tantamount  to  a  promise  of  spiritual  enrichment.  Hence 
hope  inspires  the  Christian  with  a  feeling  of  security  (Fs.  xxxL  24 ;  cxlvi.  6 ;  Bom. 
T.  6 ;  Eph.  vi.  17 ;  1  Thess.  v.  8).  The  following  clauses  indicate  the  completeness 
of  the  saint's  confidence.  "  Yea,  thou  shalt  dig  about  thee  [or,  '  look  around  thee, 
inquiringly,'  searching  into  all  possibilities  of  danger,  and  finding  none],  thou  shalt 
take  thy  rest  in  safety.  Also  thou  shalt  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  thee  afraid." 
So  did  David  (Fs.  iii.  6,  6  ;  iv.  8),  and  so  may  all  God's  people,  however  circumstanced. 
6.  Orotuing  influence  among  men.  "  Tea,  many  shall  make  suit  unto  thee ; "  literally, 
"  shall  stroke  thy  face,"  or  caress  thy  cheeks,  by  way  of  flattery  or  supplication,  perhaps 
both  (Prov.  xix.  6).  A  remarkable  testimony  to  the  influence  of  piety,  which  "  would 
be  more  respected  if  it  were  more  known "  (Hutoheson).  God's  Israels  have  power 
with  men  as  well  as  with  God  (Gen.  xxxiL  28),  and  Christ's  followers  are  the  salt  of 
the  earth  (Matt.  v.  13).  Hence  the  favour  and  friendship  of  saints  and  of  the  Church 
are  frequently  coveted  and  even  solicited  by  the  unbelieving  and  ungodly  (Gen.  xxvi. 
26—29 ;  Ps.  xlv.  12 ;  Matt.  xxv.  8). 

III.  Thb  doom  op  the  impenitent.  1.  Bitter  disappointment.  "  But  the  eyes  of 
the  wicked  shall  fail,"  shall  waste  away  with  vain  and  anxious  looking  and  longing  for 
help  which  oometh  not     He  who  expects  God  to  either  visit  him  with  benign 


m  THE  BOOK  OF  .toll.  (aa.ia.i—ib. 


BalTfction  or  bless  him  with  temporal  prosperity  while  indulging  in  sin,  li  cherish- 
ing an  ill-grounded  hope.  God  may  do  the  latter  for  wise  purposes  of  his  own;  the 
former  he  cannot  do.  To  anticipate  that  he  will  is  to  entertain  a  foolish  dream  (ch, 
viii.  14, 16).  2.  Certain  destruction.  "  They  shall  not  escape ;"  literally,  "their  refuge 
perishes  from  them."  As  wicked  men  will  not  reach  the  good  they  look  for,  so  neither 
will  they  avoid  the  evil  they  are  afraid  of.  "Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked 
shall  not  be  unpunished; "  "  The  expectation  of  the  wicked  is  wrath,"  Sooner  or  later 
calamity  will  overtake  and  overthrow  the  ungodly  (Iwa.  xiii.  9 ;  Mai.  Iv.  1 ;  Eph.  y.  6; 
1  Thess.  V.  3).  Thanks  to  Divine  grace,  a  refuge  has  been  provided  for  the  penitent- 
God  himself  (Ps,  xlvL  1),  or  the  hope  of  the  gospel  (Heb.  vi.  18) ;  but  "how  shall  we 
escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  (Heb.  ii.  3).  3.  Final  despair.  "  Their  hopt 
shall  be  as  the  giving  up  of  the  ghost ; "  literally,  "  the  breathing  forth  of  the  soul  or 
life,"  i.e.  it  shall  cease,  and  became  utterly  extinct.  "  The  expectation  of  the  wicked 
shall  perish."  "  A  wicked  man's  hope  is  but  a  cold  coal,  and  an  evanishing  thing.  It 
is  but  like  a  sob  or  two  of  a  dying  man,  and  then  he  is  gone  "  (Hutcheson). 

Learn  :  1.  True  happiness  and  true  religion  begin  at  the  same  point  and  in  the  same 
thing,  viz.  penitence.  2.  When  a  soul  returns  to  God  in  penitence,  God  never  fails 
to  return  to  it  with  prosperity,  if  not  temporal  and  material,  at  least  spiritual  and 
eternal.  3.  Though  true  piety  does  not  look  for  a  reward  on  earth,  it  most  commonly  finds 
on*.  4.  The  damnation  of  the  impenitent  is  as  certain  as  is  the  salvation  of  the  penitent. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS, 

Vers.  1-^20. — "  ffumbU  yourselvet  beneath  the  mighty  hand  of  Ood."  Zophar,  the 
youngest  of  the  friends,  now  comes  forward  once  more  to  beat  down  the  complaint  of 
Job  with  the  old  arguments  and  commonplaces.  To  support  his  words,  he  does  not 
appeal  to  a  vision  like  Eliphaz,  nor  rely  on  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients  like  Bildad,  but 
depends  on  his  own  understanding  and  zealous  though  narrow  instinct  for  Qoi.  His 
whole  speech  is  an  example  of  the  beauty  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  defect  of  religious 
seal.  In  anxiety  for  God's  honour  he  forgets  to  be  considerate  of  his  rdlow-man.  The 
general  contents  of  the  speech  may  be  obaracterized  as  the  rebufee  of  human  ignoranee. 

I.  Indignant  denukciation  of  hdman  complaint.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  He  terms  Job's 
outpourings  a  "  torrent  of  words,"  "  vain  talk,"  and  impious  "  mockery,"  a  scofSng ; 
and  Job  himself  is  an  idle  "  prater."  Further,  ho  stoutly  sums  up  all  Job's  speeches  as 
meaning  shortly  this:  "My  teaching  is  pure,  and  I  am  guiltless  in  God's  eyes."  Job, 
in  fact,  has  siepped  quite  out  of  his  place,  in  Zophar's  opinion,  laying  down  principles 
and  doctrines  instead  of  meekly  and  penitently  suffering  in  silence.  It  is  an  imjust 
view,  manifestly ;  and  we  should  be  warned  against  the  danger,  in  pleading  for  God,  Ol 
being  unjust  and  unfair,  hard  and  uncharitHble,  to  our  fellow-man.  To  fetter  the 
tongue,  to  attempt  to  lay  fetters  on  the  free  course  of  the  mind,  especially  in  its  moment 
of  sorrow,  may  be  to  inflict  a  cruel  injury  on  a  sensitive  heart. 

II.  Wish  fob  God's  apfeabakce.  '  (Vers.  6,  6.)  He  desires  that  God  in  the  fulness 
of  his  revelation,  In  the  complete  disclosure  of  knowledge  and  truth,  may  convince  Job 
how  "doubly  strong  "  is  Wisdom  in  her  nature  and  penetrating  power  (ver.  6).  Here 
would  Job  learn  that,  so  far  from  being  Unjustly  punished,  God  has  rather  passed  by 
much  of  his  guilt,  and  punishes  him  far  less  than  he  deserves.  Here  two  defects  are 
contrasted.  l.ilIlaJf-knowMge  of  Ood.  This  according,  to  Zophar,  is  Job's  condition. 
He  has  but  a  partial  understanding  of  God;  and  the  little  that  he  sees  he  misapplies, 
and  BO  is  led  into  perplexity  and  passion.  Zophar,  assuming  guilt  in  Job,  deems,  and 
wrongly,  that  Job  is  tempted  to  think  only  of  his  innocence,  and  to  overlook  his  great 
and  hidden  sins.  In  the  end  (ch.  xxxviii,),  when  God  does  manifest  himself.  Job  does 
recognize  that  he  is  but  a  half-knower,  but  not  that  he  is  a  hypocrite.  2.  But  there 
is,  on  the  other  hand,  the  assumption  qf  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  rebuking 
gpea-lier  which  is  not  less  a  fault.  This  is,  indeed,  the  error  of  all  the  friends,  and  it 
awaits  the  Divine  answer.  In  seeking  to  remove  the  mote  from  Job's  eye,  they  are 
unconscious  of  the  beam  in  their  nwu.  These  differences  may  be  reconciled  if  we  bear 
in  mind  the  great  saying  of  St.  Paul,  that  we  see  but  in  part,  and  know  but  in  part, 
and  that  all  perplexities  are  solvei'  by  an  absolute  faith  in  the  Divine  love.    We  sea 


<tt.ii.l— SO.j  tHB  BOOK  OP  JOB.  261 

•gain  and  again  illustrated  in  Divine  things  the  truth  that  "a  little  knowledge  is  a 
dangerous  thing." 

III.  Challenge  TO  human  ignorance:  THEUNBEABOHABLENBgsor  God.  (Vers.  7 — 9.) 

All  measures  of  vastness,  all  ideas  of  infinity,  are  called  in  to  impress  this  thought. 
The  might  and  the  wisdom  of  God  are  high  as  the  unscalable  heaven,  deep  us  the  dark 
lower  world  (comp.  ch.  xxii.  12 ;  xxvi.  6).  The  infinity  of  God  embraces  the  whole 
earth,  and  reaches  beyond;  it  is  longer  than  the  firm  land,  broader  than  the  broad 
sea,  go  that  before  it  there  is  nothing  too  lofty,  too  obscure,  too  remote.  It  ie  the  fixed 
thought-embrace  of  the  universe.  Will  mortal  man,  then,  be  guilty  of  the  folly  of 
quarrelling  with  God's  wisdom  and  power,  and  so  incur  the  fuU  weight  of  his  judgment? 
Eathtr  let  him  be  dumb,  and  optu  not  his  mouth,  and  say,  "  Thou  hast  dune  it." 

IV.  Human  laNOKANcis  convicted  and  abashed  before  the  Divine  judgment. 
(Vers.  10 — 12.)  If  God  holds  judgment  with  this  supreme  wisdom  and  power,  then 
plainly  man,  be  he  never  so  stupid  and  obstinately  ignorant  of  his  guilt,  must  forthwith 
become  conscious  of  it ;  and  though  he  were  furious  and  wild  as  a  wild  ass  (comp.  ch. 
xxxix.  5, 8),  he  must  be  subdued  by  that  omnipotent  power  into  tameness  and  docility. 
"The  wild  ass  is  now  born  as  a  man,"  converted  by  the  terror  of  that  moment  of  judgment. 
So  speaks  Zophar  with  caustic  rebuke  of  what  he  considers  the  contumacy  of  Job.  He 
seems  to  turn  the  language  of  Job,  in  ch.  ix.  11,  et  seq.,  to  his  own  purpose.  Thus  the 
arrival  of  the  Judge  to  execute  judgment  is  in  the  rush  of  a  rapid  storm  (ver.  10).  He 
"  passes  by,"  and  thereupon  follows  the  "  shutting-up  "  or  arrest  of  the  accusra,  that 
he  may  not  escape  during  the  judgment;  and  then  the  "gathering  together"  of  the 
people  to  hear  the  judgment. 

V.  WoBDS  OF  HOPE  AND  PROMISE.  (Vers.  13 — 20.)  Severe  as  are  the  speeches  of 
the  three  friends,  they  yet  have  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  eternal  gospel  of  God's 
mercy,  and  insist  on  the  unfailing  hope  set  before  the  true  penitent  iu  that  gospel. 
1.  Conditions.  (1)  (Ver.  13.)  The  "  direction,"  or  "  preparation,"  or  setting  straight,  of 
the  heart.  This  is  the  first  thing.  Crooked  feelings,  perverted  principles,  must  be  rectified. 
There  must  be  sincere  penitence.  Happiness  does  not  begin  with  the  outward  life  to  pass 
into  the  inward;  the  prucess  is  the  reverse.  And  the  restoration  must  be  in  the  same 
order.  If  the  inward  life  be  purified,  the  outward  will  flow  into  ■piece.  (2)  Along  with 
this  there  must  be  the  "  spieading  forth  of  the  hands  to  God ; "  in  other  words,  true 
prayer.  The  symbol  is  put  for  the  thing  signified,  the  rite  for  the  reality.  Very  signi- 
ficant and  beautiiul  was  the  Hebrew  attitude  of  prayer.  It  expressed  longing,  urgency, 
the  efi'ort  of  the  soul  to  seize  and  hold  fast  the  unseen  power  and  gracu  in  time  of  need. 
(3)  (Ver.  14.)  There  must  be  the  removal  of  all  previous  iniquity  from  the  home  as  well 
as  the  heart.  Every  vc  stige  and  association  of  it  must  be  swept  away — all  that  might 
remind  the  soul  of  forbidden  pleasures,  and  tempt  it  into  renewal  of  its  sin.  It  might  be 
well  for  a  man  in  the  endeavour  to  make  his  repentance  thorough  and  sincere,  and  might 
help  his  mind  to  form  new  associations,  to  renew  the  face  of  his  dwelling  iirom  top  to 
bottom,  and  cast  out  all  articles  of  furniture,  pictures,  utensils,  etc.,  that  might  bring  up 
the  thought  of  former  evil.  For  some  minds  it  would  at  least  be  a  wholesome  discipline. 
At  all  events,  let  nothing  be  left  undone  to  cleanse  the  heart,  the  imagination,  the 
inward  chambers  of  the  soul,  in  preparation  for  the  coming  of  the  gracious  renewing, 
consecrating  presence  of  the  Divine  Guest.     2.  The  consequences  of  return  to  God. 

(1)  Courage  (ver.  15), fresh,  calm,  and  strong.  Eiferring  to  Job's  complaint  (ch.  x.  15) 
that  he  is  compelled  to  bow  his  head  in  ignominy  before  the  unworthy,  his  friend 
declares  that  he  \vill  be  enablpd  to  lift  it  up  in  the  face  of  day.  How  serene  the  face, 
how  clear  the  glance,  how  assured  the  step  of  the  man  who  has  no  coward  secret  of  ill 
in  his  heart,  who  by  confession  and  repentance  has  made  the  mighty  God  his  Friend  1 

(2)  Oblivion  of  sorrow.  (Ver.  16.)  Is  memory  on  the  whole  a  greater  blessing  or 
torment?  Alas  I  Job  has  lately  found  it  to  be  the  latter.  The  "remembering  happier 
things"  has  proved  his  "crown  of  sorrow."  Like  a  returning  tide,  it  has  cast  his 
wrecked  treasures  at  his  feet.  But  on  the  turning  of  his  heart  to  God  these  bitter 
memories  shall  be  carried  away,  as  on  a  flowing  streaa*,  till  they  pass  out  of  sight  and 
disappear.    Thank  God  that  we  can  remember;  but  thank  God,  too,  that  we  can  forget  I 

(3)  A  season  ofhrightnest.  (Ver.  17.)  Even  if  the  darkness  come,  it  wil  I  be  comparatively 
bright  like  the  morning — exactly  opposite  to  ch.  x.  2?..  For  there  is  no  darkness  to  him 
who  has  God  aa  the  Guest  «f  his  soul.    (4)  Beat  unbrnken  by. danger  (vera.  18, 19); 


S02 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  foH.  xi.  1— 2<X 


cAeej/ui  hopein  tmli  the  respect  and  homage  qf/riends  and  suiton.  For  there  Is  som^ 
thinw  magnetic  in  piety  and  goodnesB ;  it  seems  a  kind  of  amber  which  attracts  to  iteetf. 
Such  will  be,  ever  are,  the  fruits  of  a  heart  free  from  guile,  and  at  peace  with  God. 
Zophar's  enthusiastic  picture  is  fitted  to  kindle  a  love  of  Tirtue  and  piety;  but  its 
exclusion  of  the  facts  and  relations  of  life  renders  it  but  partially  true,  like  the  maxims 
of  his  two  friends.  We  must  be  content  to  feel  that  there  is  o  truth,  and  a  very  deep 
and  Divine  truth,  in  this  sequence,  without  denying  that  there  are  complications  of  this 
truth  with  others,  as  in  the  case  of  Job,  which  God  and  eternity  can  alone  unravel. 

VL  Dabk  piotubk,  in  contbast,  of  thk  wiokbb.  (Ver.  20.)  1.  The  languor  of  vain 
longing.  Their  eyes  waste  and  consume  with  watching  and  tears  for  a  dawn  that  never 
comes  (comp.  Ps.  vi.  7).  2.  Escape  from  the  prison  of  their  woe  is  denied.  3.  Hope 
and  life  are  together  extinguished. — J. 

v'ers.  1 — 6. — Self-complacency  condemned.  Even  the  lowly  and  humble  are  liable 
to  over-estimate  their  own  goodness,  and  the  more  so  if  roused  to  self-justification.  All 
imperfect  human  judgments,  given  as  Job's  were,  under  the  influence  of  deep  feeling, 
are  liable  to  be  coloured,  to  be  overdrawn  and  extrava;:ant.  Job's  long  speech  in  his 
own  justification  is  likened  by  Zophar  to  a  torrent.  Zophar,  like  his  companions,  may 
ju'loie  Job  harshly,  wherein  lies  his  error  and  theirs ;  but  his  words  have  a  vein  of  truth 
in  them.  He  is  light  in  condemning  the  self-complacent,  who  can  prate  freely  of  his 
own  goodness,  whether  he  is  judging  Job  rightly  or  wrongly. 

I.  Sblf-oomplaoenoy  apt  to  bdbt  itself  ih  a  multitude  of  words.  It  would 
almost  seem  that  the  mere  abundance  of  Job's  answers  to  all  the  accusations  raised 
against  him  excites  his  friend's  retort.  Yet  how  true  is  it  that  the  self-complacent 
one,  willing  to  justify  himself,  finds  arguments  in  abundance  I  And,  being  on  his  defence, 
he  is  liable  to  view  things  with  a  prejudiced  eye.  The  man  "  full  of  talk  "  is  in  danger 
of  burying  truth  in  "  the  multitude  of  words."  The  greater  need  for  guarding  against 
the  perils  of  exaggeration  by  how  much  many  words  are  used.  A  strict  watch 
necessary  when  the  tongue  runneth  over. 

II.  SeLF-COMPLAOBMOT  8H0WK  ESFEOIALLT  VS  SELF-JUSTIFICATION.      This  the  point 

of  Zophar's  accusation.  This  the  constant  danger.  A  man  at  peace  with  Iiimself, 
rightly  or  wrongly  believing  in  his  own  innocence,  is  most  liable  to  justify  himself. 
The  lowly  self-accused  spirit  is  freed  from  this  especial  danger.  Self-justification  shows 
the  standard  by  which  fife  is  judged  to  be  a  low  one.  As  men  rise  in  goodness,  and 
so  in  their  clearer  discernment  of  the  true  nature  of  righteousness,  they  are  bowed 
down  in  self-abasement.  The  self-justified  has  but  a  poor  and  very  imperfect  standard 
of  right  before  his  eyes.     "  Shall  no  man  make  thee  ashamed  ?  "    Therefore — 

III.  Sblf-complaoenot  hides  the  judomsmt  of  Gk>D  FBOM  THE  ETE8.  The  man 
comes  up  to  his  standard.  He  is  open  to  no  more  teaching.  His  "doctrine  is  pure  ;" 
he  is  "clean" — at  least,  in  his  own  "eyes."  Such  a  man  in  danger  of  perverting 
judgment.  To  close  the  eyes  to  the  Divine  judgment  upon  the  life,  even  though  that 
judgment  be  severe,  is  to  do  irreparable  harm  to  the  character.  Let  the  true  light 
shine,  though  it  reveal  faults  of  the  gravest  kind  and  bring  down  the  pride  of  men  to 
the  very  e^h.  Zophar  may  not  intend  to  accuse  Job  of  intentional  lying,  but  he 
does  accuse  him  of  error.  Men  must  err  in  their  judgments  if  the  standards  by  which 
they  judge  are  false.  The  eye  blinded  by  self-complacency  cannot  see  that  which, 
if  clearly  seen,  would  condemn. 

lY.  Self-oomplaoenot  bebuked  bt  ah  aoourate  view  of  the  DiYim  juno- 
MENTB.  To  this  Job  was  ultimately  brought.  We  see  him  in  the  process — ^in  the  way. 
If  God  "  speak,"  if  he  "  open  his  lips,"  his  words  are  sure  to  condemn.  If  he  shows 
"  the  secrets  of  wisdom,"  then  would  appear  his  gracious  forbearance,  and,  even  in  the 
case  of  the  heavily  afSicted,  it  would  be  revealed  that  he  "  exacteth  less  than  iniquity 
deserveth."  One  day  the  clear  light  will  shine,  and  not  Job  only,  but  every  perplexed 
and  BufTering  son  of  Adam,  will  see  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  and  merciful,  wat  he  does 
not  render  to  man  the  whole  fruit  of  his  evil  doings.  He  remembers  the  frailty  and 
error  of  men'*  judgments,  and  is  patient  and  forgiving. — R.  G. 

Vers.  7—12. — Man  humbled  he/ore  God.  Vain  man  reasons  upon  the  ways  of  God, 
and  presumes  to  penetrate  to  the  depths  of  the  Divine  wisdom.    A  professed  wisdom 


OH.  30.1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  203 

lands  him  in  folly.  To  Bcale  the  heavens  is  as  easy  as  to  "find  out  the  Almighty  to 
perfection,"  to  fathom  the  depths  of  the  Divine  designs.  Job  and  hia  friends  and 
hosts  of  others  of  us  attempt  to  explain  the  name  and  ways  of  God,  but  our  efforts  are 
vain,  and  but  expose  a  folly  equal  to  our  ignorance. 

I.  The  Divine  hatdbb  and  the  Divine  fubfoses  infinitely  beyond  the 
FOSBIBLE  KNOWLBDOB  OF  MAN.  How  soon  may  a  prudent  reflection  on  either  of  these 
assure  men  that  they  "  cannot  attain  unto  "  them  I  "  High  as  heaven,"  "  deeper  than 
hell,"  "  longer  than  the  earth,"  "  broader  than  the  sea,"— these  are  the  terms  used  by 
Zophar  in  his  just  description.  As  well  may  man  attempt  to  touch  the  height  of 
heaven,  to  reach  to  the  depth  of  Hades,  to  stretch  his  arms  to  compass  sea  and  land 
from  the  far  east  to  the  distant  west,  as  to  pretend  to  comprehend,  within  the  compass 
of  his  feeble  and  limited  knowledge,  an  adequate  estimate  of  tlie  Divine  nature,  an 
adequate  understanding  of  the  Divine  counsels, — "  to  find  out  God." 

IL  As  the  Divine  Kame  is  incomprehensible,  by  man,  and  the  Divine  ways  past  his 
searching  out,  so  is  it  equally  beyond  the  poweb  or  man  to  hinder  the  woekino 
OUT  OF  THE  Divine  pubfobe.  In  his  ways  God  hides  his  wise  design.  He  worketh 
towards  a  definite  end.  Men  may  oppose  it  in  their  folly  or  sinfulness,  or  seem  to 
hinder  it  in  their  error.  But  like  an  onfiowing  tide  it  bears  all  before  it.  "  Who  can 
hinder  him  ?  "  His  work  is  an  omnipotent  work,  as  his  Name  is  infinite.  Against  the 
might  of  God  it  is  vain  for  feeble  man  to  oppose  his  strength,  or  the  energy  of  his  will. 
The  Divine  "  kingdom  ruleth  over  all." 

III.  It  is,  therefore,  utterly  imfossiblb  fob  man  to  escape  the  riqhteous  judg- 
ment OP  Almighty  God.  Zophar  would  thus  shut  up  Job  unto  self-abasement. 
Bevealing  his  impotence  before  Gk)d,  his  inability  so  much  as  to  know  the  Divine 
Kame,  or  to  grasp  with  his  understanding  the  widespread  ways  of  the  Most  High,  he 
would  compel  Job  to  abasement — to  a  confession  of  guiltiness,  to  the  wisdom  of  casting 
•way  his  vain  self-assurance,  that  of  God  he  may  be  made  wise.  All  these  purposes 
are  good  in  themselves,  but  the  covert  implication — God  is  angry  with  thee;  God 
judgeth  thee;  "he  seeth"  thy  "wickedness" — is  harsh  and  erroneons.  Like  his 
brethren,  he  errs  in  the  method  of  applying  his  good  principles.  Yet  is  it  wise  for  all 
men  (1)  to  learn  their  impotence  before  God ;  to  bow  to  the  Divine  ways ;  (2)  to  assure 
themselves  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  hidden  purposes  of  God ;  (3)  to  commit 
themselves  in  lowly  reverential  trust  to  the  overruling  power  and  government  of  God. 
Thus  the  intractable  one  shall  become  gentle,  docile,  and  obedient — the  "  wild  ass's 
colt"  will  become  a  man. — B.  G. 

Vers.  13 — 19. — The  invitation  to  repentanee.  All  Job's  friends  would  lead  him  to 
repentance.  They  see  the  judgments  of  God  upon  him  in  his  afflictions.  They  know  of 
no  other  cause  for  afflictions  than  as  a  punishment  for  wrong-doing.  The  conclusion  is 
clear,  "  Thou  hast  sinned."  This  underlies  all  their  speeches.  But  they  have  rightly 
seized  the  truth — God  forgiveth  the  iniquity  of  the  repentant.  Therefore  they  urge 
their  entreaty  to  their  friend  in  one  word,  "  Repent."  And  Zophar  reveals  to  Job  the 
method  of  repentance,  the  encouragement  to  it,  and  its  reward. 

I.  The  method  of  bepentancb.  1.  "Prepare  thine  heart."  Give  the  heart  its 
true  direction — from  evil  towards  God.  2.  "  Stretch  out  thine  hands  towards  God  " 
— in  prayer — the  true  sign  of  repentance,  the  sign  of  lowly  self-abasement,  the  very 
confession  of  sin,  the  opening  of  the  heart  with  the  lips  to  renounce  evil,  to  sue  for 
pardon.  The  hands  stretehed  towards  God  is  the  human  sign  of  return  to  him.  3. 
Put  away  iniquity.  The  actual  renunciation  of  evil,  forsaking  and  abandoning  it  with 
the  heart  and  hands  and  voice  lifted  to  God,  is  the  certain  and  indubitable  evidence 
of  true  repentance.  No  sorrow  for  sin  becomes  repentance  until  sin  is  by  the  sorrowing 
heart  renounced.     "  If  iniquity  be  in  thine  hand,  put  it  far  away." 

IL  The  bncoubagbmbnt  to  bepbntanoe.  1.  "  Then  shalt  thou  lift  up  thy  face 
without  spot,"  ».«.  of  guilt.  Thy  heart,  cleared  of  its  guilt,  shall  be  free  and  joyful. 
2.  And  with  consciousness  of  the  Divine  forgiveness  thou  wilt  be  able  to  look  up  without 

fear "  to  lift  up  thy  face  " — to  God.    3.  Then  sorrow  shall  be  supplanted  by  peaceful 

joy.  "  Thou  shalt  forget  thy  misery."  Thy  grief  shall  leave  no  more  trace  than  waters 
that  flow  by.  4.  Then  brightness  shall  dawn  upon  thy  life,  over  its  remainder  shall 
be  a  time  of  gladness ;  "  as  the  moruing  shalt  thou  be," 


264  tH£  fiOOK  Of  J08.  tob.  tvl-Sfk 

m.  Thb  bbwabd  of  befbmtakob.  The  encouragements  to  repentance  are  in 
themseWes  part  of  its  reward,  though  that  reward  will  bo  only  truly,  because  only 
perrectly,  found  in  the  subsequent  <£iys  of  the  life.  Beautifully  and  cheeringly  does 
this  friend  paint  the  rich  prosperity  of  later  days  even  to  the  overwhelmed  sufferer. 
Although  an  error  lurks  beneath  it  all,  which  the  teaching  of  the  entire  book  ia 
designed  to  correct ;  yet  out  of  the  bright  encouragements,  as  out  of  an  early  morning, 
the  full  promise  of  blessing  to  the  repentant  arises.  "  Thou  shalt  be  secure."  The 
sense  of  security  will  take  possession  of  the  breast  from  which  condemnation  is  removed. 
The  assurance  of  the  Divine  foigiveness  is  a  pledge  of  the  Divine  love,  and  the  forgiven 
one  hides  in  the  God  against  whom  in  his  folly  he  had  sinned.  Hope  illumines  the 
future,  and  his  spirit,  braced  with  holy  courage,  takes  its  rest  in  safety.  He  can  lie  down 
in  peace  and  sleep,  for  he  has  gained  a  new  trust  in  Grod.  He  deSes  his  foes.  Prosperity 
returns;  "many  make  suit  unto  him."  Such  is  the  rich  reward  promised  to  Job  by 
his  friend,  should  he  repent  of  his  sin.  True,  as  a  great  principle  fur  human  conduct 
it,  however,  lacks  a  correctness  of  application,  for  Job  is  not  suffering  for  his  sins. 
But  every  smitten  one  may  learn  the  wisdom,  the  comfort,  and  the  happy  consequence 
of  true  repentance.— B.  G. 

Ver.  1. — Zophar,  the  man  of  the  world.  After  the  seer  and  the  pedant  comei 
Zophar,  who  poses  as  the  man  of  the  world.  He  can  pretend  to  no  supernatural 
illumination,  neither  has  he  any  claims  to  put  forth  on  the  score  of  learning;  but  he 
thinks  he  knows  men,  he  prides  himself  on  his  common  sense,  the  ways  of  the  world 
are  familiar  to  him.  Even  from  his  low  standpoint  hu  thinks  he  can  detect  enough  to 
condemn  Job.  We  may  see  in  Zophar  the  characteristics  of  a  man  of  the  world  in  his 
treatment  of  moral  and  religious  questions,  when  he  presents  himself  as  a  devout  man 
and  friendly  adviser. 

I.  He  is  obthooox.  Zophar  entirely  agrees  with  the  main  position  of  Eliphaz  and 
Bildad.  He  accepts  the  doctrines  of  the  visionary  when  ihey  have  been  endorsed  by 
conventional  society,  and  he  echoes  the  traditions  of -antiquity  after  he  has  ascertained 
ttiat  they  are  not  regarded  as  obsolete  in  his  time.  He  has  not  the  spiritual  individu- 
ality to  be  singular.  He  will  always  side  with  the  majority.  The  fear  of  Mrs.  Grundy 
is  ever  before  his  eyes.  It  is  bad  form  to  be  a  heretic.  Conventionality  is  orthodoxy 
with  this  man,  and  conventionality  is  the  rule  of  his  life. 

II.  He  is  a  man  of  the  times.  He  would  rather  despise  the  dreams  of  the 
visionary  and  the  sajings  of  the  peJant.  He  thinks  himself  a  modem  man.  But  he 
is  no  power  in  his  day,  for  he  is  but  the  creature  of  his  age.  It  is  the  duty  of  Cliristiaug 
not  to  follow  the  age,  but  to  rule  it.  When  the  worldly  Christian  follows  it,  he  enslaves 
himself,  and  does  his  best  to  subject  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  the"  prince  of  this 
world.  We  ought  to  understand  our  times,  sympathize  with  their  need,  use  their 
advantages,  work  for  their  progress,  but  never  be  thiii-  creatures  and  drudges. 

III.  He  is  blind  to  the  greatest  truth.  The  whole  spiritual  world  is  a  non- 
entity to  this  man.  Being  religious  and  orthodox,  he  talks  the  language  of  Divine 
things;  but  his  words  are  meaningless  counters.  The  reality  of  those  things  is  quite 
beyond  his  grasp.  He  thinks  he  knows  men,  but  he  only  sees  one  side  of  the  world. 
A  whole  hemisphere  of  human  experience  is  turned  away  from  his  gaze.  He  is  like 
a  person  on  this  world  looking  at  the  moon,  seeing  one  side  in  varying  phases,  but' 
never  able  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  otlier  side  of  it.  The  truly  spiritual,  the  generous, 
the  mystical,  are  all  obscure  to  him.  We  cannot  know  the  best  truth  till  we  are 
liberated  from  the  shackles  of  conventionality. 

IV.  He  is  Cbnsobious.  Zophar  joins  his  two  friends  in  their  condemnation  of  Job. 
The  man  of  the  world  thinks  himself  broad-minded.  Very  often  he  is  not  over- 
scnipiilous  on  moral  questions  that  touch  his  own  interest.  But  no  one  can  be  harder 
in  condemning  those  who  transgress  the  customs  of  the  circle  in  which  he  moves. 
His  religion  has  no  softening,  sweetening  influence  on  him.  It  only  seems  to  make 
him  sour  and  disagreeable.  So-called  Christians  of  this  stamp  are  the  greatest  possible 
hindrances  to  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  It  is  their  conduct  that  makes  so  many 
people  hate  the  Christiaa  religion. — ^W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  2. — Thtprovoeation  <^  a  nplg.    Zophar  will  not  take  th«  tronU*  to  be  oonrteooi. 


OH.  XI.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB  205 

lie  rudely  addresses  Job  as  "  a  man  full  of  talk."  He  has  been  irritated  by  the  "  multitude 
of  words"  that  Job  has  poured  forth.  The  very  volume  of  the  patriarch's  discourse 
provokes  the  man  of  the  world  to  make  a  reply. 

I.  ThK  overflow  of   FBELINO    FINDS  VBNT   IK  A  MULTITODB   OP  WOBDB.      SpCOCh  IB 

not  all  calculated  and  purposeful.  Sometimes  it  is  aimless  and  reckless.  It  is  not 
always  directed  to  the  eod  of  telling  some  lact  or  influencing  some  person.  It  may  be 
just  the  irrepressible  outcome  of  emotion.  The  most  taciturn  become  eloquent  when 
in  a  passion.  Eicitement  needs  a  safety-valve.  The  swollen  river  must  have  a  vent 
or  it  will 'overflow  its  banks.  The  hottest  words  do  uot  always  lead  to  the  most 
violent  actions ;  but  the  fire  that  burns  under  unnatural  restraints  is  likely  to  burst 
forth  at  length  in  the  most  fearful  conflagration.  Let  us  be  patient  with  the  hasty, 
passionate  words  of  souls  that  are  deeply  moved,  not  weighing  them  nicely,  nor 
treasuring  them  up  for  future  accusation. 

II.  Passionatb  words  oaknot  be  understood  by  tiib  nNSYMPATHETio.  Zophar 
is  vexed  at  Job's  eloquence.  Quo  reason  is  that  he  cannot  understand  it.  The  man 
of  the  world  is  always  angry  with  what  he  canuot  comprehend.  It  annoys  Lim  to 
think  that  there  may  be  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth  than  are  dreamed  of  in  his 
philosophy.  The  highest  poetry  is  to  him  but  a  multitude  of  words.  He  is  wearied 
with  '  The  FaBry  Queene ; '  '  Paradise  Lost '  is  tedious  to  him.  Browning  he  regards  as 
•  juggler  with  language.  Even  in  Scripture  the  deepest  utterances«of  psalmist  xrid 
prophet  are  but  empty  words.  Christ  spoke  ia  brief  sententious  utterances,  graphic 
if  enigmatic;  yet  even  Christ's  discourses  are  but  dead  words  to  those  who  will  not 
lend  a  sympathetic  ear.  We  always  misjudge  our  fellow-men  when  we  do  not  sympa- 
thize with  them;  then  the  deepi^st  utterances  of  their  hearts  are  but  "sound  and  fury 
signifying  nothing."     A  Pilate  could  never  understand  the  prayers  of  Gethsemane. 

IIL  A  uiTLTiTDDB  OF  WORDS  FBOVOKEB  BEPLT.  Zophar  is  roused  to  answer  Job 
with  more  asperity  than  he  would  have  shown  if  the  patriarch  had  maintained  the 
dignified  silence  with  which  he  had  received  his  friends.  This  is  unreasonable,  unkind, 
wrong ;  still  it  is  only  what  must  be  expected  under  the  circumstances.  The  world 
will  not  be  reasonable  or  kind  in  its  treatment  of  us.  Therefore  it  may  be  well  for  us 
to  be  on  our  guard  against  nuisy  opposition  beyond  what  is  inevitable.  Self-restraint 
is  a  grace  which  brings  its  own  reward.  The  ahandon  of  passion  is  certain  to  lead  to 
vexation  of  spirit. 

IV.  The  PATtENOB  o*  God  endcbbb  a  MULTrrnoB  of  words.  He  does  not  hear  us 
for  our  much  speaking.  There  i.s  no  virtue  in  long  prayers  (Matt.  vi.  7).  But  deep 
feeling  will  find  expression  in  imceading  prayer.  Then  our  Father  listens  with  more 
patience  than  our  friends  show  to  us.  Job  had  good  reason  to  be  thankful  that  he 
could  make  his  complaints  to  Heaven.  God  was  more  patient  than  Zophar.  He  is 
ever  ready  to  listen  to  the  cries  of  his  children. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. — "  Oh  that  Ood  would  ^ea6 } "  Zophar's  wish  is  most  ungenerous.  Feeling 
his  own  inability  to  give  a  complete  reply  to  ihe  complaints  of  Job,  he  expresses  a 
desire  that  God  may  interpose  and  give  the  requisite  answer.  He  really  wants  God 
to  come  as  his  advocate  and  speak  on  the  side  uf  conventional  orthodoxy.  But  though 
be  is  now  moved  by  an  uncharitable  thought,  the  desire  that  he  is  led  to  express  is 
significant  of  a  common  need  of  mankind.  Both  Job  ami  his  accusers  look  for  a  Divine 
interposition,  and  long  for  a  clear  utterance  of  God's  mind. 

I.  It  is  katdral  to  desire  a  Divine  voice.  This  desii  e  springs  out  of  our  spiritual 
instincts.  We  cannot  shake  it  olf.  It  is  almost  universally  felt  among  all  races  of 
men,  and  it  becomes  only  deeper  and  more  urgent  with  the  progress  of  spiriiual  culture. 
The  animals  betray  no  signs  of  any  such  wish.  We  alone  feel  as  orphans,  as  exiles 
from  home;  we  alone  crave  a  voice  from  heaven.  This  is  but  natural.  The  child 
lonws  to  hear  from  his  father.  The  perplexed  looks  for  a  guide,  the  soriowful  for  a 
comforter,  the  wronged  for  an  advocate.  Will  God  come  and  solve  the  great  riddle  of 
existence? 

II.  It  18  UNSEASONABLE  TO  EXPECT  TO  HBAB  God'b  VOICE  WITH  THE  OUTWARD  BAB. 

By  our  materialism  we  pervert  the  natural  instinct  tliat  cries  out  for  God.  We  live  so 
much  in  the  body  that  we  come  to  overvalue  the  exptrieuce  of  our  senses.  It  seems  to 
us  that  we  should  be  better  satisfied  if  we  could  hear  Gud's  voice  sounding  like  the 


206  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  ax  1—20. 


Toice  of  our  hnman  friend.  We  forget  that  the  senses  may  be  suhject  to  illusion.  If 
we  heard  a  Toice  as  from  heaven  we  could  not  be  sure  that  it  came  from  Qod.  More- 
over, it  is  not  well  that  God  should  cut  the  knot  and  explain  every  mystery  at  once. 
We  are  not  yet  ready  to  receive  all  truth.  It  is  good  for  our  discipline  that  our 
patience  should  be  tried,  and  that  we  should  walk  by  faith. 

in.  God  has  spoken.  We  listen  for  the  thimder  and  ignore  the  still,  small  voice. 
But  God  is  ever  speaking  to  us  in  his  Spirit  through  our  consciences.  He  has  given 
more  explicit  revelations  of  his  truth  through  the  inspiration  of  prophets  and  apostles. 
The  circulation  of  the  Bible  is  the  going  forth  of  God's  voice.  Christ  is  the  incarnate 
Word  of  God.  What  Zophar  wished  for  has  in  a  measure  appeared  in  Christ.  The 
old  craving  for  a  Divine  oracle  is  met  in  the  best  way  by  the  advent  of  our  Lord  as 
"  the  truth"  (John  xiv.  6). 

IV.  God  will  speak  mobb  fully  at  the  ekd  op  the  days.  God  appeared  at  the 
end  of  Job's  trials.  A  grand  theophany  in  final  judgment  is  promised  us  (Zech.  xiv.  4). 
Even  in  the  light  of  the  gospel  many  problems  are  still  obscure.  Christ  did  not  bring 
the  answer  to  every  question  vphen  he  appeared  on  earth.  He  brought  sufficient  light 
for  saving  knowledge,  but  he  left  us  to  walk  by  faith.  Thus  we  may  still  crave  the 
complete  revelation,  when  God  shall  speak  once  more,  vindicating  the  right  and  clearing 
the  mystery  of  providence.  Meanwhile,  the  nearer  we  walk  to  Christ  the  more  of  his 
voice  can  we  hear,  and  the  less  perplexed  shall  we  be;  for  he  who  foUows  Christ  will 
not  walk  in  darkness  (John  zii.  36).— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  7. — Tht  wnsearchdble  depth  of  Ood.  It  has  been  said  that  Zophar  shows  "some 
touch  of  the  base  courtier  spirit  and  motive"  in  thus  eulogizing  the  wisdom  of  God. 
He  seems  to  wish  to  secure  God  on  his  side.  While  he  rebukes  Job  he  flatters  God. 
Nevertheless,  though  his  motive  may  be  unworthy,  the  question  which  he  here  raises 
is  real  and  important. 

I.  God's  thouoht  is  ttnfathouablt  deep.  1.  It  mmt  he  to  because  Ood  is  infinite. 
If  we  could  understand  God  completely,  it  would  be  clear  that  he  was  but  as  one  of  us. 
A  dog  cannot  fathom  the  thought  of  a  man,  because  the  inferior  being  can  never  enter 
into  the  depths  of  the  experience  of  one  greater  in  faculty.  No  creature  can  measure 
the  mind  of  the  great  Creator.  2.  It  is  found  to  he  so  in  experience.  We  are  continually 
baffled  by  riddles  of  providence.  We  are  puzzled  to  find  our  calculations  false,  and 
our  explanations  unsatisfactory.  We  fail  to  understand  the  object  and  meaning  of 
God's  mysterious  dealings  with  us. 

II.  We  oaknot  but  desibe  to  fathom  the  depths  of  God's  thotjoht.  No 
inquiry  can  be  more  intensely  interesting.  God  is  the  Source  and  controlling  Power  ol 
our  lives,  and  everything  depends  on  what  he  thinks  about  us.  Therefore  true  theology 
is  no  idle  study  of  the  cloister;  it  is  the  most  practical  inquiry  concerning  what  must 
intimately  affects  our  vital  interests  in  time  and  in  eternity.  But  apart  from  personal 
considerations,  the  study  of  God  is  the  study  of  What  is  highest,  best,  and  most  wonder- 
ful in  the  universe.  Can  any  more  lofty  employment  for  the  human  intellect  be  found  ? 
Is  it  not  grossly  unnatural  for  the  child  not  to  care  to  know  about  his  father  ?  Surely 
it  is  wrong  to  check  an  inquiring  soul  in  its  search  after  Goii,  even  wheu  it  seems  to 
go  sounding  on  through  dim  and  perilous  ways. 

III.  Men  have  made  foolish  claIims  to  have  fathomed  the  depths  of  God. 
Zophar  did  this  even  while  appearing  to  honour  the  vastness  and  mystery  of  the 
Divine  thought';  for  he  assumed  that  he  knew  God's  idea,  and  that  this  was  just 
identical  with  conventional  orthodoxy.  His  was  the  commou  error  of  extreme 
dogmatists.  Creeds  may  be  excellent  as  clear,  concise  confessions  of  belief;  but  the 
moment  a  finality  is  claimed  for  them  they  cease  to  be  a  help,  and  become  a  positive 
stumbling-block  and  hindrance  to  truth.  We  cannot  define  God ;  he  escapes  all  the 
bounds  of  the  largest  words.  When  we  attempt  to  draw  a  circle  about  him  we  tacitly 
assume  that  he  is  not  an  Infinite  Being. 

IV.  OuE  knowledge  of  God  ib  heal,  but  partial.  We  cannot  "  find  out  the 
Almighty  unto  perfection."  We  cannot  know  God  perfectly,  cannot  know  all  of  God. 
We-may  know  much  of  him.  He  is  not  represented  in  the  Bible  as  the  Unknowable, 
nor  to  Christians  as  "  the  Unknown  God."  Indeed  Christians  can  say,  "  We  know 
that  we  know  him"  (1  John  ii.  3).    Our  knowledge  ia  not  merely  a  knowledge  of  our 


OH.  XLl— 20.J  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  207 

thought  about  him;  and  theology  Is  not  simply  the  Bolence  of  man's  religion.  We 
know  God  truly,  as  far  as  our  knowledge  extends.  Yet  we  know  but  a  very  little  of 
God.  Therefore  let  us  learn  humility,  patience,  faith.  We  can  never  know  all,  but 
we  may  know  more.  Therefore  let  us  "  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord  "  (Hos.  vL  S). — 
W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  13 — 19. — The  llessedneas  of  returning  to  God.  Zophar  draws  a  beautiful 
picture  of  the  joys  and  blessings  of  restoration  to  God,  and,  though  its  implied  back- 
ground must  have  spoilt  it  for  Job  by  suggesting  that  the  patriarch  was  a  great  sinner 
needing  repentance,  in  itself  the  picture  is  true  and  helpful. 

I.  The  peocbss  or  BETTTBNmo  to  God.  1.  By  a  right  condition  of  the  heart.  The 
heart  is  first  to  he  set  right.  We  can  only  return  to  God  with  our  heart.  The  heart 
wandered ;  the  heart  must  come  back.  Going  to  church  is  not  necessarily  going  to  God. 
Beginning  to  attempt  good  works  is  not  always  entering  the  kingdom  of  heaveu.  W« 
must  begin  with  inward  and  deeper  things. •S.  By  apersonal  approach  to  Ood.  The  hands 
are  to  be  stretched  out  to  him.  This  is  the  posture  of  a  suppliant.  It  is  the  attitude  of 
prayer,  but  it  signifies  more  than  the  offering  of  a  petition ;  it  suggests  that  the  helpless 
man  ia  stretching  out  to  QoA.  for  deliverance,  that  the  penitent  child  is  trying  to  get 
near  to  his  Father.  We  cannot  be  saved  while  we  remain  at  a  distance  from  God ;  as 
our  sin  and  ruin  consist  in  our  departure  from  God,  so  our  restoration  is  accomplished 
in  our  personal  return  to  him.  3.  By  a  repentant  renunciation  of  tin.  Sin  must  no 
longer  dwell  in  our  tabernacles.  We  cannot  recover  God  while  we  retain  sin.  The 
repentance  must  not  only  consist  in  confession  and  sorrow.  The  sin  itself  must  be 
cast  off.  Until  we  are  willing  to  do  this  in  heart  and  life  no  restoration  is  possible. 
It  was  wrong  and  unfair  of  Zophar  to  assume  that  Job  needed  to  come  to  God  as  a 
penitent,  for  the  suffering  man  had  done  this  long  before  his  troubles,  and  he  was 
already  a  redeemed  and  honoured  servant  of  God.  But  till  we  have  thus  actively 
repented  we  cannot  be  restored.  Zophar's  principle  applies  to  all  who  have  not  yet 
forsaken  their  sins. 

IL  Thb  hafft  bebultb  of  thus  BETtTBNiNO.  Zophar  must  be  blamed  for  the 
narrowness,  the  unspirituality,  and  the  conventionalism  of  his  picture.  Restoration  to 
God  brings  higher  blessings  than  Zophar  dreamed  of  naming,  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  does  not  always  bring  the  swift  and  visible  rewards  which  he  portrayed  with 
sympathetic  eloquence.  Yet  we  may  gather  some  hints  of  the  blessings  of  restoraiion 
even  from  the  partial  lights  of  his  pictiu-e.  1.  Freedom  from  guilt.  The  restored 
penitent  will  "  lift  up  "  his  "  face  without  spot."  The  old  stain  has  gone.  Confidence 
takes  the  place  of  the  shame  of  sin.  2.  Fearless  steadfastnesB.  "  Yea,  thou  shalt  be 
steadfast,  and  shalt  not  fear."  An  evil  conscience  is  tunorous.  The  cure  of  sin  brings 
strength  and  stability.  3.  Forgetfulness  of  the  sad  past.  It  will  go  like  the  waters 
of  the  winter  torrent,  that  disappear  and  leave  their  stony  course  dry  in  the  summer 
heat.  The  sorrow  seems  to  be  eternal  while  we  have  it.  But  not  only  is  time  a  healer ; 
forgiveness  and  restoration  hasten  the  process.  4.  A  bright  reputation.  This  was 
Job's  old  possession,  but  he  seemed  to  his  friends  to  have  lost  it.  Sin  tarnishes  a  good 
character.  But  forgiveness  and  restoration  prepare  for  a  new  Christian  character.  The 
darkness  gives  place  to  bright  daylight.  6.  Perfect  security.  The  restored  maa  can 
lie  down  in  peace,  fearing  nothing,  for  Gud  is  with  him. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  18  (first  clause). — 3%e  security  of  hope.  I.  It  is  of  the  natubs  of  hope  to 
orvB  A  BENBB  OF  SEOUBITY.  If  a  man  thinks  himself  safe,  he  will  go  forwardconfidently ; 
if  he  expects  he  can  win,  he  will  throw  his  energy  into  what  he  is  doing;  if  he  is  sure 
of  victory,  he  will  not  shrink  from  the  foe.  When  hope  has  faded  out  of  a  man's  life, 
he  may  still  pursue  his  course  with  the  doggedness  of  despair ;  but  his  step  has  lost  its 
elasticity  and  his  eye  its  fire.  .    ,     „ 

II.  Hope  tends  to  cbbatb  bkai.  beoueity.  The  loss  of  confidence  u  itself  a 
weakness.  When  we  expect  to  fail,  we  prepare  fa&axo  for  ourselves.  On  the  other 
hand  a  cahn,  fearless  progress  makes  for  success.  There  is  a  foolish  sanguineness 
which  only  dreams  of  the  joys  that  are  to  drop  into  one's  lap  unsought  and  unearned. 
But  a  true  and  sensible  hope  will  not  he  thus  blind  and  indolent.  It  will  be  the 
insj»ratiou  of  effort.    If  we  have  hopes  of  victory  over  sin  and  of  a  useful  Christian 


208 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xn.  1 — ^28 


life,  we  are  spurred  on  to  attempt  to  realize  them.    Hope  is  necessary  in  Christian 
work.    A  hopeless  missionary  is  not  likely  to  be  very  fruitful. 

III.  A  BASELESS  HOPE  LEADS  TO  A  FALSE  sECOBrTY.  Hope  may  be  a  mere  snare. 
Possibly  the  sanguine  man  is  living  in  a  fool's  paradise.  His  hope  may  be  altogether 
without  foundation,  and  if  so,  in  trusting  to  it  he  will  only  sink  down  to  ruin.  We 
need  to  have  a  reasun  for  the  hope  that  is  in  us  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  Safety  is  not  pro- 
portionate to  confidence.  Although,  as  we  have  just  seen,  hope  simply  as  a  subjective 
feeling  does  tend  to  victory,  yet  if  it  is  quite  groundless,  its  tendency  will  not  be  strong 
enough  to  overcome  tangible  obstacles. 

IV.  Christ  has  qiten  to  ub  a  tbots  aot)  nrspiBino  hope.  1.  It  is  true.  Christ 
does  not  content  himself  with  soothing  our  fears  and  instilling  a  sense  of  restful- 
ness  and  confidence.  That  would  be  a  fatal  course,  like  drugging  a  patient  with 
morphia  instead  of  curing  his  disease.  But  when  Christ  instils  the  feeling  of  hope,  ha 
does  so  by  setting  before  us  good  reasons  for  hope.  The  Christian  hope  is  based  on 
the  revelation  of  God's  love,  on  the  atoning  work  of  our  Lord,  on  his  resurrection  and 
triumph.  He  is  our  Hope  (Col.  i.  27),  and  all  that  gives  worth  to  him  and  his  work 
gives  weight  to  the  Christian  hope.  2.  It  is  inspiring.  The  great  hope  of  Christ  is 
that  sin  shall  be  conquered  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  come  in  power.  (1)  This  is 
inspiring  to  the  individual.  No  one  of  us  need  be  satisfied  with  a  low  tone  of  Christian 
life.  It  is  open  to  all  to  rise  to  great  heights  of  holiness  and  fruitful  living.  The  hope 
is  in  Christ,  not  in  ourselves;  and  his  resources  are  unlimited,  his  riches  unsearchable 
(Eph.  iii.  8).  (2)  Tliis  is  also  inspiring  for  the  Church.  The  weary  battle  of  the  ages 
is  destined  to  ultimate  victory.  Christ,  not  the  devil,  must  triumph  at  last.  Difficulties 
press  upon  us  and  discouragements  grow  thick  around  us,  yet  the  cause  of  God  cannot 
fail.  Tlie  promise  of  victory  should  inspire  the  hope  which  helps  forward  the 
aocomplishiueut. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEK  Xn. 


The  discourse  of  Job,  liere  begnii,  continues 
through  three  ciiapters  (oh.  xii.,  xiii.,  xiv.). 
It  is  thought  to  form  the  conclusion  of  the 
first  day's  colloquy.  In  it  Job  for  the  first 
time  really  pours  scorn  upon  his  friends, 
and  makes  a  mock  of  tliem  (see  vers.  2,  8, 
20;  oh.  xiii.  4 — 13).  This,  however,  is  a 
secondary  matter :  his  main  object  is  to 
justify  his  previous  assertions,  (1)  tliat  the 
whole  course  of  mundane  events,  wliethor 
good  or  evil,  must  be  attributed  to  Gtod 
(vers.  6—25)  ;  (2)  that  his  sufferings  entitle 
him  to  plead  with  God,  and  demand  to  know 
why  he  is  so  punishid  (oh.  xiii.  3 — 28).  A 
OdiTiparatively  mild  expostulation  concludes 
tlic  fiist  series  of  speeches  (ch.  xiv.). 

Vers.  1,  2. — ^And  Job  answered  and  said. 
No  donbt  but  ye  are  the  people.  Bitterly 
ironical.  Ye  are  those  to  whom  alone  it  be- 
longs to  speak — the  only  "people"  to  whom 
attention  is  due.  And  wisdom  shall  die  with 
you.  "At  your  death,"  i.e.,  "all  wisdom 
will  have  fled  the  earth;  there  will  be  no 
one  left  who  knows  ftuy thing."  At  least, 
no  doubt,  you  think  so. 

Ver.  8, — But  I  have  oudmstanding  as  weU 


as  yon.  "  1,  however,  claim  to  hare  Jnst  a« 
much  understanding  [literally,  'heart']  as 
you,  and  to  be  just  as  well  entitled  to  speak, 
and  to  claim  attention ; "  sinoe  I  am  not 
inferior  to  you.  "  I  am  not  oonscioaa,"  *.«., 
"of  any  inferiority  to  you,  intelleotnal  or 
moral.  I  do  not  fall  below  yon  in  either 
respect."  Yea,  who  knoweth  not  snoh  things 
as  these  1  "  Not,"  Job  means  to  say,  "  that 
much  understanding  is  necessary  in  such  a 
case  as  this ;  any  man  of  common  intelli- 
gence can  form  a  correct  judgment  on  the 
point  in  dispute  between  ns."  The  special 
point,  in  Job's  mind,  seems  to  be  God's 
complete  mastery  over  the  world,  and  abso- 
lute control  over  all  that  takes  place  in  it 
(see  the  introductory  paragraph). 

Ver.  4. — I  am  as  one  mocked  of  his  neigh- 
bour. You  have  accused  me  of  mockery 
(oh.  xi.  8) ;  but  it  is  I  that  have  been  mockid 
of  you.  The  allusion  is  prdbably  to  oh.  xi. 
2,  3, 11, 12,  and  20.  Who  calleth  upon  God, 
and  he  answereth  him.  You  mock  me, 
though  I  have  always  clung  to  religion, 
liave  called  upon  God  in  prayer,  and  from 
time  to  time  had  my  prayers  answered  by 
Inm.  Thus  it  is  the  just  upright  man  that 
IS  laughed  to  scorn. 

Ver.  S.— He  that  is  ready  to  slip  with  his 
feet  18  as  a  lamp  despised  in  the  thought  of 
him  that  is  at  ease ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised 
Version,  In  the  thought «/ kim  that  itat  tai« 


OH.  xn.  1 — 25.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


209 


(here  {$  eontemplfor  miifortune;  it  (i-s.  con- 
tempt) is  ready  for  (hem  whoee  foot  lUppeth. 
The  meaning  is,  "  I  am  despised  and  sooined 
by  you  who  sit  at  ease,  because  my  foot  has 
slipped,  and  I  have  fallen  into  misfoituno." 

Ver.  6. — The  tabernaoles  of  robbers  pros- 
per. Having  set  at  rest  the  personal  ques- 
tion between  himself  and  his  friends.  Job 
reverts  to  hia  main  aigiiraeut,  and  maintains 
that,  the  whole  course  of  mundane  events 
being  under  God's  governance,  all  the  re- 
sults are  to  be  attributed  to  him,  and  among 
them  both  the  prosperity  of  tlie  wicked,  and, 
by  parity  of  reasoning,  the  sulferings  of  the 
righteous.  And  they  that  provoke  God  are 
secure  (comp,  ch.  is.  24 ;  x.  3).  Into  whose 
hand  God  bringath  abundantly.  So  both 
the  Authorized  and  the  Revised  Versions ; 
but  recent  critics  mostly  render,  "  who  bring 
their  God  in  their  hand,"  i.e.  "wlio  regard 
their  own  right  hand  as  their  God  "  (comp. 
Virgil, '  JSn.,'  x.  773, "  Dextra  milii  Deus  ") 

Ver.  7. — But  ask  now  the  beasts,  and  they 
shall  teaoh  thee.  Job  here  begins  his  review 
of  all  creation,  to  show  that  God  has  the 
absolute  direction  of  it.  The  order  of  (1) 
beasts,  (2)  birds,  (3)  fishes,  is  (hat  of  dignity 
(comp.  Gen.  ix.  2;  Ps.  viii.  7,  8).  Joli 
maintains  that,  if  appeal  were  made  to  the 
animal  creation,  and  tiiey  were  asked  tlieir 
position  with  respect  to  God,  tliey  would 
with  one  voice  proclaim  him  tlieir  absolute 
Buler  and  Director.  And  the  fowls  of  the 
air,  and  they  shall  tell  thee.  The  instincts 
of  birds,  their  periodical  migrations,  their 
inherited  habits,  are  as  wonderful  as  any- 
thing in  the  Divine  economy  of  the  universe, 
and  as  much  imply  God's  continually  direct- 
um hand. 

Ver.  8. — Or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it 
shall  teach  thee.  If  the  material  earth  be 
intended,  the  appeal  ninst  be  to  its  orderly 
course,  its  summers  and  winters,  its  seed- 
time and  harvest,  its  former  and  latter  rains, 
its  constant  productivity,  which,  no  less 
than  animal  instincts,  speak  of  a  single 
ruling  power  directing  and  ordering  all 
things.  If  the  creeping  ihings  of  the  earth, 
the  reptile  creation,  be  meant,  then  the  arpfu- 
ment  is  merely  an  expiiiision  of  that  in  the 
preceding  verse.  The  instincts  of  reptiles 
are  to  be  ascribed,  no  less  than  those  of  beasts 
and  birds,  to  the  constant  superintending 
action  and  providence  of  the  Almighty.  And 
the  Sshes  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto  thee. 
The  testimony  will  be  unanimous — beasts, 
birds,  reptiles,  and  fishes  will  unite  in  it. 

Ver.  9. — Who  knoweth  not  in  all  these ; 
or,  hy  all  these ;  i.e.  by  all  these  instances. 
That  the  hand  of  the  lord  hath  wrought 
this?  literally,  the  hand  of  Jehovah.  The 
name  "  Jehovah  "  does  not  occur  elsewhere 
in  the  dialogue,  though  it  is  employed 
freciueiitly  iu  the  historical  sections  (oh.  i. 

JOB. 


6—12,  21  ;  H.  1—7:  xxxviii.  1;  xl.  1,8.6; 
xlii.  1 ,  7 — 12).  The  writer  probably  regards 
the  name  as  unfamiliar,  if  not  unknown,  to 
•Job's  neighbours,  and  therefore  as  avoided 
by  him  in  his  discussions  with  them.  But 
here,  for  once,  he  forgets  to  be  consistent 
with  himself.  Outside  Scripture,  the  name 
is  first  found  on  the  Moabite  Stone  (about 
B.C.  800),  where  it  designates  the  God  wor- 
shipped by  the  Israelites  (see  'Eeoords  of 
the  Past,'  vol.  xi.  p.  166, 1.  18). 

Ver.  10. — In  whose  hand  is  the  soul  of 
every  living  thing.  A  brief  summary  of 
wliat  had  been  said  in  vers.  7,  8,  to  which 
is  now  appended  the  further  statement,  that 
ill  God's  lianil — wholly  dependent  on  him — 
is  the  entire  race  of  mankind  also.  And  the 
breath  of  all  mankind;  literally,  and  the 
spirit  of  all  flesh  of  man. 

Ver.  11.— Doth  not  the  ear  try  words  1  and 
the  mouth  taste  his  meat?  rather,  as  (he 
palate  tastelh  its  meati  (see  the  Bevised 
Version).  In  other  words,  "  Is  it  not  as 
much  the  business  of  the  ear  to  discriminate 
between  wise  and  unwise  words,  as  of  the 
palate  to  determine  bttween  pleasant  and 
unpleasant  tastes?"  The  bearing  of  the 
verse  on  the  general  argument  is  not 
clear. 

Ver.  12. — With  the  ancient  is  wisdom; 
and  in  length  of  days  understanding.  Men 
get  their  wisdom  gradually  and  painfully  by 
much  experience  during  a  luug  stretch  of 
time,  so  that  itis  not  until  they  are  "ancient" 
that  we  can  call  them  wise  or  credit  them 
with  "  understamling."  But  with  God  the 
case  is  wholly  dillerent. 

Ver.  13. — With  him  is  wisdom  and  strength. 
With  God  wisdom  and  strengtii  dwell  essen- 
tially. He  is  nut  wiser  or  strimger  at  one 
time  than  at  another.  Time  and  experience 
add  nothin<^  to  the  perfection  of  his  attri- 
butes, which  are  unchangeable.  Such  wis- 
dom infinitely  transcends  any  tn  which  man 
can  attain,  and  therefore  is  dmibtless  tlie 
wisdom  whereby  the  world  is  i;overned.  Ha 
hath  counsel  and  understanding.  God  lias 
these  qualities  as  liis  own.  They  are  not 
acquired  or  imparted,  but  belong  to  him, 
necessarily  and  always. 

Ver.  14. — Behold,  he  breaketh  down,  and 
it  cannot  be  built  again.  Professor  Lee 
thinks  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  cities  of 
the  plain  (Gen.  xix.  24 — 29).  But  tlie  senti- 
ment is  so  general,  that  we  may  well  doubt 
if  particular  instances  were  in  Job's  mind. 
At  any  rate,  the  destructive  agencies  of 
nature  must  be  as  much  included  as  any 
supernatural  acts.  He  shutteth  up  a  man 
(comp.  ch.  xi.  10).  God  "shuts  up"  men 
when  he  hedges  them  in  with  calamities  or 
other  circumstances,  which  'take  away  from 
tliem  all  freedom  of  action  (oli.  iii,  23;  xix 
8).     When  he  does  this,  the  result  follows 


210 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[cH.  xn.  1—25. 


Tlieia  can  be  no  opening.    No  other  power 
can  give  release. 

Ver.  15.— Behold,  he  withholdeth  the 
waters,  and  they  dry  up.  God,  at  hia  plea- 
sure, causes  great  droughts,  which  are 
among  the  worst  calamities  that  can  happen. 
He  withholds  the  blessed  rain  from  heaven 
(Deut.  xl.  17;  1  Kings  viii.  35;  xvli.  1), 
and  the  springs  shrink,  and  the  rivers  dry 
up,  and  a  firaitful  land  is  turned  into  a 
desert,  and  famine  stalks  through  the  land, 
and  men  perish  by  thousands.  Also  he 
sendeth  them  out,  and  they  overturn  the 
earth ;  i.e.  he  causes  floods  and  inundations. 
Once  upon  a  time  he  overwhelmed  the  whole 
earth,  and  destroyed  almost  the  entire  race  of 
mankind,  by  a  deluge  of  an  extraordinary 
character,  which  so  fixed  itself  in  the  human 
consciousness,  that  traces  of  it  are  to  be 
found  in  the  traditions  of  almost  all  the 
various  races  of  men.  But,  beside  this  great 
occasion,  he  also  in  ten  thousand  other  cases, 
causes,  by  means  of  floods,  tremendous  ruin 
and  devastation,  sweeping  away  crops  and 
cattle,  and  even  villages  and  cities,  some- 
times even  "overturning  the  earth,"  causing 
lakes  to  burst,  rivers  to  change  their  course, 
rast  tracts  of  land  to  be  permanently  sub- 
merged, and  the  contour  of  coasts  to  be 
altered. 

Ver.  16. — With  him  is  strength  and  wis- 
dom; rather  (as  in  the  Eevised  Version), 
vnth  him  it  strength  and  effectual  working. 
God  has  not  only  the  wisdom  to  design  the 
course  of  events  (ver.  13),  but  the  power  and 
ability  to  carry  out  all  that  he  designs.  The 
deceived  and  the  deceiver  are  his.  Not  only 
does  God  rule  the  course  of  external  nature, 
but  also  the  doings  of  men.  "  Shall  there 
be  evil  in  a  city,  and  shall  not  he  have  done 
it  ?  "  (Amos  iii.  6)  He  allows  some  to  de- 
ceive, and  others  to  be  deceived.  Moral  evil 
is  thus  under  bis  control,  and,  in  a  certain 
eense,  may  be  called  his  doing.  But  it 
behoves  men,  when  they  approach  such 
great  mysteries,  to  be  very  cautious  and 
wary  in  their  speech.  Job  touches  with 
somewhat  too  bold  a  hand  the  deepest 
problems  of  the  universe. 

Ver.  17. — He  leadeth  counsellors  away 
spoiled.  The  wise  of  the  earth  cannot  re- 
sist or  escape  him;  he  frustrates  their  de- 
signs and  overthrows  them,  and,  as  it  were, 
leads  them  away  captive.  And  maketh  the 
judges  fools ;  rather,  and  judges  malteth  he 
fools.  There  is  no  article,  and  no  particular 
judges  are  referred  to  (comp.  Isa.  xliv.  25). 
Ver.  18.— He  looseth  the  bond  of  kings, 
and  girdeth  their  loins  with  a  girdle.  This 
may  either  mean  that  God  at  his  pleasure 
both  looses  kings  from  captivity,  and  also 
binds  them  with  a  cord  and  causes  them 
to  be  carried  away  captive ;  or  that  he  looses 
tb«  authority  which  kings  have  over  their 


subjects,  and  then  lets  them  be  carried  away 
captive  by  their  enemies.  The  latter  is 
perhaps  the  more  probable  sense. 

Ver.  19. — He  leadeth  princes  away  spoiled ; 
rather,  pnesfa  (o':n3),  as  in  the  Eevised  Ver- 
sion. This  is  the  only  mention  of  "  priests" 
in  the  Book  of  Job,  and  a  priest-caste,  such 
as  that  of  Egypt  or  of  Israel,  can  scarcely 
be  meant.  The  priests  are  placed  among 
the  mighty,  on  a  par  with  kings  (ver.  18), 
princes  (ver.  21),  and  "the  strong"  (ver. 
21).  This  context  makes  us  naturally  think 
of  those  priest-kings  whom  we  hear  of  in 
the  olden  times,  such  as  were  Melchizedek 
(Gen.  xix.  18—20)  and  Jethro  (Bxod.  iii. 
1 ;  xviii.  1—27),  and  the  Egyptian  kings 
of  the  twenty-first  dynasty  ('  History  of 
Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  408—415),  as'l 
Ethbaal  of  Tyre  ('History  of  Phoenicia,' 
p.  435),  and  Sethos  (Herod.,  ii  141),  and 
others.  Job's  allusion  is  probably  to  persons 
of  this  exalted  class,  who  no  doubt  were 
sometinies  defeated  and  dragged  into  cap- 
tivity, like  other  rulers  and  governors.  And 
overthroweth  the  mighty.  Schultens  under- 
stands hj ethanim  (D'm'N)  "great  teachers;" 
but  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  is 
"strong"  or  "mighty"  (see  ch.  xxxiu.  19; 
Micah  vi  2). 

Ver.  20. — He  removeth  away  the  speech 
of  the  trusty.  God  deprives  trusted  states- 
men of  their  eloquence,  destroys  their  repu- 
tation aud  their  authority.  And  taketh 
away  the  understanding  of  the  aged.  He 
turns  wise  and  aged  men  into  fools  and 
drivellers,  weakening  their  judgments  and 
reducing  them  to  imbeoUity. 

Ver.  21. — He  poureth  contempt  upon 
princes ;  literally,  upon  the  munificent.  But 
the  word  has  often  the  more  generic  sense 
of  «  princes,"  "  great  men  "  (see  1  Sam.  ii. 
8 ;  Prov.  xxv.  7,  etc.).  And  weakeneth  the 
strength  of  the  mighty;  literally,  looseth  the 
belt  of  the  strong.  But  our  version  suffi- 
ciently expresses  the  meaning. 

Ver.  22.— He  disoovereth  deep  things  out 
of  darkness.  By  "deep  things"  are  pro- 
bably meant  the  "deeply  laid  schemes" 
which  wicked  men  concoct  in  darkness  (or 
secrecy).  These  God  often  "discovers,"  or 
causes  to  be  laid  bare.  English  history  can 
point  to  such  a  case  in  the  discovery  of  the 
famous  "Gunpowder  Plot"  in  the  second 
year  of  King  James  L  And  bringeth  out  to 
light  the  shadow  of  death.  There  is  nothing 
Secret  which  God  cannot,  if  he  choose,  re- 
veal ;  nor  is  there  anything  hid  which  he 
cannot  make  known.  Dark,  murderous 
schemes,  on  which  lies  a  shadow  as  of  death, 
which  men  plan  in  secret,  and  keep  hidden 
in  their  inmost  thoughts,  he  can,  and  often 
does,  cause  to  be  brought  to  light  and  made 
manifest  in  the  sight  of  all.  Every  such 
scheme,    however   carefully   guarded    and 


OH.  xii.  1 — 25.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


211 


concealed,  shall  be  one  day  made  known 
(Matt.  X.  26).  Many  are  laid  bare  even  in 
the  lifetime  of  their  devisers. 

Ver.  23. — He  inoreaseth  the  nations,  and 
destroyeth  them.  God's  providence  concerns 
itself,  not  only  with  the  fate  of  individual 
men,  but  also  witii  that  of  nations.  With 
Israel, his  "peculiar  people"  (Deut.  xiv.  2), 
he  especially  couoerned  himself,  but  not 
with  Israel  only.  Babylon,  Assyria,  Egypt, 
Elam,  Edoiii,  Amnion,  Moab,  were  likewise 
objects  of  his  attention,  of  his  guidance,  of 
bis  chiistening  hand,  of  his  avenging  roil. 
Particular  nations  were  consigned  by  God 
to  the  charge  of  particular  angels  (Dan.  x. 
13,  20).  At  his  pleasure  he  can  "  increase  " 
nations  by  blessing  them  with  extraordinary 
fecundity  (Exod.  i.  7 — 12),  or  "destroy" 
them  by  internal  decay,  by  civil  wars,  or 
by  the  swords  of  their  neighbours.  He 
enlargeth  the  nations,  and  straiteneth  them 
again ;  i.e.  "  enlarges  their  bounds,  or  dimi- 
nishes tbem."  In  Western  Asia,  where  Job 
lived,  empires  were  continually  starting  up, 
growing  and  expanding,  increasing  to  vast 


dimensions,  and  then  after  a  while  shrinking 
back  again  to  their  original  narrow  limits. 
Egypt,  Elam,  Babylon,  and  the  Hittite  na- 
tion were  cases  in  point. 

Ver.  24. — He  taketh  away  the  heart  of 
the  chief  of  the  people  of  the  earth ;  rather, 
the  chiefs  of  the  people,  or  "  the  popular  chief- 
tains "  (Lee).  He  deprives  these  "  chiefs  " 
of  their  wisdom  or  courage,  or  both,  and 
thus  brings  down  the  nations  under  their 
governance.  And  causeth  them  to  wander 
in  a  wilderness  where  there  is  no  way; 
rather,  in  a  ehaoe — one  of  the  words  used 
in  Gen.  1.  2  to  describe  the  condition  of  the 
material  universe  before  God  had  ordered 
and  arranged  it.  The  chieftains,  deprived 
of  their  "  lieart,"  are  so  confused  and  per- 
plexed that  they  do  not  know  what  to  do, 
or  which  way  to  turn. 

Ver.  25. — They  grope  in  the  dark  without 
light  (comp.  ch.  V.  14  and  Deut.  xxviii.  29). 
And  he  maketh  them  to  stagger  like  a 
drunken  man  ;  liti;rally,  to  wander — to  pur- 
sue a  devious  cowse  iugtead  of  a  straight 
one. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Job  to  Zopkar ;  1.  The  conduct  of  the  friends  criticized.  1.  Abbosant 
ASSUMPTION  EBPELLED,  1.  With  sarcastic  admiration.  "No  doubt  but  ye  are  the 
people,  and  wisdom  shall  die  with  you."  Irony  is  a  weapon  difficult  and  dangerous  to 
use,  apt  to  wound  the  hand  that  wields  it  as  well  as  the  heart  that  feels  it,  and  seldom 
becoming  on  the  lips  of  any,  least  of  all  of  good  men.  Admirably  adapted  to  sting 
and  lacerate,  it  rare!  y  improves  or  conciliates  those  against  whom  it  is  directed.  Yet, 
not  being  absolutely  rinful,  it  may  be  employed  with  success  against  arro^iant  pretension 
and  haughty  assumption.  Elijah  on  Mount  Carmel  (1  Kings  xviii.  27),  and  St.  Paul  in 
his  Epistles  (Gal.  v.  15;  Phil.  iii.  2;  1  Cor.  iv.  8),  used  satire  with  remarkable  effect. 
Job  also  in  the  present  instance  may  be  held  as  justified  in  retorting  on  Zophar  and  his 
colleagues,  whose  conduct  richly  deserved  castigation.  2.  With  vehement  self-assertion. 
"But  I  have  understanding  [literally,  'a  heart']  as  well  as  you;  I  am  not  inferior  to 
you  [literally,  'I  fall  not  beneath  or  behind  you']."  Modesty,  which  at  all  times 
becomes  good  men  (Prov.  xxx.  3;  Dan.  ii.  30;  John  i.  27;  2  Oor.  iii.  5),  and  is 
specially  enjoined  upon  God's  people  (Ps.  xxv.  9;  Isa,  Ixvi.  2;  Mioah  vi.  8),  and 
Christ's  followers  (Matt.  v.  3;  xviil.  4;  Rom.  xii.  3;  Col.  iii.  12;  1  Pet.  v.  5),  need 
not  prevent  a  frank  self-assertion  wiisn  one  is,  like  Job,  unjustly  aspersed.  It  is 
sometimes  false  humility  to  sit  with  uncomplaining  silence  beneath  the  tongue  of 
slander.  Provided  one  indulge  not  in  extravagant  assertion,  and  assume  not  the  credit 
of  gifts  and  graces  which  have  descended  from  above,  a  man  may  honestly  and  even 
boldly  maintain  his  intellectual  and  moral  worth,  should  these  appear  to  be  maliciously 
traduced.  Job  might  have  safely  claimed  to  surpass  his  antagonists  in  mental 
capacity  and  acquaintance  with  the  culture  of  the  day,  in  ripe  personal  experience 
and  ability  to  interpret  the  ways  of  God  to  man;  but  with  much  modesty  he  only 
aspires  to  be  their  equal,  to  have  a  heart  (Anglice,  a  head,  a  brain)  as  well  as  they,  and 
not  to  be  the  shalluw-pated  witling,  or  wild  ass's  colt,  they  insinuated.  3.  With  scornful 
contempt.  "Yea,  who  knoweth  not  such  things  as  these?"  The  sublime  wisdom 
with  which  they  sought  to  overwhelm  him  was  the  veriest  commonplace ;  their  much- 
paraded  teaching  but  a  string  of  threadbare  maxims,  "familiar  in  the  mouth  as 
household  words,"  of  which  he  himself  could  supply  an  endless  series  of  examples,  as 
beautiful  and  more  correct — which  he  does  in  the  present  chapter.  It  ii  a  jugt  ground 
of  complaint  when  old  and  hackneyed  geutimeuts  in  moral*  or  religion,  science  ui 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  [oh.  xii.  1—25. 

philosopliy,  are  served  up  with  the  air  of,  and  made  to  do  duty  for,  original  discoveries. 
Yet  it  is  proper  to  remember  that  trutli  once  appreliended  by  the  mind  does  not 
deteriorate,  or  become  less  valuable,  by  age.  Beaitles,  it  is  of  more  consequence  that  a 
doctrine  should  be  true  than  that  it  should  be  new.  Still,  new  truth,  or,  what  is  often 
mistaken  for  such,  new  aspects  of  old  truths,  poissess  a  singular  fascination  for  vijjorous 
and  independent  minds. 

11.  Unkind  BiinAviouB  kesbnted.  1.  Its  character  defcrihed.  "I  am  as  one 
mocked  of  his  iici.;libour ; "  "  The  just  upright  man  is  laughed  to  scorn,"  By  serving 
up  such  trite  platitudes  as  Job  had  listened  to,  they  had  simply  been  converting  him 
and  his  calamities  into  a  laughing-stock,  b -cause  they  saw  him  standing  on  the  sharp 
edge  of  ruin,  as  a  traveller  might  cast  away  "  a  despised  lamp,"  of  which  he  had  no 
further  need.  To  make  a  man  the  subject  of  laiigliter,  the  butt  of  ridicule,  the  object  of 
scornful  wit  on  account  of  either  personal  appearance  (Gen.  xxi.  9),  bodily  iafirmity 
(2  Kings  ii.  23),  providential  adversity  (Lam.  ii.  15),  or  religious  character  (Ps.  xlil,  3), 
is  severely  reprehended  by  the  Word  of  God  (I'rov.  iii.  34;  xvii.  5;  xxx.  17),  Yet 
good  men  may  expect  to  receive  such  treatment  at  the  hands  of  worldly  unbelieverg 
and  nominal  professors,  since  the  like  was  meted  out  to  Christ  (Matt,  xxvi,  67,  68 ; 
xxvii.  27 — 31 ;  Luke  xxiii.  35),  David  (Ps.  xxii.  7  ;  xxxv.  16;  Ixix.  11, 12),  and  the 
apostles  (Acts  ii.  13),  to  Old  Testament  saints  (2  Chron.  xxx.  10;  1  Kings  xxii.  24; 
lleb.  xi.  36),  and  New  Testament  preachers  (Acts  xvii.  32)  and  disciples  (Jude  18). 

2.  Its  aggraoations  recited.  These  wore  twofold.  (1)  Job,  who  had  been  subjected 
to  this  scornful  laceration,  had  been  (a)  a  good  man,  personally  just  and  upright,  and 
therefore  such  a  one  as  saints  should  not  have  ridiculed ;  (6)  one  who  had  enjoyed 
confidential  communications  with  Heaven — a  man  of  prayer,  who  had  called  upon  God 
and  been  answered  by  him — and  therefore  not  a  person  to  be  lightly  spoken  of  or  to; 
and  (c)  a  miserable  sufferer  overtaken  by  adversity — one  wlio  was  "  ready  t  >  slip  with 
his  feet,"  and  on  that  account  all  the  more  requiring  to  be  comforted  instead  vi  scorned. 
(2)  They  who  had  scorned  him  bad  been  (a)  -his  mighbours,  his  friends,  at  whose 
hands  he  should  i  ather  have  received  pity  (eh.  vi.  14) ;  and  (6)  were  themselves  in  the 
enjoyment  of  ease,  wliich  might  have  kindled  in  their  flinty  bosoms  a  spark  of 
sympathy  for  his  misfortunes.  3.  Its  extenuation  stated.  It  was  common.  "Contempt 
for  the  weak,  who  totter  and  fall  on  slippery  paths,  is  the  habitual  impulse  of  those 
who  stand  firmly  on  the  firm  ground  of  security,  and  see  no  reason  why  other  men 
should  not  be  as  vigorous  and  'resolute'  and  prosperous  as  themselves"  (Cox).  The 
world  worships  success ;  I'adure  is  its  uni^ardonable  sin.  When  fortune  smiles  upon  a 
person  he  is  known  of  all ;  when  adversity  engulfs  him,  he  is  forgotten  by  all  (ch.  viii. 
18).  Eecall  the  langunge  of  Buckingham  on  his  way  to  execution:  "This  from  a 
dying  man  receive  as  certain,"  etc.  ('King  Henry  VIII,'  act  ii.  sc.  1);  and  Mark 
Antony's  address  over  Caesar's  dead  body:  "But  yesterday,"  etc,  ('Julius  Caesar,' 
act  iii.  sc.  2). 

Learn :  1.  If  adversity  has  its  uses,  prosperity  has  its  dangers,  being  prone  to 
engender  self-conceit,  arrogance,  lack  of  sympathy,  and  contempt  for  others,  2. 
Wisdom  is  the  noblest  excellence  of  man ;  yet  of  wisdom  no  man  enjoys  a  monopoly. 

3.  It  is  no  dispaiagement  to  truth  to  be  styled  commonplace,  since  precisely  as  it 
becomes  commonplace  does  it  accomplish  its  mission.  4.  As  prayer  will  not  always 
hinder  peri-eoution,  so  neither  should  persecution  by  either  friends  or  foes  be  allowed 
to  extinguish  prayer.  5.  Few  faults  of  men  are  so  completely  bad  that  no  sort  of 
extenuation  can  be  discovered  for  them. 

Vers.  5 — 13. — Joh  to  Zophar :  2.  Hie  dogma  of  the  friends  demUshed.  I.  By  the 
FACTS  OF  EXPERIENCE.  1.  The  adverse  fortunes  of  the  good.  Exemplified  in  Job's 
own  case,  which  showed  (1)  that  a  man  might  be  upright  and  yet  fall  into  misfortune; 
(2)  that  a  person  enjoying  confidential  relations  with  Heaven,  calling  upon  God  and 
receiving  answers,  might  sink  so  low  in  the  mire  of  adversity  as  to  become  a  scorn  and 
a  byword,  and  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  infidel  and  outcast;  and  (3)  that  the  largest 
aud  heaviest  portion  of  a  good  man's  afliiction  might  even  come  from  the  good  them- 
selves, from  those  who  enjoyed  the  reputation  at  least  of  being  religious,  from  his 
neiuhbours  and  friends,  who  were  themselves  sitting  in  the  sunshine  of  prosperity. 
And  the  entire  veracity  of  these  deductions  is  abundautly  confirmed  by  the  concur- 


ca.in.  1— 2S.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  213 

rent  testimony  of  all  past  ages,  by  the  histories,  e.g.  of  Abel,  of  Joseph,  of  David,  of 
Christ;  while  it  is  sustained  by  the  voice  of  all  contemporary  observation.  2.  The 
■prosperous  fortunes  of  the  lad.  Apt  illustrations  were  at  hand  in  the  seemingly 
unchanging  success  which  waited  on  the  footsteps  of  those  marauding  oaterans  with 
which  Arabia  Deserta  was  overrun.  (1)  As  to  character,  they  were  notoriously  wicked, 
in  fact,  flagrantly  immoral,  outrageously  ungodly.  They  were:  (a)  Bobbers  of  men, 
violent  and  rapacious  plunderers,  who  put  might  for  right,  "  men  of  the  arm  "  (ch.  xxii. 
8),  acting  on 

"  The  good  old  rule,  the  simple  plan, 
That  they  should  take  who  have  the  power, 
And  they  sliould  keep  who  can ; " 

like  the  Nephilim  and  Gibborim  of  Noah's  day,  who  deluged  the  world  wiih  iiimio- 
rality  and  violence  (Gen.  vi.  4).  (6)  Defiers  of  God,  impudeLit  and  aiidaoiuus  sinners 
who  openly  and  presumptuously  tiampled  on  Heaven's  laws  in  order  to  obtdin  their 
unhallowed  will,  like  the  tower-builders  of  Babel  (Gen.  xi.  4),  like  Pharaoh  (Exod.  v.  2), 
like  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xviii.  19 — 35),  like  wicked  men  genemlly,  whose  foolish 
tongues  "talk  loflily,"  and  "set  themselves  against  the  heavens,"  and  ".walk  through 
the  earth"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  8,  9),  and  whooe  carnal  minds,  inflamed  with  enmity  against 
God  (Rum.  viii.  7),  conspire  against  the  Lord  and  his  Anointed  (Ps.  ii.  2).  (o)  Wor- 
shippers of  the  sword,  who  had  no  deity  but  the  dagger  which  they  carried  in  their 
hands,  as  the  glutton  lias  no  god  but  his  belly  (Phil.  iii.  ly);  who,  like  Lamech,  made 
ballads  to  their  rajiiers  (Gen.  iv.  23);  like  Laban,  regarded  brute  force  as  the  supreme 
power  of  the  world  (Gen.  xxxi.  29) ;  and  like  the  ancient  Chaldeans,  took  military 
strength  for  their  god  (Hab.  i.  11).  (2)  As  to  fortune,  it  vva.s  as  widely  removed  from 
that  of  th?  virtuous  and  pious  as  it  could  well  be.  (a)  'I'heir  tents  were  peaceful. 
That  is,  their  habitations  were  tranquil,  their  families  were  united  and  numerous; 
their  domestic  felicity  was  deep  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  8 — 11;  Ps.  xvii.  14;  xlix.  tl).  (6)  Their 
persons  were  secure.  Calamity  seldom,  almost  never,  overtook  them.  Winds  and 
hurricanes  that  desolated  the  righteous  left  them  untouched  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  4).  (c)  Their 
baskets  were  full.  Retaining  the  Authorized  Version  (Carey  and  others),  we  under- 
stand Job  to  have  said  that  God  brought  to  them  abundantly  with  his  own  hand,  as  if 
he  had  taken  them  under  his  especial  protection. 

II.  By  the  teachings  of  THfi  CREATURES.  1.  2'Ae  teachers.  The  entire  circle  of 
animate  and  inanimate  creation — everything  on  the  earth,  in  the  air,  and  in  the  sea. 
The  natural  a:id  the  supernatural,  the  visible  and  the  invisible,  the  material  and  the 
spiritual,  the  mundane  and  the  hi  avenly,  are  in  God's  universe  so  indissolubly  linked 
together,  and  so  wisely  adjusted  to  each  other,  that  the  one  is  a  picture  or  reflection  of 
the  other,  the  earthly  and  material  an  emlilem  of  the  heavenly  and  spiritual.  Hence 
all  nature  is  full  of  subtle  analogies  to  things  and  thoughts  existing  in  the  realms  above 
it — the  intellectual,  the  moral,  the  spiritual,  the  human,  the  celestiaL  Hence  the  wise 
student  of  nature  may  find 

"  Tongues  in  trees,  books  in  the  running  brooks, 
Beiiiions  in  stones,  and  good  in  everything." 

('  As  You  Like  It,'  act  ii.  bo.  1 .) 

Hence  man  is  frequently  counselled  by  Scripture  writers  to  learn  wisdom  from  the 
creatures.  "  Solomon  sends  us  to  the  ant ;  Agur  to  the  coney,  the  locust,  the  spider  ; 
Isaiah  to  the  ox  and  the  ass ;  Jeremiah  to  the  stork,  the  turtle-dove,  the  crane,  the 
swallow ;  and  the  heavenly  Teacher  himself  to  the  fowls  of  the  air  "  (Thomas).  Of  «ll 
teachers  Christ  stood  indisputably  first  in  interpreting  the  hidden  thoughts  of  nature. 
2.  ITie  teaching.  While  the  creatures  say  much  to  man  concerning  God,  his  almighty 
power,  unerring  wisdom,  unwearied  goodness,  and  ever-watchful  care;  and  concerning 
duty,  reminding  man  that  he,  like  them,  Should  act  in  harmony  with  the  laws  of  his 
nature,  and  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  his  Creator  (Ps.  cxlviii.  7—13),  they  are  here 
introduced  as  instructors  on  the  subject  of  Divine  providence.  Among  the  lower 
creatures  phenomena  exist  analogous  to  those  above  described  as  occurring  in  the  higher 
world  of  men.  How  often  is  the  harmless  lamb  devoured  by  the  wolf,  the  kid  by  the 
panther,  the  gazelle  by  the  tiger,  the  patient  ass  by  the  ferocious  lion  !  Are  not  the 
eagle,  the  vulture,  and  the  hawk  but  as  rapacious  robbers  swooping  down  upon  the  dove 


2U  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xn.  1—25 

the  Bparrow,  and  the  robin?  Can  greater  plunderers  be  found  than  the  vast  aquatic 
monsters,  the  whale,  the  shark,  and  the  crocodile,  which  roam  through  the  deep, 
striking  terror  among  the  lesser  tribes  that  haunt  the  seas  ?  And  yet  "  who  knoweth 
not  in  all  these  that  the  hand  of  Jehovah  hath  wrought  this,  in  whose  hand  is  the  soTil 
of  every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind  ?  '  Well,  if  these  things  occur 
under  God's  government  among  the  lower  creatures,  why,  asks  Job,  might  similar 
occurrences  not  transpire  under  the  same  government  among  men  ? 

III.  By  the  sayings  of  the  fathers.  1.  The  ground  of  their  authority.  The 
weight  attached  by  Zophar,  and  indeed  allowed  by  Job  himself,  to  the  maxims  of 
antiquity,  was  derived  from  the  fact  that  they  were  the  concentrated  wisdom  of  ante- 
cedent ages,  which  had  been  carefully  elaborated  by  long-lived  sa^es  as  the  result  of 
their  individual  and  collective  experience  (vide  homiletics  on  ch.  viii.  8 — 22).  2.  The 
limit  of  their  authority.  Granting  that  these  sagacious  apothegms  and  profound 
parables  were  fairly  entitled  to  be  heard.  Job  contended  that  they  were  not  possessed 
of  absolute  authority.  They  were  not  to  be  accepted  with  unquestioning  submission, 
but  with  wise  and  intelligent  discrimination,  the  ear,  and  of  course  "the  judgment 
which  sits  behind  the  ear,"  having  been  given  to  try  words  as  the  palate  does  food. 
And  even  at  the  best  they  were  only  human  judgments,  the  thoughts  of  long-lived 
patriarchs,  of  much-observing  as  well  as  deep-reflecting  sages,  but  not  at  all  to  be 
compared  with  the  thoughts  of  him  with  whom  is  "  wisdom  and  strength,  counsel  and 
understanding  "  (ver.  13).  They  were,  therefore,  not  to  be  accepted  as  final  interpreta- 
tions of  the  facts  of  providence,  which  were  the  concrete  expressions  of  eternal  Wisdom, 
as  much  as  these  traditional  maxims  were  the  abstract  utterances  of  patriarchal  wisdom. 
Man's  thoughts  never  can  be  more  than  a  finite  projection,  or  contracted  image,  of 
God's.  Hence  the  danger  of  setting  man's  thoughts  in  place  of  God's,  investing  con- 
fessions, catechisms,  and  symbolical  books  generally  with  the  authority  which  belongs 
only  to  the  supreme  revelation  of  God's  mind.  Hence  also  the  folly  of  attempting  to 
crush  the  boundless  realrn  of  God's  truth  into  the  narrow  dimensions  of  any  formula, 
however  beautiful  or  well-arranged,  however  strictly  scientific  or  profoundly  philosophic. 
The  fundamental  principles  of  ail  intelligent  Protestantism  may  be  summed  up  in 
two  thoughts :  man's  formulas  are  not  the  exact  measure  of  God's  revelations ;  "  prove 
all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  3.  The  verdict  of  their  authority.  If 
rightly  discriminated,  the  voice  of  patriarchal  vrisdom  will  be  found  to  be  on  Job's  side ; 
in  support  of  which  assertion  he  proceeds,  in  the  next  section,  to  recite  other  sayings 
of  antiquity,  which  certainly  give  countenance  rather  to  his  than  to  their  view  of  God's 
providential  government  of  the  world  and  mankind.  So  perhaps  it  wiU  be  generally 
found  that  the  best  thoughts  of  men  in  all  ages  harmonize  with  the  thoughts  of  God 
as  expressed  both  in  the  Bible  and  in  providence. 

Learn:  1.  "He  that  is  first  in  his  own  cause  seemeth  right;  but  his  neighbour 
cometh  and  searcheth  him;"  2.  "A  half-truth  is  sometimes  as  dangerous  as  a  whole 
lie."  3.  "  In  contemplation  of  created  things,  by  stejis  we  may  ascend  to  God."  4.  It 
is  not  true  that  "  man  is  the  measure  of  the  universe."  5.  "  There  are  more  things  in 
heaven  and  earth  than  are  dreamt  of  in  man's  philosophy."  6.  "  That  alone  is  true 
antiquity  which  embraces  the  antiquity  of  the  world,  and  not  that  which  would  refer 
us  back  to  a  period  when  the  world  was  young," 

Vers.  13 — 25. — Job  to  Zophar :  3,  Theprovidence  of  God  described.  I.  As  mFiNiTELT 
WISE  AND  POWERFUL.  "With  God  is  wisdom  and  strength,  he  hath  counsel  and  under- 
standing "  (ver.  13) — a  sentiment  repeated  in  ver.  16.  Of  the  two  attributes  here  men- 
tioned, the  first  is  involved  in  his  supreme  Divinity ;  though  in  the  connection  Job 
seems  to  base  it  on  his  eternal  existence,  as  if  he  meant  to  say,  "  You  affirm  that  in 
length  of  days  is  understanding,  and  I  grant  it ;  but  what  then  must  bo  the  vHsdom  of 
him  who  is  eternal  in  hia  years?"  The  second,  which  is  equally  involved  in  the  con- 
ception of  Godhead,  may  here  be  said  to  rest  upon  the  already  stated  fact  that  ".in  his 
hand  is  the  soul  of  every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind"  (ver.  10).  The 
Creator  of  the  universe  must  be  strong,  and  the  Eternal  Intelligence  must  be  wise. 
Being,  then,  infinitely  wise  and  powerful,  the  like  qualities  must  appear  in  his  handi- 
work. _  As  the  artist  putp  his  conceptions  into  the  painting  which  he  executes,  and 
the  artificer  directs  attention  to  t*>e  work  he  has  fashioned  as  a  proof  of  his  ability ; 


oa,  itu  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOa  215 


so,  reasons  Job,  will  the  providential  government  of  God  be  seen,  when  thoroughly 
examined,  to  reflect  the  matchless  wisdom  of  his  omniscient  mind,  and  attest  the 
measureless  force  of  his  almighty  hand. 

II.  Ab  absolutely  sovereign  and  resistless.  "  Behold,  he  breaketh  down,  and 
it  cannot  be  built  again :  he  shutteth  up  a  man,  and  there  can  be  no  opening"  (ver.  14). 
The  first  may  allude  to  the  destruction  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  and  the  second  to  the 
confusion  of  tongues ;  though  the  reference  may  be  more  general,  to  such  acts  of  destruc- 
tion (and,  by  implication,  of  restoration)  and  of  restraint  (and  again,  by  implication,  o< 
liberation)  as  attest  his  almighty  power.  Illustrations  of  the  former  may  be  found  in 
the  burning  of  Sodom  by  fire ;  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  armies  of  Titus ; 
the  overthrow  of  Babylon  and  Nineveh ;  the  engulfnient  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii 
by  volcanic  agency ;  while  the  shutting  up  of  men  in  prisons  may  be  regarded  as 
having  been  exemplified  in  Joseph  (Gen.  xxxviL  24),  Jeremiah  (Lam.  iii.  53 ;  cf.  Jer. 
xxxviii.  6),  Jonah  (i.  17). 

III.  As  EXTENDINS  TO  NATDBE  AND  MAN.  1.  To  nature.  "  Behold,  he  withholdeth 
the  waters,  and  they  dry  up :  also  he  sendeth  them  out,  and  they  overturn  the  earth  " 
(ver,  15).  Perhaps  exemplified  in  the  first  formation  of  the  dry  land  (Gen.  i.  9),  and 
in  the  Deluge  (Gen.  vii.  11) ;  though  more  probably  pointing  to  the  Divine  agency  as 
the  true  cause  of  drought  (1  Kings  xvii.  1),  and  of  floods  or  destructive  inundations. 
2.  To  man,  "  The  deceived  and  the  deceiver  are  his  "  (ver.  16).  Possibly  alluding  to 
himself  and  his  companions  (1$.  Good),  though  it  is  better  to  give  the  language  a  wider 
reference.  Exemplified  in  Satan  and  man  (ch.  i.  12 ;  Rev.  xx.  3),  the  lying  spirit  and 
Ahab  (1  Kings  xxii.  22),  antichrist  and  unbelievers  (2  Thess.  ii.  11).  The  language 
forcibly  expresses  God's  complete  control  over  all  classes  of  men. 

IV.  As  CONTROLLING  INDIVIDUALS  AND  COMMUNITIES.  1.  Individuals.  (1)  Civic 
rulers.  "He  leadeth  counsellors  away  spoiled  [literally,  'naked,'  i.e.  'stripped  of  their 
ofiicial  robes,  and  of  their  clothes  and  shoes  as  captives  'j,  and  malseth  judges  fools," 
destroying  their  power  and  degrading  their  position  (cf.  Isa.  iii.  2,  4 ;  xl.  23 ;  xliv.  25). 
"He  looseth  the  bond  of  kings, and  girdeth  their  loins  with  a  girdle"  or  cord;  meaning 
either  he  unbinds  their  prisoners,  and  makes  them  prisoners  instead,  or  he  unlooses  the 
jewelled  girdle  of  kings,  the  insignia  of  royalty,  and  ties  their  loins  with  the  cords  of 
servitude.  Illustrations:  Zedekiah,  Napoleon,  etc.  (2)  Ecclesiastical  ofBcers.  "He 
leadeth  princes  [literally,  *  priests ']  away  spoiled  [literally, '  stripped  of  their  robes '], 
and  overthroweth  the  mighty  [or,  'the  long  established' — those  of  great  and  high 
repute  for  sanctity  and  wisdom,  probably  such  priest-princes  as  Melchizedek  and 
Jethro]."  (3)  Eloquent  senators.  "  He  removeth  away  the  speech  [literally, '  the  lip '] 
of  the  trusty,  and  taketh  away  the  understanding  of  the  aged  "  (ver.  20).  So  he  turned 
the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  into  foolishness  (2  Sam.  xv.  31).  (4)  Haughty  nobles.  "He 
poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and  weakeneth  the  strength  of  the  iKighty ; "  literally, 
"  looseth  the  girdle  of  the  strong  '  (ver.  21).  The  girdle  being  the  belt  by  which  the 
garments  were  fastened  prior  to  undertaking  any  violent  exertion,  the  language  expresses 
the  idea  that  it  is  God's  province  either  to  impart  or  to  withhold  the  strength  requisite 
for  any  undertaking  in  which  man  may  engage.  (5)  Intriguing  politicians.  "He  dis- 
covereth  deep  things  out  of  darkness,  and  bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  death  " 
(ver.  22).  While  the  language  may  with  perfect  propriety  be  applied  to  the  power 
possessed  by  God  of  disclosing  truths  which  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  intellect, 
as  e.g,  those  of  revelation,  or  of  bringing  to  light  refcondite  discoveries  in  science  and 
philosophy,  which  are  ever  wrapt  in  impenetrable  darkness  till  he  is  pleased  to  unfold 
them,  the  connection  seems  to  rather  point  to  God's  ability  to  read  the  secret  thoughts 
and  intentions  of  the  human  heart  (Heb.  iv.  12, 13),  and  in  particular  to  detect  and 
expose  "  the  deep  and  desperate  desij^ns  of  traitors,  conspirators,  and  other  state  villains  " 
(Good) ;  as  those,  e.g.  of  Absalom  against  David  (2  Sam.  xv.  6),  and  Haman  against 
the  Jews  (Esth.  iii.  9),  of  Herod  against  Christ  (Matt.  ii.  8),  and  ol'  the  Jews  against 
Paul  (Acts  xxiii.  21),  as  the  Catiline  conspiracy  in  Rome,  and  the  Gunpowder  Plot  in 
England.  2.  Communities.  (1)  National  tendencies.  The  deep  things  out  of  dark- 
ness and  the  discovered  death-shade  may  also  allude  to  "  the  hidden  bents  and  curreatg 
which  slowly  give  shape  to  the  character  and  functions  of  a  nation  or  ever  it  is  aware, 
or  ever  even  its  rulers  are  aware,  of  them ;  that  stream  of  tendency  running  partly 
undwground  for  a  while,  which  silently  carries  us  we  know  not  whither,  we  Imow  not 


21«  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [on.  xn.  1—25, 

how,  and  lands  ns  in  enterprises  and  modes  of  national  activity  alien  and  oppa'^ed  to 
those  towards  which  our  subtlest  politicians  supposed  they  were  guiding  us  '  (Oox). 
(2)  National  movements.  "  He  increaseth  the  nations,  and  destroyeth  them :  he 
enlargeth  the  nations,  and  straiteneth  them  again"  (ver.  23).  The  original  distribution 
of  mankind  into  nations,  and  their  dispersion  over  the  face  of  earth,  although  effected 
in  aocordaace  with  natural  law,  was  directly  the  work  of  God  (Gen.  x..  xi.)-  So  national 
increase  and  i^r.tioaai  iiminution,  national  prosperity  and  national  adveisity,  however 
these  may  seem  to  be  the  result  of  well-known  and  invariably  operating  causes,  are 
traceablu  in  the  last  analysis  to  the  will  and  power  of  God  (Ps.  xxii.  28 ;  xxiv.  1 ;  xlviL 
2,  3 ;  Isa.  xi.  22, 23 ;  Dan.  iv.  17 ;  Acts  xvh.  26).  He  increased  Israel  in  Egypt  (Exoi. 
i.  12),  and  diminished  it  in  the  wilderness  (Numb.  xiv.  29),  advanced  it  to  prosperity 
under  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  6,  11,  14),  and  gave  it  up  to  decay  from  the  time  of  Eeho- 
boam  forward  (1  Kings  xii.  24).  He  enlarged  in  turn  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylonia,  Persia, 
Greece,  Rome,  and  in  turn  straitened  them.  He  ha^  exalted  Britain,  America,  Ger- 
many, but  ho  has  not  rlcprived  himself  of  power  to  bring  them  to  the  dust  again*  (3) 
National  leadi  rs.  "  He  taketh  away  the  heart  of  the  chief  of  the  people  of  the  earth, 
and  causeth  tliem  to  wander  in  a  wilderness  where  there  is  no  way,"  leaving  them  to 
their  own  foolish  and  distracted  counsels,  so  that  "they  grope  in  the  dark  without 
light,"  and  causing  them  "  to  wander  in  a  wilderness  where  thtre  is  no  way"  (vers.  24, 
25).  It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh,  whether  he  be  a  statesman  or  a  ploughman,  to 
direct  his  steps  aright.  They  that  guide  either  themselves  or  others  by  the  light  of 
their  own  understanding  are  like  travellers  who  follow  an  ignis  fatuus  to  their  destruc- 
tion. Hence  no  politician  can  safely  guide  a  state,  unless  God  first  guides  him.  A 
gigantic  intellect,  splendid  eloquence,  prolonged  experience,  the  subtlest  craft,  the  most 
careful  deliberation,  the  rarest  sobriety  of  judgment,  will  not  suffice  for  political  success 
(of  the  highest  kind)  without  the  help  of  Divine  wisdom  and  strength.  Even  a  Solo- 
mon, if  deserted  by  God,  will  begin  to  play  the  fool,  and  a  Samson  to  be  weak  as 
other  men. 

Learn:  1.  To  recognize  God's  hand  in  the  providential  government  of  the  world. 
Habitually  to  do  so  is  no  inconsiderable  sign  of  a  gracious  heart.  2.  Not  to  look  for  an 
exact  distribution  of  rewards  and  punishments  on  earth.  Ic  is  not  included  in  the 
Divine  programme  that  the  justice  of  God's  procedure  here  shall  always  be  percepiible 
by  those  to  whom  it  relates.  3.  To  rest  assured  notwithstanding  that  God  doeth  all 
things  well.  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  4.  To  reverently  bow 
before  the  providential  dispensations  of  hira  who  reigns  in  heaven  and  rules  on  eaitli. 
Though  his  will  is  too  absolute  to  be  resisted,  yet  the  choice  of  how  we  shall  submit  tj 
that  will  has  been  placed  in  our  hands.  5.  To  carry  the  thought  of  God's  overruling 
prpvidence  with  us  into  all  the  relations  and  duties  of  life.  It  is  a  great  help  to  piety 
to  recollect  that  God  is  near. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Veis.  1  -(i,--77ie  resentment  of  a  wounded  spirit.  Repeated  reproaches  and 
accusatioiH  falling  upon  the  conscience  of  an  innocent  man  sting  him  into  self-defence. 
They  may  do  a  service  by  rousing  hira  out  of  stupor  and  weakness,  and  may  bring 
to  light  the  nobler  qualities  of  his  soul.  We  are  indebted  to  the  slanders  of  the 
Corinthians  for  some  of  the  noblest  self-revelations  of  St.  Patil. 

I.  O0TBUKST  OF  INDIGNANT  SCORN.  (Vers.  1—3.)  With  bitter  irony  Job  rebukes 
the  assumption  of  these  men  to  know  better  than  himself  concerning  matters  which 
belonged  to  the  common  stock  of  intelligence,  and  in  which  he  was  in°no  wise  inferior 
to  them.  To  claim  superior  knowledge  over  others  is  always  offensive.  To  do  so 
against  a  sick  and  broken  man  from  the  vantage-ground  of  health  and  prosperity  la 
nothing  less  than  a  cruelty.  And  to  make  this  pretension  in  matters  of  common 
tradition  and  acceptance,  where  all  stand  about  on  a  level,  is  an  insult  to  the  sufferer's 
understanding. 

II.  Indionant  bemonstkanoe  aoainst  the  coubse  of  the  world.    (VerB.  4 6.) 

1,  Cruel  inversions  of  life.  Job,  who  in  his  just  and  innocent  life,  had  hitherto  stood  in 
eonfidential  relations  with  God,  who  had  prayed  and  whose  prayers  had  been  heard,  is  uo  w 


OH.  xii.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  217 

a  butt  for  laughter  and  scorn.  He  calls  now  and  God  no  longer  hears  (ver.  4).  2.  The 
injustice  of  human  opinion.  (Ver.  6.)  "Contempt  belongs  to  misfortune,  in  the  opinion 
of  the  secure."  A  true  description  of  the  opinion  of  the  world.  If  "  nothing  succeeds 
like  success,"  then  nothing  damns  like  failure  in  the  common  opinion  of  the  unfeeling 
world.  "  It  awaits  those  whose  foot  is  slipping."  As  the  herd  of  wolves  turn  upon 
the  sick  and  fallen  brute,  so  the  thoughtless  man  tramples  upon  the  mau  who  is  down. 
To  those  who  are  banded  together  by  the  tie  of  selfish  pleasure  only  or  convenience, 
the  very  sight  of  that  which  interferes  for  a  moment  with  their  content  is  hateful. 
How  different  the  sanctified  instincts  of  pity,  compassion,  and  helpfulness  which  Christ 
has  planted  in  his  society,  the  Church !  It  is  the  mission  of  the  Christian  community 
to  leaven  with  its  principles  the  hearlless  mnss  of  society.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing 
succeeds  like  success;  "restful  dwellings"  (ver.  6)  and  confident  security  are  enjoyed 
by  the  wasters  or  desolators  who  by  word  and  deed  hold  God  in  contempt,  and  think 
to  make  him  bend  to  their  purposes.  The  rude  man  of  violence,  who  owns  no  law  but 
that  of  the  strong  hand,  thinks  that  where  force  is  there  is  God,  and  all  must  bow  to 
force  as  if  to  God.  So  he  "  taketh  God  in  his  hand ; "  he  "  imputes  his  power  unto  his 
god ; "  he  sacrifices  to  his  net,  and  burns  incense  nnto  his  drag  (Hah.  i.  11,  16).  His 
motto  is  like  that  of  the  impious  warrior,  "My  right  hand  is  god"  (Virg.,  'iEn.,'  x. 
773,  "  Dextra  mihi  deus").— J. 

Vers.  7 — 12. —  The  wisdom  and  the  power  of  Ood  a  truth  universally  known.  It  is 
not  the  pectdiar  possession  of  those  fancied  wise  friends.  It  is  a  truth  impressed  on  all 
nature  and  on  the  experience  of  man. 

I.  Appeal  to  the  livino  ckbatubes.  (Vers.  7 — 10.)  The  beasts,  the  birds  of  the 
air,  the  earth  with  all  its  living  growths,  the  creatures  of  the  sea, — all  Ijear  traces  of  his 
skill,  all  receive  from  him  their  life  and  sustenance,  all  are  subject  to  his  omnipresent 
power  (comp.  Ps.  civ.  26 — 30). 

II.  Appeal  to  the  experience  op  age.  As  the  palate  tries  and  discriminates 
between  the  different  dishes  on  the  table,  so  does  the  ear  try  the  various  opinions  to 
which  it  listens,  and  selects  the  best,  the  ripest,  as  its  guide  (ver.  11).  Long  life  means 
large  experience,  and  large  experience  gives  the  criterion  of  truth  and  the  guide  of  life. 
Yet  experience  is  but  the  book  of  common  experiences.  It  fails  us  when  we  have  to 
deal  with  the  peculiar  and  the  exceptional,  which  is  the  present  situation  of  Job 
(ver.  12). 

III.  Eloquent  dbsobiption  of  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God.  (Vers.  13 — 25.) 
Here  Job  rivals  and  surpasses  his  friends.  With  repeated  blows,  as  of  the  hammer  on 
the  anvil,  he  impresses  the  truth  that  the  might  and  intelligence  of  the  Supreme  are 
irresistible,  and  before  him  all  human  craft  and  power  must  be  reduced  to  impotence. 
The  power  and  the  wisdom  of  God  alternately  occupy  his  thought,  appear  and  reappear 
in  a  variety  of  images. — J. 

Vers.  13 — 15,  18 — 21,  23 — ^25. — Images  of  the  irresistible  power  of  Qod.  I.  The 
wall,  or  house,  or  city  thus  demolished  cannot  be  built  up  again.  (Ver.  14.) 
Swept  with  the  besom  of  destruction,  it  becomes  the  possession  of  the  bitterji  and  pools 
of  water  (Isa.  xiv.  23).  The  ruined  walls  of  Babylon  and  her  charred  gates  defy  the 
weary  toil  of  the  people  (Jer.  li.  58) ;  she  sinks,  and  shall  not  rise  from  the  evil  that 
Jehovah  will  bring  upon  her  (Jer.  li.  64).     Men  may  build,  but  he  will  throw  down 

(Mai.  i.  4).  rrr         -,  A  \       TT      y        -L 

n.  The  prison-doors  which  he  shuts  no  man  can  open.  (Ver.  14.)  He  hath 
the  key  of  David  (laa.  xxii.  22 ;  Eev.  iii.  7).  Vaiu  all  human  bravery  when  the  Lord 
hath  determined  to  "deliver  a  man  into  the  hand  of  his  enemy"  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  8). 
Yet  there  is  a  merciful  asiiect  of  this  seeming  harsh  truth,  as  pointed  out  by  St. 
Paul :  "  He  hath  shut  them  all  up  in  unbelief,  that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  all " 

III.'  The  dbting  up  and  sending  of  floods.  (Ver.  15.)  As  illustrated  in  the 
ancient  story  of  Gen.  vi.  and  viii.,  and  of  the  drought  in  Elijah's  time  (1  Kings  xvii.). 
He  shuts  the  heaven  (1  Kings  viii.  35),  and  he  alone  can  give  showers  (Jer.  xiv.  22). 

IV  The  sudjuqation  of  earthly  kings.  (Ver.  18.)  As  illustrated  in  the  carrying 
ef  Manasseh  captive  to  BAylon  (2  Ohron.  xxiiL),  and  of  Zedokiah  (Jer.  Iii.).    The 


218  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xa.  1—25. 

thought  is  repeated  in  ver.  21,  and  further  illustrations  may  be  drawn  from  the  cases 
of  Pharaoh,  of  Saul,  of  Ahab. 

V.  The  deprivation  op  speech  and  wisdom.  (Ver.  20.)  Men's  sagacity  is  turned 
to  folly  ;  their  prudence  is  vain  when  it  pleases  him  to  put  forth  his  power  (oomp.  Isa. 
iii.  1 — 3).  So  in  ver.  21,  where  we  are  reminded  of  the  striking  judgment  upon 
Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.). 

M  I.  The  increase  and  DBSTEnoTiON  of  nations.  (Ver.  23.)  The  rise  and  fall  of 
empires  and  peoples  is  determined  by  constant  laws.  Obedience  to  law  means 
increase  and  prosperity ;  violation  of  law,  decay  and  ruin. 

VII.  Confusion  and  bewilderment  are  evidences  of  the  practical  power  of  God 
(vers.  24,  25).  Chaos,  wandering,  darkness,  helpless  vacillation,  fall  upon  men  and 
nations  from  time  to  time,  because  they  have  been  unfaithful  to  the  true  light  and 
the  Divine  leading. — J. 

Vers.  16,  17,  22. — Instances  of  the  overruling  vdsdom  of  Qod.  I.  The  deoeivbb 
and  the  deceived  are  his.  (Ver.  16.)  He  can  cause  the  spirit  of  the  faithless 
prophet  to  be  a  lying  spirit  (1  Kings  xxii.),  to  be  deceived  in  his  oracles,  and  incur 
destruction  (Bzek.  xiv.  9). 

II.  So  THE  judges  are  MADE  FOOLS.  (Ver.  17.)  In  short,  God  hath  made  from 
time  to  time  the  wisdom  of  this  world  foolishness  (1  Cor.  i.),  that  no  flesh  might  glory 
in  his  presence. 

III.  He  beings  new  discoveries  of  truth  to  light.  (Ver.  22.)  This  is  the 
revelation  of  God  in  history,  and  its  page  is  full  of  illustrations.  The  callin;;  of 
Abraham;  the  raising  up  of  Moses ;  the  deliverance  of  Israel ;  the  elevation  of  Daviii, 
the  "  rod  out  of  his  stem,"  the  lowly  Messiah ;  the  progress  of  the  gospel  and  triumph 
over  the  wisdom  of  Greece  and  pride  of  Borne ;  the  beginnings  of  the  Keformation, — 
are  but  a  few  of  the  salient  points  in  this  providential  history  of  the  world. 

The  whole  description  is  fitted  to  teach  :  (1)  Humility  in  the  sense  of  the  feebleness 
of  our  power,  the  inferiority  of  our  knowledge  in  presence  of  the  power  and  wisdom  of 
God.  (2)  Eeverence  in  the  study  of  history  and  the  observation  of  nature.  (3) 
Watchful  and  confident  expectation  of  changes  in  the  course  of  providence,  by  which 
iniquity  will  be  overturned,  the  rnle  of  falsehood  be  brought  to  au  end,  and  the  Divine 
kingdom  be  advanced  in  the  world. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Cpntempt  the  lot  of  misfortune.  Job  is  driven  to  retort.  He  affirms 
his  own  competency  to  speak.  He  claim'^  equality  with  his  would-be  teachers,  whose 
words  are  yet  far  from  healing  or  comfoiting  his  sorely  afflicted  heart.  "I  have 
understanding  as  well  as  you."  But  to  him  belongs  the  contempt  which  is  the  lot  of 
misfortune.  Sad  is  the  story  told  in  a  sentence  here,  but  repeated  in  every  d.iy's 
history  and  in  every  land  and  every  age.  The  selfish  heart,  rising  to  a  higher  level  of 
prosperity,  looks  down,  and  looks  contemptuously  down,  on  him  over  whom  Misfortune 
casts  her  dark  shade.  "  The  just  upright  man  is  laughed  to  scorn."  Note  the  truth 
of  this,  its  wrong  and  its  remedy. 

I.  Universal  bxpembnce  testifies  to  this — that  contempt  is  the  lot  or 
misfortune.  The  testimony  comes  up  from  a  thousand  sufferers  towards  whom 
fortune  has  shown  no  favour.  The  wounds  may  be  deep,  the  pangs  of  sorrow  keen  ; 
dark  desolation  may  encompass;  but  the  joyful,  the  well-to-do,  on  whom  the  smile  of 
prosperity  rests,  become  incompetent  to  descend  to  the  lowly  lot.  On  such  the  tale 
of  woo  makes  little  impression.  There  is  a  sad,  if  not  even  natural,  revulsion  from  the 
mere  siglit  of  suffering,  and  the  step  is  easy  from  this  to  the  bitter,  scathing  complaint, 
"Ah!  he  brought  it  all  upon  himself!"  From  Job's  days  downward  the  same  has 
been  ever  seen.  Prosperity  seems  to  blind  the  eyes,  to  harden  the  heart,  to  withdraw 
the  sympathies  even  from  the  friend  overtaken  in  misfortune.  It  is  an  interruption 
to  ease  and  felicity,  to  quiet  and  comfort.  And  Well-to-do  resists  as  impertinent  the 
appeals  of  the  victim  of  misfortune  ;  or,  as  here,  takes  up  an  accusation  against  him, 
and  treats  him  as  an  offender.  Everywhere  the  truth  of  this  is  seen.  "  He  that  is 
ready  to  slip  with  his  feet  is  as  a  lamp  despised  in  the  thoughts  of  him  that  is  at  ease." 

II.  It  is  not  more  general  than  it  is  wrong.  It  is  unworthy,  unbrctherly, 
unneighbourlike.    The  great  Teacher  hit  the  evil  with  his  hard  words,  and  exposed  for 


m.  xn.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  219 


ever  to  the  gaze  of  men  the  self-sufBcieucy  of  the  prosperous  one  anrl  his  care  lessnesa 
as  to  the  condition  of  the  sufferer.  He  passes  by  on  the  other  side,  indisposed  to  hc4p 
the  poor  wretch  lying  in  his  blood,  stript  and  sore.  Pride  fills  the  heart  to  overflowing 
that  is  well-nigh  full  of  treasure.  There  is  little  room  in  it  for  sympathy  and  pity, 
and  the  tender  communion  of  sorrow.  He  who  is  lifted  up  does  not  feel  that  the 
lot  of  him  who  is  trodden  down  is  any  affair  of  his.  He  cannot  be  hindered  on  his 
way.  Shame  upon  the  heart  that  is  so  far  forgetful  of  the  common  interest  that 
it  leaves  the  needy  and  sad,  and  finds  itself  absorbed  in  its  own  comfort  I  The  curl 
of  contempt  upon  the  lip  and  the  hard  word  upon  the  tongue — Job  fathomed  this 
depth,  and  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul  rebukes  the  wrong. 

III.  We  turn  to  other  words  for  the  correction  of  this  error.  True,  Job 
by  his  irony  accuses  his  severe  friends,  who  transport  themselves  into  accusers.  In 
their  hard  words  he  traces  the  contempt  of  which  he  complains,  and  Inkos  his  lot  with 
others  who  suffer  like  himself.  He  is  not  unmindful  of  the  true  Source  of  help.  He 
is  one  who  "  calleth  upon  God."  He  retains  his  integrity,  and  the  consciousness  of  it 
gives  him  support  even  under  this  trouble.  "  The  just  upright  man  is  laughed  to 
scorn."  But  the  assurance  of  his  uprightness  is  a  deep  consolation.  Here,  then,  are 
the  true  sources  of  help.  The  tested  faith  in  God  will  find  its  reward,  and  the 
testimony  of  a  good  conscience  is  of  price  untold.  By  these  Job  is  upheld,  and  by 
that  strength  which  is  secretly  imparted  to  all  faithful  ones  who  call  upon  God,  though 
it  may  seem  as  though  they  were  abandoned  and  forgotten.  If  the  "neighbour" 
mocketh,  the  righteous  Judge  does  not  mock ;  and  though  the  trial  is  permitted  and 
continued,  a  Divine  and  gracious  end  is  reserved  which  Job  lived  fully  to  prove. — B.  G. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  testimony  of  the  creature  to  the  Divine  government.  Job  again 
vindicates  himself  in  presence  of  his  accusing  friends.  He  professes  his  knowledge  to 
he  as  theirs,  and  he  even  points  them  to  the  lower  animals  to  find  wisdom  from  them. 
The  very  beasts  of  the  earth,  the  fowls  of  the  air,  the  fruitful  field,  the  fishes  in  the 
deep,  all  tell  the  great  truth — Jehovah  reigns  supreme.  "  In  his  hand  is  the  soul  of 
every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind  ; "  all  proclaim  the  Almighty,  all 
sprak  of  the  Ever-living  One  in  whom  all  live.     This  testimony  is  witnessed — 

I.  In  the  conscious  life  of  every  crbatdre.  Even  man,  at  the  head  of  all,  is 
conscious  of  the  dependence  of  his  life  upon  some  power  higher  than  himself.  There 
is  one  Lord  of  life,  Author  of  all  life,  Supporter  of  all.  Every  individual  life  declares 
"  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  this."  In  his  hand  alone  is  "  the  soul " — the  life 
"  of  every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind."  He  is  the  Creator  and  Preserver 
of  every  life. 

II.  In  the  infinite  variety  of  life.  What  an  unlimited  variety  do  we  behold ! 
The  birds  of  the  air,  the  beasts  of  the  field,  the  fish  of  the  sea,  abound  in  a  wide  diversity 
of  life.  All  speak  of  the  infinite  Creator,  in  whom  are  the  possibilities  of  infinite  life; 
who,  of  his  own  infinite  resources,  has  created  and  made  the  whole.  That  the  species 
vary  according  to  the  encircling  conditions  of  their  life  does  not  detract  from  their 
testimony  to  the  infinite  and  supreme  Power.  For  the  very  existence  of  every  life 
speaks  of  that  Power.  How  great  is  he  whose  creative  skill  reveals  itself  in  this 
unlimited  variety  I 

III.  Not  less  testimony  is  bokne  by  the  continuous  reproduction  of  the  vast 
varieties.  That  age  after  age  this  power  continues  to  bring  forth,  each  after  its  own 
kinil,  is  another  testimony  to  the  greatness  of  him  "  in  whose  hand  is  the  soul  of  every 
living  thing."  The  creation  and  preservation  of  the  many  species  age  after  age  speaks 
to  the  thoughtful  mind  of  him  who  is  the  one  Lord  of  all  life,  who  by  his  omnipotent 
overruling  preserves  all  in  their  order  and  in  their  continuance. 

IV.  But  in  the  marvellous  structure  of  their  bodies  another  testimony  is 
BORNE.  How  delicate  are  the  organs  of  the  body — the  powers  of  sight,  of  hearing,  of 
activity ;  the  strength  of  one,  the  delicacy  ot  the  structure  of  another !  How  wonderful' 
are  the  nerves  of  the  boriy,  conveying  the  impression  from  the  outer  world  to  the  brain ! 
Equally  so  the  blood-vessels,  and  the  hidden  powers  by  which  the  bones  are  built  up, 
and  again  the  powers  of  nutrition  gathering  food  from  without  and  assimilating  it  to  the 
body  in  all  its  parts.  This  is  done  without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  creature; 
for  the  creature,  even  man^.knows  not  how  it  is  done.    It  in-above  him ;  it  speaks 


220  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  t^.  wi.  1—25. 

definitely  and  distinctly  and  loudly  of  God,  "In  whose  hand  is  the  breath  of  all 
mankind." 

V.  Yet  a  further  testimony  is  to  be  seen  is  the  abundant  provision  made 
FOR  THE  SUSTENANCE  OF  ALL.  Notwithstatiiling  the  vastness  of  the  realm  in  which 
creature-life  is  found,  and  the  variety  of  the  forms  of  life,  each  having  its  own  peculiar 
needs,  yet  he  "  satisfieth  the  desire  of  every  living  thin;;."  Food  is  abundant  for  man 
and  beast,  and  of  the  fowls  of  the  air  it  is  truly  said,  "he  feedeth  them."  So  tlie 
Divine  work  is  seen  on  every  side ;  and  from  all  the  varieties  of  cunscious  'ife  one 
testimony  arises  to  the  great  Inith,  "The  Lord  reigneth."  On  every  work  the  truth 
lies  clearly  impressed,  "  The  hand  of  Jehovah  made  this." — B.  O. 

Vers.  11 — 25. — The  Divine  supremacy  illustrated.  Bildad  appeals  to  "  the  ancients." 
Job  replies,  "  I  also  know  tbeir  teaching;."  But  there  is  a  wisdom  higher  than  that  of 
the  ancients.  Wis<lom — unfailing  wisdom — is  a  Divine  attribute.  From  the  earthly 
to  the  heavenly  wisdom  Job  turns,  lie  speaks  of  a  higher  and  a  mightier  One — One 
"  with  whom  is  strength  and  wisdom,"  by  which  he  rules.  The  supremacy  of  that 
Divine  rule  he  illustrates  from  a  very  wide  field  of  survey.  He  points  to  the  evidences 
of  the  Divine  alniightiness — 

I.  In  the   CONTRASTED  P0WERLB88NESS  OF  THE    HUMAN  OPPOSITION  TO  THE    DiVINB 

WILL.    (Ver.  14.) 

II.  In  the  control  of  the  miohtt  elements  of  nature.  The  very  "  waters  " 
obey  his  behest  (ver.  15). 

III.  In  compelling  even  those  that  err  and  those  that  deceive  to  BE  BUB- 
BBRVIENT  to  HIS  WILL  AND  PURPOSE.      (Ver.  16.) 

IV.  In  cokfoundino  the  wisdom  of  the  wise.  Loading  "counsellors  away 
spoiled,"  and  bringing  down  the  judge  to  the  level  of  the  fuul  (ver.  17). 

V.  In  humbling  kings  and  priests  and  mighty  men.    (Vers.  18,  19.) 

VI.  In  restraining  the  speech  of  the  eloquent  and  robbing  the  aoed  of 
their  undeestandino.    (Ver.  20.) 

VII.  In  casting  contempt  upon  the  honourable,  and  making  the  strong  to 
totter  with  weakness.  (Ver.  21.)  He  giveth  or  taketh  away  wisdom  and  might  as 
it  pleaseth  him,  proving  that  he  is  wise  and  mighty  above  all ;  for  these  are  his  gifts  to 
the  children  of  men  that  have  them. 

VIII.  He  further  shows  that  the  hidden  things  of  darkness  are  open  to 
his  view.  He  discovereth  the  secret  works  of  evil.  Even  the  thick  shadow  of  death 
cannot  hide  from  him  (ver.  22). 

IX.  National  history  is  equally  under  his  control.  His  power  is  over  the 
nations ;  he  enlarges  or  straitens  as  he  pleases.  He  scatters  or  gatbors  as  he  will 
(ver.  23). 

X.  The  very  chibfbst  among  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth  are  subject  to 
his  sovereign  sway.  It  is  a  little  thing  for  him  to  remove  the  ligbt  of  reason  from 
them,  ponfounding  and  confusing  them,  and  casting  them  into  darkness  and  gloom. 
Elsewheie  we  learn  why  and  when  the  Almighty  deals  thus  with  men.  Job's  purpose 
is  to  show  that  man  is  as  nothing  before  him.  In  his  highest  honour,  in  his  utmost 
wisdom,  in  his  greatest  strength,  he  cannot  contend  with  Jehovah.  Over  the  individual 
life  in  all  its  various  conditions,  over  the  combined  lives  of  men  in  their  national  or 
political  combinations,  he  is  still  supreme.  And  over  the  heavens  and  the  earth  he  is 
Lord — oven  over  all.  This  is  Job's  faith  and  his  declaration.  He  can  proclaim  the 
supreme  and  absolute  majesty  of  Jehovah  as  truly,  and  even  more  strikingly  than  hii 
friends. — B.  G. 

Ver.  2. — Irony.  I.  Irony  is  to  be  found  in  Scripture.  There  is  great  variety  in 
the  style  of  Scripture.  Almost  every  mudification  of  language  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Bible,  consecrated  to  some  holy  purpose.  Even  the  faculty  of  humour  is  utilized, 
as  in  the  incident  of  Balaam's  ass  (Numb.  xxii.  28—30),  and  in  St.  Paul's  recom- 
mendation that  the  woman  who  will  not  wear  a  veil  had  better  complete  the  exposure 
of  her  head  by  being  shorn  (1  Cor.  xi.  6).  The  prophets  abound  in  irony.  Christ 
u-oed  irony  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  fool  (Luke  xii.  16—20). 

IL  There  is  a  I>laob  «>«)  ieos  y  in  discourse.    Some  «vils  can  be  best  met  just  by 


CH.xn.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  22J 


being  exposed.  Now,  irony  is  a  method  of  showing  a  thing  in  an  unexpected  light, 
so  that,  while  admitting  all  its  cl  liiiis,  we  make  it  apparent  that  those  very  claims 
are.absuid.  Slight  failings  will  be  best  castigatt'd  with  simple  ridicule ;  more"  serious 
ones,  if  they  are  not  great  sins,  with  grave  irony. 

IlL  Pretentiousness  especially  provokes  irony.  Each  of  Job's  three  friends 
has  now  apoken.  Though  they  were  not  alike  in  attainments  nor  in  natural  dis- 
positions, they  aiAiocd  in  their  dogmas  and  in  their  judgment  of  Job.  A  tone  of  con- 
scious superiority  and  irritating  censoriousnoss  riiii^s  through  all  their  speeches.  This 
not  only  vexes  Job ;  it  prompts  an  ironical  rutaliation.  It  is  dangerous  to  make  grand 
pretensions.  Humility  is  a  great  security,  and  when  humility  is  lost,  we  lay  ourselves 
open  to  attack  on  the  ground  of  our  assumptions.  Pretentiousness  dcjos  not  only  thus 
provoke  ironical  replies ;  it  best  meets  its  merited  castigation  by  these  ruplies,  which 
hurailitato  it  in  a  most  unanswerable  manner. 

IV.  Ibony  is  a  dangeuous  weapon  for  a  Christian  to  wikld.  it  may  be  a 
lawful  weapon.  There  are  times  when  it  cm  be  used  in  the  cause  of  righteousness 
with  tremendous  effect.  But  there  is  great  danger  lest  the  employnv  nl;  of  it  should 
destroy  "  the  greatest  thing  in  the  world" — love.  There  is  always  a  teudi:ncy  to  push 
it  too  far,  and  to  go  beyond  wholosomo  r.  biiko  in  the  direction  of  cruel  scorn.  This  is 
distinctly  unchristian.  Moreover,  as  Job's  hiends  did  not  understand  him,  possibly 
he  did  not  uuderstund  them.  If  so,  his  irony  may  have  been  too  severe  for  justice. 
We  should  be  careful  that  wo  are  in  no  error  before  we  venture  to  use  irony  against 
our  brother.  Even  then,  zeal  for  righteousness  should  be  tempered  by  brotherly 
kindness. 

V.  God  displays  irony  in  providence.  The  Greek  tragedians  saw  irony  in  fate. 
Man's  greatness  was  shown  to  be  a  very  small  thing,  and  his  boasted  success  a  mere 
bubble.  The  old  classical  idea  was  dark  and  hard,  for  it  did  not  take  into  account  the 
Fatherhood  of  God.  But  within  God's  inflnite  purpose  of  love  there  is  room  for  irony. 
By  the  slow  unrolling  of  the  course  of  event.s,  the  boasting  of  the  pretentious  ends 
in  confusion.  God  lumibles  his  creatures  in  their  pride  and  vanity,  giving  them 
sudden  falls,  by  means  of  widch  they  cannot  but  feel  their  helplessness  and  littleness. 
The  monarch  is  choked  by  a  fly.  Such  things  are  not  done  vindictively,  or  in  scorn  ; 
but  because  we  are  ruined  by  boasting  and  saved  in  our  humiliation.  Thus  the  ugly 
weapon  of  irony  may  prepare  us  for  the  healing  grace  of  the  gospel. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. — Contempt  for  the  unfortunate.  Like  Jesus,  when  he  prayed  for  his  mur- 
derers, with  the  plea  that  they  knew  not  what  they  were  doing  (Luke  XKiii.  34), 
though  in  much  less  perfect  magnanimity.  Job  sees  some  excuse  for  the  couiiuct  of 
his  censors.  He  finds  that  conduct  to  be  an  instauue  of  a  commou  rule  of  action,  viz. 
that  the  prosperous  despise  the  unfortunate.  * 

I.  We  cannot  understand  the  trouble  we  do  not  share.  Job's  vast  woe  was 
quite  beyond  the  comprehension  of  his  would-be  sympathizers.  They  thought  that 
they  haii  fathomed  its  depths,  and  that  they  were  in  a  position  to  adjudicate  upon  its 
merits.  But  they  had  scarcely  skimmed  its  surface.  They  did  not  know  what  Job 
Buifered ;  much  less  did  they  see  why  God  had  permitted  him  to  be  thus  afflicted. 
The  happy  look  from  their  sunny  homes  on  the  dark  abodes  of  misery,  but  they 
cannot  understand  the  sorrows  they  have  never  tasted.  They  who  have  always  had 
their  wants  satisfied  sin]ply  do  not  know  what  huUi^er  and  thirst  are.  The  unbroken 
lamily  cannot  conceive  of  the  agony  of  bereavement. 

II.  We  are  tempted  to  despise  the  trouble  we  do  not  understand.  As  we 
nave  not  the  faculty  to  dive  into  its  mysteiy,  it  seems  to  us  a  shallow  thing.  There- 
fore, when  the  sufferers  appear  to  make  much  of  it,  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  they 
are  exaggerating  it ;  that  they  are  giving  way  to  it  in  a  cowardly  weakness ;  that 
they  are  indecently  demonstrative  or  even  shamming  hypocritically.  The  rich  are 
too  often  ready  to  regard  the  very  poor  as  whining  impostors.  They  who  have  never 
felt   the  pangs  of  conscience  look  with  couteiupt  on  the  penitent's  tears. 

III.  We  may  use  cub  own  trouble  as  a  means  of  stimulating  our  sympathy 
WITH  THE  TROUBLES  OF  OTHERS.  PossJbly  this  is  One  reason  why  it  is  sent  to  us.  We 
have  been  too  narrow  and  selfish  in  our  view  of  it,  thinking  it  must  be  confined  to  some 
effect  diiectly  and  solely  beneficial  to  ourselves.     But  it  may  be  largely  intended  to 


222  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xii.  1—25. 

prepare  ns  for  our  work  in  helping  others  in  trouble.  The  widow  can  sympathize 
with  the  widow ;  the  poor  show  most  kindness  to  the  poor.  The  experience  of  the 
prostration  of  a  great  illness  enables  a  person  to  undiirstand  and  help  sick  people.  Thus 
sorrow  is  a  talent  to  be  used  for  the  good  of  others,  by  being  invested  in  sympathy. 

IV.  The  sorrows  of  Christ  helped  to  make  him  a  pbbfbct  Savioub.  If  Clirist 
understands  anything,  it  is  sorrow ;  for  was  he  not  "  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted 
with  grief"?  Theiefore  the  sufferer  who  is  despised  by  his  prosperous  brethren  can 
turn  with  assurance  of  sympathy  to  the  Saviour  of  men.  Christ  not  only  understands 
sorrow,  he  knows  how  to  use  it.  He  converted  his  cross  into  a  lever  for  raising  a  lallen 
world.  He  will  help  his  suffering  disciples  to  despise  their  own  sorrows  while  sym- 
pathizing with  the  sorrows  of  others.  Strong  In  his  victory  over  sin,  sorrow,  and 
death,  Christ  for  evtr  sanctifies  suffering.  While  the  superficial  may  despise  it,  truo 
Christians  can  now  sec  iu  it  a  means  of  heavenly  grace. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — Lessons  of  nature.  I.  Nature  rebukes  man's  ignorance.  Job 
refers  his  friends  to  nature  in  a  tone  of  reproach.  They  ought  to  have  known  what 
nature  was  proclaiming.  There  are  two  grounds  for  this  rebuke.  1.  The  wealth  and 
fulness  of  nature's  te4iinony  to  her  Creator.  Go  where  one  may,  nature  is  ready  to 
speak  for  God.  The  heasis  of  the  field,  the  fowls  of  the  air,  the  creeping  things  on 
the  ground,  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  all  speak  for  the  power  and  wisdom  of  their  Maker. 
There  is  variety  in  this  grand  utterance  of  nature,  yet  there  is  unity.  Many  creatiu'es, 
of  diverse  sorts,  concur  to  bear  witness  to  the  same  great  truths.  If  we  cannot  under- 
stand the  beasts,  the  hirds  may  teach  us  ;  if  the  insects  are  au  enigma,  the  fishes  may 
instruct  us.  Though  all  these  different  voices  of  nature  may  not  be  sounding  in  our 
ears  at  once,  we  cannot  be  long  out  of  the  reach  of  some  of  ihem.    Therefore— 

"  In  contemplation  of  created  things 
By  steps  we  may  ascend  to  God." 

(Milton.) 

2.  The  greater  intelligence  of  man.  "But  ask  now  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach 
thee" — as  though  tliose  dull  brutes  knew  what  man  had  missed  discovering.  So  t!.e 
lord  of  creation  is  sent  to  be  a  pupil  of  his  humblest  subjects.  Of  course,  to  be  pro- 
saically accurate,  it  must  be  said  that  the  beasts  do-  not  understand  the  lessons  they 
teach  ;  that  only  man  can  know  God,  and  that  the  testimony  of  nature  is  unconscious. 
Still,  the  higher  faculty  of  man  makes  it  a  shame  that  he  should  not  know  what 
nature  is  teaching  in  so  many  ways  all,  around  him. 

II.  Nature  eeveals  God's  presence.  1.  By  its  constitution.  The  very  variety 
of  the  creation  bespeaks  the  mind  and  power  of  the  Creator.  For  this  variety  is  not 
confused,  but  orderly.  There  must^be  a  sameness  about  the  very  disorder  of  chaos 
which  is  not  seen  in  the  cosmos.  The  various  species  of  living  creatures  keep  their 
several  places  in  the  scale  of  creation,  fulfil  their  distinctive  destinies  and  perform  their 
separate  functions.  There  is  mind  and  purpose  in  the  very  variety  of  nature.  2.  By 
its  life.  Nature  is  not  a  huge  mosaic.  If  its  variegated  picture  were  motionless  and 
changeless,  we  could  not  but  admire  the  infinite  skill  with  which  it  had  been  put  together. 
The  exhibition  of  stuffed  specimens  of  dead  animals  in  a  natural  history  museum  gives 
us  abundant  proof  of  the  skill  of  the  Creator.  But  the  fields  show  us  what  no  museum 
can  reveal.  In  the  great  world  of  nature  all  is  life  and  movement.  Thus  we  have  not 
the  relics  of  an  ancient  Divine  activity  of  God,  like  fossils  of  extinct  animals,  but  the 
creatures  in  the  very  flush  of  life.  And  this  life  must  be  constantly  maintained.  Then  by 
its  very  continuance  it  proclaims  the  presence  of  God.  He  is  in  nature,  energizing  in  it 
every  moment.  In  his  hand  is  the  soul  of  every  living  creature.  3.  By  its  human 
connections.  Man  shares  in  the  common  life  of  nature.  The  hand  that  holds  the 
soul  of  every  living  thing  holds  the  breath  of  all  mankind.  "  In  him  we  live,  and 
move,  and  have  our  being "  (Acts  xvii.  28).  Therefore  we  have  not  only  to  lock 
around  us  on  the  animal  creation.  If  we  do  but  consider  our  own  existence,  we  have 
daily  evidence  of  the  presence  of  God.  The  testimony  of  creation  is  designed  to 
remind  us  of  our  own  dependence  on  God.  It  is  especially  a  good  corrective  of  the 
subjective  notions  of  a  visionai-y.  Job  answers  Eliphaz  and  hli  awful  vision  most 
aptly  by  appealing  to  the  great  living  voice  of  nature. — W.  F.  A. 


OH.  m.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOa  223 

Ver.  11. — Discrimination.  Job  seems  to  mean  that,  as  the  mouth  detects  diffeiences 
of  taste,  BO  the  ear  discerns  distinctions  of  words.  We  do  not  eat  all  that  we  taste. 
We  can  reject  the  nauseous  and  select  the  palatable.  In  the  same  way  we  do  not  accept 
and  believe  all  that  we  hear.  We  cau  discriminate  between  the  sayings  that  come  to 
us.  Bildad  in  particular  has  been  attempting  to  settle  the  question  of  providence  by 
appealing  to  the  traditions  of  antiquity.  Job  shows  that  he  can  make  the  same  appeal 
to  another  series  of  proverbs,  and  the  result  will  be  very  different.  Tradition  is  not 
unanimous.  It  is  not  reasonable,  therefore,  to  take  all  that  comes  to  hand  from  it  as 
ipfallible  truth.  We  must  examine  and  test  it,  selecting  what  is  wise,  rejecting  what 
is  erroneous. 

I.  DisoKiMiNATiON  IS  NEEDED.  Note  why.  1.  Many  voices  claim  a  hearing.  We 
are  not  left  to  a  monotone  of  advice.  A  very  Babel  of  tongues  assails  us.  We  are 
besieged  on  all  sides  by  claimants  for  our  belief.  We  live  under  a  perfect  rain  of  rival 
notions.  Every  theory  pretends  to  be  absolute  truth  ;  yet  each  novel  theory  gives  the 
lie  to  its  predecessor,  la.  religion  this  is  very  painfully  apparent.  Not  only  do  the 
great  historic  religions  of  the  world  compete  for  supremacy,  but  Christianity  itself 
speaks  to  us  in  many  voices.  What  are  we  to  believe  amid  the  conflict  of  the  sects  and 
parties,  some  urging  to  extreme  sacerdotalism,  others  to  evangelicalism;  some  contending 
for  the  ancient  creeds,  others  favouring  now  lights  ?  We  must  use  discrimination,  for  it 
is  childish  folly  to  give  our  assent  to  the  first  voice  that  chrinces  to  attract  our  attention. 
2.  It  is  important  to  accept  the  purest  truth.  Truth  is  the  food  of  the  soul.  We  dare 
not  play  with  its  ideas  in  dilettante  indifference.  To  be  deluded  is  to  be  ensnared. 
We  suffer  by  feeding  on  error.  As  we  must  distinguish  between  wholesome  and 
unwholesome  diet  if  we  would  be  in  bodily  health,  so  we  must  distinguish'  between 
truth  and  error  if  we  would  be  in  spiritual  health.  There  are  even  deadly  poisons 
which  look  beautifuL  They  must  be  detected  and  rejected  if  our  souls  are  not  to  be 
killed. 

II.  DiscBlMlNATiON  IS  POSSIBLE.  1.  We  have  a  natural  faculty  of  judgment.  Job 
claimed  to  possess  this,  and  he  compared  it  with  the  natural  discriminating  ability  of 
the  palate.  Our  minds  were  made  by  God  for  use.  If  we  weakly  and  indolently  fail 
to  employ  them,  and  so  become  the  slaves  of  any  unscrupulous  deceiver,  we  have  only 
ourselves  to  blame  for  our  ruinous  error.  While  we  have  to  walk  by  faith,  we  need 
first  to  use  our  reason  in  order  to  be  assured  of  a  good  ground  of  faith.  To  deny  the 
possibility  of  doing  so  is  to  play  into  the  hands  of  the  ultramontane  Eoman  Catholics. 
2.  Our  Judgment  can  he  enlightened  hy  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  must  be  aware  that  we 
often  err.  The  palate  is  not  an  infallible  guide,  for  what  is  pleasant  to  the  taste  may 
be  most  unwholesome.  There  are  sweet  poisons.  How  shall  we  be  able  to  avoid 
attractive  errors  ?  This  question  is  most  important,  because  our  taste  has  been  depraved ; 
a  vicious  appetite  has  perverted  the  natural  faculty  of  discrimination.  But  Christ  has 
provided  for  the  difficulty  by  promising  the  Holy  Spirit  to  guide  us  into  all  truth 
(John  xvi.  13).  Let  us  but  be  sure  we  are  humbly  depending  on  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  we  cannot  err  fatally. — ^W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  13 — ^25. — The  wisdom  and  might  of  God,  Job  meets  his  friend's  authoritative 
utterances  of  proverbs  and  worldly  maxims  by  a  citation  of  similar  sayings,  but  with 
a  different  import.  It  is  not  true  that  the  righteous  always  prosper,  and  that  the 
wicked  alvtrays  suffer.  Such  a  primitive  notion  implies  too  authropoceatric  a  conception 
of  the  universe  ;  it  goes  on  the  assumption  that  all  thinu;s  are  done  just  to  suit  our 
condition  and  conduct.  Now,  Job  takes  a  higher  and  wider  view.  He  appeals  to  say- 
ings that  speak  of  the  supreme  wisdom  and  irresistible  might  of  God,  altogether 
irrespective  of  man  and  his  concerns. 

I.  God's  wisdom  and  might  are  over  all.  We  cannot  fathom  his  thought ;  we 
cannot  rssist  his  arm.  He  will  do  what  he  thinks  best  whether  we  concur  or  not. 
The  universe  is  under  an  irresistible  Ruler.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  question  what  God 
does,  but  we  cannot  answer  him.  We  may  rebel  against  his  authority,  but  we  cannot 
overthrow  it.  Therefore  we  should  escape  from  our  petty  parochialism,  and  consider 
God's  large  world  and  universal  rule,  before   we  attempt  to   form   any  theory  ol 

life. 
IL  God's  supbeme  wisdom  and  might  oonceen  othbb  intebebts  than  those  oj 


224  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  [oh.  xn.  1—25. 


MAN.  Our  narrow  views  of  God's  government  lead  to  false  opinions  about  his  action. 
We  are  tempted  to  fancy  that  all  he  does  is  solely  with  a  view  to  its  effect  on  our- 
selves. Thus  we  colour  the  universe  with  our  egotism.  But  the  Lord  of  all  must 
have  vast  interests  to  consider  of  which  we  know  nothing.  What  looks  foolish  to  us 
because  we  cannot  see  the  end  in  view — an  end  often  quite  outside  ourselves,  would 
appear  in  a  very  different  light  if  we  knew  all  Grod's  far-reaching  designs. 

III.  God's  wisdom  and  might  are  both  in  habmony  with  his  aooDNBsa.  This 
is  not  so  apparent  in  Job's  represeatatioQ  of  the  Divine  action  as  it  must  be  to  a 
Christian.  The  patriarch  has  fallen  into  the  error  of  a  one-sided  view  in  combatting, 
the  narrow  and  erroneous  opinion  of  his  friends,  and  he  has  come  to  represent  God  too 
much  as  the  irresponsible  Oriental  autocrat,  whose  only  law  is  his  will,  but  whose  will 
may  follow  mere  caprice,  and  may  be  free  from  all  considerations  of  justice.  Job  would 
not  say  as  much  of  God,  but  his  description  leans  in  this  direction.  Now,  we  know 
that  the  most  supreme  thing  in  God  is  not  his  might,  nor  is  it  his  wisdom  j  it  is  his 
love  (1  John  iv.  8,  9).  Therefore,  although  we  cannot  understand  his  large  purpose, 
that  must  be  a  good  one.  We  see  God  in  his  irresistible  might  casting  down  kings 
and  princes,  leading  clever  people  into  scenes  of  bewilderment,  apparently  playing  with 
all  sorts  of  men  as  mere  pawns.  But  this  is  only  because  we  are  short-sighted.  The 
large  purposes  which  include  other  worlds  than  ours  do  not  exclude  our  world.  God 
does  not  brush  man  aside  as  a  nonentity  when  he  goes'  forth  to  achieve  his  vast 
designs.  One  of  God's  greatest  purposes  is  the  redemption  of  man  by  the  gift  of  his 
own  Son  (John  iii.  16).— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  22.-:—"  Deep  things  out  of  darkness"  I.  How  God  discovers  dkep  things  out 
OF  DAKKNE8S.  He  has  means  of  knowledge  which  are  sealed  to  us,  a  key  which 
unlocks  the  most  secret  chamber,  an  eye  that  can  see  down  to  the  most  hidden  depths. 
He  sees  the  skeleton  in  the  cupboard.  The  mask  of  the  hypocrite  can  never  deceive 
him.  1.  God  sees  inwardly.  Man  looks  on  the  outward  countenance,  God  on  the 
heart  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  His  indwelling  Spirit  sees  as  far  as  it  influences,  and  it 
influences  the  inmost  springs  of  our  being.  2.  Ood  sees  iminedic^Jly.  This  re-nulti' 
from  his  inward  vision.  We  have  to  infer  and  draw  conclusions  by  means  of  a  chain 
of  reasoning.  God  can  dispense  with  this  process.  He  sees  everythin:^ ;  his  knowledge 
is  direct  and  intuitive.  3.  God  sees  everyixthere.  Our  vision  is  limited  to  a  certain 
area.  Even  when  we  stand  on  the  top  of  a  mountain  and  endeavour  to  take  in  a  groat  ^ 
panorama  of  scenery,  we  can  only  look  attentively  at  one  part  of  the  prospect  at  a  time. 
But  God's  infinite  gaze  takes  in  all  the  facts  of  the  universe  at  once. 

II.  What  deep  things  God  brings  to  light.  1.  He  discovers  hidden  sin.  The 
nefarious  design  of  the  unscrupulous  statesman  concocted  within  the  locked  doors  of 
the  council-chamber,  the  dark  plot  of  the  little  band  of  desperate  conspirators,  the  ugly 
scheme  of  the  robber  horde,  the  fell  purpose  of  the  betiayej-,  are  all  quite  known  to  God 
from  the  moment  when  the  first  black  thoughts  entered  the  minds  of  their  originators. 
The  sin  which  has  once  been  committed  is  all  known  to  God,  though  it  may  have  been 
hushed  up  and  kept  from  the  observation  of  men.  In  the  great  day  of  judgment  God 
will  bring  it  to  lijiht.  2.  Ee  discovers  hidden,  goodness.  All  that  God  brings  out  of 
its  secret  hiding-place  is  not  evil.  There  are  hid.  leu  treasures.  Miners  bring  up 
precious  minerals  from  the  dark  interior  of  the  earth.  The  voyage  of  the  Challenger 
was  a  means  of  bringing  to  light  many  wonderful  works  of  God  from  the  dim  depths 
of  the  sea.     God  observes  all  hidden  worth. 

"  The  violet  born  to  blush  unseen  " 

is  perfectly  well  known  to  him.  He  also  understands  the  innocence  that  is  cruelly 
misjiutged  and  condemned  as  guilt  by  men.  Some  day  he  will  bring  that  to  light,  and 
vindicate  the  cause  of  every  true  martyr. 

HI.  The  oonbequbnoeb  that  result  from  God's  disco  very  of  the  deep  things 
01.'  DAKKNESS.  He  wiU  rectify  al!  wrong.  He  will  give  righteous  judgments.  The 
dark  creatures  of  sin  that  are  brou-;ht  to  light  cannot  be  left  out  in  the  full  blaze  of  the 
sun  to  befoul  the  day  with  their  obscenity.  As  we  stamp  on  the  unclean  things  that 
creep  out  of  dark  places  when  they  are  suddenly  disturbed  and  crush  them,  so  God 
iiinst  destroy  the  wicked  when  their  evil  is  brought  to  light     The  revelation  can  only 


OH.  xm.  1 — 28.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


226 


bo  preliminary  to  the  condemnation.    Meanwliile  the  delusion  which  leada  men  to 
harbour  their  sin  is  fatal.    Whatever  excuse  covers  it  is  a  lie. 

"  For  love  of  grace, 
Lay  not  that  flattering  unction  to  your  sodl ; 
It  will  but  skin  and  film  the  ulcerous  place; 
Whiles  rank  corruption,  mining  all  within. 
Infects  unseen." 

On  the  other  hand,  the  ultimate  vindication  of  the  rigbt  is  a  grand  encouragement  to 
"  patient  perseverance  in  well-doing." — ^W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Vers.  1,  2. — The  first  two  verses  of  ch. 
xiii.  are  closely  connected  with  ch.  xii., 
formmg  the  natuial  termination  to  the  first 
section  of  Job's  argument,  that  all  results, 
whether  good  or  evil,  must  be  referred  to 
God.  Ver.  1  is  little  more  than  a  repetition 
of  oh.  xii.  9  and  ver.  2  of  ch.  xii.  3. 

Ver.  1. — Lo,  mine  eye  hath  seen  all  this, 
mine  ear  hath  heard  and  understood  it.  All 
the  particulars  mentioned  concerning  God's 
government  of  the  world  in  oh.  xii.  6—25 
are  derived  by  Job  from  his  own  experience. 
His  eye  has  seen  them  or  his  ear  has  heard 
them.  He  is  not  indebted  to  others  for 
information  on  these  simple  points,  which 
he  regards  as  necessarily  impressed  by  their 
experience  on  all  grown  men  (see  oh.  xii.  9). 

Ver.  2. — What  ye  know,  the  same  do  I 
know  also.  Job's  friends  have  claimed  to 
instruct  him  and  set  him  right,  on  the 
ground  of  their  age  and  experience  (ch.  iv. 
8;  V.  27;  viii.  8—10).  He  protests  that, 
in  the  matters  on  which  they  have  lectured 
him,  thoy  have  no  advantage  over  himself— 
be  knows  all  that  they  know— in  truth,  the 
knowledge  is  open  to  all  (see  ch.  xii.  3). 
I  am  not  inferior  unto  you.  An  exact  re- 
petition of  the  second  clause  of  ch.  xii.  3. 

Yerg.  3 13. — The  second  section  of  Job's 

argument  is  prefaced,  like  the  first  (ch.  xii. 

2 5),  with  a  complaint  with  respect  to  the 

conduct  of  his  opponents.  He  taxes  them 
with  the  fabrication  of  lies  (ver  4),  with 
want  of  skill  as  physicians  of  souls  (ver.  4), 
irith  vindicating  God  by  reasonings  in 
which  they  do  not  themselves  believe  (vers. 
7,  8),  and  consequently  with  really  mouking 
him  (ver.  9).  Having  warned  them  that 
they  are  more  likely  to  offend  God  than  to 
please  him  by  such  argumentB  as  those  that 
they  have  urged  (vers.  10-12),  he  calls  on 
them  lo  hold  their  peace,  and  allow  him  to 
plead  his  cause  with  God  (ver.  13). 

JOB. 


Ver.  8.— Sorely  I  would  speak  to  the 
Almighty.  It  is  not  Job's  wish  to  urgue 
his  ca^e  with  his  three  friends,  but  to  reason 
it  out  with  God.  His  friends,  however, 
interfere  with  this  design,  check  it,  thwart  it, 
prevent  liim  from  carrying  it  out.  He  must 
therefore  first  speak  a  few  words  to  them. 
And  I  desire  to  reason  with  Ood.  Com- 
pare God's  own  invitation  to  his  people, 
"  Oome  now,  and  let  us  reason  together, 
saith  the  Lord"  (Isa.  i.  18),  and  again, 
"  Put  me  in  remembrance,  let  us  plead 
together;  declare  thou,  that  thou  niayest 
he  justified  "  (Isa.  iliii.  26) ;  which  indicate 
God's  gracious  willingness  to  allow  muu  to 
plead  on  their  own  behalf  before  him,  and 
do  their  best  to  justify  themselves. 

Ver.  4. — But  ye  are  forgers  of  lies.  A 
harsh  expression,  indicating  that  Job  was 
thoroughly  exasperated.  The  lies  which 
his  friends  head  forged  were,  partly,  misre- 
presentations of  what  he  had  said,  as  for 
example  ch.  xi.  4,  but  mainly  statements, 
more  or  less  covert,  which  implied  that  he 
had  brought  all  his  calamities  on  himself 
by  a  course  of  evil-doing  (see  ch.  iv.  7,  8  ; 
viu.  13,  14;  xi.  11,  14,  20).  Ye  are  aU 
physicians  of  no  value,  Job's  fiiends  had 
come  to  him  to  "comfort"  him  (ch.  ii.  11), 
and  act  as  physicians  of  his  soul.  But  they 
had  entirely  failed  to  he  of  the  least  ser- 
vice. They  had  not  even  understood  his 
case. 

Ver.  5. — Oh  that  ye  would  altogether  hold 
your  peace !  The  friends  had  "  held  their 
peace"  for  seven  days  after  their  arrival 
(oil.  ii.  13).  Oh  that  they  would  have  held 
it  altogether  I  Their  words  had  done  nothing 
but  exasperate  and  goad  almost  to  madness. 
There  is  a  mournful  pathos  in  Job's  entreatiet 
to  them  to  be  silent  (comp.  ver.  13).  And  it 
should  be  your  wisdom,  "  Speech,"  it  has 
been  said,  "is  silvern,  silence  is  golden." 
No  doubt "  there  is  a  time  for  everything  . . . 
a  time  to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to  speak  " 
(Eceles.  iii.  1,  7);  nor  is  the  rule  of  La 
Trappe  altogether  a  wise  one.  But  probably 
ten  times  as  much  harm  is  done  in  the  world 
by  speaking  as  by  keeping  silence.  "  Words 
for  God  "  need  especial  care  and  caution. 


226 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  xiii.  1—28. 


If  they  do  not  do  Kood,  the  barm  that  they 
may  do  is  incalculable. 

Ver.  6. — Hear  now  my  reasoning.  As  his 
friends  have  not  kept  silence,  but  have  spoken, 
Job  claims  a  right  to  be  heard  in  his  turn. 
If  it  be  thought  that  he  is  somewhat  im- 
patient, it  must  be  remembered  that  his 
opponents  are  three  to  one,  all  eager  to 
catch  him  in  a  fault,  and  not  very  mild  in 
their  reprimands.  And  hearken  to  the 
pleadings  of  my  lips.  Job's  "pleadings" 
nro  addressed,  not  to  his  friends,  but  to 
God,  and  are  contained  in  vers.  14 — 28  of 
the  present,  and  the  whole  of  the  succeeding 
chapter. 

Ver.  7. — 'Will  ye  speak  wickedly  for  God  1 
We  are  not  to  suppose  that  Job's  friends 
consciously  used  unsound  and  untrue  argu- 
ments in  their  disputations  with  him  on 
God's  behalf.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  to 
be  regarded  as  convinced  of  the  truth  of 
their  own  reasonings — as  brought  up  in  the 
firm  belief,  that  temporal  prosperity  or- 
wretchedness  was  dealt  out  by  God,  im- 
mediately, by  his  own  will,  to  his  subjects 
according  to  their  behaviour.  Holding  this, 
they  naturally  tliought  that  Job,  being  so 
greatly  afflicted,  must  he  a  great  sinner,  and, 
as  they  could  not  very  plausibly  allege  any 
open  sins  against  him,  they  saw  in  his  suf- 
ferings a  judgment  on  him  for  secret  sins. 
"His  chosen  friends,"  as  Mr.  Froude  says, 
"  wise,  good,  pious  men,  as  wisdom  and  piety 
were  then,  without  one  glimpse  of  the  true 
cause  of  his  sufferings,  saw  in  them  a  judg- 
ment of  this  eharsicter.  He  became  to  them 
an  illustration,  and  even  (such  are  the  para- 
logisms of  men  of  this  description)  a  proof 
of  their  theory  that  'the  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  is  but  for  a  while ; '  and  instead  of 
the  comfort  and  help  that  they  might  have 
brought  him,  and  which  in  the  end  they 
were  made  to  bring  him,  he  is  to  them  no 
more  than  a  text  for  the  enunciation  of 
solemn  falsehood"  ('Short  Studies,'  vol.  i. 
p.  300),  i.e.  of  statements  which  were  false, 
though  solemnly  believed  by  thorn  to  be 
true.  And  talk  deceitfully  for  him.  "De- 
ceitfully," because  untruly,  yet  so  plausibly 
as  to  be  likely  to  deceive  others. 

Ver.  8. — Will  ye  accept  his  person  ?  will 
ye  contend  for  Ood  ?  Job  intends  to  accuse 
his  opponents  of  leaning  unduly  to  God's 
side,  and  being  prepared  to  justify  him  in 
the  teeth  of  reason  and  justice.  This  is  like 
the  conduct  of  a  judge  who  should  allow 
Ms  decision  to  be  biassed  by  favour  towards 
one  or  the  other  party  in  a  suit. 

Ver.  9. — Is  it  good  that  he  should  search 
you  out?  "Are  \onr  motives  in  thus  act- 
ing," Job  asks  his  opponents,  "  so  pure  that 
'hey  will  stand  the  severity  of  God's  judg- 
ment when  he  turns  his  scrutiny  upon  you, 
anil  eearcijes  out  the  grounds  of  your  pro- 


ceedings? Is  not  your  real  motive  to  oniry 
favour  with  him  because  he  is  so  great  and 
powerful  ?  "  Or  as  one  man  mocketh  another, 
do  ye  so  mock  himl  You  may  impose  on 
a  man  by  so  acting,  but  yon  will  not  impose 
on  God. 

Ver.  10.— He  will  surely  reproTe  yon,  if 
ye  do  secretly  accept  persons.  Even  though 
it  is  his  own  person  which  you  accept,  his 
own  cause  that  you  unduly  favour,  he,  as 
the  God  of  truth,  and  Maintainor  of  right, 
will  assuredly  reprove  and  condemn  you. 

Ver.  11. — Shall  not  his  ezcellenoy  make 
you  afraid  T  and  his  dread  fall  upon  yon  1 
Will  not  the  very  excellency  and  perfection 
of  God  cause  you  all  the  more  to  fear,  since 
they  will  be  arrayed  against  you?  God, 
who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity, 
who  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  and  hates 
those  who  are  respecters  of  persons,  will  by 
his  very  purity  and  truth  be  offended  at  your 
conduct,  and  induced  to  punish  it. 

Ver.  12. — ^Yonr  remembrances  are  like 
unto  ashes.  The  "  remembrances  "  intended 
are  probably  the  wise  saws,  embodiments  of 
the  ancient  wisdom,  on  which  Job's  adver- 
saries have  relied  in  their  disputations  with 
him  (ch.  iv.  7,  8;  viii.  8—11,  etc.).  These 
Job  declares  to  be  mere  dust  and  ashes — use- 
less, worthless,  such  as  the  first  breath  of  air 
will  blow  away.  Tour  bodies  to  bodies  of 
clay ;  rather,  your  mounds,  or  your  defence* 
(see  the  Revised  Version).  These  defences. 
Job  says — i.e.  the  arguments  by  which  his 
opponents  support  their  views — are  no  better 
than  "defences  of  clay" — easy  to  batter 
down  and  destroy.  The  ancient  defences  of 
a  town  were  usually  either  of  stone,  as  at 
Khorsabad  ('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  278,  279),  or  of  crude  brick  faced  with 
burnt  brick,  as  at  Babylon  and  elsewhere. 
But  Job  seems  to  be  speaking  of  something 
more  primitive  than  either  of  these — mere 
earthworks,  like  the  Boman  aggera,  hastily 
thrown  up  and  easy  to  level  with  the  ground. 

Ver.  13. — Hold  your  peace,  let  me  alone, 
that  I  may  speak  |  literally,  be  silent  from 
me  that  I  may  speak ;  but  our  version  gives 
the  true  meaning.  Job  repeats  the  entreaty 
with  which  he  had  begun  (vers.  5,  6).  And 
let  oome  on  me  what  will.  Job  is  prepared 
to  face  the  worst.  He  feels,  as  he  expresses 
it  below  (ver.  19),  that,  if  he  holds  his 
tongue,  he  must  die.  Ho  tmist  .^eak,  and 
speak  he  will.  After  that,  let  God  do  as  be 
may  please — he  will  accept  his  punishment, 
if  God  thinks  fit  to  puhisu  him. 

Vers.  14 — 28. — The  appeal  is  now  to  God ; 
but  Job  prefaces  it  by  excusing  bis  boldness 
(vers.  14—19). 

Ver.  14.— Wherefore  do  X  *ake  my  a«^  '» 
my  teeth  t    An  obscure  phrase,  to  be  fv 


CH.  xm.  1—28.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


227 


plained  hj  the  parallel  in  tiie  second  mem- 
ber of  the  verse.  The  general  meaning  is, 
"  Why  do  I  jeopardize  everything — my  body, 
taking  it  as  it  were  between  my  teeth ;  and 
my  eonl,  taking  it  as  it  were  in  my  hand  ?  " 
Neither  idea  will  bear  minute  analysis ;  but 
the  latter,  at  any  rate,  was  known  to  the 
Greeks  (Athen.,'Deipno8oph.,'  p.  569),  and 
is  common  in  English.  And  put  my  Ufe  in 
my  hand  (oomp.  Judg.  xii.  3 ;  1  Sam.  xix. 
S ;  xKviii.  21 ;  Ps.  cxix.  109). 

Ver.  15. — Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will 
I  trust  iu  him;  rather,  yet  mil  I  wait 
for  him.  The  passage  is  one  of  the  few  in 
this  book  where  there  are  two  readings — 
hn>^  Sh  and  hn'tk  tlth.  Those  who  prefer  the 
latter  commonly  render  it,  "  I  have  no 
hope ; ''  but  it  is  pointed  out  by  Canon  Cook 
that  there  are  reasons  for  regarding  S^  as 
an  archaic  form  for  i^,  which  sometimes 
takes  its  place.  If  this  be  not  allowed,  the 
reading  W  will  have  to  be  preferred,  on  the 
double  authority  of  the  versions  and  of  the 
context.  Job  cannot  possibly  have  said,  in 
one  verse,  "I  have  no  hope,"  and  in  the 
next,  "He  (God)  shall  be  my  Salvation." 
But  I  will  maintain  mine  own  ways  before 
him ;  t.e.  "  I  will  maintain  that  they  are 
right  and  good  ways,  not  open  to  the  impu- 
tations that  mv  'friends'  have  cast  upon 
them  "  (oh.  iv.  "7.  8 ;  viii.  6,  20 ;  xi.  11,  14, 
20). 

"Ver.  16. — He  also  shall  be  my  Salvation. 
Whatever  God  does  to  him  (ver.  13),  wliat- 
ever  burden  he  lays  upon  him,  though  he 
even  "  sluy  "  him  (ver.  15),  yet  Job  is  sure 
that  ultimately,  in  one  way  or  another,  God 
will  be  his  Salvation.  It  is  this  determined 
trustfulness  which  at  once  gives  Job's  cha- 
racter its  strength,  and  atones  in"  a  certain 
sense  for  his  over-boldness  in  challenging 
God  to  a  controversy.  His  heart  is  riglit 
with  God.  Though  the  secrets  of  the  un- 
■  seen  world  have  been  hidden  from  him,  and 
the  condition  of  man  after  death  is  a  mystery 
on  which  he  can  only  form  vague  conjec- 
tures, yet  he  is  sure  that  in  the  end  God 
will  not  fail  him.  Tor  an  hypocrite  shall 
not  come  before  him.  If  he  were  a  hypocrite 
the  case  would  be  different;  he  would 
tremble  before  God,  instead  of  feeling 
confident.  But,  knowing  that  he  is  honest 
and  true,  he  is  not  afraid ;  he  is  bold  to 
"come  before  him,"  and  plead  hia  cause 
before  him. 

Ver.  17.— Hear  diligently  my  speech,  and 
my  declaration  with  your  ears.  A  last 
appeal  to  his  opponents  to  give  him  their 
full  attention  (comp.  ver.  6). 

Yer.  18. — Behold  now,  I  have  ordered  my 
cause;  t.e.  I  have  prepared  my  pleadings, 
and  arranged  them ;  I  know  what  I  am 
about  to  say.    Also  I  know  that  I  shaU 


be  justified.  I  am  confident,  f «.,  that  the 
cause,  if  it  be  fiiUy  heard,  will  be  decided 
in  my  favour.  It  will  appear  that  I  have 
not  brought  my  calamities  upon  myself  by 
my  own  misdoings.  Of  justification,  in  the 
forensic  sense,  of  imputed  righteousness, 
with  its  concomitant  ideas,  Job,  of  course, 
knows  nothing. 

Ver.  19.— Who  is  he  that  will  plead  with 
me  1  Will  God  himself  plead  ?  Or  will  he 
depute  some  one,  man  or  angel?  Job  is 
impatient  that  the  pleadings  should  begin. 
For  now,  if  I  hold  my  tongue,  I  shall  give 
up  the  ghost.  Some  translate,  "For  now 
shall  I  hold  my  peace  and  give  up  the 
ghost,"  which  they  explain  to  mean,  "If 
God  does  implead  me,  I  shall  take  refuge  in 
silence,  and  straiglitway  expire."  But  this 
seems  an  impossible  conclusion,  when  all 
that  Job  has  been  aiming  at  and  striving 
for  since  his  opponents  taxed  him  with 
wickedness  has  been  that  he  might  "  speak 
to  the  Almighty,  and  reason  with  God " 
(ver.  3).  It  is  far  simpler  to  keep  to  the 
translation  of  the  Authorized  Version,  and 
understand  Job  to  mean  that  things  have 
now  reached  a  point  at  which  he  must 
either  speak  or  expire. 

Ver.  20. — Only  do  not  two  things  unto  me. 
Before  beginning  his  plea.  Job  has  two 
requests  to  make  of  God.  (1)  That  he  will 
put  an  end  for  a  time  to  his  bodily  suffer- 
ings— suspend  them,  at  any  rate,  while  the 
pleading  continues ;  (2)  that  he  will  during 
the  same  space  abstain  from  terrifying  him 
mentally,  as  he  had  done  on  previous  occa- 
sions (ch.  vi.  4;  vii.  14;  ix.  14;  see  below, 
ver.  21).  Then  will  I  not  hide  myself  from 
thee;  literally,  from  thy  face  (comp.  ch. 
ix.  34,  35,  "  Let  him  take  his  rod  away  from 
me,  and  let  not  his  fear  terrify  me :  then 
would  I  speak,  and  not  fear  him"). 

Ver.  21. — Withdraw  thine  hand  far  from 
me ;  i.e.  "  thy  afflicting  hand,"  Job  views 
all  his  physical  suffering  as  coming  directly 
from  the  hand  of  God — momentarily  caused 
by  him,  and  therefore  removable  by  him 
at  any  moment.  He  has  no  thought  for 
secondary  causes.  And  let  not  thy  dread 
make  me  afraid.  Job  speaks  here  and  else- 
where of  spiritual  terrors — those  vague  and 
impalpable  fears  which  suggest  themselves 
inwardly  to  the  soul,  and  are  far  more 
painful,  far  more  dreadful,  than  any  amount 
of  bodily  anguish.  Unless  he  is  free  from 
these,  as  well  as  from  physical  pains,  he 
cannot  plead  his  cause  freely  and  fully. 

Ver.  22.— Then  call  thou,  and  I  will 
answer.  "Then" — when  I  am  free  from 
Buffering,  both  mental  and  bodily — implead 
me,  bring  thy  charges  against  me,  and  I 
will  answer  them.  As  Mr.  Fronde  observes, 
"Job  himself  had  been  educated  in  the 
same  creed"  ua  his  comforters;  "be,  too, 


228 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xm.  1 — 28. 


had  been  taught  to  see  the  hand  of  God  in 
the  outward  dispensation"  ('Short  Studies,' 
vol.  i.  p.  300).  He  therefore  assumes  tliat 
God  will  have  a  particular  charge  to  make 
against  him,  in  connection  with  each  of  the 
calamities  that  have  come  on  him,  and  he 
is  prepared  to  face  these  charges  and  con- 
fute them.  At  the  same  time,  he  is  un- 
doubtedly much  confused  and  perplexed, 
not  Isnowing  how  to  reconcile  his  teditional 
belief  with  bis  internal  consciousness  of 
innocence.  Or  let  me  speak,  and  answer 
thou  me.  "  Let  me,"  i.e.,  "  take  the  initia- 
tive, if  thou  preferrest  it  so — ^let  me  ask  the 
questions,  and  do  thou  answer." 

Yer.  23. — How  many  are  mine  iniquities 
and  sinsl  This  is  scarcely,  as  Professor 
Stanley  Leathes  represents  it,  "a  deep 
'  confession  of  personal  sin  "  ('  Old  Testament 
Commentary,'  vol.  iv.  p.  27).  It  is  more  in 
the  nature  of  a  remonstrance.  "  These  sing 
of  mine,  for  which  I  am  so  grievously 
punished,  what  are  they?  Name  them. 
How  many  are  there  of  them?  Let  me 
know  exactly  what  they  are;  and  then  I 
can  question  my  conscience  concerning 
them."  Make  mo  to  know  my  transgres- 
sion and  my  sin,  Tliese  words  imply  that 
he  does  not  know  them  at  present.  He 
knows  of  some  infirmities  and  lighter  mis- 
doings of  his  youth  (ver.  26) ;  but  be  knows 
of  no  such  sins  as  are  commensurate  with 
his  sufferings. 

Ver.  24. — Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face, 
and  boldest  me  for  thine  enemy  !  What  is 
thy  reason  for  withdrawing  from  me  the 
light  of  thy  countenance,  and  behaving, 
towards  me  as  though  thou  wert  mine 
enemy?  Job  does  not  believe  God  to  be 
his  enemy.  He  knows  that  God  will  one 
day  be  his  Salvation  (ver.  16);  but  he 
recognizes  a  present  alienation,  and  desires 
to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  cause  of  it. 

Ver.  25. — Wilt  thou  break  a  leaf  driven 
to  and  fro?  and  wilt  thou  pursue  the  dry 
Etnbble?  Job  compares  himself  to  two  of 
the  weakest  things  in  nature — a  withered 
leaf,  and  a  morsel  of  dry  stubble.  Ho  cunnot 
believe  that  God  will  employ  his  almighty 
strength  in  crushing  and  destroying  what 
is  so  slight  and  feeble,     A  deep  sense  of 


God's  goodness  and  oompassion  nnderlieg 
the  thought. 

Ver.  26. — For  thon  wiitest  Utter  thingi 
against  me.  The  allusion  seems  to  be  to 
the  ordinary  practice  in  ancient  law-courts 
of  formulating  a  vrritteu  acte  cPaeemation 
against  supposed  criminals.  Keeping  up 
the  imagery  of  a  court  and  pleadings,  Job 
represents  God  as  engaged  in  drawing  up 
such  a  document  against  him.  The  "  bitter 
things"  are  the  charges  which  the  aete 
contains.  And  makest  me  to  possess  the 
iniquities  of  my  youth.  Job,  like  David, 
has  to  acknowledge  "sins  and  otfenoes  "  com- 
mitted in  his  youth  (Ps.  xxv.  6).  In 
considering  what  the  indictment  against 
him  can  be,  he  can  only  suppose  that  these 
old  and  long-forsaken  sins  ate  being 
remembered  and  brought  up  against  him, 
and  that  he  is  being  punished  for  them. 
He  does  not  exclaim  against  this  as  in- 
justice; he  feels  probably  that  there  is  no 
statute  of  limitations  res|jecting  sins  and 
their  punishment ;  but  it  can  scarcely  have 
seemed  to  him  consistent  with  God's  good- 
ness and  mercifulness  that  the  offences  of 
his  immature  age  should  be  visited  npou 
him  so  bitterly. 

Ver,  27. — Thon  pnttest  my  feet  also  in 
the  stooks  (comp.  ch.  xxxiii,  11).  The 
punishment  is  said  to  be  still  in  use  among 
the  Bedouin  Arahs.  It  was  well  known  to 
the  Israelites  (Prov.  vii.  22;  Jer.  xx.  2; 
xxix.  26),  to  the  Greeks  (Herod.,  ix.  37), 
and  to  the  Komans  (Acts  xvi.  24).  And 
lookest  narrowly  onto  all  my  paths.  Not 
allowing  me  to  escape  thee.  Thou  settest  a 
print  upon  the  heels  of  my  feet;  rather, 
upon  the  soles  of  my  feet.  The  "  print " 
intended  is  probably  a  mark  which  the 
stocks  were  in  the  habit  of  making  (see 
Professor  Sayce,  in  Sunday  at  Home, 
December,  1890,  p.  125). 

Ver.  28. — And  he.  The  change  of  person 
is  very  strange,  but  not  unknown  to  the 
Hebrew  idiom.  It  is  impossible  that  any  one 
but  Job  himself  can  be  meant.  As  a  rotten 
thing  consumeth,  as  a  garment  that  is  moth- 
eaten.  An  allusion  to  the  character  of  the 
disease  from  which  he  is  suffering. 


HOMILE'XICS, 

Vers.  1 — ^16, — Job  to  Zopha/r ;  4.  A  wounded  soul  at  hay.  I.  The  voiob  or  fiebcb 
BBoniMiNATioN.  Transfixing  on  the  spear-point  of  his  remorseless  logic  the  men  who 
had  mocked  at  his  misery,  and  converted  his  very  piety  into  a  laughing-stock,  with 
infinite  scorn  Job  holds  them  up  a  spectacle  to  angels  and  to  men,  charging  them  with 
at  least  three  most  detestable  offences.  1.  Ignoring  of  facts.  They  had  favoured  him 
with  their  views  of  how  God  conducted  the  affairs  of  the  universe,  citing  apothegms, 
quoting  proverbs,  and  adducing  similitudes  carefully  selected  to  bear  out  their  peculiar 
dogmas  and  preconceived  theories ;  but  he  too  could  string  together  vrise  saws  extracted 
from  the  ancients,  being  in  respect  of  traditionary  lore  not  one  whit  behind  them  (ver.  2), 


OH.  zm.  1—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  229 


and  he  had  done  it  (ch.  xiL  6, 14 — ^26).  What  is  more,  he  had  ohserved  in  the  world 
around  him  exemplifications  of  everything  he  had  advanced  (ver.  1);  and,  unless  they 
had  been  as  blind  as  moles  and  as  senseless  as  the  ass  to  whose  offspring  they  had  com- 
pared him,  they  too  must  have  frequently  perceived  the  same.  But  they  had  not 
been  willing  to  discover  anything  inconsistent  with  their  favourite  dogma ;  or  they 
had  travelled  through  the  world  with  their  eyes  shut  and  their  ears  closed ;  or  they 
had  not  been  at  the  trouble  to  reflect  and  compare.  Inattention,  or  want  of  observa- 
tion, inconsideration,  or  want  of  reflection,  insincerity,  or  want  of  a  genuine  love  for  the 
truth,  are  three  formidable  barriers  in  the  way  of  man's  advancement  in  knowledge. 
The  first  is  the  fault  of  the  careless,  the  second  of  the  foolish,  the  third  of  the  ungodly. 
Eye  and  ear,  being  the  soul's  best  gateways  for  knowledge,  should  be  kept  continually 
open.  But  the  testimonies  and  reports  which  enter  by  these  gateways  should  be  sub- 
jected to  diligent  inspection  and  careful  comparison.  The  truth  once  found  should 
never  fail  to  secure  admission  into  the  inner  chamber  of  the  heart.  2.  Forging  of  lies. 
Instead  of  patiently  collecting  and  collating  facts  from  the  opened  page  of  human 
history,  and  deducing  therefrom  conclusions  as  to  the  principle  or  principles  of  the 
Divine  government.  Job's  friends  first  invented  a  theory,  and  then  looked  about  for 
musty  proverbs  to  support  it.  They  were  not  philosophers  or  theologians  at  all,  but 
simply  theorists,  inventors  of  sophisms,  stitchers  together  of  falsehoods,  and  fabricators 
of  vanities  (ver.  4),  who  had  endeavoured  to  construct  a  theodicy  by  mingling  together 
a  little  bit  of  fact  and  a  large  amount  of  fancy,  or  by  patching  together  a  handful  of 
ancient  platitudes.  Much  of  modern  science,  philosophy,  and  even  theology,  proceeds 
upon  the  principle  here  so  severely  castigated.  The  true  Baconian  method  of  induction, 
first  to  ascertain  with  minute  accuracy,  not  a  few,  but,  as  far  as  possible,  aU  the  facts 
of  the  case  before  pronouncing  judgment  as  to  the  formula  which  shall  explain  them,  is 
the  only  safe  guide  to  be  followed  in  philosophical  discussion,  scientific  research,  or 
theological  investigation.  A  formula  that  does  not  embrace  every  known  fact,  much 
more  that  is  contradicted  by  any  known  fact,  cannot  be  correct.  3.  Accepting  of 
persons.  Passing  on  to  a  more  serious  indictment,  Job  charges  them  with  abject  and 
contemptible  sycophancy ;  with  takmg  God's  side  simply  because  they  knew  he  was 
strong ;  with  supporting  his  cause  by  means  of  arguments  which  were  consciously 
insincere,  and  generally  with  playing  the  part  of  flatterers — a  course  of  conduct  which 
Job  declares  to  be :  (1)  Wicked  in  itselt  "  Will  je  speak  wickedly  for  God?  and  talk 
deceitfully  for  him  ? ''  (ver.  7).  To  propound  fallacious  theories,  least  of  aU  to  do  so 
knowingly  and  deliberately,  never  can  be  right,  even  though  such  theories  are  advanced 
in  favour  of  God  and  religion.  This  is  practically  done  when  men  attempt  to  buttress 
up  Divine  truth,  advance  the  Divine  cause,  or  vindicate  the  Divine  character  by  means 
of  sophistical  arguments.  But  not  even  in  this  case  does  the  end  sanctify  the  means. 
(2)  Unjust  towards  himself.  "  Will  ye  accept  his  person  ?  will  ye"  contend  for  God  ?  " 
(ver,  8).  To  side  with  God  in  any  controversy  which  he  maintains  with  the  creature 
never  can  be  wrong  considered  in  itself  (Rom.  iii.  4),  but  to  do  so  without  regard  to_  the 
rights  of  that  creature  with  whom  God  contends  never  can  be  right.  Job  complained 
that,  in  declining  to  believe  his  protestations  of  integrity,  and  in  cruelly  assuming 
without  proof  that  he  was  guilty,  his  friends  were  practically  showing  partiality 
towards  God,  and  behaving  with  unfairness  towards  him.  But  it  never  can  be  right, 
in  order  to  justify  God,  to  perpetrate  injustice  against  man.  (3)  Displeasing  to  God. 
"  Is  it  tfood  that  he  should  search  you  out  ?  or  as  one  man  mocketh  another,  do  ye  so 
mock  him  ?  "  (ver.  9).  Were  God  to  investigate  their  conduct,  he  could  not  possibly 
extend  to  it  his  approbation.  They  would  seem  to  him  as  persons  who  were  attempt- 
ing to  jest  with  and  deceive  him,  as  men  jest  with  and  deceive  their  fellows.  Tiieir 
behaviour  would  be  wholly  abhorred  by  him  whose  patrons  they  had  so  presumptuously 
constituted  themselves,  since  God  never  can  approve  of  falsehoods  or  injustices  even  in 
support  of  his  own  cause,  which  stands  in  no  need  whatever  of  sophistries  or  patronage 
of  any  sort.  (4)  Certain  of  exposure.  "  Shall  it  bo  well  with  you  when  he  searches 
you  out?  or  may  you  deceive  him  as  a  man  is  deceived?"  No!  verily.  "He  will 
surely  reprove  you,  if  ye  secretly  accept  persons."  And  this  in  two  ways ;  by  confound- 
ing their  persons :  "  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid  ?"  and  exploiling  theii 
doctrines:  "Your  remembrances,"  t.e.  your  memorable  sayings,  "are," or  shall  be,«like 
unto  ashes  J  "literally,  "shall  be  prover*»8  of  ashes  ;"t.e.  they  shall  be  demonstrated 


230  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xm,  1— 2 


to  be  as  valueless  and  as  easily  effaced  as  similitudes  traced  upon  the  dust ;  "  and  your 
ramparts,"  i.e.  the  arguments  behind  which  ye  entrench  yourselves,  "  shall  be  ramparts 
of  clay,"  as  easily  broken  through  as  mud  walls. 

II.  The  VOICE  OF  OUTEAGED  INTEOBITT.  1.  An  a^opeol/rom  man  to  Ood.  "Surely 
I  would  speak  to  the  Almighty,  and  I  desire  to  reason  with  God ! "  (ver.  3).  So  David, 
when  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  and  the  tongue  of  the  deceitful  opened  against  him, 
addressed  himself  to  God  in  prayer  (Ps.  cix.  2 — 4).  Christ  also,  when  his  enemies 
gaped  upon  him  with  their  mouths,  sought  refuge  against  their  calumnies  in  holy 
intercourse  with  God  (Ps.  xxiL  2—21 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  39 — 46 ;  John  xi.  42).  The  example 
of  both  is  commended  to  saints  when  similarly  circumstanced  (Ps.  Iv.  22 ;  xci.  15 ; 
Phil.  iv.  6 ;  1  Pet.  v.  7),  and  has  been  frequently  followed.  Many  who  have  been  denied 
justice  at  the  hands  of  their  fellows  have  been  constrained  to  appeal  to  thfe  tribunal 
of  the  skies.  It  is  a  great  mercy  that  such  a  court  exists  for  suffering  men,  and 
that  its  door  is  never  closed  against  the  suit  of  a  distressed  saint  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15 ;  1  Pet. 
iii.  12;  Luke  xviii.  7,  8).  On  the  contrary,  God's  people  are  invited  to  repair  to 
liim  in  every  time  of  trouble  (Ps.  L  15 ;  Ixii.  8 ;  Eom.  xii.  12 ;  Heb.  iv.  16),  when 
burdened  by  affliction,  when  overtaken  by  spiritual  anxiety,  when  misunderstood  by 
men.  If  we  may  not  maintain  our  sinlessness  before  God  (Ps.  Ixix .  5),  we  can  at  least 
uphold  our  integrity  (ch.  x.  7  ;  John  xxi.  15,  16 ;  Eom.  i.  9).  But  whatever  be  our 
case,  it  will  be  by  him  both  exactly  appreciated  and  tenderly  sympathized  with.  2.  A 
request  for  non-interference  on  the  part  of  num.  "  Oh  that  ye  would  altogether  hold 
your  peace !  and  it  should  be  your  wisdom  "  (ver.  5) ;  "  Hold  your  peace,  let  me  alone, 
that  I  may  speak  "  (ver.  13).  Job  advances  two  reasons  for  desiderating  silence  on 
the  part  of  his  friends.  (1)  It  would  greatly  enhance  their  reputation  for  wisdom  (cf. 
Prov.  xvii.  28).  It  is  one  mark  of  wisdom  to  know  when  to  be  silent ;  and  it  is  better 
to  be  always  silent  than  to  utter  heartless  sophistries  and  pointless  platitudes  like  those 
of  Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar.  (2)  It  would  greatly  facilitate  his  converse  with  God. 
In  the  soul's  supreme  moments  of  spiritual  distress,  few  things  are  more  irksome  than  the 
well-meant  but  almost  always  irritating  admonitions  and  advices  of  good  people.  The 
ordinary  mind  fails  to  see  that,  as  there  is  a  joy,  so  also  there  is  a  sorrow,  with  which 
no  stranger  can  intermeddle  (Prov.  xiv.  10).  Besides,  the  great  controversy  between 
God  and  the  human  soul  must  be  fought  out  in  solitude  and  in  silence,  like  the  struggle 
at  the  ford  of  Jabbok  between  the  ansel  and  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.  24).  3.  A  deierminor- 
tion  to  defend  his  cause  with  Ood.  (1)  At  all  hazards.  Job  is  prepared  to  go  forward, 
"  let  coine  on  him  what  will ;  "  "  to  take  his  flesh  in  his  teeth,  and  put  his  life  in  his 
hand ; "  to  undergo  death  itself  if  need  be.  "  Behold  1  he  may  slay  me :  I  entertain  no 
liope,"t.e.of  any  other  issue  to  the  conflict:  "yet  will  I  maintain  my  ways  before  him." 
However  this  verse  be  translated  (vide  Exposition),  it  contains  a  threefold  testimony — 
to  Job's  deeply  seated  consciousness  of  his  own  personal  integrity;  to  Job's  clear  moral 
honesty,  since  a  hypocrite  would  never  have  proposed  to  invite  the  Divine  inspection 
of  himself  and  his  ways;  and  to  Job's  exalted  heroism,  which  would  rather  brave  death 
than  dishonour,  clinging  to  God  with  invincible  fidelity  in  spite  of  overwhelming 
temporal  disaster  and  mental  anxiety;  yea,  in  the  face  of  death  and  dissolution — a 
sublime  refutation  of  the  Satanic  calumny  (ch.  ii.  5).  (2)  Yet  not  without  hope.  Job 
was  inwardly  persuaded  that  the  ultimate  result  of  his  venture  would  Tae  triumphant 
vindication  and  salvation.  This  conviction  was  grounded  on  the  fact  of  his  intense 
inward  longing  to  stand  face  to  face  with  God.  His  reasoning  takes  the  form  of  a 
syllogism.  It  is  impossible  that  a  man  conscious  of  hypocrisy  should  desire  an  intei'- 
view  with  God.  But  such  desire  is  the  all-absorbing  passion  of  my  soul.  Therefore  I 
indulge  the  hope  that  I  am  not  a  hypocrite,  and  that  he  who  now  seems  to  be  my 
Adversary  will  eventually  prove  my  Salvation. 

Learn :  1.  It  is  the  delight  of  a  good  man,  the  sign  of  a  wise  man,  and  the  duty 
of  all  men,  to  study  the  ways  and  works  of  God.  2.  It  is  no  sin  to  vindicate  one's 
character  when  that  is  wrongly  aspersed.  3.  It  requires  a  good  cause  to  enable  a  weak 
man  to  speak  with  the  Almighty.  4.  It  is  not  a  fault  in  manners  to  reprove  good 
men  when  they  tell  lies*.  5.  It  is  a  fault  in  good  men  when  they  depart  from  the  truth 
even  by  a  hair's  breadth.  6.  It  is  infinitely  wiser  not  to  talk  at  all  than  to  talk  like  a  fooL 
7.  It  is  dangeious  to  summon  allies  from  the  devil's  camp,  even  when  fighting  In'  the 
Lord's  battles.     8.  It  is  an  insult  to  God  to  suppose  that  light  and  darkness,  truth  and 


OH.  XIII.  1—28.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  281 

error,  sincerity  and  hypocrisy,  rigliteousnesa  and  unrigliteousness,  Christ  and  Belial,  can 
be  confederates,  9.  It  is  better  to  revere  God's  holiness  on  earth  than  to  tremble 
before  his  glorious  power  in  a  future  world.  10.  It  is  a  poor  defence  that  even  a  good 
man  finds  in  lies  and  deceptions.  11.  It  is  preferable  to  part  with  lile  than  wiih  faith  in 
God.    12.  It  is  certain  that,  though  a  humble  believer  may  be  slain,  he  never  can  be  lost. 

Vers.  15,  16. — Faith  and  assurance.  I.  Job's  faith.  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet 
will  I  trust  in  him."  Mark  :  1.  The  Object  of  Job's  faith.  God,  as  the  Justifier  of  the 
ungodly  who  believe,  since  Job  did  not  claim  to  be  sinless,  and  yet  expected  to  be 
justified.  2.  The  trial  of  Job's  faith.  The  intense  sufferings,  both  physical  and 
mental,  through  which  he  passed.  The  faith  of  God's  people  is  commonly  subjected  to 
trial.  Yet  it  is  doubtful  if  any  have  ever  experienced  greater  difficulties  ia  the  way  of 
believing  in  God  than  Job  did.  3.  The  intensity  of  Job's  faith.  "  Though  he  slay 
me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him."  Job  was  determined  that  no  amount  of  haidship  should 
prevent  him  from  confiding  in  the  God  of  mercy  and  salvation ;  in  which  respect  he  is 
well  worthy  of  imitation  by  Christ's  followers.  4.  The  triwmph  of  Job's  faith.  It  was 
no  mere  boast  on  the  part  of  Job  that  he  would  cling  to  God  at  all  hazards,  as  it  has 
often  proved  on  the  part  of  over-confident  believers  (e.g.  Peter) ;  but  the  issue  of  his 
trial  established  the  sincerity  of  his  words.  His  faith  was  often  rudely  assaulted,  and 
sometimes  appeared  to  tremble,  but  it  was  never  overthrown. 

II.  Job's  assukanoe.  "  He  also  shall  be  my  Salvation  "  (ver.  16) ;  "  I  know  that  I 
shall  be  justified."  Assurance  of  salvation  is  clearly  possible,  since  it  was  enjoyed  by 
Abel  (Heb.  xi.  3),  Enoch  (Heb.  xi.  6),  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  6),  Moses  (Exod.  xv.  2), 
David  (Ps.  xviii.  2),  St.  Paul  (Phil.  i.  21 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8) ;  it  is  alsu  extremely  desirable 
for  the  saint's  usefulness,  as  much  as  for  the  saint's  comfort,  and  in  every  instance  in 
which  it  is  possessed  must  be  based,  as  Job's  was,  on  :  1.  Belief  in  the  Divine  testimony. 
Job  knew  that  he  would  be  justified,  not  because  he  was  a  sinless  man,  but  because  he 
trusted  in  God ;  and  this  is  the  first  ground  of  assurance  to  an  anxious  souL  The  sinner 
that  believes  is  sure  of  salvation,  because  "  he  that  believeth  shall  be  saved ; "  and 
every  one  who  trusts  in  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly  may  with  confidence  affirm, 
"  I  know  that  I  shall  be  justified."  2.  Consciousness  of  personal  sincerity.  That  is, 
if  a  man,  after  careful  self-examination,  discovers  in  himself  the  tokens  of  true  piety 
and  Christian  integrity,  he  is  warranted  to  conclude  that  he  has  passed  from  death  to 
life,  and  God  will  eventually  prove  his  salvation.  Job  felt  he  was  not  a  hypocrite,  but 
a  sincerely  upright  man;  and  hence  he  knew  that  God  would  not  condemn  him. 
St.  John,  in  his  Epistles,  supplies  marks  by  which  a  man  may  determine  for  himself 
whether  or  not  he  is  a  genuine  Christian  disciple. 

Learn :  1.  That  without  faith  there  can  be  no  assurance.  2.  That  wherever  there  is 
faith  there  ought  to  be  assurance. 

Vers.  17 — 28. — Jb6  to  Ood :  resumption  of  the  third  controversy  :  1.  The  pleading 
of  a  saint  with  Heaven.  I.  Preli  minaeibs  to  the  pleading.  1.  Public  audience 
invited.  Job  requests  his  discomfited  friends  to  be  silent  spectators  of  the  ensuing 
trial,  and  to  attentively  consider  the  defence  he  was  about  to  offer  (ver.  17).  Intended 
chiefly  for  the  ear  of  God,  it  should  yet  contain  nothing  unfit  for  publication  in  the 
hearing  of  men.  Conscious  of  sincerity.  Job  had  nothing  to  conceal.  Guilelessness  is 
ever  a  mark  of  true  saintsbip.  "  A  man  with  a  clear  conscience  can  stand  fearlessly 
before  the  whole  world."  Undaunted  courage  is  also  characteristic  of  the  godly  (Ps. 
xxvii.  1 ;  Prov.  xxviii.  1 ;  1  John  iii.  21),  who,  however,  unlike  Job,  are  emboldened, 
not  by  a  sense  of  their  own  integrity,  but  by  a  calm  reliance  on  the  righteousness  of 
Christ  (Isa.  xlv.  24,  25 ;  1.  7 — 9 ;  Bom.  viii.  32—34).  2.  Perfect  readiness  expressed. 
Job  asserts  (ver.  18)  that  he  had  carefully  arranged  the  several  pleas  he  should  urge 
in  vindication  of  his  outraged  integrity.  And  in  this  Job's  example  may  be  followed 
with  advantage.  Neither  saint  nor  sinner  should  irreverently  and  presumptuously 
intrude  into  God's  presence  without  having  first  composed  his  heart  and,  as  far  as 
possible,  arranged  his  thoughts  (Eccles.  v.  2).  No  man  is  ready  for  reasoning  with 
God  in  prayer  until  he  knows  both  what  he  wants  and  how  to  plead  for  it.  3.  Hope- 
ful confidence  entertained.  "I  know  that  I  shall  be  justified  "  (ver.  18).  This  was 
no  presumption  on  the  part  of  Job.  who  probably- based  his  justification  before  God,  in 


232  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xm.  1—28. 

the  strictly  forensic  sense  of  absolution  and  acceptance,  not  upon  bis  own  rigbteoiis- 
ness,  but  upon  the  free  favour  of  GkxJ,  through  the  merit  of  his  Eedeemer  (cb.  xix.  25) ; 
but  merely  that  inward  consciousness  of  personal  integrity  which  a  good  man  may 
justly  rely  on  as  evidence  of  a  gracious  state,  and  by  which  he  may  encourage  his 
fainting  spirit  when  about  to  appear  before  GoH,  like  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxviii.  3),  David 
(Ps.  xxvi.  1),  St.  Peter  (John  xxi.  17),  St.  Paul  (Rom.  ix.  1),  and  St.  John(l  Epist.  iii.  21). 
Of  course,  it  would  be  presumption  were  a  sinful  .man,  standing  on  his  own  righteous- 
ness, to  expect  that  he  would  be  justified  before  God  (Ps.  cxliii.  2  ;  Rom.  iii.  20).  But, 
trusting  in  the  great  propitiatory  sacrifice  of  him  who  is  "  the  Lord  our  Righteousness,'' 
the  guiltiest  and  most  unworthy  sinner  may  draw  nenr  to  God  with  holy  boldness 
(Heb.  iv.  16 ;  x.  22),  and  with  absolute  assurance  of  acceptance  and  salvation  (Heb.  vii. 
25 ;  Eom.  viii.  1),  saying,  "  I  know  that  I  shall  be  justified."  4.  Sinful  impeach- 
ment challenged.  "  Who  is  he  that  will  plead  with  me  ?  "  i.e.  against  nie,  contra- 
dicting and  disproving  what  I  now  so  fearlessly  assert,  viz.  my  personal  integrity.  If 
there  is  any,  let  him  stand  forth  and  establish  his  indictment.  If  he  succeed  in  tar- 
nishing my  fair  name,  "I  shall  be  silent,  I  shall  give  up  the  ghost,"  feeling  that, 
honour  gone,  life  itself  can  have  no  further  charm  for  me.  Many  a  one  besides  Job 
has  felt  that  "  good  name  in  man  and  woman  is  the  immediate  jewel  of  their  souls  " 
('Othello,'  act  iii.  sc.  3),  "the  immortal  part"  of  themselves  (ibid.,  act  ii.  so.  3),  and 
that,  that  being  lost,  nothing  worthy  of  possessing  can  remain  (cf. '  Richard  II.,'  act  i. 
Bc.  1).  Job's  language  reminds  us  of  St.  Paul's  address  to  his  accusers  before  Pelix 
(Acts  xxiv.  16 — 21);  and  afterwards  before  Festus  (Acts  xxv.  11);  also  of  the  loftier 
challenge  addressed  by  Christ  to  his  countrymen  (Isa.  1. 8 ;  John  viii.  46).  And  though 
certainly  believers  cannot  use  the  question  as  did  Christ,  and  may  sometimes  have  a 
difficulty  in  employing  it  in  the  sense  of  either  Job  or  St.  Paul,  it  is  always  open  to 
them,  as  they  keep  their  eyes  on  the  cross,  to  exclaim,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "  (Rom.  viii.  33). 

II.  Conditions  op  the  pleading.    1.  A  cessation  of  his  troubles.    (Ver.  21.)    The 
hand  of  God  a  frequent  biblical  expression  for  afiliction  (1  Sam.  v.  6,  7 ;  Ps.  xxxii.  4,' 
xxxviii.  2 ;  Isa.  i.  25),  which  is  sent  (Deut.  viii.  5 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  14 ;  ch.  v.  17 ;  Ps, 
xciv.  12 ;  Hob.  xii.  6,  7),  guidtd  (ch.  xxxiii.  17 — 19  ;  Prov. iii.  11, 12 ;  Isa. xlviii.  10; 
Ezek.  XX.  37),  and  removed  (Ps.  1.  15;  Ixvi.  12;  Zech.  xiii.  9;  John  xvi.  20;  Matt. 
V.  4)  by  Divine  wisdom  and  power.    The  fatherly  chastisements  of  God  are  directly 
designed  to  refine  and  purify  the  saintly  soul  (ch.  xxxvi.  8, 10;  Isa.  xlviii.  10;   Heb. 
xii.  11),  and  to  draw  it  near  his  footstool  in  penitence  and  faith,  humility  and  love 
(Hos.  V.  15 ;  Heb.  xii.  9).     Yet,  not  unfrequently,'  one  of  the  first  effects  of  bodily 
afiliction  upon  a  good  man,  especially  if  it  be  severe,  is  to  discompose  his  mind,  disturb 
his  heart,  and  generally  unfit  him  for  converse  with  God.     Notwithstanding  the 
spiritual  benefits  folded  up  in  tribulation,  there  can  be  no  greater  blessing,  even  with 
a  view  to  the  exercises  of  religion,  than  mens  sana  in  sano  corpore.      Mucli  of  the 
spiritual  depression  experienced  by  Christians  is  traceable  to  extreme  bodily  infirmity, 
though  sometimes  happy  invalids  can  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  When  I  am  weak,  then  am 
I  strong ; "  "  Most  gladly  will  I  glory  in  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  God  may  rest 
upon  me."    Then,  if  pious  souls,  groaning  beneath  the  pressure  of  physical  maladies 
and  mental  anxieties,  find  it  hard  to  concentrate  their  thoughts  upon  Divine  thing*, 
what  must  be  the  madness  of  those  who  delay  the  work  of  repenting  and  pleading 
with  God  for  forgiveness  and  salvation  till  they  are  Ijing  on  a  sick-bed,  racked  with 
pain,  and  perhaps  trembling  in  the  grasp  of  death  ?     2.  .4  removal  of  his  fear.     (Ver. 
21.)    The  Divine  character  has  a  terrifying,  as  well  as  an  attractive,  side  to  sinful  man. 
The  glory  of  the  Divine  purity  is  so  effulgent  (ch.  iv.  18),  of  the  Divine  justice  so 
incorruptible  (ch.  ix.  2),  of  the  Divine  wisdom  so  ineflable  (ch.  ix.  4),  of  the  Divine 
strength  so  overwhelming  (ch.  ix.  19),  that  the  human  spirit  instinctively  shrinks 
back  in  alarm.     Burdened  with  guilt,  tainted  with  pollution,  lying  under  condemna- 
tion, it  cannot  hold  up  its  head  in  the  presence  of  such  awful  majesty,  but,  fallin" 
prostrate  before  the  footstool  of  heaven's  glorious  King,  exclaims,  like  Isaiah,  "  Woe  u 
me  i  for  I  am  undone ! "  (Isa.  vi.  5) ;  and  like  David, 

"In  judgment  enter  not  with  me,  thy  servant  poorj 
For  why,  this  well  I  wot,  no  sinner  cau  endure 
The  Bight  of  the©..  O  God." 

(Fa.  CKliii  2,  metrical  venion.): 


OH.  xin.  1— 28.]  THE  BOOK   OP  JOB.  233 

And  like  St.  Peter,  "  Depart  from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord  "  (Luke  v.  8). 
Job  felt  that,  unless  his  mind  were  relieved  from  such  paralyzing  views  of  the 
overwhelming  grandeur  of  his  invisible  Judge,  it  would  be  utterly  hopeless  to  expect 
he  could  even  state  bis  case  aright,  much  less  win  his  cause.  Hence  already  he  had 
craved  the  interposition  of  a  daysman,  who  should  both  take  away  God's  rod  and  remove 
God's  fear(ch. ix.  34)  in  order  to  enable  him  to  speak  j  and  to  this  he  apparently  again 
recurs.  Happily  such  a  daysman  has  been  provided  for  m  in  Christ,  in  whom  tho 
anxious  sinner  may  now  behold,  not  only  the  rod  of  Divine  punishment  removed,  but 
the  greatness  of  the  Divine  glory  veiled,  so  that  one  who  desires  to  speak  with  God 
may  do  so  without  a  fear,  "  whether  God  himself  opens  Uie  cause,  or  permits  him  to 
have  the  first  word." 

III.  Contents  of  the  pleading.  1.  A  hold  interrogation.  (Ver,  23.)  (1)  A  valuable 
definition.  Sin  is  'avon,  or  perverse  acting,  a  bending,  twisting,  or  turning  aside  from 
the  Divine  Law ;  chattah,  a  false  step,  hence  a  failing,  an  error,  a  sin  of  weakness  or 
infirmity ;  and  pesha',  a  breaking  away,  hence  deliberate  and  malignant  wickedness. 
The  first  epithet  describes  the  nature  of  sin — •'  it  is  any  want  of  conformity  unto  or 
transgression  of  the  Law  of  God;**  the  second  points  to  the  source  of  sin — human 
weakness  (Jer.  x.  23) ;  while  the  third  indicates  the  heinousness  of  sin — it  is  essentially 
rebellion  against  God  (Rom.  viii.  7).  Or  the  three  expressions  may  allude  to  different 
kinds  of  sin,  palpable  offences,  venial  imperfections,  notorious  crimes,  of  all  which  Job 
was  supposed  to  be  guilty.  (2)  A  candid  confession.  Whatever  iniquities,  sins,  or 
transgressions  Job  had  committed,  God  perfectly  knew  them,  could  reckon  up  their 
number  and  estimate  their  heinousness.  Men  often  are  unconscious  of  their  faults, 
frequently  forget  their  shortcomings,  and  can  seldom  realize  the  enormity  of  theii 
wickednesses.  But  all  these  are  patent  to  God's  omniscient  mind  (Ps.  Ixix.  5 ;  Ixxiil. 
23;  Luke  xvi.  15;  Heb.  iv.  13).  (3)  A  passionate  supplication.  That  God  would 
enable  Job  to  understand  the  nature  and  enormity  of  those  offences  of  which  he  had 
been  guilty,  and  for  which  his  friends  alleged  he  was  suffering.  The  prayer  is  admir- 
ably suited  to  and  urgently  needed  by  all,  though  not  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was 
employed  by  Job.  No  man  can  attain  to  a  clear  discovery  of  his  own  sinfulness,  to  an 
adequate  estimate  of  the  number  of  his  misdeeds,  to  a  just  appreciation  of  their  essential 
wickedness,  except  through  Divine  teaching.  Such  teaching  God  imparts  through  his 
Word  (Ps.  xciv.  12 ;  Eom.  vii.  9)  and  Spirit  (John  xvi.  8).  (4)  An  obvious  implica- 
tion. Job  designed  it  to  be  understood  that  he  himself  was  uticonscious  of  any  such 
offences,  though  of  course  he  did  not  claim  to  be  entirely  innocent.  2.  An  inex- 
plicable problem,  (Yer.  24.)  Here  is  (1)  a  painful  experience,  the  sense  of  having 
lost  the  Divine  favour,  to  a  gracious  soul  the  highest  blessing  attainable  or  even  con- 
ceivable on  earth  (Ps.  xxx.  6 ;  Ixiii.  3) ;  (2)  a  common  experience,  realized  by  David 
(Ps.  xiii.  1 ;  xxii,  1),  by  Heman  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  14),  and  by  Christ  (Matt,  xxvii.  46),  as 
well  as  by  many  of  Christ's  followers  since ;  (3)  a  mysterious  experience,  not  that  God 
should  hide  his  face  and  seem  to  withdraw  his  favour  from  a  sinful  soul,  but  that, 
having  once  admitted  a  repenting  and  believing  sinner  to  his  love,  he  should  to  all 
appearance  cast  him  off — a  course  of  conduct  for  which  Job  was  perfectly  at  a  loss 
to  account ;  yet  (4)  a  needful  experiene*,  in  the  case  of  Christ  to  make  him  perfect  as 
a  Saviour,  in  that  of  Job,  David,  Heman,  and  others  to  make  them  perfect  as  saints.  3. 
A  pathetic  expostulation.  (1)  The  unworthiness  of  the  Divine  conduct  in  aflSictiiig  Job. 
Absolutely  powerless  and  insignificant  had  Job  become  through  his  long-continued 
trouble,  like  a  fallen  leaf  upon  the  way,  agitated  and  tossed  by  every  passing  wind,  or 
like  the  withered  stubble  of  a  corn-field,  and  yet  the  Almighty  assailed  him  with  the 
full  force  of  his  Divine  artillery,  as  if  he  were  some  formidable  opponent  whom  it  requiied 
the  battalions  of  omnipotence  to  crush  (ver.  25).  To  Job's  mind  it  seemed  wholly 
incongruous,  entirely  preposterous,  completely  unbecoming  the  Divine  Majesty.  So 
God's  procedure  in  providence  oftentimes  appears  to  sense  and  reason  unworthy  of  his 
greatness  and  glory ;  but  faith,  coming  to  the  rescue,  reminds  the  doubting  heart  that 
he  doeth  all  things  well.  (2)  The  seeming  injustice  of  God's  conduct  in  afflicting  Job. 
Conscious  of  innocence  in  nia  riper  years.  Job  could  only  offer,  au  the  solution  of  that 
parplexiag  enigma  by  which  he  was  confronted,  that  God  was  going  back  upon  the 
tins  of  his  youthful  days,  although  these  had  long  since  been  repented  of  and  forgiven 
(ver.  26).    But  sin  oace  forgiven  is  for  ever  forgotten  (Isa.  xliii.  25 ;  Micah  viL  18, 


234  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xm.  1—28. 

19).  God  never  reproduces  for  punishment  the  transgression  he  has  freely  pardoned. 
Yet  the  iniquities  of  youth  which  have  not  been  cancelled  by  Divine  mercy  have  a 
strange  power  of  self-resuscitation  in  riper  years ;  and  God  often  makes  wicked  men 
(e.g.  the  drunkard,  the  profligate),  in  accordance  with  the  established  and  righteous 
laws  of  retribution,  to  inherit,  or  possess,  or  reap  the  bitter  fruits  in  old  age  of  the 
excesses  and  indulgences  of  youth.  Hence  the  necessity  of  cultivating  moral  purity  in 
youth,  and  the  propriety  in  after-years  of  praying,  "  Bemember  not  the  sins  of  my 
youth "  (Ps.  XXV.  7).  (3)  The  extreme  severity  of  God's  conduct  in  afflicting  Job, 
who  was  treated  like  a  prisoner ;  whose  feet  were  thrust  into  the  stocks,  as  were  those 
of  Jeremiah  (xx.  2 ;  xxix.  6),  and  of  Paul  and  Silas  (Acts  xvi.  24) ;  whose  steps  were 
narrowly  watched,  lest  he  should  either  enjoy  too  much  freedom  or  attempt  to  escape 
(cf.  ch.  X.  14 ;  and  see  homiletics  on  ch.  vii.  12 — 21),  and  whose  liberty  was  (according 
to  one  interpretation),  restrained  within  narrow  limits,  by  a  boundary  or  circle  drawn 
around  the  soles  of  his  feet  (ver.  27),  and  that  though  he,  the  chained,  inspected,  and 
immured  prisoner,  was  a  poor  miserable  creature,  lying  rotting  on  an  ash-heap  like  a 
garment  that  the  moth  gnaweth  (ver.  28). 

Learn  :  1.  The  gratitude  which  saints  and  sinners  both  owe  to  God  for  the  throne  of 
grace.  2.  The  sublime  fearlessness  with  which  the  guiltiest  no  less  than  the  godliest 
may  approach  that  throne.  3.  The  liberty  which  all  enjoy  to  pour  out  their  hearts 
before  God.  4.  The  propriety  of  seeking  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  reality 
and  power  of  indwelling  sin.  5,  The  sinfulness  of  supposing  that  God  ever  treats  any 
of  his  creatures  as  enemies. 

Ver.  23. — The  knowkdge  of  sin.  I.  Make  mb  to  know  the  bealitt  op  sin,  in 
case  I  should  deny  it  and  be  deceived. 

II.  Make  mb  to  know  the  poweb  of  sin,  lest,  being  taken  unawares,  I  should 
become  its  .slave. 

III.  Make  mb  to  know  the  HEiironsNESB  op  sin,  lest,  making  light  of  it,  I  should 
be  led  to  glory  in  my  shame. 

IV.  Make  me  to  know  the  guilt  op  sin,  lest,  being  indifferent  to  its  danger,  I 
should  fail  to  seek  escape. 

V.  Make  me  to  know  the  pabdonablenebs  of  bin,  lest,  doubting  of  God's  mercy, 
I  should  sink  into  despair. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Man's  injustice  and  the  justice  of  Ood.  Job  proceeds  to  turn  the 
tables  upn  these  self-complacent  friends,  who  are  so  disposed  to  moralize  and  find 
illustrations  of  their  conceptions  of  the  Divine  righteousness  at  his  expense.  His 
friends,  however,  really  do  him  a  service;  not,  indeed,  by  manifesting  the  sympathy  he 
craves,  but  by  throwing  him  upon  his  own  resources— still  better,  by  throwing  him 
upon  his  God.  The  tonic  of  opposition  is  sometimes  far  more  needed  in  mental 
suffering  than  is  the  soothing  draught  of  sympathy.  The.  former  braces,  the  latter 
enervates.  It  appears  to  be  so  now  with  Job.  He  rouses  the  forces  of  his  soul,  as 
the  palm  tree  stirs  up  its  vital  energies  beneath  the  weight  attached  to  its  branches ; 
and  he  rushes  upon  the  last  cast.  He  will  throw  himself,  regardless  of  consequences, 
upon  the  pity  and  justice  of  the  Eternal. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Correction  of  the  friends,  I.  Transition  in  Job's  addbbss.  (Vers. 
1 — 3.)  He  pauses  for  a  moment  before  entering  on  a  new  course  of  thought.  He 
asserts  that  his  experience  has  not  been  without  fruit.  The  eye,  the  ear,  the  mouth 
(ch.  xii.  11),  are  the  physical  symbols  of  living  and  actual  experience.  So  St.  John : 
"  That  wiiich  we  have  heard,  .  .  .  seen  with  our  eyes, .  .  .  looked  upon,  and  our 
hands  have  handled  "  (1  John  i.  1).  And  iu  no  particular  is  their  knowledge,  in  virtue 
of  which  they  presume  to  take  so  high  ground,  superior  to  his  own. 

II.  Resolve.  "  To  speak  to  the  Almighty,  to  reason  with  God."  It  is  a  hold,  yet  a 
truly  reverential  and  a  helieving  resolve.  It  reminds  ns  of  Abraham  pleading  for  the 
cities  of  the  plain.     It  i»  founded  on  the  firm  appraheAafon  of  the  moral  attributes  of 


OH.  xni.  1—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  285 

God,  which  he  cannot  deny  withont  denying  himself.  On  this  ground  we  may  even 
Venture  safely.  Boldly  we  may  come  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  beseech  God  not  to 
forsake  the  eternal  throne  of  his  holiness. 

III.  Ebjection  op  the  intebfeeenoe  of  hib  fbiends.  (Vers.  4 — 6.)  No  sooner 
is  the  resolve  taken  to  appeal  to  God  than  new  strength  comes  to  the  heart.  Job  rises 
above  the  cloud  of  misconstruction  that  has  gathered  about  him,  like  the  tall  clifi 
towering  above  the  clouds,  and  looks  down  with  scorn  on  these  "  forgers  of  lies,"  these 
"  worthlesB  physicians."  It  is  his  turn  to  be  the  instructor,  sxti.  thjiixs  to  bold  their 
peace. 

IV.  Denuhciation.  (Vers.  7 — 9.)  He  proceeds  severely  to  expose  their  errors, 
and  to  lay  bare  the  root  from  which  they  proceed.  1.  They  seek  to  honour  God  at  the 
expense  of  truth,  which  is  a  corrupt  zeal ;  for  the  God  of  truth  can  only  be  honoured 
by  truth  in  words  and  deeds.  2,  They  arc  moved  by  the  Instinct  of  flattery,  and  thus 
become  partial,  one-sided  advocates  for  God.  But  God  is  not  exalted  by  depressing 
man,  nor  honoured  by  injustice  done  to  his  creatures.  3.  Their  accusations  of 
others  show  ignorance  of  themselves.  And  how  would  it  be  if  scrutiny  were  now  to 
be  made  into  fheir  lives  1  and  would  they  dare  to  cast  the  load  of  guilt  on  the  unhappy 
in  his  awful  presence  ?  They  are  reflections  like  these  which  are  needed  to  check 
the  uncharitable  thought  and  bridle  the  censorious  tongue. 

V.  Menace.  (Vers.  10 — 12.)  These  grave  faults  cannot  be  committed  with 
impunity.  God  would  punish  them  for  their  partiality.  His  majesty,  on  his  appear- 
ance, will  confound  them.  They  will  be  treated  as  sinners,  and  all  their  memoranda, 
their  fine  sayings,  which  they  have  got  by  heart  rather  than  derived  from  deep 
experience  (ver.  12),  will  he  scattered  like  dust  and  fall  to  the  ground  like  crumbling 
structures  of  clay.  "  For  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  be  brought 
unto  judgment."  Thus  Job  shakes  himself  free  from  his  shallow  counsellors  before 
turning  solemnly  to  God. 

Lessons.  1.  In  casting  responsibility  on  others  we  may  be  incurring  greater  respon- 
sibility ourselves.  2.  We  should  hesitate  to  apply  truth  to  others  before  we  have  first 
applied  it  to  ourselves.  3.  Self-knowledge  fits  us  for  the  office  of  counsel ;  blindness 
to  self  exposes  us  to  rebuke  and  judgment. — J. 

Vers.  13 — 22. — JoVa  appeal  to  God.    L  Dread  of  the  kesult  or  the  appeal 

COMBS    UPON    HIS    MIND    AT    THE   VERY   MOMENT  OF    BXECDTINQ   HIB    EE80LVB.      (VcrS. 

13 — 15.)  So  with  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20),  with  Manoah  and  his  wife  (Judg.  xiii.  22) ; 
so  with  Abraham  pleading  for  the  cities  of  the  plain  (Gen.  xviii.  23,  et  sej.).  It  is  the 
consciousness  of  weakness  in  the  presence  of  omnipotence,  of  sinfulness  in  the  presence 
of  perfect  holiness,  which  checks  the  spirit  on  the  threshold  of  the  unseen  world  and 
the  unseen  Presence.  Over  the  door  of  an  Eastern  temple  (as  Spenser  tells  the  story) 
there  was  an  inscriptioii,  *'  Be  bold,"  and  over  a  second  door  repeated,  "  Be  bold ; "  and 
again,  "  Be  bold,  and  evermore  be  bold ; "  but  last  of  all  over  the  inner  door  was 
written,  "  Be  not  too  bold."  So  fear  and  reverence  chasten  the  confidence  with  which 
the  believing  child  of  God,  in  the  full  confidence  of  right,  draws  near  to  him. 

n.  Teubob  laid  aside.  (Vers.  15, 16.)  There  is  solace  to  Job  in  the  thought  that 
he  shall  be  able  to  speak  forth  his  most  sacred  convictions  before  he  dies  (ver.  15). 
But  there  is  another  and  a  nobler  train  of  thought  suggested  here.  His  innocence  will 
at  last  lead  to  his  deliverance ;  for  no  unholy  man  dares  appear  before  God ;  but  he  is 
not  conscious  of  an  unholy  mind.    Compare  the  noble  fifteenth  psalm. 

III.  Demand  fob  a  heabino  fbom  his  advebsakieb.  (Vers.  17 — 19.)  In  this 
brief  challenge  we  see  all  the  features  of  the  demeanour  of  a  sincere  and  upright  soul 
in  the  hour  of  trial.  1.  Undaunted  courage.  2.  Presentiment  of  victory.  3.  Readi- 
ness for  all  opponents  and  for  all  consequences.  These  are  the  arms  which  innocence 
furnishes,  and  in  which  the  weakest  and  most  defenceless  may  be  arrayed  as  in  a 
panoply. 

IV.  Pbeliminaey  eeqcebts.  (Vers.  20—22.)  Before  proceeding  with  his  appeal. 
Job  makes  two  requests :  (1)  that  his  pains  may  be  assuaged ;  (2)  that  he  may  not 
be  terrified  by  the  sudden  visitation  of  God  (comp.  ch.  ix.  34).  These  he  asks  as 
the  guarantees  of  the  freedom  of  his  speech.  There  is  something  deeply  pathetic  in 
this  vacillation  between  confidenw  and  fear — the  confidence  derived  from  the  sense  of 


236  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xui.  1— 2a 

innocence  and  right,  the  fear  which  the  thought  of  the  dread  presence  of  the  Divine  mast 
ever  impress. 

Lessons.  1.  He  who  is  most  confident  in  the  assurance  of  his  innocence  hefore  man 
will  be  the  most  humble  and  timid  in  the  presence  of  God.  2.  Faith  must  finally 
overcome  fear  in  every  true  heart. — J. 

Vers.  23—28. — Sdf -defence  hefore  God:  1.  The  weak  against  the  Strong.  L  Thb 
CRT  OF  iNJUBED  INNOCENCE.  (Ver.  23.)  He  asks  that  he  may  have  his  sins  enume- 
rated and  bruught  home  to  him,  and  that  he  may  not  thus  ever  be  punished  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  his  guilt. 

II.  Sense  op  the  silence  and  withdrawal  of  God.  (Ver.  24.)  God  does  u^t 
answer  his  challenge,  and  still  his  suffering  continues,  as  if  he  v^ere  a  foe  t(j  whom  the 
Almighty  deigns  not  to  utter  a  word.  The  silence,  the  seeming  deafness  and  dumb- 
ness of  God  hefore  his  creatures'  pitiful  cries,  is  more  awful  than  all  his  thunder.  Oh 
that  he  would  but  speak,  in  whatever  accents !  Man  can  never  cease  to  agonize,  to 
pray,  to  wrestle  with  the  Unseen,  until  he  extorts  some  response  to  the  cry  and  craving 
of  his  heart. 

III.  Plaint  of  the  weakness  of  self  in  the  peesencb  of  Omnipotence. 
(Ver.  25.)  He  has  two  vivid  figures  to  represent  this  weakness :  (1)  that  of  the  leaf, 
driven  to  and  fro  by  the  wind,  so  feeble  and  vanishing  a  thing  has  his  life  l)econie ; 
(2)  that  of  the  dry  and  worthless  stubble ;  and  yet  God  is  against  him  as  if  he  would 
drive  and  purge  away  every  vestige  of  his  existence.  His  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  is 
winnowing  his  floor  from  this  useless  chaff  1 

IV.  Sense  of  the  aggravation  of  his  bik.  (Ver.  26.)  In  addition  to  his  natural 
pains,  he  is  loaded  with  the  memories  of  long-past  sins,  which  he  had  thought  forgiven. 
The  record  of  the  sins  of  youth  still  seems  to  stand  in  the  Divine  book.  Bemembrance 
turns  the  past  to  pain.  Men  look  indulgently  on  the  "  sins  of  youth,"  both  in  them- 
selves and  others.  But  here  is  a  warning  against  these  light  views  of  transgression. 
The  sowing  of  "  wild  oats  "  is  certain,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  followed  by  a  bitter  harvest 
(comp.  Ps.  XXV.  7). 

V.  The  sense  of  being  fettered  and  watched.  (Ver.  27.)  He  is  like  a  criminal 
with  his  feet  fastened  in  a  block  of  wood,  which  he  must  carry  with  him  wherever 
he  goes.  And  all  this  power  and  violence,  this  watching  and  restraint,  is  put  forth  on 
one  who  is  as  helpless  and  broken  as  a  worm-eaten,  moth-gnawed  garment  (ver. 
28).-J. 

Ver.  15. — Faith  in  God,  hringing  resignation.  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I 
trust  in  him."  Thus  doth  Job  declare  his  unshaken  affiance  in  God.  He  lifts  his 
thoughts  from  the  reasonings  of  his  friends ;  he  rises  superior,  at  least  for  the  time, 
to  the  oppression  of  his  sufferings,  and  with  a  boldness  that  does  him  honour,  and  a 
confidence  warranted  by  his  belief  in  the  Divine  Name,  he  gives  utterance  to  an 
expression  of  faith  which  has  passed  from  lip  to  lip  all  througli  the  ages,  and  has 
been  a  classical  formula  of  faith  for  the  saddest  and  most  deeply  alHicted  amongst  the 
children  of  men.  How  is  the  world  indebted  to  them  who,  with  a  true  heroism,  declare 
their  faith  in  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Lord  I 

I.  Faith  is  needed  in  consequence  of  the  many  heavy  trials  of  the  human 
-  heart.    External  sources  of  help  are  often  cut  off.     They  altogether  fail.     There  is  no 

hand  of  strength,  no  word  of  power,  no  sufficient  consolation.  In  bodily  affliction  the 
skill  of  the  wisest  may  be  set  at  nought.  In  the  trials  of  life  all  help  from  outward 
sources  may  fail.  The  sorrow  is  too  deep  for  an  unaided  heart  to  bear  up  under. 
Where  shall  the  afflicted  soul  hide?  There  is  help  only  in  spiritual  sources.  God  is 
the  final  goal  of  the  afflicted  spirit.  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit," 
is  the  idtimate  utterance  of  the  soul  when  all  resources  of  help  are  cut  off.  But  for 
this  faith  is  needed — I'aith  that  apprehends  the  unseen  and  spiritual.  The  soul  at 
such  times  is  borne  up  only  by  faith,  and  the  faith  that  is  needed  is  a  supreme,  lowly, 
unhesitating  faith.     Happy  he  who  has  it. 

II.  Faith  is  warranted  by  the  character  of  God.  Th\a  is  the  one  unfailing 
refuge.  This,  of  all,  is  most  worthy  of  trust.  We  cannot  always  trust  the  words  of 
human  kindness,  evett  friendship.    The  good  resolves  may  fail  from  inability  to  fulfil 


OH.  xm.  1—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  287 

them.  We  may  be  mistaken.  Our  trust  may  rest  on  a  deceitful  foundation.  Our  staff 
may  break  and  pierce  our  liand.  But  we  always  know  that  the  character  of  God  ii 
unassailable.  He  has  an  assured  ground  of  confidence  who  trusts  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord,  whose  repose  is  in  the  DlTine  character.  Absolute  goodness,  perfect  wisdom, 
infinite  love, — these  form  the  warrant  of  faith. 

III.  It  is  right  and  wise,  therefore,  that  faith  be  dbolaeed.  Let  him  who  has 
learnt  where  the  soul  may  find  refuge  and  help  declare  it  to  others.  Let  him  glorify 
God  by  his  feeble  tribute.  It  is  his  best,  if  his  lowliest,  offering.  How  great  an 
indignity  we  feel  if  any  one  disputes  our  veracity  1  But  he  who  confides  in  our  word 
and  character,  even  in  times  when  both  are  aspersed,  pays  to  us  the  highest  tribute  of 
friendship  and  of  faith.  So  let  us  bring  our  humble  offerings  of  trust,  of  thankfulness, 
and  love — our  spiritual  gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh — and  lay  them  at  the  feet  of  the 
everlasting  King.  Though  he  lay  the  heaviest  burdens  upon  me,  I  will  not  doubt  his 
goodness ;  though  he  treat  me  as  a  dog,  yet  will  I  cleave  to  him.  "  Though  he  slay 
me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him." 

■  IV.  Such  a  faith  is  sure  to  be  bewabded.  1.  It  has  its  reward  in  the  peace  of 
mind  which  it  brings.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed 
on  thee :  because  he  trusteth  in  thee."  The  driven  sparrow  finds  its  house,  and  the 
swallow  its  nest.  The  dove  returns  to  the  ark.  When  there  is  no  rest  for  the  wounded 
spirit,  it  turns  and  finds  its  rest  in  God.  Here  it  hides  and  waits  in  an  assured  hope. 
Job  was  brought  to  the  very  earth ;  but  the  Lord,  who  seemed  to  be  slaying  him,  raised 
him  up  and  gave  him  an  abundant  reward.  2.  A  furtlier  reward  is  secured  in  the 
character  gained.  3.  And  yet  a  further  one  in  the  final  Divine  approbation  of  the 
faithful,  trusting,  submissive,  obedient  servant.  Such  faith  shall  not  lose  its  reward. 
— H.  G. 

Ver.  24. — ifte  reasons  far  sorrow.  It  has  ever  been  a  longing  of  the  suffering  heart 
of  man  to  know  why  afflictions  are  permitted.  Job  is  a  striking  examjile  of  the 
sufferer  reduced  to  questioning.  He  makes  his  appeal  for  the  reasons.  "  Wherefore 
hidest  tbou  thy  face  7  "  Others  have  urged  this  inquiry.  Even  the  Exemplar  of  all 
patient,  submissive,  trustful,  obedient  sufferers  cried  aloud,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  But  the  answer  comes  not  to  Job  with  the  quickness  he 
may  have  desired.  Tet  though  he  giveth  none  account  of  his  ways,  all  may  be  assured 
his  purposes  are  wise  and  good.  In  the  light  of  later  teachings  we  may  read  "  the  end 
of  the  Lord."  That  which  we  "  endure  "  we  know  "  is  for  chastening."  This,  then,  is 
the  answer  in  general  to  the  cry,  "  Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face  ?  "  Then,  as  far  as 
we  can  interpret  the  answer  to  the  cry  to  which  no  answer  is  immediately  given,  we 
may  say — 

I.  A  reason  for  sorrow  may  be  found  in  its  fitness  to  be  a  test  of  faith.  That 
faith  should  be  tested,  and  so  developed  and  perfected,  is  an  obvious  propriety.  But  for 
such  testing  it  would  be  a  dead,  inoperative  faculty.  As  the  wing  of  the  young  eagle  is 
strengthened  by  the  demands  made  upon  it  when  borne  aloft,  and  then  committed  to 
its  own  unaided  effort,  so  faith  grows  in  strength  by  every  appeal  made  to  it.  It  is 
here  experience  is  gained.  By  this  men  grow.  The  heart  is  made  acquainted  with 
"  the  ways  of  the  Lord."  The  exercised  faculty  becomes  familiarized  with  its  duties. 
It  learns  to  bear  a  heavier  strain.  Each  successful  performance  of  duty  leaves  it  better 
fitted  to  act  in  future.     The  strong  faith  is  the  faith  that  has  borne  the  severe  test. 

II.  A  second  reason  may  be  found  in  the  necessaet  development  of  patibnob. 
The  heroic  fortitude  of  the  soul  that  can  endure  "as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible"  is 
not  gained  with  suddenness.  By  slow  steps  is  this  height  reached.  By  slow  accretions 
is  this  grace  perfected.  The  man  unaccustomed  to  discomfort  is  unwilling  to  leave  his 
freedom  and  ease,  and  to  undertake  toilsome  and  painful  service.  Sorrow  oppresses 
the  soul,  but  it  thereby  develops  that  power  by  which  the  soul  is  upheld.  The  slothful, 
self-indulgent  spirit  is  unfitted  for  hard  toil;  and  the  world  needs  the  willing  labourer. 
There  is  a  schooling  of  the  soul  by  self-denial,  by  fasting.  The  substitute  for  the  self- 
imposed  training  is  the  divinely  imposed  trial.  The  trial  of  faith  \8  very  precious  if  it 
leaves  the  soul  steadier  in  patient  endurance.  By  such  trained  souls  is  the  world's  great 
work  to  be  done. 

III.  SoiiBUW  PKaFWJTS  THE  SOUL  IN  A  LOWLY  SUBMISSION  TO  THK  DiVINB  WILL.      *•  It 


238  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xin.  1— 2a 

is  the  Lord :  let  him  do  as  seemeth  him  good,"  may  be  a  defiant  cry  of  rebellion ; 
"  Do  thy  worst ;  "  or  it  may  be  a  lowly,  trustful,  resigned  committal  of  the  life  to  the 
Divine  purposes :  "  What  he  wills  is  best."  The  school  of  aflSiction  is  a  hard  school, 
but  its  patient  scholars  aie  well  taught.  And  though  "  no  affliction  for  the  present 
seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous,  nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable 
fruit  of  righteousness  to  them  that  are  exercised  thereby." 

IV.   SORKOW   MAT   BE   THE   MEANS  OP  EVOKING    THE    MOST  8INCEBE   AND   BEAUTIFUL 

EXAMPLES  OF  OBEDIENCE.  The  histories  of  human  suffering  present  us  with  examples 
of  consummate  and  unflinching  obedience,  rendered  in  unquestioning  acquiescence  in 
the  Divine  purpose  and  in  the  pure  love  of  the  heart.  The  highest  point  ever  reached 
by  the  obedient  spirit  was  that  of  our  great  Pattern,  who,  in  the  depih  of  darkest 
affliction  and  sorrow  of  soul,  patiently  reiterated  the  sublime  expression  of  a  wholly 
consecrated  service,  "  Nevertheless  not  my  will,  but  thy  will,  be  done." — K.  Q-. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Trite  sayings.  Job's  complaint  is  that  there  was  nothing  new  in  his 
friends'  pretentious  harangues.  All  their  pompous  airs  of  superiority  and  authority  did' 
not  deceive  the  patriarch,  and  prevent  him  from  detecting  the  essentially  commonplace 
character  of  their  ideas. 

I.  Most  sayings  are  trite.  It  is  not  often  given  to  a  man  to  discover  a  new  truth. 
Even  when  a  person  makes  a  remark  that  is  original  in  him,  i.e.  that  he  has  not  derived 
from  any  other  man,  the  probability  is  that  some  one  else  has  said  something  very  like 
it  before.  Too  often,  when  a  man  is  pretentious  of  novelty,  what  is  fresh  is  only 
the  garb  of  his  notion.  The  newest  extravagances  in  religion  are  generally  only  old 
heresies  exhumed  and  magnetized  into  a  semblance  of  life.  It  is  foolish  to  think  of 
astounding  the  world  with  om'  ideaL  Even  in  Job's  day  people  were  weary  of  the  little 
stock  of  notions  that  was  in  circulation  among  the  most  intelligent  classes. 

II.  The  fussy  repetition  of  trite  sayings  can  do  no  good.  Job's  three  friends 
only  vexed  the  sorrowing  man  by  repeating  what  he  knew  as  well  as  they.  The  same 
mistake  is  often  made  in  foolish  attempts  at  administering  consolation.  No  sayings 
are  so  trite  as  those  that  treat  of  suffering  and  its  uses.  The  very  commonness  of  the 
lot  of  suffering,  and  the  very  obviousness  of  some  of  its  circumstances,  have  made  the 
stock  precepts  of  sorrow  very  familiar  to  all  of  us.  It  is  useless  to  go  to  a  person  in 
trouble  and  repeat  them  once  more.  It  would  be  better  to  be  silent.  Silence  might 
affect  him  as  a  most  original  novelty. 

III.  Trite  sayings  may  be  true  and  important.  1.  True.  It  is  not  to  be  sup- 
posed that  men  are  generally  the  victims  of  delusions.  One  reason  why  certain  say- 
ings have  become  trite  is  that  they  have  been  proved  by  experience  to  be  true.  Had 
they  been  false  they  would  have  been  discarded  long  since.  No  doubt  there  are  vener- 
able errors.  Job's  friends'  trite  sayings  were  so  one-sided  that  the  truth  of  them  was 
lost  by  perversion ;  but  still  most  trite  sayings  must  have  a  considerable  amount  of 
truth  in  them  to  stand  the  test  of  time.  2.  Important.  The  triteness  is  generally  a 
testimony  to  the  importance ;  lor  if  the  sayings  were  of  slight  moment  they  would 
have  been  neglected.  The  current  use  of  them  presupposes  some  value  attached  to 
them.  The  gospel  of  Christ  has  become  a  trite  saying  to  many.  Yet  it  is  as  true  and 
momentous  as  ever. 

I V.  Personal  application  and  sympathy  mat  revive  interest  in  trite  sayings. 
1.  Personal  application.  It  is  difficult  to  be  in  earnest  with  a  trite  saying.  Such  a 
saying  tends  to  become  a  mere  form  of  words.  It  wears  like  a  coin  that  has  lost  its  effigy 
and  legend.  "  Truths,"  says  Coleridge,  "  of  all  others  the  most  awful  and  interesting,  are 
too  often  considered  as  so  true  that  they  lose  all  the  power  of  truth,  and  lie  bedridden 
in  the  dormitory  of  the  soul,  side  by  side  with  the  most  despised  and  exploded  errors." 
But  he  adds,  "  There  is  one  sure  way  of  giving  freshness  and  importance  to  the  most 
commonplace  maxims — that  of  reflecting  on  them  in  direct  reference  to  our  own  state 
and  conduct,  to  our  own  past  and  future  being."  2.  Sympathy.  The  three  friends 
applied  the  trite  sayings  to  Job,  but  he  would  not  take  them  home  to  himself.  He 
justly  considered  that  they  did  not  apply  to  him  in  the  way  his  friends  supposed. 
They  applied  them  without  sympathy,  and  therefore  without  understanding  Job.  We 
may  repeat  very  familiar  words,  and  yet  if  the  ring  of  sincerity  and  the  tone  of  sym- 
pathy be  in  them  they  will  stUl  awaken  interest. — W.  F.  A. 


OH.  xiii.  1—28,]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  239 

Ver.  4. — "  Physicians  of  no  value."  Job's  friends  were  physicians  of  no  value.  They 
came  to  heal,  but  they  only  aggravated  his  complaint. 

I.  CONSIDEB   WHERE  WE   MEET   WITH   PHYSICIANS  OF  NO  VALUE.      1.   In  dealing  wUh 

sorrow.  How  rare  is  a  truly  helpful  friend  in  a  time  of  great  sorrow !  Many  well- 
wishers  try  their  hand  at  consolation,  but  most  of  them  bungle  painfully.  We  endure 
their  visits  of  condolence  because  we  do  not  wish  to  be  ungrateful  and  disagreeable, 
but  we  are  relieved  when  they  have  left  us  alone  with  our  grief.  2.  In  treating  sin. 
No  human  being  can  cure  sin.  Men  may  blame  sin,  but  they  cannot  cast  it  out.  Here 
is  a  disease  that  no  medicine  of  man's  can  touch.  But  there  is  room  for  some  action  of 
ours.  We  ought  to  be  able  to  bring  the  Divine  remedy.  Yet  how  often  we  fail  to  do 
so!  How  conscious  we  must  be  that  our  efforts  are  not  reaching  the  sinner  and  really 
helping  him  1  3.  In  meeting  social  trouble.  There  are  plenty  of  wild  theorists,  but 
none  of  them  have  been  able  to  set  right  the  disorganized  state  of  society.  Philan 
thropists  too  often  show  more  zeal  than  judgment. 

II.  Inquire  why  the  physicians  are  of  no  value.  1.  Ignorance  of  the  state  of 
the  patient.  If  the  doctor  has  not  rightly  diagnosed  his  case  he  is  not  likely  to  be  suc- 
cessful in  his  treatment  of  it.  We  must  understand  those  whom  we  would  benefit.  2. 
Lack  of  skill  in  the  use  of  remedies.  The  doctor  must  understand  his  drugs,  or  he  will 
poison  his  patients.  If  we  would  benefit  men  we  must  first  know  them ;  then  we  must 
know  the  Divine  medicine.  They  who  do  not  apprehend  the  gospel  of  Christ  them- 
selves cannot  be  physicians  of  value  to  others.  We  must  study  truth  as  well  as  men ; 
and  we  must  go  further,  and  be  familiar  ourselves  with  those  great  saving  ideas  which 
we  would  apply  to  others.  3.  Absence  of  sympathy.  Here  was  the  secret  of  Job's 
friends*  failure,  although  at  first  they  seemed  to  have  evinced  the  deepest  sympathy. 
We  can  never  help  the  miserable  till  we  sympathize  with  them.  The  first  essential  to 
success  in  a  mission  among  the  poor  is  brotherliness.  If  this  is  wanting,  the  mission 
must  fail  though  any  amount  of  energy  and  money  may  be  expended  on  it. 

III.  Remember  that  there  is  one  Physician  of  inestimable  value.  Christ  fulfils 
all  the  requisite  conditions.  He  knows  us,  for  he  is  one  of  ourselves — tempted  in  ail 
respects  as  we  are,  though  without  sin.  He  is  familiar  with  the  needed  remedy,  for  he 
is  one  with  God,  and  is  perfectly  at  home  among  those  great  spiritual  facts  from  which 
the  cure  of  the  world's  evil  must  come.  He,  too,  is  full  of  sympathy.  Of  old  he  cured 
the  sick  because  he  was  "  moved  with  compassion."  The  great,  tender  heart  of  Christ 
bests  in  warm  sympathy  for  all  his  brother-men.  Now  we  have  to  see  iu  experience 
that  our  good  Physician  is  able  to  do  what  the  physicians  of  no  value  have  failed  to 
accomplish.  Christ  is  the  Friend  to  help  in  sorrow ;  he  alone  can  cure  sin.  Christ  iu 
the  world  brings  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  so  corrects  the  social  troubles.  Christ  as 
a  living  Saviour,  as  an  active  Physician  now  in  our  midst,  can  heal,  and  we  know  this 
because  we  see  he  does  heal  wherever  he  is  trusted  to  do  so. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  7. — Spealcing  wickedly  for  God.  Here  was  the  great  fault  and  sin  of  the  three 
friends.  They  affected  to  be  God's  advocates,  yet  they  spoke  wickedly.  Thus  they 
endeavoured  to  support  their  view  of  providence  by  uncharitable  assumptions  and 
theories  that  were  not  in  accordance  with  the  facts.  Such  conduct  was  culpable,  dis- 
pleasing to  God,  and  most  injiuious  to  the  true  interests  of  religion. 

L  The  temptation  to  speak  wickedly  for  God.  This  comes  from  the  notion  that 
the  end  justifies  the  means.  If  the  object  is  to  serve  God,  it  is  assumed  that  whatever 
process  is  employed  must  be  right.  Thus  it  has  been  a  doctrine  among  the  Jesuits  that 
equivocal  conduct  which  would  be  condemned  in  the  work  of  the  world  is  to  be  con- 
doned when  it  is  turned  to  the  advancement  of  the  Church.  The  apparently  unselfish 
character  of  the  action  adds  to  the  subtle  deceptiveness  of  the  temptation.  What  is 
said  is  not  for  our  own  sakes,  but  for  the  glory  of  God.  Further,  it  is  argued  men 
have  no  right  to  complain,  because  the  true  servants  of  God  will  rejoice  in  what  glori- 
fies him ;  and  they  who  are  not  of  the  Church  are  out  of  court,  and  can  have  no  ground 
on  which  to  plead"  a  complaint.  Yet  even  they  might  profit,  it  is  further  urged;  if 
they  were  led  to  the  Church  by  fraud,  when  once  they  were  in,  would  they  not  bless 
the  fraud  that  saved  them  ?  All  this  is  but  the  sophistry  of  a  temptation  from  the 
devil. 

XL  The  great  sih  of  speaking  wickedly  fob  God.    This  is  peculiarly  hateful  to 


240  TEE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oH.  xm.  1—28. 

him,  for  he  is  a  God  of  righteousness.  Several  points  go  to  make  up  the  exceeding 
badness  of  such  conduct.  1.  It  destroys  truth.  If  we  may  lie  for  God,  truth  itself  is 
humiliated.  The  permission  of  mere  equivocation  which  is  intended  to  deceive  lowers 
the  standard  of  truth.  This  is  a  break-up  of  the  rigorous  moral  law.  2.  //  isfaUd  to 
charity.  The  plea  is  that  man  must  be  sacrificed  for  the  sake  of  God.  But  God  has 
said,  "  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice."  He  will  not  accept  the  service  that  is 
rendered  at  the  cost  of  cruelty  to  a  brother.  3.  It  is  dishonouring  to  Ood.  His  holy 
Name  is  dragged  down  to  man's  low  conduct,  and  enlisted  in  the  service  of  evil.  What 
is  done  for  his  glory  is  supposed  to  carry  his  sanction.  Thus  the  God  of  truth  and  love 
is  made  to  appear  as  the  champion  of  lies  and  hatred.  This  is  a  most  abominable 
insult  to  God.  4.  It  is  a  miserable  cloak  for  sin.  It  would  seem  that  men  would  not 
think  of  speaking  wickedly  for  God  unless  there  were  wickedness  in  their  own  hearts. 
It  is  true  they  may  be  foolish  enuugh  to  imagine  that  tljeir  conduct  will  really  minister 
to  the  Divine  glory,  and  it  is  only  fair  to  admit  that  people  who  are  deluded  by 
Jesuitical  casuistry  will  do  for  the  Church  what  they  would  not  dream  of  doing  for 
themselves.  Thus  these  people  are  not  really  so  bad  as  their  conduct  suggests.  Still, 
unless  they  are  utterly  duped  by  their  system,  unless  their  consciences  have  been 
warped  into  a  kind  of  moral  insanity  by  their  training — and  it  must  be  allowed  that 
this  is  possible — we  cannot  but  say  that  their  action  must  spring  from  a  low  tone  of 
morality.  At  all  events,  it  must  tend  to  produce  this,  must  be  distinctly  degrading  and 
demoralizing.  5.  It  is  doomed  to  failure.  Nothing  more  injures  the  cause  of  Christ 
than  the  unworthy  conduct  of  his  followers,  especially  when  this  pleads  his  glory  as  its 
excuse.  Nothing  so  favours  unbelief  as  the  suspicion  of  want  of  candour  in  defenders 
of  the  faith.  It  is  fatal  to  cling  to  a  bad  argument  because  of  its  tendency  to  support 
the  right.  We  can  only  please  and  serve  God  when  we  follow  truth  and  love.  This 
is  the  method  of  Christ,  who  scorned  all  subterfuges,  and  chose  the  apparent  failure  of 
the  cross  rather  than  the  triumphs  of  safe  diplomatic  policy. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  23. — Sin  revealed  by  Ood.  Job  is  in  a  sad  perplexity.  His  friends  accuse  him 
ol  great  sin  as  the  cause  of  his  great  trouble,  but  his  conscience  does  not  echo  theii 
(accusation.  Can  it  be  that  he  has  sinned  unconsciously,  that  God  is  really  angry 
with  him  for  some  offence  which  he  has  not  recognized  ? 

I.  It  is  not  possible  to  sin  unconsoiouslt.  It  is  not  to  he  supposed  that  a  man 
could  be  as  guilty  as  Job's  friends  assumed  the  patriarch  to  be,  and  yet  possess  the 
clean  conscience  that  was  the  one  mitigating  condition  in  his  terrible  distresses.  The 
glaring  contradiction  proved  the  error  of  the  comforters.  Moreover,  nobody  can  sin 
unconsciously,  because  the  evil  deed  that  is  done  apart  from  consciousness  possesses 
no  moral  character.  A  hypnotized  person  who  killed  another  would  not  be  a  murderer, 
nor  woiUd  one  who  did  so  in  the  delirium  of  a  fever.  To  sin  in  ignorance  is  not  really 
to  sin  at  all.  All  sin  lies  in  the  motive,  and  the  motive  must  be  evil  for  the  deed  to  be 
sinful.    But  we  cannot  have  an  evil  motive  without  knowing  it. 

II.  It  is  possible  not  to  be  fullt  conscious  of  one's  sin.  1.  2%e  ffuUt  of  ii  may 
he  minimized.  A  man  knows  that  he  has  done  wrong,  and  this  very  knowledge  sets 
him  to  work  on  the  ingenious  search  for  excuses.  He  puts  his  conduct  in  the  best 
light,  hides  its  more  ugly  features,  hunts  up  extenuating  circumstances,  pleads  weak- 
ness, necessity,  custom,  ulterior  goud,  etc.  2.  The  fact  may  be  ignored.  We  keep 
the  door  locked  on  the  skeleton  in  the  cupboard.  We  do  not  care  to  rake  up  ugly 
memories.  We  tread  lightly  over  the  weak  places  in  our  life's  story.  When  this 
careful  ignoring  of  sin  has  gone  on  for  some  time,  conscience  itself  is  soothed  and 
charmed  into  peace. 

III.  It  is  most  nssiEABLB  THAT  ouB  SIN  SHOULD  BE  iiBVEALED  TO  US.  The  revela- 
tion has  many  good  results.  1.  /{  leads- to  repentance.  We  never  know  how  odious 
our  sin  is  till  we  look  at  it  in  God's  light.  Hidden  and  forgotten  sin  is  not  repented 
of.  Pride  grows  on  the  graves  of  buried  sins.  The  sins  must  be  exhumed  and  scat- 
tered to  the  winds,  if  we  are  to  take  the  humble  ground  of  penitents.  2.  /*  hdps  us 
to  conquer  sin.  The  sin  that  lives  within  us  is  not  recognized  in  its  deadly  character 
till  God  reveals  it  to  us.  Thus  our  excuses  for  sin  encourage  the  reign  of  sin.  To 
destroy  it  we  must  see  it  in  its  true  character. 

IV.  It  is  well  to  peay  that  God  would  keveal  oub  sins  to  ns.     1.  Se  can. 


OH.  xin.  1-28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  241 


For  h«  knowB  the  sin  better  than  we  know  it,  and  lie  is  in  close  contact  with  our  con- 
scienceB,  The  awakened  conscience  perceives  sin  with  a  shock  of  horror,  and  it  is  tl  o 
Spirit  of  God  that  awakens  conscience.  2.  He  will  atlast.  Sin  cannot  remain  hidden 
for  ever.  The  secrets  of  all  hearts  must  be  dragged  to  the  light  in  God's  great  day  of 
judgment.  If  we  will  not  have  our  sin  revealed  to  us  now,  it  will  be  revealed  to  all 
then.  3.  We  should  seek  a  revelation.  Thus  we  may  anticipate  and  prevent  the 
future  revelation.  For  the  sin  that  is  repented  of  and  forgiven  will  never  be  revived. 
Meanwhile  the  longer  our  sin  is  hidden  the  worse  it  is  for  us.  It  is  a  viper  in  the 
breast,  poison  in  the  blood,  death  in  the  heart.  Sin  itself,  not  its  consequences,  ia  our 
worst  enemy.  Therefore  let  us  pray,  not  in  the  perplexity  of  Job's  cruelly  misjufiged 
situation,  but  in  the  simple  contrition  of  the  psalmist,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know 
my  heart :  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts :  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in 
me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting  "  (Ps.  czxxix.  23,  24). — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  24. — The  hiding  of  Ood's/ace,  I.  The  sorrowful  experience.  The  thought 
that  God's  face  is  hidden  is  most  distressing  to  Job.  Let  us  see  what  he  is  thinlsing 
of,  and  why  he  is  distressed.  The  unveiled  countenance  is  a  sign  of  favour  ;  the  veiled, 
or  averted  face,  of  displeasure.  Therefore  Job's  word  suggests  an  idea  of  God's  with- 
drawal of  favour.  He  explains  himself  by  adding,  "  And  boldest  me  for  thine  enemy." 
But  Job  means  more  than  the  withdrawal  of  manifested  favours,  as  gifts  of  grace 
flowing  from  the  bounty  of  God.  God  is  more  than  his  gifts.  The  light  of  God's 
countenance  is  better  than  the  blessings  of  God's  storehouse.  The  very  smiting  by 
God  is  itself  a  supreme  source  of  life  and  gladness.  As  the  plant  blooms  in  the  sun- 
shine and  grows  pale  and  sickly  in  the  dark,  so  the  soul  blooms  in  the  light  of  God's 
love  and  fades  into  desolation  when  that  is  hidden.  To  some,  indeed,  the  hiding  of 
God's  face  is  no  trouble.  They  cannot  exclaim  with  delight,  like  Hagar,  "  Thou  God 
seest  me,"  Such  words  are  to  them  only  the  expression  of  a  great  terror.  But  souls 
that  know  and  love  God  bask  in  the  sunshine  of  his  presence.  To  lose  the  conscious- 
ness of  God's  loving  presence  is  to  such  souls  the  desolation  of  a  Siberian  winter,  the 
darkness  of  a  storm-girt  night, 

II.  The  mysterious  cause.  The  cause  is  a  mystery.  We  may  see  it  afterwards, 
or  in  regard  to  the  experience  of  others.  But,  while  we  are  passing  through  the  great 
darkness,  its  meaning  is  hidden  from  us,  and  this  is  part  of  its  deepest  trouble.  Even 
Christ,  in  the  human  limitations  of  his  earthly  sufferings,  exclaimed,  "  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  (Matt,  xxvii.  46);  and  there  came  no  reply  like 
that  which  followed  immediately  on  other  words  of  Christ  addressed  to  his  Father  in 
heaven  (e.g.  Johu  xii.  28).  Still  some  hints  of  the  cause  may  sometimes  be  gathered 
up.  If  we  are  conscious  of  sin,  this  is  sufBoient.  The  only  wonder  is  that  God  has 
not  withdrawn  his  countenance  before  this.  If  we  have  lost  our  first  love  (Kev.  ii.  4) 
and  have  wandered  from  God,  we  may  well  look  back  with  regret  to  the  happier  past ; 
but  we  can  scarcely  be  surprised  at  our  present  depression.  Then  we  can  say  with 
Cowper— 

"  Where  ia  the  blessedness  I  knew 
When  first  I  saw  the  Lord  ? 
Where  is  the  soul-refreshing  view 
Of  Jesus  and  hia  Word? 

"  Wbat  peaceful  hours  I  once  enjoyed  I 
How  sweet  their  memory  still  I 
But  they  have  left  an  aching  void 
The  world  can  never  fill." 

Possibly,  like  the  author  of  the  Olney  Hymns,  we  may  be  suffering  from  morbid  sub- 
jective ftelinfs.  It  may  be  that  God  has  not  hidden  his  face,  but  that  our  eyes  are 
dim  with  needless  tears,  so  that  we  cannot  see  his  gracious  countenance. 

IIL  The  light  behind.  God  may  be  hiding  his  face,  but  he  has  not  changed  it. 
The  sun  has  gone  behind  a  cloud,  but  it  still  shines.  God  has  not  turned  his  love  into 
hatred  when  we  can  no  longer  see  his  kind  countenance.  He  loves  us  in  the  dark  as 
much  as  in  the  light.  He  has  not  withdrawn  his  face  in  hiding  it.  The  veil  does  not 
increase  the  distance  between  us  and  God  ;  it  only  prevents  us  from  seeing  him,  though 

JOB.  » 


242  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xiv.  1— 22, 


he  is  really  as  near  to  ns  as  ever.  Nay,  he  may  be  most  near  when  we  cannot  see  him. 
We  are  warmed  and  vitalized  by  the  sun  even  while  it  is  hidden  by  the  cloud.  God 
does  not  cease  to  bless  us  when  we  cease  to  perceive  him.  Yet  the  greatest  blessing  is 
with  the  unveiled  countenance.  That  blessing  of  the  beatific  vision  is  reserved  for  the 
pure  in  heart  (Matt.  v.  8).— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  26. — Suffering  for  the  sins  of  one's  youfh.  Job  is  perplexed.  He  cannot  see 
what  he  has  done  to  merit  such  terrible  troubles  as  he  is  now  experiencing.  It  cer- 
tainly seems  to  him  that  no  recent  conduct  of  his  can  be  deserviug  the  punishment 
from  which,  according  to  his  friends,  he  is  suffering.  Can  it  be  that  long-forgotten 
sins  of  his  youth  are  brought  up  against  him,  and  that  he  is  suliering  from  those  old 
offences  ? 

I.  The  sins  of  youth  abb  not  to  be  liohtlt  ignored.  1.  Because  they  were  done 
in  haste.  Youth  is  thoughtless;  still  it  has  moral  responsibility.  2.  Because  youth 
is  inexperienced.  Youth  will  not  be  judged  by  the  standard  of  more  enlightened 
years,  but  by  its  own  light,  which  is  sufficient  to  warn  from  sin.  3.  Because  of  their 
distant  past.  Though  they  were  committed  long  ago,  if  they  have  never  beea 
repented  of,  they  stand  in  the  record  against  us  still.  Time  does  not  condone  guilt. 
4.  Because  of  subsequent  amendment.  This  is  the  strongest  plea.  Yet  it  will  not 
stand.  For  the  subsequent  conduct  was  no  better  than  it  ought  to  have  been.  There 
were  no  "works  of  supererogation"  in  it  that  could  serve  as  an  atonement  lor  past 
offences. 

II.  The  sins  of  youth  bear  fruit  in  after-years.  They  do  so  in  this  life. 
Disease  and  early  decrepitude  are  the  bitter  fruits  of  youthful  dissipation.  If  the 
golden  opportunities  of  youth  are  wasted,  the  after-life  must  suffer.  If  opportunities 
of  educational  improvement  are  neglected  in  youth,  it  is  impossible  to  make  up  for 
them  in  manhood.  The  young  man  who  spends  the  best  years  of  his  life  in  idle 
pleasure-seeking  instead  of  laying  the  foundation  of  his  future  work,  is  sure  to  come  to 
a  day  when  he  will  bitterly  repent  his  folly.  There  is  a  unity  in  life.  We  cannot  slice 
it  into  detached  periods,  having  no  connection  with  one  another.  The  present  is  a 
product  of  the  past,  and  the  ultiinate  future  will  be  a  result  of  our  whole  life,  not  of 
the  last  moments  of  it.  Future  judgment  deals  with  the  deeds  of  the  lile,  not  with 
the  mood  of  the  death-bed. 

III.  Sins  of  youth  may  be  forgiven.  They  cannot  be  undone.  Some  of  their 
consequences  are  inevitable.  Therefore  the  hope  of  pardon  is  no  encouragement  for 
folly  and  wickedness.  Still,  when  a  man  repents  and  seeks  the  grace  of  God,  his  case 
is  never  treated  in  Scripture  as  hopeless.  Though  a  certain  loss  and  suffering  may 
remain,  God  forgives  and  heals  the  repentant  soul.  Therefore  it  is  foolish  to  forget  or 
to  defend  a  misspent  youth.  The  only  hopeful  thing  is  to  own  it  before  God,  and  to 
show  ourselves  heartily  ashamed  of  it.  It  is  far  better  to  give  to  God  eveiy  hour  of 
life ;  but  if  the  early  hours  have  been  misspent — miserable  as  is  the  thought  of  them 
— it  is  possible  to  mend  our  ways,  and  enter  the  vineyard  even  at  the  eleventh  hour. 
The  right  use  of  reflection  on  the  sins  of  youth  is  to  make  a  man  humble,  and  to  lead 
him  to  sympathize  with  young  men,  and  to  try  to  warn  them,  lest  they  make  the  sad 
mistake  which  has  thrown  a  shadow  over  all  his  subsequent  life.  For  who  that  is 
converted  in  later  age  would  not  give  all  he  has  to  go  back  and  begin  again,  and  so 
avoid  the  ugly,  unchangeable  past  ? — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITlON, 

CHAPTER  XTV. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — This  chapter,  in  which  Job 
concludes  the  fourth  of  his  addresses,  is 
characterized  by  a  tone  of  mild  and  gentle 
expostulation,  which  contrasts  with  the  com- 
parative vehemence  and  passion  of  the  two 
preceding  chapter*.     It  would  seem  that 


the  patriarch,  having  vented  his  feelings, 
experiences  a  certain  relief,  an  interval  of 
calm,  in  which,  his  own  woes  pressing  less 
heavily  upon  him,  he  is  content  to  moralize 
on  the  general  condition  of  humanity. 

Ver.  1. — Man  that  is  bom  of  a  woman. 
In  this  fact  Job  sees  the  origin  of  man's  ia- 


OH.  XIV.  1 — 22.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


243 


herent  weakness.  He  is  "  bom  of  a  woman," 
who  is  "  the  weaker  vessel "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7). 
He  is  conceived  by  her  in  unoleanness  (Ps. 
li.  5 ;  comp.  below,  ver.  4),  brought  forth  in 
sorrow  and  pain  (Gen.  iii.  16),  suckled  at 
her  breasts,  placed  for  years  under  her 
guidance.  No  wonder  that  he  shares  the 
weakness  of  which  she  is  a  sort  of  type. 
Is  of  few  days ;  literally,  short  of  days. 
Length  and  shortness  of  days  are,  no  doubt, 
relative ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  what 
term  of  life  would  not  have  seemed  short 
to  men  as  they  looked  back  upon  it.  To 
Jacob,  at  the  age  of  a  hundred  and  thirty, 
•  it  appeared  that  "few  and  evil  had  the 
days  of  the  years  of  his  life  boon"  (Gen. 
xlvii.  9).  Methuselah,  perhaps,  thought  the 
same.  We  all,  as  we  come  towards  old  age, 
and  death  draws  manifestly  near,  feel  as  if 
we  had  only  just  begun  to  live,  as  if,  at 
any  rate,  we  had  not  done  half  our  work, 
and  were  about  to  be  out  off  before  our 
time.  But  would  the  case  be  seriously  dif- 
ferent if  our  tale  of  years  were  doubled? 
And  full  of  trouble  (comp.  ch.  v.  7). 

Ver.  2.— He  cometh  forth  like  a  flower, 
and  is  cut  down.  I'ew  similes  are  more  fre- 
quently used  in  Scripture  (comp.  Ps.  ciii. 
15 ;  Isa.  xxviii.  1,  4 ;  xl.  6, 7 ;  Jas.  i.  10, 11 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  24),  and  certainly  none  could  have 
more  poetic  beauty.  Eastern  flowers  do  not 
often  last  much  more  than  a  day.  He  fleeth 
also  as  a  shadow,  and  continueth  not  (comp. 
ch.  vii.  2 ;  viil.  9 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  15 ;  Ps. 
cii.  11 ;  cix.  23;  Bccles.  vi.  12,  etc.).  Sha- 
dows are  always  changing ;  but  the  shadows 
which  flee  away  the  fastest,  anjl  which  Job 
has  probably  in  his  mind,  are  those  of 
clouds,  or  other  moving  objects,  which  seem 
to  chase  each  other  over  the  earth,  and 
never  to  continue  for  a  single  minute  in  one 
stay. 

Ver.  3. — And  dost  thon  open  thine  eyes 
upon  such  a  one  ?  Is  it  compatible  with 
God's  greatness,  unchangeableness,  and  ma- 
jesty to  take  any  notice  of  so  poor,  weak, 
and  unstable  a  creature  as  mortal  man  ? 
The  question  has  been  often  asked,  and 
answered  by  many  in  the  negative,  as  by 
the  Epicureans  of  old.  Job  does  not  really 
entertain  any  doubt  upon  the  point ;  but 
only  intends  to  express  his  wonder  that  it 
should  be  so  (comp.  Ps.  viii.  4,  and  above, 
cb.  vii.  17).  And  bringest  me  into  judg- 
ment with  thee  ?  Especially  astonishinp;  is 
it,  Job  says,  that  God  should  condescend  to 
try,  pass  judgment  on,  and  punish  so  weak, 
worthless,  and  transitory  a  creature  as  him- 
self. 

Ver.  4.— Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out 
of  an  unclean  ?  not  one.  It  is  scarcely  true 
to  say  that  "  the  fact  of  original  ein  is  thus 
distinctly  recognized "  ('  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,' vol.  iv.  p.  61).    Original  unolean- 


ness and  infirmity  are  recognized ;  but  the 
uncleanness  is  material,  and  removable  by 
material  expiation  (Lev.  xii.  2 — 8).  It  is 
rather  man's  weakness  than  his  sinfulness 
that  is  here  under  discussion. 

Ver.  5. — Seeing  his  days  are  determined. 
Job  here  returns  to  the  consideration  of  the 
shortness  of  man's  life.  "  His  days  are  de- 
termined ; "  i.e.  they  are  a  limited  period, 
known  to  and  fixed  beforehand  by  God. 
They  are  not  like  God's  days,  which  "en- 
dure throughout  all  generations"  (Ps.  cii. 
24).  The  number  of  his'  mouths  are  with 
thee.  "With  thee"  means  here  "known 
to  thee,"  "laid  up  in  thy  counsels."  Thou 
hast  appointed  his  bounds  that  he  cannot 
pass.  "  His  bounds  "  are  "  the  limit  of  hig 
lifetime."  '£he  three  clauses  are  pleonastic. 
One  idea  pervades  them  all. 

Ver.  6. — Turn  from  him,  that  he  may 
rest;  literally,  look  away  from  Mm;  i.e. 
"Cease  to  watch  liim  and  search  him  out 
so  continually "  (comp.  oh.  vii.  17,  18). 
"  Then  he  will  be  able  to  have  a  breathing- 
time,  an  interval  of  peace  and  rest,  before 
his  departure  from  the  earth."  What  Job 
had  previously  desired  for  himself  (ch.  x. 
20)  he  now  asks  for  all  humanity.  Till  he 
shall  accomplish,  as  an  hireling,  his  day. 
Hired  labourers  are  glad  when  their  day's 
work  is  over.  So  man  rejoices  when  life 
comes  to  an  end. 

Ver.  7. — For  there  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it 
he  out  down.  God's  vegetable  creation  is 
better  ofi",  in  respect  of  length  of  days,  than 
man.  Let  a  tree  be  cut  down,  it  is  not 
therefore  of  necessity  destroyed.  There  i» 
yet  hope  for  it.  T)ie  bare  dry  stump  will 
sometimes  put  forth  tender  branches,  which 
will  grow  and  flourish,  and  renew  the  old 
life.  Or,  if  the  stump  be  quite  dead,  suckers 
may  spring  up  from  the  loot  and  grow  into 
new  trees  as  vigorous  as  the  one  that  they 
replace  (comp.  Isa.  xi.  1).  Herodotus  con- 
sidered that  all  trees  had  this  recuperative 
power,  except  the  ttItvs,  a  species  of  fir 
(Herod,,  vi.  37),  and  the  traveller  Shaw 
says  that  when  a  palm  tree  dies  there  is 
always  a  sucker  ready  to  take  its  place. 
Pliny  also  observes  of  the  laurel,  "Viva- 
cissima  est  radix,  ita  ut,  si  truncus  ina- 
ruerit,  reoisa  arbor  mox  Isetius  frutificet" 
('Hist.  Nat.,'  i.  15.  §  30).  That  it  will 
sprout  again.  That  is,  from  the  spool  or 
stump.  Some  trees,  as  the  Spanish  chest- 
nut, if  cut  dovra  flush  with  the  ground, 
throw  up  shoots  from  the  entire  circle  of 
the  stump,  often  as  many  as  fifteen  or 
twenty.  And  that  the  tender  branch  thereof 
will  not  cease.  The  vigour  of  such  shoots 
is  very  great.  In  a  few  years  they  grow  to 
the  height  of  the  parent  tree.  If  they  are 
then  removed  they  are  quickly  replaced  by 
a  fresh  growth. 


244 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  XIV.  1—22. 


Vera.  8, 9.— Though  the  root  thereof  wax 
old  in  the  earth,  and  the  stock  thereof  die 
in  the  ground;  yet  through  the  scent  of 
water  it  will  hud,  and  hriug  forth  houghs 
like  a  plant.  After  the  stump  is  actually 
dead,  suckers  may  be  thrown  up  from  the 
roots,  if  sufficient  water  bo  supplied  to  them ; 
and  these  will  put  forth  branches  luxuri- 
antly. 

Ver.  10.— But  man  dieth.  "Man"  is 
here  133,  "  the  brave,  strong  man,"  not  Dns 
or  »i:N,  and  the  meaning  is  that  man,  how- 
ever brave  and  strong,  perishes.  And 
wasteth  away;  i.e.  "comes  to  nought,  re- 
tains no  strength  or  vitality."  Tea,  man 
giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  is  he? 
"Where  is  lie?"  Job  could  not  answer 
this  question.  He  might  say,  "  In  Sheol." 
Bat  where  was  Sheol,  and  what  was  Sheol  ? 
There  was  no  written  revelation  on  this 
subject,  and  no  traditional  knowledge  on 
which  dependence  could  be  placed.  The 
Hebrew  notions  on  the  subjeot  were  very 
vague  and  indeterminate ;  Job's  notions  are 
likely  to  have  been  still  vaguer.  There  is 
no  reason  to  believe  that  he  had  any  exact 
acquaintance  with  the  tenets  of  the  Egyp- 
tians. He  may  have  known  the  Chaldean 
teaching,  but  it  would  not  have  carried  him 
very  far  (see  above,  pp.  178, 179).  Doubt  and 
perplexity  beset  him  whenever  he  turned 
his  attention  to  the  problem  of  man's  con- 
dition after  death,  and,  excepting  when 
carried  away  by  a  burst  of  enthusiasm,  he 
seems  to  have  regarded  it  as  the  highest 
wisdom,  in  matters  of  this  kind,  "  to  know 
that  he  knew  nothing."  The  question, 
"Where  is  he?"  is  an  acknowledgment  of 
this  profound  ignorance. 

Ver.  11. — As  the  waters  fail  from  the 
sea.  The  allusion  seems  to  be  to  the  actual 
desiccation  of  seas  and  rivers.  Job,  ap- 
parently, had  known  instances  of  both.  A 
formation  of  new  land  in  the  place  of  sea 
is  always  going  on  at  the  iiead  of  the  Per- 
sian Gruir,  through  the  deposits  of  the  Tigris 
and  Euphrates ;  and  this  formation  was  very 
rapid  in  ancient  times,  when  the  head  of 
the  gulf  was  narrower.  The  desiccation  of 
river-courses  is  common  in  Mesopotamia, 
where  arms  thrown  out  by  Ihe  Tigris  and 
Eupliriites  get  blocked,  and  then  silted  up. 
And  the  flood  decayeth  and  drieth  up; 
rather,  and  the  river  decayeth,  etc.  (see  the 
comment  on  the  preceding  clause). 

Ver.  12. — So  man  lieth  down,  and  riseth 
not.  This  is  not  an  absolute  denial  of  a 
final  resurrection,  sincu  Job  is  speaking  of 
the  world  as  it  lies  before  him,  not  of  even- 
tualities. Just  as  he  sees  the  land  encroach 
upon  the  sea,  and  remain  land,  and  the  river- 
courses,  once  dried  up,  remain  dry,  so  he 
sees  men  descend  into  the  grave  and  remain 
there,  without  rising  up  again.    This  is  the 


established  order  of  nature  as  it  exists  before 
his  eyea.  Till  the  heavens  be  no  more,  they 
shall  not  awake.  This  order  of  things.  Job 
believes,  rightly  enough,  will  continue  as 
long  as  the  heayens  and  the  earth  endure. 
What  will  happen  afterwards  he  does  not 
so  much  as  inquire.  It  is  remarked,  ingeni- 
ously, that  Job's  words,  though  not  intended 
in  this  sense,  exactly  "  coincide  with  the 
declarations  of  the  New  Testament,  which 
make  the  resurrection  simultaneous  with  the 
breaking  up  of  the  visible  universe"  (Canon 
Cook).  Nor  he  raised  out  of  their  sleep, 
If  "the  glimmer  of  a  hope"  of  the  resur- 
rection appears  anywhere  in  vers.  10 — 12, 
it  is  in  the  comparison  of  death  to  a  sleep, 
which  is  inseparably  connected  in  oui  minds 
with  an  awakening. 

Ver.  13 — Oh  that  thou  wouldest  hide  me 
in  the  grave !  literally,  in  /SfeeoZ,.which  here 
does  not  so  much  mean  "  the  grave,"  as  the 
place  of  departed  spirits,  described  in  oh.  x. 
21,  22.  Job  desires  to  have  God's  protec- 
tion in  that "  land  of  darkness,"  and  to  be 
"hidden"  there  by  him  until  his  wrath  be 
past.  It  has  been  generally  supposed  that 
be  means  after  his  death;  but  Schultcng 
thinks  bis  desire  was  to  descend  to  Sheol 
alive,  and  there  remain,  while  his  punish- 
ment continued,  hidden  from  the  eyes  of 
men.  That  thou  vonldest  keep  me  secret, 
until  thy  wrath  be  past.  Job  assumes  that^ 
if  he  is  being  punished  for  his  youthful  sins 
(ch.  xiii.  26),  his  punishment  will  not  be  for 
long — at  any  rate,  not  for  ever ;  God's  anger 
will  at  lost  be  satisfied  and  cease.  That 
thou  wouldest  appoint  me  a  set  time,  and 
remember  me !  How  long  he  may  have  to 
suffer  he  does  not  greatly  care.  Only  let 
it  be  "a  set  time" — a  fixed,  definite  period 
— and  at  the  end  of  it,  let  God  "  remember  " 
him. 

Ver.  14. — ^If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ? 
The  question  is  clearly  intended  to  be  an- 
swered in  the  negative.  It  is  not  a  dis- 
passionate inquiry,  but  an  expression  of 
hopelessness.  Let  a  man  once  die,  and  of 
course  he  cannot  live  again.  Were  it  other- 
wise, then.  Job  says,  all  the  days  of  my  ap- 
pointed time  will  I  wait ;  or,  rather  (as  in 
the  Revised  Version),  all  the  dayt  of  my 
warfare  would  I  wait;  i.e.  I  would  pa- 
tiently endure  any  sufferings  in  the  larger 
hope  that  would  then  be  open  to  me.  I 
would  wait  tiU  my  change  (rather,  my  re- 
newal) come.  The  exact  nature  of  the  "re- 
newal" which  Job  seems  here  to  ezpeot  is 
obscure.  Perhaps  he  is  pursuing  the  idea, 
broached  in  ver.  13,  of  his  being  conveyed 
alive  to  Hades,  and  looks  forward  to  a  fur- 
ther renewed  life  after  he  is  released  from 
that  "  land  of  darkness." 

Ver.  15. — Thou  shalt  call,  and  I  will 
answer  thee ;  rather,  thnu  ehouUett  call,  and 


OH.  XIV.  1—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


245 


I  VBOuld  answer  thee  (see  the  Revised  Ver- 
sion), lu  that  case,  when  I  quitted  Hades, 
and  renewed  ray  life,  thou  wouldst  assuredly 
summon  me  to  thee,  and  I  would  respond  to 
the  summons.  There  would  be  sweet  col- 
loquy between  us ;  for  thou  wilt  (or,  rather, 
Kouideit)  have  a  desire  to  the  work  of  thine 
hands  (oomp.  ch.  x.  8 — 11).  Job  assumes 
that  God  must  love  whatever  he  has  created, 
and  be  drawn  towards  it  by  a  secret,  strong 
(iesire. 

Ver.  16. — For  now  thou  numherest  my 
steps ;  rather,  hmt  now.  Job,  at  this  point, 
proceeds  to  contrast  his  actual  condition 
with  the  ideal  one  which  (in  vers.  13 — 15) 
his  imagination  has  conjured  up.  Qod's 
actual  attitude  towards  him  he  regards  as 
one,  not  of  protecting  love,  but  of  jealous 
hostility.  His  "  steps "  are  observed, 
counted — every  divergence  from  the  right 
path  is  noted — a  false  step,  if  he  makes  one, 
is  at  once  punished.  Dost  thou  not  watch 
over  my  sinl  (comp.  ch.  x.  14).  Job's  sins, 
he  tliinks,  are  watched  for,  spied  out,  taken 
note  of,  and  remembered  against  him. 

Ver.  17. — My  transgression  is  sealed  up 
in  a  bag  (oomp.  Deut.  xxxii.  34) ;  i.e.  Goil 
keeps  account  of  all  my  transgrossions.  It 
is  as  if  he  put  them  all  into  a  bag  (compare 
"  Put  my  tears  into  thy  bottle,"  Ps.  Ivi.  8), 
whence  tliey  can  be  taken  out  and  brought 
against  me  at  any  moment.  They  are 
"  sealed  up  "  in  the  bag  for  greater  security. 
And  thou  sewest  up  mine  iniquity.  (So 
Ewald,  Dillmaiin,  Canon  Cook,  and  the 
Revised  Version.)  Others  think  the  mean- 
ing to  be,  "  Thou  addest  to  my  iniquity 
[continually] ; "  i.e.  by  placing  fresh  sins 
to  my  account.  (So  Sohultcns  and  Rosen- 
miiller.) 

Ver.  18. — And  surely  the  mountain  falling 
Cometh  to  nought.  Job  here  resumes  the 
lament  over  human  infirmity,  with  which 
the  chapter  opens  (vers.  1 — 12) ;  but  he  has, 
perhaps,  in  this  passage,  his  own  case  more 
distinctly  presented  to  his  consciousness. 
With  the  wealth  of  metaphor  which  cha- 
racterizes his  utterances,  he  compares  the 
ruin  of  a  prosperous  man  (1)  to  the  sudden 
collapse  of  a  mountain ;  (2)  to  the  removal 
of  a  rock  out  of  its  place  ;  (3)  to  the  wear- 
ing away  of  stones  by  the  constant  flow  of 
streams ;  and  (4)  to  the  destruction  of  allu- 
vial tracts  by  floods.  Mountains  collapse, 
eitlier  by  volcanic  agency,  which  is  quite  as 
much  shown  in  the  subsidence  as  in  the 
elevation  of  the  soil,  or  by  landslips,  which 
are  most  usually  the  results  of  heavy  rains. 
And  the  rock  is  removed  out  of  his  place. 
Rocks  are  sometimes  split  by  frost,  and  top- 
ple over  when  a  thaw  comes ;  at  otiier  times, 
heavy  floods  remove  them  from  their  accus- 
tomed place ;  occasionally  earthquakes  over- 
aau  them,  and  cause  them  to  fall  with  a 


crash.  There  is  also  a  removal  of  rocks  to 
much  greater  distances,  by  means  of  glaciers 
and  icebergs ;  but  of  these  Job  is  not  likely 
to  have  known. 

Ver.  19. — The  waters  wear  the  stones. 
The  power  of  the  soft  element  of  water,  by 
continual  washing  or  dripping,  to  wear 
away  tlie  hardest  stone,  has  often  been 
noticed,  and  is  a  frequent  topic  in  poetry. 
Deep  ravines  have  been  worn  in  course  of 
time,  through  broad  and  lofty  mountain 
ranges  by  rivers,  the  stone  yielding  little  by 
little  to  the  action  of  the  water,  until  at 
last  a  broad  chaam  is  made.  So  the  con- 
tinual wearing  action  of  calamity  often  lays 
low  the  prosperous.  Thou  washest  away  the 
things  which  grow  out  of  the  dust  of  the 
earth ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Version, 
the  overflowings  thereof  wash  away  the  dust 
of  Ote  earth;  i.e.  "overflows  of  water,  in- 
undations, floods,  not  duly  make  a  way 
through  rocks,  but  often  carry  off  great 
tracts  of  rich  soil,  hurrying  the  alluvium 
down  to  the  sea,  and  leaving  in  its  place  a 
marsh  or  a  waste."  And  thou  destroyest  the 
hope  of  man.  Even  thus  from  time  to  timo 
does  God  ruin  and  destroy  the  hopes  of  a 
prosperous  man. 

Ver.  20. — Thou  prevailest  for  ever  against 
him,  and  he  passeth;  rather,  thou  ptiUest 
forth  thy  power  against  him  perpetually ;  i.e. 
thou  art  continually  oppressing  him,  and 
crushing  him  by  afflictions;  and  the  con- 
sequence is  that  "  he  passes ; "  i.e.  "  ha 
pas.se8  away,  disappears,  ceases  to  be." 
Thou  changest  his  coimtenanoe.  "  Alterest," 
i.e.,  "its  expression  from  cheerfulness  to 
sadness,  and  its  complexion  from  the  hue  of 
health  to  the  sickly  pallor  of  disease  ;  setteet 
the  stamp  of  death  upon  it,  and  further  ilis- 
figurest  it  in  the  dreadful  process  of  decay." 
And  sendest  him  away.  That  is  to  say, 
"  Thou  removest  him  from  the  earth,  dia- 
missest  him  to  Sheol,  where  thenceforth  he 
remains." 

Ver.  21. — His  sous  come  to  honour,  and 
he  knoweth  it  not.  The  meaning  seems  to 
be,  "  If  his  sons  come  to  honour,  it  is  of  no 
advantage  to  him ;  in  the  remote  and 
wholly  separate  region  of  Sheol  he  will  not 
be  aware  of  it."  The  view  is  more  dismal 
than  that  of  Aristotle,  who  argues  that  the 
fate  of  those  whom  they  have  loved  and 
left  on  earth  will  be  sure  to  penetrate,  in 
course  of  time  (^ir/  Tiva  xp^"""'),  to  the  de- 
parted, and  cause  them  a  certain  amount  of 
joy  or  sorrow  ('  Eth.  Nic.,'  i..  11).  And  they 
are  brought  low,  but  he  peroeiveth  it  not  of 
them.  Equally,  in  the  opposite  case,  if 
his  sons  are  brought  low,  he  is  ignorant  of 
it,  and  unaffected  by  their  fate. 

Ver.  22. — But  his  flesh  upon  him  shall 
have  pain,  Tlie  best  rendering  is  probably 
that  which  is  placed  in  the  margin  of  the 


246 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[CH.  XIV.  1—22. 


Revised  Version,  only  for  himself  Ids  flesh 
hath  pain,  and  for  himself  his  soul  mmimeth. 
Nothing  more  is  intended  than  to  negative 
the  idea  that  the  future  condition  of  his 
children  will  seriously  affect  a  man  who  is 


suffering  under  God's  afflicting  hand,  either 
in  this  life  or  afterwards.  He  cannot  but 
be  occupied  solely  with  himself.  His  own 
sufferings,  whether  of  body  or  mind,  will  ab- 
sorb all  his  attention. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Job  to  Ood:  2.  The  death-wail  of  humanity.  I.  The  wail  of 
HUMANITY  IN  THE  BAB  OP  GoD.  1.  The  Constitutional  frailty  of  man.  MoseSj  in  the 
Book  of  Genesis  (i.  26 ;  ii.  7),  sets  forth  the  dignity  of  man  (Adam)  as  the  crown  of 
creation  (Ps.  viii.  6),  as  the  handiwork  of  God  (oh.  x.  8 ;  Ps.  c.  3 ;  Isa.  xv.  12),  as  the 
image  of  his  Maker  (Gen.  ix.  6;  Acts  xvii.  29 ;  1  Oor.  xi.  7).  Job  here  supplies  the 
companion  picture  of  the  misery  of  man  by  representing  him  as :  (1)  Descended  from 
woman,  who  was  not  only  taken  out  of  weak  man,  but  is  expressly  declared  to  be  the 
weaker  vessel  (1  Pet.  iii.  7),  and  is  the  subject  of  a  special  doom  of  weakness  in  herself 
and  offspring  in  consequence  of  having  been  first  in  the  transgression  (Gen.  iii.  16 ; 
1  Tim.  ii.  14) — ^all  which  may  be  said  to  entail  on  the  human  race,  as  it  were  by  a 
threefold  necessity,  the  pitiable  heritage  of  frailty.  (2)  Sprung  from  the  dust,  out  of 
which  man  emerged,  and  still  emerges,  like  a  flower  (Ps.  ciii.  15 ;  Isa.  xl.  6 ;  Jas.  i. 
10),  and  to  which  again,  like  the  flower,  he  shall  in  due  course  return  (Gen.  iii.  19) ; 
in  the  meanwhile,  as  he  hovers  between  the  cradle  and  the  grave,  his  birthplace  and 
his  place  of  sepulture,  being  like  the  flower,  a  structure  of  exquisite  loveliness  and  of 
admirable  symmetry  (Ps.  cxxxix.  14),  but  after  all  delicate  and  tender  as  a  flower, 
being,  like  it,  only  a  handful  of  dexterously  fashioned  and  beautifully  painted  dust. 
(3)  Insubstantial  as  a  shadow,  which  is  not  so  much  a  thing  as  the  image  and  reflection 
of  a  thing,  the  projection  on  the  ground  of  an  opaque  body  whose  dark  form  intercepts 
the  light  of  heaven,  a  metaphor  applied  already  by  Bildad  to  man's  days  (ch.  viii.  9 ; 
of.  Ps.  cii.  11 ;  cxliv.  4),  but  here  with  greater  boldness  appropriated  to  depict  the 
utter  insignificance  of  man  himself.  2.  The  extreme  brevity  of  human  life.  The 
period  of  man's  continuance  on  earth  is  sorrowfully  exhibited  as:  (1)  Of  definite 
extension  (ver.  5 ;  cf.  ch.  vii.  1,  2).  Uncertain  in  the  eye  of  man  himself  (Eccles.  ix. 
11,  12),  the  hour  of  each  one's  departure  from  this  sublunary  scene  is  accurately 
known  by  God  (Jer.  xxviii.  16),  in  whose  hands  are  not  only  the  souls  of  all  living 
things  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind  (oh.  xii.  10),  but  their  times  as  well  (Ps.  xxxi. 
15),  to  whose  all-seeing  eye  the  number  of  their  months  is  as  well  known  as  the 
number  of  their  hairs  (Luke  xii.  7),  who  hath  not  only  appointed  the  bounds  of  their 
habitation  (Acts  xvii.  26),  but  also  determined  their  days,  setting  a  bound  to  their 
goings  on  the  face  of  the  earth  as  effectually  as  he  does  to  the  waves  of  the  sea  (ch. 
xxxviii.  11).  And  this  doctrine  of  each  man  on  earth  having  a  predestined  career  is  as 
philosophical  as  it  is  scriptural,  the  foreordination  of  the  Almighty  not  interfering  with 
the  operation  of  natural  laws  and  secondary  causes.  Nor  is  it  contradicted  by  those  texts 
of  Scripture  which  seem  to  teach  that  the  limit  of  man's  pilgrimage  is  determined  by 
purely  accMental  circumstances  (ch.  xv.  32;  xxii.  16;  Ps.  Iv.  23;  Eccles.  vii.  17). 
(2)  Of  short  duration  (vers.  1,  2,  5,  6).  Whether  the  expression, "  of  few  days,"  literally, 
"  curtailed  as  to  days,"  contains  an  allusion  to  the  fact  that  human  life  was  shorter 
than  it  would  have  been  had  man  continued  innocent,  or  that  in  Job's  time  it  was 
shorter  than  it  had  been  in  the  world's  infancy,  it  is  certain  that  an  exceedingly 
impressive  picture  is  presented  by  the  phrases  and  images  here  employed,  human  life 
at  the  longest  being  characterized  as  "  months,"  then  "  days,"  and  these  only  "  few," 
and  after  that  as  "  a  day,"  as  the  brief  season  during  which  a  flower  blooms,  as  the 
short  time  during  which  the  shadow  runs.  Contrasted  with  the  age  of  the  race,  the 
duration  of  the  earth,  the  liletime  of  God,  yea,  contrasted  with  itself  in  prospective 
anticipation,  the  life  of  man,  especially  in  the  retrospect,  is  "but  a  handbreadth" 
(Ps.  xxxix.  5).  (3)  Of  quick  ti  ansition.  Coming  fortli  like  a  flower,  man  has  scarcely 
begun  to  bloom  when  he  is  cut  down  (cf.  '  Henry  VIII.,'  act  iii.  sc.  2).  The  few  days 
that  God  allots  him  to  live  refuse  to  linger,  but  hurry  on,  like  the  shadow  on  th« 
dial,  never  hasting,  never  resting,  but  ever  moving,  moving,  moving  on. 


OH,  xnr.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  247 


••  'Tis  but  an  hour  ago  since  it  was  nine ; 
And  after  one  hour  more,  'twill  be  eleven  ; 
And  so,  from  hour  to  hour,  we  ripe  anil  ripe. 
And  then,  from  hour  to  hour,  we  rot  and  rot.' 

('  As  You  Like  It,'  act  ii.  so.  5.) 

3.  The  intense  severity  of  human  sorrow.  Besides  being  of  few  days,  womnn-born 
man  is  full  of  trouble,  literally,  "  full  of  unrest,"  of  inward  commotion  and  of  outward 
motion,  its  inevitable  sequence  and  result.  Though  perhaps  it  is  not  true  of  any  that 
their  existence  on  earth  is  so  completely  "  satiated  with  sorrow,"  th-it  no  interludes  of 
joy  remain,  it  is  yet  true  of  most  that  affliction  forms  a  principal  ingredient  in  their 
cup  (ch.  V.  7),  while  of  all  it  may  be  said  that  a  considerable  portion  of  their  troubles 
springs  from  the  spirit  of  unrest  with  which  they  are  surcharged,  and  of  which  the 
primal  cause  is  sin.  "A  few  seem  favourites  of  fate,  in  pleasure's  lap  carerssed," 
though  even  these  are  not  "likewise  truly  blest"  in  the  highest  sense  of  the 
expression. 

"  But  oh  1  what  crowds  in  every  land 
Are  wretched  and  forlorn," 

tbrougb  bndily  disease,  mental  anxiety,  domestic  sorrow,  through  "  man's  inhumanity 
to  man,"  through  the  fierce  raging  of  inward  passion,  through  the  terrible  canker- 
worm  of  sin  1  4.  The  inherited  corruption  of  marHs  moral  nature.  "  Who  can  bring 
a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean?  not  one?"  (ver.  4).  Read  as  a  wish,  "Oh  that 
a  pure  one  could  come  from  an  impure ! "  (Delitzsch),  the  idea  is  the  same,  that  purity 
is  Impossible  to  man  because  of  his  origin.  Descended  from  woman,  he  brings  with 
him  into  life  a  legagy  of  physical  frailty,  and,  what  is  worse,  of  uncleanness.  The 
language  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  giving  enunciation  to  the  doctrine  of  original 
sip,  i.e.  of  the  hereditary  corruption  of  human  nature — a  doctrine  pervading  Scripture 
(Gen.  V.  3;  vi.  5;  viii.  21;  Ps.  11.  5 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  22;  Bom.  v.  12—20;  Eph.  ii.  3); 
involved  in  the  universal  prevalence  of  sin  (ch.  xi.  12 ;  Ps.  Iviii.  3 ;  Prov.  xxii.  15) ; 
presupposed  in  the  necessity  of  regeneration  (John  iii.  6);  confirmed  by  the  ex[ierience 
of  God's  people  (ch.  xl.  4 ;  Ps.  Ii.  5 ;  Isa.  vi.  5 ;  Bom.  vii.  14) ;  and  harmonizing  with 
the  all-pervading  law  of  nature  that  like  begets  like. 

II.  The  appeal  of  humanity  to  the  heart  of  God.  1.  Deprecating  Judgment. 
"And  dost  thou  open  thine  eyes  upon  such  a  one,  and  bringest  me  into  judgment 
with  thee?"  (ver.  3).  A  favourite  idea  with  Job  that  the  very  frailty  and  sinfulness 
of  man  should  have  been  his  protection  against  the  Divine  inspection  and  judicial 
visitation,  that  it  was  scarcely  worthy  of  the  Divine  Majesty  to  set  a  watch  upon  a 
creature  so  insignificant  and  feeble  as  man,  or  consistent  with  equity  to  arraign  at  his 
bar  a  being  whose  weakness  was  constitutional  and  hereditary.  But  that  original 
sin  or  hereditary  weakness  does  not  destroy  the  consciousness  of  individual  responsi- 
bility, is  proclaimed  by  Scripture  (Gen.  iv.  7;  Exod.  xxxii.  33;  ch.  xxxi.  3;  Ezek. 
xviii.  4),  attested  by  conscience,  and  believed  by  society.  And,  though  man  is 
frail,  he  is  neither  powerless  for  evil,  nor  unimportant  as  a  factor  in  the  history  of 
earth.  Hence  he  cannot  safely  be  overlooked.  Neither  is  he  unjustly  brought  into 
judgment.  Still  God  allows  himself  to  be  moved  to  compassionate  forbearance  by 
both  a  contemplation  of  man's  frailty  (Ps.  ciii.  14),  and  a  consideration  of  his  inherited 
corruption  (Gen.  vi.  3,  5).  2.  Supplicating  mercy.  "  Turn  from  him  _  [literally, 
'  look  away  from  him  *],  that  he  may  rest,  till  he  shall  accomplish,  as  an  hireling,  his 
day  "  (ver.  6).  Considering  that  man  has  only  a  short  day  to  live.  Job  entreats  that 
that  day  may  be  mercifully  exempted  from  such  special  sufferings  as  spring  from  a 
Divine  marking  and  punishing  of  sin,  in  order  that  man,  the  poor  hiieling,  may  be 
able  to  perform  his  appointed  task.  On  human  life  as  a  term  of  hard  service,  and  man 
as  a  miserable  hired  drudge,  see  ch.  vii.  1  (homiletics).  The  prayer  tells  us  that  no 
man  can  adequately  execute  the  tasks  assigned  him  by  God  on  earth  whose  boily  is 
racked  by  pain  and  whose  mind  is  tormented  by  spiritual  fear.  The  soul  that  cannot 
look  on  God  as  a  Friend,  or  upon  whom  God  seems  to  look  as  an  enemy,  can  never  be 
at  perfect  rest  (Isa.  Ivii.  21).  But  he  from  whom  God  averts  his  face  in  the  sense  of 
not  marking  iniquity  (Ps.  xxxii.  1),  and  much  more  upon  whom  God  makes  his  face 
to  shine  in  loving  favour  (ch.  xxxiii.  26 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  15;  John  xvi.  22;  Acts  ii.  28), 


248  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xiv.  1—22. 


possesses  the  true  secret  of  happiness,  and  the  noblest  inspiration  for  Christian  work 
In  Christ  the  face  of  God  is  turned  mercifully  away  from  human  sin,  and  compassion- 
ately towards  human  sorrow. 

Learn :  1.  There  is  no  room  for  pride  of  ancestry  in  man,  since  all  alike  are  woman- 
bom.  2.  The  lowly  origin  of  man  should  impress  the  heart  with  humility.  3.  Since 
man's  days  are  so  full  of  trouble,  it  is  a  mercy  they  are  few ;  and  since  they  are  so 
few,  man  should  study  to  be  patient  under  trouble.  4.  The  swift  approach  of  death 
should  stimulate  to  diligence  and  promote  heavenly-mindedness.  5.  The  heart  of  God 
can  be  touched  with  a  reeling  of  our  infirmities.  6.  God  will  never  open  his  eyes  to 
judge  their  sins  who  first  open  their  eyes  to  behold  his  mercy.  7.  One  special  reason 
of  our  requiring  mercy  is  our  inherited  corruption,  since  it  proves  that  we  are,  root  ami 
branch,  depraved. 

Ver.  2d — Man  oi  a  flower.    I.  In  his  orwin.    He  springeth  from  the  ground. 

II.  In  his  constitution.     He  is  composed  of  dust, 

III.  In  his  BTRtrcTUBB.  His  physical  organism  is  as  beautiful  and  delicate  as  that 
of  a  flower. 

IV.  In  his  frailty.    He  is  as  easily  destroyed  as  a  flower. 

V.  In  ms  evanescence.    He  is  as  short-lived  as  a  flower. 

VI.  In  his  end.    Like  a  flower,  he  returns  to  the  dust. 

Lessons.  1.  Lowly  thoughts  of  self.  2.  Care  of  the  body.  3.  Preparation  for 
the  end. 

Vers.  7 — 15. — Job  to  God  :  3.  A  glimpse  into  the  life  beyond.  I.  "  If  a  man  die, 
SHALL  HE  LIVE  AGAIN  ?  "  No  !  1.  The  voicB  of  nature  is  against  it.  "  For  there  ia 
hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,"  etc.  (vers.  7 — ^9).  But 
nothing  like  this  occurs  in  the  case  of  man,  of  whom  rather  the  cheerless  proverb  holds 
that,  as  the  tree  falls,  so  shall  it  lie  (Bcoles.  xi.  3).  Hewn  down  by  the  axe  of  death, 
or  laid  prostrate  by  age  beneath  the  sod,  there  is  in  his  decaying  body  no  vital  germ 
which  can  send  forth  tender  sprouts.  The  earth  contains  no  revivifying  principle  for 
him  as  for  trees.  The  fine  manly  fellow,  rejoicing  in  his  vigorous  health,  begins  to 
droop  and  to  die ;  he  gives  up  tbe  ghost,  or  expires,  and  where  is  he?  (ver.  10).  Theie 
is  no  subsequent  resuscitation  for  him.  Nol  Man's  appropriate  emblem  is  not  the 
trees,  but  the  streams  and  the  lakes.  When  man  dies,  he  disappears  completely  from 
ihe  present  scene,  like  the  diied-iip  waters  of  a  lake,  or  of  a  mountain  torrent  that 
have  forsaken  their  accustomed  bed.  2.  2'he  testimony  of  experience  is  against  it.  A 
phenomenon  so  stujiendous  as  the  return  of  a  dead  and  buried  man  to  life  has  never 
once  been  wituessed.  With  a  terrible  uniformity  of  sadness,  each  age  has  followed  its 
predecessor  to  the  tomb.  And  there  are  those  who  affirm  that  this  dreary  monotony 
has  never  been  interrupted  j  that  the  sum  of  human  experience  is  the  .same  to-day  as 
it  was  in  Job's  time ;  that  "  man  lieth  down,  and  riseth  not "  (ver.  12) ;  and  that  there  is 
no  reason  to  anticipate  that  it  ever  will  be  different,  but  much  cause  to  conclude  that  for 
evermore  it  will  continue  the  same  (Bccles.  i.  9).  But  (1)  uniformity  of  past  experience 
cannot  with  absolute  finality  determine  future  events  in  a  world  governed  by  Omniscient 
Wisdom  and  Infinite  Power;  (2)  in  numerous  instances  already  the  principle  of 
reokohing  from  past  uniformity  has  been  found  to  be  unsafe,  as  e.g.  the  successive 
appearance  of  new  species  of  living  creatures  on  earth,  according  to  either  geological 
science  or  biblical  revelation,  the  occurrence  of  the  Deluge,  the  manifestation  of  Christ; 
(3)  in  particular  the  uniformity  of  experience  referred  to,  viz.  of  the  non-return  of 
men  from  their  graves,  has,  on  tho  evidence  of  human  testimony,  been  broken  at  least 
once  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ ;  and  (4)  even  had  it  not  been  broken  once,  such 
uniformity  of  past  experience  cannot  be  regarded  as  valid  against  the  doctrine  of  a 
resurrection  such  as  Scrijiture  teaches,  viz.  a  return  of  mankind  to  the  earth,  not 
successively  at  different  times  and  in  divers  parts  and  parcels,  but  simultaneously  in 
one  united  body.  3.  Tfie  verdict  of  science  is  against  it.  Not  of  true  science,  but  oi 
arrogantly  talking,  iimch  asserting,  materialism.  What  Job  uses  as  beautiful  simili- 
tudes (vers.  7, 11,  18,  19)  modern  sages  employ  as  scientific  truth.  Man,  accordin'^ 
to  their  findings,  is  of  a  piece  with  the  great  material  world  by  which  he  is  surronndeii, 
tu  which  there  is  continually  going  on  a  resistless  process  of  disintegration  and  dis* 


OH.  XIV.  I— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  249 

solution,  before  which  he  Booner  or  later  succumbs,  like  the  trees  and  the  rocks,  the 
mountains  and  the  streams.  To  expect,  therefore,  that  a  dead  man  shall  return  to  his 
place  on  earth  is  as  unscientific  as  to  anticipate  that  the  alluvial  deposits  of  the  plain 
shall  replace  themselves  upon  the  mountain's  sides  from  which  they  have  been  taken, 
or  that  the  shattered  rock  shall  resume  its  station  in  the  crevice  out  of  which  it  has 
fallen,  or  that  the  water  of  a  lake  which  has  evaporated  shall  again  cover  its  desiccated 
bed,  or  the  fleecy  cloud  which  has  dissolved  and  been  dispersed  shall  recombine  itself 
upon  the  face  of  heaven. 

II.  "If  a  man  DIB,  SHALL  HE  LIVE  AGAIN?"  Tes  1  1.  The  phenomena  of  nature 
suggest  it.  "There  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will  sprout  again." 
Why,  then,  should  there  not  be  hope  of  a  man  reviving  from  the  bed  of  death  ?  Why 
should  not  man  have  his  springtime  as  well  as  the  plants  and  flowers  and  roots  ? 
"  Everything  in  nature  is  a  sign  of  something  higher  and  more  living  than  itself,  to 
follow  in  due  course,  and  in  turn  announce  a  yet  higher  one ;  the  mineral  foretells  the 
plant,  the  plant  the  animal,  all  things  in  their  degree  foretell  mankind"  (Leo  Griudon, 
•  Life :  its  Nature,'  etc.,  p.  301).  Again,  "  The  presignificance  of  animal  forms  and 
economy  by  plants  extends  to  the  whole  of  their  organic  functions,  to  many  of  their 
organs,  even  to  their  spontaneous  movements,  their  habits  and  qualities  "  (ibid.,  p.  30fi). 
Many  of  the  functions  usually  supposed  to  be  characteristic  of  animals  have  a  marvel- 
lous foreshadowing  in  vegetables,  as  e,g.  the  processes  of  eating  and  digesting  food,  the 
procreation  and  birth  of  offspring,  the  act  of  respiration  and  the  reposa  of  sleep.  May 
it  not,  then,  be  maintained  that  the  constantly  recuixing  winter  death,  and  spring 
revival  of  trees  and  plants  and  flowers,  are  prefigurements,  not  only  of  the  sleeping  and 
waking  of  animals  generally,  but  also  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  man  1  2.  lite 
instincts  of  humanity  desire  it.  "Oh  that  thou  wouldest  hide  me  in  SheolP'etc. ■ 
(ver.  13).  Job  had  not,  indeed,  perfect  certainty  on  the  subject  of  his  returning  from 
Hailes,  but  in  the  deepest  yearnings  of  his  soul,  which  here  flashed  up  into  momentary 
brightness,  he  longed  for  such  a  revival  as  is  implied  in  the  resurrection.  And  the 
argument  derived  from  this  is  that  the  existence  of  such  a  hope  in  the  human  soul 
renders  probable  at  least  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection.  "  Intuition  is  worth  volumes  of 
logic  "  (Grindon,p.  287).  "  Where  in  the  plan  of  nature  do  we  flnd  instincts  falsifled? 
Where  do  we  see  an  insiance  of  a  creature  instinctively  craving  a  certain  kind  of  food 
in  a  place  where  no  suci.  food  can  be  found  ?  Are  the  swallows  deceived  by  their 
instinct  when  they  fly  away  from  clouds  and  storms  to  seek  a  warmer  country  ?  Do 
they  not  find  a  milder  climate  beyond  the  water?  When  the  may-flies  and  other 
aquatic  insects  leave  their  shells,  expand  their  wings,  and  soar  from  the  water  into  the 
air,  do  they  not  find  an  atmosphere  fitted  to  sustain  them  in  a  new  stage  of  life  ?  Yes. 
The  voice  of  nature  does  not  utter  false  prophecies.  It  is  the  call,  the  invitation,  of 
the  Creator  addressed  to  his  creatures.  And  if  this  be  true  with  regard  to  the 
impulses  of  the  physical  life,  why  should  it  not  be  true  with  regard  to  the  superior 
instincts  of  the  soul?"  (Eeimar,  'Truths  of  Natural  Religion,'  quoted  by  Grindon,  p. 
287).  3.  The  dignity  of  man  demands  it.  "  Thou  shalt  call,  and  I  will  answer  thee : 
thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  the  work  of  thine  hands  "  (ver.  15).  It  was  utterly  incon- 
ceivable that  God  could  be  happy  so  long  as  man,  the  noblest  specimen  of  his  handi- 
work, whom  his  own  hands  had  fashioned  with  tender  care  and  infinite  skill  (ch.  x.  3,  9), 
upon  whom,  as  it  were,  he  had  impressed  the  stamp  of  his  own  Divinity  (Gen.  i.  26), 
and  whom  he  had  set  at  the  very  apex  of  creation  (Ps.  viii.  6),  was  lying  mouldering 
in  the  dust ;  nay,  by  the  very  necessities  of  the  case,  God  would  yearn  (grow  pale  with 
anxiety  and  wan  with  longing)  after  his  absent  creature  and  child,  and,  eventually 
breaking  in  upon  the  silence  of  the  grave,  would  summon  the  unconscious  sleeper  to 
arise.  "Do  you  suppose,"  Job  virtually  asks,  "that  if  I  yearn  after  God  as  I  do,  God 
does  not  likewise  yearn  after  me ;  that  if  it  would  add  to  my  felicity  to  see  God  in  the 
flesh,  and  to  talk  with  him  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  fiiond,  it  would  not  likewise 
intensify  his  blessedness  to  have  me  in  my  complete  manhood  by  his  side  ?  "  And  in 
this  idea  of  the  essential  dignity  of  man  as  God's  handiwork  and  God's  child,  we  ara 
warranted  to  find,  if  not  a  certain  demonstration,  at  least  a  strong  presumption  that 
man  will  yet  attain  to  an  embodied  life  bejond  the  grave.  4.  The  witness  of  revelation 
frodaime  it.  Like  other  parts  of  the  gospel  scheme,  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection  was 
tnly  gradually  unfolded.    In  antediluvian  times  it  may  have  been  suggested  to 


250  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xrv.  1— 22. 


thoughtful  Diincls  by  the  translation  of  Enoch.  In  the  Abrahamio  period  the  hope  of 
a  hotter  country,  even  an  heavenly,  was  strong  in  pious  hearts ;  hut  it  is  not  certain 
that  this  implied  more  than  a  belief  in  immortality,  or  in  a  continuous  existence  beyond 
the  grave  though  the  case  of  Job  clearly  shows  that  even  then  men  had  begun  to 
speculate  about  the  probability  of  a  return  to  the  embodied  state  after  death,  and  the 
practice  of  embalming  among  the  Egyptians  has  been  held  to  prove  that  such  a 
doctrine  had  even  then  become  a  popular  belief.  In  the  age  of  David  the  hope  of 
a  resurrection  burned  brighter  and  clearer  (Ps.  xvi.  11 ;  xvii.  15).  Isaiah  siioke  of  a 
rising  of  Jehovah's  dead  body,  and  of  the  earth  casting  forth  her  dead  (Isa.  xxvi.  19) ; 
Ezckiel,  of  an  opening  of  the  graves  (Bzeb.  xxxviii.  9,  13)  ;  Daniel,  of  an  awaking  out 
of  sleep  (Dan.  xii.  2).  But  not  until  the  times  of  the  gospel  was  the  dootiine  fully 
declared.  Clnistaffirmedit(John  v.28,  29);  St.  Peter  proved  it  (Acts  ii.  25— 32 ;  xii.  34); 
St.  Paul  preached  it  (Acts  xvii.  31)  and  wrote  concerning  it  (Rom.  viii.  11, 12  ;  1  Cor.  xv. 
12 — 20).  5.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  secures  it.  "But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the 
dead,  and  become  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  The  resurrection 
of  Christ  being  as  certain  a  fact  of  history  as  his  death,  the  resurrection  of  his  people 
at  least  is  conclusively  established  (John  xiv.  19 ;  Rom.  viii.  11 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  14)j  and 
the  question  of  Job  finally  answered. 

Lessons.     1.  The  importance  of  using  life  well,  since  no  man  returns  to  the  present 
scene.    2.  The  strong  consolation  which  the  saint  finds  in  the  hope  of  a  resurrection. 

Vers.  16 — 22. — Joh  to  God :  4.  Falling  lack  into  the  darkness.  I.  BROODiNa  over 
HIS  MisKRY.  1.  A  sudden  transition.  Job's  anticipation  of  the  future  resurrection-life 
was  a  momentary  inspiration ;  not  a  calm,  clear,  steady  light,  diffusing  a  cheerful 
radiance  within  his  soul,  and  shining  on  his  onward  progress  to  the  grave,  but  a  bright 
meteoric  flash  shooting  up  before  his  mind's  eye,  dazzling  it  for  an  instant  by  celestial 
splendours,  and  then  plunging  across  the  firmament  of  his  soul  into  darkness.  Like 
Moses  on  the  summit  of  Moxmt  Pisgah,  looking  out  over  Jordan  towards  the  promised 
land ;  like  Christ  upon  the  snowy  crown  of  Hermon,  gazing  far  beyond  the  cross  to  the 
glory  that  was  to  follow,  this  great  projihetic  soul,  with  his  vision  clarified  through 
suffering,  having  been  set  down  by  the  grave's  mouth,  looked  across  the  dark  Hadean 
world,  and  descried  the  resurrection-life  beyond.  But,  alas !  like  the  Pisgah-glimpse 
of  Canaan  and  the  transfiguiation-glory  of  Mount  Hermon,  the  beatific  vision  was  not  of 
long  duration.  It  was  a  momentary  parting  of  the  veil  before  the  undiscovered  country 
— nothing  more.  It  came,  it  paused  not,  it  passed,  it  vanished.  The  old  stream  of 
sorrowful  einotion,  out  of  which  Job  had  been  lifted  for  a  season,  as  St.  Paul  was  caught 
up  into  the  third  heaven,  resumed  its  course.  He  was  once  more  in  the  full  current 
of  his  misery.  Such  transitions  are  not  infrequent  in  the  Christian  life — from  light  to 
darkness,  from  joy  to  sadness,  from  peace  to  trouble,  from  delightful  anticipations  of 
heaven  to  sorrowful  forebodings  of  impending  disaster.  2.  An  extraordinary  mis- 
conception. Losing  sight  of  the  light  from  beyond  the  tomb,  he  is  once  more  a 
wretched  creature  whose  steps  are  watched,  and  whose  sins  are  marked  by  an  angry 
Judge.  God  appears  to  be  dealing  with  him  as  a  criminal,  lying  in  wait,  as  it  were,  to 
detect  his  sins,  preserving  a  careful  enumeration  of  them,  storing  them  up  in  a  bundle 
as  legal  documents  ;  or,  better,  in  a  purse  as  money  or  precious  stones,  and  sealing  it 
to  ensure  their  production  on  the  day  of  trial — nay,  for  that  purpose,  sewing  them  up 
in  a  sort  of  interior  scrip  (Cox),  or  tying  them  up  together  (Fry,  Good),  or  stitching 
on  to  them  additional  charges  (Gesenius,  Deli(zsch).  The  experience  through  which 
Job  here  passes  was  not  new  to  himself  (ch.  vii.  18  ;  xiii.  27),  and  has  sometimes  been 
approximated  to  by  believers  under  the  Law  (Ps.  xxxviii.  1 — 4 ;  Ixxxviii.  7,  16), 
though,  in  the  case  of  Christians,  it  should  for  ever  be  impossible,  proceeding  as  it 
does  upon  a  total  misconception  of  the  character  of  God  as  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Even  under  the  Law  such  a  picture  as  Joh  here  sketches  of  the  Divine  treatment  of 
a  believing  sinner  should  scarcely  have  been  possible.  As  discovered  to  Moses,  the 
character  of  Jehovah  was  "merciful  and  gracious"  (Exod.  xxxiv.  7);  as  known  to 
David,  "  ready  to  forgive  "  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  5) ;  as  proclaimed  by  Micah,  "  delighting  in 
mercy  "  (Micah  vii.  18).  Much  more  as  published  by  him  who  is  the  Image  of  the 
invisilile  God  (Col.  i.  15),  and  who  came  w  declare  the  Father  (Johu  i.  18),  it  is 
essentially  love.    The  only  being  whom  God  ever  treated  »"  a  criminal  on  account  of 


OH.  xir.  1— 22,]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  251 

sia  was  his  own  Son  (Isa.  liii.  6,  10;  Rom.  iv.  25  ;  2  Cor.  v.  21).  In  view  of  Christ'* 
propitiatory  work  he  dealt  with  men  in  a  way  of  mercy  even  before  the  advent  ; 
since  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary  God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not 
imputing  unto  men  their  trespasses  (2  Cor.  v.  19).  Yet  the  language  of  Job  is  true 
in  the  case  of  sinners  who  are  wilfully  impenitent.  Their  iniquities  are  all  observed 
by  God,  remembered  by  God,  and,  unless  repented  of  and  forgiven,  will  eventually  be 
produced  by  God  for  their  condemnation.  3.  A  strange  contradiction.  A  moment 
before  exulting  in  the  thought  that  God's  affection  for  him  when  dead  would  be  so 
great  as  to  require  the  resuscitation  of  his  lifeless  body  (ver.  15),  Job  now  pictures  the 
same  God  as  a  malignant  Adversary  and  an  angry  Judge.  The  two  conceptions  will 
not  hold  together.  A  little  calm  logic  would  have  enabled  Job  to  see  this  ;  but  men 
are  seldom  logical  at  the  grave's  mouth  or  in  the  grasp  of  an  awakened  conscience.  It 
were  well  for  Christians,  and  for  -men  generally,  to  be  distrustful  of  those  representations 
of  the  Divine  character  which  are  cast  up  before  the  mind's  eye  by  either  the  soul's 
fears  or  fancies.  Pictures  of  the  Deity  evolved  from  the  inner  consciousness,  whether 
by  philosophers  or  theologians,  are  seldom  congruous  with  one  another,  but  are  as 
variable  as  the  passing  moods  of  the  changeful  spirit.  In  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  alone 
can  GK)d  be  either  fully  or  clearly  seen ;  and  there  he  is  "  without  variableness,  or 
shadow  of  turning." 

II.  Despaiking  of  his  life.  Job  foresees  nothing  for  him  but  the  early  extinction 
of  that  hope  of  life  which  has  hitherto  sustained  him;  and  that  for  two  reasons.  1. 
Decay  appeared  to  le  the  universal  law  of  nature.  The  most  stable  things  on  earth 
were  incapable  of  resisting  this  inherent  tendency  to  dissolution.  Mountains,  rooks, 
stones,  the  very  soil,  yielded  to  the  well-nigh  o:nnipotent  forces  of  nature  (vers.  18,  19) ; 
how  much  less  could  weak  and  frail  man  overcome  that  all-pervading  m/m  disintegra^ 
tionis  by  which  he  was  assailed,  or  escape  that  slow  but  inevitable  destruction  which 
engulfed  all  mundane  things !  "  The  cloud-capp'd  towers,  the  gorgeous  palaces,"  etc. 
('  Tempest,'  act  iv.  so.  1).  2.  Ood  seemed  to  have  decreed  his  destruction.  The  con- 
sideration of  man's  frailty,  which  might  have  been  expected  to  move  God  to  pity,  in 
Job's  estimation  had  rather  stirred  him  to  relentless  severity.  He  had  instituted  laws 
against  which  even  the  most  durable  things  of  earth  were  unable  to  stand ;  "  and,"  as  i( 
these  same  laws  were  not  sufficient  of  themselves  to  accomplish  his  destruolion,  "  thou 
destroyest  the  hope  of  man  "  (ver.  19).  The  hope  of  eluding  death  is  a  delusion  (Heb. 
ix.  27).  But  if  God  destroys  man's  hope  of  life,  he  mercifully  supplants  it,  in  the  cause 
of  believers,  with  a  hope  of  immortality  (1  Pet.  i.  3). 

III.  Anticipating  his  demise.  This  Job  expected  would  be:  1.  Irresistible. 
"  Thou  prevailest  for  ever,"  either  overpowerest  (Gesenius,  Davidson,  Carey)  or  seizest 
him  (Delitzsch)  "for  ever"  (ver.  20).  The  struggle  of  life  against  death,  represented 
as  a  contest  of  man  with  God,  who  always  proves  the  Victor  (Bccles.  vi.  10),  so  that 
"  no  man  hath  power  over  the  spirit  to  retain  the  spirit,  neither  hath  lie  power  in  the 
day  of  death  "  (Eccles.  viii.  8),  but  from  all  men  equally  their  breath  is  taken  away,  and 
ihey  return  to  the  dust  (Ps.  civ.  29).  2.  Speedy.  "And  he  passeth,"  liteially,  "  he 
goeth,"  M.  into  the  unseen  world.  Notwithstanding  all  man's  attempts  to  resist  the 
decree  of  dissolution,  not  much  is  required  to  compJete  his  subjugation.  His  removal 
is  easily  effected.  Simply  God  speaks  to  him  (Ps.  xc.  3),  or  breathes  upon  him  (Isa. 
xl.   7),  and  he  moveth  on,  his  valour  overcome,  his  wisdom  defeated,  his  strength 

■  paralyzed,  his  noble  form  prostrated  in  stillness  and  decay.  3.  Humiliating.  "Thou 
changest  his  countenance."  Time  writes  wrinkles  on  the  brow,  oaie  ploughs  furrows 
on  the  cheek,  afSiction  ages  and  enfeebles  the  most  stalwart  frame ;  but,  0  Death !  for 
rudely  marring  and  disfiguring  the  fair  temple  of  the  body,  man  accords  thee  the  palm. 
Death,  which  is  exaltation  to  the  spirit,  is  degradation  to  the  body.  To  the  one  the 
gateway  of  glory,  it  is  also  to  the  other,  though  only  for  a  time,  the  door  of  dishonour. 
4.  Final.  "Thou  sendest  him  away,"  as  it  were  into  perpetual  banishment.  If  the 
language  implies  that  man  continues  to  preserve  a  conscious  existence  after  departing 
from  the  earth,  it  as  emphatically  bars  the  way  against  any  return  to  the  present  life. 

IV.  Eealizing  the  disembodied  state.  1.  A  complete  severance  from,  mundane 
things.  When  man  vanishes  from  this  mortal  scene,  not  only  does  the  place  which 
knows  him  now  know  him  no  more  for  ever  (ch.  vii.  10;  xx.  9;  Ps.  ciii.  16),  but  he 
himself  has  nt  more  knowledge  of  the  place.     His  connection  with  the  world  is 


252  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh,  xiv.  1— 22. 

completely  at  an  end  (Eocles.  ix.  5).  He  returns  no  more  to  his  house  (ch.  vii.  10), 
neither  is  he  more  concerned  with  the  fortunes  of  his  family  (ver.  21).  How  far  this 
correctly  represents  the  Hadean  world  it  is  impossible  to  say.  That  disembodied 
spirits  should  retain  the  power  of  apprehending  what  transpires  on  earth  is  neither 
impossible  nor  inconceivable  ;  and  that  they  do  may  seem  to  derive  countenance  from 
Scripture  (Luke  xv.  7 ;  xvi.  27 ;  Heb.  xii.  1).  Still,  it  is  doubtful  if  as  many  and 
potent  arguments  cannot  be  adduced  against  it ;  while  it  is  certain  that,  even  if  departed 
souls  are  cognizant  of  mundane  affairs,  they  will  not  be  profoundly  interested  in  such 
things  as  the  temporal  prosperity  or  adversity  of  their  families.  2.  An  exclusive 
occupation  with  the  interests  of  self.  "  But,"  or  only,  "  his  flesh  upon  him,"  or  on 
account  of  himself,  "  shall  have  pain,  and  his  soul  within  him,"  or  on  account  of  itself, 
"  shall  mourn "  (ver.  22).  The  dead  man's  body  is  regarded  as  a  sentient  creature 
suffering  extreme  physical  tortures  while  undergoing  the  process  of  dissolution ;  the 
dead  man's  soul  is  depicted  as  filled  with  inconsolable  sorrow  on  account  of  its  unhappy 
lot.  Scarcely  removed  from  the  conceptions  entertained  by  heathen  writers,  such 
a  picture  as  Job  here  outlines  of  the  realm  of  departed  saints  is  only  true  of  the 
impenitent  who  die  unsaved,  but  is  as  widely  astray  as  possible  from  the  truth 
concerning  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  who,  if  they  are  occupied  exclusively 
with  their  own  affairs,  do  not  bemoan  an  undone  eternity,  but  exult  in  an  exceeding, 
even  an  eternal,  weight  of  glory,  and  who,  if  they  do  grieve  over  their  absent  bodies, 
lament  not  the  pains  they  are  suffering,  but  long  for  their  emancipation  from  the  power 
of  death — "  waiting  for  the  adoption,  even  the  redemption  of  the  body  "  (Eom.  viii.  23). 
Learn :  1.  To  think  of  God's  mercy  as  beyond  disputation.  2.  To  contemplate 
death's  approach  as  inevitable.  3.  To  reflect  more  upon  the  glory  of  heaven  than  upon 
the  gloom  of  the  grave.  4.  To  keep  the  soul  as  much  as  possible  disengaged  from  the 
affairs  of  time.  5.  To  seek  for  ourselves  and  children  that  honour  which  cometh  from 
above.  6.  To  realize  that  a  saint  leaves  all  pain  and  mourning  behind  him  when  he 
enters  the  unseen  world.  7.  To  thank  God  for  all  the  light  which  has  been  shed 
around  the  grave  and  upon  the  future  world  by  the  gospel  of  Christ's  resurrection. 

Ver.  19. — Blighted  hopes.  L  A  common  bxpbrienob.  It  is  not  more  true  that  man 
hopes,  than  it  is  that  he  sooner  or  later  becomes  acquainted  with  disappointment. 
Youag  and  old,  rich  and  poor,  wise  and  unwise,  have  their  unrealized  expectations. 

II.  A  Divine  aerakqement.  Blighted  hopes  are  no  more  accidents  than  are  buds 
that  never  fulfil  their  promise.  They  form  part  of  the  great  world-plan  which  has  been 
devised  by  Infinite  Wisdom. 

III.  A  BALUTABY  DISCIPLINE.  When  God  breaks  a  man's  earthly  ideas,  it  is  that 
he  may  find  nobler  ones  in  heaven  ;  that,  turning  away  his  heart  irom  mundane  things, 
he  may  seek  those  things  which  are  above. 

Lessons.  .  1.  Thank  God  for  earth's  disappointments.  2.  Seek  to  be  possessed  of 
that  hope  which  fadeth  not  away. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ATJTHOES. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — 1.  Self-defence  before  Ood :  2.  PUtint  of  the  weakness  and  vanity  of 
manlcind.  Job's  troubles  are  typical  of  the  common  doom  of  mankind — the  "  sub-' 
jection  to  vanity."  And  again  (comp.  ch.  iii.  7;  vii.  1 — 6)  he  bursts  forth  into 
lamentation  over  the  universal  doom  of  sorrow. 

I.  His  NAITJRAL  WEAKNESS.  (Vers.  1 — 2.)  His  origin  is  in  frailty ;  he  is  "  born  of 
woman."  His  course  is  hrief,  and  full  of  unrest.  He  sees  himself  mirrored  in  all 
natural  things  that  fleet  and  pass :  (1)  in  the  flower  of  the  field,  briefly  blooming, 
doomed  to  the  speedy  soythe ;  (2)  in  the  shadow,  like  that  of  a  cloud,  resting  for  a 
moment  on  the  ground,  then  vanishing  with  its  substance.  "  Man  is  a  bubble,"  said 
the  Greek  proverb  (iro^(fiiAu|  &  Mpaiiros).  He  is  like  a  morning  mushroom,  soon  thrust- 
ing np  its  head  into  the  air,  and  as  soon  turning  into  dust  and  forgetfulness  (Jeremy 
Taylor).     Homer  calls  man  a  leaf;  Pindar,  the  "  dream  of  a  shadow." 

JI.  His  moral  weakness.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  On  the  natural  frailty  is  founded  the 
moral.    And  this  poo-r,  weak  being  is  made  accountable,  dragged  before  the  tribunal 


CH.  XIV.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  253 

of  God.  And  yet,  asks  Job,  how  is  it  possible  that  purity  should  be  exacted  of  him  ? 
How  caa  the  product  be  diverse  from  the  cause ;  the  stream  be  of  purer  quality  than 
the  source  ? 

III.  KBASONINa   AND   EXPOSTULATION   FODNDED  ON   THESE   FACTS.      (Vers.  6,  6.)      If 

man,  then,  is  so  weak,  and  his  life  determined  by  so  narrow  bounds,  were  it  not  the 
part  of  Divine  compassion  and  justice  to  give  him  some  release  and  respite  until  his 
brief  day  of  toil  and  suffering  be  altogether  spent  (comp.  ch.  vii.  17;  x.  20)?  It 
seems  to  Job,  in  the  confusion  of  his  bewildered  tlioiight,  that  God  is  laying  on  him  a 
special  and  extraordinary  weight  of  sufferin,^,  which  makes  his  lot  worse  than  that  of 
the  common  hireling. 

IV.  Fpbthkb  images  of  despondency.  (Vors,  7 — 12.)  Casting  his  eye  upon  the 
familiar  scenes  of  nature,  it  seems  that  all  things  reflect  the  sad  thought  of  the  transi- 
ency and  hopelessness  of  man's  fate,  and  even  to  exaggerate  it.  1.  Image  of  the  tree. 
The  tree  may  be  hewn  down,  but  scions  and  suckers  spring  from  its  well-nourished 
root ;  an  image  used  by  the  prophet  to  symbolize  the  spiritual  Israel.  The  stump  of 
the  oak  represents  the  remnant  that  survives  the  judgment,  and  this  is  the  source 
whence  the  new  Israel  springs  up  after  the  destruction  of  the  old  (Isa.  vi.  13).  But  when 
man  is  broken  down  and  falls  like  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  there  is  an  end  of  him.  This 
is  undoubtedly  a  morbid  perversion  of  the  suggestion  of  nature.  She  by  the  sprouting 
scion  teaches  at  least  the  great  truth  of  the  continuity  and  perpetual  self-renewal  of 
life,  if  she  can  tell  no  more.  2.  Image  of  the  dried-up  waters.  (Ver.  11.)  These 
forsake  their  wonted  channels  and  flow  in  them  no  more  (comp.  ch.  vii.  9).  So,  it 
seems  to  the  eye  of  nature,  man  passes  away  in  a  mist  from  the  earthly  scene  and 
leaves  no  trace  behind.  3.  Image  of  the  abiding  heavens.  (Ver.  12.)  This  is  intro- 
duced, not  in  illustration  of  the  transient  life  of  man,  but  in  contrast  to  it  (comp.  Ps. 
Ixxxix.  29,  36,  37).  The  heavens  appear  eternally  fixed,  in  contrast  to  the  fluctuating 
scene  below.  They  look  calmly  down,  while  nian  passes  into  the  sleep  of  death,  and 
into  Sheol,  whence  there  is  no  return.  But  when  man  rises  into  the  full  consciousness 
of  his  spiritual  nature  through  the  revelation  of  life  and  immortality,  all  seems  passing 
compared  with  the  life  in  G'^d.  The  heavens  shall  vanish  away  like  smoke,  but  God's 
ialvation  shall  not  be  abolished.    He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  shall  abide  for  ever.— J. 

Vers.  13 — 15. —  '^elf-defence  hefore  God  :  3.  Dawning  of  a  new  hope.  The  thoughts 
of  the  sufferer  i.ow  carry  him  beyond  the  confines  of  the  present  life.  He  has  just 
been  speaking  of  Sheol,  or  Hades,  as  his  destined  end,  and  now  the  reflection  occurs — 
What  may  happen  then  ?  It  is  the  nature  of  thought  to  travel' on  and  on,  to  know  no 
bounds  that  it  will  not  seek  to  overleap.  It  is  perpetually  asking,  when  one  goal  has 
been  reached,  for  the  after,  the  beyond.  And  in  some  such  way  must  human  thought 
have  travelled  towards  the  light  of  immortality,  before  the  truth  dawned  by  revela- 
tion on  the  world.  Job  evidently  sees  a  glimmer  of  the  truth,  though  it  soon  fades 
out,  for  want  of  definite  knowledge,  into  darkness. 

I.  Longing  fob  concealment  in  Hades  fob  a  season.  (Ver._  13.)  The  intense 
desire,  so  frequently  repeated,  for  a  respite,  marks  the  extremity  of  intolerable  anguish. 
And  if  the  source  of  it  be  God's  wrath,  perhaps  in  time  his  heart  will  relent.  Then  let 
the  appointed  judgment  be  held,  and  the  decision  be  made.  At  least  may  the  wrath  of 
God  not  pursue  him  into  the  darkness  of  the  other  world  1 

II.  A  FUTUBE  LIFE  SUGGESTED.  (Ver.  14.)  For  if  there  is  to  be  a  future  judgment, 
there  must  be  a  future  life  to  be  the  subject  of  it.  I'erhaps  this  is  the  greatest  ques- 
tion man  can  ask  without  the  light  of  the  gcspel.  But  some  preliminary  answer  is 
here  su^cested  for  a  moment,  though  Job  does  not  grasp  it  firmly,  that  the  future  life 
is  guaranteed  by  the  justice  and  the  love  of  God.  But  it  is  observable  how  the  very 
faintest  thought  of  the  possibility  gives  a  new  turn  to  feeling.  Patience  can  only  exist 
when  there  is  hope.  And  Job  feels  be  could  patiently  wait  all  the  days  of  lus  earthly 
service  were  that  hope  assured.  It  awakens  joy.  A  happy  change  must  occur.  The 
misunderstandings  of  the  present  will  clear  away.    And  with  this  is  connected  again 

the  glimmering  of—  n  mi    i      ^   •         j 

III.  The  consciousness  or  man  s  eternal  relation  to  God.  The  heart  is  made 
for  God  How  gladly,  when  he  appears  from  out  the  clouds  and  darkness  that  sur- 
round him,  will  "the  heart  respond  to  his  call!     God  yearns  for  man.    Man  is  his 


254  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ou.  xiv.  1—22. 


creature,  bis  handiwork,  his  offspring.  He  cannot  but  regard  man  with  tenderness, 
with  eternal  interest.  Here  again  we  find  at  the  bottom  of  the  patriarch's  heart  the 
germ  of  that  faith  which  the  bright  rays  of  the  gospel  were  to  bring  to  flower  (ver.  15). 
The  revolt  of  the  heart  from  false  views  of  God.  The  picture  of  One  who  numbers  his 
steps,  and  has  an  eye  only  for  his  sins,  is  inconsistent  with  the  filial  consciousness  of 
God  (ver.  16).  Yet  there  may  be  insufficient  knowledge  or  faith  to  overcome  this 
prevailing  mood  of  despair  (comp,  oh.  x.  8 — 12). — J. 

Vers.  17 — 22. — Self-defence  before  God :  4.  Relapse  into  despondent  imaginations.  I. 
He  still  abounds  with  varied  figures,  the  very  eloquence  of  complaint.  God 
has  taken  his  sins  and  placed  them  as  in  a  bag,  sealed  for  safety  of  deposit,  that  they 
may  be  reproduced  against  him.  He  appears  like  an  accuser  who  heaps  up  scandals  and 
offences  against  the  unhappy  object  of  his  wrath  (ver.  17). 

II.  In  this  light  op  personal  experience  he  further  contemplates  the  con- 
dition OF  MANKIND.  1.  The  impossibility  of  resistance  to  their  doom.  (Vers.  18,  19.) 
Mountains  and  rocks  are  dissolved,  hard  stones  are  gradually  dislocated,  by  the  con- 
tinuous action  of  water ;  their  fragments  are  carried  away  by  the  flood.  Much  more 
must  the  feeble  body  of  man  give  way  at  last.  And  so  his  mind  must  surrender  the 
kindled  light  of  God,  which  God  destroys  I  2.  The  overmastering  power  of  God. 
(Vers.  20 — 22.)  The  mighty  warrior  overcomes  the  feeble  resistance  of  his  fue,  and 
releases  him  only  when  he  has  set  him  before  his  face  and  given  him  a  proof  of  his  pre- 
vailing force.  So  God  only  releases  man  in  death  when  all  his  beauty  has  passed  awiiy, 
and  tiiere  remains  but  the  hideous  corpse.  In  the  lower  world  consciousness  fails  him ; 
he  knows  nothing  of  the  things  of  earth,  joyous  or  sad;  can  render  no  help  to  the  dear 
ones  who  survive  him.  In  the  lower  world  the  dead  man,  without  activity  or  energy, 
endures  his  bodily  and  mental  pain  in  dreary  solitude  and  stillness.  So  ends  again 
this  address  with  the  gloomiest,  most  despondent  outlook  as  to  the  other  world,  relieved 
only  for  a  moment  by  the  fugitive  hope  of  the  life  to  come. 

Lessons.  1.  Tiie  heart  has  an  instinct  for  immortality,  derived  from  its  revolt  from 
extreme  pain.  Something  within  us  tells  us  that^we  were  not  made  to  be  eternally, 
irrecoverably  miserable.  2.  The  truth  of  a  future  life  comes  in  flashes  upon  tlie 
mind ;  for  its  retention  we  need  the  support  of  positive  revelation.  3.  The  natural 
weakness  and  frailty  of  man  is  complemented  by  his  spiritual  power  and  greatness  as 
partaker  of  an  endless  life. — J. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Lessons  from  the  brevity  of  human  life.  These  words  are  consecrated  to 
a  supreme  moment.  Chosen  to  be  the  words  spoken  at  the  side  of  the  grave,  "  while 
the  corpse  is  made  ready  to  be  laid  in  the  earth,"  they  bear  a  solemn  and  overwhelming 
testimony  to  a  truth  men  are  apt,  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  to  forget.  So  many  are  the 
duties  and  toils  of  men  that  the  hurry  of  a  short  life  is  hardly  noticed,  save  when,  by 
enforced  attention,  the  thoughts  recur  to  it.  The  truth  is  established — man's  life  is 
short,  it  is  sorrowful,  its  early  promise  is  destroyed,  it  hurriedly  passeth  away,  it  lacks 
permanence  and  stability.  What,  then,  is  the  proper  course  of  conduct  to  pursue  in 
such  circumstances  ? 

I.  It  is  wise  to  be  diligent  in  the  fulfilment  of  duty.  Days  lost  cannot  be 
recovered.  The  duty  omitted  cannot  be  afterwards  attended  to  without  intrenching 
upon  some  other.  A  watchfulness  over  the  moments  saves  the  hours.  Diligence 
prevents  waste,  and  the  days  are  numbered.  Diligence  is  imperative  if  life's  large 
work  is  to  be  done  in  its  little  time.  He  learns  the  value  of  time  who  diligently 
applies  himself  to  his  work.     And  no  one  has  any  time  to  lose. 

II.  The  brevity,  of  life  is  an  bncouhagbmbnt  to  patience  under  trouble.  The 
way  is  not  long.  The  strength  is  taxed,  but  not  for  long.  The  life  of  "  few  days"  is 
"full  of  trouble."  Happily  it  is  but  for  a  "few  days."  Life  is  not  stretched  out 
beyond  endurance.  And  the  vision  of  immortality  may  gild  the  horizon  as  the  light 
of  a  setting  sun.  All  the  future  to  the  humble  and  obedient  is  bright,  and  the  present 
weary  march  is  not  longer  than  can  be  borne,  even  by  feeble  human  strength. 

III.  The  brevity  of  human  life  may  properly  act  as  a  salutary  check  against 
entertaining  too  high  an  estimate  op  earthly  things.  The  things  of  time  have 
their  importance — their  very  great  and  solemn  importance.     And  he  who  has  a  just 


OH.  xrv.  1— 22,]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  255 


view  of  the  future  will  be  the  more  likely  to  place  a  just  estimate  on  the  present.  But  he 
will "  sit  loose  "  to  things  of  time.  He  will  remember  he  is  but  a  sojourner.  That  the 
goods  and  possessions  he  now  calls  his  own  will  soon  be  held  by  other  hands.  He  will 
therefore  see  that  he  must  not  put  so  high  a  price  upon  the  present  as  to  barter  away 
the  future  and  more  durable  possessions  for  it.  Life  opens  to  him  like  a  flower  in  its 
beauty ;  it  "  Cometh  forth  like  a  flower  "  in  its  promise,  but  it  "  is  cut  down."  It  is 
vain  to  build  too  confidently  on  such  a  hope.  It  is  unwise  to  live  wholly  for  bo 
uncertain  a  tenure,  that  fleeth  as  a  shadow  and  continueth  not. 

IV.  The  brevity  of  human  life  makes  it  needfdl  that  men  should  lose  no 
OPPOKTDNITY  OP  LAYING  HOLD  ON  THE  LIFE  IMMORTAL.  The  true  preparation  for  the 
life  to  come — the  permanent  and  enduring  life — is  to  occupy  this  present  one  with 
careful  and  diligent  fidelity.  Great  issues  depend  upon  it.  The  condition  of  the  future ; 
the  attainment  of  character;  the  recorded  history;  the  everlasting  approval  or  disap- 
proval of  the  manner  in  which  life  has  been  held,  which  the  eternal  Judge  will  pass 
upon  it,  and  which  will  be  reflected  in  the  solitudes  of  the  individual  conscience. 
— E.  G, 

Vers.  7 — iO.—Sad  views  of  life.  If  the  tree  be  cut  down,  it  springs  again  ;  but 
if  man  dioth,  he  wasteth  away.  Certainly,  then,  man's  hope  is  not  in  this  life.  The 
dismal  views  given  in  these  few  verses  demand  the  full  assurance  of  the  resurrection. 
This  is  a  feature  of  the  Book  of  Job,  It  presents  a  negative  view  of  human  life.  There 
is  always  a  demand  to  be  met.  Only  the  fuller  teachings  of  the  New  Testament  meet 
it.  Consider  this  aspect  of  human  life  with  its  demand  for  supplementary  views  in 
order  to  completeness  and  satisfaction.  The  complementary  character  of  subsequent 
revelations. 

I.  The    present    life   of   man   presents    ohabacteristics  of  impekfectness 

WHICH   indicate   THAT  THIS   CANNOT  BE  THE   COMPLETE   VIEW  OF   LIFE. 

II.  The  moral,  spiritual,  and  intellectual  capabilities  which  are  obviously 
BUT  partially  called  into  play  demand  other  circumstances  FOB  their  full 
development,  and  indicate  the  incompleteness  OP  the  view  OF  life  when 
confined  to  the  present  only. 

III.  The  aspirations  of  men  towards  conditions  that  cannot  be  attained 
in  this  life  are  a  testimony  to  its  incompleteness. 

IV.  Tub  ideals  of  life  are  so  fab  superior  to  the  realizations,  that  they 
become  a  constant  prophecy  of  something  better  and  higher  than  the  present 

LIFE. 

V.  The  hope  of  higher  conditions  than  the  peesbnt  is  strongest  in  the 

BEST   and   purest   SOULS. 

VI.  The  painfulness  of  the  present  with  the  consciousness  op  capacity  for 

GREAT  AND  PURE  ENJOYMENT  A  FURTHER  BVTDENOB  OP  THE  INCOMPLETENESS  OF  LIFE 
IF   THE    VIEW   be   RESTRICTED   TO   THE   PRESENT. 

VII.  All   IS  satisfied  in  the  subsequent   revelations,  and   in   the  calm 

ASSURANCE  they  GIVE  OF  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  THE  DEAD  AND  THE  LIFE  OP  THE 
WORLD   TO   COME. — E,  G. 

Ver.  14. — The  future  life.  "  If  a  man  die,  shall  be  live  again  ?  "  The  true  answer 
to  this  solemn  question  is  the  only  sufScient  response  to  the  sad  wail  of  the  previous 
verses.  "  There  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  out  down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,  —  but  man 
dieth,  and  wasteth  away,"  The  answer  cometh  from  afar.  It  is  difBcult  to  determine 
the  measure  of  light  that  Job  had  on  the  question  of  the  future  life.  Bead  in  the  light 
of  our  New  Testiiment  teaching,  some  of  his  phrases  are  full  of  hope ;  but  we  may  have 
put  the  hope  there.  Generally  it  is  the  language  of  inquiry,  and  often  of  inquiry 
unsatisfied,'  Sometimes  faith  bursts  through  all  doubt  and  gloom,  and  the  confidence 
of  a  strong  and  assured  hope  takes  the  place  of  tremuh)us  fear.  Still  the  question  rings 
in  every  breast ;  still  the  longing  for  a  fuller  life  in  which  the  ideals  of  the  present  may 
be  reached  prevails ;  still  men  go  to  the  side  of  the  dark  river  and  look  into  the  gloom, 
and  hoping  and  half  fearing  ask,  "  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ? "'  The  only  satis- 
lactory  answer  to  this  conies  to  us  from  the  lips  of  the  Redeemer,  and  that  is  whoUj 
and  entirely  satisfactory.    We  mark — 


266  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xiv.  1— 22 

I.  The  kagbk,  unsatisfied  crt  of  men  apart  from  Divine  kbvelation. 

II.  The  partial  unfoldino  of  the  truth  in  the  earlier  revelations. 

III.  The  perfect  and  unequivocal  bkvelation  made  by  Jesu8_ Christ  Of 
this  last  we  may  notice :  1.  Christ's  teachintja  all  proceed  on  the  assumption  that  there 
is  a  future  life.  2.  His  teachings  are  constantly  supported  hy  an  appeal  to  the  future  con- 
ditions of  reward  and  punishment.  3.  Very  much  of  his  teaching  would  be  unmeaning 
and  inexplicable  in  the  absence  of  such  future.  4.  But  he  crowns  all  his  teaching  by  him- 
self becoming  the  Disputant,  and  affirming  and  demonstrating  the  future  life.  "  But  that 
the  dead  are  raised,  even  Moses  showed  in  th«  place  concerning  the  bush,  when  he  calletli 
the  Li  ird  the  God  of  Abrah-im,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.  Now  he 
is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living ;  for  all  live  to  him."  5.  He  crowns  all 
by  the  raising  of  the  dead  to  life,  and  by  the  example  of  his  own  triumph  over  death. 
But  Job  had  not  this  consolation,  and  he  still  abides  in  gloom,  as  must  all  who  have 
not  the  perfect  revelation  of  God. — E.  G. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  flower  and  the  shadow,  h  There  is  a  common  character  in 
ALL  HUM>N  LIFE.  Job  seems  to  be  suffering  fiom  exceptional  troubles.  Yet  he 
regards  his  condition  as  typical  of  that  of  mankind  generally.  He  turns  from  himselt 
to  "  man  that  is  born  of  a  woman."  We  differ  in  external  circumstances,  possessions, 
honours ;  in  bodily,  mental,  and  moral  characteristics.  But  in  our  fundamontal  con- 
stitution we  are  alike.  The  points  of  resemblance  are  more  numerous  than  the  points 
of  difference.  1.  All  born  of  women  come  in  the  common  descent  from  the  first  parents. 
2.  All  are  frail  and  short-lived,  3.  All  suffer  from  the  troubles  of  life.  4.  All  sin. 
5.  All  have  Christ  for  their  brother,  able  and  willing  to  be  also  their  Saviouh  6.  All 
may  enter  the  eternal  life  and  dwell  for  ever  in  the  love  of  God,  on  the  same  conditions 
of  rei)entance  and  faith. 

II.  Man  shares  the  charactebistios  of  nature.  Job  sees  in  nature  types  of 
human  life.  We  are  a  part  of  nature,  and  the  laws  of  nature  apply  to  us.  This  fact 
should  save  us  from  amazement  when  trouble  comes  upon  us.  It  is  just  in  the  course 
of  nature.  We  bavu  not  been  singled  out  for  a  miracle  of  judgment.  It  is  not  that 
God  is  writing  bitter  things  against  us  in  particular.  Oiirs  is  part  of  the  general 
experience  of  all  nature.  Our  greatest  evil,  however,  is  not  that  which  befalls  us  in 
the  course  of  nature,  but  that  which  we  bring  upon  ourselves  unnaturally.  There  is 
something  monstrous  about  sin.  We  feel  a  gentle  pathos  in  natural  sorrow,  but  w« 
recognize  a  terrible  tragedy,  a  dark  and  dreadful  curse,  in  our  self-made  sorrow  of  sin. 
That  is  infinitely  worse  than  the  fading  of  flowers  and  the  fleeing  of  shadows. 

III.  Nature  skts  forth  the  sad  side  of  life.  1.  Brevity.  Man  is  "of  few 
days."  The  age  of  nature  is  maintained  by  succession,  not  by  continuance.  The  race 
goes  on,  the  individual  passes.  2.  TrovMe.  "  Full  of  trouble."  "  The  whole  creation 
groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together"  (Rom.  viii.  22).  The  advance  of  nature  is 
through  conflict  and  struggle.  3.  Frailty.  Man  is  born  of  a  woman,  "  the  weaker 
vessel "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  The  flower,  which  is  the  most  beautiful  thing  in  nature,  is  the 
most  fragile.  Crushed  by  a  careless  step,  or  nipped  by  frost,  or  withered  by  the  very 
Sim  that  drew  out  its  life  and  painted  its  loveliness,  it  is  yet  the  type  of  human  life. 
The  most  exquisite  flowers  may  be  the  most  delicate,  and  the  finest  souls  the  most 
sensitive.  The  hot  Southern  sun  quickly  turns  a  garden  into  a  desert.  The  same  fate 
is  found  among  the  most  cultivated  and  valued  lives.  The  flowers  are  not  saved  by 
their  beauty  and  fragrance.  Some  of  the  most  precious  lives  are  cut  down  in  their 
prime.  The  scythe  that  mows  the  meadows  cuts  off  the  summer  flowers  in  the  height 
of  their  short-lived  beauty.  The  rough,  common  fate  of  man  is  indiscriminate,  laying 
low  the  best  of  men  together  with  their  less-valued  companions.  4.  Unreality.  A 
mere  shadow !  and  a  moving  shadow  1  What  could  be  more  unsubstantial  and 
transient?  Yet  the  frailty  and  changefulness  of  life  make  our  human  existence  appear 
no  more  real. 

Conclusion.  Observe  another  side  of  the  scene.  The  very  melancholy  of  the 
picture  suggests  that  it  does  not  cover  the  whole  field.  Nature  is  not  dissatisfied  with 
her  changefulness.  The  flowers  do  not  bewail  their  untimely  end.  Man  alone  looks 
with  sorrow  on  his  fate.  The  reason  is  that  he  is  made  for  something  greater.  The 
Divine  instinct  of  immortality  is  in  him.     He  is  more  than  a  part  of  nature.    A  child 


CH.  XIV,  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  257 


of  God,  he  is  called  to  share  a  larger  life  than  that  of  the  natural  world.  The  ChriBtiaii 
who  is  cut  down  as  a  frail  flower  on  earth  will  yet  bloom  as  an  immortal  flower  in 
Paradise.— W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  4. — "A  dean  thing  out  of  an  uncJean."  '  Job  seems  to  mean  that  man  cannot 
transcend  his  origin.  He  comes  from  the  frail,  imperfect,  human  stock ;  how,  then, 
can  he  be  expected  to-  manifest  the  traits  of  perfection  and  immutability  ?  Job's 
question  and  the  difficulty  it  contains  may  be  applied  in  various  ways. 

I.  Evolution.  We  are  not  now  concerned  with  the  scientific  aspect  of  the  question 
of  evolution.  That  must  be  determined  by  the  men  of  science.  But  there  is  a 
religious  aspect  of  it  that  calls  for  attention,  because  some  are  dismayed  as  though 
evolution  had  banished  God  from  his  universe.  Now,  if  this  idea  of  the  world  is  set 
forth  as  a  substitute  for  the  theological  conception  of  creation  and  providence,  it  is 
removed  from  its  rightful  sphere  and  made  to  trespass  on  a  foreign  domain,  where  it 
cannot  justify  the  claims  of  its  supporters.  There  it  is  confronted  by  Job's  question, 
"Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean?"  Evolution  signifies  a  certain 
Ivind  of  progress.  But  the  cause  must  be  equal  to  the  effect.  It  is  contrary  to  the 
very  law  of  causation  that  dead  matter  should  produce  life,  and  that  the  merely 
animal  should  produce  the  spiritual  human  being.  For  every  elevation  and  addition  a 
corresponding  cause  is  needed.  If  the  unclean  a,pe  were  the  ancestor  of  a  saint,  some- 
thing must  have  been  added  that  was  not  in  the  ape.  Whence  was  this  ?  It  must 
have  had  a  cause.  Thus  we  may  see  that  evolution  requires  the  idea  of  the  Divine, 
not  only  at  the  primal  creation,  but  throughout  the  process. 

II.  Hekeditt.  Men  inherit  their  parents'  characters.  The  man  who  is  not  the 
heir  of  any  estate  is  yet  perforce  an  heir  of  the  most  real  kind  of  property.  Now,  the 
past  of  our  race  is  stained  with  sin,  steeped  in  iniquity.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
the  succeeding  generations  will  be  spotless.  Moral  guilt  cannot  be  charged  till  the 
individual  soul  has  chosen  evil,  and  consented  to  sin  in  its  own  freedom.  But  the 
degradation  of  evil  tendencies  is  in  us  from  our  birth.  Men  are  shapen  in  iniquity 
and  conceived  in  sin  (Ps.  li.  5). 

III.  Bbdbmption.  This  is  offered  by  God.  It  cannot  come  from  man.  No  sinful 
man  could  redeem  his  brethren.  To  do  this  would  be  to  bring  the  clean  out  of  the 
unclean.  We  must  have  a  sinless  Redeemer.  Moreover,  as  sin  has  lowered  the  whole 
of  life^  there  is  need  of  a  perfect  Man  to  raise  the  type  of  the  race.  Even  this  would 
not  be  enough,  for  the  great  work  is  not  to  set  an  example,  but  to  transform  the  world. 
None  but  God  who  created  it  can  do  this.  Thus  we  need  what  we  have  in  Ohrist— 
a  sinless,  perfect  Man,  who  is  also  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God. 

IV.  Regbkbbation.  1.  In  the  individual  man.  He  must  first  be  regenerated. 
All  prior  attempts  at  goodness  fail.  Really  clean  words  cannot  come  out  of  a  foul 
heart.  Clean  deeds  must  spring  from  a  clean  soul.  All  the  corrupt  man's  conduct  is 
besmirched  with  the  filth  of  his  own  inner  life.  He  must  be  pure  in  heart  in  order  to 
live  a  truly  pure  life.  The  sinner  must  have  a  new  heart  before  he  can  live  a  new  life. 
2.  In  Christian  work.  He  who  would  lead  others  from  sin  must  first  forsake  sin 
himself.  The  reformer  must  be  a  reformed  man.  The  missionary  must  be  a  Christian. 
To  do  good  we  must  first  be  good. — W.  F.  A. 

Yer.  6. — The  day's  work.  Job  prays  that  at  least  God  will  turn  aside  from  vexing 
his  short-lived  creature,  and  let  him  finish  his  day's  work.  Then  he  will  be  no  more. 
This  is  a  prayer  of  despair,  and  it  springs  flrom  a  one-sided  view  of  life  and  providence. 
Yst  it  lias  its  significance  for  us. 

I.  Man  is  God's  servant.  He  is  more  than  the  hireling,  for  whom  a  hard  master 
cares  nothing  so  long  as  he  can  exact  the  full  tale  of  work.  Still,  he  is  the  servant. 
We  are  not  our  own  masters,  and  we  are  not  put  into  the  world  to  do  our  own  will. 
Our  business  is  to  serve.  1.  To  wovK  To  live  for  a  purpose.  Idleness  is  sin.  The 
man  who  needs  not  work  to  earn  his  bread  should  still  work  to  serve  his  Master. 
2.  To  obey.  Our  business  is  just  to  do  God's  will  in  God's  way.  It  is  not  for  us  to 
choose ;  our  duty  is  to  follow  the  Master's  orders. 

II.  Man  has  an  allotted  task.  Each  man  has  his  own  life-work.  Some  may 
be  slow  in  discovering  their  peculiar  vocation.     With  many  this  may  not  be  at  all 

JOB.  8 


258  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xiv.  1—22. 


what  they  would  have  chosen  for  themselves.    Still,  if  the  thought  of  duty  is  foremost, 
all  may  see  that  there  is  something  that  duty  calls  them  to  do.     It  gives  us  a  great 
sense  of  confidence  to  discover  this,  and  to  fling  all  wild  fancies  aside  in  the  single 
desire  to  accomplish  our  true  life-task.    Often  the  only  rule  is  "  Do  the  next  thmg ; 
and  if  we  will  hut  do  it,  that  is  just  the  one  task  Grod  has  called  us  to. 

III.  Man  has  a  day  fob  his  wokk.  1.  A  full  day.  There  is  the  opportunity. 
God  can  never  require  what  man  is  unable  to  perform.  He  does  not  seek  the  work  of 
eternity  from  the  creature  of  a  day.  2.  Only  a  day.  There  is  no  time  to  be  lost. 
We  have  but  one  day  for  our  day's  work.  If  we  waste  the  morning  we  shall  have  no 
second  opportunity.  This  short  season  should  be  well  filled.  If  the  work  is  hard  it  is 
not  interminable.  Diligence  and  patience  are  becoming  in  a  man  who  has  but  one 
short  life  for  his  work. 

IV.  Man  is  expected  to  accomplish  his  woek.  His  business  is  not  merely  to 
sway  his  limbs  and  exercise  his  muscles,  but  to  do  something  eflfeotive,  to  produce. 
We  should  all  aim  at  a  definite  end  in  our  life's  work.  The  village  blacksmith  can 
enjoy  his  rest  because 

"  Something  attempted,  something  done, 
Has  earned  a  night's  repose." 

A  busy  life  may  be  a  fruitless  one.    But  no  life  need  faU  of  finiitfulnesB,  inasmnch  a» 
the  work  to  which  we  are  all  called  is  designed  to  lead  to  useful  ends. 

V.  Man  cannot  accomplish  his  wokk  withoitt  God's  co-opbbation.  Job  prays 
that  God  will  not  hinder  him.  If,  indeed,  God  did  oppose  a  man  in  his  life'swork, 
that  man  would  be  certainly  doomed  to  failure.  It  is  hard  enough  to  succeed  in  any 
case ;  it  is  impossible  to  do  so  when  God  is  frustrating  our  efforts.  No  one  can  defeat 
Providence.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  be  let  alone.  Job  desires  that  God  will  look 
away  from  him,  for  the  look  of  anger  blasts  and  withers.  But  we  may  pray  that  God 
will  look  upon  us  in  favour  and  helpfulness.  The  greatest  success  in  the  world  was 
accomplished  by  men  who  were  "  fellow-workers  with  Grod  "  (2  Cor.  vi.). — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  7 — 14. — Is  there  a  life  heyond  the  grave  f  We  have  here  one  of  the  dim  Old 
Testament  speculations  on  the  life  beyond,  that  stand  out  in  startling  contrast  to  the 
prevalent  obscurity  and  apparent  indifference  of  ancient  Hebrew  thought  in  regard  to 
the  great  future.  This  serves  as  a  good  starting-point  from  which  to  approach  the  more 
full  Christian  light  on  the  resurrection, 

I.  The  CEAvmo  foe  immoetalitt  la  instinctivb.  The  craving  may  be  hidden 
by  more  pressing  desires  of  the  moment ;  it  may  even  be  crushed  by  despair.  But  it 
is  not  the  less  natural  and  instinctive.  For  when  we  come  to  ourselves  and  calmly 
reflect  on  life  and  its  issues,  we  cannot  be  satisfied  that  death  should  end  all.  Then 
there  wakes  up  in  us  a  deep,  insatiable  hunger  for  life.  The  essential  characteristic  of 
this  desire  is  its  craving  for  n.ore  than  the  repose  of  a  fiiture  that  is  rescued  from  the 
turmoil  of  this  present  time ;  its  object  is  life.  It  is  not  enough  for  us  that  an  end  may 
come  to  our  present  troubles.  That  is  all  Job  desired  at  first  (see  ch.  iii.),  but  now  a 
deeper  thought  stirs  in  his  breast,  and  he  thinks  of  the  possibility  of  living  again. 
Surely  it  is  a  miserable  degradation  of  this  instinct  of  immortality  that  represents  the 
future  blessedness  as  chiefly  consisting  in  indolent  repose. 

[I.  Natueb  dobs  not  satisfy  the  oeavinq  foe  immoktality.  Job  turns  to  the 
analogies-  of  nature.  They  are  obscure  and  contradictory.  The  tree  that  has  been 
cut  down  will  sprout  again  from  its  roots.  But  is  this  life  the  fate  of  man?  "Man 
giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  is  he?"  Has  he  any  root  remaining  that  can  be 
quickened  at  the  scent  of  water?  Then  if  the  tree  sprouts  again,  there  are  other  things 
in  nature  that  cease  altogether,  e.g.  the  stream  that  is  entirely  dried  up.  May  not 
man's  fate  be  like  these  temporal  things  that  come  to  an  end  ?  We  look  for  analogies 
in  the  awakening  spring,  in  the  emerging  of  the  butterfly  from  the  chrysalis,  in  the 
return  of  day  after  night.  These  analogies  afford  but  faint  suggestions,  little  more 
than  fanciful  illustrations.  Nature  does  point  to  the  existence  of  an  unseen  universe, 
but  she  gives  us  little,  if  any,  hints  as  to  our  share  in  the  life  beyond  the  present  and 
the  seen. 

III.  Chbist  satisfies  the  ceavtno  foe  iMMOETAUTy.    He  has  brought  "  life  and 


OH.  XIV.  1-22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  269 

incorruption  to  light  through  the  gospel "  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  1.  By  his  revelation  of  God. 
In  Christ  we  see  God  as  our  Father.  Such  a  God  cannot  mock  us  with  a  delusion, 
cannot  plant  an  instinct  in  us  for  -which  there  is  no  satisfaction.  All  other  instincts  have 
their  objects  provided.  A  good  Father  will  not  let  this  starve  and  pine  into  disappoint- 
ment. 2.  By  his  direct  teaching.  Christ  said  little  about  the  future  life,  but  that 
little  was  clear,  unhesitating,  emphatic.  He  made  no  mention  of  harps  and  palms, 
but  he  said,  "  I  am  the  Resurrection,  and  the  Life :  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he 
were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live  "  (John  xi.  25).  3.  By  his  own  resurrection.  Ho  is  "  the 
Firstfruits  from  the  dead"  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  One  man  has  risen.  This  is  enough  to 
show  that  death  does  not  end  all.  4.  By  his  saving  grace.  He  not  only  reveals  the 
life  beyond.  He  gives  the  life  eternal.  A  mere  shadowy  existence  in  Hades  would  be 
no  boon ;  an  existence  of  torment  in  Gehenna  would  be  a  curse.  We  want  a  full  and 
glorious  life.  That  is  not  ours  by  nature;  it  is  the  gilt  of  God  (Bom.  vi.  23);  and  it 
is  received  through  Christ  (1  John  v.  11, 12).— W.  F.  A. 


Ver.  17. — Sealed  transgression.  Job  seems  to  think  that  God  has  sealed  his  trans- 
gression up  in  a  bag,  keeping  it  in  reserve  to  bring  out  against  him  at  some  future 
judgment.. 

I.  We  cannot  take  back  oub  bins.  They  are  ours  before  we  have  let  them  loose 
on  the  world.  Then  they  pass  out  of  our  control.  They  may  wander  far  in  their 
mischievous  effects,  or  they  may  be  checked  by  the  providence  of  God.  But,  in  any 
case,  they  have  passed  away  from  us  beyond  all  chance  of  recovery.  The  bag  in  which 
God  puts  our  sins  is  sealed,  and  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  break  the  seals.  We  may 
well  be  on  our  guard  against  producing  those  evil  things  that  we  cannot  hold  in  or 
suppress. 

II.  Oim  BINS  ABE  WITH  GoD.  He  has  them  in  his  bag.  We  may  not  have  thought 
that  he  noticed  our  conduct,  and  we  may  not  have  considered  that  our  wickedness  was 
an  offence  against  God.  Yet  God  could  not  be  indifferent  t»  our  violation  of  his  laws. 
Our  first  dealings  with  our  sins  was  in  the  privacy  of  our  own  hearts.  When  we  next 
meet  them  they  will  be  in  God's  possession,  thoroughly  examined  by  him,  and  ready 
to  be  used  as  he  thinks  fit  in  his  judgment  of  us. 

III.  Oub  sins  aee  eeservbd  fob  the  futdrb.  We  do  not  now  see  them ;  they 
are  sealed  up  in  God's  bag.  The  judgment  is  not  yet.  Because  it  is  delayed  many 
men  refuse  to  expect  it,  and  grow  indifierent  to  their  guilt.  But  time  will  not  alter  it. 
We  cannot  expect  future  immimity  because  we  enjoy  present  forbearance.  Now  is  the 
time  for  repentance.  If  the  opportunities  the  present  affords  are  neglected,  can  they 
be  pleaded  in  extenuation  of  our  guilt  when  at  last  we  are  called  up  for  judgment? 

IV.  It  is  oub  impenitence,  not  God's  will,  that  causes  oub  sins  to  be  sealed 
UP  in  God's  bag.  In  the  dreadful  anguish  and  perplexity  of  his  soul,  Job  seemed 
driven  to  the  conclusion  that  God  was  carefully  treasuring  up  his  sins  out  of  a  spirit  of 
opposition  to  him.  Such  an  idea  is  quite  impossible  to  one  who  knows  God  as  he  is 
revealed  in  Christ.  God  cannot  delight  himself  in  retaining  our  sins.  They  are  no 
treasures  for  him.  He  would  much  rather  be  rid  of  them.  The  seal  that  holds  them 
is  our  hard  heart.  •      .u  i  m 

V.  The  gospel  of  Cheist  bebaks  the  seal  of  sins.  Those  sms  that  are  still 
retained  can  yet  be  cast  away,  and  the  offer  of  forgiveness  means  that  the  bag  may  be 
opened.  The  past  is  not  irreparable.  Although  it  cannot  be  reversed,  it  may  be  for- 
given and  forgotten.  Christ  has  taken  the  great  bag  of  the  world's  sins  as  a  heavy 
burden  upon  his  own  shoulders.  He  has  carried  it  with  him  to  the  grave.  He  has  left 
it  there,  buried  with  the  dark,  bad  past,  and  he  has  risen  without  it  in  a  new  life, 
triumphant  and  redemptive.  Now,  the  preaching  of  his  gospel  is  the  declaration  that 
for  every  sinner  who  repents  and  trusts  Christ  the  bag  of  sins  is  gone ;  it  will  be 
remembered  no  more.  Those  who  dread  the  reappearance  of  their  sins  as  wit- 
nesses against  them  may  have  a  sure  hope  of  escaping  them  in  the  atoning  work  of 
Christ.— W.  F.  A. 

Ver  19.— Bow  waters  wear  the  stones.  I.  The  fbocbsb.  Job  compares  the  process 
of  providence  to  the  action  of  the  winter  torrents  in  the  wadys  of  a  desert  region.  Few 
phenomena  in  nature  are  more  striking  to  those  who  examine  them  than  those  of 


260 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XV.  1 — 38. 


erosion.  A  small  trickling  stream  cuts  through  a  great  hill,  and  makes  a  deep  winding 
valley.  Water  constantly  flowing  over  granite  rooks  smooths  the  hard  stone  and  wears 
it  away,  eating  its  course  through  the  most  solid  cliffs.  The  falls  of  Niagara  are  receding, 
and  in  front  of  them  is  seen  an  ever-lengthening  chasm  as  the  river  continunlly  cuts 
away  the  rock  over  wliich  it  pours.  This  process  is  compared  by  Job  to  the  friction  of 
time  and  trouble.  1.  From  apparently  feMe  causes.  The  water  does  not  seem  capable 
of  effecting  the  marvellous  results  that  are  attributed  to  it.  Slight  causes  may  have 
great  issues.  2.  By  slow  degrees.  The  worst  and  the  best  things  are  both  produced 
slowly.  We  cannot  judge  of  the  process  by  its  immediate  effects.  3.  With,  irresistible 
force.  We  cannot  resist  time.  The  slow  course  of  providence  is  a  river  that  cuts  through 
all  opposition.  It  is  impossible  for  man  to  sacceed  when  he  opposes  God ;  for  the  very 
rock  is  worn  by  the  waters  that  wash  over  it.  Thus  vain  hopes  perish.  The  worst 
troubles  are  not  sudden  blows,  but  wearing  anxieties  and  gnawing  griefs. 

II.  Its  lessons.  Job  drew  from  the  process  only  a  conclusion  of  despair,  or  at  best 
an  expostulation  with  God  for  bringing  his  irresistible  might  to  bear  on  so  feeble  a 
creature  as  man.  But  other  and  wider  conclusions  may  be  inferred.  1.  It  is  foolish  to 
trust  in  our  own  hopes.  They  may  be  solid  as  granite,  and  yet  time  and  disappointment 
may  wear  them  away.  The  robustness  of  the  hopes  is  no  guarantee  of  their  perma- 
nence. The  sanguine  man  is  not  kept  secure  by  his  self-confidence.  2.  We  should 
examine  the  character  of  owr  hopes.  Low  hopes  fail  first.  The  stream  runs  through 
the  valley,  sparing  the  crags  on  the  mountain-top,  though  these  are  exposed  to  all  the 
fury  of  the  gale,  and  only  wearing  those  that  lie  in  its  sunken  course.  There  is  safety 
in  elevation  of  character.  3.  Thefailuri  of  earthly  hopes  is  designed  to  twm  our  mind 
to  heavenly  hopes.  God  does  not  frustrate  every  hope  of  man.  Job's  idea  is  the  fruit 
of  his  despair.  Foolish  hopes  are  destroyed,  and  even  innocent  hopes,  in  some 
cases,  in  order  that  we  may  build  higher  and  found  our  true  hopes  on  the  immovable 
rook  of  God's  truth.  The  Enck  of  Ages  is  never  worn  by  the  waters  of  time  or  trouble. 
4.  The  destroying  process  carries  away  much  that  we  are  glad  to  lose.  It  does  not  select 
the  rich  treasures  and  pleasant  experiences  of  life.  Job  thought  that  God  carefully 
sealed  up  his  sin  in  a  bag  (ver.  17),  while  he  destroyed  his  hope  as  with  the  waters  that 
wear  the  stones.  But  when  a  man  truly  repents,  God  washes  away  his  sins,  and  gives 
him  a  good  and  enduring  hope.  Many  troubles  are  worn  away  by  the  slow  but  sura 
erosion  of  the  waters  of  time.  Even  while  we  fear  them  they  are  being  lessened  for  us. 
God's  destructive  agencies  are  all  directed  by  his  supreme  goodness.  We  need  not  fear 
the  wearing  waters  if  we  are  reconciled  to  the  God  who  directs  their  course,  and  says  to 
tlie  flood,  "Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and  no  further,  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves 
be  stayed."— W.  F.  A. 


Section  III.    Ch.  xv. — ^xxi.    Second  Colloqut  between  Job  and  his  Frtends. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  XV. 


The  second  colloquy  between  Job  and  his 
friends  is,  like  the  first  (oh.  iii. — xiv.),  one 
in  which  all  of  them  take  part,  and  the 
same  order  of  speakers  is  maintained.  Job 
answers  each  speaker  in  turn ;  Elipbaz  at 
some  length  (ch.  xvi.,  xvii.),  the  other  two 
more  briefly.  The  present  chapter  con- 
tains the  second  speech  of  Elipbaz.  Com- 
pared with  the  first,  it  is  harsh  and  violent 
in  tone,  assuming  Job's  guUt,  and  reproach- 
ing him  fiercely  and  rudely.  It  naturally 
divides  into  three  portions :  (1)  a  direct  re- 


proof of  Job  for  presumption  and  impiety 
(vers.  1 — 6);  (2)  a  sarcastic  reflection  on 
liim  for  conceit  and  arrogance  (vers'.  7 — 
16) ;  (3)  an  exposition  of  God's  ways  with 
man,  based  upon  the  experience  of  ancient 
sages  (vers.  17 — 35). 

Vers.  1,  2.— Then  answered  Eliphaz  the 
Temanite,  and  said,  Should  a  wise  man 
utter  vain  knowledge  1  literally,  knowledge 
of  «)f«d— knowledge,  i.e.,  which  is  vain, 
idle,  inflated,  without  soliAty  or  substance. 
Job,  as  setting  up  to  be  "»  wise  man," 
should  not  hiivo  indulged  In  such  empty 
•nd  foolish  speaking.    It  is  observable  that 


OH.  XV.  1 — 3B.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


261 


Eliphaz  does  not  point  out  what  part  ot 
Job's  discourses  he  considers  objectionable, 
but  condemns  the  whole  of  them  under 
this  broad  and  general  description,  which 
even  he  oould  not  hare  regarded  as  appli- 
cable to  more  than  a  portion  of  what  Job 
had  said.  And  fill  his  belly  with  the  east 
wind  1  The  east  wind  was  regarded  as  the 
worst  of  winds.  In  Palestine  it  blew  from 
the  great  Syrian  and  North  Arabian  desert, 
and  was  of  the  nature  of  a  sirocco.  (On  its 
deleterious  effects,  see  Gen.  xU.  6,  23;  Jer. 
xviii.  17;  Ezek.  xvii.  10;  xix.  12;  ssvii. 
26;  Hos.  xiii.  15,  etc.) 

Ver.  3. — Should  he  reason  with  unprofit- 
able talk  1  Such,  Elipbaz  implies,  had  been 
Job's  talk,  altogether  idle  and  uuprofitable. 
A  wise  maa  should  have  abstained  from 
such  profitless  arguments.  They  were 
speeches  wherewith  he  could  do  no  goocL 

"Ver.  4. — Yea,  thou  castest  off  fear.  To 
Bliphaz,  Job's  words — his  bold  expostula- 
tions (ch.  siii.  3, 15,  22,  etc.),  his  declara- 
tions that  he  hnows  he  will  be  justified  (oh. 
siii.  18),  and  that  God  will  be  hia  Salvation 
(ch.  xiii.  16) — seem  to  imply  that  he  has 
cast  off  altogether  the  fear  of  God,  and  is 
entirely  devoid  of  reverence.  Some  of  his 
expressions  certainly  seem  over-bold;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  bis  sense  of  God's  purity, 
perfeotness,  and  transcendent  power  is  oou- 
tinually  manifest,  and  should  liave  saved 
him  from  the  rude  reproach  liere  launched 
against  him  (comp.  oh.  ix.  1^13;  xii.  9 — 
25;  xiii.  11,  ,21,  etc.).  And  restrainest 
prayer  before  God ;  rather,  and  hinderest  de- 
vout meditation  be/ore  God.  Bliphaz  means 
that  Job  expresses  himself  in  a  way  so  of- 
fensive to  devout  souls,  that  he  disturbs 
their  minds  and  prevents  them  from  in- 
dulging in  those  pious  meditations  on  the 
Bivine  goodness  which  would  otherwise 
occupy  them  (comp.  Ps.  cxix.  97).  Thus, 
according  to  Eliphaz,  Job  is  not  only  irre- 
ligious himself,  but  the  cause  of  irreligion 
in  others. 

Yer.  5. — ^For  thy  month  uttefeth  thine 
inlquty.  Some  render,  "Thine  iniquity 
teaoheth  thy  mouth,"  causing  it  to  utter 
such  profane  speeches  (Vulgate,  Dillmann, 
Canon  Cook,  Revised  Version);  but  the 
translation  of  the  Authorized  Version  is 
defensible  on  gramraatioal  grounds,  and 
yields  a  good  sense,  so  that  no  alteration 
is  necessary.  And  thon  chooseat  the  tongue 
of  the  crafty ;  or,  the  tongue  of  the  subtle 
(comp.  Gen.  iii.  1,  where  the  epithet  as- 
signed to  the  serpent  is  the  same).  Elic 
phaz  probably  means  to  tax  Job  with  cloak- 
ing his  real  impiety  under  a  pretence  of 
religiousness. 

Ver.  6.— Thine  own  month  oondemneth 
thee.  So  of  a  greater  than  Job  it  was  said, 
"  He  hath  spoken  blasphemy ;  what  furtlier 


need  havo  we  of  witnesses  ?  behold,  now  ya 
have  heard  his  blasphemy.  What  think 
ye  ?  They  answered  and  said,  He  is  guilty 
of  death ''  (Matt.  xxvi.  65,  68).  Malevo- 
lence delights  in  misunderstanding  and  mis- 
interpreting the  utterances  of  the  righteous. 
And  not  I.  A  weak  disclaimer  I  As  if  Job's 
supposed  guilt  did  not  depend  on  the  con- 
struction put  upon  his  words.  Yea,  thine 
own  lips  testify  against  thee.  Therefore, 
"  what  further  need  of  witnesses  ?  " 

Ver.  7. — Art  thou  the  first  man  that  was 
bom  1  That  is,  "  Dost  thou  claim  to  have 
the  wisdom  of  that  first  human  intelligence, 
which,  proceeding  direct  from  God  (Gen.  1. 
27),  was  without  fault  or  flaw — a  perfect  in- 
telligence, which  judged  all  things  aright  7  " 
It  is  not  clear  that  Eliphaz  had  ever  heard 
of  Adam;  but  he  evidently  believed  in  a 
"  first  man,"  from  whom  all  others  were 
descended,  and  he  attributed  to  tliis  first 
man  a  mind  and  intellect  surpassing  those 
of  all  other  men.  His  q^uestion  is,  of  course, 
rather  a  scoff  than  an  inquiry.  He  knows 
that  Job  makes  no  such  fonlish  pretence; 
but  he  throws  it  in  hi^^  teeth  that,  from 
what  he  has  said,  men  might  suppose  he 
took  some  such  view  of  himsHlf.  Or  wast 
thou  made  before  the  hills  1  This  is  a  taunt 
of  the  same  kind  as  the  previous  one,  but 
intensified.  Wisdom  is  the  result  of  ex- 
perience, Art  thou  older  than  all  the  rest 
of  us — older  than  the  earth  itself,  than  "  the 
everlasting  hills  "  ?  There  were  Greeks  who 
claimed  to  be  ethnically  vpoireKijVQi,  "  older 
than  the  moon,"  but  no  inhabitant  of  earth 
was  ever  so  foolish  as  to  imagine  himself 
individually  more  ancient  than  the  earth  on 
which  he  lived, 

Ver.  8. — East  thon  heard  the  secret  of 
God  ?  or,  Bast  tliou  been  a  hearer  in  Ihe  secret 
counsel  of  Qud  f  (comp.  Jer.  xxiii,  18,  "  Who 
hath  stood  in  the  counsel  of  the  Lord,  and 
hatli  perceived  and  heard  his  word?  who 
hath  marked  his  word,  and  heard  it?"). 
No  mortal  man  was  ever  admitted  to  the 
secret  counsel  of  the  Most  Highest  (comp. 
Bom.  xi.  SI).  And  dost  thou  restrain  wis- 
dom to  thyself!  ot,Dost  thou  confine  (appro- 
priate) wisdom  to  thyself  1  i.e.  Dost  tliou 
suppose  that  thou  art  the  only  wise  man  in 
all  the  world  V  (comp.  oh.  xii.  2,  where  Job 
had  brought  tlie  same  charge  against  hia 
three  friends). 

Ver.  9. — What  knowest  thon,  that  we  know 
notl  So  far  as  worldly  wisdom  went,  this 
was  probably  quite  true.  Job  was  not  more 
advanced  in  knowledge  than  Bliphaz,  Bil- 
dad,  and  Zophar.  But  he  had  a  keener 
spiritual  insight.  He  was  wiser  in  the 
"  wisdom  which  is  from  above."  Perplexed 
and  confused  as  were  his  thoughts  concern!  ng 
the  Divine  government  of  the  universe,  thoy 
were  nearer  the  truth,  mora  worthy  of  the 


269 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[CH.  XT.  1—35. 


Divine  nature,  than  those  of  his  adversaries. 
In  his  reply,  without  claiming  any  special 
wisdom,  he  pours  contempt  on  their  pre- 
tentions to  spiritual  understanding  (oh.  xvii. 
i,  10).  What  understandest  thou,  which  is 
not  in  usl  A  mere  repetition  of  the  first 
member  of  the  verse  iu  different  words. 

Ver.  10. — With  us  are  both  the  grey- 
headed and  very  aged  men.  "With  us" 
seems  to  mean  "  of  our  party,"  or  "  on  our 
side."  Elipbaz  claims  that  all  the  grey- 
beards of  the  time,  as  well  as  all  the  ancient 
men  of  past  times  (comp.  ch.  viii.  8,  and 
below,  ver.  18),  are  on  his  side,  and  think  as 
he  does.  Uuoh  elder  than  thy  father.  Men, 
t.«.,  not  merely  of  the  preceding,  but  of  much 
more  distant  generations.  His  claim  to  be 
supported  by  the  voice  of  antiquity  was,  no 
doubt,  in  strict  accordance  with  fact. 

Yor.  11. — Are  the  consolations  of  God  small 
with  thee?  By  "the  consolations  of  God" 
Eliphaz  probably  means  the  hopes  which 
he  and  his  friends  had  held  out,  speaking  in 
God's  Name,  that  if  Job  would  humble  him- 
self, and  confess  his  guilt,  and  sue  to  God  for 
pardon,  he  would  be  restored  to  favour,' 
recover  his  prosperity,  and  live  to  a  good 
old  age  in  tranquil  happiness  (see  ch.  v.  18 
—27;  viii.  20—22;  xi.  13—19).  He  wishes 
to  know  if  Job  thinks  lightly  of  all  this, 
regards  it  as  of  small  account,  will  make  no 
effort  to  obtain  the  bleEsings  held  out  to 
him.  This  is  all  reasonable  enough  from  his 
standpoint,  that  Job  is  conscious  of  secret 
heinous  guilt ;  Imt  it  can  make  no  impression 
on  Job,  who  is  conscious  of  the  reverse.  Is 
there  any  secret  thing  with  theet  rather. 
And  is  the  word  [of  emaZZ  account  thai 
dealeth']  gently  with  theet  Eliphaz  con- 
siders that  his  own  words  and  those  of  his 
two  companions  have  been  soft  words,  deal- 
ing "  gently  "  with  Job's  refractoriness,  and 
that  Job  ought  to  have  been  impressed  by 
them. 

Ver.  12. — Why  doth  thine  heart  oarry  thee 
away?  or.  Whither  doth  thine  heart  carry 
thee  away  ?  i.e.  to  what  a  pitch  of  presump- 
tion and  audacity  do  thy  proud  thoughts 
carry  thee  ?  And  what  do  thy  eyes  wink 
at  1  or.  Wherefore  do  thy  eyes  roll  i  The 
verb  used  occurs  only  in  this  place.  Its 
meaning  is  very  doubtful. 

Ver.  13. — That  thou  turnest  thy  spirit 
against  Ood.  To  Eliphaz  and  his  companions, 
the  wild  remonstrances  ofjob,  his  vehement 
expoBtulation.s  and  despairing  outcries,  are, 
one  and  all,  nothing  better  than  indications 
of  a  proud  and  rebellious  spirit,  that  sets 
itself  up  against  the  Almighty,  and  openly 
contends  with  him.  They  view  Job,  after 
the  speeches  that  he  has  made,  as  a  declared 
rebel,  and  no  longer  regard  it  as  incumbent 
upon  them  to  use  any  ''  gentleness  "  in  their 
reprimands.    And  lettest  such  words  go  out 


of  thy  month  T  It  is  remarkable  that  neither 
Eliphaz  nor  either  of  his  friends  ever  points 
out  what  particular  words  of ,  Job  they 
object  to  and  regard  as  impious,  so  as  to 
give  him  the  opportunity  of  defending,  ex- 
plaining, or  retracting  them.  They  take 
refuge  in  vague  generalities,  with  which  it 
is  impossible  to  grapple.  But  this  vague- 
ness and  want  of  logical  accuracy  is  character- 
istic of  the  Oriental  nations,  who  scarcely 
ever  reason  cogently  or  bring  matters  to  a 
point. 

Ver.  14. — What  is  man,  that  he  should  he 
clean  1  A  vain  "beating  of  the  air."  Eli- 
pbaz bad  asserted  the  same  truth  in  his  first 
speech,  when  he  said,  "Sliall  mortal  man 
be  more  just  than  God?  shall  a  man  be 
more  pure  than  his  Maker?  Behold,  he 
put  no  trust  in  his  servants ;  and  his  angels 
he  taxeth  with  folly :  how  much  less  in  them 
that  dwell  in  houses  of  clay,  whose  foundation 
is  in  the  dust,  which  are  crushed  before  the 
moth?"  (oh.  iv.  17—19) ;  and  Job  had  given 
his  full  assent  to  it,  when  he  exclaimed,  "  I 
know  it  is  so  of  a  truth :  but  how  should  man 
be  just  with  God?  If  lie  will  contend  with 
him,  he  cannotanswer  him  one  of  athousand" 
(ch.  ix.  2,  3).  The  true  question  was  not 
whether  Job  or  any  other  man  was  "clean," 
i.e.  wholly  sinless,  but  whether  Job  had 
sinned  so  deeply  and  grievously  that  his 
sufferings  were  the  natural  and  just  punish- 
ment  for  his  sins.  And  a  mere  repetition  of 
the  statement  that  all  men  were  sinful  and 
iTnclean  was  off  the  point — nihil  ad  rem — 
altogether  futile  and  superfluoas.  And  he 
that  is  bom  of  a  woman,  that  he  should  he 
righteous  1  (comp.  ch.  xxv.  4).  The  clause 
is  a  mere  variant  of  the  preceding  one. 

Ver.  15. — Behold,  he  pntteth  no  trust  in 
his  saints;  rather,  in  his  holy  ones  (see 
the  Revised  Version).  The  word  "saint" 
has  in  course  of  time  come  to  be  so  ex- 
clusively attached  to  holy  men,  that  it  can 
no  longer  be  applied,  without  danger  of  being 
misunderstood,  to  angels.  Eliphaz  here, 
as  in  oh.  y.  1,  speaks  not  of  holy  men,  but 
of  the  holy  angels.  Without  taxing  them 
with  sin,  he  is  strongly  convinced  of  their 
imperfection — their  defective  wisdom  (ch. 
V.  18),  weakness,  and  untrustworthiness. 
His  views  are  decidedly  peculiar,  and  not 
borne  out  by  Ihe  rest  of  Scripture.  Yea,  the 
heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  sight.  The 
material  heavens  are  probably  intended. 
That  limpid  liquid  blue  in  which  the  human 
eye  sees  no  stain  or  speck,  to  the  Divine  eye 
is  tinged  with  uncleanness.  The  idea  is 
that  neither  animate  nor  inanimate  nature 
contains  any  form  of  being  that  is  absolutely 
without  spot  or  blemish.  In  God  alone  is 
there  perfect  purity. 

Ver.  16. — How  much  more  abominable  and 
filthy  is  man,  whioh  drinketh  iniq^mty  like 


CH.  XT.  1—35.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


263 


water?  rather,  How  muck  lest  one  that  it 
abominahle  and  impure,  a  man  that  dririketh 
in  iniquity,  etc.  ?  It  cannot  bo  doubted  that 
Job  is  iudiyidually  pointed  at.  Not  man- 
kind generally,  but  a  particular  man,  is  in- 
tended ;  and  the  particular  man  can  be  none 
other  than  Job.  Thus  we  see  how  the 
progress  of  the  controversy  has  tended  to 
exasperate  the  disputants,  and  change  the 
"  ooniforters  "  from  smooth-tongued  friends 
into  open  enemies  and  accusers. 

Yer.  17. — I  will  show  thee,  hear  me ;  and 
that  which  I  have  seen  I  will  declare. 
Eliphaz  here  introduces,  with  an  elaborate 
preface  (vers.  17 — 19).  what  is  either  a  cita- 
tion from  a  book,  as  Professor  Lee  thinks, 
or  a  studied  description  by  himself  of  the 
proceedings  and  consequent  sufferings  of 
the  wicked.  This  description  extends  from 
ver.  20  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  and  is 
plainly  levelled  at  Job,  though  it  may 
originally  have  been  intended  to  apply  to 
some  other  person  or  persons. 

Ver.  18. — Which  wise  men  have  told  from 
their  fathers,  and  have  not  hid  it  (oomp.  ch. 
viii.  8 — 10).  Whether  the  words  are  his 
own  or  not,  the  sentiments,  at  any  rate, 
Eliphaz  declares  to  have  come  down  to  him 
from  remote  times.  The  "  wise  men "  to 
whom  he  refers  may  have  been  men  of  the 
Beni  Kedera  (ch.  i.  3),  who  were  noted  for 
their  wisdom  (1  Kings  iv.  30),  or  possibly 
Egyptians  or  Babylonians.  Books  contain- 
ing moral  aphorisms  and  instructions  were 
certainly  composed  both  in  Egypt  and  in 
Babylonia  at  a  very  ancient  date  (see 
'Kecords  of  the  Past,' vol.  ii.  pp.  11 — 16; 
vol.  iii.  p.  135;  vol.  vii.  pp.  119—122). 

Ver.  19. — ffnto  whom  alone  the  earth  was 
given.  The  reference  is  clearly  to  a  very 
remote  time,  when  men  were  comparatively 
few,  and  lived  in  quiet  possession  of  their 
own  lands,  undisturbed  by  invasions,  wars, 
or  struggles  for  territory.  Professor  Lee 
thinks  tliat  the  times  immediately  aftei-,  and 
even  those  before,  the  Flood  are  g:lanced  at ; 
while  Schultens  regards  Eliphaz  as  allud- 
ing to  the  first  settlements  of  the  Joktanidse 
in  Arabia.  In  either  case,  the  passage  tells 
in  favour  of,  and  not  against,  the  antiquity 
of  the  Book  of  Job,  since  it  marks  the  com- 
poser as  "living  at  a  time  when  the  memory 
of  an  age  of  patriarchal  simplicity  was  yet 
fresh  in  men's  minds  "  (Canon  Cook).  And 
no  stranger  passed  among  them.  Eaces 
were  not  mixed  up  one  with  another,  and  so 
the  purity  of  primitive  doctrine  remained 
undisturbed. 

Vers.  20 — 35. — Schultens  calls  this  "a 
magnificently  elaborate  oration,  crowded 
with  illustrations  and  metaphors,  in  which 
It  is  shown  that  the  wicked  cannot  possibly 


escape  being  miserable,  but  that  the  punish- 
ment which  they  have  bo  richly  deserved 
assuredly  awaits  them,  and  is  to  be  inflicted 
on  them,  as  an  example  and  terror  to  others, 
by  a  holy  and  just  God,  because,  just  as  he 
loves  virtue,  so  he  pursues  vice  with  a 
fierce  and  deadly  hatred"  ('Liber  Jobi,' 
p.  104,  edit.  R.  Grey). 

Ver.  20. — The  wicked  man  travaileth  with 
pain  all  his  days.  Certainly  an  over-state- 
ment of  the  truth.  With  a  much  nearer  ap- 
proach to  the  facts  of  the  case,  the  Psalmist 
remarked,  "I  was  grieved  at  the  wicked: 
I  do  also  see  the  ungodly  in  such  prosperity. 
For  they  are  in  no  peril  of  death,  but  are 
lusty  and  strong.  They  come  in  no  mis- 
fortune like  other  folk;  neither  are  they 
plagued  like  other  men  "  (Ps  Ixxiii.  3 — 5). 
And  the  number  of  years  is  hidden  to  the 
oppressor ;  rather,  even  the  number  of  yeart 
that  it  laid  up  for  the  oppressor.  So  Merx 
and  the  Revised  Version.  Another  possible 
meaning  is,  "And  a  [small]  number  of 
years  is  laid  up,"  eto.  If  we  take  the  former 
view,  we  must  regard  the  clause  as  exegetical 
of  "  all  his  days." 

Ver,  21. — A  dreadful  sound  is  in  his  ears  ; 
literally,  a  tound  of  terrors.  Fears  of  all 
kinds  beset  him,  lest  he  should  lose  his 
prosperity.  Sometimes  they  seem  actually 
to  sound  in  his  ears.  Prosper  as  he  may, 
he  feels  that  in  prosperity  the  destroyer  shall 
one  day  come  upon  him.  "The  destroyer" 
may  be  either  the  destroying  angel,  or  the 
avenger  of  blood,  or  a  robber-chief  at  the  head 
of  a  band  of  marauders. 

Ver.  22. — He  belleveth  not  that  he  shall 
return  out  of  darkness.  He  has  no  hope  of 
recovering  his  prosperity,  when  calamity 
has  once  stricken  him  down,  since  he  knows 
that  his  calamity  is  deserved,  and  feels  that 
it  is  God's  judgment  upon  him  for  his  sins. 
And  he  is  waited  for  of  the  sword.  He  feels 
as  if  an  enemy  was  lying  in  wait  for  him  at 
every  turn,  with  his  sword  drawn,  ready  to 
slay  him.  Professor  Lee  compares  the 
words  of  Cain,  "  It  shall  come  to  pass,  that 
every  one  that  flndeth  me  shall  slay  me" 
(Gen.  iv.  14). 

Ver.  23. — He  wandereth  abroad  for  bread, 
saying.  Where  is  it?  This,  again,  might 
appropriately  have  been  said  of  Cain,  who 
was  "a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  in  the 
earth  "  (Gen.  iv.  14),  and  may  at  times  have 
had  difficulty  in  procuring  his  daily  bread. 
At  any  rate,  it  is  the  frequent  experience  of 
the  wicked  who  lose  their  ill-gotten  gains, 
and  are  brouglit  down  to  abject  poverty,  and 
actual  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  "  He 
wanders  abroad  to  he  the  food  of  vultures  "  is 
a  translation  of  the  passage  suggested  by 
some  moderns    (as    Uerx),   and    has    the 


264 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XV,  1-  -35. 


support  of  the  Septuagint,  KarariTamai  eis 
fffra  yu^iv.  But  it  requires  a  Blight  change 
in  the  pointing.  He  knowath  that  the  day 
of  darkness  is  nigh  at  hand.  "  The  day  of 
■  darkness  "  is  probably  the  day  of  his  decease : 
this  he  "knows,"  or  at  any  rate,  surmises, 
to  be  near. 

Ver.  21. — Trouble  and  angnish  shall  make 
him  afraid ;  they  shall  prevail  against  him, 
as  a  king  ready  to  the  battle.  Elipbaz  seems 
covertly  to  allude  to  Job's  misfortunes,  which 
came  against  him  with  such  force,  and 
crushed  him  as  a  mighty  king  crushes  his 
foes  in  battle. 

Ver.  25. — For  he  stretoheth  out  his  hand 
against  God.  The  wicked  man  ventures  even 
to  threaten  the  Almighty.  Bo  in  Eastern 
legend  Nimrod  was  supposed  to  have  done, 
»nd  in  Greek  legend  tlie  giants.  And 
strengtheneth  himself  against  the  Almighty ; 
rather,  behaveth  himee^  proudly.  See  the 
Revised  Version,  and  compare  Sehultens, 
who  renders  the  Hebrew  laarr  by  "  ferocius 
et  iusolentius  se  gessit." 

Ver.  26. — He  nmneth  npon  him,  even  en 
his  neck ;  rather,  with  hia  iieek.  It  is  not  God 
who  runneth  upon  the  wicked  man,  as  our 
translators  seem  to  have  supposed,  but  the 
wicked  man  who  ruelies  furiously  against 
God.  Like  an  infuriated  bull,  he  makes  his 
charge  «(t<ft  hi$nech,  i.e.  with  head  lowered 
and  neck  stitTened,  thinking  to  carry  all 
before  him.  Upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his 
bnoklers ;  rather,  with  th*  thick  bosget  of  hit 
$hield-  The  metaphor  of  the  bull  is  dropped, 
and  God's  enemy  represented  as  charging 
him  like  a  warrior,  with  the  shield-arm  out- 
stretched, and  the  heavy  bosses  of  the  shield 
pressing  liim  down. 

Ver.  27.— Because  he  oovereth  his  face 
with  his  fatness.  The  ground  and  origin  of 
the  wicked  man's  audacity  is  bis.  luxurious 
and  intemperate  living.  In  the  days  of  his 
prosperity  he  pampered  his  body,  freely  in- 
dulged all  his  carnal  appetites,  and  gave 
himself  up  to  gluttony  and  gourmandism. 
This  depraved  his  moral  nature,  separated 
between  him  and  God,  and  finally  produced 
in  him  the  insolence  and  presumption  de- 
scribed in  vers.  25,  26.  And  maketh  oollops 
of  fat  on  his  flanks.  The  same  idea,  only 
very  sliglitly  varied,  as  so  often  in  tlie 
second  member  of  a  verse. 

Ver.  28. — And  he  dwelleth  in  desolate 
cities.  Not  only  was  he  sensual  and  glut> 
tonous,  but  he  was  covetous  and  rapacious 
also.  He  dwelt  in  cities  which  his  hand 
had  desolated — ^in  houses  which  no  man  in- 
habiteth — since  he  had  driven  their  owners 
from  them — and  which  were  ready  to  become 
heaps,  i.e.  were  in  a  ruinous  condition. 

Ver.  29. — He  shall  not  be  rich;  i.e.  he 
■hall  not  increase,  or  maintain,  liig  riches. 
Neither  shall  his  substance  continue.     His 


riches  shall  make  themselves  wings,  and 
take  their  departure.  Neither  shall  he  pro- 
long the  perfection  thereof  upon  the  earth ; 
ratlier,  neither  ehall  their  potaessions  be  ex- 
tended upon  the  earth.  (So  Kosonmuller, 
Professor  Lee,  and  Eenan.)  The  transition 
from  the  singular  to  the  plural  is  not  un- 
usual, when  it  is  a  olaas,  and  not  an  indi< 
virlual,  that  is  really  spoken  of. 

Ver.  30. — He  shall  not  depart  out  of  dark- 
ness (comp.  ver.  23,  where  the  wicked  man 
is  threatened  with  "a  day  of  darkness"). 
When  the  darkness  once  falls,  it  shall  con- 
tinue; there  shall  be  no  escaping  out  of  it. 
The  flame  shall  dry  up  his  branches;  rather, 
aflame.  The  "  flame  "  intended  seems  to  be 
the  wrath  of  God.  And  by  the  breath  of  his 
mouth;  i.e.  "of  God's  mouth"  (oomp.  ch. 
iv.  9).  Shall  he  go  away;  or,  jxiss  away; 
i.e.  disappear,  be  consumed,  perish. 

Ver.  31.^-Let  not  him  that  is  deceived 
trust  in  vanity ;  rather,  let  him  not  truit  in 
vanity  (or,  t»  falaehood),  deceiving  himaelj 
(see  the  Revised  Version).  All  the  supports 
and  stays  of  the  wicked  are  vanity — unsub- 
stantial, futile,  utterly  vain  and  useless.  It 
is  only  a  man  who  "deceives  himself"  that 
can  trust  in  them.  For  vanity  shall  be  his 
recompense.  Buch  as  do  so  trust  gain 
nothing  by  it;  they  sow  vanity  and  reap 
vanity. 

Ver.  32. — It  shall  be  accomplished  before 
his  time.  "It  [t.e.  the  recompense]  shall 
be  accomplislied  [or,  '  paid  in  full ']  before 
its  time  [i,e.  before  payment  is  due]."  A 
vague  threat,  probably  intended  to  signify 
that  death  will  come  upon  the  wicked  man 
prematurely,  before  lie  has  lived  out  hall 
the  days  of  his  natural  life.  And  his  branch 
shall  not  be  green ;  i.e.  he  shall  wither  and 
fade,  like  a  tree  not  planted  by  the  water- 
side (Pa.  i.  8). 

Ver.  88. — He  shall  shake  off  his  nnripa 
grape  as  the  vine.  Blight  and  untimely 
cold  cause  the  vine  to  drop  its  grapes  before 
they  are  mature.  So  the  wicked  man  will 
be  deprived,  one  by  one,  uf  his  possessions. 
And  shall  cast  off  his  flower  as  the  olive. 
The  olive  often  sheds  its  blossoms  in  vast 
numbers.  "In  spring,"  says  Canon  Tris- 
tram, "one  may  see  the  Dloom,  on  the 
slightest  breath  of  wind,  shed  like  snow- 
flakes,  and  perishing  by  millions"  ('Natural 
History  of  the  Bible,*  p.  375).  According 
to  some  commentators,  this  happens  regularly 
in  alternate  years. 

Ver.  84. — For  the  oongregatiou  of  hypo- 
crites shall  be  desolate;  or,  «j^{  be  aterile, 
or  barren,  like  the  vine  and  olive  of  the 
preceding  vurse.  The  entire  company  of 
the  wicked  shall  suifer  this  punishment. 
And  fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of 
bribery.  God's  lightning  shall  fall  from 
heaven,  and  boni  op  the  teuts  («a  the  habt 


OH.  XV.  1—35.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


265 


tatioua)  of  those  who  take  bribea  to  pervert 
justice.  It  is  suggested  that  Eliphaz  in- 
tends to  Boouse  Job  of  the  two  secret  sins 
of  hypoci'isy  and  corruption. 

Ver,   35.— They  conceive  mischief,   and 
bring  forth  vanity ;  rather,  ai  in  the  margin, 


iniquity.  AnS  their  belly  prepareth  deceit, 
Internally,  i.e.  in  their  inner  nature— in 
their  heart,  as  we  should  say — ^they  make 
ready  deceits.  "  The  viscera,"  as  Professor 
Lee  observes, "  are  often  made  by  the  He- 
brews the  seat  of  thought." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1—16. — Eliphaz  to  Job:  Jtesitmption  of  the  second  controversy:  1.  An  overwhelm- 
ing industment.  I.  Old  acoubations  bepbated.  1.  Unprofitable  talk.  The  replies  given 
by  Job  in  the  preceding  colloquy  Eliphaz  characterizes  as  (1)  unbecoming,  altogether 
unworthy  of  a  wise  man  such  as  Job  had  piofeaseri  (ch.  xii.  23 ;  xiii.  2),  and  had  indeed 
been  recognized  (ch,  xxix.  8,  9, 21, 23),to  be — an  allegation  which,  though  not  in  point 
as  directed  against  the  patriarch,  may  suggest  the  propriety  of  wise,  and  much  more  of 
good,  men  always  speaking  and  acting  in  character,  watching  over  their  words  as  well 
as  works,  and  studying,  if  possible,  to  avoid  even  the  appearance  of  inconsistency, 
especially  in  the  eyes  of  weak  brethren  (Rom,  xiv,  21) ;  (2)  unsubstantial,  mere  empty 
harangues  and  impassioned  tirades,  "vain  knowledge,"  literally,  knowledge  of  wind 
(ver,  2 ;  cf.  ch.  viii.  2 ;  xi.  2),  instead  of  sound  and  solid  sense — a  character,  again,  which 
could  not  lairly  be  ascribed  to  Job's  reasonings  and  supplications,  though,  alas !  it  not 
inaptly  describes  much  of  human  speech  and  speculation;  (3)  worthless,  being,  in 
respect  of  use,  only  "unprofitable  talk,"  "speeches  by  which  no  good  is  done"  (ver.  3), 
which,  however  magnilnquently  set  forth  and  wearisomely  iterated,  contribute  nothing 
towards  the  elucidation  of  a  great  problem,  and  serve  in  no  degree  to  aid  the  speaker 
in  making  good  his  case;  and  (4)  pernicious,  in  their  ultimate  results  being  comparable 
to  nothing  so  appropriately  as  to  the  scorching  (Jonah  iv.  8),  blasting  (Gen.  xli.  23),  vehe- 
ment (Exod.  xiv.  21),  and  destructive  (Ps.  xlviii.  7)  east  wind  (ver.  2)— Und  few  things 
are  more  injurious  to  the  minds  that  conceive  them,  or  more  hurtful  to  society  at  large 
when  it  must  endure  them,  than  such  windy  orations,  "full  of  sound  and  fury,  signifying 
nothing,"  like  "  tales  told  by  idiots,"  such  as  are  alluded  to  by  Eliphaz,  although  amongst 
such  it  was  incorrect  to  number  the  burning  thoughts  and  winged  words  of  Job.  2. 
Manifest  impiety.  Eliphaz  had  already  (oh.  iv.  6)  insinuated  that  Job  was  devoid  of 
true  religion ;  here  he  regards  the  insinuation  as  substantiated  by  the  conduct  of  Job 
himself  in  three  particulars.  (1)  The  adoption  of  irreligious  sentiments  (ver.  4).  The 
views  propounded  by  Job  were  calculated  to  subvert  the  fundamental  principle  of  all 
religion,  viz.  the  fear  of  &od,  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  outward  expression  of  religion 
in  devout  meditation  or  prayer.  Though  wrong  as  to  the  estimate  he  put  on  Job's 
theology,  Eliphaz  was  right  in  regarding  reverence  for  God  as  the  foundation  of  all 
piety  in  man,  in  thinldng  that  no  man's  religion  can  be  genuine  which  does  not  engender 
the  spirit,  and  lead  to  the  practice,  of  prayer,  and  in  maintaining  that  good  men  should 
be  careful  of  either  entertaining  views  or  promulgating  doctrines  which  have  a  tendency, 
however  slight,  to  hinder  devotion  or  destroy  veneration  in  themselves  or  others.  (2) 
The  publication  of  infidel  opinions.  'Not  only  had  Job  allowed  himself  to  form  such 
unhallowod  notions,  but  he  had  openly  proclaimed  them  (ver.  6).  Hence  Ehphaz 
inferred  his  heart  could  not  be  right  with  God.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is 
he"  (Pri)v.  xxiii.  7);  and  "out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh 
(Luke  vi.  45).  And  certainly  the  deduction  is  a  sound  one,  that  no  truly  pioiM  inan 
wiU  receive,  far  less  disseminate,  principles  subversive,  or  even  seemingly  so,  of  the  fear 
and  worship  of  God.  Only  of  such  behaviour  Job  had  not  been  guilty.  (3)  ihe 
defence  of  damnable  heresies.  It  was  imiiossible  that  wickedness  could  further  go  than 
it  had  done  with  Job,  who  had  not  only  for  himself  embraced  heretical  beliefs,  but  had 
feariesslv  stated  them,  and  even  unblushingly  attempted  to  prove  them,  using  for  that 
purpose  «'  the  tongue  of  the  crafty  "  (ver.  5),  of  which  he  was  a  master.  Undoubtedly 
it  was  outrageous  ungodliness,  if  only  the  theology  of  the  friends  upon  which  Job  had 
poured  his  withering  scorn,  biting  sarcasm,  and  scalding  indignation  had  been  the 
infallible  truth  of  God,  which  it  was  not.  But  Eliphaz  and  his  brethren,  thmkmg  it  to 
be  so,  pronounced  Job  a  self-convicted  sinner  (ver.  6).  3.  Astounding  presuvwiion. 
Stung  by  Job's  ridicule  of  himself  and  his  colleagues  (oh.  xii.  2),  and  forgetful  th»t    a 


268  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xv.?!— 86. 


soft  answer  tumeth  away  wrath,"  while  "  grievous  words  stir  np  anger  "  (Prov.  xv.  1), 
Eliphaz  retorts,  with  a  keen-edged  irony  scarcely  second  to  Job's,  that  no  doubt  Job 
was  a  wise  man,  a  very  wise  man,  in  fact  the  only  wise  man,  since  (1)  Job  had  been 
born  first  of  men  (ver.  7),  and  as  a  consequence  enjoyed  "  the  most  direct  and  profound 
insight  into  the  mysteries  of  the  world,  which  came  into  existence  at  the  same  time  as 
himself"  (Deli tzsch);  (2)  had  even  preceded  the  mountains  In  his  appearance  upon 
earth  (ver.  7) — the  mountains  and  hills  being  represented  as  the  oldest  of  created  things 
(Ps.  xc.  2),  and  the  language  being  applied  to  Wisdom  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  (viii. 
23 — 26) ;  (3)  had  been  admitted  to  the  cabinet  of  heaven,  and  listened  to  the  councils 
of  the  Supreme  (ver.  8),  the  allusion  being  to  the  divan  of  an  Oriental  prince ;  nay  (4) 
as  a  consequence  had  engrossed  or  monopolized  wisdom  to  himself,  like  some  grand 
vizier  whose  soul  was  burdened  with  state  secrets ;  and  (5)  was  possessed  of  sources  of 
information  immensely  superior  to  theirs,  although  with  them  were  both  the  grey-- 
headed and  very  aged  men,  much  older  than  his  father  (ver.  10).  4.  Contemptuous 
indifference.  (1)  To  the  consolations  of  God  (ver.  11).  That  God  is  pre-eminently  the 
God  of  all  comfort  and  consolation  (2  Cor.  i.  3 ;  vii.  6) ;  that  he  can  comfort  with  a 
mother's  tenderness  (Isa.  Ixvi.  13),  a  father's  pity  (Ps.  ciii.  13),  a  husband's  love  (Hos. 
ii.  14) ;  that  in  Christ  (Phil.  ii.  1)  he  hath  provided  rich  consolations  for  his  people 
(2  Cor.  i.  5),  suitable  for  every  circumstance  and  situation  that  may  occur  in  their  lives 
(2  Cor.  i.  4) ;  that  delightful  wells  of  consolation  are  sometimes  found  in  the  events  of 
providence  (2  Cor.  vii.  6),  and  always  in  the  promises  of  the  gospel  (2  Pet.  i.  4),  especially 
when  applied  to  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (John  xiv.  26) ;  that  these  consolations 
are  not  small  in  themselves,  being  abundant  (2  Cor.  i.  5),  satisfying  (Isa.  Ixvi.  11), 
strong  (Heb.  vi.  18),  and  everlasting  (2  Thess.  ii.  16),  and  should  by  none  be  reputed 
small  or  lightly  esteemed,  considering  the  source  whence  they  come,  the  love  of  God, 
the  channel  through  which  they  flow,  the  cross  of  Christ,  the  Agent  by  whom  they 
are  applied,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  comfort  they  impart,  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth 
understanding,  and  the  freeness  with  which  they  are  bestowed,  without  money  and 
without  price;  that  all  these  are  precious  truths  is  undeniable;  but  Eliphaz  understood 
by  God's  consolations  the  promises  held  forth  by  himself  and  his  friends  in  their  dis- 
courses, which,  however  applicable  they  may  have  bt»»n  to  an  unconverted  sinner,  were 
not  suitable  to  meet  the  case  of  a  suffering  saint  like  Job.  (2)  To  the  kindness  of 
men.  Without  doubt  sincerely  Eliphaz  commends  his  own  and  his  friends'  orations  as 
gentle  addresses,  the  utterances  of  tender  pity  (ver.  11) ;  and,  if  they  were  so,  unques- 
tionably Job  erred  in  receiving  them  with  such  palpable  scorn  as  he  did.  Kindness 
honestly  offered,  even  when  mistaken,  and  somewhat  harsh  and  ungracious,  should  be 
politely,  and  even  thankfully,  received.  But  it  is  not  so  obvious  as  it  seemed  to 
Eliphaz  that  either  he  or  Bildad,  not  to  mention  Zophar,  had  spoken  tenderly.  6. 
Fassionaie  rebdUon.  Job  allowed  his  feelings  to  get  the  better  of  his  understanding — 
his  passion  to  overwhelm  his  judgment.  It  is  the  part  of  wisdom  and  the  work  ot 
grace  to  restrain  angry  emotions  (Prov.  xxix.  8 ;  Eph.  iv.  26).  Uncontrolled  excite- 
ment leads  to  sin  (Prov.  xxix.  22).  It  had  hurried  Job  into  vehement  expressions  against 
God,  which  seemed  to  show  an  embittered  and  hostile  spirit  in  (1)  insolent  grimaces,  the 
winking  of  the  eyes  (ver.  12)  having  the  significance,  it  is  probable,  of  the  similar 
expressions  in  Psalms  (xxxv.  19),  Proverbs  (vi.  3),  and  Isaiah  (iii.  16) ;  (2)  wrathful 
opposition,  the  turning  of  the  spirit  (or  of  one's  rage)  against  God  (ver.  13)  being  a 
characteristic  of  wicked  men  (Rom.  viii.  7 ;  Gal.  v.  17);  and  (3)  foolish  speaking.  Job's 
discourses  being  styled  "  words,"  ».«.  words  as  contrasted  with  wisdom,  words  destitute 
of  meaning  and  intelligence. 

II.  Old  theology  restated.  The  crowning  sin  of  Job,  in  the  estimation  of  Eliphaz, 
was  his  persistent  attempts  at  self-justification.  As  if  to  give  this  tremendous  heresy 
its 'final  quietus,  the  solemn  Arabian  seer  once  more  advances  the  humbling  doctrine  of 
man's  universal  depravity,  which  he  establishes  from  a  fourfold  consideration.  1.  Man's 
constitutional  frailty.  Man  is  essentially  a  frail  and  diseased  creature,  etiosh  (ver.  14) ; 
and,  although  physical  weakness  is  not  the  same  thing  as  moral  pollution,  yet  the 
former  is  inconceivable  except  as  the  result  of  the  latter.  2.  Man's  depraved  origin. 
Mortal  man  is  descended  from  fallen  woman,  and,  as  a  consequence,  inherits  hei 
depravity.  So  Job  admitted  (oh.  xiv.  2),  David  bewailed  (Ps.  Ii.  5),  and  Christ  taught 
(John  iii.  6).    To  this  law  human  history  knows  of  only  rue  exception.    Christ,  though 


ca.  XT.  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  267 

the  Seed  of  the  woman,  was  untainted  by  hereditary  corruption.  Holy  in  his  birth 
(Luke  i.  35),  he  continued  throughout  life  "  holy,  harmless,  undefileci,  and  separate  from 
sinners  "  (Heb.  vii.  26).  The  moral  purity  of  Jesus  was  indispensable  to  his  mediator- 
ship  (Heb.  vii.  27).  3.  Man's  inferiority  to  the  angels.  Man  occupies  a  lower  place 
in  the  universe  than  the  angels  who  inhabit  heaven  (ver.  15).  Yet  even  these  bright 
intelligences  appear  tarnished  in  God's  sight.  How  much  less,  then,  can  a  claim  of 
moral  purity  be  made  good  for  man  ?  If  God's  holiness,  the  standard  of  all  creature 
excellence,  is  so  absolute  that  even  the  heavens  with  their  holy  inhabitants  are  not 
pure  in  his  sight  (ver.  15),  it  is  sheer  folly  to  expect  that  man  can  establish  his  moral 
cleanness  before  the  eyes  of  the  Omniscient  One  (cf.  ch.  iv.  17, 18,  homiletics).  On  the 
contrary,  man  must  be  entirely  abominable  in  the  estimation  of  a  holy  God,  because 
wholly  corrupt  (ver.  16),  sin  being  that  abominable  thing  which  God  hates  (Jer.  xliv. 
4),  and  which  renders  everything  it  infects  hateful,  because  of  changing  its  nature,  and 
making  sour,  putrid,  corrupt,  disorganized,  what  God  had  at  first  pronounced  fair, 
orderly,  and  very  good.  4.  Man^s  haiitual  practice.  This  the  culnninating  proof  of 
man's  total  and  universal  depravity.  Wherever  man  exists  he  is  found  to  drink  up 
iniquity  like  water;  i.e.  to  commit  sin  as  regularly,  eagerly,  abundantly,  easily,  naturally, 
as  the  ox  or  the  horse  drinks  up  water. 

Learn :  1.  Men  often  fail  to  see  in  themselves  the  faults  they  condemn  in  others.  2. 
The  faculty  of  speech  was  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal.  3.  The  tongue  is  badly 
used  when  it  is  employed  to  either  afflict  saints  or  encourage  sinners.  4.  "  The  fear  of 
the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom."  5.  Prayer  is  one  of  the  natural  instincts  of 'the 
human  heart.  6.  A  man's  creed  is  commonly  an  index  to  his  character.  7.  The  man 
who  condemns  himself  need  not  wonder  if  he  be  condemned  by  others.  8.  The  older  a 
man  grows  the  wiser  should  he  become.  9.  Divine  consolation  may  be,  but  is  not 
always,  administered  by  man.  10.  "Better  is  he  that  ruleth  his  spiiit  than  he  that 
taketh  a  city."  11.  The  mouth  should  never  be  allowed  to  go  without  a  bridle.  12. 
The  doctrine  of  man's  depravity  is  very  old. 

Ver.  4. — Restraining  prayer.  Of  the  reasons  leading  men  to  either  neglect  or  discon- 
tinue the  exercise  of  prayer,  these  will  be  found  to  be  the  chief. 

I.  Thbbb  is  no  God  to  pray  to.  This  the  reason  of  the  atheist.  But  the  exist- 
ence of  a  supreme  First  Cause,  possessed  of  intelligence  and  moral  character,  is  to  faith 
assured  by  :  1.  The  intuitions  of  the  human  mind,  which  may  sometimes  attempt  to 
argue  itself  out  of,  but  never  needs  to  reason  itself  into,  the  belief  in  a  Divine  Being. 
2.  The  witness  of  the  creatures,  which,  by  countless  instances  of  special  contrivance 
and  design,  attest  the  eternal  power  and  Godhead  of  their  Artificer  (Rom.  i.  20).  3. 
The  intimations  of  Scripture,  which  never  demonstrate,  but  always  assume,  that  a  God 
exists,  and  man  knows  it.  Hence,  since  there  is  a  Supreme  Being,  the  folly,  as  well 
as  sin,  of  withholding  from  him  that  tribute  of  devotion  which  is  his  due. 

II.  There  is  no  efficacy  in  pbayer.  The  usual  objections  to  the  possibility  of 
prayer  may  be  here  stated,  such  as  that  the  whole  universe  having  been  placed  under 
the  dominion  of  fixed  and  invariable  law,  there  can,  properly  speaking,  be  no  room  for 
the  exercise  of  prayer ;  that  the  Bible  itself,  by  representing  all  things  as  coming  to 
pass  in  accordance  with  a  prearranged  plan,  seems  expressly  to  exclude  the  idea  of 
prayer ;  that  the  multiplicity  and  even  contradiotoriness  of  human  interests  is  so  great 
as  to  reduce  the  whole  business  of  praying  to  an  absurdity ;  and  that,  as  no  one  pre- 
tends to  be  able  to  di-spense  with  his  own  labours  even  while  he  prays,  it  seems  hard  to 
know  precisely  wherein  lies  the  special  virtue  of  devotion.     Without  replying  to  these 

'  seriatim  in  this  place,  it  may  suffice  to  observe :  1.  The  exact  import  of  the  assertion 
that  there  is  no  efiicacy  in  prayer,  which  is  that  the  individual  so  asserting  has  been 
able  to  place  himself  precisely  where  God  stands  in  relation  to  the  universe,  to  make  a 
survey  of  the  entire  compass  of  created  things,  to  sound  the  unfathomable  depths  of 
tlie  Divine  resources,  and,  as  the  result  of  his  examination,  to  announce  that  prayer 
cannot  be  answered;  in  other  words,  such  a  confident  dogmatist  arrogates  to  himself 
the  attributes  of  God.  2.  The  complete  worthlessness  of  the  assertion  when  set  against 
the  testimony  of  the  human  consciousness,  especially  whin  supported  by  the  evidence 
of  incontrovertible  fact  that  prayer  can  be,  and  has  been,  answered. 
IIL  The  absence  of  a  felt  need  of  pbayeb.    This  is  the  reason  of  the  worldling. 


2«8  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xv.  1—35 

The  things  he  regards  as  constituting  the  summum  honum  of  existence — wealth,  plessurei 
fame,  power,  and  such  like — seem  to  belong  to  a  sphere,  that  is  not  much  affected  by 
prayer ;  while,  having  never  experienced  any  desire  for  those  spiritual  realities  oompre. 
headed  in  the  gospel,  blessing  of  salvation,  viz.  the  pardon  of  sin,  the  renovation  of  the 
heart,  the  spirit  of  adoption,  and  so  on,  he  has  never  deemed  it  necessary  to  trouble  the 
King  of  heaven  with  supplications  for  their  bestowal.  But  (1)  the  blessings  of  the  gospel 
are  none  the  less  indispensable  for  the  soul's  happiness  that  the  soul  does  not  realize 
its  lack  of  them ;  (2)  the  absence  of  any  felt  necessity  for  prayer  is  the  best  proof  the 
soul  can  desire  that  prayer  is  in  reality  its  one  thing  needful ;  (3)  the  exercise  of  prayer 
will  not  interfere  with  a  just  devotion  to  the  ordinary  businesses  and  duties  of  daily 
life ;  (4)  not  even  the  most  material  of  earthly  blessings  belongs  to  a  region  that  lies 
beyond  the  influence  of  prayer  (Phil.  iv.  6). 

lY.  The  lack  of  answebs  to  pbayebs.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  faithless  Ohristian. 
And  it  is  undoubtedly  hard  for  a  soul  to  keep  on  praying  when  to  all  appearance  the 
ear  of  God  is  deaf.  But  in  such  circumstances  the  petitioner  should  consider  (1)  whether 
a  prayer  might  not  be  answered  without  the  praying  one  being  distinctly  conscious  of 
it  at  the  time ;  (2)  whether  the  prayer  to  which  no  answer  is  returned  may  not  simply 
be  delayed,  and  not  denied;  (3)  whether,  even  on  the  hypothesis  of  its  denial,  it  may  not 
after  all  be  for  the  best  that  the  thing  asked  for  should  be  withheld ;  (4)  whether  the 
indispensable  conditions  of  true  prayer,  such  as  faith  (Heb.  xi.  6 ;  Jas.  i.  6),  humility 
(Gen.  xxxii.  10),  sincerity  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18),  etc.,  have  been  complied  with. 

v.  The  want  or  ant  true  relish  in  prater.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  spiritually 
decliniDg  saint.  Now  (1)  it  is  certain  that  the  exercise  of  prayer  ought  to  he  delightful  to 
the  Christian,  prayer  being  as  much  a  natural  function  of  the  gracious  soul  as  breathing 
is  of  the  body.  But  (2)  it  is  equally  apparent  that  over  spiritiioi  as  well  aa  physical 
functions  times  of  languor  steal,  these  being  induced  in  the  former  mostly  by  a  want 
of  watchfulness  against  the  encroachments  of  the  world,  or  by  a  careless  dalliance  with 
sin,  or  by  a  growing  spirit  of  formality.  Hence  (3)  so  far  from  being  a  reason  for 
discontinuing  devotion,  t?ie  lack  of  spiritual  relish  should  rather  stir  the  praying  soul  to 
greater  earnestness  and  neal. 

VI.  The  indulgence  of  known  sin.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  conscious  backslider. 
Nothing  so  effectually  extinguishes  the  altar-fire  of  a  spiritual  devotion  as  the  practice 
of  secret  sin.  (1)  It  disquallfles  for  coming  to  the  throne  (Isa.  i.  15) ;  (2)  it  prevents 
God  from  listening  to  prayer  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18)  j  (3)  it  deadens  the  spiritual  life  from  which 
prayer  comes  (Ps.  xxxii.  3);  (4)  it  represses  all  desire  within  the  soul  for  converse  with 
God ;  and  (5)  it  finally  silences  the  voice  of  prayer  altogether. 

Vers.  17 — 35. — Miphaz  to  Job  i  2.  More  wisdom  from  the  ancients.  I.  The  excel- 
lence OF  THIS  WISDOM.  1.  Old;  i.e.  derived  from  a  remote  antiquity.  The  traditionary 
lore  about  to  be  cited  by  Bliphaz  had  been  manufactured  by  primeval  sages,  from  whom 
it  had  been  carefully  transmitted  to  the  "  wise  men  "  who  had  told  it  to  Bliphaz.  The 
"fathers,"  "unto  whom  alone  the  earth  was  given,"  and  "among  whom  no  stranger 
passed,"  were  either  patriarchal  descendants  of  Noah  prior  to  the  time  of  Peleg,  when 
the  earth  was  divided  (Gen.  x.  25),  or  ihe  early  progenitors  of  the  Arabian  races.  2. 
Pure  ;  i.e.  unmixed  with  foreign  elements.  Whether  the  ancients  were  pre-Pelegites  or 
post-,  the  fact  to  which  Bliphaz  calls  attention  remains  unaltered.  "Purity  of  race 
was  from  the  earliest  times  considered  bv  the  sons  of  the  East  as  the  sign  of  highest 
nobility  "  (Delitzsch).  _  That  this  isolation  of  the  Arabian  fathers  would  tend  to  pre- 
serve the  current  of  primitive  tradition  pure  and  unalloyed,  and  might  even  favour  the 
healthy  development  of  independent  views,  "derived  from  their  own  experience  and 
undisturbed  by  foreign  influence,"  can  scarcely  be  questioned.  It  would  seem  also  as 
if  in  the  world's  infancy  other  methods  of  conserving  Divine  truth  wore  impracticable. 
At  least  Israel  was  separated  from  the  other  nations  of  the  earth  in  order  to  serve  as  a 
depositary  for  the  gospel  promise  in  order  to  preserve  it  till  the  fulness  of  the  times. 
Hence  she  was  forbidden  to  make  marriage  or  other  alliances  with  the  nations  around 
for  fear  of  learning  their  ways.  But  now  the  truth  of  God,  under  the  Christian  dispen- 
sation, has  been  revealed  with  such  clearness  and  fulness  of  illumiaation,  that  it  does 
not  require  to  be  hedged  about  by  safeguards  of  race,  nationality,  etc.;  though  it  is  still 
true  of  Ohristian  people  that  "  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners  "  (1  Cor.  xv 


0H.2CV.  1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  269 

33).  8.  Certain  ;  ie.  verified  by  experience.  In  the  preceding  colloquy  EUphaz  had 
treated  Job  to  wisdom  he  bad  learnt  in  ecstatic  vision  (ch.  iv.  12);  here  he  lays 
before  him  the  results  of  observation  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  information.  He 
does  not  claim  for  his  approaching  utterances  the  high  authority  of  messages  from  the 
spirit-world ;  still,  he  guarantees  their  veracity  on  the  double  testimony  of  eye  and  ear. 
What  the  wise  men  had  reported  to  his  sense  of  hearing  he  had  taken  care  to  verify  by 
the  organ  of  seeing;  so  that  practically  he  seems  to  say, "  In  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses 
is  every  word  established." 

II.  The  pukport  of  thib  wisdom.  Briefly,  it  is  the  dogma  that  a  moral  order  exists 
in  the  world,  that  good  always  comes  to  the  good,  and  in  particular  that  evil  never 
fails  to  overtake  the  evil.  1.  The  wicked  mcm's  doom.  Painted  in  lurid  colours,  as 
consisting  mainly  in  two  things.  (1)  The  terrors  of  an  evil  conscience,  which  are 
represented  as :  (a)  Self-inflicted.  "  The  wicked  man  writhes  or  torments  himself"  (ver. 
20).  Conscience  always  is  its  own  avenger.  Gagged  for  a  season,  it  eventually  speaks  out 
with  greater  power  because  of  previous  repression.  "  No  man  ever  offended  his  own  con- 
science, but  first  or  last  it  was  revenged  upon  him  for  it"  (South).  (6)  Excruciatingly 
painful,  like  the  pains  of  parturition.  "  Conscience  is  a  thousand  swords  *  ('  King 
Richard  III.,'  act  v.  sc.  2).  "  Methought  a  legion  of  foul  fiends  environed  me  "  (ibid., 
act  i.  sc.  4).  "  The  mind  that  broods  o'er  guilty  woes  is  like  the  scorpion  girt  by  fire  " 
(Byron  '  Griaour').  (c)  Never  ceasing;  the  anguish  of  the  stricken  wretch  continuing 
"  all  his  days."  Except  in  rare  instances,  this  part  of  Eliphaz's  description  can  scarcely 
be  regarded  as  literally  correct.  Yet  it  teaches  that,  from  one  end  of  life  to  the  other, 
the  wicked  man  enjoys  no  security  against  his  guilty  fears,  which  may  spring  forth 
upon  him  at  any  moment,  the  exact  instant  when  they  shall  do  so  being  hidden  from 
his  view  (ver.  20).  (d)  Horribly  terrifying;  filling  him  with  dismal  forebodings  of  evil. 
The  sound  of  approaching  calamity  ever  ringing  in  his  ears  (ver.  21),  every  footfall 
appears  to  be  that  of  a  destroyer:  "How  is't  with  me,  when  every  noise  appaU 
me?"  ('  Macbeth,'  act  ii.  sc.  2);  and  "  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth  "  (Prov. 
xxviii.  1).  His  imagination  suggests,  even  in  the  midst  of  prosperity,  that  the 
devastator  is  upon  him  (ver.  21),  that  every  one  who  finds  him  shall  slay  him  (Gen. 
iv.  14),  that  his  destruction  will  be  sudden  and  complete — a  fate  reserved  for 
unbelievers  in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  (1  Thess.  v.  3).  His  guilty  conscience  peopling 
the  dark  with  assassins  causes  him  to  live  in  constant  terror  of  the  sword 
(ver.  22) — '*  Thus  conscience  does  make  cowards  of  us  all"  ('  Hamlet,'  act  iii.  sc.  1). 
His  feeble  spirit  agonized  by  fears  of  starvation  even  in  the  midst  of  abundance  (ver. 
28),  roams  abroad  in  search  of  bread,  saying, "  Where  is  it  ?  "  and  he  becomes  a  fugitive 
and  a  vagabond  on  the  earth,  like  another  Cain  (Gen.  iv.  12),  and  like  wicked  men 
generally  whose  evil  hearts  are  restless  as  the  troubled  sea  (Isa.  Ivii.  20).  His  crowding 
fears  of  impending  calamity  so  unman  him  that  when  trouble  and  anguish  gather 
round  like  royal  armies  prepared  for  battle,  they  paralyze  him  with  dread,  and  render 
resistance  or  escape  impossible  (ver.  24).  (2)  The  miseries  of  an  evil  fortune  form 
the  second  ingredient  in  his  unhappy  lot.  He  shall  never  attain  to  true,  permanent, 
or  abundant  wealth.  If  he  make  money,  he  shall  make  nothing  else.  And  that  money 
shall  take  wings  and  flee  away.  So  that,  notwithstanding  his  apparent  success,  he 
shall  be  always  a  poor  man.  It  is  often  true  of  the  wicked  that  they  make  money  only 
to  put  it  into  a  bag  with  holes  (Hag.  i.  6).  Ill-gotten  wealth  never  lasts  long.  The 
wicked  man  shall  never  be  out  of  misfortune,  in  himself  or  in  his  family.  "  He  shall 
not  escape  darkness  "  (ver.  30).  He  shall  eventually  be  overwhelmed  in  ruin;  painful, 
like  the  burning  of  a  flame ;  speedy,  like  a  blast  of  wind ;  divinely  sent,  the  agent  of 
bis  destruction  being  the  breath  of  God's  mouth,  which  will  ultimately  consume  the 
enemies  of  Christ  (2  Thess.  ii.  8;  Eev.  xix.  15);  and  therefore  complete  and  final, 
the  wicked  perishing  utterly,  as  all  the  ungodly  will  do  hereafter.  2.  The  wicked 
man's  crime.  (1)  Tyrannical  oppression  of  men  (ver.  20).  The  ungodly  persons 
alluded  to  by  Eliphaz  were  proud  imperious  sinners  who  trampled  recklessly  on  the 
rights  of  others.  All  sin  is  more  or  less  an  infringement  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of 
men  •  and  much  of  the  wickedness  with  which  earth  is  overrun  partakes  of  this 
character— the  strong  tyrannizing  over  the  weak,  the  ambitious  making  stepping- 
stones  of  those  who  are  humble  the  powerful  treading  down  the  feeble  and  unresisting 
(cf.  Cowper,  'Task,'  bk.  ii.).     The  giants  of  Noah's  (Gen.  vL  4)  and  the  Arabian 


270  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  iv.  1—35. 

robbers  of  Job'*  time  (ch.  xii.  6 ;  xx.  19)  were  men  of  this  type.  (2)  Defiant  antagonism 
to  Qod  (vers.  25, 26).  Hostility  to  God  is  the  natural  characteristic  of  the  sinful  heart 
(Bom.  viii.  7) ;  but  all  tyrannical  oppression  of  men  is  practically  a  fighting  against 
God.  And  the  particular  aggravation  of  the  wicked  man's  ofifence  lies  in  this,  that, 
though  clearly  understanding  himself  to  be  acting  contrary  to  God's  Law,  and  thus 
virtually  entering  the  lists  against  Jehovah,  he  persists  in  his  nefarious  behaviour, 
with  much  braggadocio  "  stretching  out  his  hand,"  and  "  affecting  to  play  the  hero 
against  God  "  (ver.  25) ;  with  immeasurable  insolence  "  strengthening  himself  against 
the  Almighty,"  a  feeble  worm  presuming  to  contend  with  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  with 
infinite  zest  "running  upon  him,"  as  if  eager  to  close  in  mortal  combat  with  his 
celestial  Adversary  (ver.  26);  with  fierce  determination,  "with  a  stiffened  neck," 
expressive  of  haughty  resolution;  with  amazing  self-sufficiency,  dashing  up  against 
him  with  "  the  thick  bosses  of  his  bucklers "  (ver.  26),  as  if  expecting  to  overwhelm 
the  Supreme  with  ignominious  defeat.  Examples  of  such  defiers  of  God  may  be  found 
in  Pharaoh  (Exod.  v.  2),  Sennacherib  (Isa.  xxxvi.  20),  the  crucifiers  of  Christ  (Ps.  ii.  1 ; 
Acts  iv.  25 — 27);  though  all  sin  is  essentially  an  insolent  rejection  of  God's  rule  and 
defiance  of  his  authority  (Luke  xix.  14,  27).  (3)  Licentious  indulgence  of  self  (ver. 
27).  The  language  describes  one  given  over  to  gluttony,  a  person  whose  "god  is 
his  belly  "  (Phil.  iii.  19).  Luxurious  living  an  object  of  ambition  to  most  men  (Luke 
xii.  19) ;  a  frequent  mark  of  wicked  men  (Ps.  xvii.  14 ;  Ixxiii.  7 ;  Luke  xvi.  19) ;  a 
special  danger  for  all  men  (Deut.  viii.  12).  Fat  feeding  and  fair  clothing  have  a 
tendency  to  beget  and  foster  pride.  "  It  is  a  common  proverb  that  provender  pricketh 
men"  (Calvin).  When  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  he  kicked  (Deut.  xzxii.  15).  If  in  politics 
and  civil  matters  "  lean  men  are  dangerous  "  ('  Julius  Cassar,'  act  i.  sc.  2),  in  religion 
it  is  mostly  otherwise.  Hence  the  wisdom  of  Agur's  prayer  (Prov.  xxx.  8,  9).  (4) 
Complete  insensibility  to  sin  (ver.  28).  The  wicked  man  takes  up  his  abode  in  cities 
like  Jericho  (Josh.  vi.  26),  which  God's  curse  has  rendered  desolate  through  some 
overwhelming  visitation,  thus  evincing  not  so  much  his  insolent  defiance  of  God,  as 
the  stolidity  of  his  wicked  soul,  his  utter  want  of  pious  feeling,  the  complete  callousness 
and  deadness  of  his  moral  and  spiritual  nature.  All  sin  gravitates  towards  "  a  con- 
science past  feeling"  (Eph.  iv.  19).  ■ 

III.  The  application  of  this  wisdom.  1.  A  wicked  insinuation.  "Let  not  him 
that  is  deceived  "  (ver.  31),  i.e.  Job.  Bliphaz  charges  Job  with  a  false  confidence  in 
his  own  integrity.  Though  not  true  of  Job,  it  is  certain  that  of  many  it  is  not  false. 
Hence  the  propriety  of  self-examination  as  to  the  grounds  on  which  our  assurance 
rests.  If  it  rest  on  the  Spirit's  witness  to  our  faith  in  Christ,  it  is  good  and  will  never 
disappoint  our  expectations ;  if  it  is  based  on  any  of  those  "  vanities  "  alluded  to  by 
Eliphaz,  it  is  false,  and  will  eventually  overwhelm  us  in  despair.  2.  An  excellent 
admonition.  "  Let  him  not  trust  in  vanity."  Everything  outside  of  God  and  his 
favour,  on  which  a  human  soul  grounds  its  confidence  of  safety,  or  in  which  it  thinks 
to  find  happiness,  is  vanity — moral  excellence,  evangelical  fervour,  general  philan- 
thropy, inteUectual  power,  social  position,  commercial  credit,  political  influence,  no  less 
than  successful  wickedness  and  unchecked  antagonism  to  God.  Yet  the  human  heart 
is  insanely  prone  to  clasp  these  to  its  bosom,  saying,  "  Be  thou  my  confidence,"  instead 
of  trusting  in  the  living  God.  But  to  do  so  is  the  merest  self-deception.  For  none 
of  these  things,  nor  all  of  them,  can  satisfy  a  human  soul.  Only  Gud  can  so  occupy  the 
heart  as  to  fill  it  with  happiness  and  render  it  secure.  God  alone  is  the  saint's  portion 
and  trust.  3.  A  fearful  prediction.  "  Vanity,"  probably  in  the  sense  of  calamity, 
"  shall  be  his  recompense  "  (ver.  31).  And  this  reward,  for  which  the  self-deceived  man 
toils,  shall  be  pai.  I :  (1)  Fully ;  "  it  shall  be  accomplished  "  (ver.  32),  i.e.  his  pun  ishment 
will  be  lully  measured  out,  his  wage  paid  to  the  full — that  wage  being  death  (cf.  Rom. 
vi.  23).  (2)  Prematurely;  "before  his  time,"  i.e.  before  the  natural  termination  of  his 
life,  sin  having  a  tendency  to  shorten  (Ps.  Iv.  23),  as  godliness  has  to  prolong  life ;  before 
any  of  his  schemes  have  reached  completion,  like  a  vine  shaking  off  its  unripe  grapes 
and  an  olive  casting  ofi'  its  flowers  (ver.  33).  (3)  Sadly ;  involving  his  family  in  his 
ruin,  for  "  the  family  of  the  hypocrites  shall  be  desolate  "  (ver.  34),  the  wicked  man 
carrying  the  contagion  of  ungodliness  into  his  home,  and  bnnging  down  upon  it  the 
curse  of  God  (Prov.  iii.  33),  as  certainly  as  the  good  man  surrounds  his  children  vfith 
an  atmosphere  of  salvation  (Luke  xix.  9 ;  Acts  xvi.  31),  and  draws  down  upon  them 


OH.  XV.  1— 35.J  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  271 


by  his  prayers  the  benison  of  love.  (4)  Utterly ;  the  judgments  of  the  Almighty 
consuming  the  tabernacles  of  bribery  and  their  wicked  inhabitants,  who  conceive 
mischief  and  bring  forth  vanity,  and  whose  belly  prepareth  deceit  (ver.  35).  A 
description,  again,  which,  though  inapplicable  to  Job,  for  whom  it  was  wrongfully 
meant,  has  sometimes  been  realized,  as  in  the  case  of  the  cities  of  the  plain. 

Learn :  1.  That  the  true  Divider  of  countries  to  nations  and  of  lands  to  individuals 
is  God.  A  man  can  receive  nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from  above.  2.  That  if  the 
intercourse  of  peoples  and  tribes  with  one  another  be  productive  of  good,  it  is  by  no 
means  unattended  with  danger.  Sinful  practices  and  opinions  are  more  easily  adopted 
than  their  opposites.  3.  That  the  way  of  transgressors  is  commonly  as  hard  to  them- 
selves as  to  their  victims.  "  Evil  pursueth  sinners."  4.  That  the  fiercest  enemy  a 
soul  has  to  encounter  is  an  awakened  conscience.  It  is  hard  to  contend  against  a  foe 
through  whose  face  God  looks.  5.  That  the  biggest  coward  upon  earth  is  a  bragging 
tyrant  who  oppresses  the  weak.  Man's  moral  strength  rises  in  proportion  to  the 
meekness  with  which  he  can  endure,  not  the  cruelty  with  which  he  can  inflict,  wrong. 
6.  That  the  man  who  thinks  to  conquer  God  in  battle  la  a  fool.  The  way  to  victory 
with  God  is  by  faith  and  prayer,  humility  and  submission.  7.  That  a  fat  body  may 
become  the  grave  of  a  lean  soul.  The  man  that  would  have  a  prosperous  and  luxuriant 
soul  must  keep  the  body  under.  8.  That  the  best-deceived  man  on  earth  is  he  who 
trusts  in  earthly  vanities.  If  he  who  trusts  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool,  what  must  he 
be  who  trusts  in  unsubstantial  nothingness  ?  9.  That  wicked  men's  families  are  often 
ruined  by  their  parents.  A  father  should  lead  his  child  to  heaven  by  holy  deeds,  not 
point  him  the  way  to  hell  by  transgression.  10.  That  the  ultimate  perdition  of  ungodly 
men  is  sure.    "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers.  1 — 19. — Perversity  and  impenitence  rebuked.  In  the  next  six  chapters  the 
controversy  between  Job  and  his  friends  takes  a  new  and  embittered  turn.  They 
muster  their  forces  to  put  down  the  daring  speaker,  who  as  they  deem  has  challenged 
the  justice  of  God.  They  seek  to  humiliate  him  as  a  late-born,  ignorant,  and  passionate 
man,  who  has  incurred  fresh  guilt  by  his  impious  questionings  and  blasphemies. 
Eliphaz  gives  a  terrible  representation  of  the  general  truth  that  the  wicked  man,  living 
for  himself  alone,  must  ever  be  exposed  to  torment,  and  his  property  and  condition 
must  ever  be  insecure,  leaving  Job  to  apply  all  this  to  himself.  In  the  war  of  words  the 
hope  of  reconciliation  and  mutual  understanding  is  further  and  further  banished.  The 
present  chapter  (xv.)  falls  into  two  divisions :  the  first  containing  argument ;  the  second 
the  authoritative  utterance  of  wisdom  (vers.  2 — 19,  20 — 35). 

I.  Akqument:  Intkoduotion.  (Vers.  2 — 6.)  Eliphaz,  as  the  oldest  and  most 
experienced  of  the  friends,  seeks  to  abash  and  humiliate  Job  by  raising  doubts  of  his 
sense  and  wisdom.  1.  The  characteristics  of  unwisdom  are  indulgence  in  rvindy 
words — in  "  words  from  the  paunch^'  the  seat  of  wild  and  ungovernable  passion,  as  con- 
trasted with  words  that  are  uttered  from  the  heart  (ch.  viii.  10),  and  are  those  of 
experience,  sense,  and  truth;  in  words  that  are  useless  because  there  are  no  corre- 
sponding deeds.  Here  is  a  good  test  of  the  value  of  speech — Has  it  any  tendency  to 
bear  fruit  in  deeds  ?  can  it  be  followed  up  and  expressed  in  deeds  or  no  ?  Those  words 
are  vain  on  which  we  dare  not  set  the  stamp  and  seal  of  action.  2.  Proofs  of  guilt. 
These  wild  speeches  are  not  only  idle,  but  worse,  mischievous.  The  tongue  is  a 
powerful  agent,  either  of  good  or  evil.  It  builds  up  those  who  listen  in  faith  and  good- 
ness, or  loosens  the  root  of  piety  in  the  soul.  Further,  the  tongue  may  be  used  as  the 
weapon  of  the  crafty — a  disingenuous  means  of  defence.  And  does  not  this  show  that 
Job  is  utterly  corrupt ;  that,  like  an  unprincipled  scoundrel,  he  would  attempt  to  clear 
himself  by  throwing  blame  on  others  ? 

II.  Humiliating  CENSURES.  (Vers.  7 — 13.)  1.  Ironical  rebulce  of  liis  assumption. 
Is  he  the  first-born  man — older  than  the  hills  ?  Does  he  stand  at  the  head  of  man- 
kind, and,  therefore,  know  better  than  all  his  fellows  ?  So  Ezekiel  satirizes  the  King 
of  Tyre,  "  Thou  sealest  up  the  sum,  full  of  wisdom,  and  perfect  in  beauty  "  (xxviii.  12). 
The  Hindus  have  a  proverb  used  iu  the  same  sense,  "  Yea,  indeed,  he  is  the  first  mail  j 


872  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xv.  1—35. 

no  wonder  that  ho  is  so  wise."  The  great  Greek  sage,  on  the  other  hand,  being 
declared  the  wisest  of  men,  interpreted  the  oracle  as  meaning  that  he  alone  of  men  knew 
that  he  was  ignorant.  It  is  better  to  place  one's  self  on  a  level  with  the  meanest  and 
the  most  ignorant  than  to  assume  superiority  in  matters  about  which  all  men  may 
reasonably  think  themselves  equally  well  informed.  2.  Expostidation  against  a  bitter 
temper.  It  is  a  temper  that  will  not  soften  at  tlie  word  of  comfort,  as  the  rock  will  not 
melt  in  the  sun.  Eliphaz  thinks  that  all  his  good  instruction  and  consolation  have  been 
lavished  in  vain  upon  this  obdurate  heart.  The  "  refusing  to  be  comforted,"  the  obsti- 
nate nourishing  of  grief,  is  a  temper  that  must  be  changed,  otherwise  the  mental  view 
cannot  become  clear  and  calm.  Other  signs  of  temper  are  pride ;  the  heart  carried  away 
by  its  passionate  egotism ;  the  gleaming  or  rolling  eyes  (ver.  12),  and  the  unbridled  wild- 
ness  of  the  tongue.     These  symptoms  prove  a  disease,  and  that  disease  is  self-will. 

III.  The  right  of  complaint  agaikst  God  denied.  (Vers.  14 — 16.)  Here  the 
speaker  repeats  himself,  for  he  has  nothing  more  deeply  impressed  upon  his  own  mind 
thtm  the  folly  and  impatience  of  complaints  from  inBrm  man  against  the  supreme  and 
all-holy  One  (comp.  ch.  iv.  17 — v.  7).  1.  The  hereditary  taint  in  man  (ver.  14).  2. 
The  relative  impurity  of  heavenly  beings  in  the  sight  of  God.  3.  Man's  choice  of  sin 
(this  is  especially  emphatic  here).  All  these  considerations  show  the  impiety  of  daring 
to  question  any  action  of  God.  Man  has  a  thirst  for  sin  (ver.  16) :  shall  such  a 
creature,  from  the  edge  of  its  muddy  pool,  lift  itself  presumingly  against  Heaven? 

IV.  Demand  fob  attention  to  instkuction.  (Vers.  17 — 19.)  In  this  short 
preface  the  wisdom  of  the  speaker  is  described  as  (1)  derived  from  personal  experience ; 
(2)  confinned  by  ancient  tradition ;  (3)  as  pure,  unadulterated  wisdom,  coming  from 
a  time  when  foreign  opinions  and  foreign  manners  hod  not  corrupted  the  simplicity  of 
•ncient  truth. — J. 

Vers.  20 — 35. —  Warnings  from  ike  wisdom  of  txperienei,  I.  Thk  tebbolb 
torments  op  the  wicked.  (Vers.  20 — ^24)  1.  l^Aong  pairt.  Notwithstanding  all 
appearances  of  ease  and  prosperity,  the  bad  man  inly  suffers.  The  sword  seems  ever 
suspended  above  the  tyrant's  head.  The  serpent  is  ever  busy  with  the  tooth  of  remorse 
at  his  heart.  2.  Dread  fancies  throng  through  every  sound  into  his  imagination ;  he 
is  ever  in  terror  of  some  sudden  doom.  He  sees  a  darkness  coming  upon  him  from  which 
there  is  no  possibility  of  escape.  In  the  glance  of  dread  fancy  he  sees  himself  already 
singled  out  for  the  fatal  sword-stroke.  The  gaunt  shape  of  famine  seems  to  haunt  his 
steps;  from  his  soft  couch  and  splendid  table  he  looks  out  into  a  dark  scene,  and 
realizes  it  as  present ;  he  is  overcome  by  anguish  and  trouble,  as  a  king  is  borne  down 
amidst  the  turmoil  of  battle.  Thus  conscience  makes  the  guilty  man  a  coward,  and 
the  "  native  hue  of  resolution  is  sicklied  o'er  with  the  pale  cast  of  thought."  "  A  guilty 
conscience  1  I  ask  no  other  hell." 

II.  The  cause  of  his  suFFBEmos.  (Vers.  25 — 28.)  1.  Eehdlion  against  Ood. 
This  is  presented  under  the  powerful  figure  of  a  warrior,  rushing  against  his  foe,  on 
the  field,  in  headstrong  fury.  Self-will,  leading  to  contempt  of  the  moral  order  of 
God,  and  this  to  violent  resistance  to  all  moral  restraint;  here  is  the  genesis  and 
development  of  sin.  See  the  history  of  Pharaoh.  2.  Eis  sdfish  life.  He  lives  in 
luxury,  pampering  his  body  till  he  becomes  a  gross  mass  of  flesh,  full  of  carnal  appetite. 
In  his  unsocial  ambition  and  greed  he  has  laid  waste  flourishing  cities  rich  in  men, 
that  he  may  abide  in  them  alone,  as  if  he  could  not  find  place  enough  for  the  dwelling 
of  his  body,  and  preferred  to  live  alone  amidst  wide  desolation,  rather  than  peace- 
fully among  a  multitude  of  the  happy.  So  in  Isa.  v.  8,  "Woe  to  them  that  join 
hDUse  to  house,  that  lay  field  to  field,  till  there  be  no  place,  that  they  may  be 
placed  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  earth  1 "  "  He  enlargeth  his  desire  as  hell,  and  is  as 
death,  and  cannot  be  satisfied,  but  gathereth  unto  him  all  nations,  and  heapeth  unto 
hina  all  people  "  (Hab.  ii.  5).  "  He  builds  a  town  with  blood,  and  lays  its  foimdations 
in  iniquity  "  (Hab.  ii.  12).  The  picture  is  one  of  grasping,  insatiable  greed  and  cove- 
tousnesB,  which  shut  a  man  out  from  the  sympathy  of  his  fellows.  Some,  however, 
take  ver.  28  as  referring  further  to  an  act  of  disobedience  in  fixing  his  dwelling  among 
ruins,  cursed  by  God  and  forbidden  to  future  habitation. 

III.  The  instability  OF  THE  WICKED.  (Vers.  29— 33.)  His  uopes  are  disappointed, 
riches  elude  him,  his  accumulations  melt  away.     Unlike  the  heavy  harvest  of  the 


CH.  XT.  1—85.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  878 

waving  com,  ho  is  rather  like  the  tree  whose  roots  do  not  sink  deeply  into  the  earth 
(ver.  29),  so  that  every  outward  misfortune  becomes  an  extreme  source  of  danger — all 
his  blossoms  and  fruits  are  oast  away  before  the  time  of  gathering  1  Then,  again,  the 
figure  of  darkness  retmns,  which  he  only  escapes,  to  fall  into  the  glowing  breath  of 
God's  anger,  which  blasts  everything  that  is  green  and  fair  in  his  prospects. 

IV.  Thk  vanity  and  folly  of  the  wicked.  (Vers.  34,  35.)  He  begins  by  trusting 
in  vanity,  in  what  is  baseless,  such  as  all  absence  of  moral  principle;  and  vanity, 
according  to  the  moral  constitution  of  the  world,  must  be  the  end  of  his  schemes.  The 
time  of  ripeness  and  harvest  must  be  that  of  destruction ;  or  like  the  blossoms  of  the 
olive  in  certain  years,  which  fall  off  without  fruit  being  formed,  his  plans  never  come 
to  maturity.  The  "  brood  "  of  the  wicked  man  is  unfruitful ;  the  lire  devours  his  tent. 
Or  like  the  woman  who  has  falsely  conceived,  and  remains  long  in  deception,  but  at 
last  perceives  with^ief  the  nothingness  of  her  hopes,  so  with  the  wicked  man  (comp. 
Ps.  vji.  14 — 17 ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  11). 

Lessons.  1.  Goodness  alone  has  substance,  vitality,  endurance,  fruitfulness.  2. 
Evil  is  emptiness;  it  carries  with  it  self-delusion;  its  end  is  disappointment  and 
failure.— J. 

Vers.  2,  3. — The  wise  man  speaketh  roisdom.  There  is  a  fitness  of  things,  and  wisdom 
becomes  the  wise  man— the  man  who  is  either  truly  wise  or  who  would  presume  to  be 
wise.    Let  his  words  testify  to  the  justness  of  his  profession.    Consider — 

I.  The  incongbottt  of  wokds  of  folly  peooeedino  feom  the  up»  of  the 
WISE.  All  may  reasonably  hope  that  he  who  is  tutored  with  knowledge,  and  who  has 
accustomed  himself  to  direct  his  knowledge  to  good  ends,  will  speak  only  words  of 
truth  and  soberness — words  trustworthy  and  useiful.  For  one  known  to  be  wise,  or 
professing  to  be  wise,  to  use  words  of  foolishness  is  an  utter  incongruity.  The  speech 
ia  the  expression  of  the  souL  Out  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh.  The  world  has 
need  of  wisdom — need  of  its  salt — to  save  it  from  the  corruptions  of  error  and  folly. 
"  Should  a  wise  man  utter  vain  knowledge?"  It  is  inconsistent;  it  is  misleading;  it 
is  destructive. 

n.  The  prkoiousness  of  the  wokds  of  him  who  teuly  speaketh  wisdom.  To 
assume  the  position  of  the  teacher,  to  dare  to  guide  the  ignorant,  to  set  up  one's  self 
as  a  ruler  in  the  world  of  thought,  is  to  assume  a  position  of  the  highest  possible 
importance.  Knowingly  or  unknowingly,  the  world  is  led  by  the  words  of  its  teachers, 
good  or  bad.  The  souls  of  men  are  in  the  hands  of  the  teacher.  His  words  lead  to 
life  or  death.  The  bulk  of  men  are  ignorant  and  timid,  and  therefore  under  the  control 
of  the  stronger  minds.  The  world's  sad  history  proves  that  men,  like  a  flock  of  sheep, 
may  he  led  into  any  patli  by  their  teachers.  The  dry  and  arid  sands  will  not  keep  the 
feet  of  the  sheep  from  following  their  leader  and  shepherd,  nor  will  the  rugged  and 
stony  ground.  The  world  is  led  by  the  ears.  How  precious,  then,  to  the  world  are 
words  of  true  wisdom !  Truly  the  feet  of  him  who  publisheth  peace,  and  bringeth  good 
tidings,  are  beautiful.  The  world  is  more  indebted  to  its  teachers  of  wisdom  than  to  its 
chieftains  in  valour.  Error  binds  men  5n  chains ;  but  words  of  wisdom,  which  are 
words  of  truth,  set  them  free. 

III.  The  truly  wise  man  is  hb  who  doth  not  "reason  with  unprofitable 

TALK,"  and  with  whose  SPEECHES  IT  CANNOT  BE  SAID,  "  Hb   CAN  DO  NO  GOOD."      He  is 

truly 'wise  who,  with  words  which  he  has  good  reason  to  believe  are  wise  words,  seeks  to 
lead  the  world  in  paths  of  safety— paths  of  light,  joy,  and  blessing.  Let  the  man  be 
judged  by  his  words,  and,  by  his  words  condemned  before  the  universal  bar,  Let  the 
world  cast  its  uttermost  'condemnations  on  him  who  by  false  words  leads  the  unsus- 
pecting fool  into  the  path  of  peril ;  but  let  the  world  gather  its  garlands  for  him  who 
with  wise  words  proves  himself  to  be  wise,  and  leads  the  feet  of  men  into  the  way  of 
life.  To  be  able  to  do  good  by  speech  is  a  great  endowment ;  to  be  faithful  in  the  use 
of  right  speech  is  to  be  truly  wise,  and  a  wise  word  is  a  word  of  life. — R.  G. 

Vers.  14 16. — Human  Binfulness.    Eliphaz  accuses  Job  of  Ms  attempt  to  justify 

himself,  and  speaks  with  great  apparent  acerbity  of  spirit.  His  words  are  cutting  and 
cruel  He  secretly  declares  Job  to  be  sinful  in  proportion  to  his  sufferings.  He  branches 
into  generalities,  and  affirms  the  general  human  sinfulness  with  the  quiet  accusation, 

JOB.  ^ 


274  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xv.  1—35. 


"All  men  are  sinful;  therefore  thou  art.  Sorrow  is  the  punishment  of  the  wicked; 
therefore  thy  suffering  is  proof  of  thy  guilt."  Eliphaz's  view  is  imperfect,  and  needs 
to  be  supplemented.  Job,  in  his  struggling,  cries  aloud  for  that  supplement.  It  i^ 
found  only  in  the  assurance  of  the  future,  and  iu  the  fact  that,  with  the  future  m  yiew, 
it  pleases  the  Aliuighty  to  discipline  and  prepare  men  for  it.  Suffering  is  seen  to  be  a 
method  of  that  discipline.    Of  human  sinfulness  it  is  affirmed— 

I.  It  is  an  inhkuent  condition  of  human  life.  "  "What  is  man,  that  he  should 
he  clean  ?  and  he  that  is  born  of  a  woman,  that  he  should  be  righteous  P  "  as  though  ha 
had  said,  "  It  is  of  the  nature  of  man  to  he  unclean."  "  That  which  is  born  of  the 
flesh  is  flesh."  The  human  nature  derived  from  the  imperfect  and  unholy  iii  rxassarily 
unholy  and  imperfect.  Evidences  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  general  observed  depravity 
of  man;  in  the  necessity  for  very  powerful  influences  to  check  sinfulness;  in  the  constant 
recognition  of  the  Fall  in  Holy  Scripture;  in  the  difficulty  with  which  even  good  men 
preserve  their  goodness;  and  in  the  sad  examples  of  deep  degradation  in  all  lands. 

n.  This  sinfulness  ib  most  appabbnt  to  the  Divine  judgment.  Men  are  not 
always  alive  to  their  own  sinfulness.  Not  apprehending  righteousness,  they  have  not 
an  accurate  standard  by  which  to  judge  themselves.  But  in  the  Divine  view  the  very 
angels,  who  are  superior  to  men,  are  not  pure :  "  The  heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  sight." 

ni.  This  sinfulness  exhibits  itself  in  great  impurity  of  life  and  spirit. 
Happily  there  are  many  exceptions,  and  we  live  in  brighter,  better  times  than  did  Job ; 
yet  how  truly  is  it  still  to  be  said,  "  How  much  more  abominable  and  filthy  is  man ! " 

IV.  This  sinfulness  is  especially  shown  in  an  active  prbfbeencb  of  evil 
BEFORE  GOOD.  He  "  drinketh  iniquity  like  water."  Eliphaz  has  been  led  from  general 
views  to  single  out  the  sad  cases  which  all  may  observe,  and  which  bear  such  painful 
testimony,  that  if  human  life  be  not  checked  in  its  natural  tendencies,  it  degenerates  to 
the  worst  conditions  of  evil. 

Therefore :  1.  Life  to  be  guarded  with  great  care,  lest  degenerating  influences  exert 
destructive  power  over  it.  2.  The  most  potent  corrections  to  be  sought:  the  need  of 
regeneration.  3.  The  instruction,  grace,  and  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  be 
thankfully  received  and  most  carefully  cherished. — R.  Q-. 

Vers.  20 — 30. — The  consequences  of  evil-doing.  It  is  impossible  that  wrong-doing 
should  go  wholly  unpunished,  for  were  there  no  positive  penal  inflictions,  the  mere 
natural  consequences  of  wrong-doing  would  bring  inevitable  pemlties.  The  words  in 
these  verses  refer  to  the  present  natural  consequences  of  wrong-doiiig,  not  to  the  flnal 
penal  inflictions  which  must  follow.  The  evils  which  the  practice  of  wickedness  tends 
to  bring  upon  the  head  of  the  evil-doer,  though  many  may  escape,  are  thus  stated. 

I.  He  endures  "  pain  all  his  days."  The  reference  is  probably  to  inward  suffer- 
ings, and  the  anxieties  which  a  course  of  wrong  must  cause.  But  the  physical  pains  are 
also  great.  Perhaps  most  physical  pain  is  the  consequence  of  wrong-doing.  Keeping 
the  righteous  Law  of  God  by  man  would  free  the  human  life  from  suffering  as  truly 
as  it  frees  the  life  of  the  beast  or  the  bird.  Broken  law,  known  or  unknown,  must,  in 
the  disturbance  it  brings,  cause  pain. 

II.  Another  source  of  punishment  to  the  evil-doer  is  in  the  condemnations  op 
conscience  which  he  incurs.  The  seat  of  all  true  judgment  is  the  conscience.  It  is 
the  sum  of  all  the  soul's  powers — the  great  tribunal  before  which  all  actions  are 
brought.  There  the  verdict  is  passed;  there  the  penalty  imposed — "a  dieadfiil  sound 
is  in  his  ears."  If  the  conscience  be  indurated,  the  life  is  so  much  the  more  degraded 
and  the  punishment  the  greater. 

III.  The  wicked  man  suffers  in  the  fears  which  he  experiences.  •'  He  knoweth 
that  the  day  of  darkness  is  ready  at  his  hand."  A  dark  day  awaits  him,  and  he  knows 
it.  He  carries  his  fear  with  him  wherever  he  goes.  Judgment  has  been  passed  upon 
his  evil-doing  by  his  own  conscience — by  himself.  The  penalty  has  been  awarded,  and 
he  goes  about  expectinn;  its  infliction.     The  fear  of  punishment  hangs  over  his  head. 

IV.  All  this  deepens  into  a  dark  dread  by  which  he  is  haunted.  His  spirit 
has  no  rest.  "  Trouijle  and  anguish  make  him  afraid."  They  wage  war  against  him 
and  despoil  him.     They  "prevail  against  him,  as  a  king  ready  to  the  battle." 

V.  Further  evils  follow  in  his  outward  circumstances.  1.  His  dwelling  shall  bo 
desolate  (ver.  28).    2.  His  riches  fade  away.     He  holds  everything  by  an  uncertain 


OH.  XV.  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  275 

tenure.  3.  He  shall  dwell  in  gloom.  "  He  shall  not  depart  out  of  darkness."  4.  He 
finally  perishes  by  the  breath  of  God.  "  By  the  breath  of  his  mouth  shall  he  go  away." 
This  is  the  portion  of  the  man  who  "stretcheth  out  his  hand  against  God."  The 
assured  Christian  hope  is  bright,  clear,  comforting.  It  changes  "  the  night  into  day ; " 
it  makes  the  darkness  short,  because  of  light;  the  "grave"  is  exchanged  for  the 
"house"  on  high;  "corruption"  puts  on  incorruption ;  "the  bars  of  the  pit"  are 
burst ;  and  the  resting  "  together  in  the  dust "  passes  into  the  "  rest  in  him." — B.  G. 

Ver.  4. — Restraining  prayer.  Eliphaz  thinks  that  Job's  wild  words  are  a  reproach 
to  religion,  and  that  the  effect  of  them  will  be  to  undermine  faith  and  discourage 
prnyer.  His  is  a  common  alarm  of  short-sighted,  cautious  people  who  think  it  safest 
to  suppress  doubt,  and  to  whom  the  hasty  utterances  of  a  disturbed  mind  are  most 
dreadful,  although  the  fact  is  that  the  cold  repetition  of  narrow  and  erroneous  dogmas 
is  far  more  hurtful  to  the  cause  of  spiritual  religion. 

I.  The  evil  of  resteaining  pratee.  However  it  may  be  brought  about,  there 
cannot  be  two  opinions  of  the  evil  of  this  course  of  action.  It  may  be  said  that  we  need 
not  pray  because  God  knows  what  we  require  without  our  telling  him — knows  it  even 
better  than  we  know  it  ourselves.  The  answer  to  this  excuse  or  difficulty  is  that  the 
object  of  prayer  is  not  to  add  to  God's  information,  but  to  commit  our  needs  to  him. 
1.  We  lose  what  God  gives  in  response  to  prayer.  He  expects  us  to  entrust  ourselves 
to  him.  He  has  bidden  us  seek  his  lace  (Ps.  xxvii.  8).  Christ  has  told  us  to  ask,  that 
we  may  receive  (John  xvi.  24).  St.  James  explains  that  we  "have  not"  sometimes 
just  "because  we  ask  not"  (Jas.  iv.  2).  2.  We  miss  the  spiritual  blessedness  of  prayer. 
The  chief  good  of  prayer  is  not  in  the  gifts  it  calls  down  from  heaven,  but  in  the  very 
exercise  itself.  It  is  a  greater  blessing  than  any  of  the  things  that  it  is  the  means  of 
bringing  to  us.  To  be  in  communion  with  God  is  better  than  to  receive  any  favours 
from  God. 

"Prayer  is  the  Ohiistian's  vital -breath." 

Eestraining  prayer  is  the  soul  holding  its  breath.  This  must  end  in  death.  Even 
when  it  is  not  complete,  the  stifling  of  the  spiritual  activities  must  result. 

II.  The  causes  op  restraining  peayeb.  1.  Whatever  leads  to  unbelief.  This  was 
Eliphaz's  thought,  though  he  misapplied  it,  for  he  imagined  that  Job's  extravagant 
utterances  would  discourage  men's  faith  in  religion  and  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  But 
the  truth  is  that  the  dreary  formalism,  the  dismal  orthodoxy  which  clung  to  antiquity 
and  ignored  spiritual  instincts,  the  harsh  uncharitableness  that  killed  the  spirit  of 
religion  while  defending  the  name  of  it,  were  the  greater  hindrances  to  faith.  When 
faith  is  thus  hindered  prayer  freezes  on  our  lips.  2.  Worldly  living.  Some  men  are 
too  busy  to  find  time  for  prayer.  But  Luther  is  reported  to  have  said  he  had  so  much 
to  do  that  he  could  not  afford  less  than  four  hours  a  day  for  prayer,  regarding  prayer  a» 
the  secret  of  strength  for  work.  It  is  possible  to  be  much  in  prayer,  however,  without 
giving  a  long  time  to  acts  of  devotion ;  for  prayer  is  inward  and  spiritual.  It  is  not 
the  occupation  of  one's  time,  but  the  ensnaring  of  one's  heart  with  worldly  things,  that 
restrains  prayer.  3.  Sin.  The  penitent  sinner  may  and  will  pray,  casting  himself 
on  the  mercy  of  God.  Christ's  model  of  the  prayer  that  is  acceptable  to  God  is  the 
cry  of  the  penitent,  "  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  But  sin  harboured  and  loved 
completely  crushes  the  spirit  of  prayer.  No  man  can  really  pray  who  will  not  renounce 
his  sin.  Of  course,  it  is  possible  to  cry  out  selfishly  for  some  gift  from  God.  But  the 
real  prayer,  which  is  communion  with  God,  must  be  repressed  and  restrained  by  sin, 
because  sin  is  separation  from  God. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. — A  man  condemned  by  his  oum,  mouth.  These  word*  hav*  »  «ingular  and 
quite  unintentional  application  as  they  proceed  from  one  of  Job'«  comforters.  Eliphaz 
means  them  for  his  victim,  but  they  rebound  on  their  author.  The  three  friends 
afford  striking  instances  of  men  condemned  by  their  own  mouths.  As  we  read  their 
pretentious  and  unsympathetic  sentences,  we  cannot  but  also  read  between  the  lines 
the  self-condemnation  of  the  speakers.  The  only  safe  way  to  use  so  dangerous  a 
weapon  as  that  which  Eliphaz  here  employs  is  to  turn  it  against  ourselves.  Let  u» 
each  inquire  how  we  may  be  condemned  by  our  own  mouths. 

J.  By  confession.    1.  2%e  dv,ty.    This  is  the  most  obvious  and  direct  method  ot 


276  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  X7. 1—35. 


self-condemnation,  and  it  is  the  most  honourable.  It  is  shameful  to  sin,  but  it  is  more 
shameful  to  deny  our  guilt  and  try  to  hush  up  our  evil-doing.  There  is  something 
Dianly  in  daring  to  own  one's  own  wrong  deeds.  It  would  be  better  if  we  could  do  it 
more  among  men,  confessing  our  faults  one  to  another  (Jas.  v.  16)._  It  is  absolutely 
necessary  that  we  should  do  it  to  G-od.     Confession  is  the  first  condition  of  forgiveness. 

2.  The  difficulty.  Now,  this  confession  is  by  no  means  so  easy  as  it  appears  before  we 
have  attempted  it  for  ourselves.  Not  only  is  there  pride  to  be  overcome  and  the  fear 
of  obloquy  to  he  mastered,  but  the  subtle  self-deceit  of  the  heart  must  be  conquered. 
For  we  are  always  tempted  to  plead  excuses  and  extenuating  circumstances.  Yet  no 
confession  is  worth  anything  that  keeps  back  part  of  the  guilt.  Confession  must  be 
frank,  unreserved,  whole-hearted,  or  it  will  run  into  hypocrisy.  It  is  better  not  to 
confess  our  sins  at  all  than  to  try  to  make  them  appear  in  a  good  light.  The  true 
attitude  of  penitence  is  one  of  utter  self-abandonment,  one  of  profound  self-abasement. 

n.  By  accusikg  others.  Thus  Eliphaz  thought  Job  condemned  himself  by  trying 
to  bring  a  charge  against  God,  and  at  the  same  time  Eliphaz  succeeded  in  condemning 
himself  by  accusing  Job.  The  beam  is  never  so  visible  in  our  own  eye  as  when  we 
are  attempting  to  remove  the  mote  from  our  brother's  eye.  A  censorious  spirit  brings 
a  person  into  odious  notoriety  and  invites  criticism.  He  should  be  well  able  to  stand 
a  searching  cross-examination  who  enters  the  witness-box  against  his  neighbour.  But 
further,  the  very  spirit  of  censoriousness  is  evil,  and  the  exhibition  of  such  a  spirit  is 
self-condemnatory.  While  we  condemn  our  brother  for  unorthodoxy,  our  very  spirit 
and  action  condemn  us  for  want  of  charity — a  much  greater  fault. 

III.  Bt  all  oub  speakino.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh."  We  cannot  he  long  with  a  person  without  some  of  his  true  character 
revealing  itself.  Men  are  not  such  inscrutable  enigmas  as  they  flatter  themselves 
with  being.  The  general  conversation  must  reflect  the  normal  tone  of  the  life. 
Particular  deeds  of  wickedness  may  be  hidden  in  impenetrable  silence,  but  the  evil 
heart  from  which  they  spring  cannot  he  thus  hidden.  "Therefore  we  are  to  be  judged  by 
every  idle  word  (Matt.  xii.  36) — not  because  careless  speech  is  a  great  sin,  but  because 
our  unreflecting  language  reveals  our  true  selves.  It  is  the  straw  that  shows  the  set 
of  the  current.— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  11. —  UnappreciaUd  consolaticms.  Eliphaz  is  disappointed  at  the  failure  of 
the  consolations  which  he  and  his  two  friends  intended  for  the  mitigation  of  Job's 
sorrows.  He  coolly  assumes  that  these  consolations  are  from  God,  and  that  Job 
despises  their  Divine  worth.  So  he  asks — Are  the  consolations  of  God  small  things  to 
Job,  and  the  gentle  words  in  which  they  are  conveyed  but  little  appreciated  ?  Let  us 
see  how  it  comes  about  that  consolations  are  not  appreciated.  The  fault  may  lie  with 
the  consoler  or  with  the  sufferer. 

I.  When  the  fault  is  with  the  consolee.  It  is  very  difficult  to  offer  true 
consolation.  Too  often  we  only  chafe  the  sore  which  we  would  soothe,  and  hurt 
when  we  think  to  heaL  Where  is  the  cause  of  failure  ?  1.  A  false  assumption. 
Eliphaz  assumes  that  he  and  his  friends  have  been  bringing  to  Job  the  consolations  of 
God,  whereas  they  have  been  doing  nothing  of  the  kind.  Their  hard  doctrine  of  exact 
temporary  retribution  is  not  true,  and  it  could  not  have  come  from  God.  Truth  is 
the  first  requisite  in  all  speech  and  counsel.  It  is  a  common  error  to  confound  man's 
notions  with  God's  truth.  Very  often  the  protest  which  we  take  to  be  a  rejection  of  the 
gospel  is  only  urged  against  our  unworthy  presentation  of  it.  The  failure  of  people  to 
receive  the  truth  of  Christ  is  frequently  due  to  the  ugly  and  odious  ideas  of  man  with 
which  that  truth  is  confused.  2.  A  mistaken  Judgment,  Job  could  not  accept  the 
well-meant  consolations  of  the  three  friends  because  they  implied  that  he  was  a  great 
sinner,  and  called  him  to  repent  of  what  he  knew  he  should  not  have  been  credited 
with  doing.  The  injustice  of  the  charge  soured  the  consolation,  and  its  halm  was  turned 
to  bitti mess.     We  must  learn  to  understand  men  if  we  would  help  and  comfort  them. 

3.  An  unsympathetic  method.  The  three  friends  did  not  appreciate  Job's  sufferings; 
therefore  he  could  not  appreciate  their  consolations.  Sympathy  is  the  most  essential 
ingredient  of  comforting  influences.  Until  we  can  feel  with  the  sufferer,  all  our 
attempts  to  aid  him  will  be  but  bungling  failures.  The  Divine  Spirit  is  the  great 
Comforter,  because  he  enters  our  hearts  and  lives  with  intelligeucs  and  sympathy. 


OH.  XV.  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB,  277 

II.  Whes  the  fault  18  WITH  THE  BUFPEREB.  1.  Impenitence.  It  might  have 
been  as  Eliphaz  had  supposed,  and  in  some  cases  it  is  so,  aud  thea  the  guilty  man 
excludes  the  Divine  consolations  by  refusing  to  confess  his  sins.  So  long  as  the  sinner 
declines  to  admit  his  guilt  he  cannot  receive  God's  comfort.  The  grace  of  God  is 
sufficient  for  all  the  needs  of  all  his  children,  and  yet  none  of  it  is  effective  with  his 
disobedient  and  unrepentant  children.  2.  Rebellion.  Possibly  no  great  sin  has  been 
committed,  and  no  great  guilt  incurred,  and  still  the  attitude  of  the  sufferer  towards 
his  God  may  exclude  consolation.  He  must  submit  in  order  to  be  comforted.  Eesig- 
nation  is  a  condition  of  Divine  consolation.  When  the  wind  is  opposed  to  the  tide,  it 
tears  off  the  crests  of  the  waves  and  flings  them  about  in  wild  spray ;  whereas  when 
wind  aud  tide  flow  together,  the  great  rollers  run  smoothly  on  to  the  beach.  It  is  our 
rebellion  agaiast  the  tide  of  providence  that  tears  our  life  and  makes  its  bitterest 
agony.  When  we  have  learnt  to  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  our  harmony  with  God's 
will  smooths  down  the  height  of  the  trouble  and  prepares  for  the  Divine  peace. 
3.  Unbelief.  Until  we  can  trust  God  his  consolation  seems  small  to  us.  It  is  not 
valued  till  it  is  tried.  Unbelief  minimizes  grace.  According  to  our  faith  is  the 
blessing,  great  or  smalL — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  12. — Heart-wanderings.  Eliphaz  cannot  understand  Job.  He  will  assume  that 
the  sufferer  is  guilty,  and  that,  when  he  protests  his  innocence  and  refuses  the  consola- 
tions offered  on  condition  of  repentance,  the  patriarch  is  betrayed  by  his  own  heart 
into  turning  his  spirit  against  God.  As  usual,  what  Eliphaz  says,  though  it  is  not 
applicable  directly  to  Job,  still  in  itself  contains  an  important  lesson. 

I.  Wk  abb  led  by  oub  hbakts.  1.  The  inner  life.  All  life  flows  outward  from 
hidden,  deep-seated  springs,  as  the  Jordan  at  Banias  bursts  out  of  the  cave  of  Pan 
beneath  Mount  Hermon,  a  full  river,  whose  secret  origin  is  too  remote  and  deep  for  any 
man  to  discover  it.  .2.  The  thought.  The  heart  in  the  Bible  stands  for  the  whole 
inner  life,  and  therefore  it  includes  the  thinking  faculty.  Now,  we  are  governed 
largely  by  our  ideas  of  things ;  not  by  things  as  they  are,  but  by  things  as  they  appear 
to  us.  Therefore  we  need  to  thiuk  truly.  3.  The  affections  and  desires.  We  are 
chiefly  moved  by  what  we  love.  The  love  of  sin  is  the  parent  of  sin.  If  the  heart  is 
betrayed  into  entertaining  low  desires,  a  degraded  conduct  follows. 

II.  Oub  HEABT3  ABE  PBONB  TO  ERB.  1.  In  Weakness.  We  have  not  fixed 
thoughts  and  affections.  The  life  within  is  in  continuous  change  and  movement.  At 
the  same  time,  its  weakness  makes  it  peciiUarly  liable  to  be  led  astray.  2.  In  sinful 
inclination.  We  inherit  tendencies  to  evil.  Our  own  self-chosen  conduct  creates  habits 
of  evil.  Thus  our  heart  tends  downward.  Left  to  itself,  it  will  go  astray  and  drag  us 
down  to  ruin.  The  human  heart  is  ever  wandering  and  rebellious  until  it  has  been 
renewed. 

III.  The  WANDERiNa  heart  leads  to  buin.  We  are  tempted  to  neglect  th« 
evil  on  three  acoouuts.  1.  That  it  is  internal.  Thus  it  seems  to  be  a  secret  thing, 
not  concerned  with  conduct.  But  as  it  is  the  spving  of  all  our  conduct,  the  excuse 
is  a  delusion.  2.  That  it  is  under  our  control.  The  idea  is  that  we  can  stop  before 
we  have  gone  too  far.  We  are  not  the  slaves  of  another,  we  are  our  own  masters. 
This  is  also  a  delusion,  for  the  heart  gets  out  of  control.  8.  That  it  only  concerns  our- 
selves. It  is  only  our  heart  that  wanders,  and  our  heart  is  our  own  possession.  This 
is  to  assume  that  we  are  not  accountable  to  God.  But  the  supreme  Judge  takes 
account  of  the  heart  as  well  as  of  the  outward  act,  and  condemns  for  heart-sina 
(Matt.  XV.  19).  .  .     , 

IV.  The  wanderikg  hbabt  needs  to  be  bbnewed*  Sin  comes  from  the  heart ; 
then  sin  must  be  cured  in  the  heart.  Clean  hands  are  of  little  use  without  a  clean 
heart,  1.  Cleansing.  The  guilt  of  sin  needs  to  be  washed  away ;  the  love  and  desire 
of  sin  also  need  to  ije  pur>;ed  out  of  the  heart.  This  is  so  difBoult  a  work  that  only 
the  Creator  can  do  it.  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God  "  (Ps.  li.  10).  2.  Recovery. 
The  wandering  heart  must  be  brought  back  to  God,  It  is  not  enough  that  sin  is 
cast  out.  The  love  of  God  must  be  planted,  and  the  heart  must  be  restored  to  fellow- 
ship with  God.  These  are  blessings  which  come  with  the  reception  of  Christ  into 
tlie  heart.  3.  Preservation.  We  are  bidden  to  keep  our  heart  with  all  diligencj 
(Prov.  iv.'  23).    But  we  find  the  treacherous  heart  eluding  our  utmost  vigilance,  and 


278  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xv,  1—35, 


wandering  in  gpito  of  all  our  care.  Therefore  we  have  to  find  safety  in  obeying  a 
second  command,  "  My  son,  give  me  thy  heart  "  (Prov.  xxiii.  26). — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — OocPa  holiness  and  man's  tin.  Eliphaz]  takes  up  Job's  words  (ch. 
xiv.  1 — i),  but  turns  them  against  their  author.  Job  had  spoken  of  inherited  frailty 
as  a  ground  for  pity ;  Eliphaz  seizes  on  it  as  an  accusation  of  guilt.  How  dare  this 
puny,  imperfect  creature,  man,  boast  of  his  innocence  in  the  sight  of  the  holy  God  ? 

I.  God's  boliness  la  incomparable.  This  is  an  idea  which  we  take  for  granted. 
Yet  it  was  not  found  in  most  heathen  religions.  Monotheism  is  commonly  reckoned 
as  the  great  peculiarity  of  the  Hebrew  faith ;  but  a  more  striking  peculiarity  is  holiness. 
The  neighbouring  divinities  were  just  representations  of  magnified  human  passions, 
often  more  degraded  and  immoral  than  men.  The  revelation  of  the  true  God  shows 
that  he  is  not  only  above  all  human  passion ;  he  is  perfect  in  holiness.  We  can  find 
no  image  with  which  to  compare  his  purity.  The  mountain  is  high  above  tiie  plain,  but 
mountain  and  plain  are  equally  low  when  we  think  of  the  stars.  Our  goodness  may 
mean  Bomething  among  men,  but  it  does  not  extend  to  God  (Ps.  xvi.  2).  Even  the 
very  angels  veil  their  faces  before  him,  awed  by  the  majesty  of  absolute  goodness.  . 
Yet  God's  goodness  in  being  absolute  is  not  so  because  he  is  infinite.  If  it  were,  it 
would  be  unfair  to  complain  that  we  could  not  approach  it.  An  inch  of  snow  may  bo 
as  pure  as  an  acre  of  snow. 

IL  God's  holiness  reveals  han'b  bin.  We  do  not  know  oiu:  sin  till  we  see  it  in 
the  light  of  God.  There  are  in  the  farmyard  fowls  black  and  white.  But  when  the 
snow  has  fallen  the  white  fowls  look  so  no  longer,  because  by  the  side  of  the  Heaven- 
sent purity  of  the  snow  their  plumage  is  seen  to  be  of  a  very  impure  colour.  There 
are  men  of  various  character,  and  some  are  accounted  white-souled  saints.  But  when 
placed  by  the  side  of  Crod's  holiness  these  are  the  first  to  confess  that  their  righteous- 
ness is  as  filtliy  rags.  Christ  revealed  the  sin  of  his  age  in  contrast  to  his  own  holiness. 
We  do  not  own  our  sinfulness  because  we  do  not  know  God's  goodness.  It  is  not 
the  Law,  but  God's  goodness  in  Christ,  that  most  makes  ns  feel  our  sin. 

III.  God's  holiness  cannot  endure  sin.  Sin  may  stand  unrebuked  and  unchecked 
in  the  world,  because  all  are  "  tarred  with  the  same  brush."  Thus  there  is  a  dangerous 
condoning  of  conventional  evil.  But  this  is  not  possible  with  God.  Holiness  aad  siu 
are  opposed  as  light  and  darkness.  The  thought  of  God's  holiness  alone  makes  men 
tremble. 

"  Eternal  Light,  Eternal  Light  I 
How  pure  the  soul  must  be 
When,  placed  within  thy  searching  sight, 
It  shrinks  not,  but  with  calm  delight 
Can  live  and  look  on  thee  1 " 

Therefore  God  must  deal  with  sin,  to  banish  and  destroy  it.  If  the  sinner  cleaves  to 
his  sin  he  cannot  but  share  in  its  doom.  If,  however,  he  will  detach  himself  from  it, 
it  will  be  destroyed,  while  he  is  saved.  God  hates  the  sin,  not  the  sinner.  Now,  God's 
holy  hatred  of  sin  should  be  regarded  by  us  as  a  reason  for  great  thankfulness.  For  the 
sin  he  hates  is  just  our  most  deadly  enemy.  If  he  destroys  our  sin,  he  saves  our  soul 
from  its  fatal  foe.  On  the  other  hand,  only  God  can  give  the  purity  which  is  needed 
for  his  presence.  We  may  make  ourselves  seem  fair  before  man.  Only  God  can  purify 
us  so  that  we  are  fit  for  his  presence,  only  the  blood  of  Christ  can  cleanse  from  aU  sin 
(1  John  i.  7)^W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  31. — Trusting  in  vanity.  I.  The  habit  op  tbustinq  in  vanity.  The  vanity 
spoken  of  is  any  empty  ground  of  trust,  like  an  island  of  floating  weeds  on  which  care- 
less people  build  their  homes,  but  which  will  be  shattered,  with  all  that  is  on  it,  in  the 
first  storm.  1.  A  delusion.  We  may  be  persuaded  to  accept  what  is  not  true.  Our 
belief  does  not  give  any  reality  to  the  delusion ;  we  are  then  trusting  in  vanity. 
2.  Self.  We  are  all  too  ready  to  think  our  own  resources  greater  than  they  are.  Yet 
every  man  who  trusts  to  himself  supremely  is  trusting  in  vanity,  for  all  are  sinful, 
frail,  and  prone  to  err.  3.  Man.  The  psalmist  warns  us  against  putting  our  trust  in 
man  (Ps.  cxviii.  8).  (1)  As  a  friend.  The  best  friends  cannot  nelp  lis  in  our  greatest 
needs— in  the  guilt  of  sin,  in  the  sorrow  of  a  terrible  loss,  in  tti«  hour  of  death.    (2)  Am 


CH.  XVI.  1 — ^22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


279 


a  priest.  Some  trust  to  the  priest  to  do  their  religious  duties  for  them,  although  thov 
would  not  express  themselves  thus  holdly.  But  the  priest  is  a  man,  a  sinner,  needing 
himself  the  Saviour  to  whom  every  one  of  us  can  go  directly  for  himself.  4.  A  creed. 
The  creed  may  be  true,  yet  if  we  trust  to  that,  and  not  to  Christ,  we  trust  in  vanity. 
Faith  which  saves  is  not  the  mental  consent  to  a  string  of  propositions ;  it  is  living 
confidence  in  a  personal  Saviour.  5.  A  Church.  We  are  members  of  a  Church,  pro- 
fessing the  Christian  faith  and  in  communion  with  the  brotherhood  of  Christians.  Yet 
if  our  confidence  is  in  the  Church  rather  than  in  Christ  our  hope  is  vain.  The  Cliurch 
is  the  body  of  those  who  are  being  saved ;  it  is  not  the  Saviour. 

II.  The  tatk  of  trusting  in  vanity.  "  Vanity  shall  be  his  recompense."  Here, 
as  elsewhere,  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Let  us  consider  the 
nature  and  course  of  this  fate.  1.  A  postponed  result.  The  vanity  tempts  with  a 
plausible  appearance  of  substantiality.  It  is  not  discovered  the  moment  it  is  trusted. 
A  man  may  so  blind  himself  as  to  trust  in  vanity  all  his  life,  and  at  last  die  in  his 
delusions.  How  great  and  fearful  must  be  the  final  awakening  of  such  a  self-deceiver ! 
There  will  be  enough  punishment  for  some  men  in  the  very  discovery  of  the  utter 
vanity  of  their  hopes.  2.  A  sure  result.  Every  man's  future  is  moulded  according 
to  what  he  relies  upon.  His  fate  is  determined  by  his  God.  If  he  worships  mammon, 
self,  or  sin,  his  condition  in  the  future  will  be  the  direct  outcome  of  the  present  devotion 
of  his  heart.  This  is  just  a  case  of  natural  causation  running  into  the  spiritual  life. 
3.  A  miserable  result.  The  vanity  does  not  appear  to  be  a  very  dreadful  thing  when 
it  is  first  seen.  Yet  to  possess  it  for  ever  as  an  inheritance  is  the  punishment  of  its 
dupe.  For  when  it  is  found  out  it  must  be  loathed.  Though  we  may  trust  in  what 
is  unsubstantial,  we  cannot  live  upon  it.  The  soul  that  tries  to  support  itself  on  lies 
and  pretences  will  starve  as  surely  as  the  body  which  is  fed  on  nothing  but  air.  4.  A 
merited  result.  The  trust  was  not  in  evil,  only  in  vanity.  There  was  no  choice  of 
a  positively  bad  or  hurtful  thing.  The  worst  is  vacancy  and  negation.  Yet  vacancy 
and  negation  are  justly  recompensed  after  their  kind.  The  empty  soul  goes  deserviedly 
to  outer  darkness.  We  need  a  positive  grOund  of  faith.  The  only  sure  ground,  the 
one  Foundation,  is  Jesus  Christ.  He  who  trusts  the  Bock  of  Ages  will  not  be  recom- 
pensed with  vanity. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVL 


Job  answers  the  second  speech  of  Eliphaz 
iu  a  discourse  which  occupies  two  (short) 
chapters,  and  is  thus  not  much  more  lengthy 
than  the  speech  of  bis  antagonist.  His  tone 
is  very  despairing.  He  finds  no  help  at  all 
in  the  speeches  of  the  "comforters"  (vers. 
2 — 6),  and  turns  from  them  to  consider  once 
more  the  dealings  of  God  with  him  (vers. 
7 — 14).  Next,  he  describes  his  own  pro- 
ceedings under  his  afflictions,  and  appeals 
to  earth  and  heaven,  and  God  in  heaven, 
to  take  up  his  cause  and  help  him  (vers. 
15 — 22).  In  oh.  xvii.  he  continues  much  iu 
the  same  strain,  but  with  an  intermixture 
of  the  topics,  which  is  somewhat  confusing. 
In  vers.  1,  2  he  bewails  himself;  in  ver.  3 
he  makes  an  appeal  to  God ;  in  vers.  4,  3 
he  reflects  upon  his  "  comforters ; "  in  vers. 
6 — 9  he  returns  to  himself  and  his  prospects; 
while  in  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  (vers. 


10 — 16)  he  alternates  between  reproaches 
addressed  to  his  friends  (vers.  10,  12)  and 
lamentations  over  his  own  condition  (vers. 
11, 13—16). 

Vers.  1, 2. — Then  Job  answered  and  said, 
I  have  heard  many  such  things.  There 
was  nothing  new  in  the  second  speech  of 
Eliphaz,  if  we  except  its  increased  bitter- 
ness. Job  had  heard  all  tlie  commonplaces 
about  the  universal  sinfulness  of  man,  and 
the  invariable  connection  between  sin  and 
suffering,  a  thousand  times  before.  It  was 
the  traditional  belief  in  which  he  and  all 
those  about  him  had  been  brought  up.  But 
it  brought  him  no  relief.  The  reiteration 
of  it  only  made  him  feel  that  there  was 
neither  comfort  nor  instruction  to  be  gut 
from  his  go-called  "  comforters."  Hence  hia 
outburst.    Miserable  comforters  are  ye  all ! 

Ver.  3. — Shall  vain  words  have  an  end  ? 
literally,  as  in  the  margin,  wordt  of  wind; 
i.e.  words  which  pass  by  a  man  "as  the 
idle  wind  which  he  regards  not."  Will  his 
friends  never  being  tlieir  futile  speaking  t« 


280 


THE  BOOK  01'  JOB. 


[oh.  XVI.  1 — 22. 


a  close?  Or  what  emboldeneth  thee  that 
thOTi  answerest  1  rather,  what  provoketh 
iJiee?  (Revised  Version)  Job  had  begged 
that  Ms  friends  would  be  silent  (cb.  xiii.  5, 
13).  He  supposes  that  they  would  have 
complied  with  his  wish  if  he  had  not  pro- 
voked them,  but  professes  an  inability  to  see 
what  provocation  he  had  given.  His  last 
ipeech,  however,  had  certainly  not  been 
conciliatory  (see  eh.  xii.  1—3;  xiii.  4, 7,  etc.)- 

Ver.  i. — I  also  could  speak  as  ye  do:  if 
your  soul  were  iii  my  soul's  stead,  I  could 
heap  up  words  against  you.  It  is  only  too 
easy  to  heap  up  rhetorical  declamation  against 
an  unfortunate  sufferer,  whose  physical  and 
mental  agonies  absorb  almost  his  whole 
attention.  If  you  were  in  my  place  and 
condition,  and  I  in  yours,  I  could  moralize 
in  your  tone  and  spirit  for  hours.  And 
shake  my  head  at  you.  A  Hebrew  mode  of 
expressing  condemnation  of  a  man's  conduct 
(see  Pb.  xxii.  7 ;  Isa.  xxxvil.  22 ;  Jer.  xviii. 
16 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  S9,  etc.). 

Ver.  5. — But  I  would  strengthen  you 
with  my  mouth.  The  moining  is  somewhat 
doubtful,  and  different  renderings  have 
been  proposed.  But  the  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version  is  quite  defensible,  and- 
is  accepted  by  our  Eevisers.  This  gives  the 
gehse,  "I,  if  I  were  in  your  place,  would 
not  act  as  you  have  acted,  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, would  do  my  best  to  strengthen  you 
with  words  of  comfort  and  encouragement." 
The  moving  of  my  lips  should  assuage  your 
grief.  (So  Kosenmiiller  and  our  Eevisers.) 
The  words  are  a  covert  reproach  of  the 
three  "  friends "  for  not  acting  as  Job 
declares  that  he  would  have  acted  if  the 
positions  had  been  reverspd. 

Ver.  6.— Though  I  speak,  my  grief  is  not 
assuaged :  and  though  I  forbear,  what  am 
I  eased  1  As  it  is,  nor  speech  nor  silence 
are  of  any  avail,  Xeither  of  them  brings 
me  any  relief.  My  sufferings  continue  as 
before,  whichever  course  I  take, 

Ver.  7, — But  now.  These  words  mark 
a  transition.  Job  turns  f^om  complaints 
against  liis  "  comforters  "  to  an  enumeration 
of  bis  own  sufferings.  He  hath  made  ma 
weary,  God  has  afflicted  him  with  an 
intolerable  sense  of  weariness.  He  is  tired 
of  life;  tired  of  disputing,  with  his  friends; 
tired  even  of  pouring  out  his  lamentations 
and  complaints  and  expostulations  to  God. 
His  one  desiie  is  rest.  So  I  have  seuu 
in  the  piombi  of  Venice,  where  political 
prisoners  were  turtured  by  cold  and  heat, 
and  hunger  and  thirst,  for  long  weeks  or 
months,  and  brought  to  despair,  such  scratch- 
iugs  as  the  following:  "Luigi  A.  implora 
pace,"  "Giuseppe B.  implora  eterna  quiete." 
Job  has  entreated  for  this  boon  of  rest 
repeatedly  (ch,  iii.  13;  vi.  9;  vii.  15;  x, 
18,  etc).    Thoa  hast  made  desolate  all  my 


company.  The  loss  of  his  children  has 
desolated  his  household ;  his  other  afflictions 
have  alienated  his  friends. 

Ver.  8.— And  thou  hast  filled  me  with 
wrinkles.  So  St.  Jerome,  Professor  Lee, 
Dr.  Stanley  Leathes,  and  others;  but  the 
generality  of  modern  commentators  prefer 
the  rendering,  "  Thou  hast  bound  me  liast," 
i.e.  deprived  me  of  all  power  of  resisting  or 
moving  (oomp.  Pb.  Ixxxviii.  8,  "  I  am  so  fast 
in  prison  that  I  cannot  get  forth").  Which 
is  a  witness  against  me ;  i.e.  a  witness  of  thy 
displeasure,  and  so  (as  men  suppose)  of  my 
guilt.  And  my  leanness  rising  up  in  me 
heareth  witness  to  my  face ;  rather,  my  lean- 
ness, rising  up  against  me.  This  emaciation 
is  taken  as  anotlier  witness  of  his  extreme 
sinfulness. 

Ver.  9. — He  teareth  me  in  his  wrath,  who 
hateth  me ;  literally,  his  wrath  teareth,  and 
he  hateth  me.  God  treats  Job  as  seveitly 
as  if  he  liated  hiin.  That  he  is  actually- 
hated  of  God  Job  does  not  believe;  other- 
wise he  would  long  since  have  ceased  to 
call  upon  him,  and  pour  out  his  heart  before 
him.  He  gnasheth  upon  me  with  his  teeth 
(comp.  Ps.  XXXV.  16;  xxxvii.  12).  Mine 
enemy  (or  rather,  adversary)  sharpeneth  his 
eyes  upon  me;  i.e.  makes  me  a  whetstone 
on  which  he  sharpens  his  angry  glances. 

Ver.  10. — They  have  gaped  upon  me  with 
their  mouth.  The  "  man  of  sorrows  "  of  the 
Old  Testament  is,  in  many  respects,  a  type 
of  the  "Man  of  Borrows"  of  the  New;  and, 
in  the  Messianic  psalms,  David  constantly 
applies  to  Christ  expressions  which  j'b  had 
used  in  reference  to  himself  (see  Ps.  xiii. 
13).  They  have  smitten  me  upon  the  cheek 
reproachfully  (comp.  Micah  v.  1 ;  Matt. 
xxvii.  30;  Luke  xxii.  64;  John  xviii.  22). 
They  have  gathered  themselves  together 
against  me  (see  Ps.  xxxv.  15,  and  compare, 
in  illustration  of  the  literal  and  historical 
sense,  ch.  xxx.  1,  10 — 14). 

Ver,  11,— God  hath  delivered  me  to  the 
ungodly.  All  that  Job  had  suffered  at  the 
hands  of  wicked  men,  the  gibes  of  his 
"comforters,"  the  insults  and  "derision"  of 
"  base  men  "  (ch,  xxx.  1, 8 — 10),  the  desertion 
of  many  who  might  have  been  expected  to 
have  come  to  his  aid,  being  by  God'i  per- 
mission, is  attributed  by  Job  to  God  him- 
self, who  has  "delivered"  him  up  to  these 
"  ungodly  "  ones,  and  permita  them  to  add 
to  and  intensify  his  sufferings.  Ho  was 
not  BO  ruthlessly  treated  as  liis  great  Anti- 
type ;  he  was  not  bound  with  thongs,  or 
crowned  with  thorns,  or  smitten  with  a  reed, 
or  scourged,  or  crucified — even  the  smiting 
on  the  cheek,  spoken  of  in  ver,  10,  was 
probably  metaphorical ;  but  he  suffered,  no 
doubt,  grievously,  through  the  scorn  and 
contumely  that  assailed  him,  through  liii 
friends'  unkinduesa,  and  his  euemiet'  inso* 


OH.  XVI.  1—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


281 


lent  triumph,  and  the  rude  jeers  of  the 
"abjects,"  who  made  him  their  "  song"  and 
their  "  byword  "  (ch.  xxx.  9).  And  turned 
me  over  into  the  hands  of  the  wioked.  Job 
speaks  as  if  God  had  wholly  given  him  up, 
made  him  over  to  the  wioked,  to  deal  with 
him  exactly  as  they  choae.  This,  of  couree, 
was  not  80.  If  the  malevolence  of  Satan 
wad  limited  by  the  Divine  will  (ch.  i.  12 ; 
ii.  6);  so,  much  more,  would  the  malevo- 
lence of  man  be  limited. 

Yer.  12. — I  was  at  ease  (compare  the 
picture  drawn  in  ch.  1.  1 — 5).  Job  had  been 
"at  ease,"  tranquil,  prosperous,  happy.  He 
had  been  almost  without  a  oare,  when  sud- 
denly "  trouble  came."  But  he  hath  broken 
me  asunder ;  rather,  he  brake  me  asunder 
(see  tbe  Bevised  Version).  In  the  midst  of 
his  ease  and  tranquillity,  God  suddenly 
pourtd  out  his  chastisements,  and  "brake 
Job  asunder,"  i.e.  destroyed  his  life,  ruined 
it  and  broke  it  down.  He  hath  also  taken 
me  by  ray  neck,  and  shaken  me  to  pieces ; 
or,  dashed  me  to  pieces.  And  set  me  up  for 
his  mark;  i.e.  as  a  target  for  his  arrows 
(oomp.  Deut.  xxxii.  23 ;  oh.  vi.  4 ;  Pb.  vii. 
13;  xxxviii.  2,  etc. ;  Lam.  til.  12). 

Ver.  13. — His  archers  compass  me  round 
ahout.  God  is  represented,  not  as  himself 
tlie  shooter  of  the  arrows,  but  as  surround- 
ing Job  with  a  body  of  archers,  who  are 
under  his  command  and  carry  out  liis  will. 
So,  geuerally,  Scripture  represents  the  judg- 
ments of  God  as  carried  out  by  inferior 
agents  (see  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16 ;  1  Chron.  xxi. 
15 ;  2  Kings  xix.  35,  etc.).  He  cleaveth  my 
reins  asunder,  and  doth  not  spare.  The 
allusion  is  probably  to  Job's  physical  suffer- 
ings, which  included  severe  pains  in  the 
lumbar  region.  He  ponreth  out  my  gall 
upon  the  ground.  The  rupture  of  the  gall- 
bladder causes  the  contents  to  be  spilt  upon 
the  ground. 

Ver.  14. — He  breaketh  me  with  breach 
upon  breach.  As  an  enemy,  when  he  be- 
sieges a  town,  crushes  its  resistance  by  means 
of  "  breach  upon  breach,"  so  is  Job  crushed 
by  one  attack  after  another.  He  runneth 
upon  me  like  a  giant ;  t.e.  with  overwhelm- 
ing force — a  force  that  is  quite  irresistible. 

Ver.  15. — I  have  sewed  sackcloth  upon 
my  skin.  Another  transition.  Job  turns  to 
the  consideration  of  how  ho  has  acted  under 
his  severe  afflictions.  In  the  first  place,  he 
has  put  on  sackcloth,  not  for  a  time  merely, 
as  ordinary  mourners  do,  but  for  a  perma- 
nency, so  that  he  may  be  said  to  have  sewn 
it  to  his  skin.  There  is,  perhaps,  also  an 
allusion  to  the  adhesion  of  the  garment  to 
his  many  sores.  And  have  defiled  my  horn 
in  the  dust.  "  My  horn  "  is  equivalent  to 
"  my  pride,"  "  my  dignity."  Job,  when  he 
left  his  state,  and  put  on  sackcloth,  and 
"sat  down  among  the  ashea"  (ch,  ii.  8), 


denuded  himself  of  his  honour  and  dignity, 
and  as  it  were  trailed  them  in  the  dust. 

Ver.  16.— My  face  is  foul  with  weeping. 
He  has  wept  so  much  that  his  face  is  stained 
with  his  tears.  And  on  my  eyelids  Is  the 
shadow  of  death.  There  is  an  awful  shadow 
on  Iiis  eyes  and  eyelids,  portending  death. 

Ver.  17. — Not  for  any  injustice  in  mine 
hands ;  or,  not  that  there  i»  any  violencB  in  my 
hands  (oomp.  Isa.  liii.  9,  where  the  expres- 
sion used  of  the  Messiah  is  nearly  the  same). 
Job  repudiates  tlie  charge  of  rapine  and 
robbery  which  Eliphaz  has  brought  against 
him  (ch.  XV.  28,  34).  His  hands  have  not 
done  violence  to  any.  Also  my  prayer  is 
pure.  Neither  has  he  been  guilty  of  the 
hypocrisy  which  Eliphaz  has  also  charged 
him  with  (oh.  xv.  34).  His  prayers  have 
been  sincere  and  genuine. 

Ver.  18. — 0  earth,  cover  not  thou  my 
blood !  There  was  a  widespread  belief  in 
the  ancient  world  tliat  innocent  blood,  spilt 
upon  the  ground,  cried  to  God  for  vengeance, 
and  remained  a  dark  blot  upon  the  earth 
till  it  was  avenged,  or  until  it  was  covered 
up.  Job  apostrophizes  the  earth,  and  be- 
seeches it  not  to  cover  up  his  blood  when  he 
dies,  as  he  expects  to  do,  shortly.  And  let 
my  cry  have  no  plaoe;  i.e.  let  it  have  no 
hiding-place,  but  fill  earth  and  heaven. 
Let  it  continue  to  be  heard  until  it  is 
answered. 

Ver.  19. — Also  now,  behold,  my  "Witness 
is  in  heaven ;  rather,  even  now  (see  the  Ke- 
vised  Version).  Job  claims  God  for  his 
Witness,  looks  to  him  for  an  ultimate  vin- 
dication of  his  character,  is  sure  that  in  one 
way  or  another  he  will  make  his  righteous- 
ness clear  as  the  noonday  in  the  sight  of 
men  and  angels  (see  ch.  xix.  25 — 27,  of 
which  this  is  in  some  sort  an  anticipation). 
My  record — or,  he  that  vouches  for  me  (Re- 
vised Version) — is  on  high — one  of  the  so 
frequent  pleonastic  repetitions  of  one  and 
the  same  idea. 

Ver.  20. — My  friends  Bcorn  me ;  literally, 
my  seorners  are  my  companions ;  i.e.  I  have 
to  live  with  those  who  scorn  me  (comp.  ch. 
XXX.  1 — 13).  But  mine  eye  poureth  out 
tears  unto  God.  It  is  not  to  his  "  ftiends," 
or  "companions,"  or  "comforters,"  or  any 
human  aid,  that  Job  turns  in  his  distress. 
God  alone  is  his  Refuge.  Forced  by  his 
woes  to  pass  his  time  in  weeping  and  mourn- 
ing (see  ver.  16),  it  is  to  God  that  his  heart 
turns,  to  God  that  he  "  pours  out  his  tears." 
Hardly  as  he  thinks  God  to  have  used  him, 
bitterly  as  he  sometimes  ventures  to  com- 
plain, yet  the  idea  never  crosses  him  of  look- 
ing for  help  or  sympathy  to  any  other  quarter, 
of  having  recourse  to  any  other  support  or 
stay.  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust 
in  him  "  (oh.  xiii.  15),  expresses  the  deepest 
feeling  of  bis  heart,  the  firmest  principle  o( 


282 


THE  BOOK  OP  J6b. 


[oh.  XVI.  1—22. 


his  nature.  Nothing  overrides  it.  Even 
"  out  of  the  depths "  his  soul  cries  to  the 
lord  (see  Ps.  exxx.  1). 

Ver.  21. — Oh  that  one  might  plead  for  a 
man  with  God)  The  original  here  is  ob- 
scure. It  may  mean,  Oh  that  he  (i.e.  God 
himself)  would  plead  for  a  man  with  God  ! 
i.e.  would  become  a  Mediator  between  him- 
self and  man,  plead  for  him,  undertake  his 
defence,  and  obtain  for  him  merciful  con- 
sideration. Or,  nearly  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  Oh  that  one  might  plead  for  man 
(i.e.  mankind  at  large)  with  God!  interest 
him  on  their  behalf,  and  obtain  a  merciful 
judgment  for  them.  The  former  rendering 
is  to  be  preferred.  As  a  man  pleadeth  for 
his  neighbour;  literally,  as  a  son  of  man 
(or,  as  the  Son  of  man)  pleadeth  for  his 
neighbour.    If  ve  take  the  simpler  render- 


ing, "  as  a  son  of  man,"  then  the  meaning 
is  simply,  "  Oh  that  God  would  plead  for  man 
with  himself,  as  a  man  is  wont  io  plead  for 
his  fellow-man  I "  But  if  we  prefer  the  other 
rendering,  "as  the  Son  of  man,"  a  Messianio 
interpretation  will  be  necessary.  (So  Pro- 
fessor Lee  and  Dr.  Stanley  Leathes).  But 
Messianic  interpretations  of  passages  that 
do  not  require  them,  and  that  have  no  such 
traditional  interpretation,  require  extreme 
caution. 

Ver.  22. — When  a  few  years  are  come; 
literally,  a  number  of  years,  which  generally 
means  a  small  number.  I  shall  gpo  tie  way 
whence  I  shall  not  return.  This  verse  would 
more  fitlybegiu  the  following  chapter,  which 
opens  iu  a  similar  strain,  with  an  antici- 
pation of  the  near  approach  of  death. 


HOMILETICS. 

Yers.  1—6. — Job  to  EUjphaz:  1.  Unacceptable  comfort  and  unaasuaged  grief.  I. 
Unacceptable  comfort.  Job  characterizes  the  offered  consolation  of  Eliphaz  and  his 
companions  as :  1.  In  its  nature  commonplace.  "  I  have  heard  many  such  things." 
Not  that  Job  imagined  self-evident  and  obvious  maxims  could  not  be  true,  or  objected 
to  a  good  lesson  because  it  was  common,  or  was  himself  "  one  of  those  nicelings  who- 
are  always  longing  for  I  wot  not  what  novelties,  and  cannot  abide  that  a  man  should 
tell  them  one  tale  twice "  (Calvin),  like  the  Athenians  (Acts  xvii.  21),  and  some 
Christians  of  whom  St.  Paul  writes  (2  Tim.  iv.  3) ;  but  that  either  he  desired  to  rebuke 
the  assumption  of  the  friends,  who  had  pretentiously  styled  their  stale  platitudes 
"  the  consolations  of  God"  (oh.  xv.  11),  by  discovering  them  to  be  exceedingly  trite 
observations,  or  he  wished  to  draw  attention  to  the  greatness  of  his  misery  which 
refused  to  be  comforted  by  common  means.  2.  In  its  pertinence  powerless.  "  Shall 
vain  words  [literally, '  words  of  wind ']  have  an  end  ?  "  If  Job  meant,  by  designating 
Eliphaz's  oration  "  words  of  wind,"  to  repay  him  for  the  compliment  contained  in  ch. 
XV.  2,  most  unquestionably  Job  was  wrong,  since  good  men  should  be  meek  ((Sal.  v.  23 ; 
1  Cor.  xiii.  7  ;  Eph.  iv.  2),  and  meek  men  should  rather  bear  reproach  thai^  resent  it 
(1  Pet.  ii.  20),  being  called  thereunto  by  Christ's  precept  (Matt.  xi.  29),  promise  (Matt. 
V.  5),  and  example  (1  Pet.  ii.  21) ;  but  if  Job  simply  designed  to  direst  attention  to 
the  fact  that  a  truth  might  be  precious  in  itself  as  well  as  eloquently  set  forth,  and  yet 
possess  no  relevancy  to  the  subject  under  consideration — whistling  past  it,  in  fact,  like 
the  idle  wind — he  gave  utterance  to  a  valuable  remark.  The  public  ear  groans  at  the 
quantity  of  windy  talk,  irrelevant  observation,  impertinent  argument,  and  pointless 
discussion  to  which  it  is  obliged  to  listen.  It  is,  however,  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
good  people  and  religious  literature  enjoy  a  monopoly  of  this  sort  of  wisdom.  As  much 
weak  (ScotticS  "  feckless  ")  palaver  may  be  heard  in  parliaments  and  scientific  congresses 
as  in  pulpits  and  sermons.  3.  In  its  spirit  irascible.  "  What  emboldeneth  [literally, 
'  goadeth']  thee  that  thou  answerest?"  Eliphaz  had  thrown  off  the  somewhat  calm 
and  philosophic  manner  that  had  distinguished  him  in  his  first  address,  had  given  way 
to  temper,  and  allowed  the  heat  of  his  spirit  to  communicate  a  degree  of  sharpness  to 
his  tongue.  Between  the  two,  the  tongue  and  the  temper,  there  is  an  intimate 
connection.  It  is  hard  to  pour  forth  floods  of  glowing  eloquence  when  the  soul  is  like 
an  icicle;  but  equally  it  is  a  task  for  the  wisest,  when  the  whole  inner  man  is  on  fire,  to 
keep  the  conflagration  from  shooting  out  lambent  flames,  and  emitting  fiery  sounds  from 
the  mouth.  "  It  is  good  to  be  zealously  affected  in  a  good  thing  ; "  but  "  the  discretion 
of  a  man  deferreth  his  anger,"  "  lest  there  be  debates,  envyings,  wraths,  strifes,  back- 
bitings,  whisperings,  swellings,  tumults,"  and  because  "  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not 
the  righteousness  of  God,"  while  "an  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife,  and  a  furious  man 
•boundeth  in  trausgresBlou."    4,  In  its  utterance  facHe.    "  I  also  could  speak  as  you 


OH.  xvL  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  883 

do :  if  your  soul  were  in  my  soul's  stead,  I  could  heap  up  words  against  you,  and  shake 
mine  head  at  you."  The  allusion  seems  to  be  to  the  glibness  with  which  Eliphaz  and 
his  copartners  tossed  their  trite  maxims  I'rom  their  tongues;  which,  says  Job,  is  not  a 
great  thing  after  all,  but,  on  the  contrary,  is  rather  a  poor  accomplishment,  in  which 
I  myself  could  rival  you.  Fluent  speech  is  a  great  ornament,  as  well  as  a  powerful 
haniimaid,  to  fine  wisdom ;  but,  as  a  substitute  for  wisdom,  it  is  wholly  contemptible. 
Nimble-tongued  talkers  should  also  remember  that  sometimes  those  hear  them  who 
could  eclipse  them  at  their  own  trade,  but  are  restrained  from  doing  so,  if  not  by  regard 
for  their  fellows,  by  respect  for  themselves.  5.  In  its  cha/racter  insincere.  "  I  would 
strengthen  you  with  my  mouth,  and  the  solace  of  my  lips  would  soothe  you."  The 
same  sort  of  consolation  they  offered  him,  he  could  with  perfect  ease  present  to  them — 
mere  lip-salve,  comfort  proceeding  from  the  teeth  outward.  But  of  course  he  would 
not,  as  they  very  well  knew  who  had  been  acquainted  with  his  previous  manner  of  life 
(ch.  xxix.  11 — 17),  and  had  even  been  constrained  at  the  outset  to  acknowledge  (ch. 
iv.  3,  4).  Sincerity,  that  becomes  and  is  binding  upon  all  in  every  situation  of  life,  is 
specially  required  of  sympathizers.  That  which  comes  not  from  the  heart  never  finds 
its  way  to  the  heart.  Comfort  without  honesty  wants  the  first  element  of  success 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  1),  and  is  as  hateful  to  God  as  it  is  distasteful  to  man  (Prov.  xxvii.  14). 
6.  In  its  result  irksome.  "  Miserable  comforters  [literally, '  comforters  of  trouble ']  are 
ye  all."  Instead  of  soothing,  it  annoyed ;  instead  of  healing,  it  wounded ;  instead  of 
helping,  it  weakened.    And  no  wonder,  if  its  character  was  as  above  depicted. 

II.  Unassuaged  okiep.  Job  declares  that,  much  as  his  misery  demanded  right  and 
effectual  consolation,  he  was  not  able  to  find  it  in  God,  his  friends,  or  himself.  1.  No 
comfort  from  God.  Not  because  God  failed  to  appreciate  his  need  of  comfort  (Gen. 
xxi.  17 ;  Exod.  iii.  7 ;  Isa.  xl.  7),  or  that  his  case  exceeded  the  Divine  resources 
(2  Cor.  i.  3),  or  that  the  will  on  God's  part  was  wanting  to  alleviate  his  sorrow  (Ps. 
ciii.  13;  Isa.  xxvii.  8;  xlii.  3;  Ixvi.  13;  2  Cor.  vii.  6);  but  that  God  sometimes,  for 
wise  and  good  purposes  of  trial  and  discipline,  hides  his  face  from  afiSicted  saints  (Isa. 
liv.  7,  8).  2.  No  help  /rom  man.  Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar  had  only  proved 
"  comforters  of  trouble,"  broken  reeds  that  pierce  the  hand  of  those  who  lean  upon  them. 
Job  had  not  gone  to  them  for  consolation ;  it  was  they  who  had  proffered  comfort  to 
him.  But,  in:  either  case,  the  result  would  have  been  the  same.  Man's  resources  in 
the  shape  of  sympathy  are  soon  exhausted.  3.  No  ease  from  himself.  If  he  spoke,  his 
grief  was  not  assuaged ;  if  ho  remained  silent,  he  experienced  no  alleviation  (ver.  6). 
Common  woes  are  usually  relieved  by  tears  or  talking ;  and  great  sorrows,  at  least  by 
great  souls,  full-orbed,  self-contained,  self-sufficient  men,  can  be  restrained,  if  not 
abated,  by  silent  endurance ;  but  Job's  misery  refused  to  yield  to  any  medicine.  This 
should  have  moderated  Job's  indignation  against  his  friends,  since  if  he,  who  best 
knew  his  own  trouble,  was  unable  to  find  a  crumb  of  comfort  in  it,  it  was  worse  than 
foolish  to  expect  that  men,  who  in  a  manner  only  spoke  at  a  venture,  would  be 
successful  in  ministering  to  a  malady  which  they  did  not  understand. 

Learn  :  1.  That  truths  which  seem  original  to  ordinary  minds  are  often  recognized 
by  wiser  and  better-informed  persons  as  exceedingly  trite  and  commonplace.  2.  That 
well-meaning  people  sometimes  bandy  words  with  one  another,  and  call  each  other  bad 
names,  like  vulgar  scolds  and  common  sinners.  3.  That  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
men  in  trouble,  whether  saints  or  sinners,  to  meet  with  miserable  comforters  and 
physicians  of  no  value.  4.  That  the  three  requisites  for  comfort  are  sincerity, 
sympathy,  and  sagacity.  5.  That  God  can  place  the  most  capable  of  men  in  positions 
which  shall  reveal  their  insufficiency. 

Yers.  7 17.— JbJ  to  Ood :  resumption  of  the  third  controversy :  1.   2%e  sorrows  of 

a  weary  man.  I.  Divinely  sent.  Whether  directly  addressed  in  the  second  person 
(vers  7  8)  or  indirectly  alluded  to  in  the  third  (vers.  7,  9, 12,  14),  it  is  ever  God  to 
whorn  Job  traces  back  his  sufferings.  It  is  faith's  function,  as  well  as  faith's  delight, 
to  recognize  God's  hand  in  affliction  as  in  felicity ;  but  not  seldom  sense  intervenes  to 
misconstrue  the  end  and  motive  of  God's  dealings  with  the  saint,  and  to  regard  as 
indicative  of  ano-er  and  enmity  what,  rightly  viewed,  is  rather  symptomatic  of  affection 
and  care  (ver.  17;  Ps.  xciv.  12;  Prov.  iii.  12;  Heb.  xii.  6 ;  Rev.  iii.  19).  Prom  the 
first  Job  had  connected  his  adversity  with  God's  appointment  (ch.  i.  21 ;  ii.  10).    For 


284  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xvi.  1—22. 


a  long  time  he  had  struggled  bravely,  against  the  eloquent  representations  of  hii 
friends,  to  maintain  his  confidence  in  God's  affection,  notwithstanding  aU  untoward 
appearances.  But  now,  under  extreme  pressure  of  misery,  he  is  on  the  eve  of  giving 
way — talking  quite  openly  of  God  as  his  enemy,  whose  wrath  tears  him  and  makes 
war  upon  him,  and  whose  teeth  sharpen  themselves  against  him  (ver.  9).  The  stern 
facts  which,  appear  to  shut  him  up  to  so  reluctant  an  inference  are  three.  1.  The 
inward  testimony  of  his  own  consciousness.  Though  it  would  be  wrong  to  say  that 
this  witness  of  an  anguish-laden  spirit  expressed  the  maturely  formed  and  definitely 
fixed  judgment  of  the  patriarch,  it  would  yet  be  equally  erroneous  not  to  recognize  that, 
for  the  moment.  Job  did  believe  that  God  had  turned  against  him.  Such  a  complete 
reversal  of  a  good  man's  consciousness  was  exceptional ;  the  result,  not  of  afliiction 
alone,  however  severe  and  protracted,  but  of  Satanic  influence  and  temptation.  It  dis- 
closes  the  extraordinary  power  the  devil  has  to  work  upon  the  human  spirit.  If  he  can 
so  handle  "  a  perfect  man  and  an  upright,"  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  he  should  be 
able  to  lead  captive  at  his  will  "  silly  women,  laden  with  sins,  led  away  with  divers 
lusts"  (2  Tim.  iii.  6), and  even  proud  and  imperious  men  who  oppuse  themselves  to  the 
truth  (2  Tim.  ii,  26).  It  reveals  also  how  far  a  saint  may  go  in  a  course  of  unbelief 
and  backsliding  without  renouncing  his  integrity;  and  is  fitted  to  suggest  hope  con- 
cerning many  who  are  supposed  to  have  lapsed  entirely  from  the  truth.  It  sheds  a 
light  upon  the  Divine  Father's  forbearance  and  mercy,  that  he  can  see  a  saint  misconstrue 
his  providences,  and  calumniate  his  character,  and  yet  lay  not  his  sin  to  his  charge 
(ch.  xlii.  7).  2.  TTie  expressed  judgment  qfhis/eUovMnen.  Eliphaz  had  cited,  as  one 
of  the  items  in  the  sinner's  doom,  the  desolation  of  his  family  (ch.  xv.  34),  and  the 
obvious  allusion  to  this  remark  in  Job's  language,  "  Thou  hast  made  desolate  all  my 
household  "  (ver.  7),  seems  to  intimate  that  Job  regarded  the  cruel  verdict  of  his  friends 
upon  his  case  as  substantially  correct.  He  could  see,  from  a  comparison  of  his  sad 
condition  with  the  sentiments  they  had  uttered,  that  they,  as  well  as  he,  had  arrived 
at  the  inference  that  God  was  against  him.  3.  The  palpable  witness  of  his  misery. 
His  emaciated  body,  his  weary  and  pinched  face,  his  feeble  and  wasting  frame, 
all  covered  over  with  ulcers,  seemed  to  rise  up  and  tell  him  to  his  face  that  God  was 
dealing  with  him  as  with  a  convicted  criminal.  According  to  the  theology  of  the 
period,  this  was  strong  circumstantial  evidence  against  the  patriarch ;  but  circumstantial 
evidence  often  lies.  Here  it  notoriously  did,  as  afterwards  it  did  in  the  case  of  Christ, 
whose  marred  face  was  no  proof  that  he  was  "  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  aad  afflicted  " 
(Isa.  liii.  4).  "  A  marred  and  meagre  visage  may  testify  to  our  grief,  but  not  to  our 
guilt"  (Robinson), 

II.  ExTBBMBLY  8BVBRK.  1.  2%ejr  Variety;  Almost  every  form  of  calamity  was 
heaped  upon  the  patriarch.  (1)  Bodily  distress ;  consisting  of  complete  exhaustion  of 
physical  vigour  (ver.  7),  unsightly  emaciation  of  the  countenance  (ver.  8),  lamentable 
wasting  of  the  once  strong  and  goodly  frame  (ver.  8).  (2)  Mental  anguish ;  occasioned 
by  the  overthrow  of  his  family  (ver.  7),  the  alienation  of  his  friends,  who  beheld  in  his 
miseries  a  witness  to  his  condemnation  (ver.  8) ;  the  opposition  and  insolence  of  wicked 
men,  to  whose  mercy  God  had  apparently  abandoned  him,  who  gaped  upon  him  vrith 
their  mouths,  rejoicing  in  his  misfortune,  smote  him  upon  the  cheek  reproachfully, 
adding  insult  to  enmity,  and  conspired  against  him,  in  order  to  complete  his  destruction 
(ver.  10)— an  experience  which  in  all  its  parts  was  predicted  of  Messiah  and  fulfilled  in 
Christ  (cf.  Ps.  xxii.  12 — 21  with  Matt.  xxvi.  59,  67 ;  and  Pg.  ii.  1  with  Acts  iv.  25— 
27).  (3)  Spiritual  sorrow ;  arising,  as  above  explained,  from  a  sense  of  abandonment 
by  God.  2.  Their  unexpectedness.  Job  had  been  at  ease,  prosperous  and  contented, 
fearing  God  and  eschewing  evil,  when  all  at  once  misfortune  leaped  upon  him,  and  God, 
seizing  him,  broke  him  in  pieces.  And  this  was  an  aggravation  of  the  sufferer's  distress, 
that  without  apparent  cause,  and  certainly  without  warning,  he  was  hurled  from  the 
pinnacle  of  prosperity  to  the  lowest  depths  of  adversity ;  as  the  wicked  will  eventually 
be  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  19),  and  as  at  any  moment,  though  not  for  the  same  reason,  the  godly 
may  be.  Therefore  let  no  one  indulge  in  a  vain  confidence  like  David,  that  his 
mountain  shall  stand  strong  for  ever  (Ps.  xxx.  6,  7) ;  or  like  Job,  that  he  shall  die  in 
his  nest  (ch.  xxix.  18);  or  like  the  daughter  of  the  Chaldeans,  that  she  shall  be  a  lady 
for  ever  (Isa.  xlvii.  7) ;  but  being  forewarned,  as  the  patriarch  of  Uz  was  not,  let  him 
also  be  forearmed,     3.  Their  violence.     Job  pictures  the  dreadful  hostility  of  God 


<iH.  XVI,  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  28S 

against  himself  by  means  of  three  striking  figiires,  in  which  he  represents  God  as  (1) 
a  mighty  Hunter,  with  wrathful  soul  and  gnashing  teeth  and  flaming  eyes  (ver.  9) 
pursuing  a  poor  frail,  timid  creature  with  a  pack  of  fierce  and  yelping  curs  (ver.  10),  to 
which  the  prey  when  caught  is  mercilessly  thrown  (ver.  11) ;  (2)  a  gigantic  Wrestler, 
strong  in  thew  and  sinew,  seizing  his  antagonist  by  the  neck,  triumphantly  holding 
him  aloft  in  his  clenched  fist,  and  then  furiously  dashing  him  to  the  ground  (ver.  12) ; 
and  (3)  a  skilful  Archer,  who,  tying  up  his  helpless  enemy  to  a  post,  makes  his  arrows 
whistle  for  a  time  round  the  wretch's  head,  so  as  to  fill  him  with  consternation  without 
inflicting  mortal  injury,  and  then,  having  sported  with  him  for  a  while,  as  a  tiger  might 
do  with  its  prey,  sends  a  shaft  into  a  vital  part  (on  the  emptying  of  the  gall-bladder, 
consult  the  Exposition),  so  that  the  miserable  victim  writhes  in  mortal  agony.  4.  Their 
degradation.  The  abject  humiliation  to  which  Job  had  been  reduced  by  his  suffeiings 
is  set  forth  in  four  particulars.  (1)  The  sewing  of  sackcloth  upon  his  loins.  Sackcloth, 
the  symbol  of  mourning  (Gen.  xxxvii.  34 ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  16 ;  Ps.  xxxv.  13 ;  Jonah  iii. 
5,  6),  is  here  represented  as  not  only  put  upon  the  patriarch's  person,  but  sewed  upon 
his  skin ;  partly,  perhaps,  because  of  the  ulcerous  condition  of  his  body,  but  partly  also, 
it  is  probable,  to  indicate  the  depth  of  Job's  abasement.  (2)  The  defiling  of  his  horn 
with  dust;  the  horn  being  the  emblem  of  personal  dignity  and  social  honour  (Ps.  oxxxii. 
17),  and  the  meaning  being  that  all  Job's  glory  was  completely  tarnished  and  laid  low. 
This  is  one  of  the  expressly  designed  results  of  affliction ;  and  they  who  defile  their 
horns  in  the  dust  before  God  when  overtaken  by  his  chastisements  have  taken  the  first 
step  towards  the  final  exaltation  of  their  horns  (Ps.  Ixsxix.  17).  (3)  The  reddening 
of  the  eyes  with  weeping.  Great  grief  makes  strong  men  weep.  Yet  weeping  for  a 
sufficient  cause  is  not  unmanly.  Examples  :  Abraham  (Gen.  xxxii.  2),  Joseph  (Gen. 
xliii.  30),  David  (2  Sam.  xviii.  33),  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xx.  3),  St.  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  13), 
Jesus  (Luke  xix.  41 ;  John  xi.  35).  (4)  The  shading  of  the  eyelids  with  gloom ;  an 
indication  of  approaching  death.  Death  makes  the  eyelid  droop,  and  wraps  the  eye 
itself  in  darkness.  It  was  an  aggravation  of  Job's  misery  that  it  had  brought  him  to 
the  confines  of  the  grave. 

III.  Wholly  undesbrvkd.  1.  Eii  life  had  not  been  wicked.  There  had  been  no 
injustice,  wrong,  or  evil  deed  of  any  kind  in  his  hand,  as  his  friends  asserted.  The 
hand  being  the  instrument  of  action,  clean  hands  are  the  symbol  of  an  upright  life 
(ch.  xvii.  9  ;  Ps,  xxiv.  4).  Where  the  hands  are  not  clean  the  heart  cannot  be  pure. 
2.  His  devotion*  had  not  been  insincere.  Notwithstanding  the  imputations  of  his 
friends  to  the  contrary  (ch.  xv.  4),  his  conscience  told  him  that  his  prayer  was  pure. 
Genuine  sincerity  is  one  of  the  first  requisites  of  devotion.  "  When  thou  prayest,  thou 
shalt  not  be  as  the  hypocrites  are  "  (Matt.  vi.  5). 

Learn :  1.  That  the  same  God  who  makes  a  saint  weak  and  weary  beneath  life's 
burdens  can  also  impart  strength  and  cheerfulness  to  bear  them.  2.  That  one  of 
the  hardest  works  faith  has  to  do  is  to  oppose  those  representations  of  the  Divine 
character  and  providence  that  are  given  by  sense.  3.  That,  while  the  saint's  calamities 
are  not  always  sent  in  punishment  of  sin,  they  are  mostly  designed  to  produce  within 
the  saint  a  spirit  of  Relf-humiliation.  4.  That  God  never  abandons  a  saint  to  the 
ungodly,  though  he  will  yet  deliver  over  the  ungodly  to  perdition.  5.  That,  next  to 
the  comfortable  shining  of  God's  face  upon  a  human  soul,  which  Job  at  this  time 
wanted,  the  best  lodestar,  while  struggling  over  and  through  a  sea  of  trouble,  is  the 
ineradicable  conviction  of  one's  own  sincerity,  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience 
before  God. 

Ver.  17. Acceptable  prayer.     I,  Wasaj  addbbssbd  to  thb  bioht  Object.     God 

(Pb,  Ixv.  2).  Not,  however,  the  God  of  our  imaginations,  or  the  God  of  nature  simply ; 
but  the  God  of  revelation  and  the  God  of  grace,  the  God  who  hath  manifested  forth 
his  glory  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  When  pbbsbntbd  THROtrsH  thb  bight  Medium.  Jesus  Christ,  the  one  Mediator 
between  God  and  man  (1  Tim.  ii.  5),  the  one  Advocate  for  sinful  men  (1  John  ii.  1), 
the  one  High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God  (Heb.  vii.  25),  the  Daysman  for  whom 
Job  longed°(ch.  ix.  33),  the  Redeemer  to  whom  he  looked  forward  (ch.  xix.  25). 

III.  When  offbbed  in  the  bight  spirit.  1.  Sincerely  (Isa.  xxix.  13 ;  Matt,  xv, 
8).   2.  Humbly  (Gen.  xxxii  10;  Isa.  Ixvi.  2;  Luke  xviii.  13).   3.  Believingly  (Matt 


289  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xvi.  1— 22. 

xxL  22 ;  Heb.  xi.  6 ;  Jas.  i.  6).  4.  Holily  (1  Tim.  ii,  8) ;  i.e.  with  renunciation  of  sin 
(Prov.  X7.  8;  xxi.  27;  xxviii.  9;  Ps.  Ixvi.  18),  and  with  kind  and  forgiving  dis- 
positions (Mark  xi.  25). 

IV.  When  asking  for  the  right  things.  Things  contained  within  the  promises. 
These  give  to  prayer  a  scope  at  once  ample  and  sufficient.  1.  Ample;  since  th« 
promises  are  exceeding  great  and  precious  in  their  variety  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  2.  Sufficient ; 
since  they  contain  all  things  pertaining  to  life  and  godliness. 

Vers.  18 — 22. — Job  to  Ood:  2.  An  appeal  to  God  against  God.  L  A  sublime 
INVOOATIOK.  "  O  earth,  cover  not  thou  my  blood,  and  let  my  cry  have  no  place  I " 
(ver.  18).  1.  The  explanation  of  the  language.  The  allusion  seems  to  be  to  Gren.  iv. 
10,  where  the  blood  of  Abel  is  represented  as  crying  to  God  from  the  ground  for 
vengeance  upon  its  destroyer;  and  Job,  in  the  lofty  consciousness  of  his  innocence, 
while  momentarily  anticipating  death,  calls  upon  the  earth  not  to  drink  up  his  blood, 
but  to  permit  its  cry  to  "  urge  its  way  unhindered  and  unstilled  towards  heaven  without 
finding  a  place  of  rest."  But  the  student  may  consult  the  Exposition.  2.  The  import 
of  the  language.  It  contains  a  declaration  on  the  part  of  Job  that,  though  about  to 
perish,  he  was  innocent;  and,  since  he  regarded  God  as  the  Author  of  all  his  sufferings, 
it  was  virtually  an  accusation  of  God  as  the  Shedder  of  his  innocent  blood.  The  style 
of  address  here  employed  is  certainly  not  one  that  a  good  man  may  with  safety  imitate. 

II.  A  CONFIDENT  APPEAL.  1.  To  what  quarter  ?  Not  to  his  friends  who  had  mocked 
him  (ver,  20),  but  to  God  himself  who  had  assailed  him,  to  whom  nevertheless  he 
clung  as  for  dear  life,  and  whom  he  describes  by  a  threefold  characteristic.  (1)  His 
name ;  Eloah,  the  All-powerful  Supreme,  in  contrast  to  man,  to  strong  men  and  weak 
men  aliise,  who  are  all  at  the  best  but  dust ;  the  mighty  Maker  of  this  universal  frame, 
who  giveth  power  unto  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  inoreaseth  strength 
(Isa,  xl.  29),  and  who  hath  revealed  himself  most  graciously  as  a  Refuge  for  the 
oppressed  (Ps.  ix.  9 ;  Dent,  xxxiii.  27 ;  Jer.  xvi.  19).  (2)  His  occupation ;  that  of  a 
Witness,  an  Eye-witness,  whose  eyes  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good 
(Prov.  XV.  3),  as  those  of  Christ,  the  faithful  Witness,  are  in  the  midst  of  the  golden 
candlesticks  (Eev.  ii.  1) ;  and  in  particular  whose  eyes  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the 
whole  earth,  to  show  himself  strong  in  behalf  of  them  whose  hearts  are  perfect  toward 
him  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9).  The  thought  that  God  is  a  constant  Eye-witness  of  everything 
on  earth,  and  a  silent  Spectator  of  all  that  transpires  within  the  deep  places  of  the 
human  heart,  may  fill  the  wicked  with  alarm,  but  is  fraught  with  special  comfort  to 
the  saint.  (3)  His  dwelling-place ;  the  heights,  or  heaven.  God  has  three  dwelling- 
places — eternity,  the  Church,  and  the  saint's  heart  (Isa.  Ivii.  16) ;  and  he  is  never  really 
absent  from  the  third  any  more  than  from  the  second  or  the  first.  But  when  the 
saint,  by  reason  of  doubt,  sorrow,  or  sin,  cannot  perceive  him  in  the  second  or  third, 
he  may  always  find  him  in  the  first,  seated  on  his  high  and  glorious  throne  of  grace. 
2.  In  what  spirit  f  Clearly  (1)  with  firm  faith.  "  Behold,  my  Witness  is  in  heaven ; " 
the  first  personal  pronoun  pointing  to  the  existence  of  appropriating  faith.  So  David 
says,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd  "  (Ps.  xxiiL  1).  And  (2)  with  confident  expectation. 
"  Behold  I " — a  note  of  triumph,  as  if  a  gleam  of  bright  exultant  hope  had  already  begun 
to  make  sunshine  in  the  sufferer's  soul. 

IIL  A  FERVENT  SUPPLICATION.  1.  ITic  earnestntss  of  JoVs  prayers.  They  were  :(1) 
Persistent.  His  friends  mocked  him,  accused  him  of  impiety,  insinuated  that  he  had 
abandoned  the  habit  of  devotion ;  but,  in  spite  of  slander  and  misrepresentation,  he 
continued  "  instant  in  prayer."  Not  fitful  and  intermittent  devotion  succeeds  with 
God,  but  habitual  and  continual.  Therefore  pray  without  ceasing.  It  is  a  high  mark 
of  grace  to  be  able  to  persevere  in  well-doing,  and  to  keep  on  praying  in  face  <if 
opposition  and  ridicule  from  friends.  (3)  Tearful.  Job  presented  not  cold,  formal, 
and  listless  petitions  to  the  throne  of  gratje,  but  warm,  urgent,  and  forcefiil  entreaties. 
When  the  eye  waters,  the  heart  melts.  It  is  the  stream  of  penitential  feeling,  or  tlie 
flood  of  believing  desire,  which,  welling  up  from  the  soul's  depths,  sends  liquid  drops 
through  the  open  gateway  of  the  eye.  David  mourned  after  God  with  tears  (Ps.  xlii. 
3).  The  father  of  the  lunatic  boy  cried  out  with  tears,  "  Lord,  I  believe  "  (Mark  ix.  24). 
2.  TTie  burden  of  Job's  prayers.  (1)  That  God  would  plead  with  himself  in  behalf 
of  man ;  ».e.  that  he  would  vindicate  Job  against  himself,  by  declaring  him  (Job)  ta 


OH.x^    1—22.3  THE  BOOK  OF   JOB.  287 


be  inB  cent.  What  Job  here  desired  for  himself  has  in  a  more  exalted  sense  been  done 
for  all  men  by  Christ,  who  through  his  cross  has  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors, 
not  U  demonstrate  their  sinlessness  or  integrity,  but  to  establish  their  righteousness 
before  God.  (2)  That  God  would  plead  for  the  son  of  man  against  his  friend ;  i.e.  for 
Job  against  his  friends,  who  wished  to  put  him  down  as  a  hypocrite.  This  also  God 
will  ^  J  for  all,  if  not  here,  in  a  future  world.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth 
as  th  t  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father  "  (Matt.  xiii.  43). 

IV.  A  PATHKTio  REASON.  1.  The  brevity  of  life's  term.  "When  a  few  years  are 
conii)"  (ver.  22).  The  short  period  of  life  that  still  remained  would  soon  he  ended. 
Tin.  i  flies  with  all,  but  especially  with  the  dying.  2.  2%e  hopelessness  of  man's  return 
frm  t  the  tomb.    "  Then  I  shall  go  the  way  whence  I  shall  not  return  (of.  ch.  x.  21). 

J  «arn  :  1.  That  the  God  of  faith  alone  is  the  true  God.  2.  That  faith's  God  is  found 
in  -he  page  of  revelation  and  in  Jesus  Christ,  not  in  the  mere  canceptions  of  the 
hvuaan  mind.  3.  That  faith's  God  is  the  enemy  of  no  man,  but  the  Friend  of  all.  4. 
TlAt_  the  ear  of  faith's  God  is  never  heavy  that  it  cannot  hear,  or  his  hand  shortened 
t .  rtt  it  cannot  save. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Deep  dejection  and  irrepressible  hope.  In  this  reply  Job  refuses  to 
■uake  a  direct  rejoinder  to  the  attack  upon  him ;  he  is  too  utterly  bowed  down  in  his 
weakness.     But — 

I.  The  first  part  of  his  speech  consists  of  A  bitteb  sarcasm  upon  the  idle  talk  of 
HIS  FRIENDS.  (Vers.  1 — 5.)  Their  speeches  are  useless.  They  mean  to  comfort  (ch.  xv. 
11),  but  their  reasonings  produce  an  opposite  effect  on  his  mind.  They  should  cease  j 
there  must  be  something  ailing  those  who  are  thus  afSicted  with  the  disease  of  words. 
Words  will  not  heal  the  broken  bones  nor  soothe  the  wounded  heart.  Were  it  so, 
then  Job  could  act  the  part  of  comforter  as  well  as  they,  in  the  case  of  their  affliction. 
Thus  with  scorn  he  repels  their  futile  attempts  to  "charm  ache  with  air,  and  agony 
with  words,"  to  "  patch  grief  with  proverbs." 

"  Brother,  men 
Can  connsel,  and  speak  comfort  to  that  grief 
Which  they  themselves  not  feel ;  but,  tasting  it, 
Their  counsel  turns  to  passion,  which  before 
Would  give  preceptial  medicine  to  rage,      i 
Fetter  strong  madness  in  a  silken  thread. 
Charm  ache  with  air,  and  agony  with  words  ; 
No,  no ;  'tis  all  men's  office  to  speak  patience 
To  those  that  wring  under  the  load  of  sorrow ; 
But  no  man's  virtue,  nor  sufficiency. 
To  be  so  moral,  when  he  shall  endure 
The  like  himself:  therefore  give  me  no  counsel : 
My  griefs  cry  louder  than  advertisement." 

IL  Next,  he  relapses  into  a  mbi,ancholy  contemplation  of  his  extreme  misery. 

(Vers.  6 17.)    1.  The  alternative  of  silence  or  of  speech  is  eqiially  unbearable.    (Ver.  6.) 

A  healthy  man  can  give  vent  to  his  feelings  in  talk  j  but  no  words  suffice  to  check  the 
flow  of  this  immense  grief.  Would  he  do  well  to  be  silent  ?  But,  then,  what  grief  would 
depart  from  him  ?  None!  There  is  no  riddance  either  way.  Speak  or  not,  his  suffer- 
ing remains  the  same.  2.  The  instinct  to  pour  forth  his  woe  proves  irrepressible,  and  he 
proceeds  vnth  the  description  of  his  terrible  sufferings.  (Vers.  7—14.)  His  strength  is 
exhausted.  His  house  is  desolate.  His  wrinkled  and  emaciated  body  is  a  spectacle  to 
move  his  own  pity.  But  still  keener  are  the  sufferings  of  his  mind.  The  thought 
that  God  has  inflicted  this  suffering,  that  he  is,  as  he  supposes,  an  object  of  the  Divine 
wrath,  fills  his  mind  with  intolerable  gloom.  And  not  only  is  God  against  him,  but 
evil  men  seem  to  be  employed  as  instruments  of  his  wrath.  They,  envious  of  his 
former  prosperity,  and  of  his  goodness,  now  gather  around  to  heap  every  insult  upon 
his  head.  Tracing  again  all  to  God,  Job  conceives  of  him  under  the  image  of  a  furious 
warrior  who  has  advanced  against  him  in  utmost  violence,  caused  a  shower  of  arrows 


288  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xvr.  1— 22, 

to  fall  upon  him,  pierced  him  as  with  a  sword,  battered  him  into  rains  as  a  strong  wall 
is  battered  into  breaches  by  the  violence  of  the  battering-ram.  3.  His  present  con- 
dition. (Vers.  15 — 17.)  Humbling  himself  beneath  the  rod,  he  has  adopted  all  the 
symbolic  language  of  penitence  and  grief.  He  has  put  on  the  sackcloth ;  bowed  hia 
head  to  the  dust ;  given  himself  to  weeping  until  his  eyes  are  heavy  and  his  face  is 
red.    And  all  this  "  though  there  is  no  wrong  in  his  hand,  and  his  prayer  is  pure." 

III.  The  Heavbn-pieroino  okt  op  innocence.  (Vers.  18 — 22.)  So  soon  as  in  the 
course  of  these  sad  reflections  Job  once  more  recurs  to  the  consciousness  of  his  innocence, 
new  courage  is  born  to  his  heart ;  in  hia  very  exhaustion  he  can  still  cry  to  Heaven  in  the 
might  of  a  confidence  that  will  yet  wring  an  answer  from  Grod.  He  calls  upon  the  earth 
not  to  hide  his  blood,  and  may  his  cry  have  no  resting-place.  The  allusion  is  to  the 
ancient  sacred  custom  of  blood-revenge  (Gen.  iv.  10, 11 ;  comp.  Isa.  xxn.  21 ;  2  Sam.  i. 
21).  But  the  circumstances  under  which  the  desire  not  to  die  unavenged  here  appears 
are  quite  unusuaL  As  one  persecuted,  not  merely  by  man,  but  far  more  by  God,  near 
to  death,  he  maintains  his  innocence  before  man  and  God.  Here  is  a  seeming  contra- 
diction between  the  dark  thoughts  just  expressed  of  God,  and  this  prof  jund  faith  in  the 
invisible  and  just  Judge.  Grief  is  full  of  inconsistencies  and  contradictions,  arising 
from  the  imperfection  of- the  understanding.  They  cannot  be  solved  by  thought,  only 
as  here  by  faith.  Thus  we  come  to  another  moment  of  calm  amidst  this  terrible 
tempest  of  grief — another  break  in  the  sky  amidst  these  storms.  The  chapter  leaves 
the  deposit  of  a  noble  consolation  at  our  feet.  1.  The  existence  of  the  Witness  in 
heaven.  An  all-intelligent  Witness,  a  feeling  Witness,  an  all-remembering  Witness  of 
innocent  suflfering,  is  our  heavenly  Father.  There  may  be  ever  an  appeal  to  him  from 
the  unfeeling  conduct  and  the  mocking  observation  of  men.  2.  The  certainty  of  a 
just  decision  in  the  end.  "  If  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience 
wait  for  it."  In  all  the  sense  of  life's  mystery,  and  the  temptation  to  doubt  whether 
God  be  perfectly  good  and  kind,  let  Patience,  supported  by  faith,  have  her  perfect  work. 
Let  us  "  remember  Job,"  and  "consider  the  end  of  the  Lord."— -J. 

Ver.  6.— Sorrow  toithovt  hope.  Unalleviated  by  the  words  of  his  friends.  Job  turns 
round  upon  them,  and  in  painful,  half-passionate  words  retorts  upon  them  their  incom- 
petency to  give  him  consolation.  "  Miserable  comforters  are  ye  all."  He  is  driven 
almost  to  despair.  The  painful  alternative  of  speech  or  silence  is  before  him;  but 
neither  offers  him  any  hope,  and  he  is  compelled  to  reflect  upon  his  helpless  condition. 
He  is  exhausted.  The  future  presents  no  prospect  of  alleviation.  Ha  has  sorrow 
without  hope.    Such  sorrow  distinguished — 

L  By  its  extreme  painfulness.  To  endure  pain  of  body  or  mind  is  hard  enough, 
and  many  succumb  to  it.  But  if  there  be  a  gleam  of  hope  the  aching  spirit  clings  to 
it  and  is  upborne.  _  When,  however,  no  ray  of  brightness  is  apparent,  when  only  the 
darkness  of  an  undiminished  sorrow  is  present,  then  is  the  painfulness  of  the  circum- 
stances in  which  the  sufferer  is  placed  heightened  in  a  great  degree.  To  suffer  without 
hope  of  a  termination  is  the  very  perfection  of  suffering.  The  poor  heart  searches  for 
some  avenue  of  escape,  but  none  is  present.  It  is  thrown  back  again  and  again  upon 
itself.  This  is  extremest  sorrow.  To  see  only  the  long,  unvaried  line  of  suffering 
drawn  out  to  the  utmost  future,  and  no  break  appearing,  robs  the  soul  of  its  one  con- 
solation in  extreme  trial — the  hope  of  release.  If  a  bound  be  put  to  sorrow  it  may  be 
endured;  but  if  no  limit  can  be  traced,  and  all  probability  of  limitation  be  cut  of^  the 
case  is  desperate.     The  worst  that  can  be  said  of  any  evil  is — It  is  hopeless. 

IL  Sorrow  without  hope  is  an  exobssivb  strain  upon  thb  endurance  op  the 
SUPFBRBB.  To  lose  hope  is  to  lose  heart.  The  strong  can  bear  up  under  the  heavy 
burden,  but  the  weak  must  yield.  It  is  to  add  to  the  weight  of  the  burden  by  every 
hour  that  elapses.  Time,  which  so  often  comes  to  relieve  the  sorrowful,  but  brings  a 
heavier  load.  The  exhausted  spirit  bravely  fighting  against  its  oppressive  surroundings 
is  more  and  more  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  all  effort  is  unavailing,  and  the  added 
experience  of  every  hour  but  confirms  the  assurance  that  there  is  no  hope  left.  It 
is  the  severest  of  all  strains  that  the  spirit  can  be  subjected  to.  It  is  the  inevitable 
precursor  of  despair. 

III.  Such  sorrow  reaches  a  climax  of  severity  when,  as  in  this  case,  the  appbai,  to 
God,  the  great  Helper,  is  unavailino.     "He  hath  made  me  weary."     He  hath 


«H.  xn.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  '289 

exhausted  me.  It  is  true  a  real  help  is  in  reserve  for  Job,  but  he  does  not  know  it. 
He  suffers  without  hope.  He  has  turned  to  man  and  found  no  relief.  His  cry  to  God 
is  unavailing.  If  he  "  speak,"  his  "  grief  is  not  assuaged.'  'His  cry  returns  upon  him. 
If  he  "forbear,"  still  he  is  not  "eased."  The  world  is  indebted  to  this  sufferer  for  the 
painful  experiment  of  which  he  is  the  subject.  Now  the  world  knows  that  in  patient 
endurance  and  unswerving  fidelity  there  is  assured  hope.  The  hand  of  help  may  be 
hidden,  but  it  is  there.  God  may  seem  to  be  inattentive  to  the  sorrowful  cry,  but  he 
is  only  testing  and  proving  his  faithful  servant,  and  the  severity  of  the  test  marks  the 
measure  of  the  final  award.  Hence  may  we  learn  (1)  that  the  apparent  hopelessness 
of  human  sorrow  is  not  a  perfect  representation ;  (2)  the  wisdom  of  maintaining  the 
spirit  of  hope,  even  when  we  seem  to  have  no  encouragement  to  do  so ;  (3)  the  certainty 
of  a  final  relief  and  reward  to  the  faithful. — R.  G. 

Vers.  11 — 17. — 2%e  severity  of  the  Divine  Judgments.  The  mystery  of  the  Divine 
dealings  is  revealed  in  this  book.  The  view  from  a  human  standpoint  is  given.  Job 
and  his  friends  see  not  the  spiritual  side  of  the  whole  transaction.  The  Divine  purpose 
is  hidden.  Job  knows  not  tliat  it  is  "  Satan  "  that  has  instigated  all  these  afiSictions. 
He  knows  not  that  God  has  given  permission  for  his  trial.  Nor  does  he  know  the 
limitations  put  upon  that  trial,  nor  the  final  issue.  The  severity  of  the  Divine  judgments 
(so  are  they  in  Job's  view)  is  represented  in  striking  language. 

I.  As  A  DBLivERiNO  ovEB  TO  THE  UNGODLY.  He  18  Cast  into  the  hand*  of  the 
evil-doer. 

II.  As  A  DESTRDCTioN  OF  EXTERNAL  PBOSPEBiTV.  "I  was  at  ease,  but  he  hath 
broken  me  asunder." 

III.  As  AN  INFLIOTION  OP  SEVERE  PAINS.     "  He  clcavcth  my  reins  asunder." 

IV.  As  A  suooEssiON  OP  REPEATED  INFLICTIONS.  "He  breakcth  me  with  breach 
upon  breach."  These  judgments  evoke  from  Job:  1.  The  lowliest  humiliation.  He 
bows  in  "  sackcloth,"  and  lays  his  "  horn  in  the  dust."  2.  He  pours  out  his  soul  in 
]ienitence,  and  his  face  is  even  *'  foul  with  weeping."  3.  Over  him  hangs  the  gloom— 
"  the  shadow  " — "  of  death."  4.  In  the  consciousness  of  integrity  he  makes  his  "  pure  " 
prayer  to  God.  The  interest  of  these  few  lines  is  very  great  in  the  general  working  out 
of  the  plot  of  the  history.  Happy  he  who  in  the  midst  of  his  sorrows  can  bow  in  lowly 
penitence  under  the  severities  of  the  Divine  judgments,  still  retaining  the  assurance  of 
his  sincerity,  and  waiting  the  final  award. — R.  Q. 

Vers.  19,  20. — The  appeal  of  innocence  to  the  highest  tribunaZ.  Job  now  turns  from 
man  to'God.  He  has  the  assurance  of  faith — the  full  assurance  which  faith  gives— 
that  God  will  requite  the  injured  and  jnstify  the  pure.  Man's  judgment  is  imperfect. 
He  sees  only  the  outward  circumstance ;  God  looketh  upon  the  heart.  To  him  who 
knoweth  all  things  Job  turns ;  and  to  God  his  "  eye  poureth  out  tears."  Before  man 
can  commit  his  cause  to  Gfod  with  confidence  the  following  is  needful — 

I.  A  THOROUGH     CONVIOTIOSi    OP   THE    INSUFFICIBNOT   OP  HUMAN  JUDOMBNTB.        Job 

had  thoroughly  proved  this.  Howsoever  wise  the  sayings  of  his  friends,  or  however 
just  their  reflections.  Job  knew  that  their  accusations  of  him  were  unfounded,  and 
that  therefore  their  conclusions  were  unjust.  Hence  he  tiuned  from  them  to  that 
"  record  "  of  his  life  which  was  "  on  high." 

II.  But  this  must  be  supported  by  a  conscious  inteqbitt.  None  can  truly  commit 
his  cause  to  God  who  knows  within  himself  that  he  is  guilty.  At  the  final  bar  he 
knows  most  assuredly  that  his  sin  will  find  him  out.  But  he  whose  spirit  bears  him 
witness  of  his  uprightness,  as  Job's  did,  and  as  the  Divine  judgments  afterwards 
affirmed,  may  with  calmness  commit  his  way  unto  God.  He  knows  that  his  true 
"  Witness  is  in  heaven."    He  shall  bear  testimony  to  Job's  integrity,  uprightness,  and 

purity.  ■         .  .  . 

HI.  Further,  an  unhesitating  paith  in  God's  bighteous  dealings  is  needed  m 
order'to  a  calm  committal  of  all  to  his  arbitrament.  Job,  the  "servant"  of  God, 
knew  in  whom  he  could  confide.  He  feared  God.  On  that  fear  faith  builds  with 
safety  and  assurance.  A  conception  of  God  which  is  so  low  that  it  inspires  no  faith 
must  preclude  all  loving,  helpful  hope  in  him. 

IV.  On  Buch  foundations  may  rest  a  calm  patience  to  await  the  final  DiviNg 
Job.  " 


290  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  [oh.  xvl  1—22. 


AWABD.  The  upright,  sincere,  but  misunderstood  sufferer  leaves  all  to  the  final  judg- 
ment. The  "  witness  "  and  the  "  record  "  are  "  on  high."  To  that  tribunal  which  is. 
also  on  high  he  appeals,  and  with  the  "scorn  "  of  his  "  friends  "  breaking  his  already 
afflicted  spirit  he  turns  his  tearful  eyes  "  unto  God."  Self-assured  integrity  may 
always  thus  make  its  appeal  to  God,  "the  righteous  Judge"  to  whose  judgment-Beat  it 
is  the  highest  wisdom  of  assailed  innocence  to  appeal. — B.  G. 

Ver.  2. — Miserahk  comforters.  Job  is  able  to  rise  above  his  foolish,  narrow-minded 
friends,  and  look  down  upon  them  with  good-humoured,  pitying  irony.  So  little  do 
they  understand  him !  So  proudly  do  they  trust  in  their  empty  words  I  And  it  is  all 
a  delusion.  Job  is  almost  ready  to  forget  their  impertinence  as  he  turns  to  the  fai 
more  important  question  of  Gvd's  dealings  with  him.  But  first  he  gives  them  their 
true  character.    They  are  all  "  miserable  comforters." 

I.  MisEKABLB  C0MFOBTEE8  FAIL  FOB  LACK  OF  BTMPATHT.  This  thought  is  Con- 
tinually recurring  in  the  course  of  the  dramatic  dialogue.  It  is  at  the  root  of  the 
whole  controversy.  All  the  elaborate  argumentation  of  the  three  wise  men  is  so  much 
empty  wind,  because  they  lack  the  first  condition  of  consolation.  We  can  never  be 
reminded  too  often  that  sympathy  is  the  first  and  absolute  condition  of  all  mutual 
helpfulness.  But  how  is  it  that  well-meaning  friends  lack  it  ?  There  can  be  but  one 
answer.  The  enemy  of  sympathy  is  selfishness.  While  we  think  much  of  ourselves, 
our  own  opinions,  position,  conduct,  we  must  fail  in  sympathy,  and  onr  attempts  to 
help  others  must  come  to  the  ground  without  any  good  results.  In  visiting  the  poor, 
nursing  the  sick,  raising  the  fallen,  saving  the  lost,  teaching  children,  sympathy  is  the 
primary  requisite  for  success.  Christ  is  the  true  Friend  of  the  suffering,  because  Christ 
sympathizes  profoundly  with  all  sufferings.  We  make  a  mistake  when,  like  Job's 
comforters,  we  try  to  console  by  offering  advice.  The  sufferer  wants  not  advice,  but 
sympathy.  Why  should  his  misfortune  give  us  a  right  to  pose  as  his  counsellors  ? 
He  is  more  fitted  to  be  our  teacher,  for  he  has  been  to  the  best  of  schools,  the  school 
of  affliction. 

II.  MlBEBABLB    OOMFOBTBES    ADD    TO    THE    GBIEFB    'WHIOH    THBT    VAINLY    TET    TO 

A8SUAOE.  Thus  Rousseau  writes,  "  Consolation  indiscreetly  pressed  upon  us,  when  we 
are  suffering  under  affliction,  only  serves  to  increase  our  pain  and  to  render  our  grief 
more  poignant."  The  reasons  for  this  are  not  difBoult  to  discover.  1,  DUappointment. 
We  expect  something  better  from  a  friend.  He  should  give  us  his  sympathy,  and  if 
he  fails  to  do  so  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  unkindly  treated,  or  at  least  we  miss  a  comfort 
for  which  we  were  looking.  2.  Wea/riness.  The  sufferer  wants  quiet.  The  look  and 
tear  of  sympathy  may  console  him,  but  many  words  are  wearying  to  him.  He  is  too 
full  of  his  own  sad  thoughts  to  find  room  for  the  ill-judged  observations  of  untimely 
advisers.  3.  Injustice.  You  cannot  be  just  to  a  man  without  sympathy,  because  you 
cannot  understand  him  till  you  enter  into  his  deeper  feelings.  But  nothing  is  more  dis- 
tressing than  unjust  treatment.  Much  of  Job's  greatest  trouble  came  from  this  source. 
IIL  We  heed  Divine  gbaoe  to  help  us  to  be  true  comforters.  Perhaps  we 
shrink  from  the  task,  seeing  its  difficulties.  We  would  avoid  the  house  of  mourning 
lest  our  bungling  attempts  at  consolation  should  add  to  its  sorrows.  But  this  is  not 
brotherly.  The  Christian  duty  is  to  "weep  with  them  that  weep"  (Eom.  xii.  15). 
To  be  true  sympathizers  we  need  to  have  self  conquered  by  the  grace  of  Christ.  Perhaps 
one  reason  why  some  of  us  have  much  trouble  is  that  we  may  be  able  to  understand 
the  trouble  of  other  people,  and  so  may  become  true  comforters. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. — Incurdble  gritf.  Job  does  not  know  what  to  do ;  neither  speech  nor  silence 
will  assuage  his  grief.     It  appears  to  be  incurable. 

I.  Great  obibp  seems  utouEABLE  to  the  sufferer.  1.  It  cannot  le  measured. 
Feeling  destroys  the  sense  of  proportion.  Every  one  who  suffers  much  is  tempted  to 
think  himself  the  greatest  of  sufferers.  A  passion  of  emotion  sweeps  away  all  standards 
of  comparison.  The  stormy  sea  appears  to  be  unfathomable.  2,  It  excludes  the  thought 
of  anything  but  Usdf.  The  black  cloud  shuts  out  the  heavens  and  narrows  the  horizon. 
The  world  of  softow  is  shrunken  to  the  range  of  present,  personal  experience.  Thus 
in  overwhelming  grief  there  is  no  room  or  power  in  the  soul  to  conceive  of  a  means  of 
escape.    The  alMorbing  interest  of  pain  will  not  altow  a  rival  con«ci»usaeaa.    8.  It  i$ 


on.  xvL  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOR  291 

found  to  he  irresistible.  If  a  man  ihought  he  could  conquer  his  grief  or  escape  from 
it,  surely  he  would  not  tamely  submit  to  his  tormeuts  unless  he  were  a  fanatic  oi 
asceticism.  But  if  the  pain  cannot  be  set  aside  at  once,  it  is  di£Scult  to  believe  that 
it  will  not  endure  for  ever,  for  agony  destroys  the  sense  of  time. 

II.  Gbiat  okibp  mat  not  be  curable  by  man.  There  are  diseases  that  no 
medicine  can  heal,  and  sorrows  that  no  human  aid  can  touch.  Grief  naturally  tends 
to  endure  by  its  own  creation  of  a  habit  of  grieving. 

"  SorroWj  like  a  heavy-hanging  bell. 
Once  set  on  ringing,  with  his  own  weight  goes : 
Then  little  strength  rings  out  the  doleful  knell." 

(Shakespeare.) 

Some  sorrows  are  evidently  Incurable  by  man.  1.,  3%e  loss  of  those  greatly  beloved. 
No  human  comforter  could  bring  back  Job's  seven  sons  and  three  daughters  from  the 
dead.  What  word  or  work  of  man  could  touch  his  sorrow  of  utter  bereavement  ?  We 
know  only  too  well  that  nothing  on  earth  can  make  up  for  our  greatest  losses  by' 
death.  2.  The  discovery  of  a  wasted  life.  When  the  old  man  comes  to  himself  and 
finds  that  be  has  been  living  in  a  delusion,  when  he  sees  with  bitter  remorse  that  he  has 
been  squandering  his  years  in  folly  and  sin,  what  can  man  do  to  comfort  him?  The 
past  can  never  be  recovered.  3.  The  despair  of  guilt.  If  this  is  soothed  by  flattery 
and  falsehood,  a  fatal  mischief  is  done.  But  if  the  conscience  is  fairly  roused,  it  cannot 
be  thus  soothed.    To  man  sin  is  incurable. 

III.  Grief  that  appbabs  to  be  inoheablb  mat  yet  be  all  cubed  by  God. 
No  child  of  God  should  despair,  for  infinite  love  and  almighty  energy  can  know  of  no 
impossibility.  The  gospel  of  Christ  offers  complete  cure.  1.  Present  peace.  (1)  If  the 
trouble  is  from  sin,  the  peace  is  in  pardon.  All  sin  is  curable  by  Christ,  for  "  he  is 
able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him  "  (Heb.  vii.  25). 
(2)  If  the  trouble  is  from  any  other  cause,  the  peace  is  in  the  love  of  God.  This  love, 
which  also  brings  the  peace  of  forgiveness,  is  itself  an  infinite  consolation.  It  is  better 
to  be  Lazarus  with  God  than  Dives  with  purple  and  fine  linen.  2.  Future  blessedness. 
The  dead  will  not  return  to  us.  But  we  shall  go  to  them.  Christ  promises  to  his 
people  a  home  in  the  great  house  of  God.  There  "  Otoi  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from 
their  eyes "  (Kev.  vii.  17).  The  old  wasted  life  cannot  be  given  back  in  its  pristine 
innocence.     But  the  renewed  soul  may  live  a  new  life  in  God's  eternity. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  12. — Shattered  when  at  ease.  This  was  Job's  awful  fate.  All  was  calm  when 
the  thunderbolt  fell  and  dashed  him  to  the  ground. 

I.  God  gives  times  op  base.  This  should  be  acknowledged  even  in  the  hours  of 
suffering.  Take  life  as  a  whole,  and  the  intervals  of  ease  are  with  most  people  much 
longer  than  the  periods  of  trouble.  Yet  we  are  tempted  to  neglect  them  when  giving 
the  story  of  our  life,  and,  like  Jacob,  to  describe  our  days  as  "  few  and  evil "  (Gen. 
xlviL  9).  Quiet  times  come  from  God  quite  as  much  as  troublous  times.  It  is  an 
unjust  view  of  providence  to  suppose  that  our  ease  comes  from  ourselves  and  the 
world,  and  only  our  trouble  from  God. 

II.  Times  of  ease  will  not  endure  fob  eteb.  It  is  needless  to  be  anticipating 
futvu-e  trouble.  Christ  bids  us  not  be  anxious  for  the  morrow.  But  we  should  be 
prepared  for  trouble.  The  man  who  has  insured  his  house  against  a  fire  need  not  be 
always  dreaming  that  it  is  in  flames.  Having  made  a  proper  provision,  he  can  set 
aside  all  thoughts  of  danger.  We  require  to  have  just  so  much  perception  of  the 
uncertainty  of  life  as  to  lead  us  to  make  the  requisite  provision  for  a  reverse  of  fortune. 
The  storm  may  come.     Where  shall  we  be  when  it  is  upon  us  ? 

III.  Times  of  ease  are  not  in  themselves  secubitieb  against  times  or 
trouble.  As  they  may  give  place  to  very  different  times,  they  cannot  ward  off  the 
unacceptable  succession.  The  great  temptation  of  the  rich  man  is  to  trust  in  his 
wealth  for  what  it  can  never  purchase.  Seeing  that  its  range  is  wide,  he  is  in  danger 
of  missing  its  limits.  So  the  prosperous  man  is  tempted  to  trust  to  his  good  fortune, 
m  though  the  mere  occurrence  of  what  is  agreeable  were  a  cause  of  the  same  in  th« 
futore.  But  trouble  comes  from  outsidu  a  man's  circumstances,  or  from  his  own  hearti 
which  may  be  bankrupt  while  his  estate  is  perfectly  sound. 


292  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  foH.  xvi,  1— 22. 

IV.   TlUEB    OF     EASS    SHOITLD     HBIiP    V8    TO     PBEPABB    FOB     TIMES    OF     TBOnBLK. 

Joseph  laid  up  Btores  during  the  eeven  years  of  plenty  in  preparation  for  the  coming 
seven  years  of  famine.  The  prudent  man  will  always  try  to  put  something  by  for  a 
rainy  day.  Old  age  must  be  provided  for  by  the  forethought  of  earlier  years.  Thrift 
is  a  duty  a  maa  owes  to  his  family  whom  he  ought  to  support,  and  to  his  neighbours 
to  whom  he  ought  not  to  become  a  burden.  Higher  considerations  require  the  same 
method  of  conduct.  These  present  calm  days  afford  us  good  opportunities  for  spiritual 
preparation.  It  is  rare  indeed  that  a  man  has  power  and  disposition  to  enter  into  the 
deeper  religious  experiences  on  his  death-bed  if  he  has  not  made  himself  acquainted 
with  them  during  the  days  of  health  and  strength.  Then  death  may  surprise  us  at 
any  time,  and  the  only  safety  is  in  being  always  ready.  A  good  use  of  the  long,  quiet, 
prosperous  summer-time  of  life  should  leave  us  prepared  to  meet  whatever  wintry 
storms  it  may  please  God  to  send  us.  If  we  have  the  peace  of  God  in  our  hearts,  the 
most  shattering  blows  will  not  destroy  it,  and  that  peace  even  in  trouble  will  be  far 
more  precious  to  us  than  the  times  of  ease  of  the  lotus-eaters,  with  whom  it  was 
"always  afternoon,"  but  who  knew  not  the  deeper  blessedness  of  peace  in  sorrow. 
— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  17  (last  clause,  "My  prayer  is  pure  "). — Purity  Sprayer.  The  impure  prayer 
cannot  be  heard  by  God.  It  may  be  earnest,  passionate,  veheaient,  yet  it  must  fall 
back  rejected  and  confounded.    Let  us,  then,  consider  in  what  parity  of  prayer  consists. 

I.  Reality.  The  prayer  that  is  not  felt  and  meant  in  the  heart  is  an  impure  offer- 
ing of  hypocrisy.  Though  it  be  uttered  in  the  becoming  phrases  of  devotion,  it  is  to 
God  as  the  howling  of  blasphemous  demons.  If  there  be  no  other  sin  in  our  prayer, 
insincerity  is  fatal.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  be  always  true  and  real,  especially  in  public 
acts  of  devotion,  when  a  multitude  of  people  are  expected  to  be  joining  in  the  same 
prayer  at  the  same  moment.  Jf,  however,  the  heart  is  set  on  truly  seeking  God,  he 
will  not  count  the  wandering  thought  of  casual  distractions  as  a  mark  of  insincerity. 
The  spirit  may  be  willing  while  the  flesh  is  weak  (Mitt.  xxvi.  41),  and  God  looks  to 
the  heart.  What  is  essential  is  a  true  purpose  and  effort  to  worship  God,  who  is  a 
Spirit,  in  spirit  and  iu  truth  (John  iv.  24). 

II.  Penitence.  We  are  all  sinners,  and  therefore  can  only  come  to  God  as  sup- 
pliants coulessing  our  sm.  Any  other  method  of  approach  is  false  to  our  character  and 
deeds.  In  the  parable  of  the  publican  and  the  Pharisee  it  is  just  the  contrition  of  the 
publican  that  meets  with  God's  approval.  If  we  hold  to  otu^  sin  we  cannot  be  received 
in  our  prayer.  Though  we  may  forget  the  ugly  thing,  or  suppose  that  we  have  left  it 
behind  us,  it  is  with  us  in  the  very  house  of  God ;  it  is  even  standing  between  us  and 
God,  a  black  and  impenetrable  barrier. 

III.  Faith.  We  cannot  pray  purely  till  we  trust  God.  The  prayer  of  unbelief  is 
a  wild  cry  in  the  darkness  wrung  from  a  soul  by  its  utter  distress.  Surely  God  will 
pity  such  a  cry,  and  in  his  infinite  compassion  he  will  do  what  is  possible  to  save  his 
benighted  child.  But  the  strength  of  commnnion  with  God  that  comes  in  prayer  is 
only  possible  when  we  can  trust  GoJ  as  our  Father  and  completely  confide  in  him.  It 
is  by  believing,  by  trusting  God,  that  we  win  great  blessings  in  prayer. 

IV.  Submission.  If  our  prayer  is  a  self-willed  mandate  claiming  certain  things  from 
God  which  must  be  just  according  to  our  mind,  it  is  defiled  by  impurity.  We  have 
not  to  dictate  to  God  what  he  is  to  do  for  us.  Our  duty  is  to  lay  our  case  before  God 
and  then  to  leave  it  with  him.  He  must  do  what  he  thinks  best,  not  what  we  demand. 
The  pure  prayer  will  be  submissive,  saying,  "  Not  as  1  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

V.  Unsblpishkess.  Even  in  our  submission  we  may  still  be  selfish,  for  we  may 
be  convinced  that  it  is  best  for  ourselves  that  God  should  do  with  us  what  he  thinks 
best,  and  may  think  of  nothing  else.  Such  prayers  as  "  Bless  me ;  save  me ;  comfort 
me ;  fill  me  with  good  things,"  are  narrow,  and  when  they  stand  alone  they  are  selfish. 
Christ's  model  prayer  is  in  the  plural  number,  "  Our  Father, .  .  .  give  ua,"  etc.  We 
need  to  enlarge  our  petitions  with  intercession  for  our  brethren,  and  to  include  the 
wants  of  the  world  in  our  prayers.  The  purest  prayer  is  one  that  chiefly  seeks  the 
glory  of  God— Christ's  prayer,  "Father,  glorify  thy  Name." — W.  F.  A. 

Vera.  Id,  2ii,—The  Witntu  in  heaven.    Job  turns  from  man  to  God.    On  earih  he 


«iH.  xt».  1— 21]  tHB  BOOK  OP  JOB.  «93 

ia  misjudged,  but  in  heaven  there  is  One  who  sees  all,  and  can  wifness  both  his  woe 
and  his  integrity.  More  than  this;  he  turns  from  God  as  the  source  of  his  calamity 
to  God  as  his  Saviour,  Dr.  8.  Cox  has  pointed  out  that  Job  has  here  made  a  great 
discovery.  He  has  found  a  higher  God,  a  God  of  love,  above  the  God  who  torments. 
Or  rather,  he  has  seen  the  true  God  above  the  false,  conventional  idea  of  God.  To  this 
God  he  appeals  as  his  Witness  in  heaven. 

L  There  is  a  Witness  in  heaven.  1.  He  U  fair  ahove  us.  "  In  heaven."  God 
is  not  to  be  confined  to  the  narrow  range  of  earthly  experiences.  He  sits  above  the 
dust  and. din  of  the  battle,  above  all  the  clouds  and  storms  of  earth.  He  is  free  from 
the  passion,  the  limited  vision,  the  personal  prejudice  of  the  immediate  actors  in  the 
earthly  scene.  Though  intimately  associated  with  all  we  are  and  dn,  he  is  yet  so  great 
as  to  enjoy  that  detachment  of  mind  which  allows  of  fair  and  impartial  judgment.  He 
looks  with  other  eyes  than  oursj  from  his  high  station  he  sees  all  things  in  their  right 
proportion,  and  he  takes  in  the  whole  panorama  of  existence.  2.  He  takes  note  of 
earthly  things.  A  "Witness."  God  is  not  uninterested  in  earth,  like  an  Epicurean 
divinity.  He  looks  into  all  human  affairs,  and  they  are  all  open  to  him.  Every 
human  deed  is  done  under  the  eye  of  God ;  even  the  darkest  and  most  secret  crimes 
are  perfectly  open  to  his  all-penetrating  scrutiny.  He  too  sees  things  truly,  as  they 
are;  and  the  greatest  wrong  and  injustice  is  quite  clear  to  him.  God  never  misimder- 
stands  any  of  his  children.  3.  He  can  he  appealed  to.  Job  even  calls  God  "my 
Witness."  He  feels  that  God  is  on  his  side,  and  he  believes  that  he  may  call  upon  God 
to  testify  against  the  enormous  wrong  that  is  being  done  to  him.  God  does  not  reserve 
his  knowledge  uselessly,  like  a  student  who  is  always  learning,  but  never  employing 
what  he  acquires.  We  may  appeal  to  God  to  come  and  speak  and  act  for  our  deliver- 
ance, pouring  out  tears  unto  him. 

II.  The  Witness  in  heaven  is  troe  and  oood.  It  is  useless  to  appeal  to  a  false 
witness,  or  to  one  who  will  give  an  unfavourable  version  of  what  he  sees.  Satan  was 
a  witness  of  Job's  life ;  but  Satan's  testimony  was  one-sided,  suspicious,  and  as 
damaging  as  the  facts  could  allow.  Job  appeals  without  fear  to  the  supreme  Witness, 
knowing  that  his  testimony  can  be  relied  upon.  Goodness  and  truth  are  supreme. 
The  lower  earthly  experiences  of  God  are  contradictory  and  confusing.  What  we  see 
in  this  world  of  nature  and  providence  perplexes  us  with  hard  thoughts  of  apparent 
indifference,  injustice,  cruelty.  Some  have  even  supposed  that  the  Creator  of  a  world 
with  so  much  evil  could  not  be  good.  Browning's  Caliban  imagined,  in  his  poor,  dim, 
low-minded  speculation,  that  his  god  Setebos  made  the  world  "  out  of  spite."  This 
was  a  common  belief  with  the  Gnostic  sects.  But  Caliban,  like  the  Gnostics,  saw  that 
there  was  a  Supreme  who  did  justly.  The  notion  appears  in  modern  times.  Dr.  Jessopp 
relates  a  conversation  in  which  an  old  countryman  said  that  Providence  was  always 
against  him.  This  year  it  was  the  potato-disease,  and  last  year  the  oats  were  blifrhted. 
But  looking  up, he  added,  "  I  reckon  there's  One  above  that  will  call  him  to  account." 
The  delusion  is  in  separating  the  two  divinities.  We  have  to  see  that  the  one  God 
appears  in  lower  scenes  of  darkness  and  mystery,  and  also  in  the  heights  above  as 
perfect  love.  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  his  footstooL  But  his  countenance  is 
gracious. — W.  F,  A. 

Ver,  21. — Pleading  with  Qod.  Job  still  maintains  the  higher  strain  of  thought 
which  he  took  up  when  he  appealed  to  his  Witness  in  heaven.  The  one  desire  of  his 
heart  is  to  be  right  with  God,  and  he  is  persuaded  that  only  God  himself  can  make 
him  so. 

I.  OuB  GEEATKST  HEED  IS  TO  BE  EIGHT  WITH  QoD.  What  Is  the  uso  of  the  flattery 
of  man  if  God,  the  one  supreme  Judge  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  condemns  us  ?  But, 
then,  where  is  the  mischief  of  man's  censure  when  our  Judge  acquits  us  ?  Far  too  much 
is  made  of  the  opinion  of  the  world,  and  far  too  little  of  the  verdict  of  Heaven.  We 
need  to  rise  above  the  little  hopes  and  fears  of  human  favour  to  the  great  thought  o( 
God's  approval.  When  we  think  first  of  that,  all  else  becomes  insignificant.  The 
reasonsfor  doing  so  should  be  overwhelming.  1.  God  knows  all.  2.  Ee  is  Almighty — 
able  to  bless  us  or  to  cast  us  off.  3.  Ee  is  ow  Father.  And  it  is  better  for  the  child 
to  stand  well  with  his  parent  than  with  all  the  world. 

II.  Wb  have  to  own  THAT  WE  ARE  NOT  EIGHT  WITH  GoD.     1.  2%M  it  apparent 


294 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xm.  1 — 16 


»n  the  experience  of  life.  Job  felt  there  was  something  wrong  between  him  and  God, 
though  the  foolish  error  of  his  friends  had  confused  his  mind,  so  that  be  could  not  see 
where  the  wrong  lay.  The  dark  shadows  that  creep  between  us  and  God,  and  hide 
from  us  the  joy  of  heaven,  are  felt  in  experience.  They  certainly  bear  witness  to  soma 
condition  of  error  or  evil.  2.  Z%ts  m  also  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  consaienee,  A 
voice  within  interprets  the  dark  scene  without.  We  learn  from  Job's  distresses  that 
calamities  are  not  necessarily  indicative  of  sin.  But  we  must  all  own  that  nothing 
puts  us  so  wrong  with  God  as  our  own  misconduct. 

III.  We  need  an  advocate  to  bet  us  bight  with  God.  We  cannot  represent  our 
own  case  aright,  for  we  do  not  understand  ourselves,  and  our  "  hearts  are  deceitful  above 
all  things."  We  certainly  do  not  know  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  How,  then,  can 
we  find  our  way  back  to  him?  A  trackless  desert  lies  between,  and  the  night  is  dark 
and  stormy.  Even  if  we  were  before  him  we  could  not  answer  him  "  one  of  a  thousand." 
Thus  there  is  a  general  feeling  among  men  that  some  mediator,'intercessor,  advocate, 
priest,  is  required. 

IV.  God  in  Cheist  is  the  Advocate  with  God  the  Father.  Job  could  not  see 
as  far  as  this ;  but  he  saw  the  essential  truth,  i.e.  that  God  must  provide  the  way  of 
reconciliation.  Only  God  can  plead  with  God  for  man.  Therefore  we  flee  "  from  God  to 
God."  We  escape  irom  the  lower  experiences  of  the  Divine  in  life  which  strike  us  as 
harsh,  and  even  as  unjust,  to  the  higher  vision  of  God  which  reveals  him  as  all  truth  and 
goodness.  We  call  upon  God  in  his  love  to  reconcile  us  with  himself.  This,  the  New 
Testament  teaches,  he  does  in  Christ,  who  is  the  Revelation  of  God's  love.  ■ "  We  have 
an  Advocate  with  the  Father,"  etc.  (1  John  ii.  1).  We  want  no  human  priest  to  plead 
our  cause,  for  we  have  a  great  High  Priest  who  "  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
us."  When  we  truly  pray  in  Christ's  Name  we  have  a  right  to  trust  that  he  will  plead 
for  us.  By  all  the  merits  of  his  cross  and  Passion  his  pleading  is  mighty  to  prevail  for 
the  sinner^!  salvation. — ^W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVn. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  general  character  of 
this  chapter  has  been  considered  in  the  in- 
troductory section  to  oh.  xvi.  It  is  occu- 
pied mainly  with  Job's  complaints  of  his 
treatment  by  his  friends,  and  his  lamen- 
tations over  his  sufferings  (vers.  1 — 12).  At 
the  end  he  appeals  to  the  grave,  as  the  only 
hope  or  comfort  left  to  him  (vers.  13 — 16). 

Ver.  1. — ^My  breath  is  oorrnpt;  or,  mp 
tpirit  is  oppressed.  But  the  physical  mean- 
ing is  the  more  probable  one.  A  fetid 
breath  is  one  of  the  surest  signs  of  ap- 
proaching dissolittion.  Hy  days  are  ex- 
tinct ;  or,  cut  off.  The  verb  used  does  not 
occur  elsewhere.  The  graves  are  ready  fop 
me;  or,  the  chambers  c^the  grave  are  mine 
already.  The  plural  form  is  best  explained 
by  regiirding  it  as  referring  to  the  niches 
commonly  cut  in  a  sepulchral  chamber  to  re- 
ceive the  bodies  of  the  departed  (see  Smith's 
'  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  voL  iii.  pp.  1528 — 
1536). 

Ver.  2 — Are  there  not  mockers  with  me  t 
literally,  modteriet—the  abstract  for  the  oon- 


crete.    (For  the  sentiment,  comp.  ch. 
W  and  XXX.  1 — 14.)   And  doth  net  mini 


mine  eye 


continue  in  their  provocation  1  f  e.  "  Have  I 
anything  else  to  look  upon  ?  Are  not  the 
mockers  always  about  me,  always  provoking 
me?" 

Ver.  3. — Lay  down  now;  or,  give  now  a 
pledge  (see  the  Revised  Version).  The  terms 
used  in  this  verse  are  law  terms.  Job  calls 
upon  God  to  go  into  court  with  him,  and, 
first  of  all,  to  deposit  the  caution-money 
which  the  court  will  require  before  it  under- 
takes the  investigation  of  the  case.  Next, 
he  goes  on  to  say,  put  me  in  a  surety  with 
thee;  or  rather  (as  in  the  Bevisud  Version), 
he  surety  for  me  with  thyself,  which  is  either 
the  same  thing  with  giving  a  pledge,  or  a 
further  legal  requirement.  Finally,  he  asks 
tho  question,  Who  is  he  that  will  strike 
hands  with  met  meaning,  "Who  else  ia 
there  but  thyself,  to  whom  I  can  look  to 
be  my  surety,  and  by  striking  hands  (comp. 
Prov.  vi.  1)  with  me  to  accept  the  legal 
responsibility?"  As  Dr.  Stanley  Leathee 
says,  "  It  is  wonderful  the  way  in  which  the 
language  of  Job  fits  in  with  what  we  have 
since  and  elsewhere  learnt  concerning  the 
Persons  in  the  Godhead." 

Ver.  4.— For  thou  hast  hid  their  heart 
from  understanding.  My  so-called  friends 
will  certainly  not  undertake  for  me,  since 
thou  hast  bimded  their  eyes  and  Ijaidened 
theur  hearts  against  me.     Therefore  shalt 


OH.  xvn.  1 — 16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


295 


thoa  not  exalt  them.  God  will  not  exalt 
those  who  are  without  understanding. 

Ver.  5. — He  that  speaketh  flattery  to  his 
friends ;  rather,  he  that  denounceth  his  friends 
for  a  prey.  Job  means  to  accuse  his  "  com- 
forters" of  lo  acting.  By  their  persistent 
belief  in  his  giierous  wickedness  they  give 
him  np,  aa  it  were,  for  a  prey  to  calamity, 
which  they  pronounce  him  to  have  de- 
served on  account  of  his  secret  sins.  Even 
the  eyes  of  Ms  children  shaU  fail.  Who- 
ever so  acts  shall  be  punished,  not  only  in 
his  own  person,  but  also  in  the  persons  of 
his  descendants  (comp.  Exod.  xx.  5). 

Yer.  6. — He  hath  made  me  also  a  byword 
>f  the  people.  Ood,  by  the  unprecedented 
character  of  his  afSictions,  has  made  Job  a 
byword  among  the  surrounding  nations — a 
byword,  that  is,  for  an  afflicted  person.  Job, 
by  the  manner  in  which  he  bore  his  afflic- 
tions, made  himself  a  byword  for  patience 
and  endurance  among  Cloa's  people  through- 
out all  ages  (see  Jas.  v.  11).  And  aforetime 
I  was  as  a  tahret ;  rather,  I  am  become  an 
abomination  before  them;  or,  as  our  Bevisers 
translate,  I  am  hecome  an  open  abhorring 
(oomp.  oh.  XXX.  10). 

Yer.  7. — Mine  eye  also  is  dim  by  reason 
of  sorrow  (oomp.  Ps.  vi.  7 ;  xxxi.  9).  Ex- 
cessive weeping,  such  as  stains  the  cheeks 
(ch.  xvi.  16),  will  also  in  most  cases  dim 
and  dull  the  eyesight.  And  all  my  members 
are  as  a  shadov.  Weak,  that  is,  wora  out, 
unstable,  fleeting,  ready  to  pass  away. 

Yer.  8. — Vpright  men  shall  be  astonied 
at  this.  When  Job's  case  comes  to  be  known, 
"upright  men"  will  be  astonished  at  it. 
They  will  marvel  how  it  came  to  pass  that 
such  a  man — so  true,  so  fuithful,  so  "  per- 
fect" (eh.  i.  1) — could  have  been  allowed 
by  God  to  suffer  so  terribly.  In  a  world 
where,  up  to  Job's  time,  prosperity  had  been 
taken  as  the  measure  of  goodness,  the  marvel 
was  naturally  great.  Even  now  many  a 
Christian  is  surprised  and  disturbed  in  mind 
if  he  gives  the  case  prolonged  and  serious 
attention,  though  he  holds  the  clue  to  it 
in  that  most  enlightening  phrase,  "  perfect 
through  sufferings  "  (Heb.  ii.  10).  And  the 
innocent  shall  stir  np  himself  against  the 
hypocrite.  On  astonishment  will  follow 
indignation.  When  it  becomes  generally 
recognized  that,  in  a  vast  number  of  oases, 
the  righteous  suffer,  while  the  wicked  enjoy 
great  prosperity,  good  men's  feelings  will 
be  stirred  up  against  these  prosperous  ones ; 
they  will  wax  indignant,  and  take  part 
against  them. 

Yer.  9. — ^The  righteous  also;  rather,  i/et 
«A«  HgUteiu.  A  strong  opposing  clause. 
Notwithstanding  all  the  afflictions  tliat 
befall  him,  and  all  the  further  afflictions 
which  he  anticipates,  yet  the  trulyirighteous 
man  shaU  hold  on  his  way ;  i.e.  maintain  hia 


righteous  course,  neither  cieviatinci;  from  ii 
to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  lelt,  but  hold- 
ing to  the  strict  line  of  rectitude  witliout 
wavering.  Job  is  not  thinking  particularly 
of  himself,  but  bent  on  testifying  that 
righteous  men  generally  act  as  they  do,  not 
from  any  hope  of  reward,  but  from  principle 
and  the  bent  of  their  characters.  And  he 
that  hath  clean  hands  shall  be  stronger  and 
stronger.  Not  only  will  the  just  man  main- 
tain his  integrity,  but,  as  time  goes  on,  his 
goodness  will  be  more  and  more  firmly 
established  (comp.  Aristotle's  'Theoiy  of 
Habits '). 

Ver.  10. — But  as  for  you  all,  do  ye  return, 
and  come  now.  A  challenge  to  his  de- 
tractors. Eeturn,  all  of  you,  to  your  old 
work  of  detraction,  if  you  so  please.  1  care 
not.  Your  accusations  no  longer  vex  me. 
For  I  cannot  find  one  wise  man  among  yon. 
If  I  could  tbe  case  would  be  different.  But, 
as  you  have  all  shown  yourselves  wholly 
devoid  of  wisdom  (oomp.  oh.  ilii.  8),  what 
you  say  has  no  real  importance. 

Ver.  11. — My  days  are  past.  My  days 
are  slipping  away  from  me.  Life  is  well- 
nigh  over.  What,  then,  does  it  matter  what 
you  say  ?  My  purposes  are  broken  off,  evon 
the  thoughts  of  my  heart;  literally,  the  po»- 
sessiona  of  my  heart,  all  the  store  that  it  has 
accumulated — my  desires,  purposes,  wishes. 
I  no  longer  care  to  vindicate  my  innocence 
in  the  sight  of  men,  or  to  clear  my  cha- 
racter from  aspersions. 

Yer.  12. — They  change  the  night  into  day. 
They,  my  detractors,  who  are  also  my  so- 
called  "  comforters,"  pretend  to  change  luy 
night  into  day;  assure  me  that  the  cloud 
which  rests  on  me  is  only  for  a  time,  and 
will  ere  long  give  place  to  the  brightness 
of  day,  to  a  glorious  burst  of  sunshine  (s  e 
ch.  V.  18—26;  viii.  21,  22;  xi.  15— li>). 
The  light  (they  say)  is  short  because  of 
darkness ;  or,  rather,  is  near  because  of  the 
darkness.  Tie  extreme  darkness  sliows 
that  dawn  must  be  near,  that  the  day  m  ist 
soon  break  when  my  sorrow  will  be  tujiied 
into  joy.  Job  had  not  found  himself  com- 
forted by  these  assurances,  which  lacked  the 
ring  of  sincerity,  and  could  not  be  accon- 
plished  except  by  miracle,  which  lie  did  nut 
feel  that  he  had  any  right  to  expect. 

Yer.  13. — If  I  wait,  the  grave  is  mine 
house;  rather,  surely  I  look  for  the  grace 
{Sheot)  as  my  house ;  i.e.  I  expect  no  return 
of  prosperity,  no  renewal  of  life  in  a  sump- 
tuous mansion,  no  recovery  of  the  state  and 
dignity  from  which  I  have  fallen — I  look 
only  for  Sheol  as  my  future  abode  and  rest- 
ing-place— there,  in  Sheol,  I  have  made  my 
bed  in  the  darkness ;  i.e,  I  regard  myself  as 
already  there,  lying  on  my  narrow  bed  in 
the  darkness,  at  rest  after  my  afflictions. 

Yer.  14. — I  have  said  to  oorruption.  Thou 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oa.  XTn.  1— 16, 


art  my  father;  i.e.  I  do  not  murmur;  I 
accept  my  lot ;  I  am  ready  to  lie  down  with 
corruption,  and  embrace  it,  and  call  it  "  my 
father,"  and  henceforth  remain  with  it.  The 
idea  that  the  Boul  i«  itill  with  the  body  in 
the  grave,  more  or  less  closely  attached  to 
it,  and  sensible  of  its  condition  and  changes, 
was  widely  prevalent  in  the  ancient  world. 
Where  bodies  were  simply  buried,  the  hor- 
rible imagination  of  a  close  association  with 
corruption  naturally  and  almost  necessarily 
intruded  itself,  and  led  to  such  reflections 
as  those  of  Job  in  this  verse.  It  was  partly 
to  get  rid  of  this  terrible  nightmare  that 
the  Egyptians  were  so  careful  to  embalm 
the  bodies  of  their  dead,  and  that  the  Baliy- 
lonians  deposited  them  in  baked  clay  coffins, 
which  they  filled  with  honey  (Herod.,  i. 
198)  ;  while  others  still  more  effectually  pre- 
vented the  process  of  corruption  by  crema- 
tion. The  modern  revival  of  cremation  is 
remarkable  as  indicating  a  peculiar  form  of 
atavism  or  recurrence  to  ancient  types.  For 
many  ages  after  the  coming  of  Christ,  men 
80  separated  between  the  soul  and  the  body 
after  death  that  the  corruption  of  the  grave 
had  no  hoiror  for  them.  Now  materialistic 
ideas  have  so  far  recurred,  that  many  of 
those  who  believe  the  soul  to  live  on  after 
death  are  doubtful  whether  it  may  not  still 
be  attached  to  the  body  more  or  less,  and, 
dreading  contact  with  the  corruption,  of  the 
latter,  fall  back  upon  the  old  remedy.  To 
the  worm.  Thou  art  my  mother,  and  my 
sister.  An  expansion  of  the  idea  contained 
in  the  previous  clause. 

Ver.   15. — And  where  is  now  my  hope? 
(oomp.  oh.  xiv.  IS— IS).    At  first  sight  It 


might  seem  that  to  one  in  Sheol  there  conld 
be  no  hope.  But  Job  is  too  conscious  of  his 
own  ignorance  to  dogmatize  on  such  a  sub- 
ject. What  does  he  know  of  Sheol  ?  How 
can  he  be  sure  that  it  is  "  God's  last  word 
to  men"?  There  may  be  hope  even  to 
"the  spirits  which  are  in  prison."  Job's 
question  is,  therefore,  not  to  be  taken  as  one 
of  absolute  incredulity,  but  as  one  of  per- 
plexed doubt.  Is  there  hope  for  me  any- 
where  ?  If  so,  whore  ?  As  for  my  hope,  who 
shall  see  it  1  i.e.  what  eye  can  penetraie  the 
darkness  of  the  future,  and  solve  the  riddle 
for  me  ? 

Ver.  16. — They  shall  go  down  to  the  bars 
of  the  pit,  when  our  rest  together  is  in  the 
dust.  There  is  great  difficulty  in  determin- 
ing the  subject  to  the  verb  "go  down," 
which  is  the  third  person  plural  feminine, 
whereas  the  only  plural  substantive  at  all 
near — the  word  translated  "  bars  " — is  mas- 
culine. Some  suppose  Job's  hopet  to  be 
meant,  "  hope "  in  the  preceding  verse 
having  the  force  of  any  number  of  "  hopes  " 
(so  the  Revised  Version).  Others  disregard 
the  grammatical  difficulty  of  the  plural 
feminine  verb,  and,  making  "bars"  the 
nominative,  translate,  "  The  bars  of  Sheol 
shall  go  down,"  i.e.  "be  broken  down,  perish;" 
or  interrogatively,  "  Shall  the  bars  of  Sheol 
go  down?"  This  rendering  is  thought  to 
be  "in  harmony  with  the  whole  under- 
current of  thought  in  the  chapter ; "  but  it 
has  not  approved  itself  to  many  commen- 
tators. The  present  commentator  must 
acknowledge  that  he  is  unable  to  attach  any 
satisfactory  meaning  to  the  words  of  the 
Hebrew  text. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — Job  to  Ood:  3.  The  requiem  of  a  dying  man.  I.  Amticipatinq  his 
IMMEDIATE  DISSOLUTION.  With  three  pathetic  sighs  the  patriarch  bemoans  his  dyini; 
condition.  1.  The  total  collapse  of  his  vital  powers.  Indicated  by  the  shoitness  and 
offensiveness  of  his  breath,  announcing  the  approach  of  siifFocation  and  decay.  "  My 
breath  is  corrupt."  And  to  this  at  last  must  all  come.  The  most  vigorous  physical 
health,  as  well  as  the  feeblest,  contains  within  it  germs  of  putridity.  Essentially,  not- 
withstanding all  its  strength  and  beauty,  the  corporeal  frame  is  "  this  corruptible." 
Therefore,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  ...  let  not  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might" 
(Jer.  ix.  23).  2.  The  speedy  termination  of  his  life.  The  complete  extinction  of  the 
already  feebly  burning  taper  of  his  terrestrial  existence  was  at  hand.  "  My  days  are 
extinct."  Life  is  fittingly  compared  to  a  candle  (ch.  xxi.  17 ;  Prov.  xxiv.  20;  cf. '  Macbeth,' 
act  v.  sc.  5),  in  respect  of  its  definite  extent,  the  rapidity  with  which  it  burns,  the 
facility  with  which  it  can  be  extinguished,  and  the  certainty  that  it  shall  at  last 
burn  out.  3.  The  actual  opening  of  his  grave.  Contemplated  as  having  already  taken 
place.  "  The  graves  are  ready  for  me."  Job's  wasted  skeleton  made  it  all  too  evident 
that  he  was  prepared  for  them,  and  could  with  propriety  exclaim,  as  afterwards  th« 
aged  Gaunt — 

"  Gaunt  am  I  for  the  grave,  gaunt  as  a  grave. 
Whose  hollow  womb  inherits  nought  but  bones." 

It  is  well  botimei  to  contemplate  tb*  narrow  house  appointed  for  all  the  living;  to 


cjH.  xrn.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOfi.  Wt 

"  sit  upon  the  ground,"  and  "  talk  of  graves,  of  worms,  and  epitaphs ; "  to  reflect 
that — 

"Nothing  can  we  call  our  own,  but  deatb; 
And  that  small  model  of  the  barren  earth, 
Which  serves  as  paste  and  cover  to  onr  bones." 

('  King  Richard  n.,'  act  ii.  so.  1 ;  act  iii.  so.  2.) 

It  is  well  to  realize  that  the  tomb  is  but  a  step  from  the  youngest,  the  fairest,  the 
wisest,  the  strongest  of  Adam's  children,  and  prepare  ourselves  for  it,  as  already  it  is 
prepared  for  us. 

n.  Bidding  farewell  to  his  friends.  1<  Describing  their  character.  He  calls 
them  mockers,  who  had  trifled  with  his  m'sery,  laughed  at  his  innocence,  openly 
accused  him  of  flagrant  wickedness,  consummate  hypocrisy,  and  daring  impiety  (cf. 
ch.  xii.  4).  This  vehement  reassertion  of  Job's  estimate  of  their  beliaviour  would  fall 
with  the  greater  force  and  impress! veness  upon  their  ears,  because  of  proceeding  from 
the  lips  of  a  dying  man  (cf. '  King  Kichard  H.,'  act  ii.  so.  1,  and  '  King  Henry  VIII.,' 
act  ii.  sc.  1,  in  which  John  o'  Gaunt  and  Buckingham  call  attentinn  to  the  weightiness 
of  dying  men's  words).  It  would  sound  like  the  maledictiou  of  an  expiring  prophet. 
2.  Brooding  over  their  calumnies.  Their  wicked  insinuations  had  stung  him  to  the 
quick,  and  were  still  rankling  in  his  bosom.  Not  even  death's  shadow  or  the  grave's 
gloom  could  hide  them  from  his  mental  vision.  As  if  with  an  evil  fascination,  his  soul's 
eye  fastened  on  them,  found  a  lodging  with  them,  and  could  not  shake  them  off. 
Easily  had  they  been  spoken,  but  not  so  eabily  could  their  remembrance  be  effiiced. 
"  Cutting  words  and  cruel  reproaches  are  not  easily  banished,"  especinlly  when  spoken 
by  those  from  whom  sympathy  and  kindness  were  expected.  Hence  the  care  which 
should  be  exercised  not  to  inflict  with  the  tongue  wounds  that  only  death  can  heal.  3. 
Predicting  their  discomfiture.  "Therefore  thou  shalt  not  exalt  them"  (ver.  4).  Jub 
means  that  in  the  hotly  waged  controversy  between  himself  and  his  fi  lends  they  will  not 
be  allowed  to  triumph,  but  be  utterly  routed  and  put  to  shame.  And  of  this  he  points 
out  the  premonitory  symptom,  in  that  moral  and  spiritual  blindness  with  which  God 
had  suffered  them  to  be  overtaken — ^"for  thou  hast  hid  their  heart  from  understanding" 
(vtr,  4).  Either  they  had  wilfully  called  good  evil,  and  put  darkness  for  light,  or  they 
were  wholly  incapable  of  understanding  true  religion  or  appreciating  spiiitual  integrity. 
Uence,  in  either  case,  it  was  impossible  that  they  could  be  right.  Apart  altogether 
from  their  applicability  to  the  friends.  Job  here  lays  hold  of  important  truths;  ase.jr.  (1) 
that  the  highest  function  of  the  spiritual  understanding  is  to  "  discern  spirits  "  (1  Cor. 
xii.  10;  1  John  iv.  1) ;  (2)  that  the  capacity  of  distinguishing  the  true  from  the  false 
in  religion  belongs  to  no  man  by  nature,  but  must  be  imparted  by  God  (Matt.  xi.  25 ; 
1  Cor.  xii.  11 ;  1  John  i.  20) ;  (3)  that  the  absence  of  this  power  to  recognize  true 
moral  worth  and  spiritual  integrity  not  only  disqualiSes  an  individual  from  acting  as 
a  judge  in  the  sphere  of  religion,  but,  ipso  facto,  proclaims  him  to  be  as  yet  outside  of 
that  spliere  altogether;  and  (4)  that  God  will  certainly  in  the  long  run  award  the 
triumph  to  his  own  people  and  his  own  cause.  4.  Announcing  their  punishment,  (1) 
Its  severity.  Their  wickedness  should  be  avenged,  not  alone  upon  themselves,  but 
upon  their  children,  whose  "  eyes  should  fail,''  or  languish  (ver.  5).  That  children 
suffer  for  the  sins  of  parents  is  a  fact  of  everyday  experience;  e.g.  the  families  of 
drunkards,  profligates,  murderers,  traitors,  etc.  It  is  a  special  sign  of  excessive  wicked- 
ness when  its  results  affect  the  innocent  descendants  of  its  perpetrators.  Hence  God 
is  said  to  visit  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth 
generations  of  them  that  hate  him  (Excd.  xx.  5).  The  sin  of  Achan  was  visited  on 
himself  and  his  sons  and  daughters  (Josh.  vii.  24,  25).  The  wickedness  of  Ahab  was 
avenged  on  himself  and  his  posterity  (1  Kings  xxi.  20).  The  leprosy  of  Naaman  clung 
to  Gehazi  and  his  descendants  (2  Kings  v.  27).  Over  against  this,  however,  stands  the 
blessed  fact  that,  though  grace  does  not  run  in  the  blood,  the  [jiety  of  parents  has  a 
tendency  to  reproduce  itself  in  the  characters,  as  certainly  it  draws  down  blessings  on 
the  beads  of  children.  And  as  no  greater  felicity  can  be  bestowed  upon  a  parent  than 
to  contemplate  the  happiness  of  his  household,  so  no  greater  sorrow  can  be  his  than  to 
witness  its  destruction  or  dishonour.  And  sueh  was  the  portion  Job  foretold  for  his 
mocking  friends.  (2)  Its  naturalness.  It  would  he  a  punishment  in  all  respects 
befitting  their  oSenc*.    They  had  trampled  on  their  tost  affections,  delivering  up  him. 


298  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [<m.  xrn.  1—16, 


their  friend,  to  be  a  spoil  (ver.  6) ;  and  bo  would  they  in  tnm  be  wounded  in  theil 
parental  loves.  God's  retributions  often  show  a  striking  correspondence  to  the  crimes 
they  avenge.  Though  the  Ux  talionis  has  been  abrogated  by  the  gospel,  it  is  still  not 
unfrequently  observed  that  they  who  take  the  sword  perish  by  the  sword  (Matt.  xxvi. 
52),  and  that  "  with  what  measure  a  man  metes  it  is  measured  to  him  again  "  (Matt, 
vii.  2),  5.  Proclaiming  their/oily.  With  contemptuous  disdain  he  invites  them  to 
renew  their  efforts  to  establish  his  guilt,  to  attack  him  with  another  round  of  argu- 
ments, telling  them  he  has  no  fear  of  their  success,  knowing  them,  as  he  does,  to  be 
essential  fools  (ver.  5).  If  the  language  evinces  (1)  amazing  self-confidence.  Job 
standing  with  his  foot  in  the  grave,  and  yet  lifting  up  his  head  with  unfaltering 
assurance  to  the  skies ;  and  (2)  keen  intellectual  penetration,  the  spanker  clearly  dis- 
cerning the  fallacious  character  of  the  friends'  consolation  that,  if  he  repented,  he 
would  yet  be  restored  to  a  life  of  prosperity;  it  also  displays  (3)  extraordinary  acerbity 
of  feeling  for  a  good  man  who  might  have  been  expected  to  hush  his  angry  passions 
before  lying  down  to  sleep  in  the  grave ;  and  (4)  excessive  heat  of  language  which  ill 
became  a  saint,  even  of  the  days  of  Job. 

III.  Seeking  refuob  in  the  mekoy  of  God.  1.  2%e  hold  request.  Turning  from 
his  friends  and  confronting  death,  Job  entreats  with  a  sublimely  daring  faith,  which 
rises  clear  above  the  mists  of  despondency  and  the  hurricanes  of  passion  that  alter- 
nately fill  his  breast,  that  God  himself  would  strike  hands  with  him,  and  engage  to  be 
Surety  for  his  innocence  against  himself  (ver.  3).  It  is  a  by  no  means  dim  anticipation 
of  the  fundamental  notion  of  the  gospel,  that,  for  the  answering  of  all  that  God,  as  a 
righteous  Lawgiver,  can  lay  to  the  charge  of  man,  God  has  himself  become  the  Sponsor 
or  Bondsman.  What  Job's  faith,  standing  as  it  were  on  the  headlands  of  human 
thought,  and  looking  out  with  prophetic  eye  into  the  vast  terram  incognitam  that 
spread  out  before  him,  craved  for  himself,  that  God  would  undertake  the  task  of 
replying  for  him,  not  alone  to  the  aspersions  of  his  human  calumniators,  but  also  to  tht 
accusations  and  charges  preferred  against  him  by  his  Divine  assailant,  viz.  God  himself 
— this  astounding  entreaty  on  the  part  of  poor,  feeble,  sinful  humanity,  as  represented 
by  Job,  has  been  answered  by  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  in  the  fulness  of 
the  times  as  God  incarnate  to  champion  the  cause  of  lost  man,  and  vindicate,  not  his 
innocence,  but  his  righteousness  before  God.  2.  The  fourfold  reason.  Job  bases  his 
supplication  on  a  variety  of  grounds.  (1)  The  impossibility  of  finding  help  in  any 
other  quarter  but  with  God.  "  Who  else  [but  God]  should  furnish  surety  to  me  ? " 
(ver.  3).  Not  man,  since  Job's  friends  rather  exulted  in  his  conviction  and  condem- 
nation as  a  criminal.  Hence,  if  any  one  could  act  the  part  of  bondsman,  it  must  be 
God  himself.  So  is  it  God  alone  who  can  either  clear  up  the  saint's  integrity  or 
establish  the  sinner's  righteousness  before  God.  "  No  hope  can  on  the  Law  be  built  of 
justifying  grace ; "  nay — 

"  Vain  is  all  human  help  for  me ; 

I  dare  not  trust  an  earthly  prop  t 
My  Bole  reliance  is  on  thee; 

Thou  art  my  Hope." 

(Elliot.) 

(2)  The  fact  that  God  himself  was  the  Author  of  his  troubles.  Humiliating  as  these 
were  (ver.  6),  they  had  not  come  upon  him  accidentally,  but  by  Divine  permission.  In 
so  far,  therefore,  as  they  proclaimed  him  an  object  of  God's  judicial  wrath,  they  likewise 
made  it  clear  that  only  God  could  effectually  interpose  for  his  deliverance.  As  Job 
was  made  a  proverb  and  an  object  of  contempt  to  his  age  (ch.  xxx.  9, 10),  so  was  David 
(Ps.  XXXV.  15,  16),  and  the  Messianic  Sufferer  spoken  of  in  the  Psalter  (Ps.  xxii.  6,  7 ; 
Ixix.  7, 11,  12, 19),  and  the  prophets  (Isa.  1.  6 ;  liii.  3),  and  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  67 ; 
xxvii.  28,  29,  41 — 44),  and  so  may  Christians  expect  to  be  (1  Cor.  iv.  9,  11, 13).  (3) 
The  circumstance  that  under  the  pressure  of  deep  debasement  he  had  wasted  to  a 
skeleton.  Nothing  impairs  the  strength  or  exhausts  the  vitality  of  the  body  like 
mental  sorrow.  Such  itiward  anguish  as  Job  had  been  subjected  to  makes  the  eye  dim, 
the  hair  gray,  the  face  old,  and  the  entire  frame  feeble.  Man's  frailty,  find  even  man's 
guiltiness,  are  recognized  in  Scripture  as  an  argument  for  God's  merciful  interposition 
(Ps.  vL  2,  5,  7  ;  XXV.  11).  (4)  The  danger  of  all  moral  distinctions  becoming  confused 
if  his  int«grity  were  not  cleared  up.    If  allowed  to  pass  away  under  a  cloud,  the  truly 


OT.  xm.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  299 

pious  would  be  astonished  at  so  mysterious  a  dispensation,  as  afterwards  they  were  at 
Christ  (Isa.  lii.  14),  and  might  even  be  led,  like  David  (Ps.  xxxvii.  7),  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii. 
3),  and  Jeremiah  (xii.  1),  to  envy  the  lot  of  the  ungodly,  who,  notwithstanding  their 
impiety,  are  allowed  to  prosper.  This  danji^-er  is  hardly  possible  under  the  gospel,  which 
has  made  it  patent,  first  in  Christ,  and  then  in  his  people,  that  a  righteous  servant  of 
God  may  be  a  sufferer.  Still  the  suretyship  of  God  in  Christ  for  man  has  established 
moral  distinctions  on  a  firmer  basis  than  they  ever  were  before  (Rom.  iii.  31). 

IV.  Exulting  in  final  viotoby.  Job's  life  is  seemingly  about  to  expire  in  gloom. 
Job  himself,  nevertheless,  avows  his  confident  expectation  that  the  righteous  and  pure- 
handed  man,  like  liimself,  shall  be  ultimately  vindicated  (ver.  9).  The  words  suggest :  1. 
The  purity  of  the  righteous.  They  are  a  people  who  have  "  clean  bands."  Not  that  they 
are  righteous  or  justified  because  of  their  clean  hands.  Even  Job  (ch.  ix.  2),  as  well  as 
David  (Ps.  cxliii.  2)  and  St.  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  16),  proclaimed  that  a  man  could  not  be  justified 
by  works  before  God.  But  clean  hands  are  evidence  of  a  pure  heart.  And  holiness  is 
a  sure  mark  of  faith.  Nay,  if  purity  of  life  be  absent,  the  spirit  of  piety  is  not  present. 
Faith  without  works  is  dead.  Hence  we  are  justified  (as  to  the  sincerity  of  our  faith) 
by  works ;  hence  also  "  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  2.  The  progress 
of  the  righteous.  They  shall  "wax  stronger  and  stronger;"  "They  shall  go  from 
strength  to  strength."  They  shall  progress :  (1)  Certainly.  Wherever  life  is  there 
must  be  growth.  The  soul  possessed  of  grace  cannot  remain  stagnant.  A  Christian 
not  advancing  towards  the  stature  of  a  perfect  man  is  unhealthy  and  unnatural.  (2) 
Gradually.  The  full  measure  of  their  advancement  will  not  be  attained  at  once.  From 
stage  to  stage  go  the  heavenward  pilgrims.  First  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that 
the  full  com  in  the  ear,  is  the  law  according  to  which  the  seed  of  the  Word,  no  less  than 
the  seed  of  the  field,  ripens.  First  the  new-born  babe,  then  the  youth,  and  after  that  the 
mature  man,  is  the  order  of  development  for  life  spiritual  as  well  as  life  physical.  (3) 
Proportionately.  They  shall  grow  in  such  a  way  as  to  wax  stronger  and  stronger.  That 
is,  they  shall  advance  in  all  the  parts  and  properties  of  the  Christian  life  in  brightness 
and  tenacity  of  faith,  in  depth  and  sincerity  of  penitence,  in  ripeness  and  beauty  of 
-outward  holiness,  in  warmth  and  fulness  of  love,  in  cheerfulness  and  joyousness  of 
hope.  3.  The  perseverance  of  the  righteous.  They  shall  hold  on  their  way  (1)  in 
spite  of  every  sort  of  difficulty — the  accusations  of  conscience,  the  power  of  indwelling 
corruption,  the  feebleness  of  faith,  the  pressure  of  affliction,  the  opposition  of  the  world, 
the  misrepresentations  of  friends,  the  wiles  of  the  devil ;  (2)  with  willing  determina- 
tion, whatever  else  may  be  helpful  to  their  progress,  the  co-operation  of  their  own  per- 
gonal faith,  intelligence,  purpose,  will,  being  absolutely  indispensable,  and  these  never 
failing  entirely  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  truly  upright  in  their  hearts  ;  (3)  by  the 
help  of  Divine  grace,  since,  after  all, "  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps," 
neither  is  it  by  man's  unaided  strength  alone,  but  rather  by  the  power  of  God,  thafhe 
is  kept  unto  salvation ;  and  (4)  to  the  journey's  end,  for  it  is  written  of  God's  pilgrims 
that  they  shall  aU  come  to  Zion,  and  of  Christ's  sheep  that  they  shall  never  pensh. 

"V.  Plunging  again  into  darkness.  Descending  from  the  lofty  altitude  upon 
which  his  faith  had  for  a  moment  stood,  the  patriarch  a  second  time  takes  his  stand 
beside  the  opened  tomb,  and  finishes  his  requiem  where  he  began  it,  by  contemplating : 
1.  The  approach  of  death,  as :  (1)  The  ending  of  his  day s,— "My  days  are  past  (ver.  11); 
which  it  is  to  every  one— the  finishing  of  Ufe's  years  and  moments,  the  termination  of 
days  pleasant  and  prosperous  as  well  as  of  days  miserable  and  adverse,  of  days  of  toil 
and  days  of  rest,  days  of  suffering  and  days  of  rejoicing,  days  of  smnmg  and  days  of 
praying,  alasl  also  days  of  grace  and  days  of  discipline.  (2)  The  internipting  of  his 
tiioughtB,— "  My  purposes  are  broken  off,  even  the  thoughts,"  or  chenshed  possessions, 
"of  my  heart"  (ver.  11);  which  again  is  true  of  all,  of  good  and  bad,  of  wise  and  foohsh, 
of  rich  and  poor  alike,  death's  hand  remorselessly  arresting  the  subtle  thoughts  of  the 
busy  brain,  be  it  of  philosopher  or  poet,  statesman  or  merchant,  and  marring  with  equal 
unconcern  the  projects  of  the  pious  and  the  plots  of  the  ungodly,  the  schemes  of  the 
tradesman  and  the  intrigues  of  the  diplomatist,  the  ambitious  enterprises  of  the  rich 
and  the  modest  plans  of  the  poor.  (3)  The  disappointmg  of  his  hopes  of  life,  the  utter 
extinction  of  that  expectation  which  his  friends  had  so  often  urged  him  to  cherish,  viz. 
the  hope  of  a  return  to  prosperity  on  this  side  the  grave,  but  which  he  had  never 
seriously  entertained,  and  which,  if  he  had  entertained  it,  was  i^  completely  shattered. 


m  Tfifi  BOOK  Of  iOt.  (m.iirti.i—it. 

the  bare  idea  of  looking  for  a  restoration  when  one  was  manifestly  stepping  into  dark- 
ness being  as  foolish  as  to  look  for  daylight  when  the  night  was  near.  And  so  death 
deals  with  all  men's  hopes — ^hopes  of  life,  of  prosperity,  of  happiness,  of  usefulness  on 
earth, — intercepts  them,  cuts  them  off,  engulfs  them  in  darkness  as  th6  night  does  the 
day.  2.  The  descent  into  Sheol,  which  he  regards  as :  (1)  The  resting-place  of  his 
body.  "  If  I  hope,  it  is  for  Sheol  as  my  house.  In  darkness  I  make  my  bed  "  (ver.  13). 
The  grave  is  frequently  spoken  of  as  a  house  (ch.  xxxviii.  17),  the  house  appointed  for  all 
living  (ch.  xxx.  23),  the  long  home  of  the  departed  (Bccles.  xii.  5);  and  the  only 
expectation  of  a  worldly  sort  entertained  by  Job  was  that  of  entering  this  sepulchral 
habitation,  in  which  already  he  had  as  it  were  spread  his  couch.  (2)  The  habitation  of 
his  relatives,  these  relatives  being  corraption  whom  he  esteemed  as  his  father,  and  the 
worm  whom  he  named  his  sister  or  his  mother.  "  What  an  in)pressive  description,  and 
yet  how  true  it  is  of  all  I  The  most  vigorous  frame,  the  most  beautiful  and  graceful  form, 
the  most  brilliant  complexion,  has  a  near  relationship  to  the  worm,  and  will  soon  belong 
tu  the  mouldering  family  beneath  the  ground  "  (Barnes).  (3)  The  shelter  of  his  true 
hope,  the  hope  of  a  vindication,  which,  descending  with  him  to  the  bars  of  the  unseen 
world,  might  be  lost  to  the  eye  of  man,  and  in  large  measure  to  himself,  but  would 
rest  beside  him  in  the  dust  till  the  moment  arrived  for  its  public  manifestation. 

Learn :  1.  That  death  is  never  more  than  a  step  from  any  man.  2.  That  those  who 
are  daily  travelling  towards  the  grave  should  begin  betimes  to  prepare  for  their  future 
homes.  3.  That  the  whips  and  scorns  of  time,  the  mockings  and  calumniations  of 
friend^  or  foes,  can  pursue  a  man  no  further  than  to  the  bounds  of  life.  4.  That  God's 
people  have  already  been  delivered  from  their  greatest  adversary  by  the  willing  surety- 
ship of  Christ.  5.  That  the  royal  rtiad  to  heavenly  exaltation  is  the  inward  illumina- 
tion of  the  mind.  6.  That  good  men  should  never  rejoice  in,  though  they  may  sometimes 
foresee,  and  even  foretell,  the  punish  mrnt  of  their  enemies.  7.  That  the  best  safeguard 
of  a  saintly  man  in  trouble  is  to  trace  every  affliction  to  the  hand  of  G-od.  8.  That 
Christ's  followers  should  not  now  be  astonished  at  the  tribulation  of  themselves  or 
others.  9.  That  the  just  man  who  perseveres  in  holiness  will  attain  to  everlasting  lift, 
10.  That  if  death  terminates  the  life  of  man  on  earth,  it  begins  the  existence  of  a  saint 
in  heaven.  11.  That  man  possesses  nobler  relatives  than  the  worms  and  corruption. 
12.  That  death  may  finish  all  terrestrial  hopes,  but  it  cannot  injure  the  hope  of  ever- 
lasting life,  laid  up  for  us  in  heaven. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers,  1 — 16. — The  Just  holds  on  his  vjay.  "  The  pencil  of  the  Holy  Ghost  hath 
laboured  more  in  describing  the  afiBiotions  of  Job  than  the  felioitiea  of  Solomon,"  says 
Lord  Bacon.  "  Prosperity  is  not  without  many  fears  and  distastes,  and  adversity  is 
not  without  comfort  and  hopes.  We  see  in  needleworks  and  embroideries  it  is  more 
pleasing  to  have  a  lively  work  upon  a  sad  and  solemn  ground  than  to  have  a  dark  and 
melancholy  work  upon  a  lightsome  ground ;  judge,  therefore,  of  the  pleasure  of  the 
heart  by  the  pleasure  of  the  eye."  On  this  dark  monotonous  background  of  trouble, 
the  bright  colours  of  a  spiritual  faith  and  hope  stand  from  time  to  time  most  brUliantly 
forth.     Another  example  of  this  occurs  in  the  present  chapter. 

I.  The  first  feeling  presented  is  that  of  eeluotanoe  to  die  mrDER  MiscoNSTEUonoN. 
(Vers.  1,  2.)  But  for  this,  he  is  resigned  to  his  fate.  He  must  in  the  course  of  a 
short  time  renounce  life,  for  disease  is  fulfilling  its  course ;  and  he  would  do  so  willingly, 
if  only  the  mockery  of  his  friends  did  not  continually  vex  him,  and  his  eye  were  not 
provoked  by  their  incessant  irritation.  There  is  generally  something,  even  in  a  state 
of  extreme  suffering,  which  makes  it  hard  to  die.  But  to  die  misunderstood;  under 
the  cloud  of  a  false  accusation ;  like  one  who,  mistakenly  condemned,  has  languished 
in  the  cell  of  a  prison,  and  gone  to  •  felon's  grave; — this  must  surely  be  the  sharpest 
sting  of  death. 

II.  The  agony  of  this  thought  impels  Mm  to  benbwed  beooubbb  to  God.  (Ver. 
8.)  As  none  among  men  will  give  the  promise  and  take  upon  him  to  vindicate  Job's 
innocence  after  death,  will  God  be  bound  as  Surety  for  him,  and  undertake  this  duty  ? 
Thus  onc«  Here  we  see  how  the  extremity  of  suffering  fores*  Job  upon  his  deepest 


OH.  xvn.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  80t 

faith,  can  never  force  him  from  it.  And  he  is  bound  to  exchange  his  darker  thoughts 
of  God  for  these  truer  ones,  apparently  unconscious  that  they  are  inconsistent  with  one 
another. 

III.  But  there  comes  another  belapsb  into  despondbnot.  (Vers.  4 — 7.)  He  looks 
without,  at  the  irritating  spectacle  of  those  complacent,  unfriendly  friendii,  and  com- 
plains of  their  want  of  understanding,  defying  their  authority.  He  accuses  them  uf 
betraying  him  (ver.  5  should  probablj  be,  "he  that  raaketh  a  spoil  of  his  friends," 
etc.),  and  threatens  them  with  sorrow  in  consequence.  Then  again  he  turns  to  Grod 
as  the  source  of  all  his  suflferings,  who  has  made  his  name,  once  so  fair  in  reputation, 
now  a  byword  and  a  scoff,  and  has  brought  him  into  his  present  utter  languor  and 
exhaustion  (ver.  7). 

IV.  But  once  again  there  is  a  revival  op  hMh  oouraob  and  hope.  (Vers.  8,  9.) 
He  contemplates  himself  in  this  light  as  a  reproach  to  all  who  behold  him  or  know 
of  his  fate.  The  upright  are  thrown  into  amazed  confusion,  tliey  are  shocked  at  the 
spectacle ;  and  the  innocent  are  stirred  up  against  the  profligate  in  indignation  at  their 
prosperity.  But  the  just  man  will  hold  on  his  way,  until  the  light  again  shines  upon 
it ;  and  he  who  has  clean  hands  will,  despito  his  present  weakness,  increase  in  strength. 
His  words  are  "  like  a  rocket  which  shoots  above  the  tragic  darkness  of  the  book, 
lighting  it  up  suddenly,  though  only  for  a  short  time  "  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxiii.). 

V.  He  then  turns  again  upon  his  friends  with  a  sharp  BEPBOor  of  thbik  foolish, 
ONCONSOLATOET  WORDS.  (Vcrs.  10 — 16.)  The  sharp  rebuke  of  ver.  10  is  followed  by 
reasons.  His  strength  is  consumed,  and  his  end  is  drawing  near ;  his  days  are  past, 
his  plans  cut  off,  and  the  fondest  desires  of  his  heart;  and  the  light  which  they  think 
to  bring  in  consolation,  is  like  to  darkness  (vers.  11,  12).  He  goes  on  to  justify  himself 
for  seeing  nothing  but  darkness  and  night  before  him,  and  to  reject  the  hope  which 
they  hold  out  of  better  days.  His  hope  is  fixed  on  Hades,  on  the  dark,  lower  world 
alone  (ver.  13).  He  has  said  to  corruption,  "  Father  I  "  the  worm  he  has  designated 
"  mother  and  sister  " !  And  where,  then,  is  this  hope  of  restored  health  and  prosperity 
of  which  you  vainly  talk?  It  disappears  through  the  gates  of  Hades,  and  yonder  in 
the  dust  will  be  alone  his  rest  (vers.  14 — 16).  But  how  unlike  are  God's  thoughts  and 
ways  to  those  of  man  1  Job  thinks  his  fate  is  sealed ;  he  will  neither  live  nor  recover 
his  former  joy.  Yet  God  has  strangely  and  gloriously  ordained  that  both  life  and  joy 
restored  shall  be  his,  as  the  happy  issue  of  his  sufferings  shows.  Thus  does  he  lead 
to  the  gates  of  hell  and  bring  up  again  (1  Sam.  ii.  6),  leads  through  suffering  to  conquest 
over  the  fear  of  death,  and  to  the  germination  and  unfolding  of  a  hope  that  is  centred 
in  the  unseen. — J. 

Ver.  9. — Progress  in  virtue.  A  later  book  declares  "  the  path  of  the  just  is  as  the 
shining  light,  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  So  here  the  stability 
and  progressive  character  of  the  righteous  is  assured. 

I.  Prooeess  in  vibtob  IMPLIES  A  CAREFUL  CHOOSING  OF  A  (JOOD  WAT.  It  is  charac- 
teristic of  a  righteous  man  that  he  has  committed  himself  to  a  carefully  chosen  way. 
It  is  "  his  way."  It  describes  a  path  and  manner  of  life.  It  embraces  his  entire 
"conversation."  He  is  not  driven  as  with  a  wind  and  tossed  from  one  course  to 
anotlier.  One  only  path  is  before  him,  narrow  it  may  be,  and  often  hidden  as  a  rugged 
mouutain-path,  demanding  toil  and  watchfulness  and  effort  to  find  it  and  to  keep  it. 
But  this  "  his  way  "  is  chosen,  and  to  it  he  has  committed  himselt  He  follows  the 
path  whithersoever  it  may  lead  him. 

II.  Progress  in  virtue  on  the  part  of  a  righteous  man  implies  that  he  pebsevbbes 
IN  HIS  CHOSEN  AND  WELL-SELECTBD  PATH.  Fickleness  and  Vacillation  are  not  qualities 
of  true  righteousness ;  but  patience  in  well-doing  always  marks  the  truly  righteous 
one.  The  high  character  of  virtue,  the  gravity  of  the  interests  involved  in  the 
practice  of  virtue,  the  strong  motives  of  virtuous  principle,  together  with  the  appre- 
hension of  the  rewards  of  righteous  doing,  are  all  motives  to  perseverance ;  whilst  t« 
ihem  is  added  the  ministry  of  Divine  grace.  God  helps  the  good  and  obedient  and 
st'iving  souL  Thus  the  inward  principle  of  virtue,  and  the  support  which  it  gathers 
to  itself,  alike  help  ts  secure  a  steady  progress.  But  steady  progress  in  the  path  of 
virtuous  living  must  issue  in  growth  and  perfectness  of  virtuous  character. 

IIL  Steady  progress  in  virtue  is  maeked  bt  incrk  ising  strength  of  chabaoter 


302  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xvii.  1— 1ft 


AND  oomnonoN.  The  righteous  man  waxes  "  stronger  and  stronger."  Holy  principles 
gain  a  firmer  hold  npon  his  convictions.  His  life  settles  intoa  definiteness  and  stability 
of  habit.  He  has  greater  power  to  resist  evil ;  he  has  greater  power  over  his  own  heart ; 
he  exerts  a  greater  power  over  others  around  him.  He  is  not  moved  from  his  integrity 
either  by  the  fierce  onslaughts  of  temptation  or  by  the  severities  of  trial.  His  life  is 
pledged  to  a  course  of  obedient  living — to  purity,  truth,  goodness.  More  and  more  be 
is  established  in  his  goings.  He  rises  to  greater  brightness  as  the  sun  to  greatei 
strength.  He  gathers  strength  even  from  his  afflictions.  Deeper  and  deeper  principles 
of  holy  living  strike  their  firm  roots  into  his  whole  spirit.  He  pursues  his  chosen  and 
holy  way  undeterred  by  the  many  forms  of  temptation  that  assail  him.  In  his  right- 
eousness he  can  "  hold  on  his  way,"  and  with  his  "  clean  hands  "  he  waxes  "  stronger 
and  stronger"  day  by  day. — R.  G. 

Ver.  11. — 2%e  premature  arrest  of  the  purposes  of  life.  Job  looks  out  from  the 
sadness  of  his  present  condition,  and  turns  in  thought  to  his  past  days,  to  the  purposes 
of  those  days — the  hopes  he  had  cherished,  the  plans  he  had  laid,  even  the  thoughts 
of  his  heart.  Alas  1  they  are  dashed — broken  off.  His  purposes  not  accomplished, 
his  plans  useless,  his  hopes  frustrated,  his  thoughts  disappointed,  his  very  days  are 
past !     How  sad !  how  painful !    We  may  reflect — 

I.  On   the   liability,  to  which   BVBBT  one   is   subject,  of  ha  vino  the   PDEP0SB8 

OF  bis  life  BP.0EEN  OFF.  No  One  can  certainly  calculate  on  the  prolongation  of  his 
life.  The  plans  wisely  laid  even  for  good  and  holy  purposes  may  be  frustrated.  The 
thoughtfully  devised  scheme  for  usefulness,  even  for  the  highest  service  to  men,  as 
well  as  the  prudent  endeavour  to  promote  the  felicity  of  home,  or  to  advance  persoual 
culture,  may  all  be  torn  asunder  or  broken,  snapped  off  without  coming  to  maturity. 
None  can  calculate  on  the  future. 

II.  On  the  wisdom  op  so  framing  our  estimate  of  life  that  wb  always  take 
INTO  ACCOUNT  THE  UNCERTAINTY  OF  ITS  TENURE.  No  mau  has  a  just  view  of  his  life 
who  does  not  consider  how  soon  life's  plans  may  be  overset,  torn  to  shreds.  Life  is 
not  assured  to  us.  We  have  no  pledge  that  we  shall  have  time  to  finish  the  work  we 
have  begun.  Hence  it  is  wise  to  frame  our  estimate  of  life  in  view  of  the  possibility 
that  all  our  hopes  may  be  disappointed,  our  purposes  broken  off,  and  the  thoughts  of 
our  hearts  never  fulfilled. 

III.  The  possible  arrest  op  life's  purposes  pkematubbly  makes  it  needful  that 

EVERY  ONE  SHOULD  SEEK  DILIGENTLY  TO  DO  HIS  WORK  WHILE  OPPOBTUNITY  IS  AFFORDED. 

Some  work  is  given  to  every  man  to  do,  and  time  is  given  in  which  to  do  it.  For  no 
man  is  expected  to  do  that  for  which  he  has  not  time.  But  no  time  may  be  wasted. 
The  great  lesson  is  again  and  again  read  in  our  hearing,  "  Work  while  it  is  called  to-day, 
for  the  night  oometh  when  no  man  can  work."  The  uncertainty  of  our  .life's  duration 
makes  diligence  imperative ;  it  checks  too  confident  an  assurance  of  the  future,  and 
it  makes  it  all-important  that  the  life  be  grasped  whose  duration  is  assured.  Happy 
he  who  can  form  good  purposes  and  find  time  to  fulfil  them ! — B.  G. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  darkened  hope.  Sad  indeed  is  the  hope  which  is  attained  only 
in  the  grave,  which  has  no  clear  vision  beyond.  Unillumined,  uncheered,  it  has  no 
brightness,  no  comfort.  All  that  Job  seems  at  present  to  hope  for  is  the  silence,  the 
darkness,  the  rest,  of  the  grave.  There  certainly  does  not  dawn  upon  him  the  clear 
light  of  the  future ;  at  least  the  assurance  of  it  is  not  declared  in  his  words.  It  is  the 
grave,  the  grave,  and  the  grave  only.  Contemplate  the  condition  of  such  as  have 
this  hope  only. 

].  No  LIGHT  18  oast  UPON  lipb's  DARKNESS.  Job's  Condition  one  of  extreme  sadness. 
He  bears  up  with  much  bravery ;  but  when  his  spirit  is  sorely  pressed  he  buries  his 
thoughts  in  the  tomb.  "  I  have  made  my  bed  in  the  darkness."  No  light  comes  from 
these  dark  shades  to  make  brighter  life's  gloom.  "  The  grave,"  "darkness,"  "  corrup- 
tion," "  the  worm,"  "  the  bars  of  the  pit,''  "  the  dust," — to  these  Job  is  reduced ;  he 
cannot  rise  above  them.  No  ray  of  light  can  come  thence  to  make  his  present  path 
Imditer. 

fi.  This  hope  gives  no  base  in  life's  sobbowb.  It  awakens  no  holy  emotion.  It 
is  a  gloomy  despair.    Life  ends  in  a  tomb.    The  purposes  of  life  are  broken  off  with 


OH.  xvn.  l—l*.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  303 

the  ending  of  the  day.  Fain  may  cease  then;  but  no  ease  comes  thence  to  the 
affiioted  one.  To  cry  "  father,"  "  mother,"  "  sister,"  to  the  worm  and  to  corruption 
has  no  element  of  cheerfulness  in  it,  no  inspiration  of  brightening  hope  to  relieve  the 
gloomy  sorrowfulness  of  the  present.  Such  a  future  could  not  be  anticipated  but  with 
the  uttermost  dread  and  abhorrence  save  by  one  pressed  out  of  mind  by  the  severity 
of  his  present  afBictions. 

III.  SUOH  A   HOPE  18  INSUFFICIENT,  IHCOMPLBTB,  UNSATISFTIN6.      It  leaves  the  SOul 

with  an  unfilled  void.  In  its  incompleteness  and  unsatisfying  character  it  points  to 
the  necessity  for  a  better  and  brighter  hope.  Human  life  lacks  a  harvest  in  thfl 
absence  of  something  brighter  than  this.  For  the  best  life  to  go  down  into  the  grave  as 
its  final  condition  seems  so  anomalous  that  everywhere  the  longing  for  a  brighter 
condition  exists. 

IV.  Such  a  hope  stands  in  contbast  to  the  oleab,  comfobtin(j,  asbubbd  hope 
OF  THE  Ohbistian  FAITH.  Life  and  immortality  had  not  been  brouglit  fully  to  light 
when  these  gloomy  words  were  written.  It  remained  for  the  perfect  revelation  and 
the  all-perfect  Bcvealer  to  make  known  the  brightness  of  that  future  which  awaits  the 
godly.  Israel  held  possession  of  the  hope  of  the  resurrection ;  but  it  is  part  Of  the 
skilfulness  of  the  teaching  in  this  book  that  anything  short  of  a  fully  assured  immor- 
tality of  blessedness  is  insufficient  to  meet  the  utmost  requirements  of  the  human 
soul.— R.  Q. 

Ver.  3. — A  pledge  from  God.  Job  is  assured  by  faith  that  God  will  ultimately 
vindicate  his  innocence ;  but  meanwhile  his  horrible  disease  is  eating  into  his  very  life, 
BO  that  he  fears  he  may  not  live  to  see  the  end  when  all  shall  be  made  clear.  Therefore 
he  prays  for  a  pledge  of  the  future  liberation  from  calumny  and  vindication  of  his 
character.  In  other  experiences  we  crave  a  pledge  of  the  fulfilment  of  our  most  choice 
hopes.    Let  us  consider  what  pledges  God  offers  to  us,  and  their  significance. 

I.  Observk  the  many  kinds  or  pledoe  which  God  gives  to  us.  1.  In  nature. 
Naiure  is  full  of  promise.  She  is  eloquent  with  prophecy.  Her  parabolic  significance 
points  to  the  spiritual  and  the  eternal.  The  messages  of  God's  goodness  in  spring 
flowers  and  autumn  fruits  are  real  pledges  from  the  hand  of  God,  earnests  of  hig  greater 
goodness.  2.  In  instinct.  God  has  implanted  ia  our  breasts  ineradicable  desires — 
thirst  for  truth,  hunger  for  love,  yearning  for  holiness.  The  very  existence  of  these 
instincts  are  pledges  of  the  satisfaction  of  them,  for  God  would  not  mock  his  children 
and  torment  them  with  delusive  hopes.  We  may  all  have  some  delusive  hopes,  indeed ; 
but  not  by  nature  as  original  instincts.  3.  In  revelation.  God  reveals  himself  in 
nature  and  in  instinct, but  more  explicitly  in  the  utterances  of  inspired  human  teachers. 
The  Bible  is  a  Divine  pledge.  Its  self-evidencing  inspiration  confirms  his  truthfulness, 
God  will  not,  cannot  lie.  Therefore  the  promises  of  Scripture,  and  even  its  precepts, 
carry  with  them  pledges  of  the  future  when  what  is  then  portrayed  wUl  be  seen  in 
experience.  4.  In  Christ.  He  is  the  great  Pledge  from  God.  By  giving  us  his  Son 
God. has  confirmed  his  Word.  He  has  not  only  fulfilled  Messianic  prophecy;  he  has 
given  a  token  of  his  changeless  purpose  of  love,  and  an  earnest  of  his  future  redemption 
of  the  race.    Christ  is  the  one  greatest  Pledge  from  God. 

II.  CONSIDEB  THE   SIGNIFICANCE   OF   THE   DiVINE   PLEDGE.      1.    To  revecU  truth.      (1) 

A  pledge  of  pardon.  Christ  is  to  us  a  sign  that  God  is  willing  to  forgive  sin  and  to 
welcome  his  penitent  children.  We  are  not  left  to  vague  surmises ;  we  have  a  definite 
assurance  in  the  mission  and  work  of  Christ.  (2)  A  pledge  of  love.  The  root  from 
which  the  pardon  comes  is  love.  Christ  is  the  Proof  that  God  loves  us.  (3)  A  pledge 
of  character.  The  new  Christian  life  is  first  seen  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  He  lived  it, 
and  his  experience  is  the  pledge  of  what  it  will  be  when  it  is  perfectly  followed  by  his 
disciples.  (4)  A  pledge  of  hope.  Nature,  instinct,  and  revelation  point  vaguely  to  the 
immortality  of  which  Christ  is  the  sure  Pledge.  He  is  the  Firstfruits  of  the  resurrection, 
the  Pledge  of  eternal  life  to  his  people.  2.  To  confirm  faith.  Job  longed  for  a  pledge 
from  God.  We  have  received  pledges,  and  one  of  them  of  highest  worth.  The  supply 
of  what  Job  desired  should  have  a  great  efieot  upon  us.  We  are  unreasonable  if  we 
disregard  the  pledge  of  God,  and  turn  aside  from  it  to  plunge  into  despairing  scepticism. 
Like  Moses  we  can  see  the  promised  land.  We  have  a  better  assurance  than  Gideon's 
fleece,  in  Christ  and  his  resurrection.    Therefore  our  attitude  should  be  one  of  cahn. 


804  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xvn.  1—16. 


unflincluDg  faith.  It  must  be  only  of  faith,  however;  for  we  have  aottho  inheritance  ai 
yet,  but  only  a  pledge  of  it.  Still  God'i  pledge  is  an  absolutely  safe  security. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  4. — The  heart  that  is  hidden  from  imderstanding.  Job  is  persuaded  that  God. 
will  not  desert  him.  He  even  takes  the  very  delusions  of  his  tormeators  as  the  pledge 
from  G«i  for  which  he  has  been  praying ;  for  these  delusions  seem  to  come  from  God, 
and  to  show  that  he  has  hidden  the  heart  of  the  three  friends  from  understanding.  It 
it  be  so,  they  will  not  be  exalted  by  God  to  trample  on  the  sufferer  in  his  misery. 

I.  Ukdbhstakdino  depends  on  the  condition  of  thk  hbabt  If  the  heart  is 
wrong  the  judgment  will  be  at  fault.  We  do  uot  judge  simply  as  we  see  with  our 
eyes.  The  mental  and  spiritual  condition  within  largely  determines  the  shape  and 
character  of  our  convictions.  Observe  some  of  the  states  of  the  heart  that  hide  it  from 
understanding.  1.  Obtuseness.  The  heart  may  be  simply  dull  and  blind  to  truth. 
If  the  light  shines  with  meridian  splendour,  the  man  who  has  cataracts  in  his  eyes 
will  stumble  into  the  ditch  as  surely  as  if  he  were  walking  in  midnight  darkness. 
Some  men  have  no  eyes  of  sympathy  with  which  to  see  their  neighbours ;  they  cannot 
understand  them.  Some  have  no  spiritual^perceptions  of  God ;  and  they  cannot  under- 
stand him.  2.  Prejudice.  We  see  with  the  mind  as  well  as  with  the  eyes.  Our  percep- 
tion is  an  amalgam  of  sight  and  thought.  If  the  thought  is  warped,  the  perception  will 
be  crooked.  A  prejudiced  heart  excludes  truth  from  the  understanding.  3.  Passion. 
Strong  feeling  blinds  the  judgment  by  its  own  fiery  fury.  The  enraged  heart,  the  sin- 
loving  heart,  the  ill-regulated  heart,  are  all  void  of  understanding.  We  need  a  new  and 
clean  heart  that  we  may  receive  God's  truth. 

n.    'J'HE  heart  from  which   UNDBESTANDINO  is  hidden  cannot   enjoy  the  FAVOtJB 

OP  God.  His  favour  dues  not  depend  on  intellectual  conditions.  Purely  mental  per- 
plexity is  no  barrier  agaiust  the  soul  in  its  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  love,  for  God  does 
not  wait  for  perfect  orthodoxy  before  he  will  help  and  bless  his  children.  But  we  have 
now  to  do  with  quite  another  kind  of  error.  The  error  which  cuts  off  from  God's  favour 
is  moral ;  it  springs  from  a  perversion  of  heart.  For  this  we  are  to  blame,  and  therefore 
the  loss  it  entails  is  justly  deserved.  The  loss  of  God's  favour  is  seen  throughout,  both 
in  the  origin  aud  in  the  results  of  the  error.  1.  In  its  origin.  The  startling  thought 
of  Job  is  that  it  is  God  who  has  hidden  the  heart  from  understanding.  The  blindness 
is  judicial,  a  result  of  God's  action.  This  may  look  like  attributing  moral  evil  to  God. 
If  Job  in  his  tcrj  ible  darkuess  meant  anything  of  the  kind,  of  course  we  know  that  he 
must  have  betn  in  error.  (1)  But  without  going  so  far  as  this,  we  may  see  that  God 
would  withdraw  his  aiding  Spirit  from  the  perverse  heart.  The  result  would  be  to  hide 
that  heart  from  understanding.  (2)  The  laws  of  human  life  and  thought  which 
connect  perversity  of  heart  with  lack  of  understanding  proceed  from  God.  (3)  It  is 
not  well  that  truth  should  be  understood  by  the  perverse  heart.  Christ  bade  his 
disciples  not  cast  their  pearls  before  swine.  The  ideas  for  which  we  are  not  morally 
fit  would  be  misapplied  and  degraded  if  we  could  receive  them.  2.  In  its  results.  All 
error  is  dangerous,  and  moral  error  is  fatal.  God  pities  the  bewildared  doubter;  he  is 
angry  with  the  perverse  and  wilful  thinker,  who  goes  wrong  in  thought  because  his 
heart  is  wrung.     Such  a  man  cannot  prosper  under  the  favour  of  God. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  7, — The  eye  that  is  made  dim  by  sorrow.  Job  has  just  been  saying  that  Gk)d 
ad  hidden  the  heart  of  his  tormentors  from  understanding  (ver.  4).  Now  he  sadly 
observes  that  sorrow  has  dimmed  his  own  eye.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  clearly  through  a 
veil  of  tears.     Excessive  weeping  induces  blindness.    The  sad  soul  sits  in  darkness. 

I.  Sorrow  prevents  ub  feom  seeing  all  the  truth.  It  limits  the  range  of 
vision  wen  when  it  does  not  drive  us  down  to  the  darkness  of  despair.  1.  /{  is  an 
emotion,  and  as  such  it  absorbs  our  consciousness  with  internal  feeling,  and  therefore 
does  not  permit  it  to  luck  out  in  external  observation.  All  subjectivity  is  unobservant. 
2.  It  is  a  depressing  influence.  It  tends  to  lower  our  vitality.  It  will  scarcely  let  us 
lift  up  our  eyes  to  see  even  when  we  have  the  power  of  vision.  Poor  Hagar  was  too 
broken-hearted  to  notice  the  well  which  was  to  restore  life  to  her  child.  Thus  in  great 
grief  the  soul  cannot  see  the  Divine  purpose,  nor  the  love  that  is  above  all.  Black 
clouds  hide  the  heavens.  A  raiu  of  tears  blots  out  tine  earthly  Uudscape.  To  the 
sorrowful  eya  there  are  no  flowers  in  spring. 


«i.xvn.l— 18.]  THB  BOOK  OP  J09.  306 

n.  SoBBOw  BBomj)  MAD  U8  TO  EXKBOiBB  |-AiTH.    What  if  the  eye  be  dim  ?    We 

are  not  depenclent  on  sight.  Our  part  is  to  walk  by  faith.  Too  clear  a  landscape 
e:ioludea  the  sense  of  mystery,  and  absorbs  our  attention  in  connection  with  things 
earthly  and  visible.  It  is  well  to  feel  our  littleness,  our  darkness,  our  limitation. 
Then  our  sorrow  really  enlarges  our  lives,  by  leading  us  to  look  at  the  things  which 
are  not  seen,  but  which  are  eternal  (2  Oor.  iv.  18). 

III.  SoBBOw  MAY  OPEN  QtjB  BYES  TO  NEW  TRUTHS.  The  tears  which  blind  us  may 
also  purge  our  vision.  Shutting  out  the  familiar  sight  of  common  scenes,  they  may 
open  to  us  a  new  sight  of  heavenly  truths.  There  have  been  revelations  in  sorrow. 
Jacob  saw  heaven  opened  when  he  was  a  fugitive  for  his  life;  Joseph  interpreted 
dreams  in  prison,  and  Baniel  in  exile ;  Moses  saw  the  burning  bush  iu  the  wilderness ; 
John  beheld  his  great  apocalypse  when  he  was  banished  to  Fatmos.  Poets  learn  in 
sorrow  what  they  teach  in  song. 

IV.  It  is  cbubl  to  be  habsh  with  those  whose  blindness  comes  fbou  sorrow. 
We  must  learn  to  distinguish  this  blindness  from  the  lack  of  understanding  which 
springs  from  a  perverse  heart,  like  that  of  the  three  friends  (ver.  4).  Sinful  and  reckless 
soeptioism  deserves  a  severe  rebuke.  But  this  is  very  different  from  the  doubt  which 
is  born  of  sorrow.  In  the  hour  of  deepest  grief  it  may  be  that  all  the  heavens  seem 
blurred  and  confused.  The  old  landmarks  are  washed  away  in  the  deluge.  We  cannot 
see  God,  and  his  love  is  lost  sight  of.  Even  Christ  in  his  bitter  agony  exclaimed,  '<  My 
God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

V.  Ultimately  God  will  give  clbab  vision  to  the  soBBOW-BLisDBn  bye. 
When  he  wijies  away  the  tears  he  will  restore  the  sight.  The  burden  of  the^mystery 
will  not  be  borne  for  ever.  We  have  only  to  walk  for  a  season  in  the  darkness. 
"  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning "  (Ps.  xxi.  5). 
Then  the  very  background  of  old  troubles  will  throw  up  the  new  joys  with  the  more 
intense  splendour,  and  the  previous  blindness  will  make  the  new  vision  the  more  vivid 
and  gladsome.-T-W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  9.-!-BoMing  on  and  growing  stronger.  This  is  a  cheering  thought  breaking  out 
of  Job's  doleful  despair,  Job  is  rising  from  pessimism  to  hope  and  confidence.  He  gives 
us  a  double  picture — ^the  righteous  holding  on  his  way,  the  man  with  clean  hands 
growing  stronger  and  stronger. 

I,  HoLDiNO  ON.  We  see  the  righteous  man  quietly  going  forward,  not  turned  aside 
by  any  obstacle,  not  cast  down  by  any  opposition,  nor  rushing  madly  forward,  but  not 
hanging  back  in  fear,  weariness,  or  indolence— like  Goethe's  star,  "unhasting  and 
unresting."  1.  Pursuing  a  continuotis  course.  The  righteous  man  has  a  way,  and  it  is  to 
this  that  he  holds  on.  We  must  have  a  purpose  if  our  life  is  not  to  be  broken  and  become 
a  failure.  2.  Keeping  to  the  course.  The  idea  is  that  of  holding  on  to  the  one  right 
course.  Here  is  persistency  and  perseverance.  The  way  being  right  must  not  be  forsaken 
on  account  of  any  difficulties.  3.  Ovgreoming  opposition.  There  may  be  no  brilliant 
victory.  But  the  righteous  man  succeeds  in  holding  on  his  way.  That  is  enough. 
That  secures  his  success.  The  constantly  flowing  stream  cuts  through  the  granite  cliff 
and  scoops  a  huge  valley  out  of  tl'C  mountain-side.  Patient  perseverance  wins  in  the 
end.  4.  Walking  in  a  right  character.  It  is  the  righteous  man  of  whom  Job  makes 
the  glad  assertion.  The  bad  man  may  hold  on  for  a  time,  when  he  does  not  meet  with 
serious  opposition ;  but  he  is  not  upheld  by  principle,  and  he  is  doomed  to  a  final 
overthrow;  for  though  his  road  is  broad  and  popular,  it  leads  to  destruction.  Only  a  true 
moral  and  spiritual  character  has  strength  to  hold  on  continuously  when  severely  tried ; 
only  this  character  will  be  blessed  by  being  allowed  by  God  to  go  on  to  viotoiy.  Time 
is  the  great  test  of  character.  Weak  and  unworthy  people  may  do  brilliant  things,  and 
achieve  temporary  triumphs.  It  is  the  character  of  true  worth  that  is  "  faithful  unto 
death,"  and  that  holds  on  to  the  end.  Many  vessels  that  leave  the  port  make  shipwreck 
on  their  course;  only  those  that  are  sound  and  well  steered  reach  their  desired 
haven. 

II.  Gbowino  stbonoeb.  The  second  thought  is  more  emphatic.  The  progress  is  of 
the  best  kind,  1.  With  increase.  The  Christian  course  is  more  than  a  race  ;  it  is  an 
ascent  •  it  is  a  growth.  God's  servant  is  not  set  to  a  treadmill.  His  walk  is  not  a 
weary  round.    There  is  no  monotony  in  the- true  Obristian  life.    As  he  endures,  so  he 

WB.  « 


808  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xra.  1—18. 


Is  enlarged  and  enriched.  2.  In  strength.  This  is  the  special  kind  of  increase  to 
which  Job  refers.  No  doubt  he  was  already  beginning  to  feel  it.  He  had  lost  wealth, 
but  he  had  gained  strength.  Already  the  blows  of  adversity  had  begun  to  weld 
together  tough  fibres  in  his  soul.  He  was  stronger  now  than  when  all  men  bowed  to 
him  as  the  most  powerful  emir  of  the  East.  Here  is  the  fruit  of  the  victory  won  by 
overcoming  opposition.  Battle  strengthens  the  hero.  Climbing  the  "  Hill  DifBculty  " 
develops  the  Pilgrim's  muscles.  Now,  God  looks  for  energy  in  his  servants.  It  is  not 
enough  that  he  shelters  them  in  troublflk  He  gives  them  strength  with  which  to  bear 
it.  "  To  them  that  have  no  might  he  inoreaseth  strength  "  (Isa.  xl.  29).  3.  On  condition 
of  purity.  The  strength  is  for  the  man  with  clean  hands.  Sin  enervates.  Innocence 
is  strong.  The  sinner  may  recover  strength  when  his  sin  is  forgiven  and  his  heart 
purged.  Therefore  our  business  is  to  resist  sin  and  cultivate  purity  of  life ;  then  God 
will  give  ever-increasing  strength. — ^W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  11. — Broken  purposes.  Job  seems  to  be  sinking  back  into  despair  after  the 
hopeful  and  confident  utterance  of  ver.  9.  Perhaps  the  explanation  of  the  situation 
lies  in  the  difficulty  the  patriarch  experiences  in  squaring  the  convictions  of  his  rising 
faith  with  the  actual  condition  in  which  he  now  lies.  He  wonders  how  his  innocence 
can  be  vindicated,  how  he  can  hold  on  and  increase  in  strength,  although  he  is  now 
persuaded  that  God  will  help  him  ultimately  to  do  so.  Meanwhile  all  his  purposes 
are  broken.    Let  us  notice  three  kinds  of  broken  purposes. 

I.  Bad  purposes.  Surely  these  should  be  broken.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that 
because  an  evil  design  has  been  conceived  in  the  dark  recesses  of  the  imagioation  it 
must  be  effected.  Bad  purposes  may  be  frustrated.  1.  Broken  hy  God.  He  knows 
the  thoughts  of  men's  hearts,  and  can  "  frustrate  their  knavish  tricks."  What  we  call 
accidents  are  providential  events ;  and  how  often  has  the  purpose  of  sin  been  checked 
by  these  events!  The  destroying  angel  mows  down  the  Assyrian  host  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  21). 
A  storm  scatters  the  Armada.  "Gunpowder  treason"  is  discovered  just  before  the 
meeting  of  Parliament.  2.  Broken  hy  their  authors.  The  repentant  sinner  can  stay  his 
hand  from  further  wickedness.  He  need  feel  under  no  obligation  to  fulfil  his  vows  of 
evil.  Indeed,  there  is  no  true  repentance  without  the  breaking  off  of  bad  purposes. 
Let  us  be  thankful  if  all  our  bad  purposes  are  not  executed. 

II.  Good  pueposes.  These  also  may  be  broken.  1.  By  adverse  events.  God  will 
not  frustrate  a  really  good  design.  But  we  may  find  it  impossible  to  accomplish  the 
best  of  purposes.  God  purposed  the  salvation  of  the  world,  yet  how  far  is  his  good 
purpose  even  from  fulfilment!  We  know  that  he  must  triumph  finally.  But  in  the 
mean  time  the  spirit  of  evil  hinders.  Job's  purposes  were  broken  by  Satan.  God's 
purposes  are  not  only  hindered  by  Satan ;  they  are  checked  by  the  free  will  of  men  who 
are  reluctant  to  acknowledge  them.  2.  By  their  authors.  Good  resolutions  have 
paved  a  large  place.  How  many  of  the  plans  of  youth  have  been  carried  out  in  man- 
hood? and  how  many  of  them  have  melied  away  as  idle  dreams?  How  far  have  the 
purposes  of  the  Christian  life  been  adhered  to?  Has  the  old  sin  been  avoided,  as  we 
vowed  it  should  be  ?  Have  we  served  God  with  singleness  of  heart  ?  Have  we  denied 
ourselves  and  followed  Christ,  as  we  dreamed  of  doing  when  we  first  gave  him  our 
hearts  ?  Have  we  lived  unselfishly  and  in  charity  towards  our  neighbours  ?  Do  not 
such  questions  rouse  a  sickening  sense  of  failure  ?  Verily  we  have  broken  our  good 
purposes  most  miserably. 

III.  Mistaken  pdeposes.  These  are  of  an  intermediate  character.  Good  in 
intention,  they  would  not  have  turned  out  well  if  we  had  been  permitted  to  execute 
them.  Therefore  God  has  frustrated  them.  Some  of  these  are  quite  excellent,  only 
they  are  altogether  beyond  our  reach.  The  biave  lifeboat  crew  tries  to  save  the 
shipwrecked  sailors,  but,  alas !  the  sea  runs  too  high  to  permit  them  to  approach,  and 
their  purpose  is  broken.  Some  whole  lives  seem  to  be  failures  simply  because  their 
owners  have  mistaken  their  vocation.  The  man  who  is  a  failure  as  a  barrister  might 
have  become  an  excellent  farmer;  he  has  chosen  an  unsuitable  sphere.  We  wish  to  do 
good.  Then  let  us  pray  for  light  lest  we  blunder  into  mischief-making  in  the  very 
effort  to  help  our  neighbours. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  15,-2^  htt  ho^    Not  only  are  Job's  purpose*  broken  off.    His  hope  ia  \ori, 


OH.  xvra,  1—21,] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


807 


At  all  events,  it  seems  to  be  melting  away,  lo  that  all  chance  of  seeing  its  accomplish- 
ment appears  to  have  gone. 

I.  A  VAIN  HOPE  MUST  BE  LOST.  The  reality  will  not  depend  on  a  man's  sanguine 
temperament,  but  upon  its  own  causes.  It  is  possible  for  a  person  to  persuade  himself 
into  a  condition  of  blissful  confidence  concerning  his  future,  but  the  self-persuasion 
will  not  alter  facts ;  and  if  he  is  drifting  towards  the  rocks  they  will  shatter  him  as 
surely  as  if  he  went  in  terror  of  their  fatal  neighbourhood.  Note,  then,  some  of 
the  vain  hopes  that  must  perish.  1.  The  hope  of  success  in  cheating  God.  Some  men 
live  as  hypocrites  not  merely  to  secure  the  favour  of  their  fellows,  but  in  the  foolish 
fancy  that  by  some  jugglery  they  may  even  wriggle  into  the  favour  of  Heaven.  Such 
a  hope  must  fail.  2.  The  hope  of  succeeding  without  Ood.  This  is  not  outrageously 
impudent  like  the  hope  last  referred  to.  But  it  cannot  succeed,  for  no  man  is  sufficient 
of  himself  to  overcome  all  the  difficulties  of  life.  3.  TJie  hope  of  worldly  sufficiency. 
It  is  thought  that  if  Providence  is  kind,  and  a  man  has  much  laid  by  for  days  to 
come,  he  may  look  forward  with  confidence.  This  is  the  hope  of  the  rich  fool  (Luke 
xii.  20),  and  the  unexpected  changes  of  life,  or  death  at  last,  must  shatter  it 

II.  A  TRUE  HOPE  MAY  BE  LOST.  1.  The  Christian  hope.  This  is  a  true  hope.  (1) 
It  is  founded  on  God's  strength,  and  he  can  never  fail.  We  are  encouraged  to  hope 
for  salvation  from  One  who  is  almighty.  (2)  It  is  secured  by  God's  truth.  "  He  is 
faithful  that  promised"  (Heb.  x.  23).  To  grow  faint-hearted  with  the  Christian  hope 
is  to  distrust  God.  The  hope  depends  on  his  Word,  which  cannot  be  broken.  (3)  It  is 
guaranteed  by  Christ's  life,  death,  and  resurrection.  Christ  is  God's  Pledge  of  hope  to 
his  children.  God  would  have  wasted  Christ  on  the  world  if  he  were  not  to  fulfil  the  hopes 
that  his  Son  raised.  2.  The  possibility  of  losing  it.  This  must  be  considered  in  spite  of 
the  absolute  security  of  the  hope  itself;  for  the  hope  may  be  good,  and  yet  we  may  cease 
to  hold  it.  The  anchor  may  be  sound,  but  the  chain  tliat  unites  it  to  the  ship  may  be 
out.  (1)  The  hope  may  only  be  lost  to  consciousness.  We  may  cease  to  enjoy  it, 
cease  to  feel  the  hope  within  us.  Yet  we  may  not  really  be  cut  off  from  what  the 
great  hope  of  Christ  promises.  Job  exclaims,  "  Where  is  now  my  hope?  "  only  because 
he  is  blinded  with  grief.  Our  despair  is  not  the  measure  of  our  faith.  The  mountain 
has  not  vanished  because  the  fog  has  hidden  it.  Doubt  does  not  destroy  truth. 
Many  a  despondent  Christian  will  realize  the  hopes  which  he  is  too  faint-hearted  to 
enjoy  in  anticipation.  (2)  The  hope  may  be  really  lost.  It  is  possible  to  see  the 
hope  afar  off,  as  Balaam  saw  Israel's  hope,  and  yet  to  have  no  share  in  it  ourselves. 
Or  we  may  hold  to  the  Christian  hope  in  error  without  living  the  Christian  life. 
Then  we  must  be  bitterly  disappointed.  Or,  lastly,  we  may  prove  faithless  and  fall  away 
from  Christ.  Therefore  let  us  pray  to  be  kept  true,  seeing  that  God  is  true,  so  that 
our  fidelity  is  the  only  condition  we  now  need  to  be  assured  of  in  order  that  our  hope 
may  not  be  lost. — ^W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER   XVIII. 


Vers.  1 — 21. — Bildad's  second  speech  is 
no  improvement  upon  his  first  (ch.  viii.). 
He  has  evidently  been  exceedingly  netlled 
by  Job's  contemptuous  words  concerning  his 
"  comforters"  (ch.  xvi.  2, 11;  xvii.  10);  and 
aims  at  nothing  but  venting  his  anger,  and 
terrifying  Job  by  a  series  of  denunciations 
and  threata.  Job  has  become  to  him  "  the 
wicked  man "  (vers.  5,  21),  an  embodiment 
of  all  that  is  evil,  and  one  "that  knoweth  not 
God."   No  punishment  is  too  severe  for  him. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Then  answered  Bildad  the 
Sbalute,  and  Mud»How^lon9  wiU  it  be  ere 


ye  make  an  end  of  words  t  (So  Bosenratlller, 
Gesenius,  Welte,  Merx,  Lee,  and  Canon 
Cook.)  Others  render,  "  How  long  will  ye 
lay  snares  for  words?"  which  is  a  possible 
translation,  but  does  not  give  a  very  good 
sense.  Bildad,  a  tolerably  concise  speaker 
himself  (see  ch.  viii.  2 — 22 ;  xxv.  2 — 6),  is 
impatient  at  the  length  of  Job's  replies.  He 
had  already,  in  his  former  speech  (ch.  viii. 
2),  reproached  Job  with  his  prolixity ;  now 
he  repeats  the  charge.  The  employment  of 
the  second  person  plural  in  this  and  the 
following  verses  is  not  very  easily  accounted 
for.  Bildad  can  scarcely  mean  to  blame  faia 
friend  Eliphaz.  Perhaps  he  regards  Job  as 
having  supporters  among  the  lonkers-on,  of 
whnm  there  may  have  been  several  besides 
Elihu  (ch.  xxxii  2).    Karlc;  rather,  oon- 


808 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xvra.  1— '21 


tider}  l.e.  think  a  littlo,  instead  of  talldng. 
And  afterwards  we  will  speak.  Then,  calmly 
and  without  hurry,  we  will  proceed  to  reply 
to  what  you  have  said. 

Ver.  8. — ■Wherefore  are  we  counted  as 
beasts  1  Tke  allusion  is  probably  to  oh. 
xvi.  10,  whore  Job  spoUe  of  his  "  comforters  " 
as  "gaping  upon  liim  witli  their  mouths." 
And  reputed  vile  in  your  sight?  or,  reckoned 
unclean.  Job  had  spoken  of  liis  "  miserable 
comforters  "  as  "  ungodly  and  wickud  "  (oh. 
xvi.  11),  without  wisdom  (oh.  xvii,  10)  and 
without  understanding  (oh.  ?vii.  4).  But 
ho  had  not  said  that  they  were  "  unclean." 
Bildad,  therefore,  misrepresents  him. 

Ver.  4. — He  teareth  himself  in  his  anger. 
The  Hebrew  idiom,  which  allows  of  rapid 
transitions  from  the  second  to  the  third 
person,  and  vice  vend,  cannot  be  transferred 
without  harshness  to  our  modem  speech. 
Our  Bevisers  have  given  the  true  force  of 
the  original  by  discarding  the  third  person, 
and  translating,  "  Thou  tliat  tearest  thyself 
in  thine  anger."  There  is  probably  an  allu- 
sion to  ch.  xvi.  9,  where  Job  had  repre- 
sented God  as  "tearing  liim  in  his  wralh." 
Bildad  saya  it  is  nut  (iod  wlio  tears  him — 
he  tears  himsel  f  Shall  the  earth  be  forsaken 
for  thee  ?  i.e.  "  Shall  the  course  of  the  world 
be  altered  to  meet  tliy  wishes,  to  suit  thy 
case  ?  "  Job  had  wibhed  for  all  manner  of 
impossible  things  (oh.  iii.  3 — 6 ;  ix.  32—35 ; 
xlii.  21,  22 ;  xvi.  2X ;  xvii.  3).  Bildad's 
reproach  is  thus  not  wholly  unjust.  But 
he  makes  no  allowance  for  the  wild  utter- 
ances of  one  who  is  lialf  distraught.  And 
shall  the  rock  be  removed  out  of  his  place  1 
Sliall  that  wliieli  is  most  solid  and  firm  give 
way,  aud  alter  its  nature  ? 

Vers.  5 — 21. — Bildad,  from  this  point, 
turns  wholly  to  denunciation.  He  strings 
together  a  long  series  of  menaces — probably 
ancient  saws,  drawn  from  "the  wisdom  of 
th  •  Bcni  Kedem  "  (1  Kings  iv.  30),  and  de- 
scriptive of  tlie  wretched  fate  of  the  wicked 
man,  with  wliom  he  identifies  Job. 

Ver.  5. — Tea,  the  light  of  the  wicked  shall 
be  put  out.  Wliatever  the  wicked  man  may 
at  any  time  have  acquired  of  splendour, 
glory,  liommr,  wealth,  or  prosperity,  shall 
be  taken  froui  him,  and  as  it  were  extin- 
guished. And  the  spark  of  his  fire  shall 
not  shine.  Not  a  siiigle  trace  of  his  splen- 
dour, not  a  spark,  nut  a  glimmer,  shall 
remain. 

Ver.  6. — The  light  shall  be  dark  in  his 
tabemaole,  Tliis  is  not,  as  Kosenmiiller 
asserts,  a  mere  repetition  of  the  tliought 
contained  in  the  preceding  verse  witli  a 
change  of  terms,  and  a  variation  of  meta- 
phor,   {t  is  a  denuaciation  of  woe  to  the 


whole  home  of  the  ungodly  man,  not  to  him- 
self only.  As  Schultens  says,  "  Lumen  ob- 
tenebratum  in  tentorio  est  fortuna  domus 
extincta."  And  his  candle  shall  be  put  out 
with  him ;  rather,  as  in  the  Kevised  Version, 
hii  lamp  above  him  shall  be  put  out ;  i.e.  the 
lamp  whioh  swings  above  him  in  his  tent, 
or  in  his  chamber,  shall  be  extinguished. 
Darkness  shall  fall  upon  the  whole  house 
of  the  wicked  man. 

Ver.  7.— The  Steps  of  his  strength  shall 
be  straitened.  In  the  time  of  his  prosperity 
the  wicked  man  had  a  wide  sphere  within 
which  to  exercise  his  activity,  and  strode 
hither  and  thither  at  his  pleasure.  When 
punishment  falls  on  him,  his  "steps  will  be 
straitened,"  i.e.  his  spliere  narrowed,  his 
activity  cramped,  his  powers  '"cabined, 
cribbed,  confined."  And  his  own  oonnsel 
shall  oast  him  down  (see  oh.  v.  13  j  and 
comp.  Ps.  vii.  14— 16i  ix.  16;  x.  2;  Hos. 
X.  6). 

Ver.  8,— ror  he  is  cast  into  •  net  by  his 
own  feet.  He  walks  of  his  own  accord  into 
a  snare,  not  necessarily  into  one  that  he  has 
himself  set  for  others,  as  in  Ps.  vii.  15 ;  ix 
15;  XXXV.  8;  Ivii.  6;  and  Prov.  xxvL  27; 
but  either  into  one  of  his  own  setting,  or 
into  one  laid  for  him  by  others  (see  ver.  10). 
And  he  walketh  upon  a  snare,  A  mere 
repetition  of  the  idea  expressed  in  the  pre- 
ceding hemistich. 

Ver.  9.— The  gin  shall  take  hjm  by  the 
heel,  and  the  robber  (rather,  the  man-trap) 
shall  prevail  against  him.  Fifty  years  ago 
man-traps  were  commonly  set  at  night  in 
gardens  and  orchards  in  tliis  country,  which 
held  intending  thieves  until  the  proprietor 
came  and  took  them  before  a  magistrate  in 
the  morning.  (On  the  employment  of  such 
traps  in  antiquity,  see  Herod.,  ii.  121.  §  2.) 
Ver.  10.— The  snare  is  laid  for  him  in  the 
gronnd,  and  a  trap  for  him  in  the  way;  or, 
the  noose  is  hid  for  him  in  the  ground  (see 
the  Eovised  Version).  Six  diflerent  kinds 
of  traps  or  snares  are  mentioned,  "tlie 
speaker  lieaping  together  every  word  that 
he  can  find  descriptive  of  the  ai  t  of  snaring." 
The  art  had  been  well  studied  by  the  Egyp- 
tians long  before  the  age  of  Job,  and  • 
great  variety  of  contrivances  for  capturing 
both  beasts  and  birds  are  represented  on 
the  very  early  monuments  (Wilkinson,  in 
the  author's  *  Herodotus,'  vol.  iL  pp.  77,  78). 
We  may  conclude  from  this  passage  tliat  it 
had  also  been  brought  to  an  advanced  stage 
of  exoellenoe  in  Syria  aud  Arabia. 

Ver.  11. — Terrors  shall  make  him  afraid 
on  every  side.  Vague  fears,  panic  terrors, 
no  longer  subjective,  but  to  his  bewildered 
brain  objective,  shall  seem  to  menace  the 
wicked  man  on  every  side,  and  shall  affright 
him  continually.  There  is  an  allusion, 
doubtless,  to  what  Job  has  said  of  tji^ 


CM.  Ivni.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


gloomy  and  terrifying  thoughts  which  come 
over  him  from  time  to  time  (ch.  iii.  25 ;  vii. 
14 ;  is.  28 ;  xiii.  21)  and  fill  him  with  oon- 
■ternation.  And  shall  drive  him  to  his  feet ; 
rather,  shall  chase  him  at  his  heels  (see  the 
Eeviaed  Version).  Like  a  pack  of  hounds, 
or  wolves,  or  jackals.  Jackals  are  common 
in  Palestine  and  the  adjacent  countvies. 
They  hunt  in  packs,  and  generally  run  down 
their  prey ;  but  do  not,  unless  hard  pressed 
by  hunger,  attack  men. 

Ver.  12,— His  strength  shall  be  hunger- 
bitten.  (So  Dillmann,  Oook,  and  the  Ee- 
vised  Version.)  To  the  other  sufferings  of 
the  wicked  man  shall  be  added  the  pangs 
of  hunger.  His  bodily  strength  shall  dis- 
appear, as  destitution  and  famine  come  upon 
him.  And  destruction  shall  be  ready  at 
his  side.  Ready  to  seize  on  him  at  any 
moment.  Some  translate,  "ready  for  his 
halting,"  i.e.  ready  to  seize  on  him  in  case 
of  his  tripping  or  halting  (so  the  Revised 
Version). 

Ver.  13.— It  shall  devour  the  strength  of 
his  skin ;  literally,  the  bars  of  his  skin,  by 
which  some  understand  "  the  muscles,"  some 
"  the  members,"  of  his  body.  The  general 
meaning  is  plain,  that  destructiou  shall 
always  be  close  to  him,  and  shall  ultimately 
make  him  its  own.  Even  the  firstborn  of 
death  shall  devour  hi*  strength.  By  "the 
firstborn  of  death "  is  probably  intended, 
either  some  wasting  disease  generally,  or 
perhaps  the  special  disease  from  which  Job 
is  suffering. 

Ver.  14. — His  confidence  shall  he  rooted 
cut  of  his  tabernacle;  rather,  he  shall  be 
rooted  out  of  his  tabernaole  (ot^  tent),  which 
is  his  confideneBf  or  wherein  he  trusteth; 
i.e.  he  shall  be  torn  from  the  home,  whore 
he  thought  himself  secure  as  in  a  strong- 
hold. Md  it  shall  bring  him;  rather,  one 
shall  bring  him,  or,  he  shall  be  brought.  To 
the  king  of  terrors.  Probably  death,  rather 
than  Satan,  is  intended.  None  of  Job's 
"  comforters  "  seems  to  have  had  any  con- 
ception of  Satan  as  a  personal  being,  nor 
even  Job  himself.  It  is  only  the  author, 
or  arranger,  of  the  book  who  recognizes  the 
personality  and  power  of  the  prince  of 
darkness. 

Ver.  15. — It  shall  dwell  in  his  tabernacle, 
because  it  is  none  of  his;  either,  it  (i.e. 
terror)  shall  dwell  in  his  tabernaole,  which  is 
no  longer  his;  or,  they  sjiatt  dwell  in  his 
tabemdcle  tliat  are  none  of  his;  i.e.  strangers 
shall  inhabit  the  place  where  he  dwelt 
heretofore  (compare  the  Revised  Version). 
Brimstone  shall  be  scattered  upon  his  habi- 
tation. As  God  rained  flre  and  brimstone 
out  of  heaven  upon  the  cities  of  the  plain 
(Gen.  xix.  24),  so  shall  brimstone  be  scat- 
tered upon  his  habitation  to  ruin  and  destroy 
U  (comp.  Deal  xzix.  23;  Ps.  xi.  6). 


Ver.  16.— Hi*  toots  shall  be  dried  u; 
beneath.  He  shall  be  like  a  tree  whose 
roots  no  moisture  reaches,  and  which,  there- 
fore, withers  and  dries  up  (comp.  oh.  xiv. 
8,  9 ;  xxix.  19).  And  above  shall  his  branch 
be  cut  off;  or,  be  withered  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  2, 
where  the  same  verb  is  used). 

Ver.  17. — His  remembrance  shall  perish 
from  the  earth  (comp.  Ps.  xxxiv.  16;  cix. 
13).  This  is  always  spoken  of  in  Scripture 
as  a  great  calamity,  one  of  the  greatest  that 
can  befall  a  man.  It  was  felt  as  such,  not 
Only  by  the  Jews,  but  by  the  Semitic  people 
generally,  whose  eai-nest  desire  to  perpetuate 
their  memory  is  shown  by  the  elaborate 
monuments  and  lengthy  inscriptions  which 
they  set  up  in  so  many  places.  Arabian 
poetry,  no  less  than  Jewish,  is  penetrated 
by  the  idea.  In  one  point  of  view  it  may 
seem  a  vulgar  ambition ;  but,  in  another,  it 
is  a  pathetic  craving  after  that  continuance 
which  the  spirit  of  man  naturally  desires, 
but  of  which  it  has,  apart  from  revektion, 
no  assurance.  And  be  shall  have  no  name 
in  the  street;  or,  in  the  world  without  (comp. 
ch.  V.  10). 

Ver.  18.— He  shall  be  driven  from  light 
into  darkness,  and  chased  out  of  the  world 
(comp.  ch.  X.  21,  22;  xvii.  16).  What  Job 
represents  as  a  welcome  retreat,  whither  he 
would  gladly  withdraw  himself,  Bildad  de- 
picts as  a  banishment,  into  which  he  will  be 
driven  on  account  of  his  sins. 

Ver.  19. — He  shall  neither  have  son  nor 
nephew  among  his  people ;  rather,  nor  grand- 
son; i.e.  "his  posterity  shall  be  clean  put 
out "  (Ps.  cix.  14).  Nor  any  remaining  in  his 
dwellings;  ratlier,  in  the  places  where  he 
sojourned  (compare  the  Revised  Version, 
whicli  gives  "in  his  aojournings ").  It  is 
implied  that  the  wicked  man  shall  be  u 
vagabond,  without  a  home,  sojourning  now 
here,  now  there,  for  a  short  time.  Keither 
among  his  own  people,  nor  in  these  places 
of  his  tern  porary  abode,  shall  he  leave  any 
doscondant.  Bildad  probably  intends  to 
glance  at  the  destruction  of  Job's  children 
(ch.  i.  19). 

Ver.  20.— They  that  oome  after  him  shall 
be  astonied  at  Us  day ;  i.e.  "  at  the  time  of 
his  visitation  "  (comp.  Ps.  xxxvii.  13,  "  The 
Lord  shall  laugh  at  iiim,  for  he  seeth 
that  his  day  is  coming ; "  and  Ps.  cxxxvii.  7, 
"Remember  the  children  of  Edom  in  the 
day  of  Jerusalem,"  i.e.  the  day  of  its  over- 
throw). As  they  that  went  before  were 
aflfrighted.  His  fate  shall  alarm  equally 
his  contemporaries  and  his  snccissors,  or 
possibly  "  the  dwellers  in  the  West  and  the 
dwellers  in  the  East." 

Ver.  21.— Sorely  suoh  are  the  dwellings 
of  the  wicked.  "Such  as  I  have  described 
is  the  general  condition  and  manner  of  life 
of  the  man  who  is  wioked."     And  this  is 


m 


tBs  BOOK  OF  Job. 


t<SH.  ivm.  i— fit 


the  place  (or,  position)  of  him  that  knowetb 
not  God.  The  singular  number  used  both 
in  this  olauae  and  the  preceding  iudioatei 


that  the  whole  series  of  denunciations  (vers. 
5—21)  ia  levelled  against  an  individual — 
viz.  Job. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — Bildad  to  Job :  an  Arabian  orator't  discourse.  I.  The  faulty 
njTEODUcTiON.  Bildad  possessed  at  least  three  qualifications  indispensable  to  suc- 
cessful speaking — fervid  imagination,  glowing  eloquence,  and  vehement  passion.  He 
was  characterized  also  by  three  fatal  defects — ^want  of  calmness,  or  self-containment, 
want  of  prudence,  and  want  of  sympathetic  tenderness.  Being  destitute  of  these,  he 
blundered  like  an  inexperienced  amateur,  starting  out  on  his  oration  in  a  hurricane 
of  passion  and  ill  humour,  planting  daggers  in  the  breast  he  hoped  to  win  by  his 
eloquence,  and  forfeiting,  by  the  very  keenness  of  his  invective,  all  possibility  of 
effecting  good  impressions  by  his  words.  He  impeached  Job  of:  1.  Senseless  verbosity. 
Of  speaking  at  an  undue  length ;  of  talking  for  talking's  sake ;  of  hunting  after  words 
in  order  to  overwhelm  his  opponents;  of  speaking  without  consideration,  talking  when 
he  ought  to  have  been  thinking,  making  words  do  duty  for  ideas;  of  speaking  instead 
of  listening  to  his  betters  (ver.  2).  The  first  is  the  error  of  the  facile-tongued ;  the 
second,  of  the  shallow-pated;  the  third,  of  the  conceited  egotist.  If  Job  sinned  in 
eithei-  of  these  respects,  he  was  not  undeserving  of  reproof,  much  more  if  he  erred  in 
all.  But  Bildad,  whose  genius  was  not  original,  was  probably  moved  to  use  the  lan- 
guage of  censure  as  much  by  a  desire  to  imitate  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  2),  or  to  retort  upon 
Job  (oh.  xvi.  3),  as  by  strong  repugnance  to  the  patriarch's  offence.  2.  Unjustifiable 
contempt.  Job  had  accused  the  friends  of  lacking  spiritual  discernment  (cli.  vii.  4). 
Bildad  interpreted  the  charge  to  mean  that  Job  regarded  them  as  brute  beasts,  devoid 
of  sense  and  reason  (ver.  3).  If  Job  did  so,  he  was  guilty  of  altogether  unwarranted 
depreciation  of  his  fellows.  That  nature,  which  God  made  only  a  little  short  of 
Divinity  (Ps.  viii.  5 ;  Heb.  ii.  6),  must  for  ever  be  parted  by  a  wide  gulf  from  the 
irrational  creation.  Only  when  men  voluntarily  extinguish  all  spiritual  susceptibility 
by  continuance  in  sin  can  they  be  legitimately  compared  to  the  beasts  that  perish  (Pa. 
xlix.  12,  20).  This  the  friends  had  not  done ;  and  it  is  certain  Job  had  not  called 
them  beasts.  But,  being  men  of  a  high  spirit,  they  were  quick  to  take  offence.  3. 
Self-devowrmg  rage.  An  old  insinuation  of  Eliphaz's  reproduced  (ch.  v.  2),  with  a 
specific  allusion  to  Job's  language  charging  God  with  tearing  him  in  his  anger  (ch.  xvi. 
9),  in  contradistinction  to  which  Bildad  averred  that  Job  tore  himself,  literally,  "his 
Boul,"  in  his  anger  (ver.  4),  meaning  that  the  patriarch's  misery  was  the  fruit  of  his 
own  frantic  and  excited  behaviour,  which  again  was  the  immediate  result  of  his  soul's 
fretful  and  wrathful  resentment  against  God's  providential  inflictions.  That  Job's 
behaviour  under  his  unparalleled  calamities  was  not  perfect,  is  obvious;  that  bis 
impatience  was  such  as  to  call  for  censure  from  men,  may  be  doubted  (Jas.  v.  11).  Yet 
Bildad's  reproach  suggests  that  while  all  "  anger  is  a  short  madness,"  it  is  supreme 
insanity  to  fume  and  fret  at  the  Divine  dispensations,  and  that  the  most  miserable 
man  on  earth  must  surely  be  he  whose  soul  swells  with  rage  against  God  because  of 
his  paternal  chastisements.  4.  Egotistical  presumption.  In  the  judgment  of  Bildad, 
Job  appeared  to  imagine  that  the  Divine  Law,  which  connected  suffering  with  sin, 
should  in  his  case  be  suspended ;  but  that,  Bildad  assured  the  patriarch,  would  be  as 
likely  to  occur  as  that,  in  order  to  oblige  him,  the  earth  which  God  had  appointed  for 
man's  habitation  should  become  tenantless,  or  the  lock  which  Heaven's  ordinance  has 
rendered  fixed  and  immovable  should  be  suddenly  transported  from  its  place  (ver.  4). 
The  reign  of  law  in  the  material  universe,  and  the  fore-ordination  of  events  in  human 
history,  have  been  frequently  employed  exactly  as  they  are  here  used  by  Bildad,  viz, 
to  demonstrate  the  non-credibility  of  miracles,  the  inefficacy  of  prayer,  the  impossi- 
bility of  such  a  thing  as  a  special  providence,  and  the  intolerable  arrogance  of  a  being 
so  mean  and  insignificant  as  man  imagining  that  in  any  of  the  ways  implied  in  these 
doctrines  God  would,  in  his  behalf,  interfere  with  the  established  order  of  things.  But 
it  is  no  presumption  to  believe  in  what  Scripture  tenches — the  possibility  of  miraclei 
CUatt  xix.  26),  the  efficacy  of  prayer  (Pa.  Izv.  Z ;  Matt.  tU.  7 ;  Jas.  L  S),  iha  leality 


SB.  xtttt.  i-§l.l  fflfi  SOOK  OP  ^OS.  811 

of  a  special  jjrovidenoo  (Ps.  xL  17 ;  Matt.  x.  30) ;  since  tbe  first  can  be  prored  by 
adequate  testimony,  while  the  second  and  tUrd  are  supported  and  confirmed  by  the 
inner  witness  of  conscience.  Even  the  case  pronounced  by  Bildad  to  be  impossible, 
viz.  the  suspension  of  the  moral  law  of  retribution,  has  come  to  pass.  The  salvation 
of  man  thiongh  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  attests  the  fallacy  of  Bildad's  fundamental 
assumption.  And  now  Bildad,  having  proceeded  thus  far  with  his  oration,  for  any 
good  he  was  likely  to  do  to  Job,  might  and  should  have  prudently  relapsed  into 
silence.    Kevertheless,  he  preached  an  eloquent  discourse. 

II.  The  lofty  theme.  The  subject  descanted  on  by  Bildad  was  the  inevitable  retribu- 
tion which  sooner  or  later  overtook  the  wicked.  Set  forth  under  an  emblem  familiar 
to  Oriental  poetry,  viz.  the  extinction  of  the  fire  in  a  dwelling,  and  of  the  lamp  depending 
from  the  roof  of  a  tent  (vers.  5,  6),  it  was  depicted  as :  1.  Belayed.  The  evil-doer  was 
not  wrested  by  the  hand  of  Providence  the  moment  he  set  forth  on  his  career,  but  was 
allowed  for  a  season  to  thrive  by  his  ungodliness,  to  amass  wealth,  acquire  power,  and 
secure  friends,  to  become  the  head  of  s  family  or  the  chief  of  a  clan,  and  to  possess  a 
tent,  or  rather  a  circle  of  tents,  with  his  own  commodious,  well-furnished,  richly  orna- 
mented, brilliantly  lighted  tabernacle  in  the  midst.  So  Eliphaz  saw  the  foolish  taking 
root  (ch.  y.  3),  and  David  beheld  the  wicked  spreading  like  a  green  bay  tree  (Ps, 
zxxvii.  35),  and  Asaph  witnessed  the  ungodly  prospering  until  at  last  they  were  sud- 
denly overwhelmed  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  13).  2.  Certain.  Nevertheless,  i.e.  notwithstanding 
all  contrary  appearances,  the  sinner's  own  security,  his  determination  to  resist  or  evade 
the  pursuing  Nemesis,  his  fierce  resentment  when  the  hand  of  the  destroyer  should 
apprehend  Um, "  the  light  of  the  wicked  should  be  put  out."  Not  absolutely  and 
universally  true  of  their  terrestrial  career,  it  is  yet  positively  sure  that  the  prosperity 
of  the  ungodly  shall  decline,  if  not  on  earth,  at  least  in  the  future  world.  3.  Complete. 
The  glow  upon  the  sinner's  hearth  and  the  lamp  from  his  roof  should  be  equally 
extinguished.  ,  The  light  in  which  he  sunned  himself,  i.e.  his  personal  comfort  and 
happiness,  and  the  light  in  which  he  shone  to  others,  i.e.  his  greatness  and  glory, 
should  alike  fade  and  become  dark.  Sometimes  such  experience  is  the  lot  of  God's 
people,  as  the  case  of  Job  testifies.  Happy  they  to  whom  Jehovah  is  an  everlasting 
Light  (Isa.  Ix.  19),  and  who,  when  they  sit  in  temporal  darkness,  can  rejoice  in  his 
cheering  beams  (Micah  vii.  8). 

ILL  The  beilliaut  illustbation.  The  wicked  man's  career,  from  the  moment 
of  his  apprehension  by  misfortune  till  the  hour  of  his  complete  destruction,  was  next 
represented  in  a  series  of  graphic  pictures.  In  these  he  appears  as :  1.  Snared  hy 
calamity.  (Vers.  7 — ^10.)  (1)  Unexpectedly;  when,  at  the  height  of  prosperity,  in  the 
fulness  of  pride,  and  conscious  of  strength,  he  stalks  forth  with  giant  strides  to  execute 
the  wicked  counselslie  has  formed  (ch.  v.  3 ;  Ecoles.  ix.  12 ;  Luke  xxi.34,  35 ;  1  Thess. 
v.  3).  (2)  Willingly;  as  if  disdainfully  defiant  of  every  attempt  to  arrest  his  career, 
marching  deliberately  into  the  toils,  so  that  practically  "  his  own  counsel  casts  him 
down,"  and  "his  own  feet  thrust  him  into  a  net."  A  melancholy  example  of  that 
"vaulting  ambition  which  o'erleaps  itself  and  falls  on  the  other  side;"  of  that  self- 
avenging  Nemesis  which  slumbers  in  the  bosom  of  every  sin,  but  especially  of  a  great 
sin ;  of  that  terrible  infatuation  which  sometimes  seizes  on  the  souls  of  wicked  men, 
and  impels  them,  with  stupid  bUndness  to,  or  reckless  disregard  of,  consequences,  for- 
ward to  their  own  destruction.  (3)  Effectually ;  the  gin  taking  him  by  the  heel,  and 
the  noose  holding  him  fa^t,  so  that  fost  his  proud  steps  become  straitened,  and  finally 
himself  is  cast  down.  (4^  Inevitably;  the  snare  that  is  to  arrest  him  lying  already  in 
the  ground  and  only  waiting  his  arrival,  the  import  of  which  seems  to  be  that  the 
moment  a  transgressor  enters  on  his  evil  path  he  starts  upon  a  road  that  must  sooner 
or  later  conduct  him  to  ruin.  2.  Haunted  by  terrors.  (Vers.  11,  12.)  The  evil  con- 
science that  he  carries  in  his  bosom,  though  long  slumbering,  at  last  awakes,  inspires 
him  with  fearful  forebodings  of  impending  disaster,  peoples  all  the  atmosphere  around 
him  with  ghostly  apparitions  which  dog  his  footsteps,  summons  up  before  his  startled 
vision,  well-nigh  every  moment  of  his  wretched  existence,  spectral  shadows  of  coming 
woe,  which  paralyze  his  strength  and  utterly  unman  his  wicked  soul.  (Cf.  Eliphaz's 
picture  of  a  guilty  conscience  (ch.  xv.  21),  of  which  Bildad's  appears  to  be  an  echo  and 
imitation.)  3.  Arrested  hy  disease.  (Vers.  13, 14.)  (On  the  expression,  "  the  first- 
bom  of  death,"  see  Exposition.)    The  obvious  allusion  is  to  such  a  malady  as  Job's 


Sia  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [OB.  xvin.  1— 21. 

leprosy,  which,  when  it  apprehends  a  sinner,  (1)  devours  tha  strength  (or  bars)  of  hig 
skin,  i.e.  consumes  either  the  members  of  the  body  (Delitzsch),  or  "  the  muscles  which 
are  to  the  skin  what  bars  are  to  a  gate,  or  those  passages  and  orifices,  those  inlets  and 
outlets  of  the  body,  at  which  many  forms  of  disease  first  display  their  presence  and 
power "  (Cox)  j  (2)  ejects  him  from  his  house,  causing  him  who  formerly  sat  in  con- 
fident security  within  his  tent  to  remove,  as  under  the  ban  of  Divine  displeasure,  frojr. 
the  presence  and  habitations  of  his  fellow-men}  and  (3)  conducts  him  to  the  kibg  i' 
tenors,  which  death  must  ever  be  to  the  ungodly  aad  impenitent,  though  to  them  wi  a 
believe  in  Christ,  Who  hath  conquered  dea'ih,  its  character  and  aspect  are  completely 
changed  (1  Cor.  xv.  55  {  Heb.  ii.  14, 15).    4.  Overwhelmed  with  destrwstion,    (Vers. 
16"— IT.)    And  this  lb  three  particulars :  (1)  the  desolation  of  bis  homestead,  which, 
being  doomed, like  Jericho,  to  remain  uninhabited,  is  henceforth  tenanted  by  "creatures 
and  things  strange  to  the  deceased  rich  man,  such  as  jackals  and  nettles  "  (Delitzsch), 
or  haunted  ever  afterwards  by  ghostly  terrors  (Cox) — a  thought  which  Bildad  au'ftin 
copies  from  the  preceding  speech  of  Eliphaz  (ch,  xv.  28,  34)  ;  (2)  the  extirpation  oi  his 
family,  even  to  its  utter  destruction,  root  and  branch,  so  that  neither  he,  the  root,  shall 
remain,  nor  any  of  the  branches,  his  offspring,  shall  survive  (vers.  16,  19)—" the  most 
terrible  calamity  that  can  happen  to  a  Semite  "  (Wetstein,  quoted  by  Delitzsch) ;  (3) 
the  extiuction  of  his  memory,  the  complete  perishing  of  all  remembrance  Of  him,  so 
that  his  name  is  never  mentioned  in  the  land  or  on  the  street  (Piov.  ii,  22 ;  i.  7 ;  Ps. 
xxxiv.  16) — a  pitiable  doom  for  those  to  contemplate  who  have  no  hope  of  any  immor- 
tality beyond  the  posthumous  renown  which  their  great  power,  extensive  fame,  or 
notorious  wickedness  may  enable  them  to  secure,  though  a  comparatively  small  depri- 
vation for  them  whose  names  are  registered  in  heaven,  and  will  be  held  in  everlasting 
remembrance  by  God  even  if  they  should  be  forgotten  by  man.     5.  Thrust  into  dark- 
ness,   (Ver.  18.)    Chased  from  the  world  as  imfit  to  live  longer  on  the  earth  (Prov.  xiv, 
32),  as  afterwards,  though  falsely,  Christ  (Luke  xiiii.  18)  and  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxii.  22); 
driven  away  from  the  light  of  day  into  the  darkness  of  death,  from  the  light  of  pros- 
perity into  the  darkness  of  misfortune,  from  the  light  of  happiness  into  the  darkness 
of  misery — a  terribly  true  picture  of  the  fate  of  the  impenitent.    6.  Loaded  with 
infamy.    (Ver.  20.)    Transformed  into  an  object  of  horror  and  amazement  to  (1)  the 
people  of  all  lands — "  those  who  dwell  in  the  East  and  those  who  dwell  in  the  West " 
(Delitzsch) ;  and  (2)  the  people  of  all  times — **  them  that  come  after,"  t.e,  posterity, 
and  "  them  that  went  belore,"  i.e.  the  wicked  man's  contemporaries.     In  this  sense 
"  the  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them,"  and  "  some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand, 
going  before  to  judgment,  and  some  men  they  follow  after "  (1  Tim.  v.  24).    The 
language  of  Bildad  is  true  of  the  Sodomites  (2  Pet.  ii.  6),  Balaam  (2  Pet.  ii.  15, 16), 
Judas  (Acts  i.  18),  and  transgressors  of  a  like  order. 

IV.  The  mistaken  application.  ■  That  Job  was  the  subject  of  Bildad's  sombre 
sketch  is  apparent  from  the  portrait  of  Job's  character  prefixed  by  the  speaker  to  his 
dismal  harangue,  the  resemblance  in  many  points  of  Bildad's  imaginary  picture  to  the 
actual  histojy  of  the  patriarch,  and  the  sharp  incisive  manner  in  which  the  moral  cf 
his  tale  is  (lointed  out  (ver.  21).  Yet  the  preacher  comjiletcly  misdirected  his  disccurset 
For:  1.  Tlie  character  he  portrayed  did  not  belong  to  Job.  Job  wag  not  a  wicked  man, 
and  a  ninn  that  knew  not  God,  as  Bildad  was  perfectly  aware;  but,  as  Job  contended, 
and  Goil  himself  allowed,  "a  perfect  man  and  att  upright,  one  that  feared  God  and 
eschewed  evil."  2.  The  sermon  he  preaehed  did  not  apply  to  Job.  Even  of  wicked 
men  it  wasnot  always  and  universally  true  that  retribution  overtook  them  on  account 
of  their  misdeeds.  But  of  Job  it  was  wholly  incorrect  that  he  was  suffering  for  his 
sins.  3.  The  future  he  predicted  was  not  txperienced  by  Job. '  In  part  it  seemed  to 
he,  but  in  its  principal  ingredients  it  was  not.  He  was  cast  down  from  his  prosperity, 
but  he  was  not  chased  out  of  the  world.  The  li;.;ht  was  for  a  season  extinguished  in 
his  dwelling;,  but  it  was  afterward  rekindled  with  greater  brilliancy  than  befofe.  His 
homestead  was  ruined,  but  not  cursed,  being  afterwards  re-erected  and  blessed.  His 
first  family  was  taken  from  him,  but  a  second  was  bestowed.  His  name  was  not  con- 
signed to  infamy,  but  has  been  crowned  with  everlasting  renown. 

Learn :  1.  That  no  preacher  should  carry  personalities  to  the  pulpit.  2.  That  a  great 
text  should,  if  possible,  be  followed  by  a  great  sermon.  3.  That  an  orator  should  study 
to  be  true  rather  than  biillMnt  in  liis  illustrations.    4.  Tha^  disoouraes  otherwise  good 


on.  xtrm.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  81S 

Are  sometimes  delivered  to  the  wrong  hearers.     61  That  the  predictions  of  angry 
prophets  are  seldom  fulfilled. 

HOMILIES  Bt  YARIOTTS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 21.-~Ben«u)ed  rebuke  and  twtmtnps.  Bildad  again  replies,  mentioning  that 
the  paSsionute  outbfeaks  of  Job  are  useless.  He  holds  fast  to  his  original  principle, 
that,  according  to  the  Law  Of  Grod,  the  hardened  sinner  will  suddenly  meet  his  doom. 
And  some  secret  sin,  he  persists,  must  be  the  cause  of  the  present  suffering. 

L  Intkoduotion  :  denunciation  op  Job  as  a  foolish  and  violent  speakeb. 
(Vers.  1—4.)  He  is  one  who  "  hunts  after  words."  Let  him  he  truly  sensible  and 
rational,  begs  this  confident  Pharisaic  preacher.  "  Why  do  you  treat  us  as  stupid 
beasts  ?  "  he  indignantly  expostulates.  "  You  tear  yourself  to  pieces  in  your  anger,  and 
think  yourself  lacerated  by  God"  (comp.  ch.  vii.  16).  Does  Job  expbct  the  earth  to  be 
depopulated  and  rocks  to  be  removed  for  his  sake  ?  Bildad  thinks  that  Job's  repeated 
a^Bertion  of  his  innocence  aims  at  the  subversion  of  the  moral  order  of  the  world — 
the  holy  order  given  by  God  (comp.  Rom.  iii.  5,  6).  It  is  a  grand  thought,  though 
misapplied  by  the  speaker.  The  order  of  God,  alike  in  nature  and  the  human  spirit, 
is  unchangeable,  and  admits  of  no  exception.  But  this  order  is  not  to  be  misunder* 
stood  by  drawing  conclusions  from  the  outward  to  the  inward  life.  Where  the  higher, 
the  spiritual,  is  concerned,  reason.  Scripture,  and  conscience,  rather  than  any  outward 
tokens,  must  decide  the  truth. 

II.  Bescription  of  The  DBEAUPtrii  DOoM  of  the  habdenbd  sinneb.  (Vers.  6 — 
21.)  Most  solemn  and  pathetic  (  a  masterpieoe  of  dramatic  representation.  A  series 
of  atriking  figures  is  made  to  pass  before  the  eye  of  imagination.  1.  The  light  of  the 
wicked  is  put  out ;  no  flame  leaps  from  his  fire,  no  cheerful  lamp  hangs  from  his  tent- 
roof.  This  is  a  favourite  image  (ch.  xxi.  17 ;  xxix.  3 ;  Ps.  xviii.  28 ;  Prov.  xiii.  9). 
The  Arabs  say,  "  Fate  has  put  out  my  lamp"  (vers.  5,  6).  2.  Another  figure :  his  steps 
are  hemmed  in— Kiurrent  in  the  Bast — and  his  own  counsel  overthrows  him  (ver.  7). 
3.  Again,  the  figure  of  the  nets  and  snares  and  pitfalls,  by  which  he  meets  his  ruin 
(vers.  8 — 10).  Terrible  thoughts  and  dread  events  throng  around  him,  and  pursue  him, 
like  the  Erinnyes  of  the  Greek  mythology — messengers  from  God  to  disquiet  hLs  guilty 
soul  (ver.  11).  4.  Disaster  and  ruin  are  personified  in  the  poetic  description.  The  one 
has  an  eager  hunger  for  him;  the  other  stands  ready,  like  an  armed  foe,  to  cast  him 
down  (ver.  12). 

III.  The  description  now  takes  a  mobb  peesonal  direction — pointing  to  the 
STATE  OF  Job.  1.  His  disease — the  terrible  elephantiasis — the  "  first-born  of  death," 
devours  him  piecemeal  (ver.  13).  2.  Expelled  from  his  secure  abode,  he  advances  into 
the  power  of  the  "  king  of  terrors  "  (ver.  14).  He  dwells  in  the  tent  of  another,  while 
brimstone  from  heaven  desolates  his  former  habitation  (comp.  oh.  xv,  34 ;  Dent.  xxix. 
22,  23;  Ps.  xi.  6).  This,  it  is  said,  is  still  at  the  present  day  the  most  dreadful  of 
images  to  the  mind  of  the  Semitic  peoples— 'the  desolation  of  the  home  (ver.  15). 
3.  Another  figure :  he  is  like  a  tree,  withered  at  the  root,  and  lopped  above  (ver.  16). 
An  imprecation  was  written  on  the  sarcophagus  of  Eshmunazar,  "  Let  him  have  neither 
roots  below  nor  branches  above!"  (comp.  Isa.  v.  24;  Amos  ii.  9),  4.  His  memory 
passes  away  from  the  land,  and  his  name  is  known  over  the  wide  steppe  no  more  (ver. 
17;  comp.  ch.  xiii.  12).  Ho  is  thrust  out  of  the  light  of  life  and  happiness  into  the 
darkness  of  calamity  and  death,  and  is  hunted  from  the  round  habitable  earth  (ver.  18). 
No  scion  nor  shoot  springs  from  him  among  the  people ;  none  escaped  from  Ms  utter 
ruin  in  his  dwellings  (ver.  19).  5.  An  awful  impression  is  felt  by  all,  in  East  and  West 
alike,  who  contemplate  bo  dreadful  a  doom.  "Thus,"  concludes  Bildad,  "it  befalleth 
the  dwellings  of  the  unrighteous,  and  the  place  of  him  that  knew  not— recognized  and 
honoured  not— God  "(vers.  20,  21). 

Detaching  this  address  from  its  inappropriate  application  to  the  <<ufferer,  it  is  in 
itself  a  noble  piece  of  warning  and  eXhortaUon.  Let  us  gather  from  it  a  few  lessons, 
1.  The  curse  of  the  wicked  is  the  ex ''notion  of  the  light  of  God,  who  is  the  Light  and 
Brightness  of  the  righteous  (vers.  5,  sqg. ;  Ps.  xxxvi.  9, 10 ;  cxix.  105).  The  light,  again, 
may  be  taken  as  a  figure  for  the  clear  knowledge  of  man's  destiny,  a  clear  consciousness 
in  the  whole  life  (Matt.  Ti,  22,  23).  -  Then  the  light  in  the  tKt  enhances  the  figure,  and 


814  THE  BOOK  6P  30%  t<«- *^ttt- 1-^21. 

beautifully  points  to  this  clear  consciousness  in  the  daily  relations  of  the  house.  2. 
(Vers.  17,  sqq.)  The  memory  a  man  leaves  behind  is  not  of  so  much  consequence  as  the 
consciousness  in  life  of  being  known  to  God.  There  are  many  true  and  hidden  ones  in 
the  world,  whose  deeds  are  done  in  secret  for  God's  sake  (John  iiL21);  and  many  god- 
less ones,  who  make  so  great  a,  stir  and  noise  in  the  world  that  they  are  talked  of 
after  they  are  gone.  It  is  a  peculiar  blessing  to  the  child  of  God  if  he  be  made  an 
example  to  any,  and  after  his  death  a  sweet  savour  ascends  from  his  life  to  God's 
praise  (Prov.  x.  7).  3.  The  repeated  descriptions  of  the  doom  of  the  ungodly  are 
intended  to  quell  our  envy  at  the  sight  of  unhallowed  prospering,  and  direct  our 
thoughts  to  the  inward,  the  only  real  life.  How  can  we  judge  whether  any  one  is  a 
true  fearer  of  God  ?  Not  from  his  religious  observances,  not  from  the  external  fortunes 
which  befall  him,  not  from  his  individual  good  works;  but  from  the  faith  which  he 
owns,  from  the  whole  direction  of  his  life  to  the  Divine,  from  the  frame  of  mind  in 
which  he  dies  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  17, 19,  etc. ;  Wohlfarth).— J. 

Vers.  6—14. — The  fruits  of  impiety.  Again  Bildad  speaks.  He  is  not  thesufferer, 
but  the  judge.  He  who  came  as  a  comforter  utters  hut  miserable  words  in  the  ears  of 
the  afflicted  one.  His  words  are  true  in  themselves,  but  wrongly  applied.  Justly  he 
describes  the  fruits  of  impiety. 

I.  To  THE  IMPIOtrS  THE  LIGHT  OF  PBOSPEKITY  IS  EXCHANGED  FOB  THE   DARKNESS  OF 

MisFOBTUNB.  His  "  lamp  is  put  out."  Sorrowfulness,  sooner  or  later,  overtakes  him. 
For  a  time  he  is  in  great  prosperity;  but  his  sin  finds  him  out.  The  ill-gotten  gain 
of  ungodliness  has  no  blessing  upon  it,  but  a  withering  curse.  Sooner  or  later  the  hey- 
day of  wicked  rejoicing  is  exchanged  for  the  blackness  of  dark  night.  Universal 
experience  affirms  this.  It  is  a  just  punishment  of  wrong,  and  a  warning  to  the 
tempted ;  while  it  admonishes  the  obedient,  and  declares  "  there  is  a  God  that  judgetb 
in  the  earth." 

II.  The  evilly  fobmbd  puepose  of  impiety  fails.  His  "steps  are  straitened," 
how  strong  soever  they  may  seem  to  be.  Even  his  very  counsel  itself  shall  be  a 
stumbling-block  to  cast  the  wicked  down.  The  hope  cherished  without  God  must  be 
disappointed ;  the  selfish  design  is  itself  a  trap  for  the  feet  of  the  ungodly. 

III.  Impiety  entangles  in  difficulties.  "The  snare  is  laid  for  him  in  the 
ground."  The  whole  kingdom  of  right  and  truth  is  against  him.  Judgment  waits  on 
his  steps.  Sooner  or  later  his  feet  will  be  in  "the  trap"  that  is  laid  "for  him  in  the 
way."  His  course  is  not  a  plain,  direct,  clear  course.  His  motives  are  confused.  He 
hedges  himself  with  difficulties.  One  wrong  exposes  him  to  another.  At  last  "  the 
gin  takes  him  by  the  heel." 

IV.  Impiety  excites  to  feae  and  debad.  "Terrors  make  him  afraid  on  every 
side."  The  awakened  conscience  makes  a  coward  of  him.  He  fears  the  rustling  of  the 
leaf.    .Judgment  is  passed  in  the  secret  chambers  of  his  soul.     He  cannot  escape. 

V.  Impiety  wastes  the  steength  and  beings  the  life  down  to  destruction. 
Sin  is  the  transgression  of  law.  Laws  of  life  cannot  be  broken  without  the  health 
failing.  An  impious  spirit,  unruled  and  uncontrolled  by  righteous  principle,  will 
pursue  evil  and  dangerous  courses,  will  yield  to  evil  habits,  and  the  strength  of  the 
life  will  be  undermined.  Then  "  the  firstborn  of  death  shall  devour  his  strength."  He 
becomes  the  prey  of  destruction.  He  is  brought  "  to  the  king  of  terrors."  Thus  the 
course  of  impiety  ends  in  ignominy,  shame,  and  destruction.  "This  is  the  portion  of 
their  cup."  Darkness,  difficulty,  fear,  wasted  purpose  and  wasted  strength  finally 
issuing  in  death,  are  the  inevitable  fruits  of  impiety. — R.  G. 

Ver.  15. — The  home  of  the  wicked  insecure.  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  is  upon  "the 
habitation  of  the  just."  This  is  the  reward  of  righteousness.  But  the  Divine  judgment 
against  the  wicked  is  shown  in  permitting  his  house  to  become  desolate.  One  of  the 
oft-repeated  promises  to  Isiael  is  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  upon  the  habitation.  But 
"  the  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  house  of  the  wicked."  The  practice  of  iniquity  tends 
to  destruction.  It  has  no  element  of  stability  in  it.  The  habitation  of  the  wicked  is 
insecure  because — 

I.  It  lacks  the  defence  of  bight  pbinciples.  The  righteousness  which  exalteth 
a  nation  establishes  a  house.    On  the  health,  the  pursuits,  tbv  habits,  the  business, 


oa.  xvm.  1—21.3  *SE  fiOOK  OP  JOB.  818 


the  family,  right  prinoiplea  exert  a  beneficent  influence.  The  absence  of  them  is  the 
precursor  of  evil  of  all  kinds.  The  wall  is  broken  down;  protection  is  wanting.  The 
home  is  a  prey  to  evil. 

II.  It  lacks  the  pkomisb  op  the  Divrana  protection  and  blessino.  It  is  as  a 
field  unwatered.  There  is  no  spring  of  hope  within  it.  In  the  blessing  of  the  Lord 
lies  hidden  the  secret  germ  of  all  true  prosperity,  and  all  safety  and  permanence. 
Where  that  blessing  is  not,  the  house  is  as  a  tender  plant  unsheltered  beneath  a 
scorching  sun.  The  Divine  providence  cannot  be  expected  to  work  for  the  promotion 
of  ends  directly  contrary  to  its  own.  The  whole  world,  with  its  innumerable  laws  and 
its  wise  administration,  is  on  the  side  of  right,  on  the  side  of  virtue  and  goodness. 
The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  which  makes  the  field  to  be  fruitful,  makes  the  abode  of  the 
righteous  to  be  an  abode  of  safety,  of  peace,  and  of  blessing.  The  home  of  wickedness 
has  none  of  these  things. 

III.  The  home  of  the  wicked  finds  no  ENOormAGKMKNT  to  its  pkospbbitt  in  the 
GOOD  WILL  OF  MEN  AROUND.  The  cvil  Companions  are  not  trustworthy.  They  turn 
aside  as  a  deceitful  bow.  They  are  as  likely  to  rejnice  and  m;ike  sport  out  of  their 
companion's  downfall  as  to  pity  him  under  it;  while  the  ungodly,  having  separated 
himself  from  the  righteous,  can  find  no  sympathetic  spirit  amongst  them.  That  the 
home  of  evil  should  be  broken  up  is  rather  a  cause  of  rejoicing,  lor  it  is  the  putting 
aside  a  cause  of  evil.  This  is  the  portion  of  the  man  tliat  makeih  not  God  his  trust. 
He  fights  against  his  own  best  interests.  He  forsakes  the  only  true  and  safe  way. 
He  puts  himself  in  opposition  to  the  great  forces  of  righteousness  which  ever  in  the 
end  prevail.  He  links  his  interests  with  that  on  which  the  withering  curse  of  God 
rests,  and  "brimstone  shall  be  scattered  upon  his  habitation."  "His  roots  shall  be 
dried  up  beneath,  and  above  shall  his  branch  be  cut  off." — B.  G. 

Vers.  16 — 21. — The  curse  upon  the  family  of  the  wicked.  The  permanent  continuance 
of  the  family  was  one  of  the  most  coveted  blessings  of  Eautern  nations.  Very  deeply 
was  this  embedded  in  the  minds  of  the  peoples.  It  was,  therefore,  a  signal  curse  of  God 
to  cut  off  the  remembrance  of  a  family  from  the  earth.  With  cruel  error  Bildad  points 
to  the  cutting  off  of  Job's  family — at  least,  such  is  the  presumption,  otherwise  his 
words  are  inappropriate  here — and  he  seems  to  charge  upon  Job  the  sin  of  which  the 
punishment  was  to  be  found  in  the  death  of  his  children.  That  Bildad  states  a  true 
principle  of  Divine  retribution  all  agree ;  his  error  was  in  its  application.  The  cutting 
off  the  family  of  the  ungodly  is — 

I.  A  PRINCIPLE  or   THE   DiVINB  JUDGMENT   AGAINST   EVIL-DOINS.      It  IS  frequently 

announced  in  Holy  Scripture.  God,  the  jealous  God,  visits  "  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers 
upon  the  ehiidren  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation."  It  is  part  of  his  holy  and 
wii^e  and  just  retribution.  As  he  blesses  the  sons  of  the  faithful  for  their  fathers'  sakes, 
80  he  visits  upon  the  children  the  offences  of  their  fathers.  The  evil-doer  withers  as  a 
plant  without  water.  "  His  roots  shall  be  dried  up  beneath."  Therefore  his  branches 
spread  not ;  but  they  are  "  cut  off."  The  remembrance  of  him  perishes  from  the  earth, 
tiud  his  name  from  the  street  (ver.  17).  He  dies  away  without  descendant  and  without 
remembrance. 

II.  This  judgment  is  seen  to  be  A  natural  consequence  op  WRONO-DOiNa.  For 
evil  is  visited  in  various  ways  by  the  avenging  Nemesis  that  hovers  over  aU  life.  Evil 
undermines  the  health;  it  tends  to  habits  and  pursuits  which  are  destructive  of  the 
peace  and  security  and  progress  of  home.  It  puts  man  in  conflict  with  his  neighbour, 
and  so  men  drive  the  evil-doer  "  from  light  into  darkness."  He  is  "  chased  out  of  the 
world."  Even  should  his  posterity  be  perpetuated,  it  is  lost  to  sight.  It  sinks  down 
in  the  world  till  it  sinks  out  of  view. 

III.  This  judgment  stands  in  dkeot  contrast  to  the  lot  op  the  righteous — 
the  man  who  knoweth  God.  Over  his  house  is  the  Divine  protection.  "When  a 
man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him." 
The  blessing  of  God  rests  upon  the  home  and  the  doings  of  the  righteous.  Even 
though  chastisement  and  calamity  may  fall  upon  him,  they  do  not  destroy  him ;  rather, 
he,  as  a  pruned  tree,  groweth  the  more  and  more  frTiitful.  God's  promise  is  unto  the 
good,  and  unto  their  children  after  them.  The  family  of  the  good  man  has  the 
fwivantage  of  a  holy  example.     They  are  screened  from  a  thtMisand  perils,  while 


816  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oa.  xvm.  1— 21. 


innumerable  blessings  descend  upon  them  In  response  to  the  prayer  of  faith.  This 
will  in  the  end  be  proved  to  be  true  of  Job. 

rV.  These  judgments  stand  ab  a  waenino  to  all  pakents.  They  make  the  duty 
of  parental  piety  more  and  more  obvious.  They  illustrate  the  solemn  responsibility  of 
heads  of  houses,  since  their  doings  descend  in  their  effects  upon  their  children.  They 
owe  it  to  their  offspring  that  they  so  live  as  rightly  and  beneficently  to  affect  their 
lives.  The  blessing  of  God  which  rests  upon  the  just,  and  the  curse  and  condemnation 
of  God  upon  the  evil,  are  warnings  to  all.  Upon  those  the  eye  of  Gud  rests,  but  upon 
these  the  curse  of  God.  The  abodes  of  wickedness,  over  which  no  blessing  from  on 
high  hovers,  are  abodes  of  death  and  destruction.  •'  Surely  such  are  the  dwellings  of 
the  wicked,  and  this  is  the  place  of  him  that  knoweth  not  God." — R.  G. 

Ver.  4. — The  individual  need  and  the  universal  order.  Bildad  accuses  Job  of  being 
unreasonable  in  expecting  that  th(^  universal  order  should  bend  to  suit  a  man's  individual 
need.  He  suggests  a  common  difficulty  in  regard  to  the  harmony  between  the  particular 
and  the  general  in  the  dispensations  of  Providence. 

I.  ThK  INDIVinnAL  MAN  IS  TEMPTED  TO  THINK  StTPEEMBLY  OF   HIS  OWN  NEED.      We 

are  all  naturally  self-centred,  and  trouble  magnifies  our  sense  of  personality  and 
peculiarity.  Thus  it  comes  about  that  each  person  is  inclined  to  feel  his  own  wants  as 
of  paramount  importance,  and  to  expect  that  the  whole  order  of  things  must  shape 
itself  to  meet  his  requirements.  If  that  is  not  the  case,  and  the  world  goes  on  in  its 
large  way,  treating  him  as  but  a  unit  among  the  millions,  a  drop  in  the  ocean  of 
humanity,  he  feels  himself  slighted  and  wronged.  A  more  reasonable  view  of  the 
whole  of  God's  world  and  its  interests  should  remove  this  foolish  notion ;  but  it  can 
only  be  conquered  when  its  moral  character  is  attacked,  and  selfishness  is  made  to  give 
place  to  love. 

II.  God  govebnb  the  world  fob  the  cwod  of  the  whole  creation.  We  cannot 
judge  of  it  till  we  can  take  a  large  and  fair  view  of  the  wide  field.  The  shadow  which 
makes  a  corner  look  gloomy  by  itself  is  necessary  for  the  completion  of  the  whole 
picture.  God  is  not  partial,  selecting  one  for  favour  and  neglecting  a  multitude.  He 
is  not  like  the  aristocratic  Soman,  who  looked  down  with  scornful  indifference  on  the 
ignoble  plebs.  There  is  nothing  so  democratic  as  nature.  Here  all  alike  are  tinder 
exactly  the  same  laws.  As  the  great  ship  ploughs  her  way  through  the  ocean,  though 
children  are  crying  and  women  are  ill,  the  watch  calls  out  his  cheery  ^word, "  All's 
well  I  "  for  the  vessel  is  going  right  in  spite  of  these  individual  distresses. 

III.  The  general  constitdtion  of  the  world  cannot  be  upset  to  suit  individual 
NEEDS.  Should  the  earth  be  depopulated  for  the  sake  of  one  man's  convenience  ?  That 
is  Bildad's  extravagant  way  of  putting  the  thought ;  but  the  extravaganbe  is  only  a 
magnifying  of  an  idea  which  is  foolish  even  within  the  smallest  dimensions.  That  a 
man  should  ever  expect  a  rock  to  move  out  of  his  path  is  absurd.  As  the  massive  rock 
will  not  stir,  and  as  the  traveller  must  either  climb  over  it  or  go  round  it,  so  the  course 
of  nature  generally  will  not  budge  before  man's  will.  He  may  dash  himself  against  it, 
but  the  results  will  only  be  bruises  and  pain.  As  God  has  made  all  things  well,  and  as 
the  laws  of  nature  make  for  life  and  welfare,  it  i.s  a  matter  of  profound  thankftilness 
that  foolish,  selfish  men  cannot  set  them  aside. 

IV.  The, individual  man  ib  helped  through  the  general  course  of  the  whole 
WORLD.  There  is  a  special  providence.  God  does  nut  deal  with  masses,  but  with  men. 
The  very  hairs  of  our  head  are  all  numbered.  It  is  in  accordance  with  God's  perfect 
mind  that  he  should  so  govern  the  whole  that  the  result  should  be  good  for  each.  We 
have  to  learn  to  take  our  places  in  the  great  family  ot  God  with  humility  and  sym- 
pathy for  our  brethren.  Then  we  shall  see  that  the  rules  of  the  household,  which  cannot 
be  set  aside  to  suit  our  whims  and  capricious  fancies,  are  really  good  for  us.  It  is  better 
the  rock  should  not  be  carried  away.  We  are  trained  and  strengthened  by  having  to 
overcome  the  difficulty.  Finally,  it  is  in  accordance  with  these  principles  that— through 
his  atonement  which  magnifies  the  Law  and  makes  it  honourable — Christ  brings  a 
salvation  for  each  soul  which  does  not  disarrange  the  general  course  of  God's  govern- 
mert  of  the  universe, — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  6,  <&,-Th»  Ikht  extinguished.    This  is  a  favourite  idea  of  iflldad's,  that  occun 


OH.  xTm.  1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  81T 

more  than  once  in  his  harangue  (e.g.  ver.  18).   As  usual,  we  may  here  follow  the  imagery 
of  the  Shuhite  without  applying  it  to  Job.     Wickedness  extinguishes  light. 

I.  The  light  of  knowledob.  Bad  men  may  be  learned  and  good  men  may  ha 
ignorant  in  regard  to  the  knowledge  of  the  schools  and  the  world.  But  there  is  a  deeper 
knowledge  from  which  sin  excludes,  a  light  to  which  wickedness  simply  blinds  the  eye. 
1.  The  knowledge  of  God.  Spiritual  knowledge  depends  on  sympathy.  But  God  is 
holy.  Therefore  the  unholy,  being  out  of  sympathy  with  him,  cannot  understand 
his  thoughts  or  his  ways.  2.  The  knowledge  of  goodness.  The  wicked  life  is  spent 
in  a  state  of  ignorance  concerning  the  very  nature  of  the  Christian  life.  No  one 
knows  what  that  better  life  is  till  he  has  tried  to  live  it.  3.  The  knowledge  o} 
the  largest  truth.  Sin  degrades  and  narrows  the  soul.  It  shuts  off  that  wide,  com- 
prt<hensive  vision  which  is  only  possible  when  passion  and  lust  and  all  dark  experieuces 
are  removed. 

II.  The  light  op  love.  All  sin  is  selfishness.  The  wicked  man  degrades  the  very 
name  of  love.  Its  true  meaning  is  quite  uiiknown  to  him ;  or  if  it  dawn  upon  him  in 
his  better  moments,  as  when  he  takes  his  little  child  upon  his  knee  and  looks  into  its 
innc  cent  eyes,  it  is  like  a  light  from  a  far-off  world,  which  only  makes  the  foul  darkness 
of  the  regions  his  soul  inhabits  the  more  visible  to  his  startled  apprehension. 

III.  The  light  of  joy.  There  is  a  mad  pleasure  in  sin,  and  for  a  while  it  seems  to 
fulfil  its  deceitful  promises.  But  it  is  not  long  before  its  dupe  discovers  his  folly,  and 
finds  that  his  so-called  pleasure  is  a  mockery.  Of  real  unalloyed  gladness  he  has 
none.  There  are  bitter  dregs  at  the  bottom  of  the  cup  of  self-indulgent  pleasure  which 
he  drinks  so  greedily.  All  that  he  delights  in  is  supei  ficial,  transient,  unreal.  When 
he  has  made  the  most  of  it,  it  leaves  the  deeper  hunger  of  his  soul  unsatisfied. 

IV.  The  light  of  life.  Light  vitalizes;  darkness  is  akin  to  death.  The  sinful  sotil 
is  on  the  road  to  the  gates  of  darkness,  through  which  the  road  leads  to  the  dreadful 
death  which  is  its  rightful  wages.  Already  much  of  the  light  of  life  has  faded  away, 
and  dim  shadows  as  from  the  tomb  hover  about  the  career  of  wickedness,  He  who 
has  chosen  sin  for  his  inheritance  has  chosen  a  sunless  territory  overshadowed  by  the 
dark  wings  of  death. 

v..  The  light  of  God's  favotjb.-  When  God  lifts  up  his  countenance  upon  any  one, 
his  iight  shines  forth ;  for  God  is  Light  (1  John  i.  5).  But  the  wickedness  that  offends 
the  Law  of  God  necessarily  removes  the  light  of  his  favour.  A  certain  tenipurary 
prosperity  may  remain,  so  that  the  foolish  sinner  may  think  himself  a  favourite  of 
fortune.  But  there  is  no  grace  of  God  in  it ;  and  even  in  the  glaring  brightness  of  its 
immediate  presence  it  is  possible  to  see  the  meretricious  tinsel,  which  is  very  different 
I'rom  ihe  true  glory  of  God's  goodness, — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.-i.  8 — 10.— 2%e  sinner  entrapped  hy  his  own  feet.  According  to  Bildad's  repre- 
sentation, the  wicked  man  needs  no  huntsman  to  run  him  to  earth.  His  own  fatuous 
course  will  lead  him  to  ruin,  his  own  foolish  feet  walk  into  the  snare. 

I.  The  beady  snabe,  "The  snare  is  laid  for  him  in  the  ground."  1.  Its  author.  It 
is  laid /or  him.  He  does  not  make  and  set  it;  he  does  not  know  where  it  is.  If  he 
knew,  of  course  he  would  avoid  it.  He  does  not  even  think  of  its  existence.  Were  he 
to  do  so,  he  would  be  on  his  guard.  Another  has  lai'l  the  snare.  Man  has  a  great 
enemy,  watching  to  pounce  on  him — a  robber  of  souls,  who  sets  traps  and  gins  for  the 
unwary.  Let  us'^be  on  our  guard.  Like  the  Pilgrim,  wo  are  on  the  enchanter's  ground; 
this  earlh  has  become  our  foe's  territory.  2.  Its  charwter.  A  snare  is  a  hidden  device. 
The  net  is  set  among  the  bushes,  the  wires  are  hidden  by  the  grass.  Men  are  deluded 
into  ruin.  Deceitful  appearances  lure  them  to  destruction.  3.  Its  eondition.  The 
snare  is  already  laid.  II  we  are  not  ready  to  meet  our  foe,  he  is  ready  for  us.  No  one 
can  accuse  Satan  of  dilatoriness.  He  is  beforehand  with  his  schemes.  He  was  pre- 
pared to  entrap  the  first  man.  The  snare  was  ready  almost  as  soon  as  Eden  was  planted, 
4,  Its  position,  "  In  the  way."  (1)  The  bad  man's  way.  This  is  its  most  usual  place. 
The  snares  are  roost  numerous  on  the  broad  road.  (2)  The  comraou  way.  The  snares 
are  also  to  be  found  on  the  narrow  way  that  leads  to  life.  The  Christian  is  not  out  of 
dano-er.  Bunyan's  enchanted  ground  lay  right  in  the  road  to  the  Celestial  City.  We 
du  nut  escape  the  dangers  of  temptation  by  becoming  Christians, 

II.  Ths  pnwaby  fsst.    The  wioke4  wan  w^lks  straight  iftto  t}ie  snare.    Here  19 


318  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xvm.  1— 21. 

the  difference  between  this  man  and  the  good  man.  There  are  snares  about  the  path 
of  the  man  of  God ;  but  a  Divine  light  reveals  them,  and  a  Divine  hand  draws  him  back 
from  his  great  peril.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  godless  man.  Note  the  reasons  why  his 
feet  go  straight  for  the  snare.  1.  Darkness.  His  light  is  put  out  (ver.  5).  If  he 
started  with  a  lantern,  the  foul  atmosphere  through  which  he  has  travelled  has  extin- 
guished it.  Kow  that  he  needs  it  in  the  place  of  peril,  it  is  but  a  useless  impediment. 
2.  i)eserti<m  of  God.  We  are  too  blind  to  see  all  the  snares  that  are  set  for  our  feet,  but 
we  may  have  the  help  of  an  unerring  Guide.  The  sinner  rejects  the  heavenly  Guide. 
In  proud  independence  he  prefers  to  go  alone.  3.  Pr oneness  to  evil.  The  sinner  sees 
a  fascination  in  the  region  of  the  snare.  Perhaps  it  is  set  in  a  bed  of  flowers,  or  in  an 
orchard  of  fruit.  It  may  be  that  some  pleasant  shady  dell  conceals  it,  or  possibly  it  is 
hidden  by  a  mossy  couch  that  invites  repose.  At  all  events,  it  is  most  deceptive  and 
powerful  where  sin  most  abounds.  4.  Destiny.  A  sort  of  fatality  dogs  the  footsteps 
of  the  sinner.  Start  how  he  may,  he  is  sure  to  direct  his  feet  at  last  straight  for  the 
snare.  He  is  like  one  mesmerized.  He  can  but  walk  into  the  net.  The  hideous 
explanation  of  his  fascination  for  ruin  is  that  he  is  no  longer  his  own  master.  He  has 
made  himself  the  slave  of  Satan.  Yet  even  he  may  find  safety  in  the  mighty  deliverance 
of  the  Christ  who  came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  14. — The  king  of  terrors.  Men  regard  death  as  the  king  of  terrors.  Let  us 
consider  first  the  grounds  of  this  notion,  and  then  how  it  may  be  dispelled. 

I.  Let  us  consider  why  death  is  eegardbd  as  the  Kiua  of  teeeobs.  Men 
instinctively  think  of  death  as  "  the  grisly  terror." 

"  I  fled,  and  cried  out, '  Death  1 ' 
Hell  trembled  at  the  hideous  name,  and  sighed 
From  all  her  caves,  and  back  resounded, '  Death  1 ' " 

1,  li  is  opposed  to  the  natural  love  of  life.  "  All  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his 
life."  Therefore  death  appears  as  his  enemy.  Every  living  creature  shuns  it.  The 
fear  of  it  makes  a  tragedy  of  the  chase.  2.  It  is  irresistible.  A  veritable  monarch.  We 
may  maintain  a  state  of  siege  for  a  time,  but  we  knoftr  we  must  all  capitulate  at  last. 
When  death  storms  the  citadel  in  real  earnest,  no  power  can  keep  it  out.  3.  Its  terri- 
tory is  unknown.  The  mystery  of  death  adds  to  its  terrors.  If  we  saw  more  we  might 
fear  less.  We  launch  our  vessel  on  a  dark  sea,  not  knowing  what  sm-ges  beat  on  the 
further  shore.  4.  It  comes  in  pain.  We  often  say  that  the  worst  is  over  with  the  poor 
sufferer  before  the  end  has  come.  The  bitterness  of  death  has  passed  before  death  itself 
has  been  reached.  Still  there  is  suffering  at  the  end  of  most  lives,  and  we  instinctively 
shrink  from  this.  We  cannot  bring  ourselves  to  face  the  thought  of  the  death-struggle. 
5.  It  takes  us  from  all  the  light  and  Joy  of  earth.  The  natural  love  of  life  is  confirmed 
by  experience.  To  die  is  "  to  lie  in  cold  obstruction."  All  the  sunshine  and  flowers 
of  this  fair  world  are  gone,  all  the  sweetness  of  companionship  with  the  loved  on  earth. 
The  soul  is  severed  from  its  earthly  delights.  6.  It  comes  to  each  singly.  Each  soul 
must  venture  alone  into  the  dread  unknown.  7.  It  ushers  us  into  future  judgment. 
"After  death  the  judgment."  The  sinner  who  dares  not  give  an  account  of  himself 
before  God  dreads  to  hear  the  summons  from  the  messenger  of  the  unseen.  "The 
sting  of  death  is  sin." 

_  II.  Let  U8  see  how  death  can  be  robbed  of  its  teeroes.  Christ  dethrones  the 
king  of  terrors,  and  wrests  his  dark  kingdim  away,  flooding  it  with  the  light  of  his 
grace.  The  Christian  can  do  more  than  the  Roman  hero  and  the  Stoic  philosopher  who 
had  learnt  to  mett  death  "  with  an  equal  mind."  He  can  say,  "  To  me  ...  to  die  is  gain." 
1.  Christ  removes  the  causes  of  the  fear  of  death.  He  does  not  lull  the  fear  as  with  an 
opiate.  He  dissipates  it  by  abolishing  its  source,  as  one  dissipates  a  malarious  fog  by 
draining  the  marsh  from  which  it  rises.  He  goes  to  the  root  by  conquering  sin,  which 
is  the  most  fundamental  cause  of  the  terror  of  death.  Bringing  pardon  for  past  sin,  he 
dispels  the  alarm  of  future  jud<<ment ;  and  bringing  purification  of  soul,  he  removes  the 
indwelling  sin  that  always  shrinks  from  death  as  the  foe  of  man.  Then  Christ  helps 
us  to  face  the  pain,  the  darkness,  and  the  mystery  of  death,  by  assuring  us  of  his  own 
supporting  presence :  "It  is  I;  be  not  afraid."  2.  Christ  thrmas  light  on  the  rtgivn 
leyond  death.    He  would  not  have  us  fix  our  attention  on  de»th.    That  is  but  a 


OH.  xvm.  1—21 J  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  819 

transient  experience.    At  the  worst  it  is  a  dark  door  to  bi'   pissed  through.     Th« 
Christian  will  never  dwell  in  the  kingdom  of  death.    To  him  death  is 


"  That  golden  key 
That  opes  the  palace  of  eternity." 


There  Is  a  triumph  over  death  for  those  who,  sleeping  in  Christ,  wake  to  the  life  eternal. 
For  them  the  king  of  terrors  has  ceased  to  be.  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed 
is  death"  (1  Cor.  xv.  26).— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  16. — Soot  and  hranch.  Bilda'l  dwells  upon  his  favourite  topic  of  the  withering 
doom  of  the  wicked.  It  is  complete — root  and  branch  are  destroyed.  A  truth  again, 
though  inapplicable  to  Job. 

I.  The  boots  dkibd  up.  The  roots  stand  for  the  sources  of  life  and  strength.  Boots 
nourish  the  tree  and  hold  it  in  its  place.  If  they  fail,  all  else  must  perish.  1.  The 
roots  are  out  of  sight.  The  most  important  things  are  nut  the  most  prominent.  The 
secret  springs  of  the  soul  are  of  vital  interest.  All  that  is  visible  to  the  eye  may  be 
untouched ;  yet  if  the  hidden  roots  of  our  being  fail  we  must  be  utterly  undone.  2. 
The  roots  depend  on  nourishment.  They  are  dried  up  for  lack  of  moisture  in  the  soil. 
There  may  be  no  defect  in  the  roots ;  yet  if  the  soil  is  drained  dry  they  cannot  perform 
their  natural  function  of  nourishing  the  soul.  We  are  all  ilependent  on  what  is  outside 
us,  in  soul  as  well  as  in  body.  If  the  food  of  the  soul  is  withdrawn,  if  the  water  of  life 
no  longer  flows  near  to  the  roots  of  our  spiritual  being,  no  vigour  of  constitution,  no 
inherent  personal  life,  can  survive.  3.  The  waters  may  fail.  The  course  of  the  river 
mtj  be  deflected,  or  there  may  be  a  suason  of  drought.  We  have  nothing  in  ourselves 
0£  In  the  constitution  of  things  to  guarantee  a  continuance  of  supply  in  this  case  of 
our  deepest  wants.  We  have  no  right  to  that  supply,  no  claim  on  the  grace  of  God. 
The  hand  that  gives  may  withhold.  Therefore  our  continued  prosperity  depends 
absolutely  on  God's  continued  favour.  The  insolent  and  rebellious  independence  that 
forfeits  God's  grace  withers  the  roots  of  the  soul. 

II.  The  branch  cut  oFi?.  The  branch  stands  for  the  exteroal  growth.  It  is  seen 
by  all,  snowed  with  blossoms  &nd  freshening  with  new  green  in  the  spring,  or  laden  with 
luscious  fruit  in  the  autumn.  When  the  root  is  dried  up,  leaves  and  fruit  wither  on 
the  branch.  But  a  more  untimely  fate  may  overtake  it.  It  may  be  severed  from  the 
tree.  Perhaps  it  is  too  stout  and  tough  to  be  torn  off  in  the  gale,  but  it  cannot  resist 
the  woodman's  axe.  1.  The  hranch  is  cut  off  hy  an  external  calamity.  This  is  what 
had  happened  to  Job.  His  prosperity  was  suddenly  wrenched  away  from  him.  The 
family  into  which  his  life  had  brauched  out  was  smitten ;  this  branch  was  cut  off  from 
the  parent  stem.  What  we  most  love,  rejoice  in,  and  pride  ourselves  upon  may  be 
removed  by  the  hand  of  death,  or  by  some  mibfurtune  of  life.  2.  The  cutting  off  of  the 
branch  may  not  he  an  unmitigated  evil.  It  may  be  a  pruning  process.  The  tree  may 
be  running  to  wood  rather  than  producing  fiuit.  Mere  growth  of  wealth  and  external 
prosperity  may  be  taking  the  place  of  fruit-bearing  in  regard  to  the  real  good  of  life. 
Then  it  is  to  be  observed  that  pruning  a  tree  is  not  felling  it.  Though  the  branch  is 
cut  off,  the  trunk  is  left,  and  the  life  of  the  tree  will  yet  be  seen  in  a  new  and  healthier 
growth.  We  must  not  despair  at  external  disaster.  If  the  life  of  God  is  in  us,  we 
shall  survive  it,  and  oven  triumph  over  it.  3.  The  most  fatal  condition  is  when  the 
dying  of  the  roots  goes  wUh  the  cutting  off  of  the  hranch.  If  the  internal  resources  are 
dried  up  when  external  calamity  falls  upon  us,  our  condition  is  desperate.  There  is 
then  nothing  to  fall  back  upon.     External  ruin  only  crowns  and  completes  internal 

decay. 

Conclusion.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  as  deep-searching  and  as  far-reaching  as  the 
evil  of  sin.  It  saves  roots  and  branches,  giving  life  to  the  80ul,)uid  also  »  Divine  growth 
and  prosperity. — W.  F.A. 


320 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  MX.  1—29 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XIX. 


Vera.  1 — ^29. — Job  begins  his  answer  to 
Bildad's  second  speech  by  an  expostulation 
against  the  uukindness  of  his  friends,  who 
break  him  in  pieces,  and  torture  him,  with 
their  reproaohea  (vers.  1 — 5).  He  then  once 
more,  and  more  plainly  than  on  any  other 
occasion,  recounts  his  woes.  (1)  His  severe 
treatment  by  God  (vers.  6—13);  (2)  his 
harsh  usage  by  his  relatives  and  friends 
(vers.  14 — 19);  and  (8)  the  pain  caused  him 
by  his  disease  (ver.  20);  and  appeals  to  his 
friends  on  these  grounds  for  pity  ami  for- 
bearance (vera.  21,  22).  Next,  he  proceeds 
to  make  his  great  avowal,  prefacing  it  with 
a  wish  for  its  preservation  as  a  perpetual 
record  (vers.  23,  24);  the  avowal  itself 
follows  (vers.  25—27) ;  and  the  speech 
terminates  with  a  warning  to  his  "com- 
forters," that  if  they  continue  to  persecute 
him,  a  judgment  will  fall  upon  them  (vers. 
28,  29). 

Vers.  1,  2. — Then  Job  answered  and  said, 
How  long  will  ye  ves  my  soul,  and  break  me 
in  pieces  with  words  1  Job  is  no  Stoic.  He 
is  not  insensible  to  his  friends'  attacks.  On 
the  contrary,  their  words  sting  him,  torture 
him,  "  break  him  in  pieces,"  wound  his  soul 
in  its  tenderest  part.  'Bildad's  attack  had 
been  the  cruellest  of  all,  and  it  drives  him 
to  expostulation  (vers.  2 — 5)  and  entreaty 
(vers.  21,  22). 

Ver.  3. — These  ten  times  hare  ye  reproached 
me.  (For  the  use  of  the  expression  "ten 
times"  for  "  many  times,"  "  frequently,''  see 
Gen.  xxxi.  7,  41 ;  Numb.  xiv.  "22 ;  Neh.  iv. 
12;  Dan.  i.  20,  etc.)  Ye  are  not  ashamed 
that  ye  make  yourselves  strange  to  me ;  rather, 
that  ye  deal  hardly  with  me  (see  the  Eeviged 
Version).  The  verb  used  does  not  occur 
elsewhere,  but  seems  to  have  the  meaning  of 
"  ill  use  "  or  "  ill  treat "  (see  Professor  lyee's 
•  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Job,'  p.  328). 

Ver.  4. — And  be  it  indeed  that  I  have 
erred  ;  or,  done  wrong.  Job  at  no  time  main- 
tains his  impeccability.  Sins  of  infirmity 
he  frequently  pleads  guilty  to,  and  specially 
to  intemperate  speech  (see  oh,  vi.  26;  ix. 
14,  20,  etc.).  Mine  error  remaineth  with 
myself  ;  i.e.  "  It  remains  mine ;  and  I  suffer 
the  punishment." 

Ver.  5. — If  indeed  ye  will  magnify  your- 
selves against  me.  If  you  have  no  sense  of 
justice,  and  are  disinclined  to  pay  any  heed 
to  roy  expostulations;  if  jou  intend  still  to 


insist  on  magnifying  yourselves  against  «o 
and  bringingup  agiiinst  me  my"reproach;' 
then  let  me  make  appeal  to  your  pity. 
Consider  my  whole  condition — how  I  staml 
with  God,  who  persecutes  me  and  "  destroys" 
me  (ver.  10);  how  I  stand  with  my  relatives 
and  such  other  friends  as  I  have  beside 
yourselves,  who  disclaim  and  forsake  loe 
(vers,  13^19);  and  liow  I  am  qonditioned 
with  respect  to  my  body,  emaciated  and  on 
the  verge  of  death  (ver.  20) ;  and  then,  if 
neither  your  friendship  nor  your  sense  of 
justice  will  induce  yon  to  abstain  from 
persecuting  me,  abstain  at  any  rate  for  pity's 
sake  (ver.  21).  And  plead  against  me  my 
reproach.  Job's  special  "repraioh"  was 
that  God  had  laid  his  hand  upon  him.  This 
was  a  manifest  fact,  and  could  not  be  denied. 
His  "comforters"  concluded  ftgnj  it  that  be 
was  a  monster  of  wickedness. 

Ver.  6. — Know  now  that  God  hath  over- 
thrown me;  or,  perverted  me — ^"subvertel  me 
in  my  cs^use "  (see  Lau).  iii.  6),  And  hath 
compassed  me  with  his  net.  Professor  Lee 
thinks  that  tlie  net,  or  rather  noose,  inti  nded 
by  the  rare  word  nisD  is  the  lasso,  wliich 
was  certainly  employed  in  war  (Herod.,  vii. 
85),  and  probably  also  in  hunting,  from 
ancient  times  in  the  East.  Bildad  had  in- 
sinuated tijat  Job  had  fallen  into  his  nwu 
snare  (ch.  xviii.  7 — 9) ;  Job  replies  that  the 
snare  in  which  he  is  taken  is  from  God. 

Ver.  7. — Behold,  I  cry  out  of  wrong ;  «'.e. 
"I  cry  out  that  I  am  wronged."  I  com- 
plain that  sufferings  are  inflicted  on  me  that 
I  have  not  deserved.  This  has  been  Juli's 
complaint  from  the  first  (ch,  iii.  26 ;  vi.  29 ; 
ix.  17,  22 ;  x.  3,  etc.).  But  I  am  not  her.rd ; 
i.e.  "I  am  not  listened  to — my  cry  is  not, 
answered."  I  cry  aland,  but  there  is  no 
judgment;  or,  no  decision — "no  sentence.'' 
All  Job's  appeals  to  God  have  elicited  uo 
reply  from  him.  He  still  keeps  silence. 
Job  a|  ipears  from  the  first  to  have  anticipated 
such  a  theophany  as  ultimately  tnlres 
place  (ch.  xxxviii. — xli.)  and  vindicates  iiis 
character. 

Ver.  8. — He  hath  fenced  up  my  way  that  I 
cannot  pass  (comp.  ch.  iii.  23 ;  xiii.  27  ;  Hos. 
ii.  6),  and  he  hath  set  darkness  in  my  paths. 
Job  complains  of  the  want  of  light;  in  liis 
licartliecries,'Ei'Se <^iiei Ka\i\fiT(rov.  Nothing 
vexes  liim  so  much  as  his  inability  to  under- 
stand why  he  is  afSicted. 

Ver.  9. — He  hath  stripped  me  of  my  glory. 
The  glory  which  he  had  in  his  prosperity ; 
not  exactly  that  of  a  king,  but  that  of  a 
great  sheiUi  or  emir — of  one  who  was  on  a 
par  with  the  noblest  of  those  about  him 
(see  ch.  i.  3).  And  taken  the  crown  from  my 
ietfi.    Not  an  actual  crown,  which  sbei^ht 


caa.  xTX.  1 — 20.] 


THE   BOOK  OP  JOB. 


821 


do  not  wear,  but  a  metaphor  for  dignity  or 
honour. 

Ver.  10. — He  hath  destroyed  me  on  every 
side,  and  I  am  gone ;  or,  hroken  me  doian. 
Job  compares  himself  to  a  city,  the  walls  of 
which  are  attacked  on  every  side  and  broken 
down.  His  ruin  is  complete — he  perishes. 
And  mine  hope  hath  he  removed  like  a  tree ; 
rather,  torn  up  Wee  a  tree.  Job's  "  hope " 
was,  no  doubt,  to  lead  a  tranquil  and  a  godly 
life,  surrounded  by  his  relatives  and  friends, 
in  favour  with  God  and  man,  til]  old  age 
carae,  and  he  descended,  like  a  ripe  shock 
of  corn  (oh.  v.  26),  to  the  grave.  This  hope 
had  been  "  torn  up  by  the  roots  "  when  his 
calamities  fell  upon  him. 

Ver.  11. — He  hath  also  kindled  his  wrath 
r.gainst  me.  It  is  not  what  has  happened 
to  him  in  the  way  of  affliction  and  calamity 
that  so  much  oppresses  and  crushes  the 
patriarch,  as  the  eante  to  which  he,  not  un- 
naturally, ascribes  his  afflictions,  viz.  the 
wratli  of  God.  Participating  in  the  general 
creed  of  his  time,  he  believes  his  sufferings 
to  come  direct  from  God,  and  to  be  proofs 
of  God's  severe  auger  against  him.  He  is 
not,  however,  prepared  on  this  account  to 
renounce  God.  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet 
will  I  trust  in  him"  (ch.  xiii.  15)  is  still 
his  inward  sustaining  thought  and  guiding 
principle.  And  he  counteth  me  unto  him 
as  one  of  his  enemies.  Job  felt  himself 
treated  as  an  enemy  of  God,  and  supposed 
that  God  must  consider  him  such.  He 
either  had  no  glimpse  of  the  cheering  truth, 
"  WhoBX  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteueth " 
(Heb.  xii.  6),  or  he  could  not  imagine  that 
such  woes  as  his  were  mere  chasteniugs. 

Ver.  12. — His  troops  come  together  (oomp. 
ch.  xvi.  13,  "  His  aroliers  compass  me  round 
about").  It  seems  to  Job  that  God  brings 
against  him  a  whole  army  of  assailants,  who 
join  their  forces  together  and  proceed  to  the 
attack.  Clouds  of  archers,  troops  of  ravagers, 
come  about  him,  and  fall  upon  him  from 
every  side.  And  raise  up  their  way  against 
me ;  rather,  and  cast  up  their  bank  against 
me.  Job  still  regards  himself  as  a  besieged 
city  (.see  ver.  10),  and  represents  his  assail- 
ants as  raising  embankments  to  hem  him  in, 
or  mounds  from  which  to  batter  his  defences 
(compare  the  Assyrian  sculptures,  passim). 
And  encamp  round  about  my  tabernacle ;  i.e. 
"  my  tent,"  or  "  my  dwelling." 
.Ver.  13.— He  hath  put  my  brethren  far 
from  me.  Job  had  actual  "brothers"  (ch. 
xlii.  11),  who  forsook  him  and  "dealt 
deceitfully  "  with  him  (ch.  vi.  15)  during 
the  time  of  h's  adversity,  but  were  glad 
enough  to  return  to  him  and  "eat  bread 
with  him"  in  his  later  prosperous  life. 
Their  alienation  from  him  during  the  period 
of  his  afflictions  he  here  regards  as  among 
the  trials  laid  upon  him  by  God.     Compare 

JOB. 


the  similar  woe  of  Job's  great  Antitype 
(John  vii.  5,  "  For  neither  did  his  bretli  i  en 
believe  o  i  him  ").  And  mine  aoq^uaintaaca 
are  verily  estranged  from  me  (oomp.  Pa. 
xxxviii.  11 ;  Ixix.  9  ;  Ixxxviii.  8,  18).  The 
desertion  of  the  afflicted  by  their  fair-weather 
friends  is  a  standing  topic  with  the  poots 
and  moralists  of  all  ages  and  ntitions.  Job 
was  not  singular  in  this  affliction. 

Ver.  14. — My  kinsfolk  have  failed,  and 
my  familiar  friends  have  forgotten  me  (see 
Ps.  xli.  9). 

Ver.  15. — They  that  dwell  in  mine  house, 
and  my  maids,  count  me  for  a  stranger. 
Even  the  inmates  of  his  house,  male  and 
female,  his  servants,  guards,  retainers,  hand- 
maids, and  the  like,  looked  on  him  and 
treated  him  as  if  unknown  to  them.  I  ami 
an  alien  in  their  sight.  Nay,  not  only  as  if 
unknown, but  "as  an  alien,"  i.e. a  foreigner. 

Ver.  16. — I  called  my  servant,  and  he 
gave  me  no  answer.  Astounding  insolence 
in  an  Oriental  servant,  or  rather  slave  (13J>), 
who  should  have  hung  upon  his  master's 
words,  and  striven  to  anticipate  his  wisiies. 
I  intreated  him  with  my  mouth.  Begging 
him  probably  for  some  service  which  was 
distasteful,  and  which  he  declined  to  render. 

Ver.  17. — My  breath  is  strange  to  my  wife. 
The  breath  of  a  sufferer  from  elephantiasis 
has  often  a  fetid  odour  which  is  extremely 
disagreeable.  Job's  wife,  it  would  seem, 
held  aloof  from  him  on  this  account,  so  thit 
he  lost  the  tender  offices  which  a  wife  is 
the  fittest  person  to  render.  Though  I 
intreated  for  the  children's  sake  of  mina 
own  body.  This  trimslalion  is  scarcely 
tenable,  though  no  doubt  it  gives  to  the 
words  used  a  most  touching  and  pHthotio 
sense.  Translate,  arid  I  am  loathsome  to  the 
children  of  my  mother's  womb;  i.e.  to  my 
brothers  and  sisters  (comp.  oh.  xlii.  11).  It 
would  seem  that  they  also  avoided  Job's 
presence,  or  at  any  rate  any  near  approach 
to  him.  Under  the  circumstances,  this  is 
perhaps  not  surprising  ;  but  Job,  in  his 
extreme  isolation,  felt  it  keenly. 

Ver.  18. — Yea,  young  children  despised  me. 
(So  Rosenmiiller,  Canon  Cook,  and  the  Ke- 
vised  Version.)  Others  translate,  "the  vile," 
or  "the  perverse"  (comp.  ch. xvi.  11).  But 
the  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version 
receives  support  from  ch.  xxi.  11.  The 
forwardness  of  rude  and  ill-trained  children 
to  take  part  against  God's  saints  appears 
later  in  the  history  of  Elisha  (2  Kings  ii. 
23,  24).  I  arose,  and  they  spake  against 
me  ;  or,  when  I  arise,  they  speak  against  me 
(compare  the  Revised  Version). 

Ver.  19. — All  my  inward  friends  abhorred 
me  ;  literally,  all  the  men  of  my  counsel ;  i.e. 
all  those  whom  I  was  accustomed  to  consult, 
and  whose  advice  I  was  wont  to  take,  in 
any  difficulty,  by  keeping  aloof,  have  shown 


322 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  XIX.  1 — 29. 


tlieir  abhorrence  of  me.  And  they  wliom  1 
loved  are  turned  against  me  (comp.  Ps.  xli. 
9  ;  Iv.  12—14 ;  Jer.  xx.  10).  The  saints  of 
God  in  all  ages,  and  however  differently 
circumstanced,  are  assailed  by  almost  the 
same  trials  and  temptations.  Whether  it  be 
Job,  or  David,  or  Jeremiah,  or  One  greater 
than  any  of  them,  the  desertion  and  un- 
liindness  of  their  nearest  and  dearest,  as 
the  bitterest  of  all  sufferings,  is  almost  sure 
to  be  included  in  their  cup,  which  they  must 
drink  to  the  dregs,  if  they  are  to  experience 
to  the  full  "  the  precious  uses  of  adversity." 

Ver.  20. — My  bone  oleaveth  to  my  skin 
and  to  my  flesh.  Here  the  third  source  of 
Job's  misery  is  brought  forward — his  painful 
and  incurable  disease.  This  has  brought 
him  to  such  a  pitch  of  emaciation  that  his 
bones  seem  to  adhere  to  the  tightened  skin, 
and  the  scanty  and  shrunken  muscles,  that 
cover  them  (comp.  ch.  xxxiii.  21  and  Lam. 
iv.  8).  Such  emaciation  of  the  general 
frame  ig  quite  compatible  with  the  unsightly 
swelling  of  certain  parts  of  the  body  which 
characterizes  elephantiasis.  Andl  am  escaped 
with  the  skin  of  my  teeth.  The  expression 
is,  no  doubt,  proverbial,  and  signifies  "  barely 
escaped ; "  but  its  origin  is  obscure. 

Ver.  21. — Have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity 
upon  me,  0  my  friends.  On  the  enumeration 
of  his  various  woes,  Job's  appeal  for  pity 
follows.  We  must  not  regard  it  as  addressed 
merely  to  the  three  so-called  "  friends  "  (ch. 
ii.  11)  or  "  comforters  "  (ch.  xvi.  2),  Elipbaz, 
Bildad,  and  Zopliar.  It  is  an  appeal  to 
all  those  who  are  around  him  and  about 
him,  whose  sympathies  have  been  hitherto 
estranged  (vers.  13 — 19),  but  whose  regard 
he  does  not  despair  of  winning  back.  Will 
they  not,  when  they  perceive  the  extremity 
and  variety  of  his  sufferings,  be  moved  to 
compassion  by  them,  and  commiserate  him 
ill  his  day  of  calamity?  For  the  hand  of 
God  hath  touched  me.  To  the  "  comforters  " 
this  is  no  argument.  They  deem  him  un- 
worthy of  pity  on  the  very  ground  that  he 
is  '•  smitten  of  Gorl,  and  iifflicted"  (Isa.  liii. 
4);  since  tliey  hold  that,  being  so  smitten, 
he  must  have  deserved  his  calamity.  But 
to  unprejudiced  persons,  not  wedded  to  a 
thiory,  such  an  aggravatinn  of  his  woe 
would  naturally  seem  to  render  him  a  greater 
object  of  pity  and  compassion. 

Ver.  22. — Why  do  ye  persecute  me  as  God  f 
i.e.  Why  are  ye  as  hard  on  me  as  God  him- 
sulf  ?  If  1  have  oiTended  him,  what  have  I 
done  to  offend  you  ?  And  are  not  satisfied 
With  my  flesh  ?  i.e.  "  devour  my  flesh,  like 
wild  beasts,  and  yet  are  not  satisfied." 

Ver.  23. — Oh  that  my  words  were  written ! 
It  is  questioned  what  words  of  his  Job  is  so 
anxious  to  have  committed  to  writing — 
those  that  precede  the  expression  of  the  wish, 
or  those  that  foUow,  or  both.    As  there  is 


nothing  that  is  very  remarkable  in  the  pre- 
ceding words,  whereas  the  latfer  are  among 
the  most  striking  in  the  book,  the  general 
opinion  has  been  that  he  refers  to  these  Inst. 
It  is  now  universally  allowed,  even  by  those 
whose  date  for  Job  is  the  most  remote,  tliat 
books  were  common  long  before  bis  time, 
aod  BO  that  he  might  naturally  have  been 
familiar  with  them,  Writing  is,  of  course, 
even  anterior  to  books,  and  was  certainly  in 
use  before  b.o.  2000.  The  earliest  writing 
was  probably  on  stone  or  brick,  and  was 
perhaps  in  every  case  hieroglyphical.  When 
writing  on  papyrus,  or  parchment,  or  the 
bark  of  trees,  came  into  use,  a  cursive  cha- 
racter soon  superseded  the  hieroglyphical, 
though  the  latter  continued  to  be  employ(.d 
for  religious  purposes,  and  for  inscriptiima 
on  stone.  Oh  that  they  were  printed  in  a 
book!  rather,  inseribed,  or  engraved.  The 
impression  of  the  characters  below  the  sur- 
face of  the  writing  material,  as  in  the  Baby- 
lonian and  Assyrian  clay-tablefc^,  seems  to  be 
pointed  at. 

Ver.  24. — ^That  they  were  graven  with  an 
iron  pen  and  lead  in  the  rock  for  ever  !  A 
peculiar  kind  of  rock-inscription,  of  which, 
Bo  far  as  I  know,  no  specimens  remain, 
appears  to  be  here  alluded  to.  Job  wished 
the  characters  of  his  record  to  be  cut  deep 
into  the  rock  with  an  iron  chisel,  and  the 
incision  made  to  be  then  filled  up  with  lead 
(compare  the  medissval "  brasses  ")• 

Ver.  25. — For  I  know  that  my  Bedeemer 
liveth.  Numerous  endeavours  have  been 
made  to  explain  away  the  mysteriont  import 
of  this  verse.  Fiist,  it  is  noted  that  a  goel 
is  any  one  who  avenges  or  ransoms  another, 
and  especially  that  it  is  "the  technical  ex- 
pression for  the  avenger  of  blood  "  (Froude, 
'  Short  Stories,'  vol.  i.  p.  284)  so  often 
mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  is 
suggested,  therefore,  that  Job's  real  meaning 
may  be  that  he  expects  one  of  his  relatives 
to  arise  after  his  death  as  the  avenger  of  his 
blood,  and  to  exact  retribution  for  it.  But 
unless  in  the  case  of  a  violent  death  at  the 
hands  of  a  man,  which  was  not  what  Job 
expected  for  himself,  there  could  be  no 
avenger  of  blood.  Job  has  already  expressed 
his  desire  to  have  a  thirdsman  between  him 
and  God  (ch.  ix.  32—35),  which  thirdsman  can 
scarcely  be  otlier  than  a  Divine  Personage. 
In  oh.  xvi.  19  he  has  declared  his  conviction 
that "  his  Witness  is  in  heaven."  In  ver.  21 
of  the  same  chapter  he  longs  to  have  an 
advocate  to  plead  his  cause  with  God.  In 
ch.  xvii.  3  he  calls  upon  God  to  be  Surety  for 
him.  Therefore,  as  Dr.  Stanley  Leathei 
points  out,  "  he  has  already  recognized  God 
as  his  Judge,  his  Umpire,  his  Advocate,  his 
Witness,  and  his  Surety,  in  some  cases  by 
formal  confession  of  the  fact,  in  others  by 
earnest  longing  after,  and  aspiration  foi^ 


OH.  XIX.  1—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOa 


823 


aome  one  to  act  in  that  capacity. "  After 
»U  this,  it  is  not  taking  a  very  long  step  in 
advance  to  see  and  acknowledge  in  God  his 
Goa,  or  "Redeemer."  And  that  he  shall 
stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth; 
rather,  and  that  at  tlie  latt  he  thaU  stand  up 
over  my  duit.  )nn«  is  not  "  one  who  comes 
after  me,"  but,  if  a  noun,  "  the  last  one,"  as 
li»«T  is  "the  first  one  "(laa.  xliv.  6);  if 
intended  adverbially,  "at  the  last"— <.e.  at 
the  end  of  all  tilings.  "  At  the  latter  day  " 
is  not  an  improper  translation. 

Ver.  26. — And  though  after  my  skin  worms 
destroy  this  body.  The  supposed  ellipsis  of 
"worms"  is  improbable,  as  is  also  that  of 
"  body."  Translate,  and  after  my  skin  has 
been  thus  destroyed — "thus"  meaning,  "as 
you  see  it  before  your  eyes."  Yet  in  my 
flesh  shall  I  see  God;  literally, /rom  my  flesh 
— scarcely,  as  Kenan  takes  it,  "  without  my 
flesh,"  of  "away  from  my  flesh  " — "  priv^  de 
ma  chair;"  but  rather,  "from  the  stand- 
point of  my  flesh  " — "  in  my  body,"  not  "  out 
of  my  body  "—shall  I  see  God.  This  may 
be  taken  merely  as  a  prophecy  of  the  theo- 
phany  recorded  in  ch.  xxzviii. — xlii.  (see 
especially  ch.  xlii.  5).  But  the  nexus  with 
ver.  25,  and  the  expressions  there  used — "at 
the  last,"  and  "he  shall  stand  up  over  my 
dust" — fully  justify  the  traditional  exegesis, 
which  sees  in  the  passage  an  avowal  by  Job 
of  his  confidence  that  he  will  see  God  "from 
his  body  "  at  the  resurrection. 

Ver.  27. — Whom  I  shall  see  for  myself. 
Not  by  proxy,  i.e.,  or  through  faith,  or  in  a 
vision,  but  really,  actually,  J  shall  see  him 
for  myself.  As  Schultens  observes,  an  un- 
mistakable tone  of  exultation  and  triumph 


pervades  the  passage.  And  mine  eyes  shall 
behold,  and  not  another ;  i.e.  "  not  the  eyes 
of  another."  I  myself,  reteining  my  personal 
identity,  "  the  same  true  living  man,"  shall 
with  my  own  eyes  look  on  my  Redeemer. 
Though  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me. 
There  is  no  "  though  "  in  the  original  The 
clause  is  detached  and  independent,  nor  is 
it  very  easy  to  trace  any  connection  between 
it  and  the  rest  of  the  verse.  Sohullens, 
however,  thinks  Job  to  mesn  that  he  is 
internally  consumed  by  a  burning  desire  to 
see  the  sight  of  which  he  has  spoken.  (So 
also  Dr.  Stanley  Loathes.) 

Ver.  28. — But  ye  should  say,  Why  persecute 
we  him !  rather,  if  ye  shall  say,  Hoio  shall  we 
persecute  him  1  That  is  to  say,  "  If,  after 
what  I  have  said,  ye  continue  bitter  against 
me,  and  take  counsel  together  as  to  the  best 
way  of  persecuting  me,  then,  seeing  the  root 
of  the  matter  (i.e.  the  essence  of  piety)  is 
found  in  me,  be  ye  afraid,"  etc 

Ver.  29.— Be  ye  afraid  of  the  sword;  <a 
"the  sword  of  God's  justice,  which  will 
assuredly  smite  you  if  you  persecute  an 
innocent  man."  For  wrath  bringeth  the 
punishments  of  the  sword;  rather, /or  wrath 
is  among  the  transgreasions  of  the  sword;  i.e. 
among  the  transgressions  for  which  the 
Bword  is  the  fit  punishment.  It  is  "  wrath  " 
which  leads  Job's  "  comforters  "  to  persecute 
him.  That  ye  may  know  th  ere  is  a  judgment ; 
or,  so  that  ye  wiU  know  there  is  a  judgment. 
When  the  blow  comes  upon  them  they  will 
recognize  that  it  has  come  upon  them  on 
account  of  their  ill  treatment  of  theif 
friend. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Job  to  Bildad :  1.  A  repiy,  an  appeal,  a  complaint.  I.  Job's  wrath- 
ful reply  to  his- friends.  Job  accuses  his  three  friends  of:  1.  Irritating  words.  (Ver. 
2.)  Their  solemn  addresses  and  eloquent  descriptions  were  an  exquisite  torture,  harder 
to  endure  than  the  miseries  of  elephantiasis.  The  cruel  insinuations  and  unkind 
reproaches  contained  in  their  speeches  crushed  him  more  deeply  and  lacerated  him 
more  keenly  than  all  the  sharp  strokes  of  evil  fortune  he  ha(|  lately  sufiered.  Wounds 
inflicted  by  the  tongue  are  worse  to  heal  than  those  given  by  the  hand.  "  There  is 
that  speaketh  like  the  piercings  of  a  sword  "  (Prov.  xii.  18) ;  and  to  "  talk  to  the  grief 
of  those  whom  God  has  wounded  "  (Ps.  Ixix.  26)  is  the  severest  of  all  kinds  of  persecu- 
tion to  sustain,  as  it  is  the  wickedest  of  all  sorts  of  crimes  to  commit.  2.  Persistent 
hostility.  (Ver.  3.)  Not  once  or  twice  simply  had  they  charged  him  with  being  a 
notorious  criminal,  but  they  had  harped  upon  this  same  string  ad  nauseam  ;  they  had 
carried  their  insulting  behaviour  to  the  furthest  limits ;  the  force  of  their  acrimonious 
opposition  could  not  further  go.  Their  reproaches  had  well-nigh  broken  his  great 
beaut ;  of.  the  language  of  David,  who  in  his  sufferings  was  a  type  of  Messiah  (Ps.  Ixix. 
20).  3.  Astounding  callousnesa.  (Ver.  3.)  Job  was  simply  amazed  at  the  cool 
indifference  with  which  they  could  behold  his  sufferings,  the  unfeeling  ease,  if  not 
the  manifest  delight,  with  which  they  could  hurl  their  atrocious  impeachments 
against  him,  and  the  utter  insensibility  which  they  displayed  to  bia  piteous  appeals 


824  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  six.  1—29. 


—amazed  that  one  who  claimed  to  be  »  frieiw'  ■>£  his  should  so  completely  show 

himself  to  be 

"  A  stony  adversary,  an  Inhuman  wretch 
Uncapable  of  pity,  void  and  empty 
From  any  dram  of  mercy." 

('The  Merchant  of  Venice,'  act  iv.  so.  1.) 

4.  Unnecessary  cruelty.  (Ver  4.)  There  was  no  "  firm  reason  to  be  rendered "  why 
they  should  thus  remorselessly  pursue  him  with  their  hate.  They  would  not  be  called 
upon  to  expiate  any  of  his  unpunished  crimes.  Their  theology  arid  their  saintly 
virtues  would  combine  to  shield  them  from  that.  Believing,  as  they  did,  that  "  the  son 
shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  neither  shall  the  father  bear  the  iniquity  of 
the  son,"  but  that  "  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him,  and  the 
wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  upon  him  "  (Ezek.  xviii.  20),  there  was  no  occasion 
to  dread  that  any  portion  of  the  Divine  retribution  due  to  him  would  recoil  on  them. 
Hence  they  might  have  spared  him  any  wanton  aggravation  of  his  woes.  Job's 
language  reminds  us  (1)  that  men  may  be  guilty  of  sins  of  .which  they  are  unconscious ; 
(2)  that  the  only  thing  in  which  man  can  claim  ft  true  proprietorship  on  earth  is  hia 
sin;  (3)  that  in  the  ultimate  issues  of  Divine  government  every  man  must  bear  his  own 
burden ;  and  (4)  that  this  consideration  should  move  a  good  man  rather  to  commiserate 
than  condemn  the  wicked.  5.  Arrogant  assumjjtion.  In  "  pleading  against  him  his 
reproach,"  i.e.  in  urging  the  intolerable  misiries  he  suffered  as  a  proof  of  his  guilt, 
they  were  "  magnifying  themselves  against  him  "  (ver.  5),  i.e.  tacitly  boasting  of  their 
superior  goodness.  And  as  much  perhaps  as  by  anything  in  their  language,  the  soul  of 
Job  was  stung  by  the  solemn  Pharisaic  aspect  which  sat  upon  their  marble  visap;es, 
and  the  atmosphere  of  awful  sanctity  in  which  they  wrapt  their  holy  persons.  But 
true  piety  is  ever  meek  and  humble,  never  vaunteth  herself,  and  is  never  puffed  up, 
certainly  never  gloats  over  either  the  sins  or  the  sufferings  of  others.  A  good  man 
may  magnify  the  grace  of  God  that  is  in  him  (1  Cor.  xv.  10),  or  the  office  that  has 
been  entrusted  to  him  (Bom.  xi.  13),  but  of  himself  he  ever  thinks  with  lowliness  of 
mind,  esteeming  others  better  than  himself  (Phil.  ii.  3),  whom  he  regards  but  as  "  less 
than  the  least  of  all  saints"  (Eph.  iii.  8),  if  not  as  "the  chief  of  sinners"  (1  Tim.  i.  15). 
6.  Conspicuous  falsehood.  Bildad  had  alleged  that  Job,  by  his  incorrigible  wickedness, 
had  been  the  author  of  his  own  misfortunes,  that  he  had  been  cast  into  a  net  by  his  own 
feet  (ch.  xviii.  8),  that  his  calamity  had  come  upon  him  as  the  recompense  of  his  own 
crime ;  and  to  this  Job  replies  with  a  direct  contradiction,  insisting  that  it  was  God 
who  had  flung  his  net  alwut  him,  and  that,  if  their  theory  of  retribution  was  correct, 
God  had  wrested  his  cause  and  wronged  him  in  so  doing  (ver.  6).  That  Job's  feet  were 
.entangled  in  a  net,  the  testimony  of  Job's  senses  proclaimed.  That  this  net  had  been 
cast  around  him  by  God,  the  eye  of  his  faith  could  see.  That  God  could  not  have  done 
so  on  account  of  his  wickedness,  the  inner  witness  of  Job's  spirit  cried  aloud.  Hence 
this  theory  of  the  friends,  which  sometimes  lay  across  his  soul  like  a  nightmare,  was 
a  blunder,  and  the  allegation  of  the  friends  that  he  was  being  punished  for  his  iniquity 
was  a  lie. 

II.  Job's  dolbfdi,  complaint  aoainst  God.  1.  Treating  him  like  a  criminal. 
And  that  in  respect  of  two  particulars.  (1)  Assailing  him  with  violence :  "  Behold, 
1  cry  out  of  wrong;"  liWrally,  "I  cry  out  Violence  1 "  (ver.  7),  "like  a  wayfarer  sur- 
prised by  brigands  "  (Cox).  A  strong  metaphor,  which  may  describe  the  suddenness  and 
severity  of  the  saint's  affliction,  but  never  can  apply  to  the  Divine  motive  or  purpose 
in  afflicting,  since  God  doth  not  afflict  the  children  of  men  willingly,  but  for  their 
profit  (Lam.  iii.  33 ;  Heb.  xii.  10);  never  rushes  on  his  people  like  a  giant  (ch.  xvi.  14), 
or  overpowers  them  like  a  highwayman,  but  chastises  and  corrects  them  as  a  father 
(Heb.  xii.  7);  and  in  alibis  inflictions  never  does  them  wrong  or  evinces  hate,  but 
confers  on  thein  a  blessed  privilege  and  manifests  towards  them  the  purest  love  ^eb. 
xii.  6)  (2)  Disregarding  his  outcries,  withholding  from  him  sympathy  and  succour: 
"Behold,  I  cry,  but  I  am  not  heard;"  extending  to  him  neither  hearing  nor  redress: 
"I  cry  aloud,  but  there  is  no  judgment"  (ver.  7).  A  complaint,  again,  which  may  some- 
times receive  colour  from  the  saint's  own  thoughts  and  feelings,  but  which  never  can 
be  really  true  of  God,  who  never  fails  to  sympathize  with  his  people  in  affliction  (Ps. 
ciii  13 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  9 ;  Heb.  iv.  15),  never  disregards  the  prayer  of  the  destitute  (Ps.  cii. 


OB.  XIX 1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  «26 


17),  never  declines  to  aid  them  in  distress  (Isa.  xli.  10;  xliii.  2;  2  Cor.  xii.  9),  and 
certainly  never  denies  them  justice  unless  to  give  them  mercy.  2.  Punishing  him  as 
a  convict.  (Vers.  8 — 10.)  And  that  by :  (1)  Consigning  him  to  prison  (ver.  8).  The 
image  that  of  a  cell,  or  narrow  space,  bounded  by  a  high  wall  or  fence,  shutting  out 
the  light  of  heaven,  and  shutting  in  the  captive  it  confines  (cf.  ch.  iii,  23 ;  xiii.  27).  Two 
frequent  effects  of  affliction :  to  darken  the  soul's  look — its  inward  look  by  bringing  sin 
to  remembrance  (I  Kings  xvii.  18),  its  upward  look  by  hiding  God's  face  (ch.  xiii.  24  j 
Ps.  xiii.  3, 10),  its  onward  look  by  beclouding  the  path  of  duty  (Isa.  1.  10) ;  and  to 
shorten  the  soul's  way,  so  that  it  can  neither  escape  from  its  misery  nor  enjoy  its 
wonted  freedom  in  religious  exercises  or  in  ordinary  duties,  but  feels  itself  shut  up, 
first  to  absolute  submission,  and  then  to  cheerful  resignation.  (2)  Arraying  him  in 
prison  robes  (ver.  9).  Job's  robe  and  crown  were  his  righteousness  and  integrity  (ch. 
xxix.  14).  Of  these  he  had  been  divested,  and  clothed  in  the  unsightly  as  well  as 
humiliating  garment  of  affliction,  which  was  to  him,  what  a  prison  dress  is  to  a  convict, 
an  outward  badge  of  guilt.  Job  in  this,  however,  doubly  erred,  first  in  thinking  that 
affliction  was  either  a  proof  of  condemnation  or  a  mark  of  degradation,  and  secondly  in 
supposing  that  he  had  really  lost  either  his  crown  or  his  robe.  If  by  these  latter  he 
alluded  merely  to  his  former  prosperity,  that  was  certainly  taken  from  him  ;  and  so 
whatever  of  an  earthly  nature  man  may  glory  in — wealth,  honour,  friends — God  can  strip 
him  of  at  any  moment.  But  the  crown  of  righteousness  which  God  sets  upon  a  saint's 
head  is  never  wantonly  displaced,  and  the  garment  of  salvation  which  God  wraps  roxmd 
a  saint's  person  can  never,  without  his  own  fault,  be  removed.  (3)  Extinguishing  his 
hope  of  liberty  (ver.  10).  Like  a  ruined  house  whose  stones  lie  scattered  on  every  side, 
like  a  great  tree  plucked  up  by  the  roots.  Job  had  no  further  expectation  of  seeing  the 
splendid  edifice  of  his  prosperity  rebuilt,  or  the  expiring  life  of  his  sad  heart  rerlved 
Like  the  prisoner  of  Chillon,  he  had  no  earthly  hope  of  returning  to  freedom. 

■■I  had  no  thought,  no  feeling — none ; 
Among  the  stones  I  stood  a  stone, 
And  was  scarce  conscions  what  I  wist. 
As  shrublesB  crags  within  the  mist,"  etc. 

(Byron, '  Prisoner  of  Chillon,'  ix.) 

Huch  a  picture  is  true,  not  of  the  saint  in  the  correction-house  of  affliction  (Fs.  xxxir.  17), 
not  even  of  the  sinner  in  the  prison-house  of  condemnation,  who  is  yet  a  prisoner  of 
hope  (Zech.  ix.  12),  but  only  of  the  lost  in  the  dungeon  of  everlasting  death.  3.  Count- 
ing him  for  an  enemy.  (1)  Regarding  him  with  anger  (ver.  11).  Against  this  conclu- 
sion, however.  Job  manfully  struggled,  especially  when  replying  to  the  friends,  and 
ultimately  triumphed ;  but  at  such  times  as  he  fell  back  to  brood  upon  his  inward 
misery,  or  turned  his  weary  face  upward  to  God,  the  thought  threatened  to  overmastei 
him  (of.  ch.  xiii.  24 ;  xvi.  9).  Yet  all  the  while  God  was  his  real  Friend,  and  regarded 
him  with  tenderest  affection,  which  shows  that  God's  dealings  with  his  people  are  often 
full  of  painful  and  inexplicable  mystery  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  16 ;  Ixxvii.  19),  that  "  behind  a 
frowning  providence  "  God  frequently  "hides  a  smiling  face  "  (Rev.  iii.  19),  that  God's 
people  cannot  always  see  the  bright  light  which  is  in  the  cloud  (ch.  xxxvii.  21 ;  John 
xiii.  7),  and  that  God  only  is  a  competent  Expounder  of  his  own  acts.  (2)  Besieging 
him  with  trouble  (ver.  12).  The  magnificent  imagery  here  employed  is  borrowed  from  . 
the  operations  connected  with  a  siege  (vide  Exposition).  God's  armies  were  the  calami- 
ties that  had  befallen  Job.  Afflictions  and  the  causes  that  produce  them,  diseases  and 
the  germs  from  which  they  spring,  misfortunes  and  the  instruments  that  bring  them 
about,  are  all  under  God's  command  (Bxod.  viii.  8 ;  ix.  6 ;  xi.  4 ;  2  Kings  xix.  35 ;  Luke 
vii.  7),  advancing  and  retiring  as  he  directs.    4.  Cutting  him  off  from  human  sympathy. 

gfeTB.  13 — 19.)  A  pitiful  picture  of  abject  degradation,  even  worse  than  that  which 
ildad  predicted  for  the  wicked  man  who  should  be  chased  from  the  world  (ch.  xviii. 
19).  Surrounded  by  kinsmen  and  relatives,  and  still  attended  by  wife  and  servants,  ho 
is  to  one  and  all  an  object  of  supreme  contempt.  (1)  Those  immediately  outside  the 
circle  of  his  household  (vers.  13, 14),  his  "  brethren "  and  "  acquaintance,"  meaning 
probably  his  neighbours,  with  his  "  kinsfolk  "  and  "  familiar  friends,"  who  were,  aa 
distinguished  from  the  former,  his  relatives,  had  abandoned  him.  (2)  Those  within 
the  circle  of  Ma  household,  from  whom  better  things  might  have  been  expected,  had 


826  THE  BOOK  OP  JOR  [oh.  six.  1—29. 


followed  their  example.  His  domestics,  not  excepting  the  tender  maidens  whose  sex 
might  have  "touched"  them  "with  human  gentleness  and  love,"  gave  him  no  more 
obedience  than  a  stranger.  His  body-servant,  who  was  to  him  as  Eliezer  to  Abraham 
(Gen.  xxiv.  2),  and  the  centurion's  servant  to  his  master  (Luke  viL  2),  must  now  be 
entreated  for  what  was  formerly  performed  at  the  slightest  glance  or  gesture.  Even  his 
wife,  the  mother  of  his  noble  sons  and  fair  daughters,  now  dead,  had  forsaken  him,  her 
delicate  sensibilities  unable  to  endure  the  offensive  exhalations  from  his  body.  His  own 
brothers,  sons  of  the  same  womb,  turned  away  from  the  intolerable  stench.  (3)  In 
short,  all  who  saw  him  poured  on  him  supreme  contempt.  The  boys,  probably  of 
neighbouring  families  or  clans,  laughed  at  his  feeble  efforts  to  raise  himself  or  stand* 
upon  his  ash-heap.  His  "  inward  friends,"  those  to  whom  he  confided  his  secret  thoughts 
and  plans,  now  abhorred  him.  His  very  friends,  to  whom  he  had  given  his  love,  mean- 
ing probably  Ehphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar,  had  turned  against  him. 

HI.  Job's  piteous  appeal  fob  himself.  1.  A  pathetic  representation.  (Ver.  20.) 
Indicating  the  ground  of  Job's  appeal.  Bodily  disease  and  mental  anguish  had  reduced 
him  to  a  skeleton,  so  that  his  bones  appeared  through  his  skin ;  the  second  clause,  a  crux 
interpretum  (vide  Exposition),  probably  depicting  extreme  emaciation.  His  condition 
may  remind  us  of  the  value  of  physical  health,  of  its  instability,  and  of  the  ease  with 
which  it  can  be  made  to  consume  away  like  a  moth  (Ps.  xxxix.  11).  2.  A  melting 
supplication.  (Ver.  21.)  Expressive  of  the  fervour  of  Job's  appeal.  It  was  not  much  he 
craved — only  pity,  and  that  on  two  pleas :  (1)  The  bond  of  friendship  that  subsisted 
between  them.     His  terrible  ejuaciation  was  enough  to 

"Pluck  commiseration  of  his  state 
From  brassy  bosoms  and  rough  hearts  of  flint," 

Much  more,  then,  from  those  who  were  united  to  him  by  ties  of  affection  (cf.  ch.  tL  14, 
homiletics).  (2)  The  severe  affliction  that  had  been  laid  upon  him.  "  The  hand  }f 
God  hath  touched  me."  The  phrase  descriptive  "of  the  source  of  Job's  afdiction,  but 
pointing  chiefly  to  its  intensity.  3.  A  tender  expostulation.  (Ver.  22.)  Were  th? 
miseries  he  was  suffering  at  God's  hand  not  enough  to  satisfy  their  insatiable  appetite  ' 
or  was  God  not  able  to  exact  retribution  for  his  supposed  iniquities,  that  they  must 
assist  him  to  crush  the  poor  emaciated  skeleton  who  had  become  hia  victim  ?  Was  it 
really  come  to  this,  that  they  were  less  merciful  than  God ;  that  God's  thirst  for  ven- 
geance, if  so  be  it  was  that  he  was  being  punished,  was  more  easily  slaked  than  theirs? 
Su,  alas !  it  has  been  found  that  man's  tender  mercies  are  cruel  (2  Sam.  xkiv.  14),  and 
in  particular  that  when  bigots  turn  persecutors  they  never  cry,  "  Enough ! " 

Learn :  1.  There  is  a  limit  beyond  which  even  good  men  are  not  expected  to  endure 
aspersions  against  their  character.  2.  It  is  a  shame  for  professors  of  religion  to  indulge  in 
suspicions,  or  utter  slanders,  against  their  brethren.  3.  The  greatest  safeguard  a  suffer- 
ing saint  has,  if  also  one  of  his  acutest  pains,  is  to  connect  his  afQictions  with  God.  4. 
It  is  better  to  direct  the  soul's  plaint  to  God  than  to  utter  aloud  the  soul's  complaint 
against  God.  5.  The  man  has  fallen  low  indeed  who,  besides  being  deserted  by  God 
(or  appearing  to  be  so),  is  also  abandoned  by  man.  6.  The  woman  who  forsakes  her 
husband  in  his  hour  of  sorrow,  not  only  violates  her  marriage  vow,  but  proves  herself 
unworthy  of  the  honour  of  wifehood,  and  brings  disgrace  upon  the  name  of  woman.  7. 
It  is  an  infinite  mercy  that  God's  heart  is  not  so  little  pitiful  as  man's.  8.  A  man's 
flesh  is  all  that  a  persecutor  can  devour. 

Vers.  23 — 29. — Joh  to  Bildad :  2.  2%e  inscription  on  the  rock ;  <yr,  JoVs  faith  in  a 
redeemer.  I.  The  preface  to  the  inscription  ;  or,  the  fervent  wish  of  a  btino 
MAN.  1.  The  culture  of  Job's  times.  The  origin  of  writing  is  lost  in  the  mists  of  antiquity. 
The  earliest  known  mode  of  writing  was  by  means  of  a  sharp-pointed  instrument — stylus, 
or  engraving  tool,  made  of  iron  or  steel.  The  first  materials  used  for  writing  on  were 
leaves  of  trees,  skins,  linen  cloths,  metal  or  wax  plates,  stone  columns  or  rooks.  Egyp- 
tian papyrus  rolls  and  cuneiform  tablets,  dating  from  periods  antecedent  to  the  times  of 
Abraham,  have  been  recovered  by  the  labours  of  modern  archaeologists.  Numerous 
inscriptions  of  the  kind  alluded  to  by  Job  have  been  found  by  Oriental  travellers  in 
Arabia.  On  the  smoothed  surface  of  a  solid  rock  at  Hisn'  Ghordb  at  Hadramut,  in 
Suuthont  Arabia,  an  inscription  of  ten  lines  exists,  dating,  according  to  some,  from  the 


CH.  XIX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  827 


times  of  the  Adites,  the  most  ancient  inhabitants  of  Arabia  Felix,  Ad  the  tribe-father 
having  flourished  cotemporaneously  with  the  building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel.  The  cliffs 
of  the  wady  Mokatta,  on  the  route  of  the  Israelites,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Sinaitic 
mountains,  contain  many  such  inscriptions  (on  ancient  stone  inscriptions,  see  the  Expo- 
sition). The  knowledge  of  the  art  of  writing  at  that  early  period  confirms  the  belief, 
which  other  traces  of  primeval  man  also  suggest,  that  humanity  was  not  then  a  babe 
wrapt  in  swaddling-clothes,  but  a  vigorous  and  intelligent  adult,  already  far  advanced 
in  civilization.  2.  The  certainty  of  Job's  knowledge.  What  Job  wished  engraven  on 
the  rock  was  no  mere  probable  conjecture,  happy  guess,  philosophical  speculation,  or 
even  secret  aspiration,  but  a  firm  and  certain  personal  conviction.  If  it  he  inquired  how 
Job  arrived  at  this  immovable  persuasion,  it  may  be  answered  (1)  that  the  lofty  ideas 
here  articulated  were  perhaps  already  in  the  air  when  Job  lived,  in  confirmation  of  which 
may  be  cited  a  line  from  the  Adite  inscription  above  referred  to  :  "  We  proclaimed  our 
belief  in  miracles,  in  the  resurrection,  in  the  return  into  the  nostrils  of  the  breath  of 
life; "  (2)  that  the  superior  capacity  of  Job,  manifestly  the  seer  of  his  time,  standing 
head  and  shoulders  above  his  contemporaries  in  respect  of  intellectual  power  and  poetic 
genius  as  well  as  moral  and  spiritual  intuition,  enabled  him  to  discern  and  formulate 
the  thoughts  after  which  common  minds  were  only  dimly  groping;  (3)  that  the  solemn 
proximity  of  Job  to  death,  enabling  him  to  realize  the  unseen  with  vividness,  may  have 
contributed  to  his  extraordinary  mental  illumination  on  this  occasion ;  (4)  that  the 
inpoluble  enigma  of  Job's  own  experience  appeared  to  drive  him  towards  the  tntertaiu- 
ment  of  such  a  lofty  hope  as  is  here  expressed ;  (5)  that  over  and  above  all  Job  enjuyed 
the  inward  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  importance  o/JoVs  words,  {l)  The 
time  when  they  were  uttered.  They  were,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  his  last  dying 
testimony. 

"  Oh,  but  they  say,  the  tongues  of  dying  men 
Enforce  attention,  like  deep  harmony,"  etc. 

('King  Richard  II.,'  act  ii  so.  1.) 

(2)  The  significance  of  the  words  themselves.  They  formed  the  last  and  loftiest 
utterance  of  Job's  religious  consciousness,  struggling  to  embody  to  itself  in  well-defined 
ideas,  and  to  express  for  others  in  intelligible  language,  the  great  hope  which  had 
arisen  in  his  soul,  and  by  which  he  had  been  secretly  sustained  throughout  his  terrible 
conflict  with  bodily  afiiiction,  personal  calumniation,  spiritual  apprehension,  seeming 
Divine  desertion.  They  set  forth  the  ground  on  which  he  based  his  assured  expectation 
of  an  ultimate  complete  vindication  against  the  misrepresentations  of  his  friends,  the 
accusations  of  his  own  affrighted  conscience,  ay,  the  apparently  hostile  assaults  of  God 
himself.  (3)  The  value  of  the  words  to  future  times.  Job  had  a  clear  presentiment 
that  the  truth  he  was  about  to  utter  would  prove  of  value  to  all  succeeding  ages. 
Like  a  new  star,  it  had  shot  out  upon  the  dark  firmament  of  his  soul ;  and  he  wished 
it  inscribed  in  the  most  permanent  form  of  ancient  literature — either  engrossed  in  the 
state  records,  or  chiselled  upon  the  mountain  rock,  and  filled  in  with  lead  to  defy  the 
ravages  of  time,  that  it  might  shine  on  for  ever,  like  a  bright  particular  star  of  hope, 
all  through  the  night  of  time,  irradiating  the  darkness  of  a  sinful  world,  and  cheering 
the  hearts  of  dying  men.  4.  The  fulfilment  of  Job's  prayer.  In  a  sense,  and  to  an 
extent  undreamt  of  at  the  time,  has  the  patriarch's  desire  been  granted.  His  words 
have  been  inscribed  in  the  state  records  of  the  King  of  heaven.  They  have  been 
engraved  by  the  printing-press  in  a  form  more  imperishable  than  could  have  been 
derived  from  the  sculptor's  chisel.  They  have  now  been  published  in  well-niaih  every 
language  under  heaven.  One  of  the  latest  to  receive  them  was  the  modern  Ethiopic 
or  Abyssinian,  which  possesses  an  affinity  to  the  language  which  Job  spoke.  They 
will  now  be  transmitted  to  the  end  of  time. 

II.  The  contents  of  the  inscription  ;  or,  the  loftv  faith  op  a  prophetic  souu 
Up  to  this  point  five  striking  passages  appear  in  the  Book  of  Job.     In  the  first  (ch.  ix. 

32 35)  Job  expresses  his  ardent  longing  for  a  Daysman  or  Mediator  who  might  lay 

his  hand  upon  both  him  and  God;  in  the  second  (ch.  xiii.  15,  16),  his  confident 
expectation  of  acceptance  with  God,  or  the  strong  inward  assurance  of  his  salvation ;  in 
the  third  (ch.  xiv.  13 — 15),  his  deeply  seated  hope  of  a  resurrection-life  beyond  the 
grave  and  the  Hadean  world;  in  the  fourth  (ch.  xvi.  18 — 21),  his  belief  in  the  existence 
of  a  heavenly  Witness  who  recognized  his  sincerity,  and  his  earnest  prayer  that  God 


328  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xix.  1— 2 


might  become  man's  Advocate  against  himself  (God) ;  the  fifth,  the  present  passage, 
seems  to  gather  all  the  preceding  up  into  one  triumphant  shout  of  faith  in  a  living, 
personal,  divinely  human  GoSl,  or  Redeemer,  who  should  appear  in  the  end  of  time 
to  vindicate  and  save  Job,  and  all  who,  like  him,  should  have  died  in  the  faith,  by  a 
bodily  resurrection  from  the  grave.  Analyzed,  Job's  proposed  inscription  should 
contain  a  deckration  of  the  following  sublime  trutlis.  1.  The  existence  of  a  personal 
Redeemer.  The  goel,  in  the  Mosaic  code,  was  the  next  of  kin,  whose  duty  it  was  to 
redeem  a  captive  or  enslaved  relative  (Gen.  xiv.  14 — 16) ;  to  buy  back  his  sold  or 
otherwise  alienated  inheritance  (Lev.  xxv.  25,  26);  to  avenge  the  death  of  a  murdered 
kinsman  (Numb.  xxxv.  12)  ;  to  marry  his  childless  widow  (Deut.  xxv.  5).  Obviously, 
the  office  of  the  goel,  or  vindicator,  existed  in  pre-Mosaio  times,  and  was  doubtless 
derived  from,  primeval  tradition.  It  was  in  accordance  with  the  natural  instincts 
of  humanity,  and  was  probably  sanctioned  by  God,  both  at  the  first  and  under  the 
Mosaic  institutions,  to  strengthen  the  ties  of  natural  affection  among  mankind,  and  also, 
perhaps  chiefly,  to  suggest  the  hope  and  foreshadow  the  advent  of  the  already  proniised 
Kinsman  Avenger  ((5en.  iii.  15).  Hence  Jehovah,  the  Deliverer  of  Israel  from  Egyptian 
bondage,  was  styled  their  Goel  (Ps.  xix.  14;  Ixxviii.  35;  Isa.  xli.  14;  xliii.  14).  Hence 
the  heavenly  Witness,  to  whom  Job  looked  for  deliverance  from  his  troubles,  vindica- 
tion of  his  aspersed  character,  emancipation  from  the  power  of  the  grave,  and  protection 
against  his  unseen  adversary,  whether  God  or  Satan,  was  styled  by  him  his  Goel. 
And  so  is  Christ  the  believer's  Goel,  who  redeems  him  from  t;uilt  and  condemnation 
(Bom.  iii.  24;  Gal.  iii.  13;  iv.  5;  Bph.  i.  7  ;  Titus  ii.  14),  delivers  him  from  the  fear 
of  death  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15 ;  Bom.  viii.  23),  and  shields  him  from  the  wrath  to  come 
(1  Thess.  i.  10).  Nay,  of  Christ,  Job's  Redeemer  was  a  type  in  respect  of  being  (1)  a 
living  Redeemer,  ».«.  a  Redeemer  who  did  not  require  to  come  into  existence,  but  even 
then  was,  and  would  continue  to  be,  even  though  Job  himself  should  disappear  amid 
the  shadows  o£  the  tomb ;  (2)  a  Divine  Redeemer,  being  called  here  expressly  "  God  " 
(ver.  26),  as  indeed  Job's  language  throughout,  in  the  above-cited  passages,  assumes ; 
and  (3)  a  human  Redeemer,  since  he  was  not  only  to  be  a  Daysman  (ch.  ix.  33),  but 
to  appear  or  stand  upon  the  earth  (ver.  25),  and  be  visible  to  the  eye  of  flesh  ; — all  of 
which  characteristics  belong  by  pre-eminence  to  him  who,  while  the  Son  of  man  (Jclin 

1.  51 ;  Heb.  ii,  14),  was  yet  "  the  true  God  and  the  Eternal  Life  "  (1  John  v.  20),  "  in 
whom  was  Life"  (John  L  3),  and  who  still  claims  to  be  "  the  First  and  the  Last  and 
the'Living  One,"  who  "  was  dead,"  but  is  now  "  alive  again  for  evermore  "  (Rev.  L  18). 

2.  The  advent  of  this  heavenly  Redeemer  to  the  earth.  (1)  Job's  language  points 
unmistakaoly  to  a  visible  manifestation  of  this  Divine-human  Goel :  "  He  shall  stand," 
or  "  rise  up,"  t.e.  to  vindicate  the  cause  of  his  people,  the  verb  being  that  usually 
employed  to  designate  the  standing  forth  of  a  witness  (Deut.  xix.  15 ;  Ps.  xxvii.  12), 
or  the  rising  up  of  a  helper  or  deliverer  (Ps.  xii.  6 ;  xciv.  16  ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  10).  (2)  The 
scene  of  this  interposition  is  said  to  be  "  on  the  earth ; "  literally,  "  upon  the  dust," 
meaning  either  of  the  ground  or  of  the  grave.  As  we  cannot  think  Job  believed  him- 
self to  be  the  only  individual  in  whose  behalf  the  conquering  Goel  would  arise,  it  is 
not  to  be  supposed  that  he  expected  the  apparition  would  take  place  exactly  over  his 
own  particular  tomb.  Hence  it  is  immaterial  whether  we  supply  "  grave  "  or  "  ground." 
The  phrase  seems  to  point  to  a  terrestrial  appearance.  (3)  The  time  of  this  epiphany 
is  declared  to  be  "in  the  latter  days."  The  word  means  "the  last  one;"  and  the 
sense  of  the  clause  is  that  "he,"  the  Goel,  "  shall  arise  upon  the  earth  as  the  last  one," 
as  the  great  Survivor  who  stands  forth  when  the  human  family  has  run  its  course,  and 
pronounces  the  finally  decisive  word  upon  all  time's  controversies.  Or,  the  word  may 
be  taken  adverbially,  as  signifying  "  at  last,"  at  length,  at  some  future  date  (in  which 
sense  some  propose  to  read  the  clause,  "  upon  the  dust,"  i.e.  over  my  dust,  when  I  am 
dead),  and  as  intimating  Job's  faith  that  in  the  last  age  (cf.  the  New  Testament 
phrases,  "  the  ends  of  the  worid  "  (1  Cor.  x.  11),  "  the  last  time  "  (1  John  ii.  18),  for 
the  whole  period  of  the  gospel  dispensaticjn)  this  Goel,  ox  Kinsman  Redeemer,  should 
appear  for  the  salvation  of  his  people.  Job's  language  will  thus  include  a  reference  to 
both  the  first  and  second  advents  of  Christ,  which,  rightly  viewed,  are  not  disconnected 
events,  but  rather  two  related  acts  or  scenes,  the  first  and  the  last,  in  one  great  mani- 
festation or  epiphany  of  God's  eternal  Son  for  the  redemption  of  a  lest  world.  & 
2  he  saints  return  to  cm  *mbodi»i  existence  on  th*  earth  beside  his  Redeemer.    Th« 


cfi.  XIX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


phrase,  "in  my  flesh  [literally,  'from,  or  out  of,  my  flesh ']  shall  I  see  God"  (ver.  26), 
may  mean  no  more  than  that  after  Job's  "  skin  "  or  body  was  destroyed,  i.e.  after  he 
had  passed  into  the  Eadean  world,  he  would  enjoy  a  spiritual  vision  of  God,  and  it 
may  readily  be  granted  that  such  a  rendering  accords  with  the  prevailing  tone  and 
current  of  Job's  theology  and  Job's  mind,  neither  of  which  was  familiar  with  the  idea 
of  a  resurrection-life  beyond  the  unseen  world  of  disembodied  spirits.  But  Job  at  this 
moment  was  raised  above  the  ordinary  level  of  his  spiritual  consciousness.  As  already 
(ch.  xiv.  13 — 15)  he  had  had  a  glimpse,  transient  but  real,  of  such  a  life,  so  here  it 
returns  upon  him  once  again  with  equal  suddenness,  but  greater  brightness — a  glimpse 
of  the  happy  land  beyond  the  tomb,  when,  recalled  to  a  physical  existence  on  the  earth, 
to  which  already  his  heavenly  Goel  had  descended,  looking  out  from  his  flesh  he  should 
see  God ;  as  if  to  emphasize  which  he  adds,  "  Whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine 
eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another"  (ver.  27) — words  which  in  themselves  may  not 
necessarily  involve  the  resurrection  of  the  body-,  but  which,  when  taken  in  connection 
with  the  other  considerations  mentioned,  tend  not  a  little  to  confirm  that  interpretation. 
What  Job  only  momentarily  saw,  and  withal  only  dimly  understood,  has  now  been 
completely  unveiled  and  expounded  in  the  gospel,  viz.  the  doctrine  of  a  future  resur- 
rection. 4.  The  saint's  heaiific  vision  of  God  in  the  person  of  his  Kinsman  Redeemer. 
Job  expected  to  see  God  in  the  Hadean  world,  according  to  some ;  on  the  earth,  in  the 
flesh,  according  to  the  interpretation  just  given.  Such  a  vision  of  God  meant  for  Job 
exactly  what  it  means  for  the  Christian — salvation,  i.e.  acceptance  before  God,  protection 
by  God,  likeness  to  God,  fellowship  with  God.  In  fullest  measure  such  a  vision  of 
God  will  be  enjoyed  only  in  the  resurrection-life  (John  xiv.  3;  xvii.  24;  Phil.  iii.  20; 
Heb.  ix.  28;  1  John  iii.  2).  In  measure  and  degree  only  second  to  this  will  the  saint 
behold  God  in  the  intermediate  state  (Luke  xxiii.  43 ;  Phil.  i.  23).  Even  now,  in  a 
real  though  spiritual  sense,  such  a  vision  is  enjoyed  by  believers  (Matt.  v.  8).  6.  Tha 
sainfs  earnest  longing  for  this  future  vision  of  his  heavenly'  Friend,  Job  describes 
his  reins,  t.e.  his  heart,  as  pining  away  or  languishing  for  the  coming  of  this  glorious 
apocalypse.  Job's  friends  had  directed  him  to  set  his  hopes  on  a  return  to  temporal 
prosperity — to  health,  wealth,  friends;  in  return.  Job  informs  them  that  his  soul 
desired  nothing  so  much  as  God  and  his  salvation.  So  the  pre-Christian  saints  longed 
for  the  first  advent  of  the  Saviour,  e.g.  Abraham  (John  viii.  56),  Jacob  (Gen.  xlix. 
18),  David  (Ps.  xiv.  3,  4),  Simeon  (Luke  ii.  25),  Anna  (Luke  ii.  38).  So  Christiai 
believers  anticipate  his  second  coming  (Bom.  viii.  23 ;  Rev.  xxii.  17). 

III.  The  appendix  to  the  inscbiption;  ok,  the  earnest  eemonstrance  of  a 
PEBSBCUTBD  SAINT.  On  two  grounds  Job  dissuades  his  friends  from  attempting  further 
to  prove  him  guilty.  1.  The  wickedness  of  their  conduct.  Job's  language  (ver.  28) 
points  to  the  studied  and  systematic  character  of  their  attacks  upon  his  integrity. 
"  But  ye  say.  How  shall  we  persecute  him,  seeing  that  the  root  of  the  matter  \i.e.  the 
ground  or  occasion  of  such  persecution]  is  in  me?"  Thinking  they  could  discern  in 
Job's  guilt  ample  justification  for  such  invective  and  condemnation  as  they  hurled 
against  him,  they  wickedly  exercised  their  ingenuity  in  devising  means  to  punish  him, 
or  at  least  to  make  him  feel  their  displeasure.  Another  rendering,  "  How  shall  we  find 
ground  of  persecution  in  him  ?  "  presents  their  behaviour  in  a  light  extremely  odious, 
recalling  the  sleepless  malignity  of  Daniel's  accusers  (vi.  4,  5).  To  take  "  the  root 
of  the  matter"  as  signifying  the  fundamental  principles  of  piety  is  to  make  their 
conduct  absolutely  diabolic,  and  on  a  par  with  that  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
towards  the  Saviour  (Matt.  xii.  14;  xxii.  15;  Luke  xi.  54;  John  viii.  6).  2.  Tha 
danger  of  their  conduct.  It  would  inevitably  involve  them  in  retribution.  "  Be  ye 
afraid  of  the- sword"  (ver.  29),  the  sword  being  a  symbol  of  such  judicial  recompense, 
an  overwhelming  retribution,  the  absence  of  the  article  pointing  to  what  is  "  boundless, 
endless,  terrific "  (Delitzsch),  a  certain  retribution,  such  crimes  as  have  incurred  the 
vengeance  of  the  sword,  literally,  the  expiations  of  the  sword,  ever  being,  or  carrying 
along  with  them,  wrath,  t.e.  the  glow  of  the  Divine  anger,  a  prophetic  retribution, 
foreshadowing  a  still  more  awful  punishment  in  the  future  world,  "  that  ye  may  know 
there  is  a  judgment." 

Learn :  1.  The  duty  of  thankfulness  to  God  for  the  blessings  of  civilization,  especially 
for  the  invention  of  printing.  2.  The  fll'iminating  power  of  sorrow,  especially  to  a 
child  of  God,    3.  The  immortality  that  belonas  to  great  ideas,  especially  to  such  aa 


330  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xix.  1— 29. 


come  through  inspiration.  4.  The  sustaining  influence  of  a  good  hope,  especially  the 
hope  of  a  Bedeemer.  5.  The  value  of  Christ's  advents  to  the  world,  especially  of  his 
second  advent  in  glory.  6.  The  greater  light  enjoyed  by  the  gospel  Church,  especially 
since  the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 29. — Unconquerable  convictions.  Job  feels  bitterly  hurt  by  the  speeches 
of  Eliphaz  and  Bildad,  and  pleads,  in  face  of  their  harsh  constructions,  for  compassion 
in  his  unutterable  suffeiings.  At  the  same  time,  he  raises  himself  to  bolder  confidence 
in  Grod's  help  than  ever  bufore.  He  expresses  the  definite  hope  that,  if  not  on  this 
side  the  grave,  then  on  the  other  side,  a  justification  awaits  him  by  the  personal 
appearance  of  God. 

I.  Introduction  :  indignant  censukb  of  his  friends  as  malicious  sdspbotebs  op 
HIS  INNOCENCE.  (Vers.  1 — 5.)  "  How  long  will  ye  trouble  my  soul,  and  crush  me 
with  words?"  "  Ten  times,"  he  says,  speaking  in  round  numbers,  i.e.  again  and  again, 
have  they  slandered  him  by  attacks  on  his  innocence  ;  they  are  not  ashamed  to  deafen 
him  with  their  revilings.  It  is  true,  he  again  confesses  (ch.  vi.  24),  he  has  sinned, 
but  his  sin  remains  with  him  alone;  he  is  answerable  to  QoA  alone,  not  to  their 
unfeeling  judgment.  Is  it  their  desire  to  magnify  themselves — to  play  the  part  of 
great  speakers  and  advocates,  and  bring  home  to^him  his  disgrace  by  ingenious  pleas  ? 
Vanity  and  self-conceit  are  at  the  bottom  of  much  censoriousness ;  and  Job  here  lays 
his  finger  upon  the  moral  weakness  of  his  self-constituted  judges. 

II.  Lament  over  the  suffering  caused  him  by  God.  (Vers.  6 — 12.)  God  has 
wronged  him,  aud  surrounded  him  with  his  nets,  as  a  hunter  takes  his  prey,  depriving 
it  of  all  means  of  escape  (ver.  6).  The  sufi'erer  cries  out,  "  Violence  1 "  but  no  answer 
is  given ;  and  there  is  no  justice  in  response  to  his  cry  for  help  (ver.  7).  His  way  is 
fenced  in,  and  darkness  is  on  his  paths  (ver.  8 ;  comp.  ch.  ili.  23  ;  xiii.  27 ;  Lam.  iiL 
7,  9 ;  Hos.  ii.  6).  God  has  stripped  him  of  his  honour  and  of  his  fair  esteem  in  the  eyes 
of  men,  and  taken  away  the  crown  from  his  head  (ver.  9 ;  comp.  ch.  xxix.  14.;  Lam. 
v.  16).  "  Honour "  and  the  "crown  "  are  two  expres.'^ions  for  the  same  thing  (Isa.  Ixi.  10 ; 
Ixii.  3).  God  pulls  him  down  on  every  side,  like  a,  building  devoted  to  destruction ; 
roots  out  the  hope  of  his  restoration,  like  a  tree  (ver.  10).  His  warlike  bands — wounds, 
pains,  and  woes  of  every  kind — come  on,  and  make  their  way  against  him  as  against  a 
besieged  fortress  (vers,  ll,  12 ;  comp.  ch.  xvi.  14).  All  this  is  a  true  description  of  the 
thoughts  of  the  heart  from  which  Divine  help  has  been  withdrawn.  It  is  a  sore  conflict, 
none  sorer,  when  the  mind  is  driven  in  its  agony  to  view  God  as  an  enemy,  treating 
us  unmercifully,  willing  neither  to  hear  nor  to  help.  Job  is  tempted  to  think  God 
unjust;  one  who  promises  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  yet  does  not  remove  the  penalty; 
promises  his  presence  to  the  suffering,  yet  seems  not  to  be  touched  by  our  woes — ^nay, 
even  to  delight  in  them.  "  In  so  great  aud  glowing  flames  of  hell  we  must  look  to 
Christ  alone,  who  was  made  in  all  things  like  to  his  brethren,  and  was  tempted,  that 
he  might  succour  them  that  are  tempted  "  (Brenz). 

III.  Lament  over  the  sufpebing  caused  him  by  man.  (Vers.  13 — 20.)  In  such 
crises  we  turn  to  friendship  for  solace.  But  to  Job  this  is  denied.  In  six  different 
foTms  he  mentions  his  kindred  and  friends,  only  to  complain  of  their  coldne'ss  and 
alienation  (vers.  13, 14).  His  domestics,  too  (ver.  15),  to  whom  he  had  doubtless  been 
a  kind  master,  are  become  strange  to  him.  His  servant  does  not  answer  when  he  calls, 
so  that  he  is  obliged  to  change  parts  with  him,  and  beg  his  help  as  a  favour  (ver.  16). 
His  breath  and  diseased  body  make  him  offensive  even  to  his  wife,  and  "sons,"  or 
"  brethren"  (ver.  17).  The  impudent  little  boys  of  the  street,  like  those  who  mocked 
Elisha  (2  Kings  ii.  23,  «gg.),  make  a  butt  of  him,  indulging  in  sarcastic  taunts  wTien 
he  rises  to  speak  (ver.  18).  His  bosom-friends  abhor  him,  and  those  whom  he  had 
loved — Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar — turn  against  him  as  violent  opponents  (ver.  19). 
His  bones  cleave  to  his  skin  and  flesh,  can  be  seen  and  felt  through  his  emaciated  flesh, 
and  only  the  skin  of  his  teeth,  the  thin  film,  has  escaped  the  ravage.^  of  his  fearful 
malady.  He  can  only  just  speak  still,  without  his  mouth  being  filled  with  boils  and 
matter,  as  in  the  last  stage  of  the  disease  (ver.  20).     Friends  often  fail  iu  the  time  of 


OH.  XII.  1—29.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  331 

sorest  distress  ;  they  are  lummer-birds,  and  pass  away  when  the  colder  weather  sets  in. 
Men  are  hars,  fickle  as  the  wind.  Their  alienation  is  ascribed  to  God,  because  he  has 
caused  the  distress;  if  he  had  not  caused  the  distress,  they  would  hare  remained. 
Here,  again,  we  are  reminded  that  the  child  of  God  may  be  called  to  be  conformed  to 
the  image  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  He  knew  what  it  was  to  be  deserted  by  all 
men,  even  his  dearest  disciples  and  closest  adherents.  So  we  are  to  learn  to  build  no 
confidence  on  man,  but  on  the  living  God  alone,  whom  faith  can  hold  eternally  fast. 

IV.  ElSB   TO   A    BLESSED   HOPE  IN  GoD,  HIS  ONLY  REDEEMER  AND  A.VENOBB.      (Vers. 

21 — 27.)  This  section  is  introduced  by  a  woeful  petition  to  his  friends  for  compassion, 
"  for  the  hand  of  God  has  touched  him,"  alluding  to  the  disease,  which  from  its  fearful- 
ness  was  regarded  as  a  stroke  of  God's  hand ;  and  is  it  not  the  of&ce  of  friendship  to 
lend  its  hand  to  heal  or  soothe  (ver.  21)  ?  Why,  on  the  dbntrary,  do  they  persecute 
him  as  Gud,  assuming  an  authority  that  is  superhuman,  and  so  behaving  unnaturally 
to  him?  Tiiey  are  not  "satisfied  with  his  flesh,"  continually  piercing  and  ploughing  it 
with  the  envenomed  tooth  of  slander  (ver.  22).  The  appeal  seems  to  he  in  vain,  and  he 
turns  once  more  to  God  (ver.  23,  sqq.}.  Oh  that  his  words  were  written  down,  inscribed 
in  a  book  or  roll,  that  those  to  come  might  read  the  fervent,  repeated  protestations  of  his 
innocence !  That  they  were  engraven  with  an  iron  pen,  or  cast  with  lead,  so  as  to  remain 
an  indelible  and  eternal  record  1  And,  so  long  as  there  is  a  God,  this  wish  for  the 
perpetuation  of  his  testimony  cannot  be  in  vain.  It  has  been  fulfilled.  "  In  a  hundred 
languages  of  the  earth  it  announces  to  this  day  to  all  peoples  this  truth :  the  good 
man  is  not  free  from  sufferings,  but  in  the  consciousness  of  his  innocence  and  in  faith 
in  God,  providence,  and  immortality,  he  finds  a  consolation  which  suffers  him  not  to 
fall;  and  his  waiting  for  a  glorious  issue  of  God's  dark  leadings  will  certainly  be 
crowned  "  (Wohlforth).  Ver.  25, "  And  1  know  that  my  Redeemer  lives."  "  Redeemer  " 
is  probably  to  be  taken,  not  in  the  sense  of  blood-avenger,  but  in  that  of  restorer  of  my 
honour,  avenger  of  my  honour  j  but  the  two  meanings  are  connected.  "And  as  Last 
One  will  he  rise  upon  the  dust."  God  is  here  viewed  as  he  who  will  outlive  all, 
especially  in  contrast  to  Job,  now  sinking  into  death.  He  will  rise,  stand  up  for  Job's 
defence  and  deliverance,  on  the  dust  in  which  he  shall  soon  be  laid.  Ver.  26,  "  And 
after  my  skin  has  been  thus  destroyed,  yet  from  my  flesh  I  shall  behold  Eloah."  He 
is  thinking  of  the  time  when  he  shall  be  freed  from  his  wretched  suffering  and  lacerated 
"flesh,"  and  shall  see  God  as  a  glorified  spirit.  Ver.  27,  "Whom  I- shall  behold  for 
myself,"  i.e.  in  my  own  person,  "  and  my  eyes  shall  see,  and  not  a  stranger."  "  My 
reins  be  consumed  within  me,"  in  longing  after  this  glorious  view.  It  is  an  expression 
of  the  desire  of  the  deepest,  tenderest  part  of  the  man  for  this  high  consummation.  To 
discuss  the  different  theological  interpretations  of  this  passage  does  not  come  within  the 
scope  of  this  part  of  the  Commentary.  Perhaps  the  best  is  that  which  steers  between 
two  extremes,  and  is  adopted  by  many  eminent  expositors  of  the  present  day.  It  is 
that  Job  does  not  here  express  the  hope  of  a  bodily  resurrection  after  death,  but  of  a 
contemplation  of  God  in  the  other  world  in  a  spiritually  glorified  state.  '  It  is  the  hope 
of  immortality,  rather  than  that  of  resurrection,  to  which  he  rises,  with  such  clearness 
and  definiteness,  above  that  ancient  Israelitish  idea  of  Bheol,  which  he  himself  has 
admitted  in  earlier  discourses.  It  is  a  glorious  confession  of  faith — one  that,  in  a  fuller 
sense,  may  well  be  that  of  the  catholic  Church.  And  once  more  ths  propeHy  and 
power  of  faith  are  exhibited  in  all  their  lustre.  It  cleaves  to  life  in  the  very  jaws  of 
death ;  believes  in  heaven,  even  when  hell  is  yawning  at  its  feet ;  looks  to  God  as 
the  Redeemer  even  amidst  anger  and  judgment;  detects  beneath  seeming  wrath  his 
mercy ;  sees,  under  the  appearance  of  the  condemner,  the  Redeemer.  Faith  is  here  the 
"  substance  of  things  hoped  for  "  (Heb.  xi.  1).  The- best  consolation  in  the  trouble  of 
death  is  that  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  therefore  we  shall  rise  (Rom.  viii.  11 ; 
1  Cor.  XV.).  God  gives  more  to  his  servant,  who  shows  himself  inspired  by  such  firm 
confidence  towards  him,  than  he  could  ask  or  understand. 

V.  Solemn  warning  to  his  friends  to  desist  from  their  attacks.  (Vers.  28, 
29.)  « If  ye  think.  How  shall  we  persecute  him  ?  and  (if  ye  think)  the  root  of  the 
matter  is  found  in  me"— that  is,  if  you  think  the  reason  for  my  sufferings  is  solely 
to  be  found  in  myself,  in  my  sin—"  be  afraid  of  the  sword,"  the  avenging  sword  of  God, 
"  for  wrath  falls  in  with  the  offences  of  the  sword,"  which  may  mean  either  that  wrath 
is  a  punishment  of  the  sword,  or  that  the  punishments  •/  the  sword  are  with  wrath— 


m  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB,  [<«•  ^"X 1—20. 

A' rath  overtakes  them.  "That  ye  may  know  there  is  a  judgment!"  They  knew 
this  already,  and  upon  this  expectation  their  own  warnings  had  been  founded.  But 
Job  gives  the  thought  an  application  to  themselves.  "  That  you  may  know  that  God 
exercises  judgment  on  all  the  offences  of  the  sword,  which  you  do  not  own  nor  fear  in 
your  case,  and  that  he  severely  punishes  them."  Thus  Job  opens  that  wider  view  of 
the  future,  of  that  day  of  discrimination,  when  the  first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last  first — 
the  innocent  shall  be  justified,  and  the  hypocrite  exposed — ^which  corrects  the  narrow 
dogmatism  of  the  friends.  God  punishes  many  sins  in  this  life ;  but  many  are  reserved 
for  the  last  judgment.  Temporal  suffering  may  be  escaped,  and  yet  sure  punishment 
may  be  in  store.  On  the  other  hand,  temporal  suffering  may  be  innocently  endured,  but 
for  the  true  servant  of  Ggd  there  will  be  final  acknowledgment  and  eternal  honour. — J, 

Vers.  1 — 21. — An  appeal/or  pity.  Job  is  brought  lower  and  lower  by  the  words 
of  those  from  whom  he  might  have  expected  a  true  consolation.  He  at  length  dedans 
they  "  vex  "  his  "  soul,"  and  "  break  "  hini  "  in  pieces  with  words."  He  appeals  for 
freedom.  He  would  be  let  alone,  for,  as  he  had  sorrowfully  said,  "miserable  comforters 
are  ye  all."  The  great  underlying  teaching  is  the  insutticiency  of  those  views  of 
human  suffering  which  find  its  cause  only  in  judgment  upon  wrong-doing.  Job,  the 
typical  sufferer — typical  for  all  future  sufferers — undergoes  the  painfulness  of  being 
assailed  by  helpers  who  have  but  a  partial  and  very  imperfect  view  of  all  the  circum- 
stances of  his  case.  And  he  appeals  to  them  for  ease.  His  cry  to  them  is  also  a  cry 
to  Heaven  for  relief. 

I.  His  appeal  for  pity  is  based  on  the  ground  of  the  wrongfulness  of  his 
ACCUSATION.  "Behold,  I  cry  out  of  wrong."  His  friends  have  set  themselves  against 
him.  They  have  become  his  judges  rather  than  his  consolers  or  vindicators.  They 
"  reproach"  him  and  make  themselves  '  strange  "  to  him ;  they  "  magnify  "  themselves 
against  him.  They  try  to  plead  his  reproach  against  him.  It  is  the  way  of  the 
imperfectly  instructed  human  helper,  and  more  and  more  clearly  makes  plain  the 
necessity  for  a  voice  to  be  raised  on  behalf  of  the  sufferer  that  shall  be  of  one  better 
instructed. 

II.  But  the  appeal  is  urged  on  the  gbound  of  the  severity  of  his  bufferings. 
Job  acknowledges  his  affliction  to  be  of  God,  and  he  most  tenderly  and  touchingly 
refers  to  the  several  features  of  his  suffering.  He  cries  out  of  wrong;  he  has  no 
impartial  and  just  hearing.  He  is  encompassed  by  darkness  from  which  he  canr>ot 
escape;  his  honour  is  beclouded ;  his  substance  is  destroyed;  his  hope  has,  perished ; 
he  is  dealt  with  as  an  enemy;  his  acquaintances  are  estianged ;  he  is  forgotten  by  his 
best  friends ;  he  is  treated  with  indignity  in  his  own  home ;  he  is  offensive  even  to 
his  wife ;  even  young  children  despise  him  and  speak  against  him — "  they  whom  I 
loved  are  turned  against  me."  Through  the  severity  of  his  disease  he  is  wasted  to  a 
skeleton  J  his  "bone  cUaveth"  to  his  "skin."  Surely  this  is  a  call  for  pity.  Yet 
professed  friends  can  stand  by  and  argue  with  such  a  sufferer,  seeking  to  prove  his 
guiltiness  and  affirming  all  this  to  be  the  just  punishment  of  his  sin. 

III.  He  makes  his  further  appeal  to  their  pity  on  the  ground  of  friendship. 
"  Have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity  upon  me,  0  ye  my  friends  1 "  It  is  reasonable  to  expect 
that  professed  friends  will  at  least  show  pity  to  him  for  whom  they  have  declared 
their  great  fiiendship. 

IV.  His  filial  appeal  to  them  is  on  the  ground  of  hib  affliction  bb:ing  the 
STROKE  of  God.  "The  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me."  A;^aiQst  the  Almighty  he 
cannot  hope  to  contend.  He  is  crushed  under  the  Almighty's  power.  This  lowly 
confession  does  not  abate  the  calm  inward  assurance  of  personal  integrity.  But  the 
solution  of  the  mysterious  Divine  ways  is  wanting.  He  endeavours  to  abide  in  patience. 
But  human  sympathy  should  strengthen  the  sufferer  under  the  pressure  of  the  Divine 
band,  and  not  add  to  the  already  excessive  weight  of  his  calamities.  "  Why  do  ye 
persecute  me  as  God?" 

To  whom  should  a  sufferer  turn  if  not  to  his  friends  ?  How  obvious  the  otBoe  of 
friendship  at  such  a  time :  1.  To  sympathize.  2.  To  seek  to  ease  the  burden  of  the 
sufferer.   3.  To  strengthen  by  kindness  and  pity, — R.  G. 

Vers,  23—29. — Hie  Divine  Vindicator,  Job  awaits  a  final  "judgment,"  of  which  he 


OH.  XIX.  1— 29.J  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 

reminds  his  friends  (ver.  29).  At  present  he  is  the  accused  one;  and  all  appearances 
go  to  condemn  him.  True,  his  "  record  is  on  high."  He  knows  that  he  has  held  fast 
his  integrity.  But  he  looks  forward  to  a  final  vindication.  He  would,  therefore,  have 
his  words  "  written,"  «'  printed  in  a  book,"  "  graven  with  an  iron  pen  and  lead  in  the 
rock  for  ever."  This  is  the  final  cry  of  the  consciously  upright  one.  It  is  the  triumph 
of  integrity  over  false  accusation.  He  can  wait  for  judgment.  He  has  turned  his 
tearful  eyes  to  God,  who  has  delivered  him  for  a  time  to  the  ungodly,  but  who  will 
appear  for  him  yet  in  due  time.  It  is  here  that  Job  makes  the  noble  boast  in  confidence 
of  a  Divine  justification.  It  is' one  of  the  grandest  utterances  of  faith.  It  has  become 
the  watchword  of  hope  to  succeeding  generations.  The  interpretations  of  the  words 
have  been  various.  Job  may  have  uttered  words  the  full  meaning  of  which  he  did  not 
himself  wholly  perceive.  In  the  Vindicator  of  his  honour  he  may  not  have  seen  the 
Redeemer  of  the  race ;  or  have  guessed  that  the  God  in  whose  redemptipn  he  trusted 
would  appear  in  human  flesh  to  redeem  the  race  from  the  accuser — to  redeem,  not  from 
human  condemnation  merely,  but  from  the  Divine,  just  condemnation.  We  have 
the  highest  warrant  for  finding  in  "Mosea  and  all  the  prophets,"  and  "in  all  the 
Scriptures,"  references  to  "things  concerning"  the  Christ  (Luke  xxiv.  27).  The 
passage  is  an  illustration  of  this  progressive  character  of  the  revelation.  Buried  in 
the  old  Scriptures  were  "the  things  concerning"  the  Christ;  but  it  was  needful  they 
should  be  "  expounded."  Even  the  prophets  did  not  all  know  "  what  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify."  Thus  unconsciously  Job,  with  others,  ministers 
to  the  faith  of  the  world. 

I.  In  Job's  avenger,  vindicator,  or  redeemer,  is  to  be  seen  the  hidden  type  asd 
PROMISE  OF  THE  DNTVEKSAi.  Redebmeb.  Tlutt  for  whioh  ouc  looked  all  may  look, 
l^ot  only  the  Vindicator  of  the  innocent  and  the  upright,  but  the  "  Justifier  of  the 
ungodly." 

II.  In  the  redemption  of  Job's  honour  may  be  hidden  the  work  or  him  who  sbaiiI. 

BRING  BACK  THE   POBFBITBD  HONOUR  AND  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OP   MEN.      As  the  PerSOn,  80 

the  work  of  the  Divine  Redeemer  is  here  foreshadowed.  The  next  of  kin,  to  whom 
"  the  right  of  redemption  belongs,"  shall  restore  the  alienated  possession.  He  who 
shall  appear  for  Job  shall  appear  on  behalf  of  the  sinful  world,  shall  make  intercession 
for  the  transgressors,  shall  vindicate  by  his  own  substitutionary  offering  the  "justifica- 
tion "  of  "  the  ungodly." 

III.  In  Job's  vision  of  the  appearance  of  bis  vindicator  at  the  latter  day  upon  thp 
earth  is  to  be  seen  the  bidden  promise  of  the  final  afpbabance  of  the  worlds 
Redeemer  for  judgment,  vindication,  and  salvation — of  him  who  "  shall  appear  the 
second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation." 

IV.  In  Job's  assured  final  vision  of  God,  after  the  destruction  of  his  body,  lies  the 

COMFORTING  PROMISE  OF  THE  RBSUBBEGTION  OF  THE  DEAD ;  not  in  a  frail  body  of  flesh, 
liable  to  be  torn,  consumed,  destroyed,  but  in  "  a  spiritual  body."  So  the  Church  in 
confident  hope  chants  at  the  side  of  the  tumb.  Thus  are  the  germs  of  the  future  and 
final  revelation  held  in  the  earlier ;  thus  is  laid  the  ground  for  faith  and  thankfulness ; 
thus  is  the  suffering  one  cheered;  thus  shall  patience  and  faith  and  untarnished 
integrity,  though  afflicted,  be  vindicated;  and  thus  shall  the  faith  of  the  justified 
ungoidly  find  its  vindication  in  him  who  is  the  Vindicator,  the  Saviour,  the  Redeemer 
of  sinful,  suffering  man. — R.  G. 

Ver.  29. — A  final  judgment.  There  is  a  judgment  always  proceeding,  to  be  finally 
manifested  when  the  ultimate  rewards  and  punishments  of  human  conduct  will  he 
assigned.    A  final  judgment  is — 

I.  A   UNIVBBSAI.   BELIEF. 

II.  Testified  by  the  conscience. 

III.  Necessary  on  account  of  the  present  involved  condition  op  human 
AFFAIRS.  Conditions  are  unequal ;  wickedness  seems  to  triumph,  and  the  wicked  to 
prosper.  The  good  suffer.  The  reward  of  faithful  service  is  not  attained.  The  Divine 
ways  are  not  justified.     Human  conduct  does  not  meet  with  due  retribution. 

IV.  To  BE  dreaded  by  the  UNFAITHFUL. 

V.  Anticipated  by  the  righteous. 

VL  LU'E  TO  BE  HELD  IK  TEIB  LIGHT  OF  A  FDTUEE  JUDGMENT. — ^B.  O. 


334  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xix.  1— 29. 

Vera.  4 — 6. — Hie  erring  soul  and  its  God.  Job  replies  to  the  intrusive  censures  of 
nis  friends  with  the  indignation  of  outraged  privacy.  Granted  that  he  has  erred,  as 
his  friends  assume,  that  is  his  own  business,  not  theirs — it  is  a  matter  between  himself 
and  Grod  only ;  they  have  no  occasion  to  meddle  in  it. 

I.  Thbbe  is  a  peivaot  in  KBLioioif.  Each  soul  has  to  deal  with  God  alone. 
Although  we  may  help  one  another  by  sympathy,  and  although  our  internal  religion 
must  show  itself  in  external  conduct,  still  the  roots  and  inner  springs  of  religion  are  not 
for  public  investigation.  The  breach  of  reserve  on  the  deepest  matters  of  the  soul  is 
like  an  offence  against  decency.  The  language  of  love  is  sacred,  and  is  reserved  for  the 
ears  of  one  only.  When  love  has  been  wounded  by  wrong,  the  error  is  still  a  private 
concern,  and  one  which  strangers  have  no  right  to  interfere  with.  No  doubt  there  are 
ways  in  which  our  deepest  experiences  may  be  made  serviceable  to  others.  We  ought 
to  confess  our  faith,  for  the  honour  of  Christ  and  for  the  eucouragement  of  others. 
Too  often  a  false  shame  keeps  Christians  back  in  this  respect.  We  ought  also  to  con- 
fess OUT  faults  one  to  another.  But  these  faults  are  deeds  in  which  we  have  injured  one 
another.  No  one  has  a  right  to  expose  the  secret  sins  of  his  brother,  or  to  pry  into 
the  inner  conflicts  of  his  soul.  The  religion  that  is  turned  inside  out  in  the  light  of 
day  fades  or  coarsens.  The  roots  that  are  drasrged  from  their  secret  dwelling-place 
and  exposed  to  the  sun,  wither  and  perish.  The  spiritual  experience  that  is  handled 
by  the  multitude  loses  its  finer  character,  if  not  its  very  life.  We  cannot  help  our 
brother  by  destroying  his  delicacy  of  feeling.  Even  if  we  think  him  too  reserved, 
thougli  it  might  be  well  for  him  to  be  more  communicative,  we  cannot  be  justified  in 
tearing  down  the  veil  which  he  has  chosen  to  wear. 

II.  Thbkb  must  bb  the  utmost  openness  with  God  in  religion.  Here  the  reserve 
ceases.  Here  the  most  retiring  soul  must  be  completely  Irank.  God  claims  our 
confidence.  To  attempt  to  hide  anything  from  God  is  foolish,  for  he  knows  all  our 
most  secret  thoughts.  But  we  need  to  go  further,  and  make  our  confessions  consciously 
and  willingly.  The  reasons  for  reserve  among  men  do  not  apply  to  our  relations  with 
God.  As  God  knows  all,  so  he  rightly  understands  everything.  He  will  never  mis- 
judge us.  Moreover,  his  love  secures  his  perfect  sympathy  with  us.  Man's  prying 
curiosity  subjects  the  quivering  nerves  of  its  victim  to  a  process  of  vivisection ;  but 
God's  searching  gaze  of  love  and  sympathy  heals  and  saves.  It  is  necessary  that  we 
should  receive  this  willingly  if  we  are  to  profit  by  it.  A  foolish  shyness  of  God  leaves 
.us  without  the  cheering  of  his  presence.  It  is  always  a  bad  thing  when  one  has  to  say, 
as  a  son  exclaimed  of  his  lately  deceased  father  whom  everybody  was  praising,  "  It 
may  be  all  true ;  but  I  cannot  say,  as  I  never  knew  him."  It  is  not  our  Father's  fault 
if  we  do  not  know  him.  He  rewards  confidence  with  an  exchange  of  confidence.  Now, 
our  first  and  most  necessary  duty  is  to  fling  aside  all  reserve  before  God,  to  own  that 
"we  have  erred  and  strayed  from  his  ways  like  lost  sheep,"  to  confess  ourselves  utterly 
helpless  and  worthless,  and,  trusting  our  emptiness  to  him,  to  be  ready  to  welcome  the 
fulness  which  he  always  bestows  on  his  trusting  children. — W.  P.  A, 

Ver.  7. — The  cry  wnheard.  I.  It  mat  be  eeallt  unheaed.  That  is  to  say,  while  of 
course  God  knows  everything,  he  may  not  respond,  may  not  heed.  Why  ?  1.  Became 
the  cry  is  not  addressed  to  the  true  Ood.  The  heathen  priests  on  Mount  Carmel 
screamed,  "0  Baal,  hear  us!"  from  morning  till  evening.  "But  there  was  no  voice, 
nor  any  that  answeied"  (IKings  xviii.  26).  Men  have  their  false  gods  now,  i.e.  their 
false  ideas  of  God.  A  god  who  ignores  sin,  a  god  who  is  only  amiable  compliance,  is 
not  the  true  God.  One  who  addresses  such  a  god  will  not  bo  heard.  2.  Because  the 
cry  is  not  true.  It  is  a  formal  petition,  not  a  heartfelt  prayer.  The  words  may  be 
loud,  but  the  soul  is  silent.  Christ  says,  "  When  ye  pray,  use  not  vain  repetitions,  as 
the  heathen  do:  for  they  think  that  they  shall  be  heard  for  their  much  speaking" 
(Matt.  vi.  7).  3.  Because  the  cry  is  not  trustful.  We  may  cry  to  God  in  wild  despair ; 
the  prayer  may  bo  wrung  out  of  an  agony  of  the  soul ;  it  may  be  just  the  expression 
of  a  natural  instinct ;  but  it  may  carry  with  it  no  real  confidence  in  God.  The  Divine 
response  is  according  to  our  faith.  4.  B  cause  the  cry  is  not  aocompanied  by  penitence. 
If  we  hold  to  our  sin  we  cannot  be  saved  from  our  trouble.  While  we  excuse  ourselves 
before  God  we  make  his  ear  deaf  to  our  call.  Nothing  so  effectually  seals  the  gates  of 
2'i.v  .r  as  an  impenitent  heart.     6.  Because  thepily  sought  from  Ood  is  not  given  to  a 


CH.  XIX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  336 

brother  man.  The  prayer  of  the  selfish  is  not  heard.  Every  time  we  repeat  the  Lord's 
Prayer  we  remind  ourselves  that  our  trespasses  are  forgiven  in  proportion  as  we  forgive 
those  who  trespass  against  us.  This  is  the  one,  the  only  thing  in  the  piayer  that 
Christ  selected  for  emphatic  comment,  adding,  "  If  ye  forgive  not  men  their  trespasses, 
neither  will  your  Father  forgive  your  trespasses  "  (Matt.  vi.  15). 

II.  It  mat  be  only  apparently  unheard.  1.  Because  there  is  no  audible  response. 
Our  voice  goes  out  into  the  silence.  We  strain  our  ears  for  one  word  of  reply,  but  no 
sound  reaches  us.  Though  we  spread  out  our  hands  and  cry  aloud,  the  calm  heavens 
are  still  and  apparently  irresponsive.  But,  then,  we  are  foolish  if  we  expect  an  answer 
that  shall  be  audible  to  our  bodily  ears,  for  God  is  a  Spirit.  Moreover,  if  we  trust  him, 
i\'e  should  not  think  that  he  does  not  hear  when  he  does  not  speak.  Silence  is  not 
deafness.  2.  Because  there  is  no  immediate  relief.  At  present  all  seems  as  it  was 
before  we  prayed.  Does  it  not  appear  as  though  the  cry  had  been  wasted  on  the  air  ? 
We  have  to  learn  patience.  It  may  be  well  that  the  trial  should  last  a  little  longer. 
In  the  end  Grod  will  deliver  his  suffering  children  who  trust  themselves  to  him,  but  he 
may  not  give  them  sudden  and  immediate  relief.  3.  Because  the  response  is  not  what 
we  expected.  God  will  not  be  dictated  to.  He  will  use  his  own  judgment  in  his  reply 
to  us.  He  may  give  the  very  thing  we  ask  for.  But  if  that  be  not  fitting  Le  will 
reply  in  some  other  way.  Assuredly  he  wUl  reply.  Therefore  we  must  take  a  wider 
view  of  his  action,  and  be  prepared  to  receive  God's  response  in  new  and  unlooked-for 
forms.  Instead  of  removing  the  trouble  he  may  give  strength  to  bear  it.  Instead  of 
prosperity  he  may  give  peace.  Then  we  have  no  right  to  think  our  cry  lost  and 
neglected.    It  is  heard. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  8. — The  fenced  way.  L  God  has  a  EiaHT  to  fenoe  dp  oxir  way.  Job's 
complaint  is  sad,  but  it  does  not  here  indicate  an  injustice.  It  is  hard  to  be  checked 
and  thwarted.  Still  God  is  our  Master,  and  he  has  a  right  to  choose  our  inheritance 
for  us,  setting  us  in  a  large  place,  or  in  a  narrow  way,  as  he  thinks  best.  When  we 
complain,  we  forget  that  our  will  is  not  the  supreme  arbiter  of  our  destiny.  If  God 
stops  our  path  we  have  to  remember  that  we  are  on  his  land,  and  have  no  right  of  way 
across  it.  When,  in  his  bounty,  he  sets  us  free  to  roam  over  his  domain,  this  is  a 
favour  for  which  we  may  well  give  thanks ;  it  is  no  privilege  that  we  can  demand. 
The  opportunities  of  life,  and  our  freedom  to  use  them,  are  given  by  God;  and  he  who 
gives  may  withhold. 

II.  God  may  tencb  up  oub  way  to  prevent  us  from  STRAYnra.  We.  blunder  in 
the  darkness.  There  are  precipices  over  which  we  may  fall,  jungles  in  which  we  may 
become  victims  to  prowling  enemies,  By-path  Meadows  that  may  lead  us  to  Doubting 
Castle.  Therefore  God  shuts  us  in.  We  are  annoyed  at  the  restraint,  but  it  is  for  our 
soul's  preservation.  Liberty  is  not  always  good.  God  sees  when  it  may  be  abused ; 
then  in  his  great  mercy  he  withdraws  it.  Thus  the  ambitious  man  fails  to  reach  the 
giddy  height  from  which  he  would  soon  be  flung  headlong  to  ruin.  Business  does  not 
bring  one  in  the  wealth  that  was  expected,  for  God  sees  that  money  is  becomiiig  an 
idol.  Many  delights  are  shut  off,  and  a  man  looks  over  the  fence  with  great  envy 
towards  them ;  but  God  knows  that  they  would  be  poison  and  death  to  him. 

III.  God  sometimes  fences  up  oue  way  for  discipline  or  punishment.  We 
feel  ourselves  checked  and  hindered  on  every  side.  Our  busy  activity  is  stopped. 
Even  our  good  designs  are  frustrated.  We  find  it  hard  to  account  for  such  treatment. 
Possibly  it  is  just  the  punishment  of  our  sins.  This  has  come  not  as  direct  pain  ana 
loss,  but  as  hindrance  and  failure.  We  feel  like  the  Egyptians  when  their  chariot- 
wheels  stuck  in  the  bed  of  the  sea.  But  it  may  be  that  the  cause  lies  not  so  much 
in  sin  as  in  a  need  of  wholesome  discipline.  Perhaps  we  can  serve  God  better  by 
patient  endurance  than  by  vigorous  activity.  Then  what  looks  like  failure  is  really 
the  divinely  chosen  method  of  success.  He  fences  up  our  way  that  we  may  learn  to 
serve  by  waiting. 

IV.  God  who  fences  up  our  way  also  opens  it.  The  fence  is  but  a  temporary 
structure — not  a  wall.  God  checks  us  for  a  season  that  we  may  use  our  liberty,  when 
it  is  restored,  with  the  more  enthusiastic  energy.  While  he  is  fencing  up  one  way  he 
is  opening  out  a  new  way.  We  wonder  why  we  are  hindered,  but  if  we  would  but  lift 
up  our  eyes  we  might  see  another  path,  leading  us  to  a  far  more  noble  and  Chrisi-lika 


336  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  (oh.  xix.  1— 29. 

service  than  any  the  path  that  has  been  stopped  pointed  to.  Meanwhile  let  us  not 
complain  that  our  way  is  hopelessly  fenced  up  till  we  are  quite  brought  to  a  standstill. 
Our  fears  are  premature.  The  Norwegian  fiord  seems  to  be  completely  locked  iu  by 
the  mountains,  and  the  ship  appears  to  be  making  straight  for  the  cliffs  till  a  point  is 
reached  which  suddenly  reveals  a  new  expanse  of  water.  We  must  proceed  with  the 
diity  within  our  power,  and  then  the  future  will  open  out  as  we  approach  it. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  21. — Touched  by  the  hand  of  Ood.  Job  appealed  to  the  commiseration  of  his 
friends.  His  was  no  ordinary  trouble  coming  from  external  circnmstanoes.  The  hand 
of  God  was  upon  him.     Therefore  his  case  was  most  pitiable. 

I.  The  hand  or  God  may  hurt.  His  hand  holds  his  children  even  in  the  depths 
of  trouble  (Ps.  cxxxix.  10).  It  is  a  creative,  sustaining,  blessing  hand.  Yet  it  may 
also  be  used  to  smite  and  bruise.  The  coming  of  God  is  not  always  for  the  happiness 
of  his  children.  He  must  chastise  their  sin  and  folly.  Then  the  trouble  is  irresistible 
and  overwhelming.  It  is  the  contemplation  of  the  Divine  source  of  his  trouble  that 
makes  Job  appeal  to  his  friends  as  from  the  depths  of  an  unfathomable  misery. 

II.  Great  effects  are  pkoduced  by  the  mebb  touch  of  God's  hand.  Job  does 
not  say  that  God's  hand  had  stricken  him ;  he  only  complains  that  it  had  touched 
him.  But  that  was  enough  to  plunge  him  into  an  agony  of  soul.  A  touch  of  the 
"Traveller  unknown"  put  Jacob's  thigh  out  of  joint  (Gen.  xxxii.  25).  God  is  so 
strong  and  great  that  his  slightest  action  is  irresistible,  and  pregnant  with  tremendous 
consequences.  But  if  his  touch  is  so  powerful,  how  terrible  must  be  his  wrathful 
smiting  1  A  man  could  not  exist  for  one  moment  if  God  really  roused  himself  in  anger 
against  hiru. 

III.  The  touch  of  God'b  hand  should  bouse  oub  compassion.  The  trouble  is  so 
great  that  all  tlioughts  of  blame  should  be  swallowed  up  in  a  deep  feeling  of  sympathy. 
Job  here  seems  to  reverse  his  previous  conduct.  Before  this  he  had  appealed  from  the 
unfairness  of  man  to  the  justice  of  God.  Now  he  appeals  from  the  heavy  hand  of  God 
to  the  brotherly  compassion  of  a  fellow-creature.  Even  if  the  contention  of  the  three 
friends  had  been  well  founded,  and  Job  had  been  the  great  sinner  they  assumed  him  to 
be,  his  sufferings  were  now  so  severe  that  all  other  thoughts  should  have  been  swallowed 
up  in  commiseration  for  them.  It  is  only  human  to  feel  sympathy  with  suffering.  The 
censure  that  hardens  itself  against  the  distresses  that  it  regards  as  the  just  punishment 
of  sin  is  harsh  and  cruel,  and  unworthy  of  any  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  The  hand  that  hurts  heals.  Even  the  touch  of  cliastisement  is  meant  in 
love,  and  if  it  is  received  in  a  right  spirit,  it  will  be  followed  by  quite  another  touch. 
We  ought  not  to  be  afraid  of  the  hand  of  God.  As  it  has  sheltered  us  from  the  first, 
so  it  will  protect  and  save  lis  at  last.  Job  was  ultimately  blessed  by  the  hand  of 
God.  We  have  God  with  us  in  Christ,  and  Christ's  hands  boar  the  nail-prints  that 
tell  of  love  unto  death.  When  he  touches  us  it  is  with  a  pierced  hand.  We  may  feel 
pain,  but  he  felt  more  for  us,  and  the  record  of  his  suffering  is  the  pledge  of  the  saving 
grace  which  he  extends  to  all  who  truly  seek  him.  When  John  was  dismayed  at  his 
vision  of  the  glorified  Christ,  the  Lord  laid  his  hand  on  him,  and  that  gracious  touch 
of  sympathy  dispelled  his  fears  (Rev.  i.  17).  The  healing  touch  of  Christ  is  -with  us 
now,  and  it  really  comes  from  the  same  hand  as  that  which  hurts  in  our  trouble.  God 
only  hurts  to  heal.— W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  23. — Written  words.  Job  Is  supposed  to  sigh  for  the  very  thing  that  the  jwet 
has  done  for  him.  His  words  are  written,  and  they  have  acquired  a  permanence  and 
a  publicity  of  which  the  patriarch  could  have  had  no  conception. 

I.  The  desire  for  written  words.  Job  is  about  to  set  forth  a  great  conviction. 
He  thinks  it  so  important  that  he  would  have  it  recorded  in  the  state  chronicle,  even 
chiselled  and  leaded  in  the  face  of  the  rock,  like  some  great  historic  inscription.  1. 
Conviction  of  truth.  Job  would  not  want  a  lie  to  be  recorded  against  him  for  ever. 
It  is  natural  to  desire  that  the  truth  which  we  hold  should  be  maintained.  2.  Weight 
and  importance.  Many  true  words  are  but  of  limited  and  temporary  interest.  The 
ordinary  talk  of  social  intercourse  certainly  neither  needs  nor  merits  a  permanent 
record.  It  is  natural  for  it  to  disappear  like  the  successive  waves  that  break  on 'the 
beach.    But  weighty  words  should  endure.    There  are  truths  the  discovery  of  which 


OT.  xnc  1— 29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  887 

Is  a  permanent  l)oon  to  mankind.  These  tratlii  should  be  qamfulljr  treasured  ;tpd 
transmitted.  3.  Graving  far  jvitie:  Job  Is  conceirned  wltb  a  pergonal  feeling  in  liis 
desire.  If  \rhat  he  saya  makes  no  impressiqn  on  lug  immediatis  circle,  it  taay  bring 
conviction  to  a  T^ider  area  of  less  prejudiced  persons,  or  to  a  later  age. 

II.  Thk  dsb  of  written  troBDS.  1.  Distinctnets,  Job's  thought  is  clearly  before 
U3.  The  Scripture^  afford  a  definite  revelation.  With  wri'tteii  words  we  are  not  left 
to  vague  surrnisep.  We  do  pot  only  depend  on  the  inward  itripulpes  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  Th^  ipper  light  may  he  very  real  and  precious.  But  we  are  in  danger  of  mis- 
interpreting it  if  we  neglect  the  written  Wprd  of  th^  Bible.  2.  Permanence,  Job's 
great  thought  of  the  future  life  has  permanence  by  being  recorded  in  Scripture.  It  is 
fearful  to  think  how  the  Christian  truth  would  in  al'  probability  have  been  perverted 
and  lost  among  the  shifting  currents  of  tradition  if  there  had  been  no  "  New  Testament " 
in  which  to  preserve  it.  Npw  we  can  go  back  to  the  very  fountain  of  the  gospel.  We 
can  leave  all  th@  errors  of  the  ages  and  take  our  stand  pn  the  pure  teaching  of  Christ 
and  his  apostles ;  or  if,  as  is  only  reasonable,  we  belieye  that  the  course  of  Christian 
thought  has  contributed  tp  the  development  of  the  understanding  of  truth,  still  we  can 
test  that  development,  and  distinguish  it  froni  the  degeneration  that  mocks  it,  by 
keeping  close  to  the  {Jew  Testament.  So  long  as  the  written  words  of  revelation  are  in 
our  hands  there  is  a  grand  security  for  purity  of  doctrine.  3,  Puhlicity,  Job  desired 
that  the  great,  new  truth  he  was  about  to  utter  should  go  abroad.  No  doubt  his  flrijt 
wish  was  that  it  might  lead  to  the  justification  of  his  misunderstood  character.  But 
much  larger  consequences  follow.  When  the  voice  of  the  prophet  is  silent,  his  written 
word  speaks  to  the  ages  and  spreads  far  and  wide  to  multitudes  that  could  never  have 
been  affepted  by  his  personal  presence.  The  Bible  ip  a  means  of  making  God's  truth 
widely  known.  That  truth  is  not  for  an  elect  few  of  the  initiated,  but  for  mankind 
at  large.  Therefore  it  is  our  duty  to  do  what  we  can  to  circulate  the  Divine  Word.  At 
the  same  time,  let  us  not  forget  to  pray  for  the  enlightening  Spirit  to  interpret  this 
written  Word  to  ourselves  and  to  others ;  "  for  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giyeth 
life  "  (2  Cqr.  iji.  6).— W,  F.  A. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — The  great  hppe.  These  monumental  words  are  what  Job  desired  to 
be  written,  noted  in  a  book,  "  graven  with  an  iron  pen  and  lead  in  the  rock  for  ever." 
Certainly  few  words  are  more  worthy  of  permanent  publipity. 

I.  The  absubanoe  of  the  great  hopi!,  Job  says,  "  I  know-"  He  is  not  vaguely 
feeling  after  truth.  He  has  it,  and  he  holds  it  firnaly.  How  different  is  this  great 
passage  from  ch.  iii.  I  In  what  way  can  we  account  for  the  new  triumphant  tone 
of  the  sufferer?  How  does  Job  iknoii!  that  his  Kedeemer  liveth,  etc.?  1.  By  inspira- 
tion. This  passage  bears  its  own  evidence  to  its  Divine  origin  in  its  tone  and  spirit 
and  exalted  thought.  The  patriarch  is  carried  put  of  himself.  He  is  almost  like  St. 
Paul  in  the  third  h^^^^ns  (2  Cor.  xii.  2).  Tfet  ha  is  in  no  wild  ecstasy ;  his  tone  is  one 
of  calm,  solemn,  glad  assurance.  The  greatest  truths  o(  redeniptipn  and  resurrection 
are  from  God.  2,  Through  the  discipline  of  ^viffering.  Job  did  not  see  all  this  at 
Jrst,  But  sorrow  has  given  him  a  marvejlops  power  of  intuition.  It  has  traineii  him 
to  see  the  highest  truth.  Thus  God's  revelation  comes  to  the  prepared  sou].  Suddenly 
the  black  clouds  are  rent  asupder,  and  the  much-suffering  man  looks  right  up  tp  the 
eternal  blue,  while  the  very  light  of  God  illurnines  and  transfigures  his  countenance. 

II.  The  qrounds  of  the  great  hope.  The  living  Kedeemer,  Job  has  a  Gael,  an 
Avenger,  whp  will  plead  his  cause  and  deliver  him  from  bis  trouble.  \.  Divine. 
Clearly  he  is  thinking  of  God.  He  has  no  idea  pf  another  being  who  shall  be  his 
friend  while  God  remains  his  persecuting  Enemy.  He  flees  from  God  to  God.  He 
knows  that,  though  he  pannpt  understand  God's  present  treatment  pf  him,  he  will  bp 
ultimately  delivered  if  he  trusts  in  God.  Although  it  was  not  given  to  Job  to  see 
further  in  this  direction,  we  now  know  that  his  great  hope  and  prophecy  is  fulfilled  in 
Christ,  who  has  qoiue  to  be  the  sinner's  Qo(il,  the  great  Bedeempr  of  man,  2.  Persong,!,, 
Job  says,  "  my  Redeemer."  Each  must  knpw  Christ  for  himself,  Put  all  ma:[  know 
and  own  hjm.  Christ  not  pnly  redeems  the  irmocent  by  vindicating  them — which  was 
what  Job  expected.  We  now  see  that  he  goes  further,  and  redeems  the  guUty  by 
saving  them  even  frem  their  sin  and  doom.  3.  Living^  The  Redeemer  lives,  though 
fcjr  a  while  we  dp  not  see  hiw.    We  have  t^  living  Saviour. 

V39.  ^' 


338  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xn.  1—29. 

m.  Tmi  BTTBffrijroK  or  thk  obiat  hope.  1.  Afuium  life.  Though  some  sappose 
that  Job  is  only  thinking  of  the  cure  of  his  diseased  skin  and  flesli,  and  a  vindication 
of  him  in  health  during  hi8  earthly  life,  it  is  difScult  to  see  how  his  words  could  be 
satisfied  with  this  simple  meaning.  Taking  them  as  prophetic  of  a  future  life  when  Ifae 
worm-eaten  body  is  left  behind,  we  hare  a  grand  picture  of  the  triumph  of  hope  in  Old 
Testament  times.  Here  is  the  answer  to  ch.  xiv.  14.  There  will  be  a  future  life  when 
the  tabernacle  of  this  body  is  laid  aside.  2.  A  vision  of  Ood.  Job  had  been. longing 
to  meet  God.  His  prayer  was  lost  in  silence  (ver.  7).  God's  hand  was  only  upon  him 
for  chastisement.  Now  he  foresees  the  great  apocalypse.  (1)  This  is  for  the  vindica- 
tion of  righteousness.  God  will  then  explain  the  mysteries  and  put  an  end  to  the 
wrongs  of  earth.  (2)  This  is  itself  a  great  joy.  The  beatific  vision  it  an  adequate 
compensation  for  all  the  sufferings  of  earth. 

IV.  The  oiKOUMSTANCES  OP  THE  SBBAT  HOPE.  1.  Apart  from  th»  earthly  body. 
This  is  no  trouble  to  Job.  His  body  has  become  a  loathsome,  tormenting  encumbrance. 
"  Mesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  neither  doth  corruption  inherit 
incorruption  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  50).  2.  With  personal  identity.  Job  would  not  be  content 
to  be  dissolved  into  the  universe.  The  future  life  is  one  of  personal  existence.  It 
must  be  linked  by  memory  to  the  present  life.  Every  one  who  knows  Christ  as  his 
living  Redeemer  on  earth  will  enjoy  the  personal  fellowship  of  God  in  heaven. — 
W.  F.A. 

Ver.  28. — "  Th«  root  of  the  matter."  Job's  friends  think  that  the  explanation  of 
the  patriarch's  singular  experience  lies  in  himself.  It  is  not  to  be  explained  by  the 
laws  of  the  imiverse,  by  the  opposition  of  a  foe,  etc. ;  it  is  to  be  explained  by  Job's 
own  character  and  conduct.  The  root  of  this  matter,  his  affliction,  is  in  Job  himself. 
That,  says  Job,  is  their  idea,  and  that  Job  of  course  repudiates.  The  prologue  shows 
that  Job  was  right.  The  root  of  the  matter  was  not  in  him;  it  was  in  Satan.  The 
great  accuser  had  originated  the  whole  trouble. 

I.  We  cannot  cndebbtand  a  mattee  uktil  wb  dibcoveb  the  boot  of  it.  Job's 
friends  were  quite  wrong ;  all  their  conclusions  were  invalid,  all  their  accusations  were 
unjust,  all  their  admonitions  were  irrelevant,  because  they  mistook  the  root  and  cause 
of  Job's  afflictions.  Their  conduct  is  a  warning  against  judging  with  superficial  know- 
ledge. In  their  assurance  of  infallibility  they  inferred  the  existence  of  the  root  when 
they  had  not  been  able  to  see  it.  In  all  branches  of  knowledge  we  need  to  bore  down 
to  the  root  of  our  subject.  The  greatest  task  of  science  is  the  search  for  causes.  Tiie 
mere  collection  and  classification  of  facts  is  but  the  first  step.  Seal  science  aims  at 
accounting  for  its  facts.  So  in  religion  we  are  not  content  to  receive  certain  impres- 
sions ;  we  want  to  get  behind  and  beneath  them  and  find  their  roots.  We  must  find 
the  root  of  poverty  and  social  trouble  before  we  can  understand  these  evils. 

n.  It  is  DippionLT  to  discover  the  boot  of  a  matteb.  The  root  is  underground. 
It  hides  itself  in  darkness.  Possibly  it  runs  far  for  its  nourishment,  like  that  of  the 
famous  Hampton  Court  vine,  which  is  said  to  reach  to  the  river  Thames.  In  human 
uHairs  it  is  very  hard  to  find  the  roots,  because  men  do  not  generally  expose  their 
inmost  thoughts.  History  searches  for  causes,  but  it  is  a  very  tentative  and  precarious 
science.  One  historian  will  see,  or  thinks  he  sees,  the  cause  of  an  event  in  something  of 
which  another  denies  the  existence.  We  cannot  even  see  the  roots  of  the  conduct 
of  our  daily  acquaintances.  In  particular  this  difficulty  is  increased  when  there  is  lack 
of  sympathy.  A  mean  and  selfish  man  can  never  discover  the  roots  of  generous  action, 
and  a  noble-minded  man  is  slow  to  suspect  the  roots  of  the  conduct  of  a  person  of 
lower  character.  We  must  beware  of  the  attempts  of  hot-headed  philanthropy  to  cure 
evils  the  roots  of  which  have  not  yet  been  discovered.  Else  we  may  do  more  harm 
than  good. 

in.  Thebs  abb  evils  which  abb  not  rooted  in  the  man  who  bufpebs  prom 
THEU.  This  was  the  truth  which  Job's  Mends,  blinded  by  prejudice,  could  not  see. 
They  assumed  that  the  root  was  in  Job,  but  their  assumption  was  an  error.  Now,  the 
admission  of  this  idea  should  not  only  check  hasty  judgment ;  it  should  encourage  faith 
and  teach  patience.  The  roots  are  much  deeper  than  we  suspect.  We  cannot  under- 
stand providence,  for  we  cannot  see  its  roots. 

rf .  Tbx  wo«bt  xyn<  is  x«at  wsiob  bju  its  hoot  nr  tbx  wan  vbo  ictteb^  non 


OH.  XX.  1—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


S39 


FT.  If  Job's  friends  had  been  right,  his  position  would  have  been  far  more  dreadful 
than  it  was.  Often  we  must  confess  to  ourselves  that  we  have  brought  trouble  upon 
our  own  heads.  Our  folly  or  our  sin  is  its  primary  cause.  Then  it  is  wholly  our 
own.  It  is  well  to  search  ourselves  and  see  if  the  root  of  the  matter  be  in  us.  If  it 
is,  there  is  no  hope  of  salvation  while  it  remains  there.  To  cut  down  the  superficial 
growth  will  do  no  good.  The  deep-seated  root  will  sprout  again.  Evil  must  be 
eradicated  from  the  heart.     We  want  a  cure  that  goes  to  the  root  of  the  matter. 

V.  The  koot  of  Divine  grace  is  a  sure  source  of  Divinb  life.  There  are  good 
things  as  well  as  evil  things  that  have  their  roots  in  a  man.  The  root  of  the  better 
life  may  be  in  a  man  when  we  do  not  see  it.  1.  It  is  within  the  individual  man. 
Otherwise  the  external  grace  is  not  his.  2.  It  may  be  hidden.  3.  The  growth  above 
may  be  checked.  4.  Still,  if  the  root  of  the  matter  is  in  the  soul,  there  must  be  some 
growth  visible  in  the  outer  life. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XX. 


Vers.  1 — 29. — Zophar's  second  speech  is 
even  more  harsh  than  his  first  (ch.  xi.).  He 
adds  coarseness  and  rudeness  to  his  former 
vehement  hostility  (vers.  7,  15).  His  whole 
discourse  is  a  covert  denunciation  of  Job  as 
a  wicked  man  and  a  hypocrite  (vers.  5, 12, 
19,  29),  deservedly  punished  by  God  for  a 
life  of  crime.  He  ends  by  prophesying 
Job's  violent  death,  the  destruction  of  his 
house,  and  the  .rising  up  of  heaven  and 
earth  in  witness  against  him  (vera.  21 — 28). 

Ters.  1,  2 Then  answered  -Zophar  the 

Naamathite,  and  said,  Therefore  do  my 
thoughts  cause  me  to  answer.  Zophar  "has 
heard  the  check  of  his  reproach  "  (ver.  3), 
•'.e.  the  reproach  contained  in  the  last  words 
of  Job  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Therefore 
his  thoughts  rise  up  within  him,  and  com- 
pel him  to  make  a  reply.  He  cannot  allow 
Job  to  shift  the  onus  of  guilt  and  the 
menace  of  punishment  on  his  friends,  wlieu 
it  is  he.  Job,  that  is  the  guilty  person,  over 
whom  the  judgments  of  God  impend.  And 
for  this  I  make  haste ;  rather,  and  because 
of  my  haste  that  is  within  me  (see  the  Re- 
vised Version) ;  i.e.  "  because  I  am  of  a  hasty 
and  impetuous  temperament." 

Ver.  3. — I  have  heard  the  check  of  my 
reproach ;  or,  the  reproof  which  pufteth  me  to 
shame  (Eevised  Version).  Some  suppose  an 
allusion  to  ch.  xix.  2,  3 ;  but  it  is  better  to 
regard  Zophar  as  enraged  by  vers.  28,  29  of 
ch.  xix.  And  the  spirit  of  my  understanding 
canseth  me  to  answer.  This  claim  is  not 
quite  consistent  with  the  acknowledgment 
of  hastiness  in  ver.  2.  But  it  is  no  unusual 
thing  for  an  impetuous  and  hasty  man  to 
declare  that  he  speaks  &om  the  dictates  of 
pure  dispassionate  reason. 

Ver.  4. — Knowest  thou  not  this  of  old, 
■in«9  mm  w»«  pla««d  opos  9i4\b}   Tbes* 


words  scarcely  "imply  cognizance  of  the 
record  (of  the  creation  of  man)  iu  Genesis," 
as  Canon  Cook  suggests ;  but  they  do  imply 
belief  in  a  creation  of  man,  not  an  evolu- 
tion ;  and  in  the  existence  of  a  continuous 
tradition,  extending  from  that  time  to  Job's. 
The  passage  is  among  those  which  make 
for  the  high  antiquity  of  the  book. 

Ver.  5. — That  the  trinmphing  of  the 
wicked  is-  short  (comp.  Ps.  xxxvii.  35,  'iS ; 
U.  1—5 ;  Ixxiii.  17 — 19,  etc.).  This  is  one 
of  the  main  points  of  dispute  between  Job 
and  his  opponents.  It  has  been  previously 
maintained  by  Eliphaz  (ch.  iv.  8 — 11;  v. 
3—5 ;  XV.  21,  29)  and  by  Bildad  (ch.  viii. 
11 — 19),  as  it  is  now  by  Zophar,  and  may 
be  regarded  as  the  traditional  belief  of  the 
time,  which  scarcely  any  ventured  to  ques- 
tion. His  own  observation,  however,  has 
convinced  Job  that  the  fact  is  otherwise. 
He  has  seen  the  wicked  "live,  become  old, 
and  remain  mighty  in  power  "  (ch.  xxi.  7) ; 
he  has  seen  them  **  spend  their  days  in 
wealth,"  and  die  quietly,  as  "in  a  moment " 
(ch.  xxi.  13).  In  oh.  xxiv.  2 — 24  he  seems 
to  argue  that  this  is  the  general,  if  not 
universal,  lot  of  such  persons.  Later  on, 
however,  in  ch.  xxvii.  18 — 23,  he  retracts 
this  view,  or,  at  any  rate,  greatly  modilies 
it,  admitting  that  usually  retribution  does 
even  in  tliis  life  overtake  the  wicked.  And 
this  seems  to  be  the  general  sentiment  of 
mankind. 

"  Baro  antecedentem  scelestum, 
Deseroit  pede  poena  claudo." 
(Horace, '  Od.,'  iii.  2,  U.  31,  32.) 

There  remains,  however,  the  question 
whether  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  can 
fairly  be  considered  "  short,"  and  the  joy  of 
the  hypocrite  but  for  a  moment.  When  we 
consider  the  lives  of  Dionysius  the  elder, 
Bylla,  MariuB,  Tiberius,  Louis  XIV.,  Na- 
poleon, it  is  difficult  to  answer  this  question 
in  the  affirmative. 
Yef,  6,— Itioafb  bi*  MtsUwcy  etovnt  u| 


340 


THE  BOOK  OF  J0& 


[oh.  XX.  1— ?ft 


to  the  heareni.  "Thongh  he  reMh,"  i*,, 
"the  highest  pitch  of  prosperitj"  (conip. 
Fci.  Ixxiii  9).  And  his  head  leaoh  imto  the 
clouds  (comp.  Dftn.  iv.  22,  "  Thon,  O  king, 
art  ^:Town  and  beoome  Btrong :  And  thy  great- 
Bess  is  grown,  and  reacheth  unto  heaven"). 

Ver.  7.— Yet  he  shall  perish  for  ever  Uka 
bis  o-wn  dung.  Some  understand  "  his  own 
dung-heap,"  regarding  the  "  ashes "  of  ch. 
ii.  8  as,  in  reality,  a  heap  of  refuse  of 
all  kinds;  but  it  is  simpler  to  suppose  a 
plainer  and  more  Tulgar  teunt  (eomp.  2 
Kings  xviii.  27).  They  which  have  seen 
him  shall  say.  Where  is  he  1  i.e.  "  Whither 
hath  he  gone  ?  What  is  become  of  him  ?  " 
(comp.  Ps.  ixxvii.  36). 

Ter.  8. — He  shall  fly  away  as  a  dream, 
and  shall  not  he  found;  i.e.  "us  a  dream 
flies,  when  one  awaketh"  (see  Ps.  Ixxiii. 
20 ;  Isa.  zzix.  7, 8).  Yea,  he  shall  he  chased 
away  as  a  Tision  of  the  night.  A  "  vision 
of  the  night"  is  perhaps  something  more 
than  a  "  dream ; "  but  it  is  equally  fugitive, 
equally  unstable — with  morning  it  wholly 
vanishes  away. 

Ver.  9. — 'fba  eye  also  which  saw  him 
■hall  see  him  no  more;  or,  ihe  eye  which 
teanned  him.    The  verb  used  (y0)  is  a  rare 

one,  occurring  only  here,  i^  ph.  sxviii.  7, 
and  in  Cant.  i.  6.  In  the  forpier  passage 
it  is  used  of  a  falopn,  in  the  latter  of  the 
sun.  Keither  shall  his  place  any  more 
behold  him  (comp.  Fe.  oiii.  16,  "  The  place 
thereof  shall  know  it  no  more  "). 

Yer.  10. — His  children  shall  seek  to  please 
the  poor.  Another  rendering  is,  "  The  poor 
shall  oppress  his  children,"  since  the  mean- 
ing of  the  verb  iity^  is  doubtful.  But  tha 
translation  of  the  Authorized  Version  seems 
prei'erabU.  His  children  will  curry  favour 
with  the  poor,  either  by  making  restitution 
to  them  on  account  of  weir  father's  injuries, 
or  simply  because  they  are  friendless,  and 
desire  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  some 
one.  And  his  hands  shall  restore  their  goods 
(comp.  vers.  IS  and  18).  He  himself  will 
be  BO  crushed  and  broken  in  spipt  that  he 
will  give  back  with  his  own  hands  the 
goods  whereof  he  has  deprived  the  poor. 
The  restitution,  t.^.,  will  be  made,  in  many 
cases,  not  by  the  oppressor's  children,  but  by 
the  oppressor  himself. 

Ver.  11, — His  bones  are  foil  of  the  sin  of 
his  youth ;  literally,  hit  bones  arefutt  of  hi$ 
ymtth ;  i.e.  lusty  and  strong,  full  of  youthful 
vigour.  There  is  no  sign  Of  weakness  or 
decay  about  them.  Yet  they  shall  lie  down 
with  him  in  the  dust,  A  little  while,  and 
these  vigorous  bones,  this  entire  body,  so 
full  of  life  and  youth,  shall  be  lying  with 
the  man  himself,  with  all  that  constitutes 
his  personality,  in  the  dust  of  death  (comp. 
vers.  24,  25). 

Yen.  19,  IS. — Thon|h  wiokedness  he  swe^t 


in  his  month;  i.t.  thougn  the  wicked  man 
delight  in  his  wickedness,  and  glp^.t  over  it, 
and  keep  the  thought  of  it  in  hi^  mind,  aa 
a  gourmand  keeps,  so  lang  as  he  can,  a. 
delioions  taste  in  his  mouth ;  though  he,  as 
it  were,  hide  it  under  Ms  tongue,  in  order 
not  to  let  it  escape  him;  though  he  spare 
it,  and  forsake  it  not;  but  keep  it  still 
within  his  mouth,  yet,  notwithsiiuiding  ail 
this,  disgust  and  nausea  arrive  in  course  of 
time  (see  the  next  two  verses).  It  is,  perhaps, 
the  most  surprising  among  the  phenomena 
of  wiokedness  that  men  can  gloat  over  it, 
voluntarily  recur  to  it,  make  a  boast  of  it,  re- 
count signal  instances  of  it  to  their  friends, 
and  seem  to  find  a  satisfaction  in  the  recollec- 
tion. One  would  have  expected  that  shame 
and  self-disapproval  and  fear  of  retribution 
would  have  led  them  to  dismiss  their  wicked 
acta  from  their  thouglits  as  soon  aa  possible. 
But  certainly  the  fact  is  otherwise. 

Yer.  14. — Yet  his  meat  in  his  bowels  is 
turned.  Still,  a  time  comes  when  the  self- 
complacency  of  the  wicked  man  is  shaken. 
He  experiences  a  failure  of  health  or  spirits. 
Then,  suddenly,  it  is  aa  if  the  meat  that  he 
has  swallowed  had  been  turiied  to  poison  in 
his  bowels,  as  if  the  gall  of  asps  were  within 
him.  Compare  what  Bishop  Butler  says  of 
the  sudden  waking  up  of  a  man's  conscience 
('  Analogy,'  pt.  i.  eh.  ii.  p.  52).  The  ancients 
seem  to  have  known  that .  the  poison  of 
serpents  was  a  aizong  acid,  an4  therefore 
supposed  that  it  was  secreted  by  the  gall- 
bladder (see  Pliny,  'Hist,  Nat.,'  xi,  37). 

Ver.  15. — He  hath  swallowed  down  riches, 
and  he  shall  vomit  them  up  again.  The 
wicked  man  shall  be  made  to  UisgoTg?  his 
ill-gotten  gains.  Either  fear,  or  iismorse,  or 
a  judicial  sentence  will  force  him  to  m^ike 
restitution  (sea  ver.  10).  God  shall  cast  them 
out  of  his  belly.  Whatever  is  the  immediate 
motive  of  the  restitution,  it  will  really  be 
God's  doing.  He  will  cause  the  fear,  or 
the  remorse,  or  bring  about  the  judicial 
sentence. 

Yer.  16. — He  shall  sack  the  poison  of  asps, 
Probably  Zophar  does  not  afSx  any  very 
distinct  meaning  to  his  threats,  He  is  uonT 
tent  to  utter  a  series  of  fierce-sounding  but 
vague  menaces,  which  he  knows  that  Job 
will  regard  aa  launohed  against  himself,  and 
does  not  care  whether  they  are  taken  meta- 
phorically or  literally.  Job  will  be  equally 
distressed  in  either  case.  Ihe  viper's  tongue 
shall  slay  him.  It  is  really  the  viper's  teoift, 
and  not  his  tongue,  that  slays;  but  Zophar 
is  not,  any  more  than  Job  (oh.  xzviL  18),  an 
accomplished  naturalist. 

Ver.  17. — He  shall  not  see  the  iiTers,  the 
floods,  the  brooks.  The  wicked  man  sliall 
suffer,  not  only  positive  pains,  but  what 
casuists  call  the  poena  damni,  or  "  penalty 
of  losy "— 4epivatioii,  in  other  wufda,  at 


OH.  xz.  1 — 2$.% 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


til 


bleBsMgs  which  he  wotild  naturally  hare 
enjoyed  but  for  his  wiekedness.  ZopW 
here  threatens  hiiu  with  the.  loss  of  those 
paradisiacal  delights  wtiioh  the  Orientals 
associated  with  water  in  all  its  forms, 
whether  as  niJ^ej  or  "  rills  derived  from 
larger  streams,"  or  as  'Tis,  "  rivers,"  or  as 
'7n3,  "brooks"  or  "torrents,"  now  strong 
and  impetuous,  now  reduced  to  a  mere 
thread.  These  are  said  poetically  to  flow 
with  honey  and  butter,  nbt^  of  course,  in  any 
literul  sense,  such  as  Ovid  may  have  meant, 
when,  in  desetibing  the  golden  age,  he 
said — 

"  Flumina  jam  lactis,  j&m  flumina  nectaris 
ibant;'' 

('Metaph.,' 1.111.) 

but  as  fertilizing  the  land  through  which 
they  ran,  and  so  causing  it  to  abound  with 
bees  iihd  cattle,  whence  would  be  derived 
butter  and  hcney.  Compare  the  terms  in 
which  Canaan  was  described  to  the  Israelites 
(Exod.  iii.  8,  17 ;  xiii.  5 ;  Deut.  xxvi.  9, 15, 
etc.). 

Ver.  18.— That  which  he  laboured  for  he 
shall  restore.  Even  that  which  he  gets  by 
his  own  lionest  laboul:  be  shall  have  to  part 
with  and  give  iip.  He  Shall  not  8wa.Uow  it 
Sown;  i.e.  "shall  not  absorb  it,  and  make 
it  ills  oWn."  AibbriiAg  to  his  substanoe 
shall  the  restitution  be.  So  Scbultens, 
Professor  Lee,  and  Df.  Stanley  Leathes,  who 
understand  ^bphar  as  assorting  that,  in 
ordef  to  compensate  those  whom  he  has 
robbed,  the  wicked  man  will  have  to  make 
over  to  them  all  tlie  wealth  that  is  honestly 
his.  Others  translate,  "  AcOordiilg  to  the 
substance  that  he  bath  gotten,  he  shall  not 
rejoioB  "  (sed  the  EevieeJ  Version,  and  the 
commentaries  of  EWald,  Dglitalsch,  and 
Dillmanh). 

Yer.  19.^Beoanse  he  hath  oppressed  and 
hath  forsaken  the  poor.  These  charges  are 
now  for  the  first  time  insinuated  against 
Job ;  later  on,  they  are  openly  brought  by 
Eliphaz  (ch.  xxii.  5 — 9).  Job  denies  them 
categorically  in  ch.  xxix.  11 — 17.  they 
seem  to  have  been  pure  Calumnies,  Without 
ao  atom  of  foundation.  Because  he  hath 
violently  taken  away  an  house  which  he 
builded  not.  Another  calumny,  doubtlessi 
Something  like  it  was  insinuated  by  Eliphaz 
in  ch.  XV.  28, 

Ver.  20. — Sorely  he  shall  not  feel  qniet- 
ness  in  his  belly ;  rather,  because  he  knew  no 
quietness  in  his  hellj/,  or  ibithin  him  (see  the 
Eevised  Version) ;  i.e.  because  his  greed  and 
his  rapacity  Were  iusfttiable — he  was  never 
at  rest,  but  continually  oppressed  and  {iluU- 
dered  the  poor  more  and  more  (see  the  <ibia- 
uient  on  ver.  19).  He  shall  not  save  of 
that  which  he  desirfid ;  or,  he  shall  not  save 
ftught  of  that  wherein  ie  delightitk  (fiee  the 


Revised  Version).  For  his  oppression^  for 
his  violenoe,  for  his  insatiable  greed,  he 
shall  be  punished  by  retaining  nothing  of 
all  those  delightful  things  which  he  had 
laid  up  for  himself  during  the  time  that  he 
was  powerful  and  prosperous. 

Ver.  21. — There  shall  none  of  his  meat  ba 
left;  rather,  there  was  nothing  left  that  h» 
devoured  not,  or  nothing  remained  ovetfrom 
his  eating  (Sphultens).  Scarcely  intended 
literally,  as  Canon  Oook  supposes.  Bather 
said  in  reference  to  the  wicked  man'i  per- 
sistent oppression  and  robbery  of  the  poor, 
the  needyj  and  the  powerless  (comp.  Ters, 
19,  20;  and  note  our  Lord's  words,  "Yo 
devour  widows'  houses,"  Matt,  xxjii.  14). 
Therefore  shall  no  man  look  for  his  goods. 
This  is  an  impossible  rendering.  Trans- 
late, with  Bosenmiiller,  Gauon  Oook^  Stanley 
Leathes,  and  our  Eevieera,  therefore  his  proi* 
perity  shall  not  endure.  In  other  words,  a 
Nemesis  shall  overtake  him.  For  his  op- 
pression and  cruelty  lie  shall  be  visited  by 
the  Divine  anger;  a  sudden  end  shall  bs 
made  of  his  prosperity,  and  he  shall  fall  into 
penury  and  misforiiune.  Covert  allusion  is, 
no  doubt,  intended  to  Job's  sudden  loss  of 
his  extraordinary  prosperity  by  the  series 
of  calamities  so  graphically  portrayed  in 
ch.  i.  13—19. 

Ver;  22. — In  the  fulness  of  his  snffloiency 
he  shall  be  in  straits.  Even  while  hia 
wealth  and  prosperity  remain^  he  shall  find 
himself  m  difBculties,  since  every  hand  of 
the  wioked  (or  rather,  the  hand  of  every  <mt 
thai  is  wretched)  shall  come  upon  him; 
t.e.  all  those  who  are  poor  and  miserable^ 
especially  such  as  he  has  made  poor  and 
miserable,  shall  turn  against  him,  and  rax 
him. 

Ver.  23.— When  he  is  about  to  fill  hU 
belly  (comp.  vers.  12 — 18);  «.«.  "when  ho 
is  on  the  point  of  making  some  fresh  attack 
upon  the  weak  and  defenceless."  God  shall 
oast  the  fnry  of  his  wrath  upon  him  (comp. 
Ps.  Ixxviii.  30,  31,  where  a  far  less  harmful 
lust  is  noted  as  having  brought  down  the 
Divine  vengeance).  And  shall  rain  it  upon 
him  while  he  is  eating;  or,  as  his  food 
(comp.  Ps.  xi.  6,  "  Upon  the  wioked  he  shall 
rain  snares,  fire  and  brimstone,  storm  and 
tempest :  this  shall  be  the  portion  of  their 
cup  '). 

Ver.  21.— He  shall  flee  from  the  iron 
weapon.  This  is  no  indication  of  the  late 
authorship  of  Job.  Iron  was  in  use  in 
Egypt  at  a  very  early  date,  A  thin  plate 
of  it  was  found  by  Colonel  Howard  Vyse 
embedded  in  the  masonrv  of  the  great 
pyramid;  and  iron  implements  and  orna- 
ments, iron  spear-heads,  ii'on  sickles,  iron 
gimlets,  iron  kfiys,  iron  bracelets,  iron  vrire, 
have  been  found  in  the  early  tombs  not  infre- 
queutiy  (see  the  author's  'Histoiy  of  An<dent 


342 


TflE  BOOK  Of  JOB. 


[ott.  St.  1—59. 


Egypt,'  Tol.  i  p.  505).  That  they  are  not 
more  common  is  accounted  for  by  the  rapid 
oxidization  of  iron  by  exposure  to  the  air,  and 
its  rapid  decay  in  the  nitrous  soil  of  Egypt. 
The  inhabitants  of  South-Western  Asia  were 
at  no  time  much  behind  the  Egyptians  in 
their  knowledge  of  the  useful  arts  ;  and  iron 
appears  as  a  well-known  metal  in  the  Jewish 
Scriptures  from  the  time  of  the  Exodus 
(see  Numb.  xxxT.  16 ;  Deut.  iii.  11 ;  iv.  20 ; 
Tiii.  9;  xxviiL  23;  Josh.  viii.  31).  It  is 
true  that  the  principal  weapons  of  war  con- 
tinued to  be  made  ordinarily  of  bronze,  both 
in  South-Western  Asia  and  in  Egypt,  till  a 
comparatively  late  period ;  bnt  Zophar  may 
mean  to  assign  to  the  slayer  of  the  wicked 
man  weapons  of  a  superior  character.  And 
the  bow  of  steel  shall  strike  him  through.  It 
is  uncertain  whether  steel  was  known  in  the 
ancient  world.  Bnt,  whether  or  no,  *'  steel " 
is  not  meant  here.  The  word  used  in  the 
origintil  is  nghushtah,  which  undoubtedly 
means  either  "copper"  or  ''bronze."  Aj 
copper  would  be  too  soft  a  material  for  a 
bow,  we  may  assume  bronze  to  be  intended. 
The  bronze  used  in  Egypt  was  extremely 
elastic,  and  there  would  haye  been  little 
difBoulty  in  fashioning  bows  of  it  (on  the 
existence  of  such  bows,  see  8  Sam.  xxtL  5; 
Ps.  xTiii.  34). 

Ver.  25. — ^It  IB  drawn,  and  cometh  out  of 
the  body ;  rather,  he  draweth  it  forth,  and 
it  eoTneth  tnU  of  his  body  (see  the  Bevised 
Yersion).  The  stricken  man  draws  the 
arrow  from  his  flesh,  the  natural  action  of 
every  one  so  wounded.  If  the  arrow  was 
simply  tipped  with  a  smooth  iron  point,  it 
wotud  be  easy  to  withdraw  it ;  bnt  a  barbed 
arrow  could  only  be  cut  out.  Yea,  the 
glittering  sword  cometh  out  of  his  gsdl; 
rather,  Ute  glittering  point,  llie  arrow  is 
supposed  to  have  pierced  the  gall-bladder, 
and  to  be  drawn  forth  from  it.  There  would 
be  Uttle  chance  of  recovery  in  such  a  case. 
Hence  terrors  are  upon  him, 

Ver.  26. — All  darkness  shall  be  hid  in  hia 
secret  places;  literally,  dU  darkneu  it  re- 
tervedfor  hit  trecuuret,  which  gome  under- 
stand of  hia  hidden  earthly  treasure*,  which 


no  one  shall  ever  find — some  of  the  retribution 
laid  np  for  him  by  Glod,  which  will  be  such 
darkness  as  Job  describes  in  ch,  x.  21,  22. 
A  fire  not  blown  shall  consume  him ;  t.e.  "  a 
fire  lighted  by  no  human  hands,"  probably 
lightning  or  brimstone  from  heaven  (ch. 
xviii.  15).  It  shall  go  iH  with  him  that  is 
left  in  his  tabernacle;  literally,  in  hit  tent, 
i.e.  in  his  dwelling.  His  wife,  his  children, 
if  he  has  any,  and  his  domestics,  shall  be 
involved  in  the  general  ruin. 

Ver.  27. — The  heaven  shall  reveal  hia 
iniquity;  and  the  earth  shall  rise  up  against 
hiTn  This  is  Zophar's  reply  to  the  appeal 
which  Job  made  (in  ch.  xvi.  18, 19)  to  heaven 
and  earth  to  bear  their  witness  in  his  favour. 
Heaven,  he  says,  instead  of  testifying  to  his 
innocence,  will  one  day,  when  the  books  are 
opened  (Bev.  xx.  12),  "  reveal  hia  iniquity ; " 
and  earth,  instead  of  echoing  his  cry,  will 
"rise  up"  in  indignation  "against  him." 
He  will  have  none  either  in  heaven  or  earth 
to  take  his  part,  or  give  any  testimony  in  his 
favour. 

Ver.  28, — ^The  increase  of  his  house  shall 
depart.  *■  The  increase  of  his  house"  may 
be  either  his  children  and  descendants ;  or 
his  substance— that  which  he  has  accumu- 
lated. In  tiie  former  case,  the  departure 
spoken  of  may  be  either  death  (see  ver,  26), 
or  carrying  into  captivity;  in  the  latter, 
general  rapine  and  destruction.  And  his 
goods  shall  flow  away  in  the  day  of  his  wrath. 
It  seems  to  be  necessary  to  supply  some  snch 
nominative  aa  "  his  goods,"  or  "  his  treasure," 
vilBX  (see  ver,  26),  These  ahaU  "flow 
away,"  i.e.  melt  and  disappear, "  in  the  day 
of  his  wrath,"  *.«.  the  day  when  wiath  comes 
upon  him. 

Ver.  29. — ^Ihis  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked 
man  from  Qod ;  i,e.  the  lot,  or  possession  of 
a  wiched  man — that  which  God  makes  over 
to  him  as  his  own  in  the  last  resort,  and  which 
is  all  that  he  has  to  look  for.  In  other 
words,  it  is  the  heritage  appointed  unto 
him  by  God  (comp.  ch,  xxvii.  13),  Aa  to 
some  God,  at  the  last,  will  assign  an  in- 
heritance of  good,  so  to  others  he  will  appoint 
an  inheritance  of  evil 


HOMILETIOa. 

Vers.  1 — 29. — Zophar  to  Jeh;  an  orthodox  champion  to  (Ko  rescue.  L  Ah  iupk* 
Tuous  OBATOB  PEBTUBBBD.  Threatened  with  Divine  vengeance,  Zophar  advances  to  the 
combat  in  hopes  of  utterly  confounding  his  antagonist.  His  appearance,  manner,  aad 
address  are  characterized  by  :  1,  Bold  d^ance.  "  Therefore,"  ».e.  in  view  of  what  you 
have  just  spoken ;  nay, "  nevertheless,"  ».e.  in  spite  of  all  yom'  grandiloquent  talk  abiaut 
a  sword.  Zophar  had  been  unmoved,  equally  by  Job's  pathetic  wail  depicting  his 
abandonment  by  God  and  man,  and  by  Job's  sublime  utterance  respecting  his  Divine- 
human  GoSl.  Job's  prayer  for  a  drop  of  human  pity  had  made  no  impression  on 
his  flinty  bosom.  Job's  suggestion  that  the  law  of  retribution  they  so  vehemently 
preached  might  one  day  receive  unexpected  illustration  in  themselves  (ch.  xiz.  29)  bftd 


0B.XX.1— 2fl.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOE  «4» 

touched  him  to  the  quick.  Accordingly,  to  hide  the  writhings  of  hi*  lacerated  spirit, 
he  assumes  an  aspect  of  courage  which  lie  does  not  possess.  2.  Extreme  perturbation. 
The  inward  agitation  of  his  spirit  he  betrays  in  his  language.  His  cogitations  were 
confused.  His  "  thoughts"  shot  up  in  all  directions  from  his  heart  like  the  manifold 
and  intricate  ramifications  of  a  tree  (cf.  ch.  iv.  16).  The  word  strikingly  represents 
the  mind's  activity  under  violent  excitement.  The  soul  of  Zophnr  was  perplexed. 
Job's  discourse  had  possessed  the  merit  of  enlisting  the  attention,  if  not  the  sympathy, 
of  his  hearer.  It  had  moved  the  feelings,  if  it  had  not  convinced  tlie  judgment.  And 
Zophar,  if  he  did  not  listen  with  a  loving  spuit,  at  least  did  not  hcarkuii  with  a  vacant 
mind.  Yet,  considering  the  mental  disturbance  which  Job's  speech  had  produced, 
Zophar  would  have  acted  prudently  had  he  maintained  a  discreet  silence.  Troubled 
thoughts  seldom  fashion  wise  or  weighty  words;  and,  though  vehement  emotion, 
especially  when  under  control,  is  of  immense  advantage  to  an  orator,  yet  an  intellect 
deianged  by  passion  is  divested  of  whatever  power  of  conviction  it  might  otherwise 
possess.  3.  Indecent  haste.  Whether  or  not  a  pause  usually  intervened  between  the 
different  speeches  in  this  controversy,  Zophar  would  appear  to  Lave  been  exceptionally 
impatient  to  smite  his  adversary,  and  to  have  rushed  into  the  arena  of  debate  like  a 
war-horse  neighing  for  the  battle.  If  the  rush  of  feeling  and  the  multitudinous  array 
of  ideas  which  Job's  words  provoked  did  not  "cause  him  to  answer"  (ver.  2),  they  at 
least  furnished  him  with  what  seemed  a  crushing  rejoinder  to  the  outspoken  insolence 
to  which  he  had  been  compelled  to  listen — a  rejoinder  made  and  ready,  so  that  he 
required  not  to  meditate, but  simply  to  "follow  the  suggestions  of  his  thoughts  as  fast 
as  they  arose  "  (Carey),  which  he  did.  It  had  been  better  infinitely  that  Zophar  had 
exercised  a  little  self-restraint — bettor  for  his  own  credit,  since  "  he  that  is  hasty  of  spirit 
exalteth  folly  "  (Prov.  xiv.  29),  since  even  good  men  are  prone  to  err  when  they  speak 
in  haste  (Ps.  cxvi.  11),  since  it  is  the  part  of  a  wise  man  to  "  refrain  his  lips  "  (Prov.  x. 
19),  and  the  commandment  of  God  to  "  be  not  rash  with  one's  mouth  "  (Bccles.  v.  2), 
but  to  be  "  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak  "  (Jas.  i.  19),  and  since  "  there  is  more  hope  of 
a  fool  than  of  him  that  is  hasty  in  his  words  "  (Prov,  xxix.  20) ;  and  it  would  have  been 
better  for  Job's  comfort,  since  hasty  words  are  seldom  kindly  words.  4.  Virtuous  resent- 
ment. Zophar,  "the  very  pink  and  pattern  of  orthodoxy  "  (Cox),  had  been  threatened  with 
tiie  sword.  He  had  perfectly  understood  what  Job  meant  by  brandishing  (metaphori- 
cally, of  course)  that  lethal  weapon  before  his  eyes.  It  was  designed  as  a  "check  of 
his  reproach  "  (ver.  3),  a  reprimand  to  overwhelm  him  with  disgrace,  which  he,  Zophar, 
now  hurled  back  upon  the  speaker  with  indignant  scorn.  The  wounding  of  Zophar's 
self-esteem  had  been  a  more  serious  offence  on  Job's  part  than  the  striking  at  his  faith. 
Zo|>har  "  one  of  those  hot-heads  who  pretend  to  fight  for  religion  that  is  imperilled, 
while  in  reality"  they  are  "only  zealous  for  their  own  wounded  vanity"  (Delitzsch). 
Instead  of  answering  Job's  arguments,  which  doubtless  he  could  not,  he  wipes  out,  or 
imagines  he  wipes  out,  the  gratuitous  dishonour  done  to  his  reputation  as  an  orthodox 
believer  by  vehement  reassertion  of  the  current  faith.  It  is  usual  for  those  who  cannot 
reply  to  an  opponent's  objections  to  indulge  in  personal  invectives  and  extravagant 
assertions.  5.  Wonderful  conceit.  Zophar  practically  informs  Job  that  if  he  (Zophar) 
does  not  confound  him  (Job)  and  his  heretical  doctrines,  it  is  not  for  want  of  ability  to 
do  so.  "  The  spirit  of  his  understanding,"  i.e.  the  inner  light  of  his  intellectual  discern- 
ment, the  spirit  emanating  from  the  keen  faculty  of  perception  which  he  knows  to  be 
within  him,  furnishes  him  with  all  the  information  requisite  for  such  a  purpose.  Now, 
doubtless,  "  there  is  a  spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth  him 
understanding "  (ch.  xxxii.  8);  but  "this  also  is  a  vanity"  which  maybe  witnessed 
beneath  the  sun,  that  they  who  have  the  least  of  such  understanding  not  unfrequently 
^suppose  themselves  to  have  the  most,  while  they  who  have  the  most  are  the  least 
inclined  to  praise  themselves  on  its  account, 

II.  The  obthodoi  faith  bbassbbtbd.  1.  With  sarcastic  surprise.  Zophar  pro- 
fesses astonishment  that  Job  required  to  be  instructed  on  so  obvious  a  point  as  the 
Divine  law  of  retribution,  considering  (1)  what  a  wise  man  Job  was :  "  Knowest  thou 
not  this  ?  "  thou  who  knowest  everything — an  obvious  allusion  to  ch.  xix.  25  ;  and  (2) 
what  an  old  law  it  was,  having  been  "of  old,  since  man  was  placed  upon  the  earth," 
and  therefore  surely  not  beyond  the  cognizance  of  a  man  whc  ~.ould  look  to  the  world's 
end.    Zophar's  ii-ony  was  clever,  but  not  kind.    2.  Witk  evident  rdiih.    With  ill- 


844  THE  BOOtt  OP  JOB.  [<»•  *^  1^^ 


boncealed  gusto  Zophar  repeats  the  poptUsr  dogmi  of  the  day,  that  "the  triumphing 
of  the  wicked  is  near  [literally,  'la  ftom  near'],  and  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite  but  for 
a  moment,"  adding  that  "  though  his  excellency,"  or  exaltation*  "  mount  up  into 
hi  aven,  yet  shall  he  perish  for  ever ; "  words  Suggestite  of  (1)  the  SuperSeial  character 
of  the  irreli^ous  man's  happiness,  which  is  commonly  derived  from  things  at  hand, 
the  creature-comforts  by  which  he  is  surrounded;  (2)  the  short-lived  duration  of  the 
wicked  man's  hope,  which  is  Only  "  from  near,"  i.ti  of  recent  origiu,  and  contihues  but 
a  little  srace,  being  doofned  to  perish  at  the  close  of  life's  brief  day  at  the  furthest  j 

(3)  tlie  seeming  elevation  of  the  hypocrite's  piety,  which  often  appears  to  wear  an 
extraordinary  aspect  of  sanctity,  setting  its  head  among  the  clouds,  while  common 
saints  have  much  ado  to  walk  upon  thu  earth  witliout  stumbling  (Isa.  Ixv.  5 ;  Matt. 
xxiii.  14 ;  Luke  iviii.  11) ;  (4)  the  absulute  certainty  of  the  ungodly  man's  overthrow, 
since  he  Shall  yet  be  cast  down  from  the  loftiest  position  of  security  to  the  lowest 
depths  of  degradation  (Isa.  xiv.  13 — 15 ;  Amos  ix.  2 ;  Obad.  4) ;  (5)  the  terrible  com- 
pleteness of  the  sinner's  destruction— ^he  shall  perish,  and  that  for  ever.  Had  Zophar 
been  a  man  of  tender  spirit,  instead  of  a  fierce  and  fiery  bigot,  he  would  not  have 
exulted  with  such  fiendish  delight  in  a  doom  so  appalling  even  iu  itnagination. 
3.  With  varied  illustration.  (1)  A  coarse  metaphor.  The  wicked  man  shali 
perish  "  like  his  own  dung,"  <.e.  with  abhorrence  and  contempt  (1  Kings  xiv.  10 ; 
2  Kings  ix.  37;  Ps.*  Ixxxiii.  10;  Jer.  viii.  2)^^  sentiment  Which,  although  not 
conveyed  in  polite  language,  is  sometimes  verified  in  this  world  in  the  case  of  notorious 
transgi  essors,  and  in  the  next  world  will  certainly  prove  true  of  all  the  ungodly. 
(2)  An  impressive  image.  The  prosperous  vricked  man  is  likened  to  an  unsubstantial 
tJrt'am,  which,  with  its  magical  phantasmagoria,  highly  excites  the  fancy  of  the  sleeper, 
but  which  vanishes,  when  night  is  passed,  into  the  limbo  of  oblivion.  What  Zophar 
here  afBrms  of  the  individual  is  true  of  men  getierally.  The  sinful  life  is  a  tremendous 
Unreality ;  it  may  often  assume  ittposing  ShapfeS,  fascinating  to  beholders ;  but,  after 
all,  is  only  a  pretentious  shadow,  which  will  disappear  When,  at  the  dawning  of  eternal 
day,  the  good  man  awakes.  The  piOus  life  alone  has  solidity  and  continuance.  (3)  A 
borrowed  text.  Zophar  plagiarizes  a  sentiment  (ver.  9)  from  a  previous  address  of 
Job  (ch.  vii.  8,  10).  When  preachers  appropriate  the  thoughts  of  othersj  they  should 
carefully  acknowledge  to  whom  they  are  indebted  fdr  their  wisdom  or  eloquence. 

(4)  A  solemn  reflection.  That  when  a  wicked  man  dies  he  commonly  bequeaths  a 
legacy  of  shame  to  his  descendants,  his  children  being  obliged  "  to  please  the  poor  " 
(ver.  10),  i.e.  to  court  the  favour  of  the  destitute  whom  his  rapacity  has  impoverished, 
and,  in  his  name,  so  that  it  might  actually  be  held  to  be  by  his  hands,  to  "  restore  the 
goods"  of  those  whom  his  boVetOUsness  and  oppression  have  reduced  to  beggary. 
Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  a  father's  ungO(Uiness  is  often  visited  upon  his  family 
(Ezek.  xviii.  2)^-an  argument  for  parental  piety;  that  the  whirligig  of  time  brings 
strange  revenges  upon  sinners,  punishitig  them  by  the  very  inflictions  they  entailed  on 
others,  e.g.  reducing  their  children  to  beggary  as  they  had  reduced  the  children  of 
others  (1  Sam.  xv.  33) — a  proof  of  God's  overruling  providence ;  that  ill-gotten 
gain  seldorn  proves  a  blessing  to  its  possessors,  mostly  bringing  misery  into  a  man's 
house  instead  of  felicity  (Gen.  xiii.  11) — a  caution  against  covetousness ;  and  that  God 
frequently  compels  the  restitution  of  wealth  unjustly  acquired,  sometimes  by  the  power 
of  grace  (Luke  xix.  8),  sometimes  by  the  anguish  of  remorse  (Matt,  xxvii.  3 — ^5),  some- 
times by  the  hand  of  death  (Ps.  xxxix.  6),  sometimes  l>y  the  superior  craft  of  others 
(Gen.  XXX.  37) — a  reason  for  honest  dealing.  (5)  A  cruel  innuendo.  That  Job  had 
been  wicked  in  his  youth,  that  Job's  bones  were  eVen  then  fuU  of  the  secret  lusts  of 
his  early  manhood,  that  at  least  his  physical  disease  was  the  direct  retribution  of  his 
previous  excesses,  and  that  theSe,  his  unrepCnted  crimes,  were  about  to  descend  with 
him  to  his  grave  (ver.  11).  Though  not  applicable  to  Job,  at  whom  all  commentatrrs 
are  agreed  it  is  pointed  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  26  ;  xvii.  15, 16),  ihe  language  conveys  a  solemc 
warning  as  to  youthful  indulgence  in  sin,  (o)  its  proneness  to  progress  and  develop 
into  a  licentious  and  profligate  old  age ;  (6)  its  tendency  to  avenge  itself  in  time  in  a 
diseased  body,  an  enfeebled  mind,  a  premature  death;  and  (c)  its  certainty,  unless 
repented  of,  abandoned,  and  forgiven,  to  lie  down  With  the  transgressor  in  his  grave, 
ay,  to  accompauy  him  beyond  the  graVe  into  the  unseen  world  of  eternity. 

m.  Ax  APPBOVBO  iKKiTBlNB  KNTOBOED.    \.  Th»  fictw  ^  (nit^fvi  tpitttTt.    (Yet* 


te.xx,1^26J  •THIS  feOOK  Of  JOS.  34S 


12-^18.)  (1)  The  wicked  maa's  estimate  of  sin.  He  regards  it  M  a  dainty  whlck 
communicates  to  his  soul  the  same  gratification  that  delicious  viands  do  to  the  palate. 
A  melancholy  proof  Of  the  degradation  into  Vrhich  man  has  «Utik,  that  that  Whifeh  God 
pronounces  an  ahosdnation  he  should  conteinplatA  with  approbation;. that  a  natur* 
which  God  formed  to  find  its  hapjaness  In  holy  fellowship  with  himself  should  eiperienca 
pleasure  in  disobedience.  Yet  to  the  carnal  mind  all  sin  possesses  more  or  less  a  relish, 
While  some  forms  of  indulgence,  Such  as  intemperanca  in  eating  and  drinking,  inordinate 
ambition  and  avarice,  devotion  to  the  frivolous,  and  often  wicked,  amusements  of 
fashionable  liffe,  are  attended  with  at  least  a  seeming  satisfaction.  (2)  The  wicked 
man's  delight  in  sin.  He  deals  With  it  as  an  epicure  does  with  a  dainty^— keeping 
hold  of  it  as  long  as  he  is  able,  seeking  to  extract  frdm  it  as  much  sweetness  as  possible, 
"  hiding  it  under  his  tongue,  sparing  it  and  forsaking  it  not,  but  keeping  it  still  in  the 
middle_6f  his  jtalate"  (vers.  IS,  13);  as  a  glutton  dbes  with  delicious  food,  eagerly 
devouriftf;  it,  gulping  it  down  with  aridity,  swallowing  it  with  greediness  (ver.  IS), 
gormandizing  and  stuffing  himself  with  the  tasty  viands  with  the  voracity  of  a  beast 
-^*i  description  applicable  to  the  drunkard  (Prov.  ixiii.  20,  21),  the  debauchee  (Prov. 
vii.  22),  the  ooVetoUS  man  (Isa.  v.  8;  Ivi.  ll).  (S)  The  wicked  man's  recompense 
from  sin.  He  shall  be  filled  with  misery  by  that  in  Which  he  formerly  delighted,  as  il 
the  pleasant  food  of  which  he  had  partaken  had  been  changed  in  his  stomach  into  the 
gall  of  asps  (ver.  14).  "  Though  Wicked  men  relish  sin  at  the  time,  roll  it  as  a  sweet 
plum  in  the  mouth,  and  feel  its  deliciousness,  the  issue  will  be  agony ;  it  Will  turn  into 
wormwood,  li  will  rankle  as  a  hellish  Virus  in  every  vein  of  the  soul "  (Thomas).  He 
shall  bfe  taken  With  a  loathing  for  that  which  he  formerly  desired.  Viz.  riches,  which 
shall  compel  him  to  disgorge  that  which  he  gulped  down  with  greediness  (ver.  15); 
nay,  what  he  toiled  so  hard  to  obtain  he  Shall  not  be  permitted  to  retain,  but  Shall  be 
obliged  to  restore  Without  having  experienced  from  it  any  real  enjoyment  (v6r.  18). 
Though  donveying  a  cruel  and  malicious  insinuation  that  Job's  wealth  had  been 
Unjustly  acquired — which  it  was  not — ^yet  the  sentiment  is  often  true,  especially  of 
riches,  that  that  which  men  pursue  with  avidity  and  accumulate  with  eager  anticipa- 
tions of  deUght,  seldom  realizes  the  expectations  it  excites,  often  fills  its  possessors 
with  disgust,  anl  mUst  event'^lly  be  given  up,  if  not  before,  at  least  at  death  (Eccles. 
▼i.  2 ;  en  '  Measure  for  Measure,'  act  iii.  sc.  1).  He  shall  be  slain  by  the  very  thing 
which  he  supposed  should  be  his  life,  the  sweet  morsel  of  sin  which  he  sucked  turning 
out  to  be  the  poison  of  asps,  and  as  the  deadly  bite  of  a  viper.  So  sin  ever  carries 
retribution  in  its  oVm  bosom.  The  fair  fruit  which  was  expected  to  make  Adam  and 
Eve  wise  as  gods  left  them  Overwhelmed  with  guilty  shame  (Gen.  iii.  7) ;  Samson's 
amorous  dalliance  With  Delilah  conducted  him  to  Gaza's  prison  (Judg.  xvi.  21);  David's 
sin  with  Bathsheba  proved  like  molten  fire  within  his  veins  (Ps.  xxxii.  4 ;  li.  8);  the 
Wine^up  of  the  drunkard  at  last  biteS  like  a  serpent  and  stings  like  an  adder  (Prov. 
xxiii.  92).  He  shall  be  excluded  from  any  real  happiness  on  earth.  "  He  shall  not 
see  the  rivers,  the  floods,  the  brooks  of  hotley  and  butter "  (ver.  17).  Much  more,  it 
may  be  added,  he  shall  not  attain  to  the  felicity  of  the  future  Paradise  of  God.  "  The 
rivOi-  Of  life,  the  wine  of  the  kingdom,  the  fruits  of  Paradise,  the  joys  at  God's  right 
hanil,  the  pleasures  for  evermore,"  are  "  all  forfeited  for  the  momentary  pleasures  of 
sill  "  (Robinson).  2.  The  picture  of  a  powerful  tyrant.  (Vers.  19^28.)  The  portrait 
iriieiided  for  Job.  (1)  The  crimes  laid  to  his  charge  are:  (a)  Merciless  oppression,  in 
the  threefold  form  of  grinding  down,  forsaking,  and  robbing  the  poor  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  6, 7) ; 
conduct  Common  in  the  era  of  the  Preacher  (Bccles.  iii.  16)  and  in  the  days  of  primi- 
tive Christianity  (JaS.  ii.  6),  though  by  no  means  infrequent  in  these  times ;  conduct 
ofi'ensive  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man  (Ecdes.  vi,  8 ;  vii.  7),  and  wholly  unbecoming 
in  a  good  (ISa.  x^xiiL  15),  but  specially  characteristic  of  a  bad  (Ps.  Iv,  3),  man ; 
cotidUct  attaining  its  highest  degree  of  wickedness  when  the  poor  oppress  the  poor 
(Prov.  xxviii.  3),  and  Certain  to  be  fiercely  avenged  (Ps.  xxxv.  10 ;  Prov.  xxii.  16 ; 
Isa.  iii.  16;  Jet-.  xxiL  l6)  by  him  who  espoUses  the  cause  of  the  oppressed,  (jb) 
Insatiable  greed,  being  represented  as  one  who  felt  no  quietness  in  his  belly,  i.e.  whose 
cravings  knew  Uo  bounds  (ter.  20),  and  from  whose  covetousness  nothing  escaped  (ver. 
21).^a  Bin  against  which  men  are  warned  in  the  Decalogue  (Eiod.  xi.  17),  and  saints 
In  the  gospw  (Luke  xli.  15),  and  Upon  which  woes  are  ;«onounced  by  the  prophets 
(Isa.  T.  8 ;  Jer.  li.  13 ;  MlCah  iL  2 ;  Hab.  ii.  6),  and  judgments  bjr  the  apostles  (Bom 


m  MB  BOOK  OF  JOa.  t<M-**.l— 2ft. 


L  29;  i  Cor.  T.  11;  Eph.  v.  3,  6;  Heb.  xiiL  5;  Jas.  t.  1—3;  2  Pet.  ii.  3).  (2) 
The  doom  predicted  as  his  portion  is  exhibited  as :  (o)  Deceiving  prosperity.  He  shall 
not  be  able  to  escape  with  that  to  which  his  soul  clings  as  its  dearest  treasure  (ver.  20). 
Calamity  shall  overtake  his  accumulated  spoil  in  spite  of  his  most  watchful  care.  His 
prosperity  shall  not  continue  (ver.  21),  but  "  in  the  fulness  of  his  sufBciency,"  when 
rejoicing  in  abundance,  "  he  shall  be  in  straits  "  (ver.  22),  either  dreading  impending 
destitution,  or  being  deprived  of  his  property,  as  Job  was,  by  the  stroke  of  swift 
calamity.  As  no  man's  riches  can  save  him  from  peril  (Ps.  xlii.  7),  so  neither  can  any 
man  save  his  riches  when  God  commands  them  to  take  wings  and  flee  away  (Pror. 
xxiii.  5).  God  can  take  a  sinner  from  his  wealth  (Luke  xii.  20)  as  easily  as  a  sinner's 
wealth  from  him  (Gen.  xix.  29),  or,  permitting  the  wealth  to  remain,  he  can  cause  its 

fiossessor  to  feel  in  straits.  (6)  Thickening  adversity.  "  Every  hand  of  the  wicked 
literally, '  every  hand  of  the  wretched,'  i.e.  every  stroke  that  falls  upon  the  wretched] 
shall  come  upon  him."  He  shall  be  assailed  by  every  form  of  trouble ;  as  e.g.  Divine 
wrath  in  the  midst  of  his  enjoyment  (ver.  23) — God,  in  order  to  fill  his  belly,  raining 
down  upon  him  the  fiery  glow  of  his  indignation  as  he  did  upon  the  cities  of  the  plain 
(Gen.  xix.  24),  upon  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  (Numb.  xi.  33 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  30, 
31),  and,  according  to  Zophar,  upon  Job  (ch.  i.  16).  Sudden  destruction  in  the  midst 
of  his  oppressions  (vers.  24,  25).  Fleeing  from  an  adversary,  he  is  pierced  in  the  back 
by  an  arrow  from  a  bow  of  steel.  Drawing  the  gleaming  weapon  from  his  body,  the 
metal  head  of  the  arrow  from  his  gall,  terrors  of  approachiog  death  or  of  a  fearful 
conscience  encompass  him.  So  God  sometimes  causes  the  siimer  to  be  struck  down  in 
the  very  act  of  his  wickedness  (Numb.  xvi.  31 ;  2  Sam.  viii.  5 ;  2  Kings  L  9,  10 ; 
Acts  V.  5),  and  so  are  bold  transgressors  commonly  transformed  into  cowards  when 
death  comes  and  conscience  wakes.  Complete  anaihilation  of  himself  and  his  treasures 
(ver.  26).  Though  concealed  in  the  earth,  these  treasures  will  yet  be  laid  bare  by  fire 
from  heaven,  which  shall  also  burn  up  him  and  them  (as  the  fire  of  God  had  already, 
literally,  burnt  up  Job's  sheep  and  oxen,  and  was  on  the  eve,  metaphorically,  of 
devouring  himself),  consigning  both  to  a  gloom  darker  than  that  which  enshroud^  the 
freebooter's  spoil — a  doom  reserved  for  the  finally  impenitent.  Certain  exposure  of  his 
wicked  character  and  life  (ver.  27),  not  only  heaven  renouncing  and  abhorring  the 
transgressor,  but  the  earth  also  conspiring  to  ensure  his  detection.  As  certainly  as 
God  and  the  universe  are  on  the  side  of  saints  (Kom.  viii.  28),  so  certainly  are  they 
arrayed  against  the  sinner.  It  was,  perhaps,  only  poetry  when  Deborah  and  Barak 
sang  that  the  heavenly  powers  fought  for  Israel,  and  the  stars  in  their  courses  contended 
against  Sisera  (Judg.  v.  20) ;  it  was  superstition  which  made  the  Melitans  imagine 
Paul  to  be  a  wicked  wretch  whom  Divine  vengeance  suffered  not  to  live  (Acts  xxviii. 
4) ;  it  is  plain  prose  and  solemn  truth  when  God  says  that  heaven  and  earth  are  in 
league  against  the  sinner.  Final  extinction  for  his  house  and  its  belongings  in  the 
day  of  wrath  (ver.  28),  as  appeared  to  be  the  case  with  Job,  though  it  was  not,  and  as 
will  eventually  be  the  case  with  the  wicked,  though  they  think  not. 

IV.  A  PowBEFtTL  8EEM0N  APPLIED.  1.  The  dements  of  truth  in  this  conclusion. 
These  are :  (1)  That  the  wicked  man  has  a  portion  or  heritage,  which  he  shall  assuredly 
receive  as  the  righteous  reward  of  his  ungodly  life.  EquSly  with  the  saint  will  the 
sinner  be  recompensed  according  to  his  works.  (2)  That  this  portion  or  heritage  is 
decreed  for  the  wicked  man  by  God.  As  God  appoints  to  ail  men  their  earthly  lots, 
so  does  he  determine  the  lots  of  all  in  the  life  beyond.  (3)  That  this  portion  or  heritage 
shall  be  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  hand  of  God,  so  that  his  evading  or  eluding  it  will 
be  wholly  impossible.  2.  The  ingredients  of  error  in  this  conclusion.  (1)  The  wicked 
man's  portion  is  not  always  bestowed  upon  him  on  earth :  the  first  mistake  of  Zophar. 
(2)  Even  if  bestowed  on  earth,  it  is  not  universally  a  heritage  like  that  described 
above :  Zophar's  second  blunder.  (3)  If,  again,  it  was  exactly  as  portrayed,  it  did  not 
apply  to  Job :  the  third  mistake  of  Zophar,  and  the  worst  of  the  three. 

Learn :  1.  That  controversy,  especially  in  religion  (and  politics),  is  seldom  profitable, 
and  almost  always  irritating.  2.  That  controversialists  are  commonly  characterized 
more  by  exaggerated  language  than  by  convincing  argumentation.  3.  That  no  cause 
is  advanced  by  either  vulgarity  of  speech  or  personality  of  allusion.  4.  That  it  is  not 
uncommon  for  a  careless  reasoner  to  mistake  a  half-truth  for  a  whole,  an  exceptional 
truth  for  •  universal,  on  occasional  truth  for  a  perpetual     6.  That  it  is  impossible  for 


m.  tx.  l-2§.3  Tflfi  BOOR  OP  JOBw  U1 

a  wicked  man  to  wcape  retribution,  if  not  in  this  world,  at  least  in  the  next.  6.  That 
unpardoned  sins  are  the  worst  grave  that  any  man  can  lay  his  bones  in.  7.  That 
though  sin  may  be  attended  with  pleasure,  it  can  never  result  in  happiness.  8. 
That  what  prevents  ultimate  success  to  a  sinner  is  the  fact  that  God  is  against  him. 
9.  That  God  knows  when  and  how  to  strike  bis  avenging  blows  so  as  to  cause  them 
to  fall  hardest  on  the  object  of  his  displeasure.  10.  That  the  greatest  calamity  which 
can  overtake  a  human  soul  is  the  wrath  of  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 29. — Godless  prosperity  short-lived.  Here  we  have  a  new  variation  jn  the 
favourite  theme  of  the  friends — the  inconstancy  of  godless  prosperiiy.  "  Tlie  jubila- 
tion of  the  wicked  is  but  of  short  duration,  and  the  juy  of  the  profligate  but  a  moment." 
The  wicked  man  is  specially  here  described  as  a  rich  man,  who  greedily  snatches  at 
others'  property,  and  whose  ill-gotten  gains  become  a  deadly  consuming  fire  to  him 
and  all  his.  It  is  related  to  Eliphaz's  speech  (ch.  xv.)  as  the  superlative  to  the 
positive,  and  to  Bildad's  (ch.  xviii.)  as  the  superlative  to  the  comparative.  Similar 
remarks  to  those,  then,  must  here  apply ;  and  the  description  is  in  itself  true,  apt, 
and  striking,  but  its  evident  animus  against  Job  is  fiercely  unjust. 

I.  Censure  of  Job:  intboduotion  op  the  themb.  (Vers.  1 — 6.)  "Therefore 
my  thoughts  reply  to  me,  and  hence  comes  the  storm  of  my  bosom.  Must  I  hear  correc- 
tion that  insults  me  ?  But  my  spirit  out  of  my  understanding  gives  me  an  answer  " — 
namely,  of  warning  and  chastisement  to  Job  as  a  godless  man  (vers.  1 — 3).  Zophar 
then  gives  these  suggestions  of  his  spirit  in  the  form  of  a  question  directed  to  Job : 
"Kuowest  thou  this  from  eternity,  since  man  was  placed  on  the  earth,  that  the 
triumph  of  the  wicked  endures  but  a  short  time,  and  the  joy  of  the  reprobate  but 
a  moment?"  He  is  astonished  that  Job,  as  appears  from  his  speeches,  is  unacquainted 
with  this  well-worn  and  familiar  truth  of  experience  (vers.  4,  5). 

II.  Development  of  the  theme.  (Vers.  6 — 29.)  1.  "  Though  his  glory  mounts  to 
heaven,  and  his  head  reaches  to  the  clouds"  (comp.  Isa.  xiv.  13,  14: ;  Obad.  4), "  like  his 
dung  he  perishes  for  ever ;  they  that  saw  him  say,  Where  is  he  ?  "  The  coarsest  and 
most  contemptuous  comparison  seems  to  be  purposely  selected  (ver.  7).  The  next  is  that 
of  the  fugitive  dream  (ver.  8;  comp.  Isa.  xxix.  7  j  Ps.  Ixxiii.  20;  xc.  5).  Dreams  and 
visions  of  the  night  I  emptiest  things  1  appearing  to  be  something  while  they  last,  but 
leaving  no  trace  behind  when  the  sleeper  wakes.  The  eye  that  has  seen  him  shall  see 
him  no  more ;  and  the  place  where  he  seemed  to  move,  a  solid  person  of  flesh  and 
blood,  beholds  that  figure  no  longer  (ver.  9).  The  curse  descends  to  his  children ;  they 
are  reduced  to  court  the  favour  of  humble  folk,  and  they  have  to  give  up  to  their  father's 
creditors  his  ill-gotten  wealth  (ver.  10).  How  often,  though  not  without  exception,  do 
we  see  this  to  be  the  rule  of  life — the  beggary  or  the  wealth  of  children  is  rooted  in  the 
wickedness  or  goodness  of  the  parents  (Bxod.  xx.  5 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  25)  1  Let  him  who 
would  see  his  children  happy  beware  of  sin.  •'  His  bones  were  full  of  youthful  strength, 
and  with  him  it  lies  in  the  bed  of  dust "  (ver.  11).  2.  The  inconstant  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  under  the  figure  of  sweet  food,  but  deadly  poison.  (Vers.  12— 16.)  "  Though 
evil  tastes  sweet  in  his  mouth,  he  hides  it  under  his  tongue,"  rolling  it  as  a  delicious 
morsel,  he  sparingly  fosters  it,  and  lets  it  not  go,  and  keeps  it  back  on  his  palate  "  (in 
five  synonymous  phrases  the  idea  of  the  dwelling  and  gloating  over  the  sweet  morsel 
of  sin  is  set  forth,  vers.  12, 13) ;  "  yet  his  food  is  changed  in  his  bowels— vipers'  poison  is 
in  his  interior  "  (ver.  14).  -  The  riches  he  has  swallowed  "  God  expels  from  his  paunch." 
The  drastic  language  betrays  the  energy  and  violence  of  Zophar's  feelings  (ver.  15).  Then, 
recurring  to  the  figure  of  ver.  14,  « the  tongue  of  adders  slays  him  "  (Ps.  cxl.  3),  the 
deadly  bite  replacing  in  the  description  the  deadly  draught  (ver.  16;  Prov.  xxiii.  32).  So 
God  turns  men's  "  pleasant  vices  "  into  whips  and  scourges  for  their  backs  ('  King  Lear '). 
The  sweet  Dead  Sea  fruits  that  tempt  the  taste  turn  to  ashes  on  the  lips.  Sinful  pleasure 
turns  to  pain.  It  begins  with  sweetness,  like  sugar,  but  afterwards  bites  like  a  serpent 
(Prov.  XX.  17 ;  Siracb  xxi.  2,  et  seq.).  3.  (Vers.  17-22.)  "  He  may  not  see  his  pleasure 
in  brooks,  streams,  floods  of  honey  and  cream  "  (ver.  17).  These  are  well-known  biblical 
figures  for  luxury  and  fulness  of  prosperity  (Exod.  iii.  8, 17>     And  where  the  classic 


THE  BOOS  OF  JOB.  ton-  »^  1—29 


tinjust  means  of  exobangfe,  to  obtain  temporal  gobds  and  enjoytlient,  he  does  not  rejoice 
in  them,  he  must  go  without  the  mirth  that  he  promised  hitiiBelf  from  them  (ver.  18). 
"  For  he  crushed,  and  caused  the  lowly  tt>  lid  doiVb."  With  what  tender  regard  does 
biblical  morality  and  law  treat  the  poor  and  defenceless  I  what  indignation  does  it 
testify  against  the  oppressor!  "  He  snatched  houses  for  himself,  and  built  them  not." 
The  meaning  peihapS  is,  be  built  Ih^m  not  anew,  did  nbt  BUticeed  in  rebuilding  them 
according  to  his  taste,  because  he  could  not  possess  them  for  a  permanence  (ver.  19). 
"  For  he  knew  no  rest  in  his  belly,"  "  The  *ay  of  peace "  (Isa.  lix.  8)  is  hot  for 
restless  greed  and  selfish  hardness  to  others'  sufferings  to  tread.  "  Therefore  he  will 
not  escape  with  that  which  is  dearest  to  him  "  (ver.  20).  "Nothing  es&aped  his  greed, 
therefore  bis  possessions  shall  not  continue  "  (ver.  21).  "  In  the  fulness  of  his  super- 
fluity he  comes  into  straits ;  every  hand  of  the  wretched  comes  upon  him  "  (ver.  22). 
The  clamours  of  those  whom  he  has  wronged,  the  cries  of  the  widows,  the  orphans,  the 
poor,  inake  a  din  in  the  ears  of  the  bad  man ;  their  hands  stretch  forth  to  seize  the 
goods  of  Which  he  has  defrauded  them.  It  is  a  striking  picture  Of  retribution.  Perhaps 
the  most  salient  point  in  this  description  is  that  of  the  insatiableness  of  greed.  "  The 
dire  dirbpsy  indreases  by  self-indulgence,  nor  expels  the  thirst,  unless  the  cause  of 
disease  flees  from  the  veins,  and  the  watery  languor  from  the  pale  body,"  says  Horace, 
in  a  noble  ode  on  the  use  and  abuse  of  riches.  "  You  shall  more  widely  rule,"  he  says, 
"  by  laming  the  greedy  spirit,  than  could  you  join  Libya  to  far-off  Gades"  ('  Od.,'  iL  2). 
Biches  cannot  satisfy  the  soul,  nor  Any  earthly  good^  but  only  God  (Eccles.  L  8).  The 
Covetous  temper  finds  as  much  want  in  what  it  has  as  in  what  it  has  not.  No  posses- 
sionSf  however  great,  can  satisfy  us,  until  we  have  found  the  treasury  of  all  good  things 
in  God,  We  are  still  little  Alexanders,  not  content  to  irule  over  one  world — gnefred  to 
hear  there  are  no  more  (Brenz),  4.  End  of  the  Wicked  man  in  accordance  with  the  Divint 
jut^ment.  (Vers.  23—^28.)  "That  it  nlay  serve  for  the  filling  of  his  belly,  he  causes 
his  fiery  wrath  to  fall  upon  him "  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  16).  (On  the  figure  of  filling  the 
belly,  cf.  ver, 20 ;  Luke  xv.  16.)  "And  causes  to  rain  upon  him  with  his  food  j "  that  is, 
his  food,  the  wtiges  of  his  sin,  is  the  just  punishment  from  God  (ver.  23).  The  description 
goes  on  to  point  out  the  means  by  which  the  wrathful  judgment  of  Heaven  is  executed 
(ver.  24,  sqq.).  (1)  Warlike  examples :  pursuit  and  wounds.  "  He  flees  from  the  iron 
harness,  the  brazea  bow  pierces  him "  (Judg.  v.  26).  He  draws  the  arrow  from  his 
body  (Judg.  iii,  22),  and  the  shining  steel  comes  out  of  his  gall ;  the  terrors  of  death 
come  upon  him  (ver.  25).  Then  (2)  Some  further  descriptions  of  the  Divine  judgment, 
especially  with  reference  to  the  property  of  the  wicked.  "  All  darkness  is  reserved  for 
bis  treasures."  His  hoards  are  exposed  to  every  casualty.  He  finds  that  he  has  been 
"  treasuring  up  for  himself-^wrath  1 "  (Bom.  ii.  6).  A  fire  that  no  human  hands  have 
kindled  devours  him,  destroying  the  relics  of  former  jtidgments  (ver.  26).  "The 
heavens  disclose  his  giiilt,  and  earth  rises  against  him  "  (ver.  27).  A  striking  contrast  , 
to  ch.  xvi;  18,  19)  where  Job  had  appealed  to  heaven  and  earth  as  witnesses  of  his 
innocence.  Thus  deniid  and  cast  from  both,  the  only  place  for  the  wicked  is  in  Sheol, 
or  Hades.  The  produce  of  his  house  must  pass  awiy,  like  wrecks  floating  down  a 
flood,  in  the  day  of  God's  ^rath  (ver.  28). 

Conclusion.  "  Such  is  the  lot  of  the  wicked  man  from  God,  and  the  heritage  allotted 
to  him  by  God  "  (ven  29).  The  witness  of  nature  against  the  sinner — this  is  the  most 
powerful  concluding  thought  in  this  awe-striking  address.  Nature  seems  to  be  uncon- 
Bcitius  of  men's  guilt,  as  of  theif  virtuesi  The  leaves  of  the  forest  do  not  shudder,  the 
bright  blue  sky  is  not  overcast,  the  earth  does  not  quake  when  deeds  of  crime  are  done. 
Yet  that  majestic  order  represented  by  heaven  and  earth— the  order  which  finds  its 
reflection  in  the  conscience  of  man — cannot  be  violated  with  impunity.  It  will  avenge 
iti^elf  in  the  end.  And  we  see  from  time  to  time  striking  types  and  prophecfes  of  this 
in  the  way  by  which  crime  is  detected  from  the  traces  left  on  the  faCe  of  nature,  or  by 
the  clues  fiflbrded  by  natural  Uw,  The  light  of  day  reveals  the  deed  of  the  night-time, 
and  the  earth  gives  up  her  dead.  If  all  sins  thus  leave  some  record,  what  rest  or  peace 
oould  there  be  for  the  guilty  conscience  except  in  the  gosj^l^  which  aaaurea  us  that  is 


en.  rs.  1^21>.]  THE  BQOK  QP  JOa  349 

ChriBt  the  sins  of  the  penitent  and  beli^TiQg  ve  "  ^verecl,"  »nd  ^t  Ua  blood  oIe«nietl> 
frona  all  sin  ? — J. 

Vers.  6 — 20. — The  temporary  triumph  i^the  lafckfd.  Zpplia;:  noy^  conjes  fortji  w>t!» 
wise  words ;  but  they  are  as  arrows,  slender,  strong,  and  sharp,  whMh,  though  drawn 
upon  a  strong  bow,  yet  miss  their  m^rk.  Qnly  top  true  is  his  ^gsertipn  of  the  brievity 
of  the  triumph  of  the  evU-doer,  the  womentury  joy  cf  thfl  hypopr^te;  only  too 
accurate  hjs  forcible  setting  forth  of  the  state  and  jjortioq  of  the  ungodly.  Job  h^s 
to  hear  agf^in  cruel  words.  His  patierit  faith  has  yet  to  be  further  tcssted;  hJs  fin^l 
triumph  is  postponed, 

I,  His  honoub  is  tempobabt.  If  he  raise  I^mself  so  that ''  his  head  reach  uiito  the 
clouds,  yet  he  shall  perish  for  ever ; "  "  he  shall  Sy  away  3/i  a  dream,"  so  short  is  hlg 
grasp  of  any  position  of  honour. 

II.  His  family  pbospbbitt  is  but  bbibf.  The  goods  he  has  gained  by  hig  npgpd- 
liness  "his  hands  shall  restore,"  and  his  children  crouch  to  appease  the  poor.  1)1- 
gotten  gain  is  held  by  uncertain  hands.  For  a  time  the  ungodly  ^eems  to  prosper, 
but  it  is  that  he  may  be  consumed  out  of  his  place. 

IIL  His  ufe  p  wasted  a^b  p^sseth  away.  BJven  hi^  youthful  vigovfi  fajls  hip. 
It  shall  speedily  "  lie  down  with  him  in  the  dttst."  The,  praptic^  of  wicKedpess  bi'iogs 
punishment  on  him  who  pffends,  Th^  teudency  pf  wrong-doing  is  ever  to  prey  upon 
the  strength  of  the  life. 

rv.  The  pleasubbs  of  sni  to  him  abe  vqT  fob  a  sbaso».  Though  he  "hide" 
wickedness  "  under  his  tongue,"  though  it  be  "  sweet  in  hJB  WQuth,"  yet  shall  it  ba 
turned  to  "  the  gall  of  asps  within  him." 

■  v.  The  possession  of  biohbs  is  pbemittkp  onit  fob  A  rbief  pbbiod.  Thougli 
he  swallow  them  down,  "  he  shall  vomit  them  up  again,"  loathing  has  permanence 
with  him.  Changes  come  over  him  from  sources  he  c;i,ifflpt  trace  ^^d  certainly  could 
not  foresee.  His  toil  is  fruitless.  "  That  which  he  laboured  for  shall  he  restore  ,  .  , 
he  shall  not  rejoice  therein."  Wickedness  eats  into  the  streng^ih  arid  joy  of  life.  It 
exposes  life  to  innumerable  evils  and  robs  it  of  its  chief  good,  The  wicked  man  has 
no  pledge  of  permanent  blessing.  "He  shall  not  save  of  that  which  he  desired." 
Truly  "  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  Bhort."-^R.  G. 

Vers.  21 — 26. — Disappointment  to  the  ymJced.  Even  when  all  promises  well  to  the 
wicked,  evil  shall  lurk  under  poyer  of  the  seeming  prosperity,  When  he  is  about 
to  satisfy  himself,  suddenly  he  shall  be  in  stiaits.  His  hppes  shall  be  blasted,  his 
strong  confidence  disappointed.  With  a  singular  cluster  pf  stropg  figures  Zo^ar  depicts 
the  unsatisfying  position  of  the  wicked  man.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  enemies.  Every 
source  of  help  and  joy  seems  to  fail  him, 

I.  He  finds  no  help  in  man.  "  Every  hand  of  the  wip^ed  shall  come  upon  Wm.'' 
Even  they  of  his  own  way  of  thinking  disappoint  him,  They  turn  upon  him.  An 
ungodly  man  can  have  no  true  confidence  in  his  ungodly  associates.  Evil  in  them 
enables  them  to  detect  evil  in  him,  The  spirit  which  they  Unow  within  themselves  to  be 
wrong  and  untrustworthy,  unkind  and  evil-plotting,  they  know  to  be  the  samg  in  him. 

II.  He  finds  no  help  in  God,  "  When  he  is  about  to  fill  his  belly,  Gpd  shall 
cast  the  fury  of  his  wrath  upon  him."  The  wicked,  so  long  as  he  continue  wicked, 
has  nothing  to  hope  for  from  God.  It  was  the  joyful  boast  of  one  assailed  on  every 
hand,  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  he  against  us  ?  "  So  if  God  be  ''  against "  »  man,  of 
what  avail  is  it  that  any  are  ••  for  "  him  ?  Gpd  is  the  best  of  friends,  the  most  mighty 
of  enemies.  Not  that  in  the  Divine  heart  are  any  sentiments  of  enmity  ftgajngt  the 
children  of  men,  but  men  turn  blessings  into  curses  by  the  way  they  use  them.  So 
men  make  an  enemy  of  their  best  Friend. 

III.  He  finds  no  help  in  oiboitmstanoes.  The  iron  weapon  which  he  naight  have 
grasped  he  shall  flee  from ;  and  the  bow  of  steel  which  he  might  ha?e  drawn  shidl 
strike  him  through,  "Terrors"  seize  him,  "darkness"  hides  in  his  secret  places,  "• 
fiw  not  blown"  consumes  him.  He  is  encompassed  by  foes.  All  things  are  aguust 
him,  Thpugh  he  prosper,  yet  "in  the  fulness  of  his  sufficiency  he  shall  be  in  striutB," 
"  This  is  the  portion  of  the  wielded  m»n  from  God|  <uid  the  heritage  appointed  ui^to  him 


360  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xx.  1—29 


Ver.  27. — Thsfinci  testimony  agaitut  ungodlinets.  The  wickad  may  hide  himself 
•*  in  his  secret  places,"  but  his  iniquity  will  be  revealed.  He  cannot  escape.  For 
B  time  he  may  prosper  and  may  practise  deceit ;  but  ultimately  his  doings  shall  be 
made  known  and  meet  with  their  just  retribution.  The  natural  consequence  of  wrong- 
doing is  to  go  on  from  bad  to  worse  until  at  length  it  bursts  all  restraint.  Even  the 
dull  eye  of  the  neighbour  will  detect  the  prevailing  wrong,  but  the  keen  eye  of  • 
Divine  justice  cannot  be  escaped.  Evil  outwits  itself.  Its  fruit  appears  in  due  time. 
Faultiness  of  life  and  conduct  make  themselves  apparent.  But  should  it  be  possible 
wholly  to  hide  iniquity  through  life,  and  to  die  with  the  dreadful  secret  locked  in  the 
breast  of  the  wrong-doer,  yet  there  still  remains  a  revelation  which  cannot  be  evaded. 
*'  The  heaven  shall  reveal  his  iniquity ;  and  the  earth  ihall  rise  up  against  him."  This 
final  testimony  against  ungodliness  iar— 

I.  Inevitable. 

U.  Imfabtial. 

ni.  Desebvbd. 

IV.  Sevbeb.— E.  a. 

Ver.  5. — The  short  triumphing  of  the  loieked.  Zophar*!  auperficial  view  has  truth  In 
it  as  far  as  it  goes.  He  is  a  man  of  the  world,  and  he  has  kept  his  eyes  open.  What 
he  has  seen  has  been  no  illusion.  It  is  not  enough  to  explain  the  deeper  mysteries  of 
Job's  experience.    Yet  it  has  an  obvious  truth  in  it. 

I.  There  is  a  triumphino  of  the  wicked.  1.  This  is  seen  in  experience.  Even 
Zopbar,  who  finds  it  not  exactly  in  accordance  with  his  ideas  of  providence,  stUl  cannot 
but  admit  that  it  exists.  A  swindler  fattens  on  the  spoils  of  the  robbery  of  widows 
and  orphans.  A  Napoleon  dominates  Europe.  2.  It  is  important  to  recognize  the/act. 
We  must  make  our  theories  accord  with  our  experience  and  observation  of  the  world. 
It  is  useless  to  comfort  ourselves  in  the  seclusion  of  our  private  meditation  with  an 
easy  optimism,  if  this  will  not  fit  in  with  the  events  of  everyday  life.  If  we  are  not 
prepared  to  expect  the  triumph  of  the  wicked,  the  sight  of  it  will  strike  us  with  a  shock 
of  dismay.  3.  TTie  triumphing  of  the  mcked  does  present  a  difficulty.  It  is  contrary 
to  our  notion  of  justice.  No  doubt  the  narrow,  conventional  notion  of  the  three  friends 
was  founded  on  a  genuine  sense  of  right  and  fitness.  If  there  is  to  be  no  future  judg- 
ment, and  if  this  temporal  state  is  typical  of  the  whole  course  of  life,  here  is  an 
instance  of  gross  injustice.    We  must  therefore  face  it,  and  inquire  what  it  means. 

II.  This  tbiumpe  is  short.  Zophar's  explanation  is  that  the  triumph  will  soon 
pass  away,  and  will  give  place  to  overthrow  and  ruin.  1.  This  is  seen  on  earth.  As  a 
rule,  the  swindler  does  not  die  rich.  He  usually  outlives  his  gains.  Great  wickedness 
generally  disappoints  its  owner.  Napoleon  finishing  his  career  as  an  exile  at  St.  Helena 
is  typical  of  the  most  frequent  end  of  a  very  bad  course.  But  this  is  by  no  means  a 
universal  principle.  The  whole  of  a  bad  man's  life  may  be  externally  prosperous,  right 
on  to  death.  2.  l^iis  wUl  he  seen  after  death.  We  must  extend  our  contemplatiun 
of  the  course  of  the  wicked  man.  He  dies,  leaving  wealth,  pleasure,  power,  triumph, 
behind  him.  None  of  these  can  accompany  him  through  the  dark  doors  of  death.  He 
has  laid  up  no  treasures  in  the  unseen  world.  There  he  is  certainly  beggared,  and  he 
has  good  groxmd  for  expecting  the  infliction  of  well-merited  punishment.  His  short 
earthly  life,  but  a  moment  when  compared  to  eternity,  is  over,  and  with  it  all  his 
triumphing  has  ceased. 

III.  The  short  tbhtmph  of  the  wicked  is  fallaoious.  1.  It  is  fallacious  because 
its  brevity  is  hidden.  The  foolish  man  who  glories  in  it  does  not  see  how  swiftly  it  is 
slipping  away  from  him.  A  triumph  which  must  soon  give  place  to  shame  is  not  worth 
much  to  its  owner.  2.  It  is  fallacious  because  it  gives  no  solid  satisfaction.  The  wicked 
glee  of  triumphing  in  sin  is  quite  superficial.  Often  its  very  excitement  is  only  a 
result  of  restless  discordant  passions.  It  wears  a  bold  front,  but  it  covers  a  weary 
spirit.  If  there  is  a  spark  of  conscience  left  there  must  be  a  haunting  fear — like  the 
mummy  at  the  Egyptian  feast — that  spoils  the  pleasure. 

IV.  The  only  enuubino  triumph  is  that  which  follows  a  tbuly  Chbibtian  life. 
1.  This  is  solid.  It  begins  with  victory  over  sin  and  self,  our  greatest  enemies.  2.  li 
it  assured.  It  is  brought  about  by  the  work  of  Christ ;  it  is  just  sharing  in  his  victory ; 
and  Christ  most  triumph.     8.  /K  ii  litmail.    On  wtrth  Vasn  ttAj  be  shame  tad 


OB.  XX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  S5l 


humiliation,  but  in  heaven  Ohriatiana  are  called  to  the  joy  of  victory— to  be  "  more  than 
conquerors"  (Bom.  viii.  37). — "W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  12 — ^17. — The  nueet  taste  of  sin  <md  iti  bitter  after-taste,  L  The  bwbkt  tasth 
OF  BIN.  How  can  we  account  for  the  fact  that  if  sin  is  essentially  an  evU  thing  it 
should  ever  be  attractive  to  us?  Surely  its  natural  hatefulness  should  make  it  repul- 
sive. If  it  is  hideous  in  the  sight  of  God,  by  what  witchery  can  it  be  made  to  appear 
fascinating  to  our  eyes?  1.  It  appeals  to  ow  lower  desires.  It  makes  its  first  appeal 
to  nature.  There  was  no  evil  at  first  in  Adam  and  Eve,  and  yet  sin  was  made  attrac- 
tive to  them.  Christ  could  not  have  been  tempted  unless  sin  had  been  made  to  wear 
a  fair  mask  in  his  presence.  The  bodily  appetites  and  the  self-seeking  desires  are 
natural  and  innocent  in  themselves.  But  they  should  be  kept  under  by  our  higher 
nature.  If,  however,  the  tempter  appeals  to  them  directly,  he  appeals  to  the  prospect 
of  natural  pleasure.  2.  It  is  aided  hy  our  selfish  natitre.  We  are  all  ftdlen  creatures. 
If  the  fall  has  not  taken  the  form  of  sensuality,  it  has  certainly  been  accomplished  in 
selfishness.  Now  sin  appeals  to  our  selfish  nature,  and  promises  personal  gratification 
at  the  expense  of  righteousness.  3.  It  is  intensified  by  corrupted  desires.  Sin  perverts 
the  natural  appetites  and  corrupts  the  most  innocent  desires.  The  wicked  thing  which 
is  first  sought  because  of  some  promised  result  comes  to  be  loved  on  its  own  account. 
As  the  miser  loves  his  money,  so  the  sinner  loves  his  sin — first  for  what  it  can  purchase, 
then  on  its  own  account.  He  is  like  a  hypnotized  person,  to  whom  gall  tastes  like 
sugar,  because  he  is  deluded  into  believing  evil  to  be  his  good. 

II.  Thb  bittbb  afteb-tabtk  or  bin.  Zophar  rightly  enlarges  upon  this  subject. 
We  do  not  need  any  amplification  of  the  delights  of  sin.  The  very  presentation  of 
them  to  the  imagination  is  degrading.  The  soul  is  soiled  by  contemplating  them. 
We  are  quite  ready  to  admit  their  strength.  But  it  is  not  so  easy  to  imagine  vividly 
and  to  keep  well  in  view  the  dreadful  after-results.  They  are  remote,  unattractive, 
uncongenial.  Therefore  we  need  to  be  forced  to  see  the  results  of  sin  in  detail.  Zophar 
narrates  them  with  graphic  vigour.  Let  us,  then,  consider  the  disagreeable  details  of  the 
bitter  after-taste.  1.  It  is  pain  within.  The  morsel  is  sweet  in  the  mouth,  and  it  is 
hidden  under  the  tongue  to  keep  it  safe  and  to  prolong  the  delicious  enjoyment  of  it ;  yet 
when  it  is  swallowed  it  becomes  like  the  gall  of  asps.  The  recollection  of  past  sin  is  a 
pain  of  conscience.  Its  very  delights  are  turned  to  bitterness  in  the  after-thought. 
Just  in  proportion  to  their  tempting  fascination  before  the  deed  is  their  repulsiveness 
after  it  has  been  committed.  The  foolish  victim  of  temptation  looks  back  on  his  orgies 
with  disgust.  He  loathes  himself,  he  grovels  in  humiliation.  How  could  he  have 
been  such  a  fool  as  to  sink  to  this  shame  and  degradation  ?  2.  It  resiUts  in  the  loss  of 
future  ddights.  The  sinner  is  made  to  give  up  his  riches.  He  is  denied  "  the  brooks, 
the  rivers,  the  torrents  of  honey  and  butter,"  which  he  was  greedily  looking  forward 
to.  The  justice  of  God  will  not  permit  him  to  revel  for  ever  in  wickedness.  By  his 
indulgence  in  sinful  pleasures  he  has  -  destroyed  the  faculty  of  innocent  joy.  His 
debauch  has  turned  the  garden  of  innocent  delights  into  a  desert.  For  such  a  man 
there  is  no  hope  but  in  complete  regeneration.  Yet  that  is  possible.  Even  he  can  be 
converted,  and  made  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus. — ^W.  F.  A. 

Yers.  19,  20. — Oppressing  the  poor.  This  is  a  sin  most  frequently  referred  to  in  the 
Bible,  a  common  wrong  against  which  the  prophets  of  Israel  continually  protested  with 
vehement  indignation.  Christ,  usually  mild  and  gentle,  spoke  in  great  anger  of  this 
wickedness  (Matt,  xxiii.  14).  St  James  denounced  it  as  not  unknown  among  Christians 
( Jas.  v.  4). 

I.  The  8I^r.  1.  Its  various  forms.  It  is  not  always  seen  in  the  bare  and  open 
fashion  of  primitive  times.  The  sheikh  exacts  more  than  is  due  from  his  tribe,  the 
Eastern  landowner  grinds  down  his  fellaheen,  the  baron  enslaves  and  robs  his  serfs, 
and  we  denounce  the  manifest  wrong.  But  is  not  the  same  evil  to  be  seen  in  the 
more  decorous  injustice  of  modem  Western  civilization?  The  great  body  of  working 
men  is  now  emancipated  from  the  tyranny  of  past  ages,  and  is  able  to  assert  itself 
and  claim  its  rights.  But  below  this  powerful  class  is  a  mass  of  unskilled  workers,  the 
helpless  men  and  women  who  crowd  the  lower  quarters  of  great  cities — the  really 
poor.    Witen  advantage  is  taken  of  the  poverty  of  theae  nuaer»ble  people  to  grind 


KH  THE  BOOK  OF  JOg,  [oh,  xx.  1—29 


them  dqwD,  they  are  being  robbed.  With  u^  the  sweating  iystqui  takes  the  place  of 
the  old  territorial  oppression.  2.  Its  invariable  untJcedne^s.  Is  the  tao^^r^  pomraerplsil 
oppression  one  whit  less  guilty  than  the  old  lordly  tyranny  ?  The  evil  is  more  dis- 
guised with  us ;  it  is  more  di$ou]t  to  bring  it  home  to  its  authgrg ;  our  opinplicEkted 
civilization  hushes  it  up— yet  the  cruelty  find  wiqkeduess  ftre  as  reijl  a?  ^ver, 

II.  The  ppnishment.  The  vfriters  of  the  liible  who  denounced  the  sin  of  opp;:essing 
the  pQor  continually  threfttened  puuishment  to  the  guilty  opp;-es3oi-8,  1,  Ttifeet,  loss, 
Zophar  contemplates  the  actual  loss  of  iU-gottgn  g^ins,  fhis  njay  happen  in  the  presept 
life,  it  will  ci  rtainly  occur  at  defith.  The  oppressor  can  take  Borie  of  the  profits  of 
his  cruelty  out  of  the  world  with  him.  2.  Bisappointmeii^,  In  the  fulness  of  his 
Buftici^ucy  he  shaU  be  in  straits.  Even  without  the  loss  of  pioperty  difBcultieg  will 
•rise.  The  rich  man  may  be  murdered  in  his  pa^ce.  Most  oppressiprs  live  in  fgar. 
Trouble  of  mind  mingles  likp  gall  in  the  sweetest  qup  of  pleasures  got  by  cruelty. 

III.  The  CIU5I1.  Punishment  is  not  cure.  The  fpar  of  it  may  act  as  soii^ewhat  o^ 
a  check.  But  we  must  go  deeper  for  "  the  root  pf  the  matter  "  if  we  would  cure  it. 
Now  undoubtedly  in  this  case  the  root  is  npt  hard  to  find,  fpr  i|t  is  simply  unmitigated 
selfislmess.  Therefore  until  men  caq  be  taught  tp  substitute  brqtherliuess  for  selfish- 
ness, oppression  of  the  poor  must  continue.  Np  gopial  revolution,  no  legal  enactiuent, 
DO  forpible  change,  can  eradicate  the  evil.  We  must  go  for  the  cure  pf  social  evils  to 
Christ,  He  is  cpncenjed  with  society  as  well  as  with  the  individual,  apd  there  is  no 
hope  for  society  until  he  is  recognized  as  its  Saviour  ai'4  its  Lord.  Christianity  instils 
brotherliness.  No  man  can  be  a  Christian  who  is  destitute  of  tWs  grape.  Opp'fssion 
of  the  poor  belies  the  most  sanctimonious  profession  of  religion.  We  want  tp  get  back 
to  the  relijiion  of  Christ,  which  made  more  of  brotherliness  thap  even  of  faith ;  the 
religion  of  St.  Paul  and  ^t.  John,  which  taught  that  love  is  the  greatest  thing  in  the 
world.— W.  P.  A, 

Ver,  22. — Straitened  in  the  time  offiAne^t.  I,  Sudpen  disabtee.  This  had  come 
upon  Job.  It  looks  as  if  the  pragmatip  Zpphar  was  rude  enough  to  insinuate  that  the 
picture  he  was  paintipg  would  be  recognized  by  the  patriarch  as  a  portrait  of  himself. 
Now,  the  external  part  of  the  picture  was  true  to  the  circumstances  of  Job,  Therefore 
the  broad  hint  that  the  internal  part  also  applied  to  him  was  the  more  criiel,  Job's 
sufferings  were  extreme,  but  they  were  not  ooptrary  to  preoedent.  Sudden  disaster  is 
not  unknown,  The  rich  man  is  beggared  by  an  unexpected  commercial  collapse.  An 
epidemic  or  a  storm  at  sea  suddenly  bereaves  a  father  of  his  whole  family.  Death 
snatches  the  prosperous  person  away  at  the  height  of  his  success.  1.  This  is  not 
expected.  Although  it  is  not  uncommon,  people  are  cenerally  unprepared  for  it ;  and 
when  it  comes  they  are  astounded  and  dismayed.  We  are  deceived  by  present  appear- 
anees.  It  is  diflipult  to  believe  in  the  overthrow  of  that  which  gives  no  sign  of  being 
in  danger.  2.  This  is  .crushing.  The  pain  of  a  fall  is  determined  by  ithe  height  from 
which  one  descends  as  much  as  by  the  depth  that  is  reached.  The  troubles  of  those 
who  were  once  prosperous  are  far  worse  to  bear  than  the  troubles  of  people  "ho  do  not 
know  what  earthly  happiness  means.  3.  This  should  teaeh  us  to  look  beyond  the  present. 
(1)  In  preparation  for  possible  disaster.  We  should  pot,  however,  be  always  brooding 
over  the  possibility.  "  Suffioient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  Still,  we  should 
be  fortified  against  it.  (2,)  In  the  possession  of  better  than  earthly  things,  We -can 
endure  the  shocks  that  strike  our  earthly  tabernacle,  if  we  have  "a  building  of  God, 
a  house  npt  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens"  (2  Cor,  y.  I). 

II.  Internai,  poyi'Hty,  The  ruin  may  take  another  form.  There  may  be  no  such 
external  and  visible  calamities  as  those  that  came  upon  Job.  The  normal  course  of 
events  may  be  unbroken,  the  material  prosperity  may  be  unaffected.  Yet  there  may 
be  distre.'is  and  misery.  Then  the  soul  is  straitened  although  the  fulness  of  earthly 
sufBcjency  is  not  touched,  1.  This  comes  from  pur  spiritual  nature.  The  body  has 
been  fed,  but  the  soul  has  been  starved ;  therefore  the  soul  is  straitened.  There  are 
times  when  we  perceive  deeper  needs  than  any  earthly  bread  can  satisfy;  "for  man 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,"  etc,  (Matt,  Iv,  4).  2.  This  is  felt  in  the  awakening  of 
conscience.  A  voice  vithin  calls  us  to  a  service  for  which  Pur  earthly  suffieiency 
affords  no  support.  On  the  contrary,  the  wealth  of  external  things  seems  a  sort  of 
liiniirance,  dihtractinp  our  thoughts  and  absorbing  our  pare  when  we  s}iould  b?  turning 


CH.  XXI.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  353 


to  more  spiritual  affairs.  The  spiritual  nature,  once  aroused,  feels  cramped  and  oppressed 
by  the  very,  fulness  of  earthly  sufBoienoy.  3.  Tliis  should  drive  us  to  the  wdh  of  living 
water.  We  are  tempted  to  neglect  those  sources  of  spiritual  life  when  the  streams  of 
earthly  blessings  flow  in  fulness.  Yet  nothing  but  the  water  of  life  can  nourish  the 
soul.  Without  this  we  are  thirsty  still.  We  are  straitened  that  we  may  turn  to  Christ 
for  the  water  which  he  gives,  and  for  his  bread  of  life. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  27. — Iniquity  revealed.  I,  It  is  hidden.  Otherwise,  of  course,  it  would  not 
need  to  be  revealed.  How  is  it  hidden?  1.  By  secrecy.  Ttie  sin  is  not  committed  ia 
the  light  of  day  and  before  the  eyes  of  a  crowd.  Tlie  wicked  deed  is  done  in  the  dark. 
2.  By  circumstances.  Events  are  such  that  the  evil  does  not  come  out  to  the  light. 
Snow  falls  and  conceals  the  footprints  of  the  thief.  3.  By  falsehood.  Charged  with 
his  crime,  the  sinner  denies  it.  For  a  while  his  lie  is  accepted,  if  there  is  no  proof 
against  him.  4.  By  negligence.  It  is  not  the  business  of  everybody  to  be  an  amateur 
detective.     The  world  lets  much  wickedness  pass  from  sheer  indifference. 

n.  It  will  be  bevealed.  1.  Certainly  in  the  future  jitdgment.  Then  the  secrets 
of  all  hearts  shall  he  made  known.  God  knows  the  wickedness  that  is  hidden  from 
man,  for  nothing  can  be  concealed  f lom  his  all-searching  gaze.  We  are  not  only  to  expect 
tliat  God  will  then  punish  sin.  Further  than  this,  there  will  be  a  general  unveiling  of 
character.  The  hypocrite  will  be  unmasked.  Everybody  will  be  seen  in  his  true 
nature.  2.  Possibly  on  earth.  Even  here  Heaven  may  reveal  the  iniquity.  A  pro- 
vidential turn  of  events  may  bring  it  all  to  light.  Without  any  handwriting  on  the 
wall  or  any  trumpet-toned  annunciation,  the  slow  and  awful  unrolling  of  providence 
may  make  the  ugly  story  known. 

III.  Its  bevelation  will  be  followed  by  its  punishment.  This  follows 
naturally :  no  avenging  angel  needs  to  be  sent  from  heaven.  "  The  earth  shall  rise  up 
against  him."  It  is  as  though  the  earth  itself  were  horror-stricken  at  the  sight  of  such 
enormity.  She  cannot  bear  the  presence  of  the  wicked  man.  Her  silence  would  ha 
like  acquiescence,  or  even  complicity,  in  his  guilt.  Nature  itself  works  tor  the  punish- 
ment of  sin.  The  laws  of  nature  are  on  the  side  of  righteousness.  They  are  God's 
laws,  and  all  the  laws  of  God  are  in  harmony.  All  that  is  needed  is  sufficient  time 
and  scope,  and  the  course  of  nature  itself  will  produce  the  punishmeut.  We  see  this 
already  in  regard  to  sins  of  the  flesh,  which  bring  disease,  misery,  death.  It  will  take 
longer  time,  and  the  free  opportunities  of  another  world,  to  bring  about  the  same  result 
with  all  other  sins. 

IV.  Its  baelieb  confession  will  prevent  its  lateb  bevel ation.  All  this  dark 
and  direful  doom  is  not  inevitable.  We  are  warned  of  it  in  order  that  we  may  avoid 
it.  Tlicre  is  no  necessity  for  us  to  wait  for  the  Divine  unveiling  of  oiu:  sin.  Though 
that  is  certain  to  come  if  we  do  wait  long  enough  for  it ;  we  may  yet  anticipate  it  by 
confession.  God  does  not  desire  to  expose  the  most  guilty  man  to  shame  and  suffering. 
His  great  wish  is  to  conquer  sin  in  the  heart  of  the  sinner.  If  the  wickedness  is  owned 
and  repented  of,  that  is  what  God  most  wishes,  and  greatly  prefers  to  the  punishment 
of  the  impenitent.  Not  only  does  love  yearn  to  save  the  sinner,  but  righteousness 
also  desires  to  oast  out  the  sin,  as  a  more  effectual  conquest  of  it  than  merely  punishing 
it  while  it  is  still  retained  in  the  heart  of  a  man.  Still,  the  thought  of  the  impending 
revelation  of  sin  shows  how  necessary  an  unreserved  and  complete  confession  is,  if  the 
sinner  is  to  be  forgiven.  This  is  the  first  condition  of  pardon.  While  we  hold  to  our 
sin,  God  cannot  set  us  free  from  it  and  its  consesj^uences. — W.  F.  A 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXL 

Vers.  1 — 34. — Job  answers  Zophar,  as  he 
had  answered  Bildad,  in  a  single  not  very 
lengthy  chapter.     After  a  few  caustic  in- 
troductory remarks  (vers.  2 — 4),   he  takes 
JOB. 


up  the  challenge  which  Zophar  had  thrown 
out,  respecting  the  certain  punishment,  in 
this  life,  of  the  wicked  (oh.  xx.  i — 29),  and 
maintains,  "m  language  of  unparalleled  bold- 
ness "  (Cook),  the  converse  of  the  proposi- 
tion.    The  wicked,  he  says,  live,  gp:ow  old, 

2  A 


354 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  XXI.  1 — 34 


attain  to  great  power,  have  a  numerous  and 
flourishing  offspring,  prosper,  grow  rich, 
spend  their  time  in  feasting  and  jollity — 
nay,  openly  renounce  God  and  decline  to 
pray  tohim— yot  suffer  no  harm,  and  when 
they  die,  go  down  to  the  grave  without 
suffering,  "in  a  moment"  (vers.  5—15).  To 
the  suggestion  that  from  time  to  time  they 
are  cut  off  suddtnly  in  a  signal  way,  he 
answers,  "How  often  is  this?"  or  rather, 
«  How  seldom  1 "  (vers.  17, 18).  To  the  further 
suggestion  that  tliey  are  punished  in  their 
children  he  replies,  "  How  much  better  if 
they  were  punished  in  their  own  persons  I " 
(vers.  19 — 21).  As  it  is,  he  argues,  one 
event  happens  to  all  (vers.  23 — 26).  In 
conclusion,  he  observes  that  common  opinion 
supports  his  view  (vers.  29 — 33),  and 
denounces  as  futile  the  attempts  of  his 
comforters  to  convince  him,  since  his  views 
and  theirs  respecting  the  facts  of  God's 
government  are  diametrically  opposed  to 
each  other  (ver.  34). 

Vers.  1,  2. — But  Job  answered  and  said, 
Hear  diligently  my  speech,  and  let  this  be 
your  consolations.  As  ye  have  no  otlier 
consolation  to  offer  me,  at  least  attend 
diligently  to  what  I  say.  That  will  be  some 
comfort  to  me,  and  I  will  accept  it  in  lieu 
of  the  consolations  which  I  might  have 
looked  for  at  your  hands. 

Ver.  3. — Slier  me  that  I  may  speak  j  or, 
ewff'er  me,  and  I  also  wiU  epeak.  There  ia 
an  emphasis  on  the  "  I "  (OJN).  Job  implies 
that  his  opponents  are  not  allowing  him 
his  fair  share  of  the  argument,  which  is  an 
accusation  that  can  scarcely  be  justified. 
Since  the  dialogue  opened.  Job's  speeches 
have  occupied  eleven  chapters,  those  of  his 
"  comforters  "  seven  only.  But  a  controver- 
sialist who  has  much  to  say  is  apt  to  think 
that  Buffiuient  time  is  not  allowed  him. 
And  after  that  I  have  spoken,  mock  on.  Job 
does  not  hope  to  convince,  or  silence,  or 
shame  the  other  interlocutors.  When  he 
has  said  his  say,  all  that  he  expects  is 
mockery  and  derision, 

Ver.  4.— As  for  me,  is  my  complaint  to 
man?  Do  I  address  myself  to  man,  pour 
out  my  complaint  to  him,  and  expect  him  to 
redress  my  wrongs  ?  No ;  far  otherwise.  I 
address  myself  to  God,  from  whom  alone 
I  can  look  for  effectual  assistance.  And  if 
it  were  so ;  rather,  and  if  so,  if  tliis  is  the 
case,  if  my  appeal  18  to  God,  and  he  makes 
me  no  answer,  then  why  should  not  my 
spirit  be  troubled  ?  or,  Why  should  I  not  be 
impatient  1  (Eevised  Version).    Job  thinks 


that  he  has  a  right  to  be  impatient,  if  God 
does  not  vouchsafe  him  an  ang#ei. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Here  we  have  an  abrupt 
transition.  Job  is  about  to  controvert 
Zophar's  theory  of  the  certain  retribution 
that  overtakes  the  wicked  man  in  this  life, 
and  to  maintain  that,  on  the  contrary,  he 
usually  prospers  (vers.  7 — 18).  Knowing 
that,  in  thus  running  counter  to  the  general 
religious  teaching,  he  will  arouse  much 
horror  and  indignation  on  the  part  of  those 
who  hear  him,  he  prefaces  his  remarks  with 
a  notice  that  they  will  cause  astonishment, 
and  an  acknowledgment  that  he  himself 
cannot  reflect  upon  the  subject  without  a 
feeiing  of  alarm  and  dismay.  He  thus  hopes 
partially  to  disarm  his  opponents. 

Ver.  5. — Hark  me.j  literally,  look  to  me; 
i,e.  "  attend  to  me,"  for  I  am  about  to  say 
something  well  worth  attention.  And  be 
astonished.  Prepare  yourselves,  i.e.,  for 
something  that  will  astonish  you.  And 
lay  your  hand  upon  yo\ir  month.  Har- 
pocrates,  the  Egyptian  god  of  silence,  was 
often  represented  with  his  finger  on  his  lips 
(see  the  author's  *  History  of  Ancient 
Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  362).  The  symbolism  is 
almost  universal.  Job  begs  his  auditors  to 
"refrain  their  lips,"  and,  however  much 
astonished,  to  keep  silence  until  he  has 
concluded. 

Ver.  6. — Even  when  I  remember;  i.e. 
"when  I  think  upon  the  subject."  I  am 
afraid,  and  trembling  taketh  hold  on  my 
fiesh.  A  shudder  runs  through  his  whole 
frame.  His  words  will,  he  knows,  seem  to 
verge  upon  impiety. 

Ver.  7. — Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live, 
become  old,  yea,  are  mighty  in  powerl  Job 
asks  for  an  explanation  of  the  facts  which 
his  own  experience  has  impressed  upon 
him.  He  has  seen  that  "  the  wicked  live " 
quite  as  long  as  the  righteous,  that  in  many 
cases  they  attain  to  a  ripe  old  age,  and 
become  among  the  powerful  of  the  earth. 
The  great  "  pyramid  kings "  of  Egypt, 
whose  cruel  oppressions  were  rememliered 
down  to  the  time  of  Herodotus  (Herod.,  ii. 
124 — 128),  reigned  respectively,  according 
to  Egyptian  tradition,  sixty-three  and  sixty- 
six  years(Manetho  ap.  Euseb., '  Chron.  Can.,' 
pars  ii.).  Barneses  II.,  the  cruel  oppressor 
of  the  Jews,  and  the  Pharaoh  from  whom 
Moses  fled,  had  a  reign  of  sixty-seven  years 
('  Hist,  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  ii.  p.  301). 

Ver.  8. — Their  seed  is  established  in  theii 
sight  with  them  (comp.  Ps.  xvii.  14 ;  and 
see  below,  ch.  xxvii.  14).  It  could  scarcely 
be  doubted  that  the  wicked  had  as  many 


CH.  XXI.  1—34,] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB, 


865 


children  M  the  righteous,  and  often  estab- 
lished them  in  posts  of  honour  and  emoln- 
ment.  And  their  offspring  before  their 
eyes.     A  pleonastic  repetition. 

Ver.  9. — Their  houses  are  safe  from  fear ; 
literally,  their  houses  are  in  peace,  without 
fear.  Neither  is  the  rod  of  God  upon  them. 
So  Asaph,  "  They  are  not  in  trouble  as  other 
men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like  other 
men"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  5).  The  chastening  rod 
of  God  does  not  aeem  to  smite  them. 

Ver.  10, — Their  bull  gendereth,  and  faileth 
not ;  rather,  their  cow  coneeiveth.  81i6r  (iW), 
whieli  is  of  both  genders,  must  here  bo 
taken  as  feminine.  Their  oow  (rather,  their 
heifer)  calveth,  and  casteth  not  her  calf. 
Both  conception  and  birth  are  prosperou* ; 
there  is  neither  barrenness  noi-  abortion. 

Ver.  11  — They  send  forth  their  little  ones 
Uke  a  flock.  Free,  t.e.  joyful  and  froliusome, 
to  disport  themselves  as  they  please.  Tiie 
picture  is  charmingly  idyllic.  And  their 
children  danoe.  Frisk,  i.e.,  and  skip,  and 
leap,"  like  the  young  of  cattle  full  of  health, 
and  in  the  enjoyment  of  plenty  "  (Lee). 

Ver.  12, — They  take  the  timbrel  and  harp, 
and  rejoice  at  the  sonnd  of  the  organ.  The 
"  timbrel "  (C|n)  is  probably  the  tambourine, 
an  instrument  used  from  a  remote  antiquity 
by  the  Orientals.  It  consisted  of  a  round 
hoop  of  wood,  into  which  were  sometimes 
inserted  jingling  rings  of  metal,  and  upon 
which  was  stretched  at  one  end  a  sheet  of 
parchment.  It  is  represented  on  the  monu- 
ments both  of  Egypt  and  Phoenicia  (' Hist, 
of  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  522 ;  '  Hist,  of  Phoenicia,' 
pp.  219,  223).  The  harp  (liw)  was,  in  the 
early  times,  a  very  simple  instrument,  con- 
sisting of  a  framework  of  wood,  across  whith 
were  stretched  from  four  to  seven  strings, 
which  were  of  catgut  and  of  different 
lengths,  and  were  sounded  either  with  the 
hand  or  with  a  plectrum.  The  "organ" 
(3J1J?)  was,  of  course,  not  an  organ  in  the 
modem  sense  of  the  word.  It  was  either 
a  pan's  pipe,  which  is  a  very  primitive 
instrument,  or  more  probably  a  double  reed 
blown  from  the  end,  like  a  flageolet, 
examples  of  which  are  found  in  the  remains 
both  of  Egypt  and  Phoenicia  ('Hiat.  of 
Egypt,'  vol.  L  p.  524 ;  '  Hist,  of  PLioenicia,' 
U.c). 

Ver.  13.— They  spend  their  days  in  wealth, 
and  in  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave. 
They  die,  i.e.,  without  suffering  from  any 
prolonged  or  severe  illness,  such  as  that 
grievous  affliction  from  which  Job  himself 
was  suffering.  Probably  Job  does  not  mean 
to  maintain  all  this  absolutely,  or  as  uni- 
versally the  ease,  but  he  wishes  to  force  his 
friends  to  acknowledge  that  there  are  many 
excep lions  to  their  universal  law,  that 
wickedness  is  always  visited  in  this  world 
with  condign   punishment,  and  he  wants 


them  to  acoonnt  for  thew  axoeptloiit  (see 

ver.  7). 

Ver.  14.— Therefore  they  say  unto  God, 
Depart  from  ns.  It  is  this  impunity  which 
leads  the  wicked  to  renounce  Grod  altogether. 
They  think  that  they  get  on  very  well  with- 
out God,  and  consequently  have  no  need  to 
serve  him.  Job  puts  their  thoughts  into 
words  (vers.  14,  15),  and  thus  very  graphi- 
cally represents  their  tone  of  feeling.  For 
we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways. 
The  wicked  feel  no  interest  in  God ;  tliey 
do  not  trouble  themselves  about  him;  his 
ways  are  "far  above  out  of  their  sight," 
and  they  do  not  care  to  know  them. 

Ver.  15.— What  is  the  Almighty,  that  we 
should  serve  him  1  "  Who  is  Jehovah,"  said 
Pharaoh  to  Moses,  "  that  I  should  obey  his 
voice  ?  I  know  not  Jehovah  "  (Exod.  v.  2). 
So  the  ungodly  in  Job's  time.  They  pretend 
to  have  no  knowledge  of  God,  no  sense  of 
his  claims  upon  them,  no  internal  conscious- 
ness that  they  are  bound  to  worship  and 
obey  him.  They  are  agnostics  of  a  pro- 
nounced type,  or  at  least  they  profess  to  be 
such.  What  profit,  they  ask,  should  we 
have,  if  we  pray  to  him  f  Expediency  is 
everything  with  them.  Will  serving  God 
do  them  any  good  ?  Will  it  advanop  their 
worldly  interests  ?  Persuade  them  of  that, 
and  they  will  be  willing  to  pay  him,  at  any 
rate,  a  lip-service.  But,  having  prospered 
BO  long  and  so  greatly  without  making  any 
religious  profession,  they  see  no  reason  to 
believe  that  they  would  prosper  more  if  they 
made  one. 

Ver.  16. — Lo,  their  good  is  not  in  their 
hand;  i.e.  their  prospeiity  is  not  in  their 
own  power,  not  the  result  of  their  own  efforts. 
God's  providence  is,  at  least,  one  element  in 
it,  since  he  exalts  men  and  abases  them, 
he  casteth  down  and  lifteth  up.  Hence 
it  would  seem  to  follow  that  they  are  his 
favourites.  Shall  Job  therefore  cast  in  his 
lot  with  them?  No,  he  says,  a  thousand 
times.  No  I  The  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far 
from  me ;  or  better,  be  the  counsel  of  the 
wicked  far  from  me  I  I  will  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it.  I  will  cling  to  God.  I  will 
maintain  my  integrity.  Satan  had  charged 
Job  with  serving  God  for  the  sake  of 
temporal  reward.  Job  had  disproved  the 
charge  by  still  clinging  to  God,  notwith- 
standing all  his  afflictions.  Now  he  goes 
further,  and  declines  to  throw  in  his  lot 
with  the  wicked,  even  although  it  should 
appear  that  the  balance  of  prosperity  is 
with  them. 

Ver.  17. — How  oft  is  the  candle  of  the 
wicked  put  out !  This  is  not  an  exclama- 
tion, but  a  question,  and  is  well  rendered 
in  the  Kevised  Version,  "  How  oft  is  it 
that  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  is  put  out?" 
Is  not  the  signal  downfall  of  the  wicked 


856 


THE   BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  XXI.  1 — 34. 


prosperous  man  a  comparatively  rare  ooonr- 
lence?  How  oft  cometli  their  destruction 
npon  them !  When  the  problem  here  pro- 
pounded came  before  Asaph,  he  seems  to 
have  solved  it  by  the  supposition  that  in  all 
cases  retribution  visited  the  wicked  in  this 
life,  and  that  they  were  cast  down  from 
their  prosperity.  "I  went,"  he  says,  "into 
the  sanctuary  of  God  ;  then  understood  I  tlio 
end  of  these  men.  Surely  thou  didst  set 
tliem  in  slippery  places ;  thou  castedst  them 
down  into  destruction.  How  are  they  brought 
into  desolation,  as  in  a  moment  I  They  are 
utterly  consumed  with  terrors.  As  a  dream 
when  one  awaketh ;  so,  O  Lord,  when  tliou 
awakest,  thou  sbalt  despise  their  image " 
(Ps.  Ixxiii.  17 — 20).  Job  maintains  that 
such  a  catastrophe  happens  but  seldom,  and 
that  for  the  most  part  the  wicked  go  down 
to  the  grave  in  peace.  God  distributeth 
sorrows  in  his  anger.  This  is  not  an  in- 
dependent clause.  The  sense  runs  on  : 
JSow  oft  is  it  that  the  candle  of  the  wicked 
is  put  out,  and  that  destruction  cometh  upon 
them,  and  God  showers  sorrows  upon  them  in 
his  anger  t  (compare  the  comment  on  the 
next  verse). 

Ver.  18. — ^They  are  as  stubble  before  the 
wind,  and  as  chaff  that  the  storm  carrieth 
away ;  rather.  How  oft  is  it  that  they  are  as 
stabile  before  the  wind,  and  as  chaff,  etc.  ? 
The  construction  begun  in  tKe  first  clause 
of  ver.  17  is  carried  on  to  the  end  of  ver.  18. 
"  Stubble  "  and  "  chaff"  are  ordinary  figures 
for  foolish  and  ungodly  men,  whom  the 
blast  of  God's  anger  sweeps  away  to  destruc- 
tion (comp.  Exod.  XV.  7 ;  Ps.  i.  4 ;  xxxv.  5 ; 
Ixxxiii.  13 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  13;  xxiii.  5  ;  xli.  2, 
etc.). 

Ver.  19. — God  layeth  up  his  iniquity  for 
his  children.  Job  supposes  his  opponents 
to  malie  this  answer  to  his  arguments. 
"  God,"  they  may  say, "  punishes  the  wicked 
man  in  his  children  "  (comp.  Exod.  xx.  5). 
Job  does  not  deny  that  he  may  do  so,  but 
suggests  a  better  course  in  the  next  sentence. 
He rewardeth him ;  rather, lethim recompense 
it  on  himself— lai  him  make  the  wicked 
man  himself  sufier,  and  then  he  shall  know 
it.  He  shall  perceive  and  know  that  he  is 
receiving  the  due  reward  of  his  wicked- 
ness. 

Ver.  20. — His  eyes  shall  see  his  destruc- 
tion (or,  let  his  own  eyes  see  his  destruction), 
and  he  shall  drink  (or,  let  him  drink)  of  the 
wrath  of  the  Almighty.  It  will  impress 
him  far  more  with  a  sense  of  his  wickedness, 
and  of  his  guilt  in  God's  sight,  if  he  receives 
punishment  in  his  own  person,  than  if  he 
merely  suffura  vicariously  through  his 
children. 

Ver.  21. — For  what  pleasure  hath  he  in 
his  house  after  him?  What  does  he  care, 
ordinarily,    about    the    happiness   of    his 


ohUdran  and  descendants?  "Apr%8  moils 
ddluge "  is  the  selfish  thought  of  bad  men 
generally,  when  they  cast  a  glance  at  the 
times  which  are  to  follow  their  decease. 
The  fate  of  tliose  whom  they  leave  behind 
them  troubles  them  but  little.  It  would 
scarcely  cause  them  a  pang  to  know  that 
their  posterity  would  soon  be  "  clean  put 
out."  When  the  number  of  his  months  is 
cutoff  in  the  midst;  i.e.  when  liis  appoiuted 
time  is  come,  and  he  knows  that  "the 
number  of  his  months  "  is  accomplished. 

Ver.  22. — Shall  any  teach  God  knowledge  1 
Job  has  been  searching  the  "  deep  things  of 
God,"  speculating  upon  the  method  of  tlie 
Divine  government  of  the  world.  He  haa 
perhaps  rashly  ventured  to  "rush  in  where 
angels  fear  to  tread."  Now,  however,  he 
checks  himself  with  the  confession  that 
God's  ways  are  inscrutable,  his  knowledge 
far  beyond  any  knowledge  possessed  by 
man.  Men  must  not  presume  to  judge  him ; 
it  is  for  him  to  judge  them.  Seeing  he  judgeth 
those  that  are  high.  None  so  exalted,  none 
so  advanced  in  wisdom  and  knowledge,  none 
so  venturesome  in  sounding  depths  that 
they  cannot  fathom,  but  God  is  above  them, 
judges  them,  knows  their  hearts,  and,  accord- 
ing to  his  infallible  wisdom,  condemns  or 
approves  them.  This  is  a  chastening 
thought,  and  its  effect  on  Job  is  to  make 
him  contract  his  sails,  and,  leaving  the 
empyrean,  content  himself  with  a  lower 
flight.  Previously  he  haa  maintained,  as  if 
he  were  admitted  to  tlie  Divine  counsels, 
that  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked  was  a  rule 
of  God's  government.  Now  he  goes  no 
further  than  to  say  that  there  is  no  rule 
discoverable.  Happiness  and  misery  are 
dispensed — as  far  as  man  can  see — on  no 
definite  principle,  and,  at  the  end,  one  lot 
happens  to  all :  all  go  down  into  the  tomb, 
and  lie  in  the  dust,  and  the  worms  devour 
them  (vers.  23—26). 

Ver.  23.— One  dieth  in  his  fuU  strength, 
being  whoUy  at  ease  and  quiet.  Some  con- 
tinue healthy  and  vigorous  in  body,  peaceful 
and  satisfied  in  mind,  up  to  the  very  moment 
of  their  departure  (comp.  ver.  13,  "They 
spend  their  days  in  wealth,  and  in  a 
moment  go  down  to  tlie  grave"). 

Ver.  21.— His  breasts  are  full  of  milk ; 
rather,  his  milk-pails,  as  in  the  margin. 
The  main  wealth  of  the  time  being  cattle, 
the  man  whose  milk-pails  are  always  full  is 
the  prospurous  man.  And  his  bones  are 
moistened  with  marrow.  Being  thus  wealthy 
and  prosperous,  hia  body  is  fat  and  well 
nourished. 

Ver.  25.— And  another  dieth  in  the  bitter- 
ness of  his  soul.  Others  have  to  suffer 
terribly  before  death  coines  to  them.  Their 
wliole  life  is  wretched,  and  their  spirit  is 
embittered  by  their  misfortunes.    And  never 


CH.  xn.  1—34.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


357 


eateth  \nth  pleasure;  rather,  and  never 
taeteth' of  good  (see  the  RevlBed  Version). 

Ver.  26. — They  shall  lie  down  alike  in 
the  dnst,  and  the  worms  shall  cover  them. 
However  different  tlie  ciicumstances  of 
their  life,  men  are  alike  in  their  death. 
One  event  happens  to  all.  All  die,  are 
laid  in  the  dust,  and  become  the  prey  of 
worms. 

Ver.  27. — Behold,  I  know  your  thonghts, 
and  the  devices  (or,  mrmisingi)  which  ye 
wrongfully  imagine  against  me.  I  know, 
i.e.,  what  ;ou  think  of  me.  I  am  quite  aware 
.  that  you  regard  me  as  having  brought  my 
afflictions  upon  myself  by  wicked  deeds, 
which  I  have  succeeded  in  keeping  secret. 
You  have  not  openly  stated  your  surmises, 
but  it  has  been  easy  for  me  to  "read  between 
the  lines,"  and  understand  the  true  meaning 
of  your  insinuations,  which  are  all  wrongful 
and  unjust. 

Ver.  28. — For  ye  say,  Where  is  the  house 
of  the  prince  ?  i.e. "  What  has  become  of  the 
house  of  the  powerful  man  (Job  himself)? 
How  is  it  fallen  and  gone  to  decay  I "  And 
where  are  the  dwelling-places  (literally,  the 
tent  of  the  habitations)  of  the  wicked? 
Again  Job  is  intended,  although  the  insult 
is  veiled  by  the  plural  form  being  used. 
Job  supposes  that  his  opponents  will  meet 
his  statement,  that  the  righteous  are  afflicted 
and  the  wicked  prosper,  by  pointing  to  his 
own  case  as  one  in  which  wickedness  has 
been  punished. 

Ver.  29. — ^Have  ye  not  asked  them  that  go 
by  the  way  I  Job  refers  his  opponents  to 
the  first  comer  (rbv  iTri6vTa)—thB  merest 
passer-by.  Let  them  ask  his  opinion,  and 
see  if  he  does  not  consider  that,  as  a  general 
rule,  the  wicked  prosper.  And  do  ye  not  know 
their  tokens?  or,  their  observations;  i.e.  the 
conclusions  to  which  they  have  come  upon 
the  subject  from  tlieir  own  observation  and 
experience. 

Ver.  30. — ^These  conclusions  are  now  set 
forth.  They  are,  that  the  wicked  is  reserved 
for  (or  rather,  spared  in)  the  day  of  destruc- 
tion, and  that  they  shall  be  brought  forth 
to  (rather,  removed  out  of  the  may  in)  the 
day  of  wrath.  This,  according  to  Job,  was 
the  popnlar  sentiment  of  his  time  ;  and,  no 
doubt,  there  is  in  all  ages  a  large  mass  of 
floating  opinion  to  the  same  effect.  Striking 
examples  of  wickedness  in  higli  places  draw 
attention,  and  provoke  indignation,  and  are 
much  talked  about ;  whence  arises  an  idea 
that  such  cases  are  common,  and  ultimately, 
by  an  unscientific  generalization  iu  the 
vulgar  mind,  that  they  form  the  rule,  and  not 
the  exception  to  the  rule.  It  requires  some 
power  of  intellect  to  take  a  broad  and  com- 
prehensive view  over  tlie  whole  of  human 
life,  and  fairly  to  strike  the  balance.  Such 
a  view  seems  to  have  been  taken  by  Bishop 


Butler  (among  others) ;  and  the  conclusion, 
reached  by  calm  iuTestigation  and  philo- 
sophic thought,  is  that,  on  the  whole,  even 
in  this  life,  the  balance  of  advantage  rests 
with  the  virtuous,  who  really  prosper  more 
than  the  wicked,  have  greater  and  higher 
satisfactions,  escape  numerous  forms  of 
Bufiering,  and  approach  more  nearly  to 
happiness.  An  exact  apportionment  of 
liappiness  and  misery  to  desert  is  a  thing 
that  certainly  in  this  life  does  not  take 
place ;  but  the  tendency  of  virtue  to  accumu- 
late to  itself  other  goods  is  clear;  and  Job's 
pessimistic  view  is  certainly  an  untrue  one, 
which  we  may  suspect  that  he  maintained, 
rather  from  a  love  of  paradox,  and  from  a 
desire  to  puzzle  and  confuse  his  friends, 
than  from  any  conviction  of  its  absolute 
truth. 

Ver.  31. — ^Who  shall  declare  his  way  to 
his  face?  rather.  Who  shall  denounced  i.e. 
Who  will  be  bold  enough  to  tell  the  rich 
aud  powerful  man  that  he  is  wicked?  that 
his  "  way,"  or  course  of  life,  is  altogether 
wronf!;  ?  And  who  shall  repay  him  what  he 
hath  done  ?  Still  less  will  auy  one  be  f(jund 
who  will  take  upon  him  to  attack  such  a 
one,  to  prosecute  liim  in  courts,  or  otherwise 
bring  him  to  coridiirn  punishment.  Thus, 
being  castigated  neither  by  Ctod  nor  man, 
he  enjoys  complete  impunity. 

Ver.  32. — Yet  shall  he  be  brongHt  to  the 
grave ;  rather,  he  moreover  is  borne  (in 
pomp)  to  the  grave.  Bven  in  death  the  ad- 
vantage is  still  with  the  wicked  man.  He 
is  borne  in  procession  to  the  grave — a 
mausoleum  or  a  family  vault — by  a  long  train 
of  mourners,  who  weep  and  lament  for  him, 
and  pay  him  funeral  honours.  The  poor 
virtuous  man,  on  the  other  hand,  is  hastily 
thrust  under  the  soil.  And  shall  remain  in 
the  tomb ;  or,  shall  keep  watch  over  his  tomb. 
The  allusion  is  probably  to  the  custom, 
common  certainly  in  Egypt  and  Phoenicia, 
of  carving  a  figure  of  the  deceased  on  the 
lid  of  his  sarcophagus,  to  keep  as  it  were 
watch  over  the  remains  deposited  within. 
The  figure  was  sometimes  accompanied  by 
an  inscription,  denouncing  curses  on  those 
who  should  dare  to  violate  the  tomb  or 
disturb  the  remains  (see  'Records  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  ix.  pp.  112 — 114;  and  compare 
the  author's  'History  of  Phoenicia,'  pp. 
393—395). 

Ver.  33.— The  clods  of  the  valley  shall  be 
sweet  unto  him.  In  his  mausoleum,  by  the 
side  of  the  running  stream,  the  very  clods 
of  the  valley,  wherein  his  tomb  is  placed, 
shall  be  sweet  and  pleasant  to  him — death 
thus  losing  half  its  terrors.  And  all  men 
shall  draw  after  him.  Some  explain  this 
of  the  l(;iigthy  funeral  procession  which 
follows  his  corpse  to  the  grave,  and  take  the 
next  clause  of  the  midtitude,  not  forming 


358 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[cH.  XXI.  1 — 34. 


part  of  the  procesiion,  who  gather  together 
at  the  tomb  beforehand,  waiting  to  see  the 
obsequies ;  but,  as  EosenmuUer  remarks,  this 
explanation  seema  precluded  by  the  previous 
mention  of  the  funeral  procession  (ver.  32), 
besides  being  otherwise  Jinsatisfactory.  The 
real  reference  is  probably  to  the  common 
topic  of  consolation  implied  in  the  "  Omnes 
eodem  oogiraur"  of  Horace.  He  is  happy 
in  his  death,  or  at  any  rate  not  unhappy, 
seeing  that  he  only  suffers  the  common  fate. 
He  will  draw  after  him  all  future  men,  who 
will  likewise  inevitably  perish,  just  as  there 
are   innumerable    befoie   him,  who   have 


travelled  the  same  road  and  reached    the 
same  resting-place. 

Ver.  34.— How  then  comfort  ye  me  in  vain, 
seeing  in  your  answers  there  remaineth 
falsehood!  Your  position,  that  the  godly 
always  prosper,  while  the  wicked  are  afi9icted 
and  brought  low,  being  an  absolutely  false 
one,  your  attempts  to  console  and  comfort 
me  are  wholly  vain  and  fotile.  Why  con- 
tinue them  ? 

Most  commentators  consider  the  second 
colloquy  here  to  end,  and  a  pause  to  occur, 
before  Eliphaz  resumes  the  argument. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 34. — Job  to  Zophar  :  Audi  alteram  partem.  I.  The  spirit  of  Job's  reply. 
1.  Intense  earnestness.  Indicated  by  the  respectful  invitation  addressed  to  his  friends 
to  attend  to  his  discourse,  the  nervous  reduplication  of  the  verb  "  hear,"  and  tlje  assur- 
ance that  such  behaviour  on  their  part  would  more  effectually  console  him  than  all 
their  eloquent  and  laboured  harangues.  Job's  character  of  eminent  sanctity.  Job's 
condition  of  extreme  wretchedness,  and  Job's  condemnation  by  the  three  friends,  all 
entitled  him  to  receive  from  them  a  generous  and  patient  hearing.  Good  men  and 
great  sufferers  are  usually  in  earnest  when  they  do  speak,  especially  when  justifying 
the  ways  of  God  to  man,  and  are  well  worthy  of  being  listened  to  for  both  their  own 
sakes  and  their  subject's.  It  is  one  of  a  saint's  sweetest  consolations  to  be  allowed  to 
vindicate  the  cause  of  God  and  truth.  2.  Absolute  confidence.  So  satisfied  did  Job  feel 
that  what  he  was  about  to  advance  was  in  perfect  accord  with  truth  and  right,  that 
he  was  completely  indifferent  to  all  personal  considerations  in  the  declaration  of  it.  It 
might  expose  him  to  further  ridicule  and  calumnious  animadversion,  might  intensify 
the  su.spicioDs  already  existing  against  him,  and  even  lead  to  angrier  and  more  direct 
accusations.  He  was  prepared  to  meet  these  for  the  sake  of  liberty  to  publish  what 
in  his  inmost  conscience  he  believed  to  be  the  truth.  Job's  example  is  well  worthy  of 
imitation.  First,  let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind  that  what  he 
purposes  to  speak  is  true,  and  then  let  him  manifest  the  courage  of  his  convictions  by 
suffering  for  them  if  need  be.  3.  Self-justification.  Job  vindicates  himself  against 
the  oft-repeated  charge  of  impatience.  (1)  Admitting  to  his  friends  that  their  accu- 
sation was  substantially  correct.  His  spirit  had  been  "  shortened "  (ver.  4)  by  the 
perplexing  enigma  of  Divine  providence  over  which  he  had  been  brooding,  as  after- 
wards was  that  of  David  (Ps.  xxxvii.  1),  of  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  3),  of  Jeremiah  (xii.  1) ; 
as  men's  spirits  are  sometimes  shortened,  irritated,  and  rendered  impatient,  by  diffi- 
culties (Numb.  xxi.  4),  temptations  (Judg.  xvi.  16),  afflictions  (Exod.  vi.  9);  and  as 
God,  more  humano,  represents  his  spirit  as  being  shortened,  filled  with  the  impatience 
ol  compassion,  through  beholding  the  misery  of  man  (Judg.  x.  16).  (2)  Denying 
their  right  to  impute  blame  to  him  on  that  account,  seeing  that  his  complaint  was 
directed  against,  not  themj  but  God  (ver.  4).  It  was  not  their  lack  of  sympathy  with 
his  sufferings  that  annoyed  him,  or  even  their  virulent  aspersions  of  bis  character,  but 
the  apparent  inequality  of  God's  dealings  with  himself.  A  saint's  greatest  trials  always 
come  from  God.  A  good  man  can  live  without  the  commiseration  or  approbation  of 
his  fellows,  but  not  without  the  communion  or  favour  of  his  God  (Ps.  xxx.  5).  The 
hardest  problem  a  sanctified  intelligence  has  to  solve  is  not  to  account  for  the  oppres- 
Bjons  and  injustices  of  man,  but  to  solve  seeming  inconsistencies  in  God's  dispensa- 
tions. (3)  Maintaining  the  perfect  reasonableness  of  his  behaviour  in  so  manifesting 
shortness  of  spirit  under  the  awful  mystery  of  Divine  providence.  If  they,  his  friends, 
were  in  any  respect  different  from  him,  it  was  because  they  wore  incapable  of  discern- 
ing the  mystery.  They  had  simply  shut  their  eyes  upoti  the  hard  problem  before 
which  he  (Job)  staggered,  and  then  affirmed  that  the  problem  did  not  exist.  So,  often, 
good  people  to-day,  through  lack  uf  intellectual  capacity  or  spiritual  sincerity,  either 


OH.  m.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  359 

do  not  see  or  do  not  steadily  look  at  the  difficulties  by  which  earnest  seekers  affef 
truth  are  perplexed,  and  accordingly  withhold  from  these  all  expression  of  sympathy 
for  their  doubt,  and  unfeelingly  condemn  them  for  their  unbelief  j  whereas  could  good 
people  only  see  the  difficulties  which  stand  in  the  way  of  those  whom  they  call  sceptics, 
infidels,  heretics,  they  would  at  least  commiserate,  if  tliey  did  not  participate  in,  the 
hesitation  and  uncertainty  they  condemn.  4.  Pr of mmd  reverence.  Job  could  not  con- 
template the  awful  problem  to  which  he  alluded  without  trembling  and  bewilderment. 
The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  was  a  theme  that  filled  him  with  silent  astonishment, 
that_  dazed  his  intellect  the  more  he  reflected  on  it,  that  seized  his  spirit  with  a  sort  of 
stupefaction — seeming  as  it  did  on  the  one  hand  (i.e.  on  the  theory  of  the  friends)  to 
suggest  blasphemous  thoughts  of  God,  and  on  the  other  hand  (».e.  on  the  hypothesis 
advanced  by  him)  to  foreshadow  appalling  woes  for  the  wicked.  Job,  who  was  not 
terrified  by  Eliphaz's  spectre,  who  was  not  moved  by  the  prospect  of  Hades,  was  over- 
powered with  consternation  at  what  appeared  to  tarnish  the  Divine  glory  or  to  impair 
the  happiness  of  man.  So  Abraham  was  jealous  of  the  Divine  honour  (Gen.  xviii.  25), 
and  David  was  afraid  of  the  Divine  judgments  upon  the  wicked  (Ps.  cxix.  20).  So  by 
all  men,  and  in  particular  by  all  saints,  should  God's  Person  be  held  in  reverence  (Ps. 
Ixxxix.  7),  and  God's  Word  be  listened  to  with  awe  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2),  and  God's  works  and 
ways  in  both  the  Church  and  the  world  be  studied  with  silent  wonder  (Ps.  ilvi.  10; 
Hab.  ii.  20;  Zeph.  i.  7;  Zech.  ii.  13). 

II.  Thb  abqumbnt  of  Job's  reply.  The  dogma  of  Zophar  and  his  companions  was 
contradicted  by  :  1.  The  facts  of  experience.  (Vers.  7 — ^21.)  In  enlarging  upon  these, 
Job  draws  attention  to  three  points.  (1)  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  (vers.  7 — 13). 
This  he  represents  as:  (o)  Long-continued,  " the  wicked "  being  permitted  "to  live 
and  become  old  "  (ver.  7).  Eliphaz  had  affirmed  that  the  ungodly  transgressor  should 
die  before  his  time  (ch.  xv.  20,  32),  and  Zophar  had  declared  that  the  joy  of  the  hypo- 
crite was  but  for  a  moment  (ch.  xx.  5).  These  statements.  Job  asserts,  were  notoriously 
incorrect.  (6)  Greatly  augmented,  "  the  wicked  "  not  simply  living  long  and  happily, 
but,  as  iCouce  more  to  confute  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  29)  and  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  15),  becoming 
"  mighty  in  power,"  attaining  to  vast  wealth,  and  therefore  to  what  wealth  represents — 
influence,  honour,  pleasure — the  three  principal  ingredients  in  the  world's  cup  of  felicity. 
(c)  Firmly  established,  the  good  fortunes  of  the  wicked  descending  to  their  families,  who, 
is  express  contradiction  to  the  teaching  of  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  84),  Bildad  (ch.  xviii.  19)., 
and  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  10),  grow  up  to  manhood  and  womanhood,  and  permanently  settle 
beside  the  patriarchal  tents — one  of  the  best  and  most  highly  valued  blessings  a  parent 
can  enjoy,  as  Job  formerly  knew  from  personal  experience  (ch.  i.  4,  5).  (d)  Perfectly 
secured,  their  houses  being  safe  from  fear,  or  "  in  peace,  without  alarm,"  and  having 
no  rod  of  God  upon  them  (ver.  9),  as  his  had  when  attacked  by  Chaldean  robbers,  and 
desolated  by  Divine  judgments — again  in  flagrant  antithesis  to  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  34), 
Bildad  (ch.  xviii.  15),  and  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  26).  (e)  Richly  varied,  consisting  of  material 
increase  (ver.  10),  in  opposition  to  Eliphaz  (oh.  xv.  29)  and  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  28); 
family  enlargement  (ver.  11),  against  Bildad  (ch.  xviii.  19) ;  and  social  felicity  (ver, 
12),  instead  of  the  lifelong  misery  awarded  to  them  by  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  20),  Bildad 
(ch.  xviii.  11 — 14),  and  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  18).  (/)  Absolutely  uninterrupted,  their 
affluence  and  ease  never  ceasing  throughout  life,  but  attending  them  to  the  grave's 
mouth,  into  which  they  quietly  and  quickly  drop  without  experiencing  either  physical 
disease  or  mental  misery  (ver.  13),  thus  attaining  to  the  very  culmination  of  mundane 
felicity — a  picture  widely  different  from  that  sketched  by  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  24),  Bildad 
(ch.  xviii.  18),  and  Zophar  (oh.  xx.  11).  {g)  Divinely  bestowed,  Job  adding  (ver. 
16)  that  the  true  source  of  all  the  felicity  and  prosperity  enjoyed  by  the  wicked, 
though  not  recognized  as  such  by  them,  was  the  hand  of  God,  who  is  the  primal 
Fountain  of  every  benefit  conferred  on  man,  whether  temporal  or  eternal,  material  or 
spiritual  (Jaa.  i.  17),  who  makes  his  sun  to  shine  upon  the  evil  and  the  good  (Matt,  v, 
45),  and  who  so  deals  with  the  ungodly  to  lead  them  to  repentance  (Rom.  ii.  4).  (2) 
The  impiety  of  the  prosperous  (vers.  14 — 16).  This  Job  depicts  in  four  particulars: 
(a)  The  strangeness  of  it.  On  the  theory  of  the  friends,  these  favourites  of  fortune 
ought  tt  have  been  good;  "and  yet"  (ver.  14)  they  were  the  opposite.  Though 
designed  to  engender  piety  in  the  heart,  material  prosjierity,  in  point  of  fact,  seldoii^ 
does.    Yet  God's  goodness  to  the  siunsr  is  an  aggravation  of  the  sinmr's  criminality 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxi.  1— 34. 


against  God.  (5)  The  wickedness  of  it.  The  prosperous  say  to  God,  "  Depart  from  us," 
not  as  Peter  said  to  Christ  (Luke  v.  8),  but  rather  as  the  Gadarenes  besought  him 
(Luke  viii.  37),  desiring  that  God  would  leave  them  to  the  enjoyment  of  their  lusts,  as 
these  latter  wished  to  have  their  swine,  not  troubling  them  with  either  the  reproofs  of 
conscience,  the  checks  of  Providence,  the  precepts  of  his  Law,  or  the  prickings  of  his  Spirit. 
What  the  sinner  most  fears  the  saint  most  desires — the  presence  and  fellowship  of  God. 
What  makes  the  wicked  man's  hell  constitutes  the  good  man's  heaven,  (c)  The 
foolishness  of  it.  Tlie  arguments  adduced  in  its  sui)port  are  three :  that  the  ways  of 
God  are  undesirable — which  was  not  the  opinion  of  Enoch  (Gen.  v.  21 — 24),  or  of 
Noah  (Gen.  vi.  9),  of  David  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  5),  of  Solonjon  (Prov.  iii.  17),  of  Isaiah, 
(Iv.  2),  of  Jeremiah  (xxxi.  12—14),  of  St.  Paul  (Phil.  iv.  4),  of  St.  Peter  (1  Epist.  i.  8),  or 
of  St.  John  (1  Epist.  v.  3),  and  certainly  not  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  28 — 30);  that  the  service 
of  God  is  unreasonable — which  it  cannot  be,  considering  wbo  God  is,  Elohim,  Jehovah, 
Shaddai,  the  All-powerful,  All-sufficient,  Self-existent,  wonder-working  Supreme,  and 
the  relations  he  sustains  to  man  as  Creator,  Preserver,  Redeemer,  Judge;  that  the 
worship  of  God  is  unprofitable — which  it  is  not,  since,  besides  having  the  promise  which 
belongs  to  godliness  generally  (1  Tim.  iv.  8),  prayer  has  the  special  guarantee  that  its 
desires  shall  be  fulfilled  (Matt.  vii.  7 ;  John  xv.  7),  while  it  is  inconceivable  that  a 
creature  could  commune  with  his  Creator,  or  a  saint  hold  fellowship  with  his  Saviour, 
without  experiencing  therefrom,  in  continually  augmenting  measure,  peace,  joy, 
illumination,  holiness,  everything  comprehended  in  what  is  styled  "growth  in  grace." 
(d)  The  repulsiveness  of  it.  The  counsel  of  the  wicked  Job  regards  with  abhorrence 
(ver.  16) ;  and  so  do  all  truly  pious  souls.  2.  The  plan  of  providence.  (Vers. 
22 — 26.)  This  Job  characterizes  as  (1)  arranged  by  Divine  wisdom, — to  maintain 
a  theory  out  of  harmony  with  which,  tlierefore,  was  a  practical  impeachment  of  the 
Divine  wisdom,  an  attempt  to  teach  God  (ver.  22),  who  can  receive  no  accession  to  his 
knowledge  or  understanding  from  any  of  his  creatures,  an  assumption  of  ability  to 
prescribe  to  him  the  scheme  in  accordance  with  which  his  universe  should  be  governed; 
(2)  all-embracing  in  its  sweep,  comprehending  in  its  provisions  aud  enactments  all 
creatures  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  "  those  in  heaven,"  t.e.  angels,  authorities, 
and  powers,  and  "  the  highest "  on  earth,  lordly  potentates,  mighty  magnates,  preten- 
tious sages,  as  well  as  common  serfs  and  lowly  peasants,  being  subject  to  his  sway, 
and  therefore  again,  because  of  its  all-inclusive  character,  scarcely  admitting  of  criticism 
on  the  part  of  puny  man ;  (3)  non-  retributive  in  its  chai  acter,  frequently  assigning 
to  the  wicked  man  a  life  of  ease  and  prosperity  (vers.  23,  24),  and  to  the  godly  man  a 
pilgrimage  of  poverty  ending  in  a  bitter  death  (ver.  25),  all  the  same  as  if  it  were 
regardless  of  the  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  piety  and  wickedness,  holiness  and 
sin  ;  and  (4)  indiscriminate  in  its  execution,  reducing  good  and  bad  alike  to  the  same 
dead  level  of  equality  in  the  grave  (ver.  26),  and  therefore  as  unlike  as  possible  to  the 
plan  of  providence  which  should  have  prevailed  had  the  theory  of  the  friends  been 
correct.  3.  The  teitimony  of  ordinary  men.  (Vers.  27 — 33.)  The  "  tokens  "  of  "  them 
that  go  by  the  way,"  i.e.  the  observations  made  by  them,  abundantly  declared  six  things 
concerning  the  ungodly,  viz.  (1)  that  they  were  not  usually  overwhelmed  with  retribu- 
tion on  earth  and  in  time,  as  the  friends  asserted  (ver.  28),  with  special  reference  to  Job 
(ver.  27),  whose  homestead  and  family  had  been  engulfed  iu  ruin  by  swift  calamity ;  (2) 
that  they  were  generally  exempted  from  the  ills  of  life,  even  in  a  season  of  widespread 
adversity  (ver.  30),  escaping  the  stroke  of  evil  fortune  by  which  other  and  better  men 
were  prostrated ;  (3)  that  they  were  commonly  allowed  to  pass  through  the  world 
without  either  punishment  or  reproof  (ver.  31),  amenable  to  no  human  law,  suffering 
no  sort  of  check  in  their  wickedness,  because  no  one  was  bold  enough  to  bear  witness  to 
them  of  their  misdeeds,  as  Nathan  did  to  David  (2  Sam.  xii.  7),  Elijah  to  Ahab  (1  Eings 
xviii.  17),  and  John  the  Baptist  to  Herod  (Matt.  xiv.  4),  or  powerful  enougli  to  exact 
retribution  for  tlieir  offences ;  (4)  that  honour  and  prosperity  attended  them  even  to 
their  graves,  the  wicked  tyrant's  lifeless  body  being  conducted,  as  were  the  corpses  of 
rich  men  in  the  days  of  the  Preacher  (Ecoles.  viii.  10),  and  as  probably  was  that  uf  Dives 
(Luke  xvi.  22),  with  immense  pomp  and  magnificent  ceremony,  to  "  the  vaults  or 
chambers  in  se|iulchral  caverns  or  tombs  in  which  the  dead  were  laid"  (Carey),  where 
affectionate  friends  and  relatives  shall  watch  over  his  tomb  (Good,  Pry),  or  he  himself 
shall  keep  guard  over  his  lieap,  ija.  over  the  mound  or  pile  in  which  he  lies  buried. 


OH.  xn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  05"  JOB.  361 

looking  down  upon  it  in  monumental  effigy ;  (6)  that  even  in  the  grave  they  suffer 
no  disadvantage  in  comparison  with  other  men,  "  the  clods  of  the  valley "  being  as 
"sweet"  unto  them(ver.  33)  as  to  the  pious,  which  may  be  true  so  far  as  the  insensate 
dust  is  concerned,  though  of  course  it  is  only  an  imaginatiou  that  the  tenants  of  the 
tomb  can  feel  either  pain  or  pleasure  (Eccles.  ix.  6,  6),  but  implies  nothing  as  to  the 
iBondUion  of  their  souls,  which  we  know  to  be  after  death  in  a  situation  widely  different 
from"  that  of  the  righteous  (Luke  xvi.  23)  j  and  (6)  that,  in  so  far  as  death  itself  may 
be  accounted  an  evil,  it  is  one  which  they  share  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  race, 
every  one  in  his  turn  coming  after,  as  innumerable  multitudes  have  already  gone 
before,  them  (ver.  33). 

III.  The  application  of  Job's  reply.  1.  The  consolation  <^  his  friends  was  vain. 
(1)  It  was  inefficacious.  It  did  not  soothe  him  in  his  sorrow  or  help  him  to  beav  his 
burden,  but  very  much  the  opposite.  (2)  It  was  insincere.  It  was  not  really  aimed 
at  the  comfort  of  the  patriarch  at  all,  but  at  his  condemuatioiu  It  exhorted  tiim  to 
penitence  instead  of  aiding  him  with  friendly  sympathy.  (3)  It  was  fallacious.  It 
was  based  on  wholly  erroneous  principles.  This  Job  explicitly  asserts.  2.  The 
answers  ofhis  friends  were  wicked.  (1)  They  were  untrue.  They  misrepresented  God 
by  ascribing  to  him  principles  of  government  which  he  palpably  repudiated;  and  they 
calumniated  him,  Job,  by  imputing  to  him  sins  of  which  he  was  iimocent.  Hence  to 
that  extent  (2)  they  were  also  sinful.  They  were  perfidious  attempts  to  blacken  the 
character  of  their  suffering  friend,  and  to  curry  favour  with  the  King  of  heaven. 

Learn :  1.  That  a  good  man  should  never  weary  in  contending  for  the  cause  of  God 
and  truth.  2.  That  a  man  who  has  God  and  truth  upon  his  side  has  the  best  possible 
allies  in  debate.  3.  That  they  who  have  no  difficulties  in  their  creeds  are  not  the 
most  likely  to  be  possessed  of  truth.  4.  That  the  best  souls  on  earth  are  not  necessarily 
those  who  have  no  hard  problems  to  solve.  6.  That  on  the  whole  continuous  prosperity 
is  less  desirable  as  an  earthly  portion  than  perpetual  adversity.  6.  That  God  confers 
many  of  his  best  gifts  upon  the  worst  of  men — families  and  flocks  upon  tyrants,  Christ 
and  salvation  upon  sinaers.  7.  That  great  wealth  is  prone  to  separate  the  soul  from 
God.  8.  That  God's  people  should  shun  the  counsel,  avoid  the  company,  and  abhor 
the  conduct  of  wicked  men.  9.  That  wicked  men's  "Depart  from  us,"  will  yet  be 
•nswered  by  Christ's  "  Depart  from  me."  10.  That  it  is  better  to  be  God's  wheat  than 
the  devil's  chaff,  since  though  the  former  may  be  bruised,  the  latter  shall  be  blown 
away.  11.  That  the  God  who  is  able  to  judge  angels  is  not  likely  to  prove  incapable 
of  judging  men.  12.  That  the  wicked  man's  glory  upon  eaitli  is  little  better  than  the 
paraphernalia  of  a  funeral  procession.  13.  That  God's  ever-watchful  eye  is  a  better 
guardian  of  a  saint's  dust  than  gilded  mausoleums  and  monumental  columns. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES, 

Vers.  1 — 34. — Diverse  interpretations  of  life.  The  friends  of  Job  remain  entrenched 
in  the  one  firm  position,  as  they  think  it,  which  they  have  from  the  first  taken  up. 
No  appeals  on  his  part  have  availed  to  soften  their  hearts,  or  induce  a  reconsideration 
of  the  rigid  theory  of  suffering  which  they  have  adopted.  But  he  now,  no  longer 
confining  himself  to  the  assertion  of  his  personal  innocence,  makes  an  attack  upon 
their  positiou.  He  dwells  upon  the  great  enigma  of  life— the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
through  the  whole  of  life,  in  contrast  to  the  misery  and  persecution  which  often  fall 
to  the  lot  of  the  righteous.  In  face  of  these  contradictions,  it  is  wrong  and  malicious 
of  his  friends  to  desire  to  fix  guilt  upon  him  because  he  suffers. 

I.  Intboduotokt  addbess  to  the  fmbnds.  (Vers.  1 — 6.)  He  asks  for  a  patient 
hearing,  because  he  is  not  about  to  complain  of  man,  but  of  a  terrible  enigma  which 
may  well  excite  the  amazement,  the  dread  wonder  of  men,  as  being  beyond  their 
power  to  unravel.  He  speaks  as  one  the  very  foundations  of  whose  faith  are  shaken, 
as  he  thinks  of  this  painful  and  perplexing  "  riddle  of  the  earth."  "  Because  reason 
cannot  comprehend  the  mystery  of  the  sross,  and  why  God  deals  often  so  hardly  with 
his  children,  bitter  thoughts  will  arise  from  time  to  time  in  devout  hearts,  and  cause 
them  to  tremble  in  great  dismay  "  (Zeyss).  (See  Ps.  ixxvii.  1 ;  Ixxiii.  12 ;  Jer.  xii.  1.) 
The  solid  columns  of  our  reason,  so  to  speak,  are  shaken  by  doubts  of  the  justice  of  God's 
government  of  the  world. 


362  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  sn.  1—34. 


II.  AwEAL  TO  bxpebienob:  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  oonteasted  with 
TUB  AFPLicTioNs  OF  THE  BMHTEOUS,  IN  THIS  LIFE.  (Vers.  7 — 26.)  l._  Traits  of 
godless  prosperity.  (Vers.  7 — 16.)  (1)  The  wicked  are  fortunate  in  their  persons 
(ver.  7).  Instead  of  heing  out  off  hy  premature  death,  aa  Zophar  had  maintained,  they 
remain  in  vigour  to  a  good  old  age.  (2)  In  their  families.  They  see  their  posterity 
flourishinj;  before  them  like  young  scions  from  the  old  root  (ver.  8).  (3)  In  their 
houses.  Peace  dwells  there,  free  from  alarm,  and  no  chastising  rod  of  Providence  falls 
upon  them  (vei.  9).  (4)  In  their  herds  and  flocks — the  great  elements  of  Oriental  wealth 
(vers.  10, 11).  (5)  In  their  merry  life.  Sportive  throngs  of  children  play  around  them, 
full  of  joyous  pranks  and  frolic,  wliile  the  sound  of  music  charms  the  ear  (vers.  11,  12). 
(6)  Their  easy  death.  Their  days  are  spent  in  comfort  to  the  very  last,  quite  in  opposition 
to  the  gloomy  pictures  which  the  friends  have  drawn  of  their  fearful  and  violent  ends 
(ch.  xi.  20;  xviiL  14;  xx.  11).  They  disappear  suddenly,  painlessly,  into  the  unseen 
world — theirs  is  a  euthanasia  (ver.  13)1  Such  a  life  may  be  lived,  such  a  death 
may  he  met,  without  a  spark  of  religion  to  justify  or  explain  it  (vers.  14,  15). 
They  are  men,  these  wicked  ones,  whose  language  to  God  has  been,  "Depart  from 
us!"  Their  happiness  awakens  no  gratitude  towards  its  Source;  they  deem  worship 
and  prayer  to  be  useless.  Job  proceeds  with  his  description,  and  declares  further,  to 
support  his  position,  "  Lo,  not  in  their  hand  stands  their  good."  That  is,  not  they  are, 
but  God  is  himself,  the  Author  oi  their  prosperity;  and  it  is  this  which  makes  the 
problem  so  dark  and  hard  to  solve.  "The  counsel  of  the  wicked  be  far  from  me!" 
(ver.  16).  Here  flashes  out  once  more  the  true,  deep  faith  of  the  patriarch.  Despite 
all  the  mystery  and  all  the  temptation,  he  will  endure  to  the  end;  never  will  he 
renounce  his  God  (ch.  i.  11 ;  ii.  5).  2.  These  lessons  of  experience  confirmed,  with  refer- 
ence to  the  positions  of  the  friends.  (Vers.  17 — 21.)  Bildad  had  spoken  (ch.  xviii.  5, 12) 
of  the  quenching  uf  the  light  of  the  wicked  man  and  of  his  sudden  overthrow.  Job 
questions  the  universal  application  of  this.  "How  often,"  etc?  is  here  equivalent  to 
"How  seldom,"  etc.  1  How  often  does  God  distribute  sorrows  in  his  anger V  with 
allusion  to  ch.  xx.  23  (ver.  17).  This  doubting  questioning  still  continues  in 
vor.  18,  "How  often  do  they  become  as  straw  before  the  wind,  and  like  chalf 
which  the  tempest  carries  away  ?  "  (see  ch.  xx.  8,  9).  "  God  lays  up  for  his  children 
his  calamity?"  referring  to  Eliphaz's  words  (ver.  4)  and  Zopliar's  (ch.  xx.  10). 
Job  proceeds  (ver.  20)  to  refute  this  theory  of  satisfaction  by  sub.stitution.  "  Let  his 
eyes  see  his  destruction;  and  of  the  fiery  wrath  of  the  Almighty  let  him  drink!" 
The  allusion  is  to  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  23).  And  further,  against  this  theory  (ver.  21) ; 
in  his  dull  insensibility  the  wicked  man  cares  nought  for  the  fate  of  his  pos- 
terity. "  For  what  pleasure  is  his  house  after  him  ? " — what  interest  or  concern 
has  the  selfish  egotist  in  the  sufferings  of  his  descendants  after  he  is  dead  and  gone? 
And  if  this  be  so,  how  can  it  be  alleged  that  the  wicked  man  is  purdshed  in  his  pos- 
terity ?  "  If  the  number  of  his  moons  is  allotted  to  him."  The  thought  is  that  the 
selfish,  pleasure-seeking  bad  man  is  content,  if  only  he  lives  out  the  full  measure  of  his 
days.  What  amidst  these  perplexities  can  keep  the  soul  true  to  God  and  steadfast  in 
the  pursuit  of  goodness?  Experience  suggesta  these  doubts;  and  a  larger  experience 
must  solve  them.  The  Christian  knows  that  in  God's  ordering  of  life  the  outward  pro.i- 
perity  is  often  unrelated  to  moral  worth.  The  good  things  of  this  world  cannot  satisfy  ; 
without  a  good  conscience  earthly  happiness  is  impossible.  Often  the  worldly  pros- 
perity enjoyed  by  the  bad  man  is  the  means  of  his  destruction.  This  is  not  the  scene 
of  final  recompense  and  retribution.  Doubtless  God,  whose  counsels  are  inscrutable, 
will  indemnify  pious  sufferers  for  these  earthly  privations.  3.  Restatement  of  the 
enigma.  (Vers.  22 — 26.)  The  contrast  in  men's  destinies  to  our  expectations  involves 
a  Divine  counsel  which  we  may  not  presume  to  understanH.  "  Shall  one  teach  God 
knowledge,  who  judges  those  that  are  high  ?  "  (ver.  22).  The  friends  had  brought  this 
thouiiht  forward  (ch.iv.  18 ;  xv.  15)  with  the  view  of  supporting  their  narrow  theory  of 
retribution.  Conversely,  Job  would  refute  by  the  same  means  this  short-sighted 
view,  pointing  to  the  ufifathomable  depth  and  mystery  of  the  counsels  and  laws  of  God 
for  the  government  of  the  world.  Two  examples  illustrate  this.  One  man  dies  in 
bodily  ease  and  comfort — his  troughs  full  of  mUk,  strong  and  vigorous  to  the  marrow 
of  his  bones  (vers.  23,  24).  Another  dies  with  bitterness  in  his  soul,  and  has  not 
enjoyed  good  (ver.  25).    Aj»d  yet  they  are  united  in  one  common  fate,  though  theii 


OH.  xn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  868 

moral  worth  is  bo  different  and  go  contrasted.  "  With  one  another  they  lie  on  the 
dust  of  the  grave,  and  the  worms  cover  them."  "  Both,  heirs  to  some  six  feet  of  clod, 
are  equal  in  the  earth  at  last"  (ver.  26). 

III.   COBKECTION  OF   HIS   FRIENDS   FOE  TBEIB  FABTIAIi  JUDaHBNT   OF   THE   ODTWARD 

CONDITION  OF  MEN.  (Veis.  27—34.)  He  knows  their  thoughts,  and  the  malice  with 
which  they  ill-treat  him,  with  the  object  of  proving  him  by  any  means,  fair  or  unfair,  a 
hypocrite.  "Where,"  they  say,  "is  the  house  of  the  tyrant?  and  where  the  tent 
inhabited  by  wicked  men?"  Job  alludes  still  to  the  repeated  descriptions  of  Eliphaz 
and  Bildad  (ch.  xv.  34 ;  xviii.  15,  21)  of  the  overthrow  of  the  tent  of  the  wicked  man 
(ver.  28).  Have  they,  then,  not  asked  the  wanderers  by  the  way  (Lam.  i.  12 ;  Ps. 
Ixxx.  12),  and  will  they  mistake  their  tokens?  The  instances  of  prosperous  bad  men 
and  unhappy  good  men  which  these  persons  can  produce — they  must  not  misunderstand 
nor  reject  them.  The  "  tokens  "  are  the  memorable  and  wonderful  events  of  this  kind 
(ver.  29).  Then  follow  the  summary  contents  of  these  people's  experiences  (ver.  30) : 
"  That  on  the  day  of  destruction  the  wicked  is  spared,  on  the  day  of  wrath  they  are 
led  away  "  from  its  devastating  fury,  so  that  they  suffer  nothing.  "  Who  will  show 
him  his  way  to  his  face?  and  if  he  has  acted,  who  will  repay  it  to  him  ?"  (ver.  31). 
This  is  Job  s  question.  It  concerns  God,  the  unfathomably  wise  and  mighty  Author 
of  the  destinies  of  men.  "And  he"  (alluding  to  ver.  30)  "is  brought  to  burial" 
in  honour  and  pomp,  "and  on  a  mound  he  keeps  watch/'  like  one  immortalized  in  a 
statue  or  tomb.  His  tumulus  remains  to  record  his  name  and  memory,  while  Bildad 
had  described  the  memory  of  the  wicked  as  perishing  from  the  earth,  his  name  being 
forgotten.  Ver.  33, "  The  clods  of  the  valley  lie  softly  upon  him  " — the  valleys  being  the 
favourite  burying-places  in  the  East — "and  all  the  world  draws  after  him,"  treading  the 
same  path  which  multitudes  have  done  before. 

Conclusion.  (Ver.  34.)  "  How  will  you  now  so  vainly  comfort  me  ?  "  Falsehood  only 
remains  from  their  replies.  There  is  some  truth  both  in  Zophar's  and  in  Job's  speeches. 
But  both  represent  one  side  only  of  the  truth.  The  end  of  the  wicked  man  is  that 
which  Zophar  depicts.  Yet  the  temporal  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  lasting  to  the  latest 
hour  of  life,  is  often  seen.  Job  cannot  deny  the  facts  of  Zophar;  but  neither  can 
Zophar  deny  the  exceptions  pointed  out  by  Job.  The  friends  are  blind  to  these, 
because  the  admission  of  them  would  overthrow  the  whole  battery  of  their  attack. 
Jot  'emains  nearer  to  the  truth  than  Zophar  (Delitzsch).  The  gudless  are  often  greatly 
exalted,  to  fall  the  more  deeply  afterwards.  "  Raised  up  on  high  to  be  hurled  down 
below  "  (Shakespeare).  "  Lofty  towers  have  the  heavier  fall "  (Horace, '  Od.,'  ii.  10. 10 ; 
Juvenal, '  Sat.,'  x.  104,  sqq.,  on  the  fate  of  Sejanus).  But  it  is  the  belief  in  a  future 
judgment  and  a  future  life  which  can  alone  give  patience  under  the  anomalies  and 
contradictions  of  the  present.  The  God  who  is  "  upright,  true,  and  all-disposing  "  hath 
appointed  a  day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  and  "  reward  every 
man  according  to  his  works."  "  This  is  certain,  that  God  is  infinitely  just ;  whether  or 
not  we  apprehend  him,  he  is  so.  When  we  think  his  ways  are  imperfect,  we  should 
remember  that  the  imperfection  is  only  in  our  understanding.  It  is  not  the  ground  or 
the  trees  that  turn  roimd ;  but  the  truth  is,  we  are  giddy,  and  think  so.  .  .  .  Because 
I  cannot  see  the  light,  shall  I  say  that  the  sun  does  not  shine?  There  may  he  many 
reasons  that  may  hinder  me.  Something  may  cover  the  eye,  or  the  clouds  may  cover  the 
sun,  or  it  may  be  in  another  horizon,  as  in  the  night ;  but  it  is  impossible  for  the  sun, 
so  long  as  it  is  a  sun,  not  to  shine.  ...  It  was  not  for  Job's  sin  that  God  afBiotcd  him, 
but  because  he  was  freely  pleased  to  do  so;  yet  there  was  a  reason  for  this  pleasure, 
which  was  to  discover  that  grace  of  patience  given  him  by  God,  to  the  astonishment  of 
the  world  and  the  confutation  of  the  devil "  (South). — J. 

Vers.  7 — 15. — The  perverse  misapplication  of  the  Divine  goodness.  Job  is  ready 
with  his  answer.  Although  Zophar  has  correctly  represented  the  judgments  that  come 
upon  the  wicked,  and  the  evils  to  which  wickedness  not  unfrequently  lead,  yet  many 
cases  of  departure  from  this  rule  are  to  be  observed.  Job  therefore  proposes  a  counter- 
question,"  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live,  become  old,  yea,  are  mighty  in  power?  "  He  then 
depicts  the  prosperity  which  again  and  again  marks  the  career  of  the  wicked,  to  whom 
the  Divine  bounty  is  shown  (1)  in  prolonged  life;  (2)  in  the  power  and  influence 
they  are  permitted  to  gain ;  (3)  in  their  family  prosperity ;  (4)  in  their  freedom  from 


864  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxi.  1—34. 


calamity;  (5)  in  their  domestic  security;  (6)  in  tlieir  abundance  and  joy.  This 
mystery  Job  does  not  instantly  unravel.  But  what  is  the  effect  of  all  this  prosperity 
on  the  wicked?  It  does  not  humble  him  nor  make  him  thankful.  As  an  uneven  glass 
distorts  the  fairest  image,  so  their  impure  and  ill-regulated  minds  turn  the  goodness  of 
God  into  an  occasion  of  impious  rejection.  "  Therefore  they  say  unto  God,  Depart  from 
us."    The  distortions  of  the  evil  mind  pervert  the  goodness  of  God  into — 

I.  An  occasion  of  impious  despisal  op  the  Divine  Name.  They  refuse  to  know 
God.  They  shut  out  the  knowledge  of  God  from  their  hearts.  With  a  wicked 
"Depart  I  "  they  resist  the  Holy  One.  They  have  no  aspiration  after  a  holy  communion, 
or  the  vision  of  the  pure.  The  Lord  is  abhorrent  to  them.  Their  tastes  are  corrupt ; 
their  preferences  are  for  evil.  Truly  they  pervert  anil  reverse  all  good  things.  They 
put  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness.  They  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet 
for  bitter.  The  very  call  to  adoration  and  praise  they  turn  into  an  occasion  of  despisal 
and  rejection. 

II.  In  their  perversions  they  make  the  Divine  goodness  an  occasion  foe  a  despisal 
OF  THE  Divine  ways.  This  is  always  the  danger  of  them  who  have  abundance  and 
yet  lack  the  fear  of  God.  This  is  the  basis  of  a  teaching  long  afterwards  touchingly 
taught  concerning  the  rich,  to  whom  it  is  so  "  hard  "  to  "  enter  into  the  kinp:dom  of 
heaven."  The  satisfied  man  becomes  the  self-satisfied,  even  though  imlebted  to 
another  for  his  possessions.  Then  the  spirit  nf  independence  becomes  a  spirit  of 
revulsion  against  all  authority  that  might  be  raised  over  it.  So  they  who  "  spend  their 
days  in  wealth"  say,  ".We  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways." 

III.  This  same  spirit  ripens  into  an  absolute  refusal  to  submit  to  the  Divinb 
AUTHOBITT.  "What  is  the  Almighty,  that  we  should  serve  him?"  So  far  is  the 
goodness  of  God  from  leading  him  to  repentance  who  is  evil  in  spirit.  Wickedness  is 
the  fruit  of  an  ill-directed  judgment,  and  it  tends  to  impair  the  judgment  more  and 
more.  It  distorts  all  the  moral  sensibilities,  and  therefore  all  the  moral  processes.  If 
the  judgment  were  accurately  to  decide  in  favour  of  the  Divine  Law  and  its  obligatory 
character,  the  perverted  preferences  of  the  mind  would  reject  the  testimony,  and  by  a 
rude  rebellion  within  would  prevent  a  right  decision  from  being  arrived  at.  Even  the 
check  and  restraint  of  the  enlightened  judgment  becomes  a  signal  for  resistance.  Its 
goad  is  kicked  against;  its  repressions  refused;  its  warning  unheeded;  its  plain  path, 
narrow  and  diflScult  to  follow,  is  rejected,  and  a  broad  and  easy  way,  in  which  the 
foolish  heart  finds  its  pleasure,  chosen  in  preference.  So  the  Divine  authority  is  rejected 
and  despised. 

The  ill  effects  of  rejecting  the  Divine  authority  are  seen :  1.  In  the  loss  of  the 
guidance  of  the  supreme  wisdom.  2.  In  the  inevitable  injuries  resulting  from  following 
a  false  and  erroneous  judgment.  3.  In  the  demoralization  of  the  life.  4.  In  the  final 
vindication  of  the  Divine  authority. — E.  G. 

Ver.  30. — The  reservation  of  the  Divine  Judginent.  The  expositions  of  these  verses 
are  various,  and  all  true  homiletics  must  be  based  on  true  exposition.  But  there  is 
no  diversity  of  opinion  amongst  expositors  as  to  the  final  judgment  of  the  wicked. 
Whatever,  therefore,  may  be  the  aspect  in  which  it  is  viewed  by  the  argument  of  this 
chapter,  it  cannot  be  too  loudly  declared  that  judgment  upon  the  wicked  is  reserved. 
That  a  final  day  of  adjudication  will  come  has  its  aspect  of  warning  to  the  wrong-doer 
who  temporarily  escapes  punishment,  and  its  aspect  of  encouragement  to  the  patient 
doer  of  that  which  is  good,  who  is  nevertheless  called  upon  to  suffer  affiiction.  The 
reservation  of  the  Divine  judgment — 

I.  A  wabnino  to  the  wicked  not  to  presume  on  a  present  exemption  from 
CALAMITY.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore 
the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil."  Thus  is  man  perverse, 
blind,  foolish.  The  declaration  of  a  final,  inevitable  judgment  is  the  effectual  check 
upon  foolish  presumption.  The  wicked  man  is  a  weak  man,  whose  own  conscience 
makes  a  coward  of  him.  Tlie  appeal  to  his  fear  and  dread  is  the  effectual  check  upon 
his  carelessness. 

II.  In  the  reservation  of  the  Divine  judgment,  the  oppressed  righteous  ones  mat 
FIND  A  true  ground  OF  CONSOLATION.  Revenge  is  not  a  pious  sentiment.  To  desire 
punishment  upon  the  wicked  from  vindictive  feelings  is  far  from  the  pure  mind ;  but 


OH.  XM.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  865 

ke  that  Is  unjustly  traduced  may  abide  in  hope  that  one  day  a  Divine  judgment  will 
bring  hidden  things  to  light,  and  make  the  righteousness  of  the  falsely  accused  shirje 
as  the  light.  The  Divine  judgments  being  always  wise  and  good  and  just — ^the  judg- 
ments of  the  loving  God — they  will  find  their  echo  of  approval  in  the  heart  of  every 
wise  and  just  man.  The  final  Divine  judgments  will  commend  themselves  to  the 
utmost  tenderness  of  the  human  heart;  for  their  absolute  rightness  will  be  apparent. 

III.  The  reservation  of  the  Divine  judgment  against  wickedness  will  afford  oppor- 
tunity FOB  THE  FINAL  VINDICATION  OF  THE  DiviNE  WATS.  In  his  great  coudesccnsion 
it  may  please  God  to  vindicate  his  dealings  with  the  sons  of  men,  wlien  each  will  have 
evidence  of  the  righteousness  of  his  doings.  Clouds  and  darkness  may  now  hide  the 
Divine  purpose  and  the  Divine  methods  of  procedure ;  but  all  will  be  clearly  revealed, 
and  hidden  iniquity  be  exposed  and  oppressed  goodness  vindicated  and  the  Divin"  ways 
justified.  The  certainty,  the  strictness,  the  equity,  the  unbiassed  rectitude  of  the 
Divine  judgment,  are  causes  for  dreading  it.  A  lowly,  reverent,  obedient  spirit  is  the 
true  preparation  for  the  final  award.  Judgment,  though  delayed,  will  not  be  forgotten. 
"  G-od  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the  wicked." — E.  G. 

Ver.  8. — The  right  of  reply.  I.  The  right  of  beply  is  justly  claimed.  Job  has 
heard  enough  from  his  friends.  He  is  impatient  to  answer  them.  Surely  they  should 
allow  him  to  do  so.  1.  This  right  is  conceded  in  law.  The  worst  criminal  may  be 
defended  by  counsel,  may  call  witnesses  in  bis  favour,  may  make  his  own  statement. 
In  civil  cases  both  sides  are  heard  before  judgment  is  pronounced.  2.  This  right  should 
be  allowed  in  social  life.  It  is  not  just  to  condemn  any  one  unheard.  There  may  come 
to  us  a  damaging  tale  concerning  a  person ;  it  is  our  duty  to  suspend  our  judgment  till 
he  has  given  his  explanation.  3.  This  right  ought  to  he  permitted  in  theology.  It  was 
a  theological  as  well  as  a  personal  discussion  that  Job  was  carrying  on  with  his  friends. 
But  in  theology  people  are  most  impatient  of  hearing  anything  contrary  to  their  own 
views.  Yet  it  is  not  just  to  condemn  those  who  differ  from  us  until  we  have  heard 
what  they  have  to  say  on  f  heir  side  of  a  question. 

II.  The  bight  of  ebply  is  helpful  in  the  intbbests  of  truth.  We  are  all 
tempted  to  take  partial,  one-sided  views  of  things.  It  is  only  by  bringing  light  from 
all  quarters  that  we  can  see  tie  rounded  totality  of  truth.  Therefore  discussion  helps 
truth.  At  first,  indeed,  it  may  not  seem  to  do  so,  and,  indeed,  there  seems  to  be  a 
certain  irony  in  it,  for  the  most  eager  combatants  are  usually  furthest  from  a  just  con- 
ception of  what  they  are  contending  for.  But  after  the  discussion  is  over,  those  who 
look  on  are  better  able  to  understand  the  whole  subject.  Thus  the  discussion  of  Job 
and  his  friends  throws  light  on  the  mystery  of  Providence.  The  creeds  of  Christendom 
were  forged  in  the  fires  of  controversy.  Theology  is  a  result  of  discussion.  The  right 
of  reply  has  given  breadth,  depth,  and  deflniteness  to  it.  Truth  is  not  helped  by  the 
persecution  of  error. 

III.  The  bight  of  reply  is  a.  consolation  to  the  misjudged.  Job  only  asks 
for  this.  When  he  has  spoken  his  friends  may  mock  on.  There  is  some  humour  in 
his  tone,  or  peihaps  a  bitter  scorn.  Truth  is  strong.  Only  let  it  shine  out  in  its 
native  strength,  and  calumny  must  wither  befoie  it.  Any  unjust  accusations  will  then 
only  break  themselves  like  waves  that  are  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  crags.  We  can 
afford  to  be  indifferent  to  falsehood  and  error  if  we  can  speak  out  and  let  the  truth  be 
fairly  seen. 

IV.  The  bight  op  reply  will  be  given  ultimately  to  all.  It  will  be  of  little 
use  to  those  who  are  in  the  wrong.  To  be  able  to  stand  up  in  the  searching  light  of 
eternity  and  reply  for  a  bad  case  is  no  desirable  privilege.  Bather  than  attempt  to 
reply,  the  self-convicted  sinner  will  call  on  the  mountains  and  hills  to  cover  him.  But 
those  who  are  honestly  endeavouring  to  make  the  truth  manifest  in  face  of  great  oppo- 
sition and  gross  misapprehension  may  learn  to  possess  their  souls  in  patience  if  they 
will  come  to  understand  that  the  oppression  and  injustice  are  but  temporary.  Though 
silenced  for  a  season,  ultimately  truth  will  speak  out  with  a  trumpet-voice. 

lu  conclusion,  let  us  remember  that  God  has  a  right  of  reply  to  all  man's  foolish 
sophistry,  to  all  his  shuffling  excuses.  All  error  and  pretence  will  be  pulverized  and 
annihilated  when  God  speaks  his  great  answer  to  cavillers,  unbelievers,  and  opponents 
of  every  kind. — W.  F.  A. 


366  THE  BOOK  OP  JOR  [oh.  xxi.  1— 84 


Ver.  i. — The  complaint  ttiat  goes  leyond  man.  L  The  complaint  that  is  op  morb 
THAN  man's  doinos.  Job  does  not  only  complain  of  man's  injustice.  That  would  be 
hard  to  bear ;  and  yet  a  strong  soul  should  be  able  to  withstand  it,  trusting  in  a  higher 
justice  that  will  set  all  right  at  last.  But  the  mystery,  the  horror,  the  agony,  of  Job's 
complaint,  spring  from  the  persuasion  that  his  troubles  are  to  be  attributed  to  a  more 
than  earthly  origin.  They  are  so  huge  and  terrible  that  he  cannot  but  ascribe  them  to 
a  superhuman  source.  This  fact  intensifies  the  complaint  in  many  respects.  1.  The 
mystery  of  the  supernatural.  Man  quails  before  it.  The  bravest  hero  who  is  not  afraid 
of  any  human  strength  trembles  at  the  thought  of  the  unseen.  2.  The  power  of  the 
Divine.  Job  can  resist  man,  but  he  cannot  stand  out  against  God.  It  is  not  mortal 
frailty,  but  immortal  Omnipotence,  that  assails  him.  The  contest  is  unequal.  3.  Tlie 
apparent  injustice  of  the  Just  One.  This  is  hardest  of  all.  It  would  be  possible  to 
bear  the  lower  injustice  if  assured  of  the  impartiality  and  triumph  of  the  higher  justice. 
But  when  Job  looks  up  for  justice  to  its  great  central  throne,  even  there  he  seems  to  see 
wrong,  misapprehension,  and  unfair  treatment.  It  is  not  that  Job  directly  charges 
God  with  injustice ;  but  there  is  in  liis  heart  an  all-perplexing,  baiSing  thought,  dis- 
couraging confidence.  Tho\igh  we  may  not  doubt  God,  it  is  hard  to  bear  his  hand  when 
he  seems  to  go  against  justice  and  love.     Hei'e  is  the  great  test  of  faith. 

II.  The  complaint  that  goes  beyond  man's  ears.  As  Job  complains  of  what 
is  done  by  more  than  man,  so  he  cries  to  a  power  above  the  human.  The  sublimity 
of  the  drama  is  seen  in  its  relations  with  the  unseen  world.  It  assumes  more  than 
heroic  proportions.  It  is  concerned  with  God  as  well  as  man.  1.  The  complaining 
cry.  Job  continually  lifts  up  his  voice  to  God.  We  have  to  learn  to  look  above  the 
earth.  It  is  foolish  to  complain  of  God,  but  it  is  natural  to  complain  to  God.  If  we 
even  think  hard  thoughts  of  God,  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  bury  them  in  the  secrecy 
of  our  own  breasts.  There  they  will  only  burn  as  hidden  fires,  and  consume  all  faith  and 
hope.  It  is  far  better  to  be  courageous,  and  confess  them  frankly  to  God  himself.  He 
can  understand  them,  judge  them  fairly,  and  see  the  sorrow  and  perplexity  from  which 
they  have  sprung.  And  it  is  he  who  can  dissipate  them.  .  2.  The  merciful  Heaven. 
God  hears  every  cry  of  his  children,  and  when  faith  is  mixed  with  fear  he  accepts  the 
faith  and  dispels  the  fear.  Men  judge  their  fellows  harshly  for  their  complaining 
utterances.  God  is  like  the  patient  mother  who  soothes  her  fretful  child.  Though 
the  cry  is  wrung  from  the  heart  in  an  agony  of  dismay,  so  that  no  hope  of  relief  is 
visible  through  the  blinding  veil  of  tears,  God  does  not  fling  it  back  with  angered 
dignity ;  he  treats  it  with  pitying  mercy.  If  only  the  siml  will  give  itself  utterly  up 
to  him,  even  in  its  darkness  and  despair,  he  will  hear  and  save. — ^W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  7 — 21. — TOe  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  Job  here  gives  his  version  of  the  old 
familiar  theme.  It  is  not  as  the  three  friends  supposed.  These  neat  maxims  do  not 
fit  in  with  the  facts  of  life  as  Job  has  seen  them.  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  is  a 
real  though  a  mysterious  fact,  one  that  cannot  be  gainsaid. 

I.  The  facts  as  witnessed  in  life.  1.  An  established  family.  Job's  home  is 
desolate.  The  seed  of  the  wicked  is  established  in  their  sight.  They  have  their 
children  about  them.  2.  Security.  (Ver.  8.)  "  Their  houses  are  safe  from  fear."  They 
are  not  haunted  by  the  alarms  of  guilt.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  very  comfortable 
and  self-satisfied  (ver.  9).  3.  Freedom  from  chastisement.  The  rod  of  God  is  not 
upon  them.  The  righteous  man  is  chastised ;  the  godless  man  is  spared  (ver.  9).  4. 
Good  fortune.  Their  cattle  breed  successfully  (ver.  10).  The  mishaps  which  fall  to 
the  lot  of  others  avoid  them.  A  certain  good  fortune  follows  them,  even  into  those 
chances  of  life  which  are  beyond  human  control.  6.  Pleasure.  These  wicked  people 
are  not  troubled  by  their  sins.  They  have  no  puritanical  scruples  to  sour  them. 
They  spend  their  days  in  gaiety  (vers.  11, 12).  6.  Prosperity  lasting  till  death.  (Ver. 
13.)  I'hey  do  not  have  the  reverse  of  fortune  which  the  three  moralizers  assumed  to 
be  their  lot.  A  long  life  of  wealth  and  ease  is  followed  by  a  quick  and  almost  painless 
death.     Here  is  uniiiitigated  prosperity  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave. 

II.  The  disastrous  consequences  of  these  facts.  Because  they  are  so  pvosperaus 
the  wicked  harden  themselves  against  God.  1.  Dispensing  with  Ood.  (Ver.  14.)  They 
think  they  can  do  very  well  without  God.  This  world's  5>oods  satisfy  them,  and  o/ 
this  world's  goods  they  have  a  sufficiency.     They  have  no  need  to  cry  to  God  for  hein 


OH.  XH.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  367 

for  they  are  not  in  trouble.  They  see  no  reason  for  prayer,  for  they  have  all  they 
want  without  it.  2.  Bejecting  God.  C^er.  15.)  These  prosperous  wicked  people  go 
further  than  to  live  without  God.  They  actually  rebel  against  him.  Being  self- 
sufficient,  they  decline  to  admit  that  they  are  under  any  obligation  to  serve  OtoA.  Thus 
their  very  prosperity  increases  their  sin. 

III.  The  gubat  mtstbbt  op  these  facts.  This  is  inexplicable  from  the  standpoint 
of  Job's  friends.  If  suffering  is  only  the  punishment  of  sin,  the  wicked  must  suffer,  or 
there  is  no  just  Judge  over  all.  By  pointing  to  the  plain  facts  of  life  Job  is  able  to 
refute  the  pedantic  dogmas  of  his  critics.  Theology  that  will  not  stand  the  test  of  life 
is  worthless.  But  graver  questions  are  at  issue  than  those  that  merely  concern  the 
correctness  of  ortliodox  notions.  Where  is  the  justice  of  facts  as  Job  sets  them  forth? 
To  him  all  is  a  profound  mystery.  Now,  it  is  something  to  be  brought  to  this  point. 
There  is  a  mystery  in  the  course  of  life  which  we  cannot  fathom.  Then  let  us  not 
attempt  to  judge,  but  confess  our  ignorance.  Still,  if  there  is  to  be  an  outlook  towards 
the  light,  we  must  seek  it  in  two  directions.  1.  In  the  prospect  of  a  future  life,  Theie 
God  will  rectify  the  inequalities  of  this  life.  2.  In  attaching  less  weight  to  outward 
circumstances.  Prosperity  is  not  the  greatest  good.  On  both  sides,  among  the  dis- 
appointed good  as  well  as  among  the  fortunate  wicked,  too  much  ia  made  of  extei'nal 
things.   True  prosperity  is  soul-prosperity.   "  The  life  is  more  than  meat,"  etc. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  22. — Teaching  Ood.  Job  has  already  warned  his  friends  that  their  advocacy 
of  a  cruel  creed  was  speaking  wickedly  for  God  (ch.  xiii.  7).  The  presumption  of  the 
foolish  advocates  of  an  effete  orthodoxy  now  reaches  a  greater  height,  and  they  virtually 
assume  to  teach  God.  Their  dogma  is  above  Divine  revelation.  If  the  two  differ,  so 
much  the  worse  for  the  revelation.  Let  us  see  how  this  same  error  may  be  found  in 
other  branches  of  life  and  thought. 

L  In  authoeitative  orthodoxy.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  mere  act  of  calling 
in  the  aid  of  authority  to  establish  and  support  what  we  believe  to  be  the  truth 
implies  a  disposition  to  assume  to  be  the  teachers  of  God.  But  there  is  a  tendency  in 
absolute  lelianco  on  authority  to  move  towards  that  absurdity  which  reaches  its  climax 
In  the  folly  that  Job  ascribes  to  his  frieuds.  'I'he  tendency  is  to  think  the  settled 
opinion  of  our  party  or  section  of  the  Church  a  certain  and  infallible  truth.  Thus  people 
are  urged  to  submit  to  such  settled  opinion  without  inquiry.  Though  God  may  have 
given  teaching  available  to  all  in  nature  and  in  the  Scriptures,  though  he  may  be 
speaking  in  the  hearts  of  his  children  by  the  voice  of  his  Spirit,  all  these  Divine  com- 
munications are  set  aside  in  favour  of  the  one  human  authoritative  utterance.  Instead 
of  this  being  subject  to  the  test  of  nature.  Scripture,  and  conscience,  GoJ's  voice  in 
those  three  channels  is  translated  and  often  distorted  into  accordance  with  the  dogma 
of  authority. 

II.  In  pbivatb  judgment.  The  same  error  may  be  seen  in  the  opposite  direction, 
in  a  sort  of  ultra-Protestant  employment  of  the  right  of  freedom  of  thought.  The 
individual  man  asserts  his  opinion  as  infallible,  regardless  of  the  ideas  of  all  other 
people.  He  poses  as  "  Athanasius  contra  mundum,"  without  possessing  the  title  to 
independence  which  was  earned  by  the  hero  of  NicMa.  The  mischief  is  not  that  he 
is  independent — surely  everybody  should  think  for  himself;  it  is  that  he  rejects  all 
external  aids  to  knowledge,  and  sets  up  his  own  reason,  or  often  his  own  prejudice,  as 
the  standard  of  truth.  He  rejects  the  Pope  of  Borne  that  he  may  be  his  own  pope. 
Even  the  Divine  revelation  in  the  Bible  must  be  interpreted  so  as  to  agree  with  Lis 
opinions.  Instead  of  going  to  the  Scriptures  as  a  humble  learner  seeking  light,  he 
approaches  them  as  one  who  has  made  up  his  mind,  and  who  must  now  get  the  Bible 
to  echo  his  notions.  The  same  mistake  is  made  by  those  who  presume  to  judge  nature 
or  providence,  thinking  they  would  have  done  better  if  they  had  been  in  God's  place. 

IIL  In  pbateb.  Is  it  not  very  common  for  people  to  pray  as  though  they  were 
instructing  God?  They  inform  him  of  what  he  already  knows  far  better  than  they 
know  it  themselves.  God  invites  our  confidence  and  confession;  but  this  is  that  we 
may  put  ourselves  into  right  relations  with  him,  not  that  we  may  tell  him  anything  of 
which  he  would  he  ignorant  but  for  our  prayer.  Or  people  go  further,  and  offer  instructions 
to  God  as  to  the  way  in  which  he  .should  act.  Prayer,  instead  of  being  a  supplication, 
becomes  a  dictating  to  God.    Entreaty  is  virtually  converted  into  a  demand.     "W« 


368  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxi.  1—34. 


haye  to  learn  to  submit  to  the  higher  knowledge  as  well  as  the  higher  anthority  of 
God.  Prayer  needs  to  be  more  simply  the  trusting  of  ourselves  to  Qod  for  him  to  do 
with  ns  just  what  he  knows  to  be  best. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  23 — ^26. — The  common  fate.  Job  has  pointed  out  that  the  wicked  are  not  always 
punished  in  this  life  with  external  trouble ;  on  the  contrary,  they  often  flourish  to  the 
end  in  unbroken  prosperity  (ver.  7,  etc.).  He  next  proceeds  to  show  that  the  end  of 
the  happy  and  the  sorrowful  is  the  same.  The  prosperous  bad  man  does  not  meet  with 
a  reverse  of  fortune  at  last,  nor  does  the  afflicted  righteous  man  find  an  earthly  leward 
in  his  later  days.  Both  go  down  to  death  without  a  sign  of  the  reversal  of  their 
condition  which  justice  would  seem  to  demand. 

I.  Dkath  happens  alike  to  all.  As  Shakespeare  puts  it,  this  may  be  said  of 
all  of  us — 

"  Nothing  can  we  call  our  own,  but  death ; 
And  that  small  model  of  the  barren  earth, 
That  serves  as  paste  and  cover  to  our  bones." 

The  "great  leveller"  should  not  only  humble  pride,  but  also  teach  us  more  human 
brotherhood.  If  we  are  brothers  in  death,  should  we  not  be  brothers  also  in  life  ?  The 
deepest  facts  of  life  arc  common  to  all  men.  Our  differences  of  state  and  rank  only 
affect  what  is  superficial. 

II.  Death  is  not  felt  to  be  the  same  by  all.  Our  feelings  are  affected  by 
contrasts  and  changes,  not  by  our  absolute  condition  at  any  moment.  The  candle-light 
that  looks  brilliant  to  the  prisoner  in  a  dungeon,  is  most  gloomy  to  a  man  who  has 
just  come  from  the  sunshine.  Death  is  all  loss  and  darkness  to  one  who  is  suddenly 
snatched  away  from  earthly  enjoyment,  but  it  is  a  haven  of  rest  to  the  storm-tossed 
soul.  The  same  death  has  very  different  meanings  according  to  our  spiritual  condition. 
In  sin  and  worldliness  and  heathenish  ignorance,  death  is  a  going  out  into  the  darkness. 
To  the  Christian  it  is  falling  asleep  in  Christ. 

III.  These  ib  no  earthly  adjustment  op  lots.  Job  is  quite  right.  It  is  vain  to 
expect  it.  If  it  has  not  come  yet,  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  will  come  later 
on,  even  at  the  last.  Tliere  is  nothing  in  experience  to  warrant  us  in  the  hope  that  it 
will  come  at  all.  In  many  respects,  no  doubt,  moral  causes  work  out  Visible  effects  on 
earth.  But  this  is  by  no  means  universal,  nor  are  the  effects  always  adequate  to  the 
requirements  of  justice. 

IV.  There  must  be  a  future  life.  The  story  is  not  complete  on  earth.  It 
breaks  off  suddenly  without  any  kind  of  finish.  This  abruptness  of  the  visible  ending 
of  life  points  to  a  continuance  beyond  the  grave.  Justice  requires  that  the  unfinished 
life  should  have  its  appro|iriate  conclusion.  Not  from  necessity  of  nature,  but  from 
moral  considerations,  we  conclude  that  the  broken  threads  must  be  picked  up  and 
drawn  together  again  to  make  the  perfect  pattern. 

V.  The  spiritual  life  is  infinitely  superior  to  the  material.  It  looks  as 
though  the  differences  of  external  fortune  could  be  treated  with  contempt.  The  good 
have  misfortune,  the  bad  have  prosperity.  These  are  slight  matters  in  the  eyes  of 
Providence,  because  real  prosperity,  is  spiritual  prospeiity,  and  that  is  only  possible  to 
those  who  live  a  right  life. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  34. —  Vain  comfort.  The  three  bungling  comforters  are  wasting  their  effort^!, 
because  they  are  not  speaking  the  truth.  Their  misapprehension  and  misrepresentation 
vitiate  all  their  good  intentions. 

I.  We  must  understand  those  whom  we  would  help.  1.  By  mixing  toith  them. 
Job's  friends  took  the  first  step.  They  travelled  from  their  remote  homes  across  the 
desert  and  came  to  see  him.  We  can  only  help  the  miserable  if  we  first  go  among 
them  and  see  them  with  our  own  eyes.  Much  philanthropy  fails  by  reason  of  distance 
and  separation.  We  cannot  know  people  till  we  are  with  them.  Christ  came  down 
from  heaven  and  lived  among  men.  2.  By  freedom  from  prejudice.  Job's  friends 
came  with  fixed  notions.  They  only  looked  at  Job  through  their  coloured  spectacles. 
We  can  never  understand  people  till  we  throw  aside  all  our  preconceived  notions  about 
tnem  and  look  at  them  as  they  are.    3.  By  sympathy.    This  must  be  insisted  on  over  and 


OH.  rxii.  1 — 30.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


869 


over  again.     The  lack  of  it  was  the  chief  cause  of  the  failure  of  Job's  friends.     The 
presence  of  it  is  the  first  essential  for  understauduig  people. 

II.  Tkuth  is  a  primakt  condition  of  consolation.  1.  In  regard  to  the  sufferer. 
It  ig  useless  to  ignore  his  suffL-rings,  or  to  try  to  reason  him  into  the  belief  that  they 
do  not  exist.  Tlie  attempt  to  help  will  be  spoilt  if  we  argue  that  what  he  knows  to 
be  undeserved  is  really  his  due.  Any  view  that  does  not  regard  him  as  he  is  spoils 
all  efforts  to  console.  2.  In  regard  to  the  remedy.  It  is  worse  than  useless  to  offer 
wrong  remedies.  The  trite  commonplaces  of  consolation  are  only  irritants.  Some  of 
them  are  known  to  be  false  in  fact.  Others  have  not  the  ring  of  sincerity  about  them 
when  repeated  by  the  conifortini;  friend.  However  true  they  have  been  once,  they 
have  ceased  to  bear  any  meaning  that  people  believe  in. 

III.  Spiritual  consolation  is  conditioned  by  spibitual  truth.  1.  In  tJioiight. 
We  cannot  console  others  with  dogmas  that  we  do  not  believe  in  ourselves.  If  we 
have  no  faith  in  Christ  we  cannot  use  the  Name  of  Christ  to  heal  the  wounds  of  others. 
Unless  we  look  forward  to  a  future  life  it  is  vain  for  us  to  talk  about  the  "  many 
mansions"  when  we  are  trying  to  console  others.  There  is  a  foolish  notion  that  we 
should  tcUk  up  to  the  maximum  of  orthodoxy,  even  thougli  we  do  not  live  and  think 
up  to  it.  But  this  notion  is  only  an  excuse  for  cant,  and  nothing  is  more  vexing  to 
the  sufferer  than  to  be  treated  with  cant.  Let  us  say  only  what  we  believe.  2,  In 
fact.  Delusions  cannot  afford  permanent  consolations.  They  may  soothe  pain  and 
alarm  for  the  moment ;  but  they  cannot  endure,  and  when  the  mistake  of  them  is 
discovered  the  result  will  be  a  deeper  despair  than  ever.    If,  however,  we  could  succeed 

'  in  lulling  all  distress  on  earth  by  means  of  a  false  hope,  the  consolation  itself  would  be 
a  most  terrible  calamity.  The  soul  needs  truth  more  than  comfort.  It  is  better  to 
hear  the  painful  truth  now  than  at  the  great  judgment.  But  there  is  another  truth, 
one  which  gives  real  consolation — the  truth  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. — W.  F.  A. 


Seotioh  IV.    Third  Colloquy  of  Job  with  his  Fbihnd^ 
EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Vera.  1 — 30. — Eliphaz  returns  to  the 
attack,  but  with  observations  tliat  are  at 
first  strangely  pointless  and  irrelevant,  e.g. 
on  the  unprofitableness  of  man  to  God  (vers. 
1,  2),  and  on  the  slight  importance  of  Job's 
case  (ver.  3).  After  this  weak  prelude, 
however,  there  is  more  vigour  in  his  assault. 
In  vers.  4 — 9  he  directly  charges  Job  with 
a  number  of  specified  sins,  and  in  vers.  10, 
11  declares  his  sufferings  to  be  the  con- 
aequenoe  of  them.  He  then  proceeds  to 
accuse  him  of  denying  God's  omniscience 
(vers.  12 — 14),  and,  alter  some  not  very  suc- 
cessful attempts  to  retort  on  him  his  own 
words  (vers.  15—20),  finally  recurs  to  his 
favourite  devices  (see  ch.  v.  17 — 26)  of 
exhorting  Job  to  submission  and  repentance, 
and  promising  him  restoration  to  God's 
favour  and  a  return  of  prosperity  (vers. 
21—30). 

Vers.  1,  2. — Then  Eliphaz  the  Temanite 
answered  and  said,  Can  a  man  be  profitable 
unto  God  !    Job  had  said  nothing  upon  this 

lOB. 


point ;  but  perhaps  Eliphaz  thinks  bis  com- 
plaints and  expostulations  to  imply  a,  higher 
value  in  man,  and  a  greater  claim  to  con- 
sideration at  God's  hands,  than  can  rightly 
be  challenged.  Certainly  God  does  not 
depend  on  man  for  profit  or  advantage  of 
any  kind.  Neither  our  wisdom  nor  our 
goodness  "  extendeth  to  him."  As  he  that 
is  wise  may  be  profitable  unto  himself; 
rather,  truly  he  that  is  wise  is  profitable  unto 
himself;  i.e.  to  himself  only,  and  not  to  God. 
Man's  intelligence  and  researches  can  add 
nothing  to  God's  knowledge. 

Ver.  3. — Is  it  any  pleasure  to  the  Almighty, 
that  thou  art  righteous  1  As  "  our  goodness 
extendeth  not  to  God,"  and  as  his  all-perfect 
happiness  knows  neitljer  increase  nor  dimi- 
nution, we  cannot  be  said  to  advantage  him 
by  our  goodness.  Still  "good  works,  which 
are  the  fruits  of  fdlh,  and  follow  after 
justification,  are  pleasing  and  acceptable  to 
God  in  Christ ; "  and  God  himself  con- 
descends to  say  tbat  he  "  takes  jiZeasure  in 
his  people,"  ''  in  them  that  fear  him  "  (Ps. 
cxlvii.  11;  oxlix.  4).  Or  is  it  gain  to  him 
that  thou  makest  thy  ways  perfect  1  Of 
course,  the  "  gain "  is  to  the  man  himself, 
and  not  to  God.  He  saves  his  soul  alive. 
God  has  one  more  worshipper  in  the  courts 
of  heaven,  one  more  voice  added  to  the  choi' 


370 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB, 


[oh.  xxii.  1 — 30. 


which  hymns  his  praise  for  evermore.  But 
what  is  one  drop  added  to  an  ocean  ? 

Ver.  4.— Will  he  reprove  thee  for  fear  of 
thee?  rather,  Is  it  for  thy  fear  of  him  that 
hereproveththeel  Surely  not.  If  he  reproves 
thee,  it  mast  be  hecanse  thou  fearest  him 
not.  The  fact  of  thy  reproof  is  sure  evidence 
of  the  fact  of  thy  guilt.  "•  Will  he  enter  with 
thee  into  judgment  ?  rather,  that  he  entereth 
with  thee  into  judgment  (see  the  Eevised 
Version). 

Ver.  5. — Is  not  thy  wickedness  great? 
Judging  from  the  greatness  of  Job's  punish- 
ment, Eliphaz  concludes,  logically  from  his 
premisses,  that  his  wickedness  must  be  com- 
mensurate. He  must  have  been  guilty  of 
almost  every  form  of  ill-doing.  And  thine 
iniquities  infinite ;  literally,  and  is  there  not 
no  end  to  thine  iniquities'!  These  general 
conclusions  seem  to  Eliphaz  to  justify  him 
in  proceeding  to  the  enumeration  of  details. 

Ver.  6. — For  thou  hast  taken  a  pledge 
from  thy  brother  for  nought ;  i.e.  thou  hast 
lent  to  thy  brother  on  pledge,  without 
reasonable  cause,  when  thou  wert  rich  enough 
to  need  no  security  (comp.  Neh.  v.  2 — 11). 
And  stripped  the  naked  of  their  clothing. 
When  thy  brother,  on  borrowing  from  thee, 
pledged  his  raiment,  thou  didst  retain  it, 
and  so  didst  leave  him  to  shiver  all  night 
without  covering  (see  Bxod.  xxii.  26,  27). 
We  may,  perhfeps,  gather  from  this  that  the 
Mosaic  Law  on  the  subject  was  founded  on 
an  anterior  custom  widely  prevalent  in  South- 
western Asia. 

Ver.  7. — Thou  hast  not  given  water  to 
the  weary  to  drink.  To  give  water  to  the 
thirsty  was  regarded  in  the  East  as  one  of 
the  most  elementary  duties  of  man  to  man. 
The  self-justification  of  the  dead  in  the 
Egyptian  Hades  contained  the  following 
passage :  "  I  gave  my  bread  to  the  hungry, 
and  drink  to  him  that  was  athirst ;  I  clothed 
the  naked  with  garments;  I  sheltered  the 
wanderer  "  ('  Eitual  of  the  Dead,'  ch.  cxxv. 
§  38).  The  same  claim  appears  continually 
on  Egyptian  tombs.  "  AH  men  respected 
me,"  we  read  on  one ;  "  I  gave  water  to  the 
thirsty;  I  set  the  wanderer  in  his  path  ;  I 
took  away  the  oppressor,  and  put  a  stop 
to  violence "  ('  Non-Biblical  Systems  of 
Keligion,'  p.  46).  In  the  proverbs  assigned 
to  Solomon,  "which  the  men  of  Hezekiah 
copied  out"  (Prov.  xxv.  1),  the  duty  was 
declared  to  be  one  owed  even  to  enemies 
(see  Prov.  xxv.  21,  "If  thine  enemy  be 
hungry,  give  him  bread  to  eat ;  and  if  he 
be  thirsty,  give  him  water  to  drinle").  Isaiah 
notices  it  as  praiseworthy  in  the  Temanites 
(Eliphaz's  people),  that  they  "brought  water 
to  him  that  was  thirsty,  and  prevented  with 
their  bread  him  that  fled  "  (Isa.  xxi.  14). 
Jael  is  praised  for  going  further  than  this  : 
"  He  asked  water,  and  she  gave  him  milk ; 


she  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish  " 
(Judg.  V.  25).  And  thon  hast  withholden 
bread  from  the  hungry.  Later  on  Job  abso- 
lutely denies  this,  as  well  as  many  of  the 
other  charges.  "  If  I  have  withheld,"  he  says, 
"  the  poor  from  their  desire,  or  have  caused 
the  eyes  of  the  widow  to  fail ;  or  have  eaten 
my  morsel  myself  alone,and  the  fatherlesshath 
not  eaten  thereof, . . .  then  let  mine  arm  fall 
from  my  shoulder-blade,  and  mine  arm  be 
broken  from  the  bone  "  (ch.  xxxi.  16 — 22). 

Ver.  8. — But  as  for  the  mighty  man,  he 
had  the  earth ;  literally,  as  for  the  man  of 
arm;  i.e.  .the  man  strong  of  arm.  Job's 
retainers  are  probably  meant,  whom  Eliphaz 
supposes  to  have  been  allowed  by  Job  to 
oppress  the  poor,  and  have  their  own  way 
in  the  world.  This  charge  was  doubtless  as 
baseless  as  the  others  (comp.  ch.  xxix.  16, 
17).  And  the  honourable  man  dwelt  in  it ; 
or,  the  aceepted  man — "  the  favoured  man," 
i.e.'  those  of  whom  Job  approved  and  whom 
he  favoured. 

Ver.  9. — Thou  hast  sent  widows  away 
empty.  Job,  on  the  contrary,  declares  that 
he  "caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for 
joy  "  (ch.  xxix.  13).  The  sin  of  oppressing 
widows  was  one  of  which  Job  deeply  felt 
the  heinousness.  He  is  certainly  a  priori 
not  likely  to  have  committed  it  (ch.  i.  1 ; 
iv.  3,  4),  and  the  prejudiced  testimony  of 
Eliphaz  will  scarcely  convince  any  dis- 
passionate person  to  the  contrary.  And  the 
arms  of  the  fatherless  have  been  broken; 
i.e.  the  strength  of  the  fatherless  has  been 
(by  thy  fault)  taken  from  them.  Job  has 
allowed  them  to  be  oppressed  and  ruined. 
The  reply  of  Job  is,  "  When  the  ear  heard, 
then  it  blessed  me ;  and  when  the  eye  saw, 
it  gave  witness  to  me :  because  I  delivered 
the  poor  that  cried,  and  the  fatherless,  and 
him  that  had  none  to  help  him  "  (ch.  xxix. 
11,  12 ;  see  also  ch.  xxxi.  21,  22). 

Ver.  10. — Therefore  snares  are  round  about 
thee.  As  Bildad  had  threatened  (oh.  xviii. 
8 — 10),  and  as  Job  himself  had  acknowledged 
(ch.  xix.  0).  And  sudden  fear  troubleth 
thee  (comp.  oh.  iii.  25;  vii.  14;  xiii.  21, 
etc.). 

Ver.  11. — Or  darkness,  that  thou  canst  not 
see.  Job  had  complained  of  the  "  darkness  " 
that  was  "set  in  his  paths"  (ch.  xix.  8), 
meaning  probably  his  inability  to  discover 
the  cause  of  his  alHiotious.  And  abundance 
of  waters  cover  thee.  The  comparison  of 
severe  affliction  to  an  overwhelming  flood 
is  very  common  in  Scripture  (see  Ps.  xlii. 
7;  Ixix.  1—3,  14, 15;  cxxiv.  4,  5  ;  Lam.  iii. 
54,  etc.).  So  Shakespeare  speaks  of  "  a  sea 
of  troubles." 

Ver.  12. -Is  not  God  in  the  height  of 
heaven?  From  taxing  Job  with  definite 
open  sins,  Eliphaz  proceeds  to  accuse  him 
of  iiupiouB  thoughts  and  principles.     Ha 


OH.  XXII.  1 — 30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


871 


does  not  acknowledge,  Eliphaz  says,  either 
the  majesty  or  the  omnisoienoe  of  God. 
Here  he  has,  at  any  rate,  some  tangible 
ground  for  his  reproaolies.  Joh's  words  have 
been  over-bold,  over-venturesome.  He  has 
seemed  to  forget  the  distance  between  God 
and  man  (ch.  ix.  80—33;  x.  2,  3;  xiii.  3, 
etc.),  and  to  call  in  question  either  God's 
omniscience  or  his  regard  for  moral  dis- 
tinctions (ch.  ix.  22, 23 ;  xxi.  7—13, 23—26). 
Hence  Eliphaz  is  enabled  to  take  »  high 
tone  and  ask,  "  Hast  thou  forgotten  that 
God  is  in  the  heiglit  of  heaven,  far  up  above 
all  us  poor  wretched  mortals?  Dost  thou 
need  to  be  reminded  of  this  ?  He  is  above 
the  stars,  and  yet  behold  the  height  of  the 
stars,  how  high  they  are !  Even  they  are 
infinitely  above  men,  yet  how  far  below 
him  I"  (comp.  ch.  xxxv.  5). 

Ver.  13. — And  thou  sayest,  How  doth  Ood 
know?  Job  had  not  said  this  in  so  many 
words,  but,  by  equalizing  the  godly  and  the 
wicked  (ch.  ix.  22 ;  xxi.  23—26),  he  might 
be  supposed  to  mean  that  God  took  no  note 
of  men's  conduct,  and  therefore  had  not 
a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  things.  The 
psalmist  implies  that  many  men  so  thought 
(Ps.  X.  11 ;  Ixxiii.  11 ;  xoiv.  7).  Can  he 
Judge  through  the  dark  oload  1  rather, 
through,  the  thick  darleness.  God  was  sup- 
posed to  dwell  remote  from  man,  in  the 
highest  heaven,  and,  according  to  many, 
"  clouds  and  darkness  were  round  about  him  " 
(Ps.  xcvii.  2) — he  "  dwelt  in  the  thick  dark- 
ness" (1  Kings  viii.  12) — he  "made  dark- 
ness his  secret  place;  his  pavilion  round 
about  him  was  waters,  and  thick  clouds  of 
the  skies"  (Ps.  xviii.  11).  The  imagery 
was,  no  doubt,  at  first  used  in  reference  to 
man's  inability  to  see  and  know  God;  but 
when  men  became  familiar  with  it,  they 
turned  the  metaphor  round,  and  questioned 
God's  ability  to  see  and  know  anything 
about  man.  Job  had  not  really  ever  shared 
in  these  doubts ;  but  it  suits  Eliphaz's  pur- 
pose to  malign  and  misrepresent  him. 

Ver.  14. — Thick  clouds  are  a  coTering  to 
him,  that  he  seeth  not  (see  the  comment 
on  the  preceding  verse) ;  and  he  walketh  in 
the  circuit  of  heaven;  or,  on  the  drcumfer- 
enct  ef  the  hec^em.  The  heavens  are  re- 
garded as  a  solid  vault,  outside  which  is  the 
place  where  God  dwells. 

Ver.  15. — Hast  thou  marked  the  old  way 
which  wicked  men  have  trodden  1  rather, 
Wilt  thou  keep  the  old  way,  etc.?  (see  the 
Revised  Version).  Eliphaz  assumes  that  it 
is  Job's  intention  to  cast  in  his  lot  with 
those  persons  whose  prosperous  wickedness 
he  has  described  in  the  preceding  chapter 
(vers.  7—15).  And  this  notwithstanding 
Job's  final  protest,  "  Be  the  counsel  of  the 
wicked  far  from  me"  (ver.  16).  He  calls 
the  mode  of  life  pursued  by  these  wicked 


persons  "  the  old  way,"  either  with  allusion 
to  the  seed  of  Cain  before  the  Flood,  who 
"corrupted  their  way"  (Gen.  vi.  12),  or 
perhaps  with  reference  to  the  descendants 
of  Nimrod  after  it  (see  Professor  Lee's 
'  Book  of  Job,'  p.  361). 

Ver.  16.— Which  were  ont  down  (rather, 
rmept  or  snatched  away)  ont  of  time ;  i.e.  before 
their  time,  prematurely.  Whose  foundation 
was  overflown  with  a  flood.  Some  suppose 
an  allusion  to  the  general  destruction  of 
mankind  by  the  Noachian  Deluge;  but  per- 
haps no  more  is  meant  than  that  the  sup- 
ports of  the  wicked  are  ordinarily  loosened 
and  carried  away  by  «,  flood  of  calamity. 
No  single  event  need  be  referred  to. 

Ver.  17. — Who  said  unto  God,  Depart 
from  as  (comp.  oh.  xxi.  14).  Eliphaz  tries, 
though  with  no  very  great  success,  to  turn 
Job's  words  against  him.  And,  What  can 
the  Almighty  do  for  them  1  i.e.  and  ask  what 
'the  Almighty  can  do  for  them.  A  change 
from  the  second  to  the  third  person,  with- 
out any  change  of  subject,  is  not  unusual  in 
Hebrew.  The  wicked  renounce  God,  and 
bid  him  depart  from  them — conduct  which 
they  justify  by  asking  what  good  he  could 
do  them  if  they  acted  otherwise.  The  idea 
is  the  same  as  that  of  ch.  xxi.  15,  though 
not  expressed  so  pointedly.  What  Eliphaz 
thinks  to  gain  by  echoing  Job's  words  is 
not  very  apparent. 

Ver.  18. — ^Tet  he  filled  their  houses  with 
good  things.  The  "  he  "  is  emphatic  (Nin). 
Translate,  Tet  it  vias  he  that  filled  their 
houses  with  good  things;  and  comp.  ch. 
xxi.  16,  where  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
is  said  not  to  have  proceeded  from  them- 
selves. But  the  connsel  of  the  wicked  is 
far  from  me ;  or,  hut  let  the  counsel  of  the 
wicked  be  far  from  me.  Again,  Job's  words 
in  ch.  xxi.  16  are  echoed,  perhaps  that  Eli- 
phaz may  show  himself  to  be  at  least  as 
pious  as  Job. 

Ver.  19. — The  righteous  see  it,  and  are 
glad;  i.e.  "the  righteous  see  both  the 
short-lived  prosperity  (ver.  18)  and  the  ulti- 
mate destruction  (ver.  16)  of  the  wicked, 
and  rejoice  over  them,  especially  over  the 
latter"  (comp.  Ps.  Iviii.  10;  cvii.  40—42; 
Prov.  xi.  10).  And  the  innocent  laugh  them 
to  scorn  (comp.  Ps.  ii.  6).  Scorn  and  derision 
are  the  just  portion  of  the  wicked,  and  in 
Old  Testament  times  even  saints  did  not 
scruple  to  pour  them  out  on  those  who 
deserved  them.  But  the  gospel  spirit  is 
different. 

Ver.  20. — ^Whereas  our  substance  is  not 
cut  down.  It  is  best  to  take  these  as  the 
words  of  the  righteous  in  their  triumph  over 
the  wicked ;  but  they  can  scarcely  bear  the 
interpretation  given  them  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  The  clause  is  not  really  negative 
but  affirmative,  and  the  word  D'j3  does  not 


372 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB, 


[CH.  rxn.  1 — 30. 


mean  "  Bubstance,"  but "  advereary."  Trans- 
late, Surely  they  that  rose  up  against  us  (or, 
our  adversaries}  are  cut  off;  and  coinimre 
the  Revised  Version.  The  "adversaries" 
of  the  righteous  are  the  "wicked  men" 
who  have  been  "  snatched  away  before  their 
time,"  and  have  had  their  "foundation  over- 
flown with  a  flood"  (ver.  16).  But  the  rem- 
nant of  them  the  &ce  consnmeth;  rather, 
and  the  remnant  of  them  hath  the  fire  con- 
sumed (see  the  Eevised  Version).  The 
"fire"  here,  like  the  "flood"  in  ver.  16,  is 
a  metaphor,  and  therefore  not  to  be  pressed. 
All  (hat  is  essential  is  that  the  wicked  are 
destroyed.  Over  this  the  "  righteous  "  and 
the  "  innocent "  rejoice. 

Vers.  21 — 30. — At  this  point  a  transition 
occurs.  Eliphaz  turns  away  from  reproaches, 
open  or  covert,  designed  to  exhibit  Job  as 
an  example  of  extreme  wickedness,  and  falls 
back  on  those  topics  which  were  the  main 
subjects  of  his  first  exhortation  (ch.  v.  8 — 
27),  viz.  an  earnest  appeal  to  Job  to  return 
to  God,  to  repent  and  amend  (vers.  21 — 23), 
and  a  lavish  outpouring  of  promises,  or  pro- 
phecies, that  in  that  case  he  should  be 
delivered  from  all  his  troubles,  should  re- 
cover his  wealth  and  prosperity,  obtain  of 
God  all  that  he  should  pray  for,  succeed  in 
«ll  his  enterpriser,  and  be  able  tu  lielp  and 
ease  others,  even  those  who  might  be  guilty 
in  Gud's  sight  (vera.  24 — 30). 

Ver.  21.  —  Acquaint  now  thyself  with 
him  (t.«.  God),  and  he  at  peace ;  or,  mahe, 
I  beseech  thee,  a  trial  of  him,  and  be  at  peace; 
i.e.  risk  everything,  throw  thyself  upon  liis 
mercy,  and  so  make  thy  peace  with  him. 
To  do  so  is  well  worth  thy  wliile,  for  thereby 
good  shall  come  unto  thee.  It  is  a  question 
what  sort  of  "  good  "  is  meant.  If  we  are  to 
explain  the  "  good  "  of  this  passage  by  vers. 
24,  25  exclusively,  Eliphaz  will  become  a 
mere  utilitarian,  and  he  will  be  rightly  cha- 
racterized as  "  selfish  and  sordid"  (Oook) — 
an  anticipation  of  the  Mammon  of  Milton. 
But  there  seem  to  be  no  sufficient  grounds 
for  singling  out  vers.  24,  25  from  the  rest 
of  the  passage,  and  regarding  them  as  form- 
ing its  key-note.  The  "good"  which  Eli- 
phaz promises  to  Job  includes,  besides  "  tlie 
gol.l  of  Ophir"  and  "plenty  of  silver,"  such 
things  as  "deliglit  in  the  Almiglity,"  and 
confident  trust  in  him  (ver.  26),  God's  hear- 
ing of  his  prayers  (ver.  27),  the  thining  of 
light  upon  his  path  (ver.  28),  his  own  pay- 
ment of  his  vows  (ver.  27),  his  giving  assist- 
ance to  the  poor  and  needy  (ver.  29),  and 
even  his  deliverance  of  the  guilty  by  the 
pureness  of  his  hands  (ver.  30) ;  so  that  other 


besides  material  considerations  are  clearly 
taken  into  account,  and  the  worldly  pros- 
perity which  Elipliaz  promises  forms  a  part 
only  of  the  good  rcbult  which  he  anticipates 
from  the  patriarch  making  hia  peaoe  witli 
the  Almighty. 

Ver.  22. — Beceive,  I  pray  thee,  the  law 
from  his  mouth  |  or,  receive  now  instruction 
from  hie  mouth.  The  supposition  of  some 
commentators,  that  the  "Law  of  Moses"  is 
intended,  is  negatived  by  the  entire  absence 
from  the  Book  of  any  allusion  to  the  details 
of  the  Mosaic  legislation,  as  well  as  by  the 
primitive  character  of  the  life  depicted  in  the 
book,  and  the  certainty  that  no  one  of  the 
interlocutors  is  an  Israelite.  The  Hebrew 
rinin,  without  the  article  prefixed,  is  pro- 
perly "instruction,"  and  is  only  to  be  as- 
sumed as  meaning  "the  Law"  when  tlie 
context  shows  this  meaning  to  be  probable. 
The  "instruction"  to  which  Eliphaz  here 
points,  and  which  he  regards  as  instruction 
from  God's  mouth,  is  probably  the  teaching 
of  religious  men,  such  as  himself,  which  he 
considered  to  have  come  from  God  origin- 
ally, though,  perhaps,  he  could  not  have 
explained  how.  And  lay  up  his  words  in 
thine  heart.  This  is  a  mere  variant  of  the 
preceding  clause,  and  adds  no  fresh  idea. 

Ver.  23.— If  thou  shalt  return  to  the  Al- 
mighty. Eliphaz,  like  Bildad  in  ch.  viii.  5, 
and  ZophM:  in  ch.  xi.  13,  taxes  Job  with 
having  fallen  away  from  God,  almost  with 
having  apostntized.  All  his  prophecies  of 
future  prosperity  rest  upon  the  assumption 
that  Job,  having  fallen  away,  is  now  about 
to  turn  to  God,  repent  of  his  misdoings, 
and  be  again  received  with  favour.  Thou 
shalt  be  built  up;  i.e.  "restored,  re-estab- 
lished." Thou  shalt  put  away  iniquity  far 
from  thy  tabernacles  (comp.  ch.  xi.  14,  where 
Zophar  implies  that  Job's  tents  have  ill- 
gotten  gains  concealed  in  them). 

Ver.  24. — Then  shalt  thou  lay  up  gold  as 
dust ;  rather,  iJien  shalt  thou  lay  thy  treasure 
in  the  dust;  i.e.  hold  it  in  slight  esteem, 
because  of  its  abundance.  And  the  gold  of 
Ophir  (literally,  and  Ophir')  shall  he  to  thee 
as  the  stones  of  the  brooks  (comp.  2  Chron. 
ix.  27,  "  And  the  king  [i.e.  Solomon] 
made  silver  iu  Jerusalem  as  stones "). 
"  Ophir  "  stands,  no  doubt,  fflr  untold  wealth, 
being  the  great  gold  -  producing  country 
(see  1  Kings  ix.  28;  x.  11;  xxii.  48;  1 
Chron.  xxix.  41 ;  Ps.  xlv.  9 ;  Isa.  xiii.  12). 
(On  its  location,  see  the  arlielo  on  "Ophir," 
in  Smith's '  Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  ii.  pp. 
637 — 642,  and  compare  the  comment  on  ch. 
ixviii.  16.) 

Ver.  25.— Yea,  the  Almighty  shall  be  tiy 
defence  j  rather,  thy  treasure.  The  word  is 
the  same  as  that  used  in  the  first  clause  of 
ver.  24.  It  properly  signlfii  s  "  ore."  The 
general  meaning  of  the  passage  seems  to 


CH.  xxn.  1 — 30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


878 


be,  "However  rich  thou  may  est  be  in  the 
preoions  metals,  thy  true  treasure — that 
which  thou  wilt  value  most — will  be  the 
Almighty  himself."  And  thou  shalt  have 
plenty  of  silver;  or,  and  he  ehall  be  pre- 
cious silver  unto  thee  (see  the  Revised 
Version). 

Ver.  26. — Tor  then  shalt  thou  have  thy 
delight  in  the  Almighty.  God  shall  no 
limger  be  u,  terror  and  alarm  to  thee,  as  he 
is  at  present  (ch.  vU.  17—20 ;  ix.  17,  34  ; 
X.  15—17;  xiii.  21;  xix.  6—13,  etc.),  but 
a  source  of  rejoicing  and  joy.  Tlinu  shalt 
have  blessings  at  his  hands  instead  of 
sufferings,  rewards  instead  of  punishments. 
Therefore  slialt  thou  delight  in  him,  and 
shalt  lift  up  thy  face  unto  Qod  ;  i.e.  "slialt 
turn  towards  him,  like  the  sunflower  towards 
the  sua,  and  bask  in  the  light  of  his  coun- 
tenance." 

Ver.  27. — Thou  shalt  make  thy  prayer 
unto  him,  and  he  shall  hsar  thee.  Now  Job 
prays,  but  is  not  heard ;  he  asks  for  death, 
but  it  docs  not  come ;  he  begs  for  a  respite 
from  suifering,  but  it  is  refused  him ;  he- 
beseeches  God  to  enter  into  iirgumont  with 
him  (ch.  ix.  32—34;  x.  2),  bnt  God  vouch- 
safes no  answer.  Let  him  follow  Elipliaz's 
advice,  "return  to  the  Almighty"  (ver.  23), 
liumble  himself  in  the  dust,  repent  and 
"  put  away  his  iniquity  "  (ver.  23),  and  then, 
Eliphaz  promises  him,  all  sliall  be  clianged — 
God  will  become  gracious  to  him,  will  listen 
to  him,  and  grant  his  requodts,  will  remove 
his  heavy  hand,  and  crown  him  witli  mercy 
and  loving-kindness.  Then,  he  adds,  thou 
shalt  pay  thy  vows.  Thou  shalt  have 
wealth  enough,  and  strengtii  enough,  to 
pay  any  vows  that  thou  hast  made,  which 
now  in  thy  afflicted  state  thou  canst  not  do. 
Vows  are  part  of  natural  religion,  and  were 
widely  previileut  over  all  the  East  in  ancient 
times.  The  performance  of  vows,  which 
was  strictly  enjoined  iu  the  Mosaic  Law 
(Dent,  xxiii.  21),  must  at  aU  times  have 


been  felt  as  obligatory  by  the  natural  con- 
science. 

Ver.  28.— Thou  shalt  also  decree  a  thing, 
and  it  shall  be  established  unto  thee.  What- 
ever thou  resolvest  on,  i.e.,  God  shall  ratify 
with  his  authority,  and  bring  to  pass  in 
due  time  for  thy  benefit — a  promise  which 
has  certainly  "  a  touch  of  audacity  "  about 
it  (Cook).  David  is  less  bold,  but  intends 
to  give  the  same  sort  of  encouragement  when 
he  says,  "  Duligbt  tliyself  in  tho  Lord,  and 
he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart ; 
commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord;  trust  also 
in  him ;  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass  "  (Ps. 
xxxvii.  4, 5).  And  the  light  shall  shine  upon 
thy  ways.  Job  had  complained  of  the 
"  darkness  "  by  which  his  path  was  shadowed 
(f'h.  xix.  8).  Eliphaz  promises  that  this 
cause  of  complaint  shall  be  removed.  Job's 
way  shall  be  "  made  plain  before  his  face." 
A  bright  light  shall  illumine  it — a  light 
that  shall  ever  "  shine  more  and  more  unto 
tho  perfect  day  "  (Prov.  iv.  18). 

Ver.  29.  —When  men  are  cast  down,  then 
thou  shalt  say,  There  ia  lifting  up ;  rather, 
when  men  cast  down,  and  thou  shalt  say. 
Let  there  be  lifting  up;  i.e.  when  oppressors 
have  east  a  man  down,  and  thou  appealest 
to  God,  and  pray  est  for  his  lifting  up,  then 
be  (i.e.  God)  shall  save  the  humble  person. 
Goil  shall  hear  thy  prayer,  and  the  oppressed 
person  shall  be  rescued  and  saved. 

Ver.  30. —He  shall  deliver  the  island  of 
the  innocent;  rather,  he  shall  deliver  even 
him  that  is  not  innocent  (see  the  Revised 
Version).  It  is  now  generally  admitted  that 
>l<  in  this  place  is  for-  ]'N,  as  in  1  Sam.  iv. 
21 ;  Prov.  xxxi.  4.  The  meaning  seems  to 
be  that  God  will  deliver,  at  Job's  prayer, 
even  guilty  persons,  who  will  be  delivered 
by  the  pureness  of  Job's  hands.  Eliphaz 
thus  prophesies  his  own  deliverance  and 
that  of  his  two  friends  from  God's  wrath  at 
the  intercession  of  Job,  as  actiially  came  to 
pass  afterwards  (see  oh.  xlii.  7 — 9). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers  1—4.— Eliphaz  to  Job:  the  third  colloquy:  th«  second  controversy:  1.  A 
fallacicms  syllogism.  I.  A  sound  premiss.  That  God's  government  of  mankind  is 
entirely  disinterested,  his  judicial  retributions  noL  bemj;  affected  by  coaaiderations  of 
personal  benefit  or  hurt  arising  from  the  conduct  of  his  creatures.  1.  Not  by  expectation 
ofadvantaqe.  (Vers.  2, 3.)  Here  is :  (1)  An  admission;  that  a  wi.se  man,  rightly  exercising 
his  faculties  in  the  sphere  of- natural  life,  may  effectually  promote  his  own  advantage— 
a  proposition  incontrovertible  by  reason,  since  wisdom  in  this  sense  signifies  superior 
discernment  and  ability,  the  capacity  of  employing  means  to  accomplish  ends  (bccles. 
X  101  •  and  abundantly  confirmed  by  experience,  which  attests  that  "by  wisdom  there 
is  proti't  to  them  that  see  the  sun"  (Eccles.  vii.  11)  that  "through  wisdom  is  au  house 
builded  and  its  chambers  filled  with  all  precious  and  pleasant  riches  (Prov.  xxiv. 3, 4), 
»nd  tha't  "  wisdom  stiengtheneth  the  wise  more  than  ten  mighty  men  which  are  in  the 
«ty "  (Eccles  vii.  19).     (2)  An  implication ;  that  the  same  law  holds  good  in   the 


374  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxii.  1—30. 


higher  realm  of  religion  ;  that  a  man  acting  wisely,  i.e.  living  under  the  influence  of  that 
wisdom  which  cometh  from  ahove  (Jas.  iii.  17),  filling  his  heart  with  that  fear  of  the 
Lord  which  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  (ch.  xxviii.  28 ;  Ps.  cxi.  10 ;  Prov.  i.  7 ; 
Eccles.  xii.  13),  and  shaping  his  ways  in  accordance  with  its  instructions  (ch.  xxviii.  28 ; 
Prov.  iii.  7;  xvi.  6),  shall  also  advance  his  highest  interests  (Prov.  iv.  8) — ^a  sentiment 
likewise  endorsed  by  Scripture  (1  Tim.  iv.  8;  vi.  6)  and  experience.  (3)  An  admonition ; 
that  the  above  law  does  not  apply  to  man's  relations  to  bis  Creator ;  that  a  man  even 
in  his  best  estate  (Geber),  which  is  wholly  vanity  (Ps.  xxxix.  5),  clothing  himself  in 
righteousness,  and  striving,  with  apparent  success,  to  make  his  ways  perfect,  as  Job 
somewhat  boldly  asserted  he  had  done  (ch.  ix.  21 ;  xiii.  15),  can  comer  nothing  in  the 
shape  of  increase  or  profit  upon  God ;  that  his  piety,  which  may  be  useful  to  himself 
(Prov.  xix.  8)  and  helpful  to  his  neighbours  (Eccles.  ix.  15),  does  not  reach  as  far  as 
God  in  the  way  of  bestowing  advantage  (ch.  xxxv.  7 ;  Ps.  xvi.  2),  neither  augmenting 
his  felicity  nor  enhancing  his  sufSciency  (Bom.  xi.  35),  and  therefore  cannot  enter  into 
God's  calculations  in  the  distribution  of  rewards  and  punishments  among  his  subjects, 
as  certainly  it  should  not  mingle  with  man's  cogitations  about  himself  (Luke  xvii.  10). 
(4)  A  qualification.  Nevertheless,  God  not  only  expresses  himself  as  if  the  piety  of 
his  people  did  contribute  to  his  felicity  (Numb.  xiv.  8 ;  1  Kings  x.  9 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  23 ; 
cxlvii.  11)  and  advantage  (Matt.  xxi.  41),  but  pathetically  complains  that  sinful  men 
are  "  together  become  unprofitable  "  (Bom.  iii.  12).  2.  Not  ly /ear  of  dcmiage.  (Ver. 
4.)  Eliphaz  appears  to  mean  that  God  has  as  little  reason  to  dread  loss  from  man's 
wickedness  (ch.  xxxv.  6)  as  to  expect  gain  from  his  godliness,  and  therefore  no  need  to 
defend  himself  against  man  by  either  punishing  him  with  undeserved  calamities,  or 
weakening  him  through  unmerited  rebukes.  The  sentiment  may  remind  us  (1)  of 
man's  weakness,  which  can  do  nothing  against  God,  who  sits  enthroned  in  heaven  lar 
beyond  the  reach  of  man's  puny  arm;  (2)  of  sin's  folly,  which  by  all  its  craft  and  ' 
contrivance  can  succeed  in  inflicting  damage  only  on  itself;  (3)  of  God's  greatness, 
which  remains  unaffected  by  all  the  conspiracies  of  men  and  devils  against  his  throne, 
his  Law,  his  grace,  his  Person;  (4)  of  affliction's  design,  which  is  not  to  crush  but  to 
convert  man,  not  to  reduce  him  to  weal<ness  but  to  bring  him  to  repentance,  not  to 
evince  the  Divine  indignation  against  him  but  to  attest  the  Divine  love  and  compassion 
towards  him. 

II.  The  mistaken  iiifbbenob.  That  Job  was  a  sinner.  1.  ITie  inference  appeared 
obvious.  (1)  It  was  evident  that  Job  was  a  great  sufferer.  (2)  It  was  self-cuntradictory 
to  suppose  that  Gud  was  chastising  him  on  account  of  his  piety.  So  some  read  the 
words, "  Will  he  reprove  thee  for  fear  of  thee  ?  "  literally,  "  for,  or  on  account  of,  thy  fear," 
t.e.  thy  piety  ?  No,  verily.  (3)  It  was  inconceivable  that  God  could  be  punishing 
him  from  any  interested  motive.  Hence  (4)  it  was  a  natural  inference  that  Job's 
calamities  were  judicial  visitations  on  account  of  sins.  Therefore  (5)  Job,  in  spite  of 
appearances  to  the  contrary,  must  be  a  great  sinner — in  fact, a  criminal  of  gigantic  pro- 
portions, as  Eliphaz  next  proceeds  to  show  (vers.  5 — 9).  Nevertheless:  2.  The  inference 
was  wrong.  Since  (1)  Job  was  not  a  sinnef  in  the  sense  intended  by  his  accuser,  but, 
as  his  conscience  tesiifled  and  God  had  declared,  a  perfect  man  and  an  upright,  one  that 
feared  God  and  eschewed  evil.  (2)  Besides  strict  judicial  retribution,  and  infliction  of 
suffering  from  interested  moiives,  there  was  a  third  alternative,  of  which  Eliphaz 
appeared  to  be  ignorant,  viz.  chastisement  for  the  individual's  good  (Heh.  xii.  10) — the 
view  of  suffering  subsequently  brought  into  prominence  by  Elihu  (ch.  xxxiii.  14r — 30), 
and  constantly  exhibited  in  the  gospel.  And  (3)  in  point  of  fact,  Job  was  not  being 
treated  penally  on  account  of  any  personal  transgression.  Hence  (4)  the  inference  of 
Eliphaz,  though  on  his  pi'emisses  correct,  was  essentially  fallacious. 

Learn :  1.  That  the  best  saint  has  no  more  claim  on  God's  grace  and  favour  than  the 
worst  sinner.  2.  That  God's  salvation  of  sinful  men  can  in  the  case  of  none  be  of  work 
and  merit,  but  in  the  case  of  all  must  be  of  faith  and  grace.  3.  That,  as  a  special  mark 
of  condescension  and  kindness,  God  is  pleased  to  accept  and  reward  the  services  of  his 
people  as  if  they  had  been  profitable  unto  himself.  4.  That  if  God  has  no  need  of  man's 
righteousness,  man  has  infinite  need  of  God's.  5.  That,  notwithstanding  God  derives 
no  advantage  from  the  piety  of  his  creatures,  he  commands  all  men  to  make  their  ways 
perfect.  6.  That,  though  God  never  reproves  men  out  of  fear,  he  sometimes  does  out 
of  love.     7.  That  good  people's  piety  is  sometimes  better  than  their  logic. 


OH,  xxiL  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOR  375 

Vei-s.  6 — 20. — Eliphaz  to  Job :  2.  A  false  accusation.  I.  A  chaboe!  of  flaobant 
iMMOBALiTi.  1.  Qenerally  preferred.  (Ver.  5.)  All  sia  may  be  justly  characterized  as 
great,  being  committed  against  a  great  God,  a  great  Law,  great  light,  great  love,  great 
obligations,  and  great  penalties ;  and  every  man's  iniquities  may  be  styled  "  without 
an  end,"  i.e.  numberless,  since  David  says  of  his,  "  They  are  more  than  the  hairs  of 
mine  head"  (Ps.  xl.  12) ;  but  Eliphaz  designs  to  represent  Job's  wickedness  as  exception- 
ally flagrant  in  comparison  with  that  of  ordinary  sinners,  and  d  fortiori  of  such  good 
people  as  Bildad,  Zophar,  and  himsblf  (of.  Luke  xviii.  11),  and  Job's  crimes  as  not  only 
already  beyond  computation,  but,  probably,  as  even  then  not  terminated  (Carey).  2. 
Specifically  detailed.  More  abominable  wickedness  can  scarcely  be  imagined.  (1) 
Mercil'ss  extortion  (ver.  6).  Job  had  exacted  in  pledge  from  his  unhappy  creditor  the 
large  upper  garment  of  Orientals,  and  had  not  restored  it  at  sundown,  as  was  afterwards 
commanded  by  Moses  (Exod.  xxii.  26,  27) — a  sin  in  Job's  case  aggravated  by  several 
considerations,  as  e.g.  that  his  creditor  was  his  "  brother,"  i.e.  either  a  relative  or,  at 
any  rate,  a  fellow-countryman,  and  not  a  stranger ;  that  he  was  poor,  and  would  be 
rendered  comparatively  des'titute  without  his  upper  raiment;  and  that  the  pledge  had 
been  taken  from  him  "for  nought,"  or  without  cause,  t.e.  either  had  been  exacted  though 
the  debt  was  small,  such  as  rich  Job  might  have  overlooked,  or  the  pledge  had  in  value 
greatly  exceeded  the  debt,  or  it  had  been  retained  after  the  debt  was  paid.  (2)  Heart- 
less inhospitality  (ver.  7).  It  was  regarded  in  Oriental  countries,  especially  in  early 
times,  as  both  a  dictate  of  nature  and  a  mark  of  piety,  to  provide  kindly  entertainment 
and  comfortable  shelter  for  famished  and  hungry  travellers  (Gen.  xviii.  4,  5;  xix.  2  ; 
xxi.  14, 15 ;  xxix.  13 ;  Exod.  ii.  20).  Nevertheless,  according  to  Elihu,  Job  had  "  not 
given  water  to  the  weary  to  drink,"  and  "  had  withholden  bread  from  the  hungry  " — a 
charge  which,  though  unjustly  preferred  against  Job  (ch.  xxxi.  17,  32),  will  yet  be 
righteously  advanced  against  not  a  few  professing  Christians  (Matt.  xxv.  44),  who  are 
enjoined  by  the  gospel  to  "use  hospitality  without  grudging"  (Rom.  xii.  13  ;  1  Tim. 
iii.  2 ;  Titus  i.  8 ;  Heb.  xiii.  2 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  9).  (3)  Barefaced  robbery  (ver.  8).  Con- 
ceiving that  the  land  was  made  for  the  rich  and  the  mighty  and  the  noble — &  delusion 
which  has  survived  in  the  minds  of  the  earth's  "mighties"  and  "  honourables  "  from 
Job's  day  to  this  (Ps.  oxv.  16)— Job,  "the  man  of  the  arm,"  had  by  force  or  by  fraud 
d.spossessed  the  poor  of  their  possessions  and  acquired  them  for  himself.  The  wicked- 
ness is  the  same  whether  a  man  robs  his  neighbour  with  the  help  of  the  law  or  in  defiance 
of  it;  and  legislation  tending  to  drive  the  poor  from  the  soil  is  legalized  robbery.  (4) 
Pitiless  oppression  (ver.  9).  Instead  of  proving  a  shield  and  defender  of  helpless  widows 
and  orphans,  a  duty  prompted  by  humanity  ami  prescribed  by  religion  (Exod.  xxii.  22; 
Jas.  i.  27),  in  imitation  of  God  himself  (Ps.  Ixviii.  5),  Job,  Elihu  says,  not  only  turned  a 
deaf  ear  to  their  cries  of  distress  and  solicitations  for  aid,  like  the  unjust  judge  in  the 
parable  (Luke  xviii.  2 — 5),  but,  like  the  Pharisees  who  devoured  widows'  houses  (Matt, 
xxiii.  14;  Mark  xii.  40;  Luke  xx.  47),  took  advantage  of  tlieir  friendless  and  helpless 
condition  to  defraud  them  of  the  last  fragment  of  their  possessions,  thus  "  brealiing  the 
arms  of  the  fatherless,"  i.e.  taking  away  everything  on  which  they  relied.  The  crime  of 
robbing  the  poor  because  he  is  poor  is  one  that  God  will  avenge  (Prov.  xxii.  22,  23). 
Orphans  and  widows  are  God's  peculiar  care.  3.  Plausibly  constructed.  The  charge  pre- 
ferred by  Eliphaz  had  this  mark  of  truthfidness,  that  the  crimes  specified  were  such  as  a 
rich  and  powerful  prince  might  naturally  have  been  supposed  to  commit.  Men's  vices  as 
well  as  their  virtues  usually  adjust  themselves  to  external  surroundings  as  well  as  to 
interual  dispositions.  All  men  have  their  characteristic  and  besetting  sins,  while  there 
are  other  forms  of  wickedness  which  they  cannot  commit.  A  person  may  shun  burglary 
and  yet  perpetrate  forgery.  He  who  cannot  steal  a  purse  may  yet  appropriate  an  inheri- 
tance. A  man  may  avoid  the  vulgar  sin  of  drunkenness  and  yet  fall  into  the  greater 
wickedness  of  whoredom.  4.  Ostensibly  proved.  Eliphaz  could  point  to  Job'.^  calami- 
ties as  evidence  that  what  he  had  alleged  was  true.  That  calamity  had  been  (1)  sudden 
in  its  coming,  it  had  caught  him  like  a  snare ;  it  was  (2)  terrifying  in  its  effects,  filling 
the  mind  of  Job  with  inward  fears ;  (3)  unavoidable  in  its  endurance— out  of  the  dark- 
ness that  encompassed  him  no  way  of  escape  could  be  detected ;  (4)  overwhelming  in  its 
measure,  being  likened  to  a  multjta'de  of  waters;  and  it  woWld  be  (5)  fatal  in  its  end,  there 
being  no'  hope  of  other  issue,  so  far  as  Eliphaz  could  see,  but  that  Job  should  be  sub- 
merged in  the  sea  of  trouble  that  surged  around  him.    It  was  useless,  then,  to  »ay  that 


876  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [on.  xxa.  1—30. 

proof  was  wanting.  Yet  was  the  charge  of  Eliphaz :  5.  WhoHy  imagined.  It  was  purely 
a  creation  of  the  Arabian  seer's  fancy.  Not  only  did  Job  declare  it  untrue,  but  Eliphaz 
himself  must  have  known  it  to  be  baseless  (cf.  oh.  iv.  3,  4).  Either  Eliphaz  had 
allowed  his  excited  and  wrathful  imagination  to  beguile  his  judgment,  which  was  not 
like  a  seer,  or  he  had  taken  up  a  slanderous  report  against  Job,  in  spite  of  his  betti  r 
knowledge,  which  was  not  like  a  saint.  But  passion  can  disperse  piety  and  confourd 
reason,  while  malice  will  constrain  even  good  people  to  believe  lies.  Envying  and 
strife  are  the  parents  of  confusion  and  every  evil  work  (Jas.  iii.  16). 

II.  A  CHARGE  OF  PRACTICAL  ATHEISM.  1.  The  import  of  this  form  of  infidelity. 
It  denies  not  the  existence,  but  the  overruling  providence  of  God — in  this  respect  differ- 
ing from  theoretical  atheism.  It  places  the  Supreme  at  an  iufi)iite  distance  from  the 
universe  which  he  has  called  into  being,  setting  him  "  in  the  height  of  heaven,"  banish- 
ing him,  as  it  were,  beyond  the  stars,  where  "  he  walketh  in  the  circuit  of  the  heavens," 
wrapped  about  by  "clouds"  which  "veil  him  that  he  seeth  not,"  alike  ignorant  of,  and 
unconcerned  about,  anything  that  transpires  in  this  lower  sphere,  and,  of  course,  never 
interfering  in  any  way  with  "  the  work  of  his  hands,"  wliich,  like  a  perfect  piece 
of  mechanism,  goes  without  inspection  or  repair — ^in  all  this  contradistinguished  from 
pantheism,  which  believes  in  a  God  at  hand,  but  at  the  same  time  confounds  the 
Creator  with  his  works.  Practical  atheism  says,  "  The  Almighty  was  once  here  pre- 
sent, but  he  has  withdrawn  ages  ago ;  nature  reigns,  and  all  physical  phenomena  are 
the  necessary  result  of  mechanical  laws"  (Pearson  on  ' Infidelity,' ch.  iii).  2.  The 
antiquity  of  this  form  of  infidelity.  This  was  the  creed  of  the  men  of  the  antediluvian 
world,  "  the  old  way  of  the  wicked,  who  were  cut  down  out  of  time  "  (i.e.  before  their 
time),  "whose  foundation  was  overflown  by  a  flood"  (literally,  "a  river  poured  out  was 
their  firm  foundation  ") — "  a  strong  but  suitable  expression,  referring  probably  to  Noah's 
flood"  (Umbreit).  Though  not  the  faith  of  Job,  it  was  that  of  some  of  Job's  contem- 
poraries Toh.  xxi.  14),  as  afterwards  of  some  of  David's  (Ps.  x.  11)  and  Asaph's  (Ps. 
Ixxiii.  11),  and  at  a  later  time  of  many  Hebrews  before  and  dnring  the  exile  (Isa.  xxix. 
15;  Ezek.  viii.  12).  Among  Greek  philosophers  it  was  the  teaching  of  Epicurus  and 
the  atomists.  The  French  encyclopsadists,  the  English  deists  of  the  last,  and  the 
Comtists  of  the  present  century,  all  concur  in  this  opinion.  It  is  the  latest  finding  of 
modern  materialistic  science.  3.  The  origin  of  this  form  of  infidelity.  (1)  Intel- 
lectual pride.  The  belief  that  man  can,  or  ought  to  be  able  to,  explain  everything 
has  as  its  correlative  the  astounding  assumption  that  nothing  can  exist  which  man 
does  not  understand.  Practically  this  is  the  fundamental  article  in  the  modern  scien- 
tific religion  of  agnosticism,  which  consigns  to  the  limbo  of  the  unknowable  everything 
outside  the  domain  of  the  senses  and  the  reason,  among  other  things  such  a  doctrine  as 
that  of  an  overruling  providence.  The  human  mind  discerns  an  insuperable  difficulty 
in  harmonizing  the  theory  of  a  continual  Divine  interposition  with  the  scientific  dogma 
of  the  reign  of  law — "  Hnw  doth  God  know?  can  he  judge  through  the  dark  ?  " — with 
the  insignificance  of  this'  earth,  which,  in  comparison  with  the  boundless  universe,  is 
but  as  a  drop  to  the  ocean,  and  in  particular  with  the  majesty  of  God,  whose  Divine 
perfections  and  glory  are  thought  not  to  admit  of  such  a  condescension  to  details  as  is 
implied  in  an  ovirruling  providence.  (2)  Heart-depravity.  Even  more  than  in  intel- 
lectual obliquity  does  practical  atheism  take  its  rise  in  moral  perversion.  It  is  the 
doctrine  of  "  the  wicked,"  of  the  moral  fool,  of  those  whose  hearts  are  alienated  from  , 
God, by  wicked  works,  who  are  so  destitute  of  spiritual  life  that  they  have  nothing  the 
Almighty  can  do  for  them,  and  who  desire  nothing  more  earnestly  than  to  have  no 
further  thought  of  God,  to  be  left  alone  to  their  own  infidelity  and  sin.  4.  The  wicked- 
ness of  this  form  of  ivfldelity.  Were  there  no  indications  of  God's  overruling  providence 
discernible,  such  amazing  incredulity  might  in  part  at  least  be  excusable.  But  proof 
in  abundance  existed  which  these  atheists  miglit  have  studied  had  they  been  willing, 
for  "  he  had  filled  their  houses  with  good  things."  So  Paul  told  the  men  of  Lystra 
that  God  had  never  left  himself  without  a  witness  (Acts.  xiv.  17),  and  the  Athenians 
that  he  was  not  far  to  seek,  or  find,  from  any  one  who  looked  upon  the  world  with  open 
eye  and  honest  mind  (Acts  xvil.  26 — 28).  Hence  such  infidelity  is  criminal^  and  to 
be  held  in  abhorrence  by  all  good  men,  as  well  as  by  Eliphaz  and  Jtb  (ch.  xxi.  16). 
5.  The  final  doom  of  this  form  of  infidelity.  In  opposition  to  Job,  who  maintained 
that  men  of  atheistical  principles  flourished  and  were  happy  all  their  lives,  Eliphas 


OH.  xxn.  1— 30,]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  87T 


contends  that  their  common  fate  is  rather  that  of  the  sinners  who  were  engulfed  hy  the 
Deluge  (ver.  16) ;  which  fate,  though  often  (1)  invisible  to  them,  coming  on  them  at 
the  moment  when  they  are  saying,  "Depart  from  us,"  as  it  did  on  the  infidels  of  Noah's 
day  (Luke  xvii.  26,  27),  is  (2)  progressing  towards  them,  the  righteous  being  able  to 
discern  its  approach,  though  they,  the  wicked,  cannot,  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord  being 
with  them  that  fear  him,"  and  "the  Lord  showing  them  what  he  is  about  to  do,"  as  ho 
did  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  17)  and  Pharaoh  (Gen.  x!i.  28),  and  will  ultimAtely  prove 
(3)  unavoidable  by  them,  the  fire  of  retribution  being  as  certain  to  devour  their  ahun- 
dance  aa  it  did  that  of  the  Sodomites  (Luke  xvii.  29),  as  well  as  (4)  ignominious  for  them, 
the  innocent  mocking  at  them  and  exulting  in  their  destruction,  just  as  the  worshippers 
of  the  beast  shall  yet  be  tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone  in  the  presence  of  the  holy 
angels  and  of  the  Lamb  (Rev.  xiv.  11); 

Learn :  1.  That  good  men  may  tell  lies.  2.  That  saints  should  be  chary  in  prefer- 
ring charges  against  one  another.  3.  That  no  cause  can  be  permanently  advanced  by 
an  untruth.  4.  That  atheism  is  an  old  sin,  and  is  commonly  associated  with  immo- 
rality. 5.  That  neither  distance  nor  darkness  can  hide  from  God.  6.  That  the 
Almighty  can  do  more  for,  or  against  men,  than  unbelievers  imagine.  7.  That  God'a 
goodness  does  not  always  lead  the  ungodly  to  repentance.  8.  That  they  who  now 
scorn  the  righteous  will  eventually  be  scorned  by  the  righteous.  9.  That  God  must 
reign  until  all  his  adversaries  are  overthrown. 

Vers.  21 — 30. — Eliphaz  to  Job :  3.  An  wncaUed-for  exhortation.  I.  The  pathway 
OP  PENITENCE.  1.  Acquaintance  with  God.  The  word  points  to  such  an  intimate 
knowl(dge  of  God  as  might  be  secured  by  dwelling  with  hira  on  familiar  terms  in  the 
same  house.  The  meaning  is  that  Job  required,  as  a  first  step  towards  temporal  and 
spiritual  recovery,  to  disabuse  his  mind  of  the  obviously  false  impressions  of  the  Divine 
character  which  he  entertained,  and  to  get  to  know  God  as  he  really  was  in  the  excellence 
and  beauty  of  his  Person.  Ignorance  of  God — of  his  character  as  a  God  of  love ;  of  his 
purpose  as  a  purpose  of  salvation';  of  his  Gift,  Christ  Jesus,  the  outcome  of  his  grace ; 
of  his  gospel,  which  contains  a  free  invitation  to  fallen  sinners — is  the  fruitful  cause  of 
unbelief  and  sin  (Eph.  iv.  18),  as,  on  the  other  hand,  a  thorough  appreciation  of  God's 
Name  and  character  as  revealed  in  Christ  invariably  leads  to  repentance  and  faith  (Ps. 
ix.  10).  Such  acquaintanceship  with  God  can  only  be  realized  in  and  through  Christ, 
who,  as  the  "  Image  of  tlie  invisible  God,"  "  dwelt  among  us,"  that  men  might  see  hii 
glory ;  that,  so  to  speak,  Goil  might  become  familiarized  to  man  ;  that  man  might  be 
able  to  get  on  speaking  terms  with  God,  and  so  come  to  understand  God  better  than  ha 
had  ever  done  before  (.John  xiv.  7,  9).  2.  Reconciliation  to  Gnd.  The  second  clause, 
though  sometimes  resui  as  consecutive,  may  be  taken  as  jussive,  and  as  intimating  the 
second  step  in  the  sincere  penitent's  return.  There  naturally  rises  out  of  a  better 
acquaintance  with  God  a  laying  aside  of  enmity  towards  him,  or  a  making  friends  with 
him.  Already  God  is  reconciled  to  the  sinner  (2  Cor.  v.  18)  ;  or  rather,  he  has  objectively 
and  legally  set  the  sinful  world  in  a  state  of  reconciliation  towards  himself,  i.e.  he  has 
turned  away  his  judicial  wrath  from  the  world,  so  that  now  nothing  prevents  the  instan- 
taneous establishment  of  "  peace,"  friendship,  at-one-ment,  between  God  and  man,  except 
man's  own  disinclination  and  enmity.  The  publication  of  God's  reconciling  work  is  the 
message  of  the  gospel  (2  Cor.  v.  19);  the  invitation  addressed  to  man  to  discontinue 
hostility  against  God,  to  lay  down  the  arms  of  rebellion,  to  live  no  more  in  a  state  of 
war  against  God,  but  of  amity  and  peace  with  God,  constitutes  the  ministry  of  recon- 
ciliation. 3.  Instruction  from  God.  Accepting  God's  gracious  offer  of  forgiveness  and 
salvation,  and  entering  with  him  into  a  covenant  of  friendship,  the  penitent  must  next 
submit  his  soul  to  the  Divine  teaching  (vor.  22).  God's  Law,  first  written  on  the 
tablets  of  the  heart  (Rom.  ii.  15) ;  afterwards  promulgated  from  Sinai  (Bxoii.  xx.  1) ; 
at  a  subsequent  period  amplified,  illustrated,  and  enforced  by  the  prophets  (Heb.  i.  1) ; 
in  the  fulness  of  the  times  exemplified  in  the  Person,  character,  and  work  of  Jesus 
Christ  (John  iii.  2 ;  Heb.  i.  2) ;  now  reaches  its  finnl  stage  when  engraven  on  the  renewed 
heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Cor.  iii.  3 ;  Hfeb.  viii.  10).  To  this  Law  God  requires  sub- 
mission as  one  of  the  imperative  conditions  of  enjoying  his  friendship;  and  this  sub- 
mission must  be  (1)  sincere,  proceeding  from  the  heart;  (2)  implicit, yielding  obedience 
to  the  utterances  of  his  mouth ;  (3)  complete,  not  to  one  or  two  of  the  utterances,  but  to 


078  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxn.  1—30. 

all ;  and  it)  cheerful,  laying  np  his  words  in  the  heart  with  an  earnest  desire  to  bring  the 
life  into  full  accord  with  their  iristructions.  4.  Holiness  hefore  Qod.  Equally  does  the 
grace  of  repentance  involve  a  hearty  forsaking  of  sin  and  a  steadfast  resolution  after 
iiKW  obedience  (ver.  23).  This  sentiment  is  a  repetition  from  Bildad's  second  oration  (ch. 
xi.  14 ;  vide  homiletics),  but  is  nevertheless  true.  No  man  really  returns  to  God  who  con- 
tinues to  adhere  to  sin  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  If  a  man  does  return  to  God,  he  will  "  cease  to  do  evil, 
and  learn  to  do  well"  (Isa.  i.  16).  Conversion  means  death  to  sin,  but  life  to  righteous- 
ness (Rom.  vi.  6 — 22).  Follow  holiness  is  the  all-comprehensive  precept  of  the  gospel 
(Heb.  xii.  14).  The  Christian  life  is  essentially  an  upward  jirogress  towards  personal 
purity.  This  is  assuredly  the  grand  lesson  of  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation 
(Titus  ii.  11,  12).  5.  Benunciation  of  all  besides  Ood.  The  genuinely  contrite  man 
must  complete  the  evidence  of  his  sincerity  by  abjuring  everything  in  which  he  has 
formerly  placed  his  trust,  in  particular  his  riches,  even  though  these  should  happen  to 
have  been  justly  ard  honourably  acquired,  "  laying  down  in  the  dust  his  gold,  and 
placing  among  the  pebbles  of  the  brook  the  gold  of  Ophir "  (ver.  24) ;  t,e.  he  must 
esteem  them  as  absolutely  worthless  in  comparison  with  religion — language  which  seems 
an  anticipation  of  the  sublime  utterance  of  St.  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  7, 8).  So  Christ  exhorted 
the  rich  young  ruler  to  sell  all  that  he  had  (Matt.  xix.  21),  and  called  his  disciples  to 
leave  all  (Matt.  iv.  20).  And  so  must  saints  still  be  willing  to  part  with  every  treasure 
that  might  dispute  with  Christ  the  supreme  affection  and  control  of  the  heart  (Matt.  x. 
37,  38 ;  xvi.  24 ;  Luke  xiv.  26) ;  in  particular,  neither  trusting  in  uncertain  riches 
(1  Tim.  vi.  11),  nor  attempting  to  serve  God  and  mammon  (Matt.  vi.  24). 

II.  The  reward  op  penitence.  1.  Inward  peace.  The  first  effect  of  such  a 
penitent  return  to,  and  reconciliation  with,  God  would,  according  to  Eliphaz,  be  deliver- 
ance from  mental  disquietude  (ver.  21,  Authorized  Version).  Laying  down  its  weapons 
of  rebellion,  and  closing  with  the  Divine  overtures  of  pardon,  the  contrite  soul  would 
experience  a  holy  calm, "  a  peace  above  all  earthly  dignities,  a  still  and  quiet  conscience." 
True  peace  of  mind  is  unattainable  in  sin  and  under  condemnation  (Isa.  Ivii.  21).  It  is 
only  possible  as  the  result  of  acceptance  with  God  (ch.  xxxiii.  26 ;  Ps.  xxix.  11).  Hence 
it  is  described  in  the  gospel  as  the  first  effect  of  justification  (Eom.  v.  1),  as  the  great  gift 
bestowed  by  Christ  upon  his  people  (John  xiv.  27  ;  xx.  19),  and  as  the  certain  experience 
of  every  believer  (Bom.  vlii.  6 ;  xiv.  17  ;  xv.  13).  It  is  also  represented  as  a  peace 
which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away  (John  xiv.  27),  as  a  peace  which  passeth 
all  understaiiding  (Phil.  iv.  7),  «'hether  by  a  saint  or  by  a  sinner.  2.  Outward  geod. 
The  subsequent  enumeration  of  blessings  attenrla,nt  on  the  lowly  penitent  almost  leads 
to  the  surmise  that  Eliphaz  was  thinking  mainly  of  spiritual  good  (ver.  21).  Yet  it  is 
certain  that  temporal  enlargement  was  nut  excluded  from  his  contemplation.  Probably 
he  intended  both ;  and  "good"  in  the  widest  acceptation  of  the  term  is  promised  to 
believing  followers  of  God  in  both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  (Ps.  xxxiv.  10;  Ixxxiv. 
11 ;  Rom.  viii.  28).  Even  things  that  in  themselves  wear  an  adverse  aspect  are  trans- 
formed into  benefits  for  the  child  of  God  (Heb.  xii.  11).  St.  Paul  gives  an  inventory  of 
the  saint's  "  good  "  things  (1  Cor.  iii.  21).  And  these  good  things  come  to  the  saint 
without  his  labouring  for  them  (Matt.  vi.  33),  simply  as  the  gilt  of  God.  3.  Domestic 
prosperity.  The  building  up  alluded  to  (ver.  23),  while  cafiable  of  voider  reference,  may 
here  be  understood  of  family  enlargement.  Children  are  like  olive  plants  about  the  table, 
i.e.  noble  sons  and  fair  daughters;  and  to  have  many  of  them  was  a  special  mark  of 
Divine  favour  under  the  Law  (Ps.  cxxviii.  3).  Indeed,  all  right-thinking  persons  regard 
a  numerous  offspring  as  a  blessing  rather  than  a  curse.  4.  Qod  for  the  soul's  Portion.  In 
exchange  for  the  castaway  gold  and  silver.  Job  is  promised  that  which  constitutes  the  true 
riches,  viz.  the  Almighty  himself,  who  should  be  to  him  "  gold  from  the  mine,  and  silver 
of  the  brightest  lustre  "  (ver.  25).  So  God  represents  himself  as  his  people's  Portion  (Jer. 
X.  16  ;  li.  19),  and  as  such  he  is  claimed  by  his  people  (Ps.  xvi.  5 ;  Lam.  iii.  24).  His 
salvation  also  is  depicted  as  the  soul's  true  treasure  (Luke  xvi.  11).  At  this  point  the 
recitation  of  the  penitent's  reward  may  be  said  to  culminate.  'J'he  undermentioned 
benefits,  though  here  exhibited  as  co-ordinate  with  the  foregoing,  are  really  nothing  else 
than  the  unfolded  contents  of  the  last  benefit  recorded.  I'he  man  who  has  God  for  a 
Portion  will  in  consequonce  possess  all  the  privileges  that  follow.  5.  Delight  in  Ood'» 
presence.  Instead  of  sitting  melancholy  and  dejected,  sullen  and  gloomy,  before  God, 
like  another  Cain,  he  will  be  able  to  lift  up  '  <«reiiely  joyous  face  to  God  as  a  father 


OH.  xxn.  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  379 

reconciled  (ver.  26),  and  will  not  only  exult  in  his  acceptance  (Rom.  v.  2),  but  delight 
in  his  Portion,  i.e.  take  pleasure  in  studying  God's  character  as  unveiled  in  Jesus  Christ 
(2  Cor.  iii.  18),  in  learning  God's  will  as  revealed  in  the  Bible  (Isa.  Iviii.  2),  in  obeying 
God's  Law  as  promulgated  m  the  fiospel  (Rom.  v,  22),  in  enjoying  God's  society  in 
every  situation  aud  phase  of  life  (1  John  i.  7).  6.  Acceptance  in  prayer.  Taking  God 
as  his  Portion,  Job  shouLi  have  (1)  free  access  to  the  thione  of  ^race  in  order  to  present 
his  petitions ;  (2)  freedom  of  utterance  in  expressing  the  desires  of  Ids  heart ;  (3)  certain 
assurance  that  God  would  listen  to  his  supplications;  (4)  sooner  or  later,  answers  to 
his  petitions ;  (5)  a  spirit  of  thankfulness  for  mercies  received  and  expected,  which 
should  lead  him  to  vow  an  offering  to  God ;  and  (6)  the  needful  fidelity  to  enable  iiim 
to  keep  his  promise  and  pay  that  which  he  had  vowed  (ver.  27).  Note  that  all  of 
the'ie  are  comprehended  in  the  blessings  promised  to  Christ's  believing  people  (Phil.  iv. 
6  ;  Heb.  iv.  16  ;  x.  19 — 22  ;  1  John  v.  14,  15).  Here  again  the  blessings  that  ensue 
are  illustrations  of  the  power  with  God  which  a  good  man  possesses  through  believing 
prayer.  7.  Success  in  his  own  undertakings.  Job,  or  the  penitent,  would  only  neid 
to  "  decree  a  thing  "  and  it  should  be  "  established  "  unto  him,  so  that  "  the  light "  of 
prosperity  should  shine  on  his  ways  (ver.  28).  The  same  promise  is  given  to  the  Old 
Testament  saint  (Ps.  xxxvii.  4 — 6)  and  the  New  Testament  believer  (Mark  xi.  22 — 
24) ;  and  the  promise  was  verified  in  the  cases  of  Abraham's  servant  (Gen.  xxiv.  12), 
Nehemiah  (i.  11),  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  1 ;  Jas.  v.  16 — 18),  and  others.  8.  Helpfulness 
to  others  in  their  troubles.  (1)  Encouraging  the  cast-down  by  his  words,  saying  unto  them, 
"Arise"  (ver.  29),  as  St.  Paul  cheered  the  crew  and  passengers  of  the  Alexandrian  corn- 
ship  in  the  storm  (Acts  xxvii.  21 — 25) ;  (2)  saving  the  humble,  literally,  tho  downcast 
of  eyes,  by  his  prayers,  as  doubtless  Epaphroditus  was  restored  to  health  in  answer  to 
St.  Paul's  entreaties  (Phil.  ii.  26,  27"),  as  St.  Paul  himself  expected  to  be  liberated  from  his 
Roman  confinement  in  response  to  Philemon's  supplications  (Philem.  22),  and  as  the  elders 
of  the  primitive  Church  knew  that  the  prayer  of  faith  would  save  the  sick  (Jas.  v.  15) ; 
and  even  (3)  delivering  the  ungodly  by  his  intercessions,  "  rescuing  the  not-guiltless  by 
the  pureness  of  his  hands  "  (ver.  30),  as  Abraham  would  have  saved  Sodom  had  it  only 
contained  ten  righteous  persons  (Gen.  xviii.  23 — 32),  and  actually  lecovered  the  house- 
hjld  of  Abimelech  (Gen.  xx.  7,  17),  and  as  Job  subsequently  interceded  for  his  friends 
(oh.  xlii.  7 — 9).  Thus  in  all  the  three  ways  specified  God's  people  have  power  with 
God  in  behalf  of  others,  and  are  honoured  to  co-operate  with  God  in  the  noblest  work 
in  which  a  man  can  engage  on  earth,  that  of  saving  souls. 

Learn  :  1.  That  many  a  noble  sermon  is  pn^iched  to  the  wrong  hearers.  The  discourse 
of  Eliphaz,  thongh  lofty  in  its  conceptions  anS  moving  in  its  strains,  was  not  adapted 
to  the  case  of  Job.  2.  That  men's  creeds  are  sometimes  better  than  those  who  liold 
them.  The  piety  and  spiritnality  of  this  exhortation  stand  at  a  higher  elevation  than 
the  character  of  him  who  uttered  it.  3.  That  more  gospel  light  may  bs  possessed  by 
those  outside  the  Church  than  those  within  suspect.  Eliphaz's  sermon  sounds  like  an 
anticipation  of  New  Testament  teaching.  4.  That  there  is  only  one  way  of  salvation 
for  all  countries  and  all  times.  Eliphaz  preached  to  his  listener  what  St.  John  Baptist, 
St.  Peter,  St.  Paul,  and  St.  John  proclaimed  to  their  hearers,  "  Repent  and  be  converted, 
that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."  5.  That  true  happiness  can  be  reached  by  none  who 
do  not  first  return  to  God.  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  our  God,  to  the  wicked."  6.  That 
the  pious  poor  man  is  richer  than  the  godless  millionaire.  God  is  better  as  a  Portion  for 
the  human  soul  than  gold  of  0|jhir.  7.  That  the  royal  road  to  all  genuine  success  in 
life  lies  in  establishing  a  friendship  with  Heaven.  The  man  who  delights  in  God  shall 
have  his  desires  granted,  his  prayers  heard,  and  his  plans  fulfilled.  8.  That  the  most 
influential  men  on  earth  are  the  truly  pious.  God's  Israels  have  power  with  both  God 
and  man.  9.  That  the  wicked  world  is  more  indebted  to  the  Church  of  God  than  ft 
imagines.     God's  saints  and  Christ's  followers  are  the  salt  of  the  earth. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 SO.  — Censorious  and  uncharitable  reasoning.     Eliphaz  again  takes  upthl 

word.  He  does  not  contest  Job's  position,  that  life  presents  many  examples  of  the 
prospirity  of  the  godless,  and  of  the  calamities  of  the  godly,  but  he  still  maintains  that 
only  "rievous  sins,  such  as  he  proceeds  to  specify — oppression,  hard-heartedness,  injustic* 


380  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  [oh.  ixil  1— 30. 


to  his  neighbours — could  be  the  cause  of  his  misfortunes  and  miseries  (vers.  2 — 10). 
He  then  proceeds  to  give  an  earnest  warning  against  further  indulgence  in  profane 
thouglits  and  words,  because  the  tatal  end  of  the  wicked  man,  whatever  his  course  may 
have  been,  can  be  no  other  than  dreadful,  like  that  of  all  wicked  men  from  olden  time 
(vers.  11 — 20).  Then  comes  an  invitation  to  repeatance  and  conversion,  and  to  the 
enjoyment  of  the  blessings  promised  to  the  penitent  by  God  (vers.  21 — 30). 

L  Accusation  OF  Job  AS  A  GKEAT  siNNEn.  (Vers.  2 — 10.)  1.  These  questions  taken 
together  (vers.  2 — 5)  form  a  syllogism  (Zockler).  The  major  premiss  (vers  2,  3) 
expresses  the  thought :  in  God,  the  all-sufficing  One,  who  is  not  affected  by  man's  good 
or  evU,  the  cause  of  Job's  unhappiness  cannot  lie ;  the  minor  premiss  shows  that  if  Job 
himself  bears  the  blame,  tliis  cannot  possibly  be  because  of  his  reverence  fur  Gud  (ver. 
4) ;  and  the  conclusion  is  drawn  to  the  prejudice  of  the  moral  character  of  Job  (yer.  5). 
"  Does  man  bring  profit  to  God  ?  No,  the  man  of  sense  profits  himself."  Gud  needs 
nothing,  and  gains  nothing,  whether  man's  conduct  be  wise  or  foolish ;  therefore  if  he  has 
acted  wisely,  man  is  but  consulting  his  own  interest.  "  Is  it  an  advantage  to  the  Almighty, 
if  thou  art  just?  or  a  gain,  if  thou  makest  thy  ways  sound?"  i.e.  pure  and  free  from 
blame  and  punishment.  Therefore  it  cannot  be  selfish  or  arbitrary  motives  which 
determine  God  to  afflict  men.  "  Will  he  chastise  thee  for  thy  reverence,  go  with  thee 
to  judgment  ?  "  If  the  reason  of  your  doom  is  to  be  found  in  yourself,  can  it  be  reverence 
to  him  for  which  he  punishes  you  ?  It  must  be  the  very  opposite.  Thea  comes  the 
conclusion,  "  Is  thy  wickedness  not  great,  and  of  thy  transgressions  no  end  ?  "  On 
the  rigid  principles  of  Eliphaz  and  his  companions,  no  other  conclusion  can  be  drawn. 
"  The  thiugs  said  are  good,  but  they  are  carnally  understood.  For  the  wisdom  of 
the  flesh  thinks  that  blessing  outwardly  belongs  in  this  world  to  the  godly,  and  to 
the  ungodly,  curses ;  but  the  truth  teaches  that  the  godly  enjoy  blessing  in  this  life 
under  the  guise  of  cursing,  life  in  death,  salvation  in  seeming  condemnation ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  the  ungodly  are  cursed  under  the  show  of  blessing,  are  dead  while  they  live, 
are  condemned  though  in  seeming  safety  "  (Brenz).  2.  Enumeration  of  Job's  supposed 
sins  (vers.  6 — 10).  They  are  the  sins  of  the  rich  and  powerful,  such  as  Job  had  been. 
"  For  thou  didst  take  a  pledge  of  thy  brother  without  cause,"  thine  abundance  rendering 
such  measures  against  a  poor  neighbour  unnecessary.  Note  the  indignation  with  which 
the  Bible  ever  treats  sins  against  the  poor  and  needy.  "  And  stripped  off  the  clothes  of 
the  naked,"  ».e.  the  ragged,  the  scantily  dffthed.  Common  humanity  would  forbid 
the  taking  of  the  last  garment  of  such  in  pledge ;  and  the  Law  of  Mosos  strictly  prohibited 
it  (Exod.  xxii.  25,  sqq. ;  Dent.  xxiv.  6,  Ipf  sjj.)-  "  Thou  gavest  not  the  thirsty  water 
to  drink,  and  didst  refuse  the  hungry  bread;  "  comp.  Isa.  Iviii.  10,  and  the  beautiful 
contrast  in  the  words  of  Christ  concerning  giving  the  cup  of  cold  water  to  the  little 
one  (Matt.  i.  42).  "  And  the  powerful  man  [literally, '  the  man  of  arm  *],  his  was  the 
land,  and  the  man  of  consideration  was  to  dwell  in  it."  A  picture,  as  the  speaker 
supposes,  true  to  the  life  of  what  Job  had  been.  "  Widows  thou  didst  send  empty 
away,  and  the  arms  of  the  orphans  were  crushed,"  i.e.  their  rights  and  their  resources,  all 
that  they  could  rely  on  (Ps.  xxxvii.  17 ;  Ezek.  xxx.  22).  "  Therefore  snares  are  round 
about  thee,  and  terror  comes  upon  thee  suddenly"  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  11;  Prov.  iii.  25).  The 
truth  of  God's  special  care  over  widows  and  orphans,  over  the  poor,  the  prisoners,  and 
the  oppressed  is  thus  incidentally  brought  out  with  force.  Sins  against  them  are 
amongst  the  vilest  that  cry  to  Heaven  (Sirach  xxxv.  14, 15, 18,  sqq.). 

II.  Wakninq  OP  FURTHER  PUNISHMENT.  (Vcrs.  11 — 20.)  1.  "  Or  darknoss  that  thou 
canst  not  see,  and  a  flood  of  waters  covers  thee" — the  night  of  woe  and  the  deep  misery 
which  have  come  upon  him  in  consequence  of  his  sins  (ver.  1).  "  Is  not  Eloah  heaven- 
high?" — infinitely  exalted — "and  do  but  behold  the  head  [or,  'highest']  of  the  st.ars, 
how  exalted  they  are  I  "  (ver.  12).  Then  how  idle  is  every  thought  of  the  limitation  of 
his  power,  and  every  doubt  of  the  absolute  justice  of  his  dealings  I  In  vers.  13, 14  Job's 
doubts  of  the  justice  of  God's  government  are  construed  by  the  speaker  as  denials  of  God's 
knowledge  of  earthly  things  and  his  providence  over  mankind,  like  the  Epicureans  in 
ancient  and  the  deists  in  modern  times.  "  And  thou  sayest.  What  knoweth  God  ?  will 
he  judge  through  the  dark  clouds  ?  clouds  are  his  covering,  that  he  seeth  not ;  and  he 
waiketh  on  the  circumference  of  the  heaven,"  deigning  not  to  give  heed  to  this  little 
and  insignificant  earth.  Similar  expressions  of  ancient  scepticism  are  found  in  Ps. 
Ixxiii.  11;  xciv.  7 ;  Isa.  xxix.  15;  Ezek.  viii.  12.    Its  refutation  is  in  the  words  oi 


OH.  rxii.  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  «8l 

Jeremiah  (xxiii.  23,  sqq.).  God  is  not  afar  off,  but  near  to  every  creature — not  far  from 
every  one  of  us  (vers.  27,  28 ;  Acts  xvii.).  To  think  that  God  is  too  exalted  to  attend 
to  our  mean  affairs,  is  to  set  out  on  the  road  of  unbelief,  sin,  q,ad  ruin.  Rather,  because 
God  is  so  exalted,  nothing  is  hidden  from  him.  He  is  as  manifest  in  the  microscopic 
dust  as  in  che  planetary  worlds.  He  knows  our  most  secret  deeds,  our  inmost  feelings, 
our  sufferings  that  most  retire  from  the  notice  of  others  (Jer.  xxiii.  23,  24 ;  Ps.  cxxxix. 
1,  sjg'.  ,•  Matt.  vi.  8;  1  Jolin  iii.  20).  2.  Ute  overthrow  of  the  godless.  (Vers.  15 — 20.) 
"  Wilt  thou  observe  the  way  of  the  old  world,  which  men  of  perdition  trod?  " — alluding, 
perhaps,  to  those  before  the  Deluge  (2  Pet.  ii.  5).  Swept  away  before  their  time,  their 
foundation  was  poured  away  like  a  stream,  so  that  they  could  not  remain  (ver.  16). 
These  ungodly  ones  had  said  to  Go  J,  "Depart  from  us;"  had  asked,  "What  can  the 
Almighty  do  for  us?"  (ver.  17).  Job  had  in  the  previous  chapter  (vers.  14,  15)  put 
words  like  these  into  the  mouth  of  the  prosperous  bad  men ;  and  now  Bliphaz  ascribes 
them  to  the  subject  of  his  description,  to  show  Job  that  he  approves  up  to  a  certain  point 
of  the  representation  he  had  made  of  the  relation  of  external  happiness  to  human  guilt 
(Zocklur).  "  And  yet  it  was  he  that  had  filled  their  houses  with  blessing,"  giving  the 
contrast  between  the  sudden  Divine  judgments  and  the  previous  prosperous  condition 
which  suggested  their  exemption  from  punishment.  "  The  counsel  of  the  wicked  be  far 
from  me  1 "  exclaims  the  speaker  (ver.  18),  echoing  Job  (ch.  xxi.  16),  as  if  to  imply — 
only  one  who,  like  myself,  has  no  doubt  of  God's  retributive  justice,  may  dare  thus  to 
speak.  The  wish  of  the  godly  is  that  God  may  draw  near,  ever  nearer,  to  him;  that 
of  the  ungodly  is  always,  "  Remove,  depart  from  us  1 "  "  They  would  willingly  leave 
God  his  heaven,  if  he  would  only  leave  them  their  earthly  comfort "  (Starke).  Ver.  19, 
the  overthrow  of  the  wicked  is  a  subject  of  rejoicing,  even  of  derision,  to  the  righteous 
and  innocent,  according  to  the  proverb,  "He  laughs  best  who  laughs  last"  (cump. 
Ps.  Iviii.  10,  11 ;  Ixiv.  9,  20).  Ver.  20  contains  the  words  of  triumph  of  the  godly, 
"  Verily,  our  adversaries  are  destroyed,  and  their  remainder  the  fire  has  consumed." 
Contrast  the  spirit  of  Christ  (Matt,  xxiii.  37  ;  Luke  xix.  42,  sqq. ;  Jas.  v.  19,  20).  ■ 

III.  Exhortation  to  ebpbntancb  and  pbomisb  of  salvation.  (Vers.  21 — 30.) 
1.  Exhortation.  "Make  friends  with  him,  and  be  at  peace"  (Jas.  iv.  8),  "thereby 
blessing  will  come  to  thee  "  (ver.  21) ;  "  Take  instruction  from  his  mouth  "  (Prov.  ii.  6). 
"  If  thou  retuniest  to  the  Almighty,  thou  wilt  be  built  again ;  if  thou  put  wrong  far  from 
thy  tents,  and  lay  in  the  dust  the  precious  metal,  and  under  the  gravle  of  the  brooks  the 
Ophir  gold  " — getting  rid  of  it  as  a  worthless  thing — "  then  will  the  Almighty  be  thy 
Treasure,  and  silver  in  heaps  "  (vers.  23,  25 ;  see  on  this  sentiment  the  New  Testament 
passages.  Matt.  vi.  20,  33;  xix.  21;  Luke  xii.  33;  1  Tim.  vi.  16 — 19).  God's  grace 
builds  up  what  sin  destroys.  To  enjuy  that  grace  is  competency,  is  wealth.  Deus  meus  ei 
omnia!  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  25,  26).  "Let  thy  heart  rely  on  God,  and  thou  mayest  cast  away 
thy  gold,  lose  It  without  care;  the  Almighty  reu.ains  thine  inviolable  Tieasure;  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  without  him  the  most  troubled  watching  and  anxiety  are  of  no 
avail "  (vide  Geilach).  2.  Promises  continued.  (Vers.  26 — 30.)  "  Yea,  then  thou  wilt 
delight  thyself  in  the  Almighty,  and  lift  up  thy  face  to  God"  (ver.  26),  in  the  freedom 
of  a  conscience  without  guilt  (ch.  xi.  15 ;  comp.  Ps.  xxxvil.  4  ;  Isa.  Iviii.  14).  "  If  thuu 
prayest  to  him,  he  will  hear  thee,  and  thy  vows  thou  wilt  pay  "  (Ps.  xxii.  25  ;  1.  14; 
Ixi.  8 ;  Ixv.  2).  The  vow  is  looked  at  in  the  light  of  promise  lather  than  of  duty  ;  God 
will  always  grant  so  much  that  thou  canst  fulfil  all  thy  vows,  "If  thou  resolvest  on 
anything,  it  will  come  to  pass,  and  light  shall  beam  on  thy  way.  If  they  [the  ways] 
go  downwards,  thou  sayest.  Up!" — a  cry  of  triumph  and  thanksgiving.  "And  to 
the  cast  down  he  gives  help.  He  will  deliver  the  not-innocent,  and  he  is  delivered 
by  the  cleanness  of  thy  hands  "  (vers.  28 — 30).  For  the  sake  of  thy  innocence,  which 
thou  shalt  have  regained,  Gcd  will  be  gracious  to  others  who  need  atonement  for  their 
guilt.  Little  does  the  Pharisaic  speaker  dream  that  it  is  he  who  will  receive  the 
pardon  at  God's  hands  for  Job's  sake  (ch.  xlii.  8).  The  "prayer  of  a  righteous  man 
availeth  much."  At  his  intercession  exil-doers  may  be  spared,  and  not  visited  with 
the  merited  punishment  (Gen.  xviii.  23,  24;  Ezek.  xiv.  14,  sqq.).— J. 

Vers.  2 — 11. — The  impartiality  of  the  Divine  judtjment.  Eliphaz  knows  of  no 
cause  for  suffering  but  sin.  Doubtless  sin — transgression  of  Divine  laws — does  lie 
deeply  buried  in  the  causes  of  hnman  suffering.     This  is  the  fruitful  seed  from  which 


382  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xto.  1—30. 


widespread  harvests  of  suffering  grow.  But  it  is  not  within  the  power  of  man  to  fix 
on  the  actual  offender.  Suffering  occurs  in  a  thousand  instances  where  not  the  sufferer 
but  another  is  the  offender.  To  charge  home,  therefore,  upon  every  sufferer  the  cause 
of  his  sufferings  is  an  error.  Into  this  error  Job's  friends  fell.  But  Eliphaz  proclaims 
a  great  truth  in  affirming  the  judgment  of  God  to  be  unbiassed.  No  unworthy  motives 
move  him  in  iiis  decisions.  They  are  true  and  righteous  altogether.  The  impartiality 
of  the  Divine  judgments  is — 

I.  Assured  by  the  inviolability  or  the  Divine  eighteousnbss.  The  character 
of  the  Most  High  is  the  utmost  refuge  of  the  human  thought.  It  is  the  basis  of  human 
confidence.  That  Name  is  absolutely  unimpeachable.  No  difficulty  in  the  Divine 
ways  or  in  onr  interpretation  of  them  can  for  a  moment  check  our  assurance  of  the 
Divine  sanctity  and  justice.  On  this  rock  all  hope  is  built.  As  now  we  repose  on  it, 
so  in  our  thoughts  of  the  future.  The  final  as  the  present  judgmenis  of  God  are  and 
can  be  only  true  and  righteous.  The  sanctity  of  the  Divine  Name  is  the  assurance 
of  the  unimpeachable  rectitude  of  the  Divine  ways.  The  impartiality  of  the  Divine 
judgments  is  therefore — 

II.  A  GROUND   or   CONFIDENT   APPEAL   BY  THE   UNJUSTLY  ACCUSBD.      In  CalmnCSS  he 

may  wait  who  knows  himself  to  be  unrighteously  accused,  slandered.  It  is  hard  to 
bear  the  unjust  accusations  of  men,  and  all  the  more  if  we  have  no  means  at  hand  by 
which  to  vindicate  ourselves.  To  the  final  adjudication  we  may  safely  appeal.  .  There 
justice  will  be  done.  There  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  shine  out  as  the 
sun,  or  as  the  stars  in  the  black  night.  The  human  judgment  errs ;  it  is  swayed  by 
false  words,  by  base  motive,  by  ignorance,  by  want  of  integrity.  But  high  above  the 
imperfeotness  of  the  human  rises  the  Divine  judgment,  calm  and  profound,  pure  as 
a  sea  of  glass.  To  that  judgment  Job  has  again  referred  himself  now  in  strong 
confidence,  now  in  fear ;  though,  in  moments  of  weakness,  he  has  seemed  to  impugn 
it.    The  impartiality  of  the  Divine  judgment  is — 

in.  A  SOURCE  OF  TEUE  COMFORT  FOB  THE  SORROWFUL.  Ever  there  llcs  deep  in  the 
heart  of  the  suffering  the  hope  that  some  counterbalancing  good  shall  follow.  To 
the  full  round  of  scriptural  teaching  we  are  indebted  for  the  clear  light  that  wu  have 
on  this  subject.  "  There  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth."  "  There  is  a  reward  for 
the  righteous."  Weeping  may  endure  through  life,  and  turn  it  into  a  long  night,  but  a 
morning  of  joy  breaketh,  when  tears  shall  be  wiped  away.  Though  men  are  tried,  yet 
shall  they  come  forth  as  gold  purified  in  the  fire.  To  the  final  Divine  award,  when 
God  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works,  the  patient  sufferer  may  commit 
himself  in  calmness  of  hope.  The  impartiality  of  the  Divine  judgment  stands  in 
contrast  to  the  error  and  imperfection  of  all  human  judgment.  The  human  knowledge 
is  partial,  the  human  motives  liable  to  be  vvarped ;  therefore  the  human  decisions 
are  often  unjust.  Thus  was  it  with  Job.  His  friend  accused  him  in  severe  terms. 
"Is  not  thy  wickedness  great?  and  thine  iniquities  infinite?  "  Then  in  severe  words 
he  names  his  offences,  and  adds,  "  Therefore  snares  are  round  about  thee,  and  sudden  fear 
troubleth  thee."  Such  was  not  the  Divine  judgment,  as  the  sequel  declares.  Hence 
shines  forth  the  lesson  to  the  sufferer  and  the  falsely  accused,  to  abide  calmly  in  hope  of 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God. — R.  G. 

Vers.  13,  14. — The  unseen  eye.  God  is  exalted;  he  is  "in  the  height  of  heaven." 
He  is  unseen  by  man,  and  therefore  often  forgotten.  He  is  above,  beyond ;  and  the 
frail  judgment  perverts  this  great  truth  into — 

I,   A  *JPP0SITI0N  OF  THE  DiVINE  IGNORANCE  OF  HUMAN   AFFAIRS.      "  HoW  doth  God 

know  ?  "  "  Thick  clouds  are  a  covering  to  him,  that  he  seeth  not."  Thus  ignorance 
«r  folly  perverts  the  right  and  the  good.  Either  the  judgment  or  the  moral  character 
is  at  fault.  Men  sin  in  forgetfulness  that  the  Divine  eye  is  upon  them.  "  Thou  God 
seest  me  "  is  a  hedge  of  fire  to  prevent  from  evil-doing.  How  great  a  departure  from 
right  reason  is  the  foolish  supposition  that,  because  God  is  not  seen,  therefore  he  seeth 
not !  So  the  Divine  is  measured  by  the  human.  Only  godlessness — ^the  indifference 
of  the  soul  to  God  —can  lead  men  to  such  perversions.  The  pure,  they  who,  coraiuun- 
ing  with  the  pure  One,  are  changed  into  his  image,  see  God.  They  discern  his  tye. 
It  is  the  light  and  the  joy  of  their  life.  The  evil  with  darkened  eye  seeth  not.  A 
cloud  of  ignorance  covers  him,  as  a  cloud  of  mystery  the  Most  Hijjh, 


HB.  XXII.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK   OP  JOB.  883 

n.  This  ignorance  is  further  perverted  into  A  bupposition  of  the  incompetenot  of 
THE  Divine  judsment.  "  Can  he  judge  through  the  dark  cloud  ?  "  Thus  the  blind 
falls  into  the  pit  of  error.  One  fault  follows  another  in  quick  succession.  The 
faulty  view  which  shuts  God  out  from  his  own  world,  which  thinks  of  him  as  too  far 
exalted  above  human  affairs  to  take  knowledge  of  them,  must  needs  complete  itself  in 
denying  the  Divine  judgment  of  human  actions.  It  is  the  perilous  perversion  of 
ignorance  and  of  sin — the  blindness  of  mind  which  springs  from  a  hardness  of  heart. 
The  moral  sensibilities  being  blunted,  moral  truth  is  not  apprehended.  Spiritual 
things  are  foolishness  to  the  unspiritual ;  he  cannot  discern  them.  The  heart  loving 
evil  bril  es  the  conscience  into  doubt  as  to  the  judgment  upon  evil,  and  finally  wins 
it  over  to  a  denial  of  it.  God  cannot  judge.  So  does  the  frail,  ignorant,  foolish  creature 
judge  of  the  Creator,  and  thus  assumes  to  itself  what  it  denies  to  its  Maker. 

Murk  (1)  the  error,   (2)  the  folly,   (3)  the  wickedness,  (4)  the  danger,   of  this. 

— R.  a. 

Vers.  21 — 30. — Peace  with  Qod.  In  clear  words  reconciliation  with  God  is  urged. 
"  Acquaint  now  thyself  with  him,  and  be  at  peace."  Ignorance  of  God  casts  men  off 
from  the  highest  good — from  the  fellowship  of  their  truest  and  best  Friend.  Deep  in 
the  heart  of  the  wicked  enmity  against  God  reigns.  This  is  sin's  utmost  folly.  Men 
are  to  be  judged  by  their  relation  to  a  pure  and  true  standard.  The  utmost  con- 
demnation lies  buried  in  a  repudiation  of  the  highest  goodness,  the  supreme  righteous- 
ness, the  purest  benevolence.  "  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee  ?  "  was  the  expression 
of  a  purely  devilish  mind.  The  reconciliation  of  the  human  soul  to  God  is  the  noblest 
and  best  work  of  philanthropy.    Eliphaz  [loints  out — 

I.  The  way  op  reconciliation.  1.  The  search  for  the  knowledge  of  God. 
"Acquaint  now  thyself  with  him."  The  knowledge  of  God  is  the  basis  of  peace  and  the 
encouragement  to  it.  It  is  the  knowledge  that  comes  of  the  heart  turning  to  God.  To 
such  a  heart  God  turns  and  manifests  himself.  Mere  intelleotiial  search  is  insufficient, 
God  is  known,  as  he  is  seen,  by  the  heart.  2.  Eeoeiving  teaching  from  him.  The  accept- 
ance of  his  holy  Law  as  the  law  of  the  returning  life,  hiding  his  words  in  the  heart, 
taking  them  up  into  a  loving  recognition  of  them, — this  is  the  way  of  all  true  peace  and 
blessedness.  3.  The  putting  away  iniquity.  This,  the  true  repentance,  is  a  departure 
from  evil.  4.  A  return  of  the  soul  wholly  to  God.  This  is  the  true  conversion.  From 
this  issues  the  utmost  good  which  Eliphaz  points  out  in  describing — 

II.  The  fruits  of  peace.  1.  The  restoration  of  prosperity.  "  Thou  shalt  be  built 
up."  The  blessing  of  God  upon  the  human  life  is  the  highest  pledge  of  true  prosperity. 
"Thou  shalt  lay  up  gold  as  dust,"  may  not  be  a  definite  promise  of  riches  to  every 
returning  one,  but  it  indicates  the  true  effect  of  righteousness.  God  will  be  to  him  his 
true  gold.  2.  Divine  protection.  "  The  Almighty  shall  be  thy  Defence."  3.  A  confident 
and  joyous  approach  to  God.  "  Thou  shalt  have  thy  delight  in  the  Almighty."  How 
greatly  is  the  character  of  life  raised  by  its  purer  fellowships  I  The  soul  brought  to 
find  its  delight  in  the  highest  good  is  blest  indeed.  4.  The  free  access  of  prayer ; 
and  the  pledge  of  a  favourable  response,  "  Thou  shalt  make  thy  prayer  unto  him,  and 
he  shall  hear  thee."  6.  Prosperity  and  joy.  "  Thou  shalt  also  decree  a  thing,  and  it 
shall  be  established  unto  thee :  and  the  light  shall  shine  upon  thy  ways."  Thus  shall 
it  come  to  pass  that  he  who  was  "  cast  down  "  shall  be  lifted  up,  and  the  lowly  shall 
be  saved,  Thus  the  guiltless  shall  be  rescued,  and  he  who  has  pure  hands  shall  be 
delivered.  The  way  of  the  sinner's  approach'  to  God  is  as  of  old — it  is  the  path  of 
humility,  of  repetitauce,  of  lowly  confession,  of  faith — the  heart's  whole  trust  in  the 
Lord  and  in  his  word  of  grace.  And  the  fruits  of  righteousness  are  now  as  always — 
peace  and  assurance  and  blessing. — B.  G. 

Ver.  2. —  Whether  man  can  he  profitable  to  Ood.  Here  is  a  question  to  which 
Eliphaz  only  expects  a  negative  answer.  Let  us  look  at  the  grounds  of  the  question, 
its  difficulties,  and  the  possible  solution  of  it. 

1.  The  grounds  of  the  question.  With  many  persons  such  a  question  never 
occurs.  They  do  not  dream  of  becoming  profitable  to  God,  nor  do  they  wish  to  be 
of  real  service  to  him.  Their  only  desire  is  tlat  they  may  be  profitable  to  them. 
Even  in  religion  their  great  idea  is  to  save  their  own  souls.    When  they  think  of  God 


384  TEE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxii.  1— SO. 


at  all,  it  is  to  consider  what  they  may  get  from  him  for  their  own  advantage.  Any 
idea  of  sacrificing  themselves  to  God  and  rendering  bim  disinterested  service  has  never 
dawned  upon  their  consciousness.  But  when  a  true  Christian  spirit  is  aroused  in  the 
heart  of  a  man,  he  must  look  beyond  himself;  he  must  desire  to  show  his  gratitude  to 
God  by  some  act  of  gcrvice  ;  he  must  wish  in  some  way  to  be  profitable  to  God.  It 
will  be  a  pain  to  him  to  find  that  he  can  only  receive  bounties  from  God  and  can  never 
render  him  any  return.  Thus  there  will  arise  within  him  an  eainest  question  as  to 
whether  indeed  he  can  do  anything  that  will  really  be  useful  to  God. 

II.  The  difpicultibs  of  the  question.  These  come  from  two  main  sources — 
from  man's  littleness,  and  from  God's  greatness.  1.  Man's  littleness.  (1)  In  know- 
ledge. How  can  we  discover  what  will  be  profitable  to  God  ?  Have  not  men  often 
done  for  religion  what  has  really  neither  pleased  God  nor  helped  his  cause  ?  (2)  In 
power.  Wo  are  limited,  imperfect,  feeble  creatures.  All  we  liave  is  directly  derived 
from  the  goodness  of  God.  How,  then,  can  we  find  means  with  which  to  give  him  back 
any  service?  (3)  In  goodness.  Sin  mars  all  wc  touch.  Our  sacrifice  is  defiled,  our 
service  is  corrupt.  We  do  not  approach  him  with  clean  hands  and  pure  hearts.  How, 
then,  can  he  accept  our  service?  2.  Ood's  greatness.'  It  would  seem  that  our  slight 
service  would  be  simply  lost  in  the  va«t  sea  of  Divine  activities.  It  would  be  like  a 
drop  of  water  added  to  the  ocgan.  Indeed,  it  would  be  no  real  addition ;  for  God  is 
infinite,  his  resources  are  boundless.  He  can  do  all  things  without  an  efibrt.  Therefore 
he  cannot  need  our  service. 

III.  The  possible  solution  op  the  question.  Even  if  we  cannot  find  this  we 
should  believe  that  it  exists,  because  God  calls  us  to  serve  him,  and  he  would  not  do  so 
if  effective  service  were  impossible.  He  could  not  desire  us  to  waste  our  strength  in 
work  which  was  exhausting  to  ourselves  and  yet  not  useful  to  him,  while  we  were 
simply  aiming  at  serving  him  in  obedience  to  his  command.  That  would  be  a  cruel 
mockery.  Therefore  we  must  believe  that  God  does  account  our  service  profitAble. 
Further,  there  are  some  ways  in  which  we  can  see  that  it  is  so.  1.  Through  the  love 
of  Ood.  The  parent  is  delighted  to  receive  the  small  ministries  of  his  child,  though  he 
doe.s  not  absolutely  need  them,  and  though  they  may  really  cost  him  more  in  first 
furnishing  the  means  and  then  helping  the  accomplishment,  than  they  are  worth  when 
regarded  from  a  commercial  standpoint.  But  love  adds  a  value  of  its  own.  God 
delights  to  receive  the  service  of  his  children.  He  waits  for  it  and  makes  it  valuable 
by  the  condescension  which  gives  it  a  place  in  his  plans.  2.  By  helping  our  fdlow- 
men.  We  serve  God  when  we  serve  our  human  brothers.  Though  in  the  infinity  ot 
his  resources  he  does  not  lack  anything,  they  lack  many  things.  Yet  God  rejoices 
in  what  benefits  any  of  his  creatures.  Thus  we  may  become  profitable  to  God  by 
being  profitable  to  our  neighbours  (Matt.  xxv.  40). — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  7. — Belp  for  the  needy.  I.  This  i8  natural.  God  has  made  ub  mutually 
oependent  on  one  another.  In  social  order  there  is  an  interchange  of  service,  and  the 
general  life  of  the  community  is  simply  maintained  by  people  helping  one  another. 
The  cases  of  extreme  distress  are  those  in  which  .the  reciprocity  breaks  down  because 
the  hungry  and  helpless  can  make  no  return  for  what  they  receive.  Still  they  are  part 
of  the  body,  and  if  "  one  member  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it"  (1  Cor.  xii.  26). 
The  "  solidarity  of  man  "  is  such  that  the  needy  are  naturally  dependent  on  others  for 
maintenance. 

II.  This  is  simple.  Only  water  and  bread  are  here  referred  to.  These  are  the 
most  necessary  things ;  but  they  are  also  the  most  accessible.  A  poor  man  who 
cannot  give  the  smallest  coin  to  a  beggar  may  yet  offer  a  cup  of  cold  water.  Of  course, 
true  sympathy  will  lead  us  to  desire  to  help  up  to  the  utmost  of  our  powers.  But  a 
very  great  amount  of  distress  might  be  alleviated  without  a  proportionate  expenditure 
of  money ;  e.g.  penny,  halfpenny,  and  even  farthing  dinners  for  children  give  an  assist- 
ance far  beyond  what  their  cost  suggests. 

III.  This  is  unconditional.  At  least  the  one  condition  is  need.  We  have  not 
to  consider  merits  when  we  relieve  extreme  distress.  Water  to  the  thirsty  and  bread 
to  th2  starving  should  be  given  at  the  mere  sight  of  extreme  need,  thous;h  the  recipients 
are  quite  undeserving.  This  we  admit  by  our  poor-law.  As  soon  as"  the  immediate 
and  pressing  needs  are  supplied,  other  and  more  difficult  questions  must  be  considweA 


OH.  xxn.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  385 

» 
If  we  go  further  we  may  pauperize  the  objects  of  our  charity.    It  is  necessary,  therefore, 
to  cousider  character  and  methods  of  help  suited  to  lift,  not  to  degrade,  fhe  recipients. 
Here  most  complicated  problems  arise.    But  the  priinary  help  is  simple  and  uncon- 
ditional. 

IV.  This  is  Chutst-likb.  Our  Lord  took  pity  on  the  world's  sore  need.  He  did 
not  consider  whether  he  could  find  "  deserving  cases."  He  offered  his  salvation  to  the 
most  undeserving.  Need,  not  merit,  was  the  call  that  brought  him  from  heaven.  The 
most  undeserving  are  really  the  most  needing  of  help,  not  indeed  with  lavish  doles  of 
charity  that  will  keep  them  in  idleness,  but,  after  the  first  necessaries  are  supplied  to 
maintain  life  itself,  by  a  kind  of  assistance  that  will  raise  them  and  better  them.  How 
to  give  this  help  is  a  most  difficult  question.  We  cannot  do  better  than  to  follow  our 
Lord's  example.  He  raises  where  he  helps.  The  grace  of  Christ  never  pauperizes 
the  soul. 

V.  The  neglect  of  this  is  a  great  sin.  Eliphaz  was  unjust  in  accusing  Job 
of  such  a  sjn.  In  the  eyes  of  the  Oriental,  often  dependent  on  casual  hospitality  for 
life  itself  in  the  desert,  to  refuse  water  and  bread  to  the  needy  was  a  gross  wrong.  You 
may  kill  your  enemy  with  the  sword,  but  you  must  not  deny  him  water  to  drink 
and  bread  to  eat  when  he  comes  to  you  as  a  guest.  Christianity  widens  and  deepens 
the  obligation.  Though  in  various  forms  suited  to  the  various  circumstances  of  the 
world  as  we  find  it,  brotherly  helpfulness  is  always  expected  of  Christ's  people.  It  is 
taken  as  a  service  rendered  to  himself.  The  neglect  of  it  is  a  reason  for  rejection  at 
the  great  judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  41 — 46). — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  13. — Ood's  Jcnowledge.  I.  The  apparent  DiFFlorrr.TT  of  it.  It  may  not  be 
asserted  that  God  does  not  know  all,  and  yet  people  act  as  though  they  could  hide  from 
God.  In  distress  and  lotieliness  it  sometimes  seems  as  though  God  could  not  know  what 
were  the  troubles  of  his  children,  or  he  would  not  permit  them  to  be  so  grievously  tried. 
The  vastness  of  the  universe  raises  the  same  difBculty.  Many  things  are  covered  up, 
and  it  is  not  easy  for  us  to  believe  that  he  can  "judge  through  the  thick  cloud." 

II.  The  beal  truth  of  it.  IfGod  is  the  infinite  Being  whom  we  know  him  to  be, 
all  difficulties  will  vanish  before  him.  We  may  not  be  able  to  conceive  of  the  method 
by  which  he  comes  to  know  all  things ;  but  this  is  not  wonderful,  for  that  metliod 
itself  must  have  an  infinity  about  it  quite  beyond  our  comprehension.  On  the  other 
hand,  God  frequently  gives  startling  evidence  that  he  sees  in  secret  and  knows  all 
things.  He  surprised  Hagar  by  discovering  her  in  the  desert  (Gen.  xvi.  13).  Achan's 
stolen  booty  could  not  be  hidden  (Josh.  vii.  16 — 21).  Our  own  lives  must  bear  witness 
to  the  searching  knowledge  of  God.  At  first,  perhaps,  his  treatment  of  us  may  have 
seemed  to  go  on  without  any  regard  to  our  requirements,  but  that  was  only  because 
we  were  short-sighted  and  superficial ;  for  when  we  have  been  able  to  look  back  over 
a  long  stretch  of  life,  have  we  not  been  surprised  again  and  again  at  observing  how 
wonderfully  God  has  wrought  just  the  very  thing  that  was  needed  to  bring  out  what 
was  best  in  the  end  ? 

III.  The  oonsequenobs  dependent  on  it.  1.  It  is  vain  to  try  to  hide  from  God 
He  sees  through  the  thickest  cloud.  Thus  we  only  waste  our  efforts  when  we  try  to 
make  a  darkness  that  shall  shut  oflf  the  piercing  gaze  of  God.  He  knows  all  now.  He 
does  not  need  to  wait  for  the  future  revelation  of  the  judgment-day.  Already  all 
nypocritical  pretences  are  perfectly  open  and  apparent  to  him.  2.  It  is  foolish  to 
distrust  God's  wisdom.  We  see  a  little  comer  of  life;  he  has  the  whole  field  of  it 
before  him.  Therefore  he  must  have  vastly  greater  materials  for  his  judgment  than 
we  possess  for  ours.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  his  decision  often  differs  from 
ours.  But  if  his  ways  are  not  as  our  ways  and  his  thoughts  not  as  our  thoughts,  the 
simple  explanation  is  that  his  ways  and  thoughts  are  higher  than  ours  (Isa.  Iv.  8,  9). 
3.  It  is  well  to  seek  God's  guidance.  When  we  follow  his  lead  we  are  conducted  by 
One  who  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning.  Our  riifflculties  arise  from  partial  lights 
and  intercepted  views.  We  see  enough  to  lead  us  astray.  But  the  perfect,  all- 
penetrating  knowledge  of  God  invites  us  to  renounce  our  prejudices  and  look  up  for 
the  indications  of  God's  guiding  hand.  These  may  be  given  to  us  (1)  in  the  course  of 
events ;  (2)  in  the  admonitions  of  conscience ;  (3)  in  the  teachings  of  Scripture ;  (4)  in 
the  life,  the  teaching,  and  the  example  of  Jestis  Christ.    Browning  says— 

Tnn  2  0 


88«  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [on.  xxn.  1—30 


"  Our  times  are  in  his  hand 
Who  said, '  A  whole  I  planned.' 
TouLh  shows  but  half;  trust  God ;  see  all.  nor  be  afraid." 

W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  21. — Peace  from  the  knowledge  of  Ood.  Eliphaz  has  here  stumbled  on  a  great 
truth,  which  even  his  wrong-headedness  cannot  pervert,  which  is  indeed  a  flash  of 
Divine  inspiration.  Our  unrest  springs  from  our  ignorance  of  God.  If  we  did  but  know 
him,  we  should  be  at  peace. 

I.  How  PEACE  SPRIN8S  FBOM  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OP  GoD.  1.  From  the  charetcUrisUcs 
of  hnowledge.  There  is  a  restfnlness  about  all  knowledge.  Vague  apprehensions  and 
surprising  alarms  dog  the  footsteps  of  ignorance.  We  cannot  walk  tranquilly  in  a  dark 
night  through  regions  of  unknown  dangers.  Even  the  knowledge  of  painful  truths  is 
less  disturbing  than  uncertainty  about  them.  When  we  know  the  worst  the  fever  of 
anxiety  is  allayed,  although  the  lethargy  of  despair  may  have  taken  its  place.  The 
higher  knowledge  induces  patience,  calmness,  strength.  2.  From  the  natv/re  of  Ood. 
Here  is  the  wonderful  truth  that  comes  to  the  troubled  soul  like  a  gospel  of  peace. 
Our  hard  thoughts  of  Grod  are  erroneous.  They  spring  from  a  complete  misconception 
as  to  his  nature.  We  have  thought  him  indifferent,  or  stem,  or  vindictive.  These 
ideas  were  born  of  our  own  ignorance.  If  we  had  but  known  him  we  could  not  have 
held  such  views  of  his  nature.  The  more  we  do  know  him  the  more  we  see  that  his 
true  name  is  Love.  His  purposes  are  gracious.  Afar  off  they  appear  hard  ;  on  a  near 
acquaintance  the  beauty  and  goodness  of  them  is  made  evident  to  us.  3.  From  the  needi 
of  our  soul.  We  cannot  be  at  peace  till  we  know  God.  The  severance  from  God  is  a 
great  cause  of  unrest.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  life  eternal,  and  we  are  cut  off  from 
that  life  while  we  hold  aloof  from  God. 

II.  How  THE  PBACE-aiviNG  KNOWLEDQB  OP  Gk)D  IS  ACQUIRED.  1.  By  some  effort. 
We  have  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  God.  We  do  not  know  God  in  our  condition  of  sin 
and  sorrow.  The  world  is  in  ignorance  of  God.  A  deep  gloom  hangs  over  a  large  part 
of  heathendom  through  mistaken  beliefs  about  malignant  deities.  Christians  need  to 
escape  from  hard  thoughts  of  God.  Our  despondency,  our  limited  views,  our  weakness, 
our  consciousness  of  sin,  all  make  it  hard  for  us  to  know  God  in  his  perfect  goodness. 
2.  Through  revelation.  In  acquainting  ourselves  with  God  we  have  not  to  feel  after 
him  if  haply  we  may  find  him.  He  has  spoken  to  us.  The  Scriptures  enlighten  us  and 
dispel  needless  fears  as  they  make  known  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  that  endureth  for  ever. 
The  greatest  distress  is  sometimes  felt  by  people  dwelling  too  much  in  the  region  of 
subjective  religion.  Thus  they  imagine  hard  things  about  God  that  are  contrary  to 
his  revelation  of  himself.  3.  In  Christ.  He  is  the  supreme  Revelation  of  God,  and  he 
has  come  to  brino;  "  peace  on  earth."  To  see  Christ  is  to  know  God  as  favourable  to 
us.  He  is  "our  Peace."  4.  By  means  of  reconciliation.  This  further  thought  is 
implied  in  the  notion  of  acquainting  ourselves  with  God.  We  are  estranged  by  sin, 
which  hides  from  us  the  vision  of  the  love  of  God.  We  must  turn  to  God  sub- 
missively, and  make  practical  acquaintance  of  him  by  yielding  ourselves  to  his  will. 
Then  the  intimacy  of  spiritual  communion  will  bo  "  the  peace  of  God  that  passeth 
all  understanding." — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  22. — Heart-treasures.  God's  words  are  here  regarded  as  heart-treasures,  to  be 
received  with  eagerness  and  laid  up  with  care.  The  ignoring  of  the  "  Torah,"  the 
ancient  Law  of  Israel,  by  the  author  of  Job  is  one  of  the  striking  features  of  the  poem. 
It  would  seem  that  the  poet  wished  to  set  the  scene  of  his  great  drama  of  providence 
in  the  open  field  of  nature,  free  from  the  disturbing  influences  of  a  special  system  of 
religion.  But  now  he  does  just  refer  to  the  word  "  law,"  or  "  instruction."  There  is 
a  larger  law  than  that  of  Moses,  a  wider  teaching  than  that  of  the  Pentateuch.  All 
God's  words  in  nature.  Scripture,  conscienco,  and  Christ  are  treasures  to  be  received  and 
guarded  in  the  heart. 

I.  The  nature  op  the  teeasurbs.  "  Law,"  or  "  instruction,"  and  "  words." 
These  treasures  are  not  material  things.  Gold  and  jewels  are  not  the  most  precious 
things.  Good  thoughts  are  worth  more  than  diamonds.  God's  words  are  of  the 
greatest  value  on  several  accounts.     1.    Their  truth.    All  truth  is  precious;  Divio* 


CH.  XXII.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  887 

truth — truth  about  God  and  spiritual  things — is  most  valuable.  2.  Their  hearing  on 
lift.  God's  words  are  not  ooncerned  with  abstract  truth.  They  throw  light  on  duty. 
They  show  us  the  way  of  salvation. 

II.  The  Source  of  the  treasures.  The  Law  is  from  God's  mouth.  He  originates 
the  commandment ;  he  conveys  the  instruction ;  he  teaches  the  truth.  God's  revela- 
tion is  the  original  source  of  all  truth,  for  we  can  only  know  nature  in  so  far  as  God 
reveals  it  to  us  through  iti  phenomena  and  by  means  of  the  faculties  he  has  given  to 
us.  1.  The  original  Source.  God  made  the  Law,  impressed  the  truth  on  nature, 
inspired  the  ancient  prophet,  gave  the  hearing  ear.  2.  The  immediate  Source.  We 
can  only  receive  the  truth  of  God  when  the  Spirit  of  God  brings  it  home  to  lis.  Thus 
it  comes  from  God  to  each  indiv  iiiual. 

III.  The  reception  of  the  treasures.  We  have  to  receive  the  Law  and  tllf  words 
of  God.  1.  They  are  not  in  us  hy  nature.  Or,  if  it  may  be  said  they  are  with  us  iin 
cur  pristine  state  of  nature,  wo  have  lost  them  through  sin,  and  we  need  to  recover 
them.  2.  ITiey  must  be  received  viUlingly.  We  can  keep  them  out ;  therefore  we  are 
urged  to  open  the  door  and  let  them  in.    The  best  revelation  fails  before  unwilling  ears. 

IV.  The  preservation  op  the  truasures.  1.  To  he  laid  up.  God  does  not  favour 
us  with  a  flash  of  revelation  for  the  use  or  the  enjoyment  of  a  moment.  The  truth  is 
given  for  a  permanent  good.  2.  In  the  heart.  (1)  The  thought.  It  is  useless  to 
hear,  if  we  do  not  comprehend  and  consider.  (2)  The  memory.  "  The  hoarded 
memories  of  the  heart  "  are  stores  for  use  in  after-years.  (3)  The  affections.  We 
need  to  love  God's  truth  and  make  it  part  of  our  very  being  by  embracing  it  in  our 
deepest  affections.  • 

V.  The  use  of  t^  treasures.  They  are  not  buried  in  oblivion,  nor  are  they  kept 
only  for  show,  like  the  Crown  jewels  at  the  Tower.  In  the  heart  they  are  at  the 
source  of  the  life,  and  they  are  there  to  inspire  and  influence  the  whole  man.  God's 
Law  is  to  be  written  on  the  fleshy  tablets  of  the  heart,  that  there  it  may  live  and  rule. 
This  treasure  within  purifies  the  soul  and  guides  the  conduct. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  23. — The  penitent's  return  and  restoration,  I.  The  return.  1.  To  Ood.  All 
gin  is  departure  from  God ;  and  repentance  is  a  return  to  God.  As  the  fall  is  from 
personal  relations,  so  the  recovery  is  a  renewal  of  jjersonal  relations.  When  the  sinner 
comes  to  himself,  he  sees  that  his  one  hope  is  to  "  arise  and  go  unto "  his  Father. 
Thus  the  very  Being  against  whom  he  has  sinned  is  sought  for  pardon  and  restoration. 
Now,  it  is  not  possible  to  mend  our  ways  without  thus  coming  back  to  God.  His 
power  and  presence  are  the  inspiration  of  the  new  life.  The  very  thought  of  God  as 
the  Almighty  is  a  help  in  this  return.  Although  we  are  first  moved  by  perceiving 
his  goodness  and  mercy,  we  are  conscious  that  we  are  helpless  in  ourselves  and  need 
heavenly  aid  to  regenerate  our  souls.  Thus  the  invincible  power  of  God,  which  was 
our  terror  while  we  remained  impenitent,  becomes  our  hope  as  soon  as  we  repent.  2. 
From  sin — taking  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  as  a  condition  of  God's  help.  We  must 
put  away  iniquity  frum  our  tabernacles  if  we  are  to  expect  God's  restoring  mercies. 
(1)  Sin  must  be  rejected.  We  cannot  return  to  God  and  retain  our  sin.  That  must 
ever  remain  at  a  distance  from  him.  Therefore  we  can  only  return  by  cutting  our- 
selves off  from  it,  and  leaving  it  behind.  It  is  necessary  to  abandon  the  practice  of 
sin  as  well  as  to  regret  the  past  sin.  (2)  Sin  must  go  from  the  home — from  the 
■"  tabernacles."  Private  sin  must  be  abandoned ;  though  now  curtained  in  secret,  it 
may  not  be  harboured  any  longer.  Cherished  sin  muot  go.  Habitual  sin  must  be  cast 
out.  It  is  easy  to  renounce  the  strange  sin  that  only  touches  us  now  and  again.  The 
difliculty  is  with  the  besetting  sin — that  which  dwells  in  the  tabernacles.  Yet  this 
too  must  go. 

11.  The  restoration.  The  returning  penitent  is  to  be  ••built  up."  1.  On  fulfil- 
ling the  conditions.  He  must  return  to  God;  he  must  renounce  sin.  There  is  a 
foolish  notion  that  God's  goodness  will  blot  out  the  consequences  of  sin  without  these 
conditions  being  fulfilled.  To  do  so  would  be  to  outrage  justice  as  well  as  to  fly  in 
the  face  of  nature.  We  cannot  have  the  rewards  of  grace  without  first  accepting  its 
inward  influences.  Forgiveness  is  not  merely  the  cancelling  of  penalties ;  that  is  but 
an  incident  of  the  transaction ;  in  itself  it  is  a  very  personal  thing,  and  until  the  per- 
sonal reconciliation  in  which  it  consists  is  accomplished,  only  the  lowest  views  of  God'i 


388  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxn.  1— 80. 

govennnent  could  lead  us  to  look  for  the  external  advantages.  2.  In  personal  recovery. 
The  sinner  himself  is  to  be  built  up.  Sia  breaks  a  man  down — breaks  down  character, 
reputation,  faculty,  energy.  The  fallen  life  is  a  broken  life.  Now,  the  first  act  of 
Divine  restoration  touches  the  nature  of  the  sinner  himself.  He  is  lifted  up  from  the 
dust  and  set  on  his  feet.  Like  a  ruined  building,  shaken  down  by  the  earthquake,  he 
is  built  up  again,  that  he  himself — and  not  merely  his  belongings — may  be  stronj;  and 
beautiful.  Thus  the  restored  penitent  is  made  a  temple  for  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  a  fortress  to  keep  out  future  invasions  of  evil,  a  palace  in  which  the  fairest 
graces  of  the  kingdom  can  be  nourished,  a  hospital  and  asylum  for  the  sick  and 
miserable,  a  school  of  new  thoughts  and  enterprises,  a  home  of  prayer  and  love.  3. 
In  external  prosperity.  It  is  only  too  likely  that  poor  Eliphaz  thought  exclusively, 
or  at  all  events  quite  disproportionately,  of  this  when  he  spoke  of  Job  being  built  up 
again.  The  patriarch's  ruined  fortune  could  be  restored.  This  is  not  the  chief  part 
of  a  Divine  restoration.  Still  in  some  way — though  not  always  in  restored  wealth — it 
does  follow  that  the  outer  as  well  as  the  inner  life  is  favoured  by  a  penitent  return  to 
God.— W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  24,  25. — Rich  in  God.  The  idea  of  these  verses  seems  to  be  that  if  a  man 
will  give  up  his  earthly  riches,  his  jewels  and  gold  of  Ophir,  God  will  be  to  him  a 
Defence,  and  as  gold  ore  and  silver  in  bars. 

I.  Bekunoiation  the  condition  of  true  wealth.  We  do  not  get  the  best  riches 
by  grasping,  but  by  giving.  Sacrifice,  not  selfishness,  is  the  source  of  the  highest 
prosperity.  We  must  renounce  in  order  that  we  may  attain.  This  principle  is 
exemplified  in  various  ways.  1.  Typified  in  nature.  The  farnftr  must  not  store  his 
wealth  in  his  granary  if  he  would  increase  it.  He  must  commit  the  seed  to  the  earth, 
oast  it  away  and  bury  it,  in  order  that  he  may  receive  more  in  return.  2.  Practised 
in  commerce.  We  rarely  meet  with  the  old-fashioned  miser  and  his  bags  of  gold.  In 
our  day  the  money- worshipper  lays  out  his  wealth  so  that,  like  Shylock,  he  may  make  it 
"  breed."  ,3.  Taught  by  Christ.  Our  Lord  showed  in  his  parables  of  the  talents  and  the 
pounds  that  the  gifts  of  God  were  to  be  used,  expended  profitably,  and  that  they  should 
have  more  who  had  traded  with  what  they  first  received.  He  led  to  deeper  truths 
when  he  told  the  young  man  who  desired  eternal  life  to  sell  all  he  had  and  give  to  the 
poor,  promising  that  he  should  then  have  treasure  in  heaven  (Mark  x.  21),  and  when 
he  promised  bis  disciples  that  there  was  no  man  who  had  renounced  home  and  family 
for  his  sake  and  the  gospel's,  but  he  should  receive  a  hundredfold  now  in  this  time,  and 
in  the  coming  age  eternal  life  (Mark  x.  29,  30).  Here  we  see  that  mere  renunciation 
is  not  enough.  It  will  not  do  murely  to  pour  the  money  into  the  sea,  nor  to  sell  all 
one's  goods  and  give  to  the  poor,  unless  we  also  follow  Christ.  4.  Proved  by  experience. 
It  is  found  with  surprising  gladness  that  to  give  up  all  for  Christ  is  to  be  lich  indeed, 
while  to  cling  greedily  to  earthly  possessions  is  to  be  miserably  disappointed  in  the  end. 

II.  God  the  Souboe  op  t«ue  wealth.  It  is  not  that  God  will  give  us  new  riches  in 
exchange  for  what  we  have  given  up.  We  shall  find  our  wealth  in  God  himself.  He 
is  to  us  all  we  need.  1.  A  defence.  Biches  are  valued  for  what  they  will  purchase. 
In  the  last  resort  they  are  chiefly  prized  because  they  can  ward  off  evils.  To  keep 
hunger,  pain,  and  death  from  their  doors,  men  will  give  up  any  amount  of  wealth. 
Nations  spend  vast  sums  in  their  defensive  arrangements.  Europe  is  now  an  armed 
camp,  with  armies  maintained  at  an  enormous  cost,  simply  in  order  that  each  country 
may  be  safe  from  invasion  by  its  neighbours.  Now,  God  is  the  true  Defence  of  his 
people,  better  than  any  armamen  ts  that  money  can  maintain.  2.  A  store  of  vast  possi- 
bilities of  good.  Gold  ore  and  silver  bais  are  the  precious  metals  in  an  elementary  state. 
They  thus  represent  value  that  may  be  employed  in  various  ways.  God  is  our  most 
elemental  wealth.  (1)  He  is  as  a  treasure  to  the  soul  that  possesses  him,  as  gold  and 
silver  are  precious  in  themselves.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  seek  God  only  for  what  he 
f^ves,  forgetting  that  he  is  better  than  all  his  gifts.  (2)  Still,  he  is  the  Source  of  all 
other  good,  as  gold  and  silver  are  means  for  purchasing  innumerable  things.  Through 
God  we  may  own  all  things.  St.  Paul  says  to  Christians,  "  All  things  are  yours." 
— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  26. — Tk€  Joy  <if  the  Lard.    I.  Thk  lntbbiob  expebii£bos.     "  Delight  in  tl)« 


OH.  xxn.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  889 

Mmighty."  1.  Ood  gives  joy.  As  we  have  but  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  God  to  bo 
at  peace  (ver.  21),  so  we  Lave  but  to  appreciate  his  intentions  to  see  that  he  does  not 
wish  us  to  be  in  distress.  2.  This  joy  is  in  himself.  We  have  to  learn  by  experieuce 
how  this  is  the  case,  for  no  words  can  express  it.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard, 
...  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  But 
Christian  experience  shows  how  real  this  Divine  joy  is.  (1)  The  joy  of  pardon.  The 
soul  has  been  estranged  from  God,  darkened  with  the  gloom  of  the  wrath  of  Heaven ; 
now  the  cloud  is  broken  up  and  God  smiles  forgiveness.  (2)  The  joy  of  love.  This 
is  mutual — the  soul  loving  God  in  exchange  for  his  love.  (3)  TTie  joy  of  trust.  No 
fear  need  disturb  the  soul  that  is  at  peace  with  God.  Its  confldenoe  is  a  source  of 
deep  gladness,  because  it  dispels  the  most  terrible  alarms.  (4)  The  joy  of  service.  It 
is  a  happy  thing  to  be  working  for  God,  especially  when  we  perceive  that  we  can  be 
"  fellow- workers  with  God."  He  is  the  inspiring  energy  of  all  our  work.  (5)  The 
joy  of  communion.  To  be  walking  with  God  is  itself  a  joy.  The  blessedness  of  the 
pure  in  heart  who  enjoy  the  vision  of  God  is  deeper  than  any  earthly  delight. 

II.  Thk  spieitual  attitude.  "  And  shalt  lift  up  thy  face  unto  God."  1.  Conjl- 
dence.  While  we  fear  and  distrust  God  we  cannot  look  up  to  him.  We  rather  shrink 
from  his  gaze  and  hide  ourselves,  like  Adam  and  Eve  in  the  garden.  We  may 
even  cry  to  God  for  help  without  daring  to  look  up,  like  the  publican  in  Christ's 
parable  (Luke  xviii.  13).  It  is  happy  for  the  soul  when  the  shame  of  sin  and  the  fear 
of  doubt  are  removed  by  the  forgiving  love  of  God,  so  that  the  child  can  look  quite 
naturally  and  confidently  into  the  face  of  his  Father.  2.  Contemplation.  To  lift  up 
the  face  to  God  is  to  gaze  upon  him  as  well  as  to  submit  to  his  gaze.  This  is  no  vision 
of  the  eye  of  sense,  for  God  is  Spirit,  and  must  therefore  be  always  invisible  to  the 
bodily  eye.  But  the  spirit  of  man  may  contemplate  the  Divine  Spirit.  Theology  tries 
to  do  this,  but  theology  consists  of  purely  intellectual  conceptions.  There  is  a  deeper 
contemplation  of  sympathy  which  is  only  possible  to  the  soul  that  is  in  living  com- 
munion with  God.  3.  Expectation.  Our  contemplation  should  be  an  act  of  pure 
worship  in  which  we  forget  ourselves,  rejoicing  only  in  the  beauty  of  God's  goodness. 
Yet  personal  wants  will  make  themselves  felt,  and  when  they  do,  there  is  no  one  more 
ready  or  able  to  supply  them  than  our  Father  in  heaven.  Therefore  it  is  natural  to 
k)ok  to  him  for  help  in  prayer,  patience,  and  hope.  (1)  Prayer,  because  the  help  should 
be  sought  from  God ;  (2)  patience,  because  it  may  not  come  immediately ;  and  (3)  hope, 
because  it  can  be  anticipated  with  the  assurance  that  God  will  not  disappoint  his 
children.  4.  Beatijication.  The  face  that  is  lifted  up  to  God  is  illumined  by  the 
glory  of  God.  His  light  falls  upon  it  and  glorifies  it.  There  is  a  great  blessedness 
springing  directly  from  communion  with  heaven.  If  we  looked  up  more,  our  counte- 
nances would  be  brighter. 

Conclusion.  Observe  that  these  blessings  follow  a  penitent  return  to  God,  and  are 
conditioned  by  it.  "  Then  thou  shalt  have  thy  delight,"  etc.,  pointing  back  to  ver.  23. 
— W.  P.  A. 

Ver,  27. — The  prayer  that  sliaU  be  heard.  This  verse  is  one  of  a  series  that  describe 
the  happy  results  of  the  penitent  return  to  God  referred  to  in  ver.  23.  Thus  Bliphaz 
means  that  after  we  have  returned  in  penitence  to  God  our  prayer  will  be  heard.  His 
principle  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  teaching  of  Scripture,  though,  as  usual,  his 
application  of  it  to  Job  is  unjust. 

L  Peateb  13  AN  ELEMENT  OF  PE08PBBITY.  It  is  not  Only  a  Condition  on  which 
prosperity  is  given;  it  is  a  part  of  the  prosperity  itself.  Trouble  drives  us  to  prayer; 
but  happiness  cannot  let  us  dispense  with  it.  It  is  possible  for  one  to  be  too  miserable, 
too  depressed,  too  hopeless,  to  pray.  The  best  praying  seems  to  need  an  element  of 
joyous  confidence.  When  it  spiings  fmm  this  happy  condition  it  enhances  the  joy  of 
it.  It  is  a  very  low  and  selfish  notion  that  leads  people  to  economize  their  prayers,  and 
reserve  them  for  times  of  dire  necessity.  Surely  it  should  be  a  happy  thing  for  the 
child  to  talk  with  his  Father  I 

II.  Peayeb  expects  an  answbb.  We  may  pray  without  lookibg  for  any  reply — 
pray  because  wo  cannot  contain  ourselves  in  silence,  because  the  strong  feelings  of  the 
soul  will  burst  out  into  utterance.  Then  there  may  be  a  certain  relief  in  the  roera 
opeitlug  of  the  floodgates  of  emotion.    Bnt  this  is  nut  the  chief  end  of  prayer.    Further, 


890  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxn.  1— 30t 

we  may  just  confide  our  case  to  God,  consoled  by  the  thought  that  he  hears,  evec 
though  we  do  not  believe  that  any  help  is  possible.  Thus  comfort  is  sought  in  the 
silent  sympathy  of  a  friend  to  whom  the  burdened  soul  can  pour  out  its  griefs.  Still, 
the  chief  end  of  prayer  is  not  reached  in  this  way.  It  is  (Ufficult  to  carry  on  a  one- 
sided conversation  with  an  auditor  who  makes  no  reply,  who  does  not  even  give  us  s 
sign,  that  he  hears  or  is  at  all  interested  in  what  one  says.  Prayer  would  languish  and 
perish  if  God  did  not  answer  it.  This  he  will  not  now  do  in  an  audible  voice,  nor 
always  by  such  evident  tokens  that  we  can  have  no  doubt  that  what  he  has  done  is  in 
response  to  the  cry  of  his  children.  Yet  all  who  are  in  the  habit  of  praying  can  bear 
witness  to  the  fact  that  God  hears  prayer,  and  replies  often  in  the  most  surprising  and 
unmistakable  way. 

III.  The  peateb  that  is  to  be  answered  must  be  sincbre.  Cain's  sacrifice  was 
rejected.  The  Pharisee's  prayer  could  not  reach  heaven.  We  cannot  pray  to  God 
effectively  until  we  renounce  sin  and  return  to  him.  Then  the  prayer  must  be  a  real, 
inward,  spiritual  act.  Such  prayer  is  not  valued  by  the  correctness  of  its  phraseology ; 
much  less  is  it  estimated  quantitatively  by  the  time  it  occupies  and  the  number  of  its 
words.  The  one  essential  quality  is  reality.  The  simple  reason  why  many  so-called 
prayers  are  not  answered  is  that  they  are  not  really  prayers  at  all.  They  do  not  come 
out  of  a  worshipper's  heart.  Therefore  they  cannot  reach  the  ears  of  God,  and 
Incline  him  to  respond  to  them.  If  all  such  pretended  prayers  were  left  out  of  account 
there  would  be  less  scepticism  and  more  glad  confidence  that  God  does  hear  prayer. 
— W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  29. —  Uplifting  the  fallen.  Accepting  that  rendering  of  the  verse  which  takes 
the  reference  to  the  cast-down  as  not  applying  to  Job  himself  or  his  affairs,  but  to  other 
people  and  their  troubles,  we  have  here  a  fine  turn  given  to  the  description  of  the 
happy  estate  of  the  returned  and  restored  penitent.  He  Is  not  only  full  of,  gladness, 
and  enjoying  many  blessings  by  himself;  he  turns  to  others  in  their  need  and  uplifts 
them. 

I.  The  duty  and  jot  of  uplifting  the  fallen.  1.  The  duty.  We  are  by 
nature  members  of  one  family,  because  our  descent  from  a  common  parentage  makes  us 
all  brothers  and  sisters.  But  Chiistianity  has  strengthened  the  ties  of  nature.  There 
is  no  Christian  duty  so  obligatory  as  that  of  following  our  Lord  in  his  greatest  work — 
that  of  seeking  and  saving  the  lost.  Whether  it  be  sin  or  sorrow  that  has  cast  one  of 
our  brothers  down,  his  very  distress,  apart  from  all  questions  of  merit  or  attraction, 
calls  upon  us  to  aid  him.  (1)  Now  this  aid  must  be  practical.  We  must  do  what  we 
can  to  lift  the  cast-down.  (2)  It  must  be  encouraging.  The  helper  is  represented  as 
crying,  "  Up  I "  A  cheering  word  may  go  far  to  give  courage  and  hope.  We  have  to 
help  people  to  help  themselves.  Depressing  preaching  does  .little  good.  There  are 
plenty  of  things  to  discourage.  People  want  hopeful  encouragement.  2.  The  joy. 
This  action  of  lifting  up  those  who  are  cast  down  appears  as  part  of  the  blessedness  oi 
the  restored  servant  of  God.  It  is  not  a  heavy  penance  for  the  sinner ;  it  is  a  happy 
occupation  for  the  saint.  It  cannot  but  involve  toil  and  pain,  and  often  disappoint- 
meni.  Yet  it  is  really  a  much  happier  work  than  self-indulgent  pleasure-seeking. 
It  contains  the  very  joy  of  God,  who  is  blessed  in  giving  and  loving. 

II.  The  experience  which  enables  us  to  lift  up  the  fallen.  The  glorious 
and  Christ-like  work  of  saving  the  fallen  is  promised  to  a  man  who  is  himself  restored. 
1.  Experience  of  misery.  He  who  has  been  cast  down  knows  what  it  is  to  be  cast 
dowTi.  The  lessons  of  adversity  teach  sympathy.  Thus  we  may  explain  some  of  the 
mystery  of  sorrow.  It  is  a  school  for  the  training  of  sympathy.  Even  the  experienca 
of  sin  may  be  turned  to  good  in  this  way.  It  must  always  be  best  not  to  have  fallen. 
Still,  though  original  innocence  cannot  be  recovertd,  God  may  mitigate  the  sad  con- 
sequences of  sin  in  the  penitent  by  making  him  a  helper  to  the  tempted  and  the  fallen, 
whose  condition  his  own  terrible  experience  enables  him  to  understand.  2.  Eamerience 
of  recovery.  While  suffering  with  others  we  may  sympathize  with  them,  but  we  cannot 
do  much  to  aid  them.  While  ourselves  living  in  sin  we  can  imly  exert  a  baleful 
influence  on  others.  Therefore  the  first  step  is  to  be  ourselves  restored  to  God  and  the 
life  of  Christian  holiness.  Then  the  joyous  consciousness  of  redemption  is  an  inspi- 
ration for  seeking  to  bring  to  others  the  same  privilege.    Thus  Christians  can  preach 


ofl.  xxm.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


m 


the  gospel  with  a  force  that  no  unfallen  angel  can  command.  The  greatest  argument 
for  urging  man  to  accept  it  is  that  what  God  has  done  for  one,  he  can  and  will  do  for 
another.  The  greatest  motive  for  sacrificing  ourselves  to  save  our  brother-men  is  that 
Christ  gave  hia  life  to  save  us. — W.  F.  A, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  XXIIL 


Vers.  I — oh.  xxiv.  25. — Job  replies  to  Eli- 
phaz  In  a  speech  of  no  great  length,  which, 
though  it  occupies  two  chapters,  runs  to 
only  forty-two  verses.  He  begins  by  jus- 
tifying the  vehemence  of  his  complaints, 
flrst,  on  the  ground  of  the  severity  of  hia 
sufferings  (ver.  2),  and  secondly,  on  the 
ground  of  bis  conviction  that,  if  God  would 
bring  him  to  an  open  trial  before  his  tri- 
bunal, he  would  acquit  him  (vers.  3 — 12). 
By  the  way,  he  complains  that  God  hides 
himself,  and  cannot  be  found  (vers.  3,  8,  9). 
He  then  further  complains  that  God  is  not 
to  be  bent  from  his  purpose,  which  is  set 
against  Job  (vers.  13 — 17).  In  ch.  xxiv.  he 
goes  over  ground  already  trodden,  main- 
taining the  general  prosperity  of  the  wicked, 
and  their  exemption  from  any  special 
earthly  punishment  (vers.  2 — 24).  He  winds 
up,  finally,  with  a  challenge  to  his  oppo- 
nents to  disprove  the  truth  of  what  he  has 
said  (ver.  25). 

Vers.  1,  2. — Then  Job  answered  and  said, 
Even  to-day  is  my  complaint  bitter;  i.e. 
eveu  to-day,  notwithstanding  all  that  has 
been  said  by  my  opponents  against  my  right 
to  complain,  I  do  complain,  and  as  bitterly 
as  ever.  And  I  justify  my  complaint  on  the 
following  ground — ^my  stroke  is  heavier  than 
my  groaning.  If  I  complain  bitterly,  I  suffer 
even  more  bitterly  (comp.  oh.  vi.  2). 

Ver.  3.— Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might 
find  him!  This  is  the  cry  of  the  desolate 
human  soul,  feeling  its  need  of  God,  and  yet 
not  knowing  how  to  approach  him.  God 
geems  to  be  very  far  removed  from  us.  He  is 
in  heaven,  and  we  are  on  earth ;  nay,  he  is 
in  the  highest  heaven,  or  outside  it,  walking 
on  its'  circurafirence  (ch.  xxii.  14).  How 
are  we  to  approach  near  to  him,  so  near  as 
to  be  sure  that  he  can  hear  us  ?  How  are 
we  to  "  find  "  him  ?  So,  in  all  ages,  has  the 
human  heart  gone  out  to  God,  aspiring 
towards  him,  seeking  after  him,  but,  for  the 
most  part,  baffled  and  disappointed.  Job, 
like  most  other  men  in  the  olden  times, 
though  he  has  faith  in  God,  though  be  serves 
bim  and  prays  to  him,  has  yet  the  feeling 
tliat  he  is  remote,  distant,  well-nigh  inac- 


cessible. It  needed  revelation  to  let  man 
know  that  God  is  not  far  off,  but  very  near 
to  each  one  of  us ;  that  "  in  him  we  live,  and 
move,  and  have  our  being  "  (Acts  xvii.  28). 
That  I  might  come  even  to  his  seat !  Job's 
idea  of  bridrfng  the  distance  between  him- 
self and  God  ia  that  he  should  rise  to  tlie 
region  where  God  is,  not  that  God  should 
condescend  to  come  down  to  him.  He 
wishes  to  "come  to  God's  seat" — to  that 
awful  throne  in  the  heaven  of  heavens, 
where  God  sitteth,  surrounded  by  his  hosts 
of  angels,  dealing  out  justice  and  judgment 
to  mortal  men  (comp.  Ps.  ix.  4,  7 ;  xi.  4 ; 
xlv.  6 ;  Isa.  vi.  1). 

Ver.  4. — ^I  would  order  my  cause  before 
him.  Job  has  put  away  the  feelings  of 
shame  and  diffidence,  which  were  predomi- 
nant with  him  when  he  said,  "  How  should 
man  be  just  with  God  ?  If  he  will  contend 
with  hiiu,  he  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a 
thousand"  (ch.  ix.  2,  3);  and  again,  "How 
much  less  shall  I  answer  him,  and  choose 
out  my  words  to  reason  with  him  ?  Whom, 
though  I  were  righteous,  yet  would  I  not 
answer ;  but  I  would  make  ray  supplication 
to  my  Judge  "  (ch.  ix.  14,  15).  He  now 
wishes  to  contend  and  argue  and  reason. 
This  is  quite  in  accordance  with  our  ex- 
perience. Maliy  are  the  moods  of  man — 
various  and  conflicting  his  desires  I  His 
mind  never  continues  long  in  one  stay.  And 
fill  my  mouth  with  arguments  (comp.  Ps. 
ixxviii.  14,  where  our  translators  render  the 
same  word  by  "  reproofs,"  but  where  "  argu- 
ments "  or  "  pleadings  "  would  be  more  appro- 
priate). The  LXX.  has  there  4\fyiio\,  and 
in  the  present  passage  IXtyxoi.  The  word 
is  forensic. 

Ver.  5.— I  would  know  the  words  which 
he  would  answer  me.  It  would  be  a  satis- 
faction to  Job  in  his  present  mood  to  know 
exactly  how  God  would  answer  him,  what 
reply  he  would  make  to  his  "  arguments." 
The  tone  of  thought  is  too  bold  for  a  creature, 
and  would  certainly  not  be  becoming  in 
Christians.  And  understand  what  he  would 
say  unto  me.  Here  we  have  another  of  tlie 
redundant  second  clauses,  which  merely  echo 
the  idea  contained  in  the  previous  clause. 

Ver.  6. — Will  he  plead  against  me  with 
his  great  power?  rather,  Would  he  contend 
against  me  in  the  greatness  of  his  powers 
(see  the  Revised  Version).  That  is,  "  Would 
he  crush  me  by  mere  strength  and  force  ? 
Would  he  use  against  me  that  overwhelm- 


392 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[on.  XXIII.  1 — 17. 


ing  might  which  he  poasesees?  No,  Job 
answers,  certaiuly  not ;  but  he  would  put 
strength  in  me ;  or,  rather,  hut  lie  would 
give  heed  to  me,  he  would  pay  attention  to  my 
cause  (comp.  ch.  iv.  20,  ad  fin.,  where  the 
same  verb  is  used). 

Ver.  7.— There  the  righteous  might  dis- 
pute with  him.  There,  before  liis  high  tri- 
bunal (ver.  3),  the  upright  man  (!»')  might 
argue  or  reason  witli  him,  appealing  from 
his  justice  to  hia  mercy — from  God  the  Judge 
to  God  the  Saviour  (Leathes),  vindicating 
Lis  integrity,  acknowledging  his  transgres- 
sions, and  pleading  that  they  were  sins  of 
infirmity — and  at  last  obtaining  from  God 
the  acquittal  anticipated  in  the  second 
clause  of  the  verse.  In  the  absence  of  any 
revelation  of  an  Advocate  who  will  plead 
our  cause  before  God  for  us.  Job  would 
seem  to  have  been  justified  in  expecting 
such  a  liberty  of  pleading  hia  own  cause  as 
he  here  sets  forth.  So  should  1  be  delivered 
for  ever  from  my  Judge.  The  "  Judge  of  all 
the  earth"  wUl  certainly  and  necessarily 
"  do  right."  Job's  conscience  testifies  to  his 
substantial  integrity  and  uprightness  (comp. 
1  John  iii.  21).  He  is,  therefore,  confident 
that,  if  he  can  once  hiing  his  cause  to  God's 
cognizance,  he  wiU  obtain  acquittal  and 
deliverance. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Here  Job  returns  to  the  com- 
plaint of  ver.  3.  He  cannot  "  find "  God. 
God  hides  himself.  It  is  in  vain  that  he 
searches  on  every  side.  There  is  no  mani- 
festation, no  open  vision.  Nothing,  how- 
ever, leads  him  to  doubt  God's  existence,  or 
even  his  presence  where  he  is  nnperceived. 
"  Job's  conviction  of  God's  absolute  presence 
comes  out  most  strongly  when  he  feels  that 
he  .cannot  discern  him"  (C!ook). 

Ver.  8. — Behold,  I  go  forward,  hut  he  is 
not  there ;  that  is,  "  He  is  not  there  to  my 
pereeptioni."  I  may  believe  it,  but  I  have 
no  sensible  proof  of  it,  and  I  cannot  demon- 
strate it.  And  backward,  but  I  cannot  per- 
ceive him.  In  describing  locality,  tlie 
Hebrews,  Arabs,  and  Orientals  generally 
always  imagined  themselves  to  be  looking 
eastward,  facing  the  rising  sun.  Hence  tlje 
same  word  is  used  for  "  in  front,"  "  forwards," 
and  "the  east;"  for  "behind,"  "buck- 
wards,"  and  "the  west;"  for  "the  left 
hand"  and  "the  north;"  for  "the  right 
hand  "  and  « the  south." 

Ver.  9. — On  the  left  hand,  where  he  doth 
work ;  literally,  in  Me  workshop,  Theie  is 
nn  ellipse  after  "  workshop  "  of  some  phiase 
like  "  I  look  for  him."  But  I  cannot  behold 
him ;  rather,  but  I  apprehend  him  not — I 
cannot  as  it  were,  lay  my  hand  upon  him 
(LXX.,  •«  KiTfirxov).    He  hideth  himself 


on  the  right  hand,  that  I  cannot  see  him ; 
literally,  and  I  do  not  see  him. 

Ver.  10. — But  he  knoweth  the  way  that 
I  take;  or,  tlie  way  that  i»  with  me.  Hy 
inability  to  find  God  does  not  in  any  way 
interfere  with  his  perfect  knowledge  of  me. 
God  knows  both  "  the  way  of  the  righteous  " 
(Ps.  i.  6)  "  and  "  the  way  of  the  wicked," 
which  "  he  turns  upside  down  "  (Ps.  cxlvi.  9); 
He  is  "  about  our  path,  and  about  our  bed, 
and  apieth  out  all  our  ways  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  2). 
When  he  hath  tried  me,  I  shall  oome  forth 
as  gold;  i.e.  as  gold  from  the  furnace,  I 
shall  oome  forth  purified,  when  my  trial  is 
over  (comp.  Ps.  xii.  6;  Isa.  i.  25;  Jer.  vi. 
29,  30;  ix,  7,  etc.).  Job  seems  at  last  to 
have  woke  up  to  the  conception  that  there 
is  a  purifying  power  in  affliction. 

Ver.  11. — Hy  foot  hath  held  Ms  steps; 
lather,  hath  held  close  to  his  steps,  or  his 
path  ;  i.e.  I  have  followed  in  God's  way,  and 
kept  as  close  to  it  as  possible.  In  other 
words,  I  have  kept  his  way,  and  not  declined 
from  it. 

Ver.  12. —  Neither  have  I  gone  hack  from 
the  oommahdmeat  of  his  lips.  Professor 
Lee  rightly  observes  that  this  declaration 
"  takes  it  for  granted  that,  -at  least,  some 
precepts  of  God  had  been  revealed  before 
this  time"  ('Book  of  Job,'  p.  370).  There 
were  "commandments"  which  Job  recog- 
nized as  having  proceeded  from  God,  and 
"  words  "  which  he  looked  upon  as  being  the 
utterances  of  his  mouth.  This  is  strong 
evidence  of  a  primeval  revelation  which, 
if  not  leduced  to  writing,  had,  at  any  rate, 
been  handed  down  by  tradition  to  Job's  day. 
Gen.  iii.  14 — 19  and  ix.  1 — 7  may  afford  the 
true  explanation  of  this  difficulty.  I  have 
esteemed  the  words  of  his  mouth  more  than 
my  necessary  food.  This  is  scarcely  strong 
enough.  Job  says,  "I  have  treasured  up, 
taken  to  myself,  and  preserved  the  wordi  of 
his  mouth,"  either  "  more  than  my  neces- 
sary food  "  or  "  more  than  my  own  law."  If 
the  former  rendering  be  preferred,  there  is 
no  need  of  explanation ;  if  the  latter,  we 
must  regard  "my  own  law"  as  meaning 
"  the  law  of  my  own  mind,  my  own  will,  the 
will  of  the  natural  man  "  (Cook). 

Ver.  13. — Bat  he  is  in  one  mind,  and  who 
can  turn  himf  Once  more  we  hear  the 
voice  of  complaint.  The  happier  tone  of 
thought  which  extends  from  ver.  6  to  ver. 
12  grows  out  of  a  sanguine  hope  on  Job'g 
part  that  God  will  bring  him  before  his 
tribunal,  and  judge  his  cause  according  to 
righteousness.  Now  he  bethinks  himself 
that  hitherto  God,  notwithstanding  his 
prayers,  has  refused  to  summon  him  to  his 
judgment-seat,  and  begins  to  fear  that  there 
is  no  likelihood  of  his  changing.  "  He  is 
One,"  or,  "in  one."  With  him  is  "  no  vari- 
ableness, neither  shadow  of  turning  "  (Jas.  i 


OH.  XXIII.  1 — 17.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


393 


17).  How  is  it  likely  that  he  will  act  in  tlio 
future  othcnvise  than  he  has  acted  in  tlie 
past  ?  What  his  soul  desireth,  even  that  he 
doeth.  A  somewhat  harsh  way  of  saying 
that  God  doeth  that  which  seemoth  him 
best — and  which,  therefore,  is  best.  Job 
does  not  really  suppose  that  God  is  actuated 
by  caprice  or  favouritism. 

Ver.  14.— For  he  performeth  the  thing 
tknt  is  appointed  for  me;  i.e  ha  will  ns- 
Buredly  accomplish  whatever  he  has  decreed 
for  me.  I  cannot  expect  that  he  will  blench 
or  change.  And  many  such  things  are  with 
him.  He  has  many  other  weapous  in  his 
armoury,  many  other  woes  with  which  he 
might  afflict  me. 

Ver.  15. — Therefore  am  I  troubled  at  his 
presence.  The  thought  of  these  fuither 
afBictions  troubles  me,  and  makes  me  shrink 
from  his  unseen  presence.  I  know  not  how 
soon  he  may  lay  a  fresh  burden  upon  me. 


When  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  him.  When 
I  reflect  on  the  many  forms  of  suffering 
which  X  may  still  have  to  undergo,  my  fears 
increase,  I  tremble  at  the  future. 

Ver.  16. — rdr  God  maketh  my  heart  soft ; 
or,  faint,  as  in  Lev.  xxvi.  36  and  Deut  ii. 
3.  He  takes  away  my  courage,  and  leaves 
me  a  prey  to  terror.  And  the  Almighty 
tronbleth  me.  The  verb  used  (the  hiph. 
form  of  ^m)  is  a  very  strong  one,  and  means 
**liath  filled  me  with  horror  and  conster- 
nation." 

Ver.  17. — Because  I  was  not  cut  off  before 
the  darkness,  neither  hath  he  ooTered  the 
darkness  from  my  face.  Job  complains  of 
two  things :  (1)  Tliat  he  was  not  cut  off  (i.e. 
removed  from  earth)  before  tho  great  dark- 
ness fell  upon  his  life  (comp.  oh.  iii.  11 — 
13).  (2)  That  he  was  not  "covered,"  i.e. 
sheltered  and  protected,  by  the  love  and  care 
of  God  when  the  dark  days  cume. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Joh  to  Eliphaz :  1.  The  experience  of  a  seeker  after  Ood.  I.  Great 
SORROW.  (Ver.  2.)  Two  wonders.  1.  An  afflicted  man  a  seeker  after  Ood.  Designed 
to  recall  men  to  God  (ch.  xxxvi.  8,  9 ;  Isa.  xix.  22 ;  Jer.  ii.  27 ;  Hos.  v.  15),  temporal 
calamity  is  not  always  attended  by  so  blessed  a  result.  Unaccompanied  by  grace,  it 
tends  to  harden  rather  than  soften  the  human  heart,  to  repel  rather  than  attract  the 
soul's  confidence  and  love.  Happily,  however,  in  Job's  case  its  natural  tendencies  were 
corrected.  With  greater  urgency  and  vehemence  than  before,  it  impelled  him  to  inquire 
after  God  (of.  2  Ohron.  xv.  4;  xxxiii.  12;  Ps.  xxxiv.  6;  Ixxvii.  2;  cxix.  67;  Hos. 
vi.  1 ;  Luke  xv.  18).  2i  A  seeker  after  Ood  an  afflicted  man.  Strange  that  one  who 
sought  God  so  sincerely  as  Job  did  should  have  been  subjected  to  such  overwhelming 
tribulation.  Yet  the  more  triumphant  waxed  Job's  faith,  the  heavier  seemed  to  fall  the 
pressure  of  his  misery.  Notwithstanding  the  lofty  declarations  of  confidence  in  God 
which  had  fallen  from  his  lips  (oh.  xiii.  15 ;  xix.  25),  his  complaint  still  bade  defiance, 
while  his  hand  lay  heavy  upon  his  groaning  (Delitzsch),  refusing  to  let  it  go,  because, 
of  course,  the  cause  of  it  was  not  removed.  His  physical  disease  was  in  no  degree 
abated.  The  calumniations  of  his  friends  were  aggravated,  not  ameliorated.  The  felt 
absence  of  God  was  become  more  intolerable  than  ever.  Even  the  groaning  which 
involuntarily  escaped  his  lips  was  pronounced  rebellion.  But  saints  and  seekers  after 
God  have  no  guarantee  of  exemption  from  trouble.  Rather,  trouble  is  to  them  as  a 
refining  fire.  Hence  the  loftier  their  piety,  the  hotter  may  be  made  the  furnace  through 
which  they  walk.  Nay,  their  affiictions  may  so  abound,  bodily  pain,  mental  distress, 
spiritual  desolation,  that  they  are  compelled  to  "  groan,  being  burdened  "  (2  Cor.  v.  4) ; 
but,  like  true  saints  and  genuine  seekers  after  God,  they  will  neither  complain  too 
bitterly  nor  groan  too  heavily,  but  study  to  keep  their  complaint  in  subjection,  and  to 
make  their  groaning  less  than  their  suBeiing. 

II.  Ardent  longing.  (Ver.  2.)  1.  A  seeker  after  Ood  at  a  loss  to  find  him.  Con- 
sidering that  God  desires  (Acts  xvii.  27)  and  commands  men  to  seek  him  (Isa.  Iv.  6), 
and  promises  that  they  who  seek  shall  find  (Matt.  vii.  7),  it  would  almost  seem  as  if 
guch  a  thing  should  be  impossible.  But  Job  being  witness,  and  David  (Ps.  ilii.  2), 
even  a  saint,  losing  his  inward  consciousness  of  God's  presence  and  favour,  may  be 
unable  to  recover  either.  And  if  a  saint,  then  much  more  a  sinner,  who  has  never  yet 
met  with  God,  may  find  it  hard  to  reach  his  seat.  It  is,  of  course,  certain  that  true 
seekers  will  ultimately  find.  Only  the  time  of  finding,  for  wise  and  holy  purposes, 
may  be  delayed;  sometimes  to  try  the  faiih  or  increase  the  earnestness  of  the  seeker, 
iometimes  because  of  sin  or  wilful  defect  in  tho  seeker,  sometimes  to  make  knotvn  ta 
the  seeker  the  unchallengeable  iio?ereignty  of  God  in  discovering  himself  to  men.    2.  A 


M4  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ofi.  Mm.  1— 11 

seelcer  after  Ood  alviays  possessed  of  certain  eha/racteristics ;  as :  (1)  Knowledge.  Like 
Job,  he  may  be  ignorant  of  where  God's  seat  is ;  but  he  must  know  that  God  is,  and 
has  a  seat.  Like  the  Greeks  who  spoke  to  Andrew  and  Philip  (John  xii.  21),  he  may 
not  understand  how  to  reach  the  Saviour's  presence ;  but  he  must  be  aware  that  a 
Saviour  exists.  The  first  step  in  seeking  God  or  Christ  is  illumination.  The  minimum 
of  knowledge  for  a  seeker  after  God  is  more  now  than  in  the  days  of  Job.  God  must 
be  known  as  revealed  in  Christ.  (2)  Faith.  Like  Job,  he  must  not  simply  know  that 
God  is  and  has  a  seat ;  he  must  believe  that  God  is  accessible  to  sinful  men  (Hcb.  xi.  G). 
Besides  understanding  where  to  find  God,  viz.  anywhere,  in  Christ,  seated  on  a  throne 
of  grace,  we  must  apprehend  the  way  to  that  throne  to  be  continually  open  (2  Cor.  v. 
19;  Heb.  iv.  16;  x.  22).  BVith  in  this  now  constitutes  an  indispensable  prerequisite 
for  genuine  seeking  after  God.  (3)  Desire.  Like  Job,  and  like  the  Greeks  who  were 
anxious  to  see  Jesus,  the  seeker  after  God  must  be  in  earnest.  Those  whose  longings 
after  God  are  as  intense  as  were  David's  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1 ;  xlii.  2)  cannot  always  obtain 
access  to  his  presence ;  but  it  is  certain  they  who  have  no  such  warm  aspirations  will 
be  denied,  though  they  seek. 

in.  Holt  boldness.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  The  courage  of  the  patriarch  arose  from  three 
things.  1.  Well-arranged  thoughts.  Coming  into  God's  presence,  and  commencing  to 
plead  before  God's  throne,  he  would  set  forth  his  words  in  orderly  array.  This  implied 
that  Job  had  spent  much  time  in  communing  with  his  heart.  Thoughts  seldom  arrange 
themselves  spontaneously  or  unconsciously,  rather  their  arrangement  requires  deliberate 
and  sometimes  protracted  mental  effort.  Intelligent  disposition  of  the  soul's  ideas  and 
emotions  before  pressing  forward  to  heaven's  throne  is  not  only  demanded  by  the  ineffable 
majesty  of  him  who  sits  upon  the  throne  (ch.xxxvil.  19),  but  is  eminently  conducive  to 
the  spiritual  fortitude  of  him  who  as  a  suppliant  approaches  the  throne.  Thoroughly 
prepared  and  well-arranged  words  never  fail  to  impart  confidence  to  a  speaker,  as  inward 
disorder  is  aknost  sure  to  overwhelm  him  with  outward  confusion.  2.  Well-constructed 
arguments.  Job  meant  that  he  was  able  to  adduce  convincing  proofs  of  his  integrity. 
What  these  were  is  not  stated,  but  that  ho  alluded  to  the  witness  of  his  past  life  may 
be  reasonably  conjectured.  The  best  evidence  of  piety  is  the  testimony  of  the  outer 
walk  and  conversation  (Matt.  vii.  20;  John  xv.  8;  Gal.  v.  22;  1  John  iii.  10).  Nor  is 
any  sign  so  assuring  to  the  heart  before  God  as  the  consciousness  of  inward  sincerity 
when  supported  by  the  argument  of  outward  propriety.  And  to  this  the  believer  may 
legitimately  appeal  in  his  pleadings  before  God,  like  St.  Peter  when  he  said  to  the  risen 
Christ,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee  "  (John  xxi.  17).  3.  Well-assured  hope. 
So  confident  is  Job  of  having  right  upon  his  side,  that  he  fears  not  to  hear  the  decision  of 
the  Judge.  In  this  Job  was  perhaps  a  little  guilty  of  pride.  The  spirit  here  evinced 
is  that  of  self-righteousness,  rather  than  of  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God.  Still,  a  child  of 
God  might  now  evince  as  great  a  confidence  as  Job  without  being  open,  like  him,  to  the 
challenge  of  self-righteousness ;  might  be  able  to  anticipate  the  Judge's  decision  without 
alarm,  not  because  of  his  own  personal  integrity,  but  because  of  the  all-sufficient  merit 
of  Jesus  Christ  (cf.  oh.  xiii.  18,  homiletics). 

IV.  Sublime  confidence.  Of  two  things  Job  declares  himself  satisfied.  1.  Ood's 
mercy  towards  him,.  (Ver.  6.)  God  would  not  confound  him  with  the  fulness  of  his 
strength,  or  terrify  him  with  his  majesty  (oh.  ix.  34,  q.v.\  but  would  mercifully  strengthen 
him  to  plead  his  cause,  or,  according  to  a  more  literal  translation,  would  set  his  heart 
upon  him,  i.e.  would  regard  him  with  affectionate  attention,  not  only  giving  him  a  fair 
hearing,  but  dispelling  his  apprehensions,  and  enabling  him  to  present  his  case  with 
lucidity  and  completeness.  What  Job  anticipated,  the  believer  in  God  is  promised. 
God  will  not  overawe  with  his  majesty  any  suppliant  who  comes  to  his  throne ;  but 
will  regard  him  with  tender  love  (Prov.  xv.  8 ;  Zech.  xiii.  9 ;  John  iv.  23) ;  will  listen 
to  his  cries  (2  Chron.  vii.  15 ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  15 ;  cxiv.  18) ;  will  even  strengthen  him  with' 
might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man  (Zech.  xii.  10 ;  Rom.  viii.  26 ;  Eph.  ii.  18).  2. 
His  victory  through  Ood.  (Ver.  7.)  The  sincerely  upright  man,  having  an  oppor- 
tunity to  plead  before  God,  would  be  certain  of  ultimate  triumph  over  all  who  should 
seek  to  condemn  him ;  and  so  shall  the  Christian  believer  come  off  victorious,  when  he 
stands  before  God's  throne,  and  be  made  more  than  a  conqueror  through  him  that  loved 
us  (Eom.  viii.  33—39). 

Learn  ;  1.  The  first  step  towards  blessedness  is  taken  Dy  man  when  he  cecomec  a 


OH.  xxm.  1— 17.]  THS  BOOK  OF  JOB,  896 

geekei  after  God.  2.  A  man  may  be  getting  nearer  God,  though  all  outwaid  Bigna 
appear  to  proclaim  the  reverse.  8.  The  gospel  has  for  ever  rendered  Job's  prayer 
unnecessary.  4.  If  a  man  fails  to  find  God,  he  must  be  seeking  for  him  in  the  wrong 
quarter  or  the  wrong  way.  5.  They  who  come  to  God's  throne  in  earnest  will  find 
mercy  to  pardon,  and  grace  to  help  in  every  time  of  need. 

Ver.  3  — A  great  question  answered.  I.  The  becobded  question.  "  Oh  that  I 
knew  where  I  might  find  him  I  "  1.  Necessary/ ;  since  man  does  not  naturally  under- 
stantl  either  where  or  how  to  find  God  (Rom.  i.  28 ;  1  Cor.  i.  21 ;  Bph.  iv.  18).  2. 
Important ;  since  only  in  the  finding  and  knowing  God  lies  the  secret  of  true  happiness 
(ch.  xxii.  21)  and  the  pathway  to  eternal  life  (John  xvii.  3).  8.  Personal;  since  no  man 
can  find  God  for  his  neighbour,  but  every  individual  fur  himself  alone  (Eccles.  xi.  9 ; 
Bom.  ii.  6  ;  Gal.  vi.  5).  4.  Urgent ;  since  the  present  is  the  only  moment  a  soul  can 
count  upon  for  putting  such  a  question  (Prov.  xxvii.  1;  2  Cor.  vi.  2). 

II.  The  unwritten  answer.  God  is  to  be  found:  1.  In  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ 
(2  Cor.  V.  19),  as  opposed  to  the  temple  of  nature,  which  may  speak  of  God  (Ps.  xix. 
1 ;  Rom.  i.  20),  but  dues  not  unveil  his  presence  like  the  Incarnation.  2.  In  the  shrine 
of  the  human  spirit  (John  iv.  23,  24),  as  opposed  to  definite  localities.  For  the  truly 
spiritual  worshipper  every  spot  of  ground  on  which  he  stands  is  consecrated.  3.  In 
the  contrite  heart  (Isa.  Ivii.  16),  as  opposed  to  the  soul  of  the  unbeliever. 

Learn :  1.  The  necessity  of  earnestness  in  seeking  God.  2.  The  certainty  of  finding 
God,  if  sought  in  faith. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — Job  to  EUphax:  2.  A  child  of  light  walking  in  darkness.  I.  The 
CHILD  OF  LIGHT.  That  Job  was  entitled  to  be  so  described  will  appear  from  a  con- 
sideration of:  1.  The  creed  he prqfissed.  It  is  obvious  that  Job  believed  in:  (1)  The 
existence  of  God.  He  was  not  one  of  those  fools  who  in  their  hearts  say,  "  No  God !  " 
(Ps.  xiv.  1).  Throughout  this,  as  throughout  his  previous  discourses,  the  personality 
of  God  is  assumed,  and  indeed  is  frequently  referred  to  without  being  named.  (2)  The 
providence  of  God.  As  little  was  the  patriarch  one  of  thuse  practical  atheists  to  whom 
he  himself  had  alluded  (ch.  xxL  14).  Eliphaz  insinuated  such  a  charge  against  the  sufifer- 
ing  saint  whom  he  preteuded  to  comfort.  But  Job  implicitly  repelled  the  imputation  by 
recognizing  that  God's  presence,  if  unseen,  was  still  around  him,  and  God's  hand, 
though  ever  veiled,  was  always  working.  (3)  The  authority  of  God.  Job  recognized 
that  the  supreme  Lawgiver  for  man  was  this  invisible  but  omnipresent  and  continually 
working  Deity,  the  commandment  of  whose  lip  and  the  word  of  whose  mouth  was  the 
perpetually  and  universally  binding  rule  of  life  and  obedience,  rather  than  the  inward 
resolves,'  purposes,  determinations  of  the  individual,  as  is  commonly  but  mistakenly 
supposed  by  the  natural  heart  (oh.  xxi.  15 ;  Exod.  v.  2 ;  Jer.  xviii.  12 ;  Luke  xix.  14). 
(4)  The  omniscience  of  God.  Job  believed  not  simply  that  God  exercised  a  general 
superintendence  over  mundane  affairs,  but  that  his  inspection  of  the  world  embraced 
a  knowledge  of  particulars.  Like  Hagar  in  the  wilderness,  he  could  say,  "  Thou  God 
seest  me  1 "  (Gen.  xvi.  13).  Like  David,  he  could  sing, '"  I  am  poor  and  needy,  yet 
the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me"  (Ps.  xl.  17).  Like  Jeremiah,  he  could  pray,  "Lord, 
thou  knowest  all  their  counsel  against  me "  (xviii.  23).  Like  Peter,  he  could,  pro- 
test "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee "  (John  xxi. 
17).'  Job  regarded  his  whole  life  as  lying  continually  beneath  the  eye  of  God :  "  He 
knoweth  the  way  that  is  with  me."  So  God's  eyes  are  always  upon  the  ways  of  man 
(ch.  xxxiv.  21),  and  in  particular  of  the  righteous  (Ps.  i.  6).  It  is  the  part  of  a  good 
man  to  walk  before  God  (Gen.  xvii.  1),  and  to  rejoice  that  he  can  say,  "  All  my  ways 
are  before  thee  "  (Ps.  cxix.  168).  2.  ITie  character  he  maintained.  Be.sides  being  an 
intellectual  believer  in  God,  Job  was :  (1)  An  earnest  seeker  after  God.  Not  content 
with  knowing  that  God's  presence  filled  the  universe  around  him,  and  that  God's  hand 
was  constantly  working  beside  him  in  the  mysterious  phenomena  of  nature  and 
providence  (ch.  ix.  11),  Job  desired  a  visible  manifestation  of  and  a  personal  acquaint- 
ance with  this  unseen  Deity.  Many  believe  in  God's  existence,  character,  and  work 
who  never  seek  to  know  God  himself,  or  make  the  slightest  eflFort  to  secure  his  favour. 
Such  a  visible  manifestation  of  God  as  Job  craved,  and  afterwards  obtained  (oh.xxxTiii 
1)  has  been  Toucbsafed  to  men  in  Christ,  the  Image  of  the  invisibla  Qod  (2  Cor.  iv 


398  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB,  [oh.  xxm.  1— 17. 

4 ;  Col.  i.  15 ;  Heb.  i.  3),  in  whom  alone,  accordingly,  God  can  now  be  found.  (2)  A 
faithful  servant  of  God.  Eecognizing  his  allegiance  to  God,  Job  not  only  used  meana 
to  acquaint  himself  with  God's  will,  as  all  saints  should  do,  but  accepted  that  will  as 
the  rule  and  pattern  of  his  life :  (a)  cheerfully,  making  God's  way  his  way,  like  the 
Mossianic  Sufferer  (Ps.  xl.  7,  8),  and  like  Christ  (John  vi.  38);  (6)  perpetually,  adhering 
to  God's  commandment  always  (Ps.  cxix.  44),  rendering  obedience  not  alone  to  precepts 
which  accorded  with  his  inclination,  but  to  every  word  that  proceeded  from  God'g 
mouth  (Ps.  cxix.  88) ;  (o)  firmly,  holdinf!  fast  to  God's  steps  by  his  foot,  resisting  all 
attempts  to  cause  him  to  decline  or  turn  aside  (Ps.  xliv.  18 ;  cxix.  31) ;  (d)  appre- 
ciatingly,  esteeming  the  words  of  God's  mouth  more  than  his  necessary  food  (Authorized 
Version),  like  David  (Ps.  xix.  10 ;  cxix.  72),  Jeremiah  (xv.  16),  Daniel  (vi.  5,  10), 
Mary  (Luke  x.  39—42),  and  New  Testament  believers  generally  (1  Pet.  ii.  2); 
according  to  another  translation,  (e)  carefully,  treasuring  up  God's  Word  in  his  breast, 
like  the  Hebrew  psalmist  (Ps.  cxix.  11);  and  (/)  sacrificingly,  preferring  God's  com- 
mandments to  the  inclinations,  resolves,  and  purposes  of  his  own  heart,  when  at  any 
time  these  came  into  collision,  like  St.  Paul  (Kom.  viL  22); — all  which  proclaimed  Job 
a  genuinely  pious  man. 

_  II.  The  child  of  light  in  dakkness.  The  passage  exhibits  Job  in  three  different 
situations.  1.  Encompassed  by  the.darknets.  The  darkness  alluded  to  not  the  cloud 
of  outward  pain  and  distress  by  which  Job  was  overshadowed,  but  the  inward  mental 
and  spiritual  obscuration  which  these  occasioned — the  horrible  eclipse  which  his  faith 
suffered,  the  terrible  revulsion  of  unrequited  love  which  his  soul  experienced.  A 
genuine  believer  and  lover  of  God,  who  was  conscious  in  his  inmost  soul  of  sincerity, 
who  with  admirable  fortitude  had  shunned  every  evil  way,  and  who  with  unrelaxing 
tenacity  had  adhered  to  the  path  of  truth  and  right,  preferring  on  every  occasion  God's 
will  to  his  own,  he  had  yet  lost  all  sense  of  the  Divine  favour  as  well  as  all  conscious- 
ness of  the  Divine  presence.  Though  he  earnestly  longed  to  meet  and  made  frantic 
efforts  to  obtain  an  interview  with  God,  it  was  always  in  vain.  "  Behold,  I  go  eastward, 
but  he  is  not  there ;  and  westward,  but  I  perceive  him  not.  Northwards  where  he 
worketh,  but  I  behold  him  not ;  he  turneth  aside  southwards,  and  I  see  him  not." 
Job  meant  that  he  looked  in  all  directions  for  some  visible  manifestation  of  God  before 
which  he  might  come  and  plead  his  cause.  Job's  spiritual  desolation  and  fruitless 
longing  after  God  are  not  without  their  counterparts  in  the  experiences  of  Old  Testament 
saints  and  New  Testament  believers  (Isa.  1.  10 ;  John  xx.  14),  who  sometimes,  like 
David  on  account  of  sin  (Ps.  xxx.  7),  or  like  Ethan  through  calamity  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  46),  oi 
like  Mary  through  bereavement  (John  xx.  14),  or  like  the  travellers  to  Emmaus  through 
spiritual  dejection  (Luke  xxiv.  17),  are  altogether  unable  to  realize  the  comfortable 
shinino;  of  God's  favour  and  Christ's  love  upon  their  souls.  Job's  inward  condition  had 
its  highest  exemplification  in  the  Boul-desertion  of  Christ  upon  the  cross.  2.  Supported 
in  the  darkness.  As  God  did  not  leave  Christ  entirely  without  consolations  in  the 
hour  of  his  great  sorrow,  so  neither  does  he  leave  any  of  his  people  (Isa.  xliii.  2 ;  Heb. 
xiii.  5).  Job  was  upheld  in  the  gloom  by  three  considerations.  (1)  The  knowledge 
of  God's  presence.  He  could  not  see  God,  but  he  was  perfectly  aware  that  God  could 
Bee  him.  Though  God  seemed  far  removed,  Job  knew  that  he  was  close  at  hand — if  a 
veiled  presence,  yet  still  a  presence.  So  Christ  believed  his  Father  to  be  nigh  though 
his  face  was  hid.  And  faith  should  teach  saints  to  believe  in  the  continual  encom- 
passing of  God's  gracious  presence,  even  when  all  inward  sense  of  that  presence  has 
departed  from  the  soul.  (2)  The  consciousness  of  personal  integrity.  David  could 
not  have  enjoyed  this  when  he  lost  God's  favour  in  consequence  of  sinning  with  Bath- 
sheba.  It  is  a  terrible  aggravation  to  the  soul's  distress  to  know  that  through  personal 
transgression  one  has  relapsed  into  the  gloom.  On  the  other  hand,  the  calm  clear 
peisuasion  that  one's  conduct  has  been  such  as  not  only  conscience  but  God  commends, 
must  prove  a  rock  of  adamant  beneath  the  fainting  spirit.  (3)  The  discernment  of 
God's  purpose  in  affliction.  This  seemingly  a  new  discovery  to  the  patriarch.  Formerly 
inclined  to  view  his  misfortunes  as  a  token  of  Divine  anger,  he  now  regards  them  as 
sent  for  his  trial,  as  designed  to  test  his  spiritual  character  as  fire  is  employed  to  assay 
gold.  So  God  did  tempt  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  1),  and  so  believers  are  subjected  to 
manifold  temptations  for  "  the  trial "  of  their  faith  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  That  saints  are  so 
tried  proves  them  to  be  saints.     This  thouglit,  conjoined  with  the  gracious  purpoM 


o«.  xxm.  1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  897 

aimed  at  in  affliction,  makes  it  possible  for  God's  people  to  glory  in  tribulations  (Bom. 
7.  3 ;  1  Pet.  i,  6 ;  Jas.  i.  12).  3.  Emerging  from  the  darkness.  Indirectly  alluded  to, 
but  contemplated  as  certain.  (1)  At  what  time?  "When  he  hath  tried  mo,"  when 
the  process  of  assaying  has  been  completed,  but  not  till  then.  Trouble  and  adversity 
are  not  removed  from  a  child  of  God  till  they  have  done  their  work  in  him  (Bom.  v.  3 ; 
Heb.  xii.  11)  as  well  as  for  him  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  But  the  great  Eefiner  never  keeps  a 
soul  in  the  furnace  longer  than  is  needful  to  accomplish  its  purification  and.  salvation 
(Mai.  iii.  3).  (2)  In  what  manner?  "As  gold;"  i.e.  true  as  gold  and  shining  like 
gold.  Sincere  saints  are  never  injured  by  affliction,  as  pure  gold  is  never  hurt  by  the 
refiner's  pot.  Heat  only  evinces  the  genuine  quality  of  precious  metal,  and  the  fires  of 
adversity  only  manifest  the  saint's  integrity  of  character.  Adulterated  metal  is  always 
harmed  by  the  process  of  assaying,  and  untrue  disciples  are  without  fail  detected  in 
times  of  persecution  and  seasons  of  affliction  (Matt.  xxiv.  12).  But  the  sufierings  of  this 
present  life  oidy  serve  to  refine  and  purify,  to  burnish  and  beautify,  the  faithful  disciple 
and  humble  believer.  (3)  With  what  result  ?  That  he  no  longer  walks  in  darkness, 
but  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  friendship  and  favour  for 
evermore. 

Learn :  1.  It  is  better  to  be  a  child  of  light  walking  in  darkness  than  a  child  of 
darkness  walking  in  light,  t.e.  in  the  sparks  of  his  own  kindling.  2.  Though  God's 
way  is  sometimes  hid  from  a  saint,  the  saint's  way  is  never  hid  from  God.  3.  It  is  a 
special  privilege  which  the  good  man  enjoys  that  he  is  never  afflicted  but  with  an  eye 
to  his  improvement.  4.  The  severest  season  of  trial  through  which  a  follower  of  God 
may  be  called  to  pass  is  certain  to  have  an  end.  5.  The  sufferings  of  this  present  life 
are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed  in  us.  6.  The 
only  way  to  happiness  for  man  is  the  way  of  God.  7.  It  is  a  sure  mark  of  wisdom 
to  prefer  God's  commandment  to  the  wishes  or  resolves  of  self. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Jol  to  Eliphaz :  3.  A  meditation  on  the  Divine  Being,     I.  Loftt 
THOUGHTS  coNOEKNiNa  GoD.     1.  The  Unity  of  the  Divine  natt)/re.     "  For  he  is  in  one 
mind ; "  literally, "  for  he  is  in  one  "  (ver.  13).    The  interpretation  which  regards  this  as 
an  allusion  to  the  absolute  majesty  and  undivided  essence  of   the  Deity,  as  in  the 
sublime  monotheistic  confession  of  Israel  (Deut.  vi.  4),  though  not  accepted  by  all 
expositors,  is  yet  pronounced  by  most  to  be  perfectly  admissible.     How  far  Job  bad 
attained  to  a  perception  of  the  unique  personality  of  the  Godhead,  as  containing  more 
hypostases  (persons)  than  one,  may  be  a  subject  of  controversial  discussion.     But  an 
utterance  like  the  present  seems  to  mark  off  Job  by  a  wide  gulf  from  ancient  poly- 
theistic  idolaters.     Job,  his  three  friends,  and  doubtless  many  more  besides,  were 
monotheists,  who  held  by  the  grand  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God,  which  had  di-scended 
to  them  in  the  line  of  primitive  tradition,  and  which  was  subsequently  republished  to 
Israel  from  the  summit  of  Mount  Sinai.     Nay,  such  passages  as  those  which  speak  about 
a  Daysman  (ch.  x.  33),  a  heavenly  Witness  (oh.  xvi.  19 — 21),  and  a  Kinsman  Redeempr 
(ch.  xix.  25),  seem  to  intimate  that  Job  at  least,  in  his  ecstatic  moments,  had  caught 
a  glimpse  of  the  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  Persons  in  the  Godbead,  just  as  throughout 
the  Old  Testament  generally  the  same  doctrine  is  found  lying  in  embryo,  though  not 
fuUy  or  distinctly  revealed  (cf.  Gen.  i.  1 — 3 ;  Ps.  ii.  7  ;  xxxiii.  6 ;  ex.  1).     2.  The 
•  immutability  of  the  Divine  purpose.     "But  he  is  in  one,"  t.e.  one  purpose  or  determi- 
nation, e.fl'.  towards  Job.     Hence  adds  the  patriarch,  "Who  can  turn  him?"  (ver.  13), 
meaning,  nothing  could  deflect  him  from  his  fixed  resolution  to  treat  Job  as  a  criminal. 
Dropping  out  of  view  the  misconception  which  gave  tone  and  colour  to  all  Job's  repre- 
sentations of  the  Divine  Being,  the  truth  which  remains,  that  the  supreme  God  is 
unchangeable  in  his  being,  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth,  and 
therefore  invariable  and  unalterable  ip  his  decrees  and  purposes,  is  in  accordance  not 
only  with  the  teachings  of  Scripture  (Numb.  xxiiL  19 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  29 ;  Ps.  cii.  27  ; 
Prov.  xix.  21 ;  Eccles.  lii.  14 ;  Mai.  iii.  6;  Acts  xv.  18),  but  with  the  dictates  of  reason 
A  Being  not  absolutely  perfect  in  himself  cannot  be  Divine.     But  a  Being  in  himself 
absolutely  perfect  cannot  be  affected  by  anything  from  without  or  within  so  as  to 
render  him  eitheir  less  or  more  perfect  than  he  is.     Hence  absolutely  and  in  himself  he 
must  l)e  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.'"   If  upon  any  of  his  dispensations 
towards  the  creature  changes  seem  to  pass,  these  changes,  having  been  fixed  and  deter- 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxm.  1—17. 


mined  from  the  beginning,  are  in  no  degree  inconsistent  with  his  immutability.  What- 
ever further  alteration  appears  to  surround  his  decrees  is  the  result  of  change  or 
variability  in  the  creature.  3.  The  irresistibility  of  the  Divine  power.  "  And  what 
his  soul  desireth,  even  that  he  doeth ; "  literally,  "  And  his  soul  desireth,  and  he  doeth  " 
(ver.  13).  Not  only  does  the  Supreme  Intelligence  act  in  accordance  with  a  plan,  but 
he  has  power  adequate  to  carry  into  complete  realization  every  item  and  detail  of 
that  plan.  Nay,  with  such  ease  does  he  accomplish  his  purposes,  his  resources  being 
unlimited,  that  he  has  simply  to  speak  and  it  is  done,  to  command  and  it  standeth 
fast  (Ps.  xxxiii.  9),  or,  as  here  represented,  to  form  a  wish  and  proceed  to  execute  it 
(cf.  Ps.  cxv.  3  ;  Isa.  xlvi.  10,  11 ;  Jar.  xxxii.  17,  27  ;  Dan.  iv.  25 ;  Eph.  i.  11),  without 
apprehension  of  defeat  (oh.  ix.  12 ;  xi.  10 ;  xli.  10,  11 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  6 ;  Isa.  xliii.  13) ; 
or  failure  (ch.  xlii.  2 ;  Gen.  xvili.  14 ;  Luke  i.  37 ;  Eph.  iii.  20).  4.  The  particularity 
of  the  Divine  decrees.  "  For  he  performeth  the  thing  that  is  appointed  for  me  "  (ver. 
14).  What  the  Divine  mind  had  preappointed  as  Job's  portion,  the  Divine  hand  was 
engaged  in  carrying  out.  The  plan  of  the  universe  is  one  that  provides  for  attention 
to  individuals.  Nothing  is  too  vast  for  infinite  wisdom  and  power  to  comprehend  or 
execute ;  nothing  too  mean  and  insignificant  for  the  Divine  mind  to  notice,  or  the 
Divine  hand  to  govern.  The  falling  6f  a  sparrow  equally  with  the  dissolution  of  an 
empire  has  a  place  in  the  programme  of  the  world  wliich  is  prearranged  by  God.  The 
portion  of  the  feeblest  saint  on  earth  is  as  truly  prepared  for  him  as  is  the  place  that 
shall  be  filled  by  a  nation  or  a  race.  6.  The  universality  of  the  Divine  government. 
"  And  many  such  things  are  with  him."  Possibly  Job  meant  that  God  had  many 
more  applications  and  calamities  of  a  like  description  wherewith  to  torture  him ;  but 
the  interpretation  is  not  wrong  which  understands  Job  to  say  that  his  case  was  not 
exceptional,  that  his  sufferings  formed  part  of  a  great  plan  in  which  others  besides 
himself  were  embraced;  that,  in  fact,  the  supreme  Euler  was  exercising  over  mankind 
at  large  the  same  soi  t  of  irresistible  sovereignty  as  over  him,  Job.  And  certainly  the 
thought  should  in  some  degree  mitigate  the  stroke  of  affliction  when  it  falls  on  us, 
that  no  strange  thing  has  happened  to  us,  but  only  such  as  is  common  to  men  (1  Pet. 
iv.  12 ;  V.  9). 

II.  Mingled  fbblingb  towabds  God.  1.  A  sense  of  awe.  "  Therefore  am  I 
troubled  at  his  presence:  when  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  him"  (ver.  15).  If  the 
thought  of  an  all-powerful,  irresistibly  and  universally  decreeing  God  arrayed  against 
Job  possessed  him  with  inward  fear  and  confusion,  terror  and  dismay,  much  more 
should  such  emotions  fill  the  minds  of  men  who  are  as  yet  in  their  natural  condition. 
And  though  in  the  case  of  such  as  have  made  peace  with  God  there  is  no  occasion  for 
inward  trepidation,  slavish  terror,  or  paralyzing  fear,  yet  even  they  must  find  it 
difficult  to  contemplate  the  Divine  character  as  above  depicted  without  a  consciousness 
of  awe,  without  a  feeling  of  profound  veneration.  So  David  remembered  God,  and 
was  troubled  (Ph.  Ixxvii.  3).  Christ's  followers,  however,  have  no  need  to  be  troubled 
by  thoughts  of  either  the  Divine  character  or  presence  (John  xiv.  1).  "  Perfect  love 
casteth  out  fear"  (1  John  iv.  18).  And  we  liave  received  not  the  spirit  of  bondage 
again  to  fear,  but  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  "  Abba,  Father  "  (Eom.  viii. 
15).  2.  A  consciousness  of  weakness.  "  For  God  maketh  my  heart  soft "  (ver.  16), 
i.e.  deprives  it  of  strength,  makes  it  feint  and  feeble  (Deut.  xx.  3 ;  Isa.  vii.  4 ;  Jer.  iL 
46).  The  effect  produced  on  Job  by  a  contemplation  of  the  Divine  character  as  an 
all-wise,  irresistibly  powerful,  moral  Governor,  who  worketh  all  things  according  to  the 
counsel  of  his  will,  is  not  infrequently  experienced  by  serious  minds.  Nothing 
impresses  mm  with  a  conviction  of  his  feebleness  like  a  vivid  realization  of  the  power 
and  wisdom  of  God  as  displayed  in  the  material  universe  (Ps.  viii.  5,  6);  nothing 
afibrds  a  glimpse  into  his  spiritual  worthlessness  and  insufficiency  like  a  luminous 
presentation  belbre  his  soul's  eye  of  the  moral  majesty  of  God  (Isa.  vi.  5 ;  Luke  v.  8 ; 
Eev,  i.  17).  Indeed,  the  human  heart  never  either  breaks  or  becomes  dejected,  discerns 
its  weakness  or  realizes  its  insufficiency,  until  it  comes  in  contact  with  God,  e.g.  Moses 
(Bxod.  iv.  10) ;  Isaiah  (vi.  5) ;  Job  (ch.  xlii.  6).  3.  A  feeling  of  perplexity.  As  under- 
stood by  our  translators,  Job  (ver.  17)  expresses  amazement  that  God  had  not  cut  him 
off  "before  the  c'arkness"  of  affliction  had  come  upon  him  ;  i.e.  either  that  Qod  had 
kept  him  alive  solely  for  the  purpose  of  inflicting  on  him  such  mysterious  suffering  as 
h»  then  endured  (cf.  ch.  iii.  10),  or  that  God  had  not  removed  him  while  at  the  height 


OH.  xxm.  1—17.1  THE  BOOK  OF  JOR  W9 

of  prosperity,  and  in  visible  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour.  So  good  people  are  often 
puzzled  to  understand  why,  in  the  providence  of  God,  they  should  have  been  reserved 
for  this  or  that  particular  calamity ;  and  why,  being  what  they  are,  sincere  and  humble 
followers  of  God,  they  should  be  treated  with  as  much  severity  as  if  they  were  his 
foes.  But  this,  of  course,  results  from  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  special  design  and 
gracious  benefits  of  affliction.  4.  A  deficiency  of  faith.  Otherwise  interpreted,  the 
language  of  Job  (ver.  17)  asserts  that  what  confounds  him  is  not  the  external  darkness 
covering  his  face,  surrounding  him  on  every  side,  and  threatening  to  engulf  him,  but 
the  inward  thought  that  God  is  against  him.  And  just  here  Job  evinces  a  lack  of 
genuine  trust,  or  spiritual  confidence,  in  God.  Had  Job  been  as  honest  towards  God 
as  he  was  just  towards  himself,  had  he  given  God  as  full  credit  for  sincerity  as  he 
claimed  for  himself,  he  would  never  have  accused  God  of  dealing  with  him  as  an  enemy, 
but,  rather  than  impeach  God's  immutable  love  towards  his  faithful  followers,  would 
have  Bought  another  solution  for  the  mystery  of  his  suflferings. 

Learn :  1.  The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  God.  2.  The  immutability  of  God  is 
as  full  of  comfort  to  God's  people  as  it  is  of  terror  to  God's  adversaries.  3.  When  God's 
purposes  have  been  revealed,  whether  in  providence  or  in  grace,  they  should  not  be 
resisted,  but  received  with  meekness  and  submission.  4.  Only  one  Being  in  the 
universe,  viz.  God,  can  do  what  his  soul  desireth ;  every  other  is  dependent  upon  God's 
will.  5.  No  man  can  be  truly  said  to  be  the  architect  of  his  own  future,  since  every 
man's  lot  is  assigned  him  by  God.  6.  When  a  saint  is  afraid  of  God's  presence,  he  has 
either  fallen  into  sin,  like  Adam  (Gen.  iii.  10)  and  like  David  (Ps.  xxx.  7),  or  has  mis- 
construed the  character  of  that  appearance,  like  the  apostles  (John  vi.  19).  7.  The 
breaking  or  the  bruising  of  a  sinner's  heart  is  a  work  for  which  only  God  is  competent. 
8.  There  are  worse  calamities  than  death  to  a  good  man  ;  e.g.  the  loss,  or  supposed  loss, 
of  the  Divine  favour.  9.  Whatever  befalls  a  child  of  God  on  earth,  he  should  never 
part  with  faith  in  his  heavenly  Father's  love. 

Ver.  13. — Tht  unchanging  God.    "  He  is  in  one  mind  "  with  regard  to^ 

I.  The  plan  op  the  universe.  1.  There  is  such  a  plan.  "  Known  »mto  God  are 
a'l  his  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world "  (Acts  xv.  18 ;  Bph.  i.  11).  2.  This 
pi  an  is  so  perfect  that  it  never  requires  subsequent  modification  (ch.  xxxvi.  4;  xxxvii. 
16 ;  Ps.  civ.  24 ;  Prov.  iii.  19 ;  Isa.  xl.  13).  3.  This  plan  is  efficiently  carried  out  in  its 
minutest  detail  (Numb.  xi.  23;  2  Chron.  xx.  6j  Job  xlii.  2;'Ps.  xxxiii.  9;  Isa. 
xiv.  24). 

II.  The  sin  or  man.  1.  That  it  is  an  abomination  in  his  sight  (Deut.  xxv.  16 ; 
Ps.  V.  4 ;  Prov.  xv.  9 ;  Jer.  xliv.  4 ;  Zech.  viii.  17 ;  Luke  xvi.  15).  2.  That  it  is 
infinitely  dangerous  to  man  (Numb.  xvi.  38;  Deut.  xxix.  18;  ch.  v.  2;  Prov.  i.  31; 
Eph.  V.  6). 

III.  The  scheme  of  salvation.  "  There  is  none  other  Name  under  heaven  given 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved  "  (Acts  iv.  12).  From  the  Fall  downwards,  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  has  been  substantially  the  same — salvation.  1.  In  antedi- 
luvian times,  through  faith  in  the  woman's  Seed  (Gen.  iii.  15 ;  iv.  4).  2.  In  patriarchal 
times,  through  faith  in  Abraham's  promised  Child  (Gen.  xii.  3  ;  xv.  6).  3.  In  Mosaic 
times,  through  faith  in  the  sacrificial  Lamb,  of  which  the  Levitical  offerings  were  the 
shadows  and  the  types  (Heb.  ix.  8 — 10;  x.  3).  4.  In  the  times  of  the  monarchy, 
through  faith  in  David's  Son  (2  Sam.  vii.  15).  5.  In  the  times  of  Isaiah,  through  faith 
in  the  suffering  Servant  of  Jehovah  (Isa.  liii.  1).  6.  In  the  fulness  of  the  times, 
through  faith  in  him  who  was  the  woman's  Seed,  Abraham's  Descendant,  David's  Son, 
the  suffering  Servant  of  Jehovah,  and  the  world's  Paschal  Lamb,  all  in  one. 

IV.  The  purpose  of  affliction.  Ever  since  God's  mercy  came  to  this  fallen 
world,  and  that  was  immediat.  ly  upon  Adam's  transgression,  the  design  aimed  at  in 
life's  discipline  has  been  not  to  punish  man,  but  to  convert  and  save,  to  purify  and 
perfect  him  (Gen.  iii.  23 ;  Deut.  viii.  5 ;  ch.  v.  17 ;  Ps.  xciv.  12 ;  Ezek.  xx.  37 ;  John 
XV.  2;  Acts  xiv.  22;  Rom.  v.  3  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  32;  Heb.  xii.  7). 

V.  The  destiny  of  his  people.  Though  not  as  clearly  understood  or  revealed 
in  pre-Christian  times  as  now  under  the  gospel  dispensation,  it  was  still  the  same 
"  better  country,  even  an  heavenly,"  to  which  saints  in  all  ages  have  looked  forward. 
Cf.  Abraham  (Heb.  xi.  10),  David  (Ps.  xvii.  15),  Paul  (Phil.  i.  23 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8). 


400  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxm.  1—17 

OoNOLUSiiON.  "  Who  can  turn  him  ? "  L  Consolation  to  the  saint.  2.  Condem- 
n  a  lion  to  the  wicked. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1 — oh.  xxlv.  26. — Struggles  of  faith  with  doubt.  To  this  long  and  severe 
accusation  of  Eliphaz  the  sufferer  returns  no  reply.  He  comes  back  to  the  wish  he  has 
already  expressed  more  than  once,  that  God  will  appear  as  Witness  and  Judge  of  his 
innocence,  and  so  put  an  end  to  this  long  embroilment  (see  oh.  Ix.  and  xiii.).  He  is 
distressed  by  the  doubt  that  God  has  withdrawn  himself  from  him,  and  left  him  to 
drain  the  cup  of  suffering  to  the  dregs.  And,  again,  many  examples  occur  to  him  of 
wicked  men  who  lived  in  happiness  to  a  good  old  age,  even  to  death ;  and  he  dwells  on 
these  pictures  with  a  kind  of  pleasure,  thinking  to  establish  his  position :  the  incom- 
prehensibility of  the  Divine  government. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 17. — Longing  for  the  appearance  of  the  delivering  and  Justifying  God.  L 
Exclamation.  (Vprs.  2 — 5.)  So  bitter  is  his  complaint,  "  his  hand  is  heavy  upon  his 
groaning,"  i.e.  he  must  force  groan  after  groan  out  of  himself.  Oh  that  he  knew  where 
to  find  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  and  that  he  might  have  the  opportunity  of  pleading 
his  cause !  (vers.  3 — 5).  He  possesses  still  "  faith  and  a  good  conscience,"  those  best 
jewels  of  a  Christian  (1  Tim.  i.  5),  and' can  think  of  appearing  before  God,  not  with 
terror,  but  with  confidence.  "  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we 
sonfidence  with  God  "  (1  John  iii.  21). 

II.  DoDBT  (vers.  6 — 9)  of  the  possibility  of  this  intervention  of  God  on  his  behalf. 
He  timidly  thinks  of  the  overwhelming  effect  of  God's  majesty  upon  him  (oorap.  ch.  ix. 
34 ;  xiii.  21).  But  here,  relying  on  the  consciousness  of  innocence,  he  casts  the  doubt 
away.  "  Would  he  contend  with  me  in  his  omnipotence  ?  No ;  he  would  only  attend 
to  me  "  (ver.  6).  It  would  be  seen  that  it  is  a  righteous  man-  who  enters  into  judgment 
with  him,  and  Job  would  escape  his  Judge  (ver.  7).  But  then  this  cheerful  expecta- 
tion is  checked  by  the  thought  that  God  is  nowhere  to  be  found — neither  east  nor  west, 
north  nor  south  (vers.  8, 9),  although  present  in  all  quarters  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8 — 10).  With- 
out the  definite  revelation  of  the  gospel,  we  may  readily  lose  ourselves  in  a  vague  and 
aimless  pantheism.  God  is  everywhere,  yet  nowhere;  present  in  all  things  for  the  intel- 
lect, found  in  none  by  the  heart.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Mediator,  of  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus,  which  resolves  this  contradiction.  God  must  meet  us  in  the  form  of  man,  other- 
wise he  is  but  an  abstraction. 

III.  Reason  or  God's  withdrawal.  (Vers.  10 — 13.)  According  to  Job,  this  is,  that 
although  God  knows  his  innocence,  he  will  not  depart  from  his  resolve  not  to  be  found 
of  him.  Vers.  10 — 12  contain  strong  assertions  of  his  innocence.  God  knows  Job's 
wonted  way  or  manner  of  life ;  and,  if  proved,  he  would  come  out'  like  gold  from  the 
lumace.  His  foot  has  kept  firmly  to  God's  step,  God's  way  he  has  observed,  and  has 
not  turned  aside,  nor  departed  from  the  commandment  of  his  lips.  "  More  than  my 
own  law  I  kept  the  words  of  his  mouth,"  i.e.  more  than  the  dictates  of  pleasure  or  self- 
will  (ver.  12).  "But  he  remains  one,  and  who  will  turn  him"  from  his  design  (comp. 
Ps.  xxxiii.  9 ;  Numb,  xxiii.  19  ;  1  Sara.  xv.  29)? 

rV.  Awe  and  humility  in  the  presence  of  God.  (Vers.  14 — 17.)  God  will  fulfil 
Job's  destiny,  like  that  of  many  others  (ver.  14).  The  thought  of  this  unfathomable 
counsel  of  God  throuj^h  which  Job  must  suffer  fills  him  with  fcarfulness  and  amazement 
(ver.  15).  It  is  God  himself,  not  the  mere  sufferings,  who  has  unnerved  Job  and  over- 
thrown him  (ver.  16).  It  is  not  the  darkness  of  his  trouble  (ch.  xxii.  11)  nor  his  own 
hideous  form  (ch.  xix.  13 — 15)  which  have  stupefied  him.  No,  it  is  God  alone  who  is 
the  cause  of  this  stupor,  who  is  behind  these  sufferings  with  his  incomprehensible 
counsels. 

Here,  again,  we  see  how  deep  is  faith  in  the  heart  of  Job,  how  inextinguishable  the 
longing  and  the  need  for  communion  with  God,  which  is  life  to  him,  and  more  than  life ! 
He  can  bear  pain,  he  can  dispense,  if  need  be,  with  human  sympathy ;  but  he  cannot  bear 
the  absence  of  Godl  As  the  plant  in  the  cellar,  so  the  faitliful  soul  ever  turns  and 
(struggles  towards  the  light ;  and  the  only  Light  of  the  soul  is  God  1 — J. 


en.  xxin.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  401 

Vers.  3 — 13. — The  true  lupport  under  deferred  Judgment.  In  the  bitterness  of  hia 
complaint  and  the  heaviness  of  his  stroke.  Job  makes  known  his  desire  to  appeal 
directly  to  God.  In  the  impossibility  of  this  his  faith  is  more  and  more  severely  tested ; 
but  he  reposes  in  an  assurance  that  the  Divine  eye  is  upon  him,  and  he  is  confident  of  a 
just  and  even  merciful  sentence.  So  does  conscious  integrity  uphold  the  tried  and 
suffering  believer,  over  whom  for  the  present  the  shadows  of  suspicion  gather,  although 
the  sufferer  is  tried  by  deferred  judgment. 

I.  The  demand  for  a  patient  hbabing.  Only  the  consciously  upright  would 
desire  to  plead  with  his  judge.  The  self-accused  tries  to  hide  from  the  keen  eye  of 
detection  and  exposure ;  hut  he  who  knows  himself  to  be  unjustly  accused  may  well 
desire  to  appear  before  a  righteous  tribunal.  It  is  a  high  testimony  to  Job's  character 
that  he  makes  demand  to  be  tried  by  One  who  cannot  err  (vers.  3 — 7).  But  his 
longing  is  not  allayed.  A  further  test  is  applied  to  his  character.  For  the  present,  at 
least,  judgment  is  denied  him.  ' 

II,  Judgment  withheld,  a  further  trial.  To  the  unjustly  condemned  no  severer 
testing  couM  be  given  than  the  withholding  of  the  desii'ed  judgment.  Job's  hope  is  in 
God ;  but  God  is  hidden.  If  he  attempts  to  "  go  forward,"  behold  "  he  is  not  there." 
If  "  backward,"  he  "  cannot  perceive  him."  Turning  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left, 
it  is  tlie  same.  God,  his  Friend,  is  hidden.  His  only  refugees  closed.  How  severely 
is  faith  tried  and  patience  put  to  the  proof  by  the  hiding  of  "God  1  The  struggle  is  a 
spiritual  one.  The  soul  is  cast  upon  the  unseen.  It  is  thrown  back  upon  its  integrity 
and  upon  its  power  to  wait.  It  is  the  supreme  test  of  faith.  It  precedes  the  dawn  of 
the  day  of  vindication,  of  judgment  and  deliverance.  It  is  a  further  weight  upon  the 
already  tried  heart  of  the  patriarch.  To  an  afSicted  spirit  is  added  a  suffering  body, 
and  for  the  present  the  cruel  accusations  of  would-be  friends,  who  mistake  the  dis- 
cipline of  God  far  his  judgment  against  sin. 

HI.  It  18  HERE  that  Job's  faith  in  the  Divine  justice  shines  out  with  clear- 
ness. He  knows  God  would  not  take  advantage  of  his  "great  power "  to  plead  that 
against  him  or  to  crush  him  with  it.  Nay,  rather  he  would  "  put  strength  "  in  the 
poor  suppliant.  He  would  compassionate  the  oppressed,  and  concede  to  him.  So  Job 
comforts  himself  in  the  quiet  repose  upon  the  justice  of  the  Divine  decisions.  The  fruits 
of  early  obedience  and  faith  are  now  gathered.  He  who  sows  in  his  own  heart  the 
seeds  of  Divine  truth  in  earlier  days,  prepares  for  himself  a  harvest  of  consolation  in 
the  days  of  trial  and  adversity.  Job  is  proving  the  blessedness  of  the  man  whose  ways 
please  the  Lord. 

IV,  All  this  is  based  upon  Job's  consciousness  of  personal  integrity.  With 
confidence  he  rebuts  the  accusations  of  his  accusing  friends.  He  rejoices  in  the  assurance 
of  the  Divine  cognizance  of  his  doings:  "He  knoweth  the  way  that  I  take."  Happy  the 
man  who  can  appeal  with  confidence  to  the  searching  of  the  Divine  eye!  Job  may  have 
had  cause  sufficient  to  be  abased  before  God,  but  he  is  conscious  of  innocence  of  the 
charges  preferred  by  his  friends.  Thus  is  falsely  accused  innocence  sustained  when 
its  judgment  is  deferred.  And  Job  appears  a  bright  example  of  the  comfort  derived  in 
affliction  from  faith  in  God  and  consciousness  of  untarnished  integrity, — It.  G. 

Veri.  14 — 17. —  The  hunibled  and  overwhelmed  sufferer.  The  position  of  Job  is  one  of 
confusion  and  unexplained  mystery.  He  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty,  His  punish- 
ment, as  some  affirm  it  to  be,  is  very  heavy.  It  at  times  seems  to  be  greater  than  he  can 
bear.  Yet  he  is  uncondemned  within.  He  holds  fast  to  his  integrity.  Like  his  friends, 
he  interprets  sufferings  into  punishments  for  sin.  Yet  he  is  not  conscious  of  sin,  certainly 
not  of  sin  to  such  a  degree  as  to  merit  such  heavy  judgment.  He  is  confounded.  He  can 
but  yield.  He  believes  in  the  Divine  justice,  although  his  faith  in  it  is  tried  by  the  con- 
flicting convictions  of  his  mind  and  his  inability  to  interpret  the  Divine  ways.  That  his 
own  righteousness  will  shine  out  ultimately  he  is  persuaded.  "When  he  hath  tried  me, 
I  shall  come  forth  as  gold."  In  the  meanwhile  he  ia  overpowered.  The  struggle  is 
severe ;  the  strain  upon  his  faith  is  very  great.  It  is  the  uninterpreted  mystery,  the 
apparent  confliction  of  tlie  Divine  dealings,  that  bows  Job  to  the  earth.  He  is  troubled 
at  the  Divine  presence ;  when  he  thinks  of  God  he  is  afraid,  and  his  heart  is  dejected. 
This  picture  of  the  humbled,  overwhelmed  servant  of  God  holding  fast  his  faith  in  the 
consciouBiieas  of  integrity,  declares  the  true  causes  of  the  support  which  Job  experienced 

JOB.  Sd 


*n  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxm.  1— 17. 

in  his  overwhelming  afflictions  to  he  (1)  o  consciousness  of  integrity ;  {2)  faith  in  the 
Divine  Name ;  (3)  patient  anticipatimi  of  final  vindication. 

I.  Without  THE  ASSUBANCB  OF  PERSONAL  TNTEGHITT  Joh  could  not  he  free  from  the 
Borrows  which  come  of  condemnation.  The  testimony  of  conscience  to  the  wrongness 
and  disobedience  of  life  is  the  keenest  and  most  penetrative  of  afBictions.  It  reaches 
to  the  very  core  of  the  spirit.  The  utmost  sensihility  of  the  soul  is  aroused.  No 
outward  calm  can  allay  this  inner  agitation.  But  if  there  is  peace  within ;  if  the 
soul  is  not  at  war  with  itself;  if  there  is  the  inestimable  consciousness  of  personal 
freedom  from  condemnation,  the  soul  may  writhe  in  its  pain,  but  it  is  upheld  by  the 
assurance  that  the  affliction  comes  not  weighted  with  the  burden  of  retribution. 

II.  It  is  through  this  freedom  from  self-reproach  and  self-condemnation  alone  that 
TKCB  PAITH  IN  GoD  Can  be  sustained.  Job  may  be  overwhelmed  at  the  thought  of  God, 
but  he  lacljs  not  faith  in  him ;  and  there  is  no  sense  of  buried  wrong  weakening  his 
trust,  or  impairing  the  comfort  that  comes  from  a  belief  in  the  deep,  if  hidden.  Divine 
approval. 

III.  And  it  is  this  which  supports  him  in  the  hope  op  a  final  vindioation.  The 
unjustly  condemned  may  wait.  Trouble  may  overshadow  him,  he  may  be  heavily 
burdened,  his  heart  may  quake  and  fear,  but  he  knows  he  shall  at  last  rise  superior 
to  all  aspersions  of  evil-4oing.  Herein  lies  the  secret  of  a  sustaining  peace  in  the  midst 
of  the  severest  of  earth's  trials ;  this  is  the  true  ground  of  hope,  this  the  encourage- 
inent  to  sustaining  faith. — B.  G.    . 

Ver.  2. — The  hitter  complaint.  Job's  comforters  have  failed.  Their  many  words 
have  not  lightened,  his  troubles.  On  the  contrary,  they  have  aggravated  them.  To 
external  disaster  has  been  added  cruel  misunderstanding  and  false  accusation.  Of  all 
this  Job  naturally  complains  most  bitterly.  Many  troubles  are  softened  with  time.  It 
is  not  BO  with  his.  The  same  melancholy  despondency,  the  same  cry  of  agony,  the 
same  grievous  complaining,  are  still  with  him. 

I.  It  is  natural  to  give  expbbssion  to  grief.  In  the  East  this  is  done  with  great 
demonstration,  and  even  ostentation.  Any  extravagance  is  foolish ;  self-restraint  is 
certainly  more  manly  than  a  wild  abandonment  to  sorrow.  Yet  it  is  neither  necessary 
nor  desirable  to  suppress  all  signs  of  feeling.  God,  who  has  made  the  fountain  of  teais, 
cannot  require  it  to  be  always  sealed.  There  is  a  relief  in  the  natural  expression  of 
sorrow.  To  hide  it  in  the  bosom  is  to  injure  the  soul.  Extreme  reserve  and  self- 
restraint  may  lead  to  insanity.  We  are  more  likely  to  think  unjust  thoughts  of  God 
when  we  brood  over  our  wrongs  in  secret  than  when  we  venture  to  give  an  external 
expression  to  them. 

II.  The  greatest  grief  exceeds  expression.  Job  feels  that  this  is  the  case  with 
his  sorrow.  Bitter  as  his  complaint  is,  his  stroke  is  heavier  than  his  groaninii.  We 
are  tempted  to  exaggerate  the  smaller  troubles  of  life ;  but  we  cannot  find  adequate 
expression  for  the  greater  ones.  They  who  have  never  suffered  from  those  troubles 
cannot  understand  how  keenly  they  are  felt.  It  is,  therefore,  unjust  to  jud^e  of  the 
Complaining  spirit  of  other  men,  as  the  three  friends  did  of  Job's.  On  the  other  hand, 
inexpressible  grief  is  perfectly  understood  by  God.  It  is  no  drawback  to  his  sympathy 
that  men  cannot  give  full  expression  to  their  feelings,  because  he  reads  the  heart. 

III.  The  bitter  complaint  of  qriep  shoitld  lead  to  prayer.  This  is  the  case 
with  Job ;  and  after  one  brief  utterance  of  his  burdened  soul,  the  suffering  man  turns 
at  once  to  God  (see  ver.  2).  Then  he  must  do  more  than  give  expression  to  grief. 
While  God  listens  patiently  to  the  complaints  of  his  suffering  children,  it  is  not  a 
worthy  thing  on  their  part  only  to  burden  him  with  those  complaints.  Submission, 
obedience,  and  trust  should  have  a  part  in  the  utterance  to  God. 

IV.  No  HUMAN  grief  CAN  EQUAL  THAT  OF  CHRIST'S  SORROWS.  Job's  Bufferings 
seemed  to  be  unique.  But  they  were  fearfully  surpassed  by  what  Christ  endured.  To 
know  that  some  one  has  suffered  more  is  not  to  hghten  the  present  sufferer's  load.  On 
the  contrary,  this  fact  only  makes  the  world  look  the  darker  and  the  more  miserable. 
But  there  are  characteristics  of  Christ's  sufferings  that  should  help  other  sufferers. 
He  shows  us  how  to  bear  suffering.  Moie  than  that,  his  suffering  brings  healing  to 
others.  "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed  "  (Isa.  liii.  5).  Thus  the  sufferer  may  look 
for  saving  deliverance  from  hia  own  trouble  to  the  Christ  who  suffered  for  binj. — W.  F.  4. 


OH.  XXIII.  1-17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  *03 

Ver.  3. — 2%*  search  for  Ood.  I.  Its  soubcb.  Job  is  prompted  to  seek  God  by  his 
terrible  troubles.  The  false  accusations  make  him  the  more  anxious  to  find  the  just 
Judge,  who  can  clear  up  the  dreadful  misunderstandings  and  vindicate  his  injured  cause. 
Thus  the  innocent  man  in  trouble  needs  Grod.  Still  more  does  the  guilty  man  ;  for 
no  one  can  deliver  from  sin  but  he  against  whom  one  has  sinned.  Although  it  is  most 
evident  that  many  who  thus  need  Grod  are  not  actively  seeking  for  him,  yet,  even  if 
held  back  by  fear  or  distracted  by  worldliness,  all  men  have  somewhere  in  the  depths 
of  their  hearts  the  instinct  of  hunger  for  God.  We  need  God,  and  we  can  have  no  rest 
till  we  find  him. 

II.  Its  hope.  Job  believes  that,  if  only  he  can  find  God  and  come  to  his  seat,  justice 
will  be  done,  and  right  will  be  apparent ;  for  Job  is  only  thinking  of  vindication.  No 
doubt  that  result  will  follow.  But  others  also  enter  into  the  great  human  hope  for 
God.  If  he  were  only  to  vindicate  the  righteous,  the  great  multitude  of  men  could 
hope  for  little  from  him.  But  the  great  Judge  who  does  this  is  the  compassionate 
Father,  who  has  pity  on  his  children's  needs  apart  from  their  deserts.  Thus  the  hope 
turns  to  the  mercy  of  God  for  deliverance  and  blessing.  Still,  it  is  not  wise  to  separate 
these  two  forms  of  the  hope.  God  can  only  bless  by  leading  us  to  righteousness ;  and 
it  is  really  for  our  good  that  he  is  just.  We  need  God  not  only  that  he  may  judge  the 
righteous  cause,  but  also  that  he  may  make  the  sinner  righteous. 

III.  Its  difficulty.  Job  expresses  a  deep,  heartfelt  desire  with  great  anxiety.  He 
has  not  yet  found  God.  Others  have  been  in  the  same  condition — longing  for  God,  yet 
finding  him  not.  Where  is  the  difficulty  ?  1.  God  is  a  Spirit.  If  we  try  to  find  God 
by  earthly  means  we  must  fail.  He  is  not  hidden  among  the  mountains  or  above  the 
clouds.  He  is  simply  invisible  by  nature.  We  must  look  for  him  in  spiritual  ways. 
2.  We  are  sinful.  Nothing  so  blinds  us  to  God  as  sin.  This  first  of  all  banishes  us 
to  a  great  distance  from  God,  and  then  makes  darkness  about  our  way  back.  3.  Lifa 
is  often  perylexing  and  sorrowful.  Job  had  lost  the  vision  of  God  in  his  sorrow,  rather 
than  through  sin.  So  had  Christ  on  the  cross  when  he  cried,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Great  grief  seems  to  blot  out  the  heavens  and  leave  us  in 
desolation. 

IV.  Its  bewabd.  Job  did  find  God  at  last  (ch.  xlii.  5).  God  has  promised  that 
they  who  seek  him  earnestly  shall  find  him  (Prov.  viii.  17),  and  Christ  that  if  men 
seek  they  shall  find  (Matt.  vii.  7).  1.  Ood  reveals  himsdf  to  faith.  We  believe  in 
order  that  we  may  see,  trust  in  order  that  we  may  know.  This  is  true  of  all  know- 
ledge of  persons.  2.  God  is  seen  in  Christ.  Philip  expressed  the  soul's  desire  for  God 
when  he  said,  "Lord,  showus  the  Father, and  it  sufBoeth  us;"  and  then  Christ  declared 
where  the  revelation  of  God  was  to  be  seen:  "He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the 
Father  "  (John  xiv.  8,  9).  3.  The  full  vision  of  Ood  is  dependent  on  purity  of  heart. 
Some  knowledge  of  God  can  be  had  without  this;  but  we  cannot  see  him  as  he  is  till 
we  are  like  him  (Matt.  v.  8).— W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  unseen  Ood.  Job  enlarg,4ii  on  the  'idea  of  his  search  for  God  and 
the  efforts  that  he  has  vainly  made  to  find  bim.  God  is  still  invisible ;  searching  has 
not  found  him. 

I.  The  physical  impossibility  op  seeiwg  God.  There  is  more  to  be  said  for 
modem  agnosticism  than  for  eighteenth-century  deism.  Pure  rationalism  will  not  find 
God.  Physical  science  cannot  discover  him.  The  animal  is  dissected,  the  metal  is 
melted  in  the  crucible,  but  the  analysis  reveals  not  Divinity.  We  sweep  the  heavens 
with  the  telescope,  and  can  see  no  Deity  enthroned  above  the  stars.  But  we  are  very 
foolish  if  we  expect  to  find  God  in  any  of  these  ways.  He  is  neither  seen  by  the  bodily 
oye  nor  discovered  by  the  scientific  faculty.  Science,  indeed,  points  to  causation,  and 
reveals  order  and  thought;  but  she  does  not  say  how  these  things  came  to  be.  Katural 
Uheology  prepares  the  way  for  the  revelation  of  God ;  or,  if  it  may  be  said  that  it  is 
u  revelation  of  God,  still  this  comes  only  in  such  a  large  and  confusing  idea  that  we 
cannot  find  in  it  what  we  need — the  revelation  of  our  Father  in  heaven. 

II.  The  mobal  difficulty  of  seeing  God.  Job's  search  was  not  in  regions  of 
uoieuce.  He  looked  abroad  on  the  great  world,  aud  he  probed  into  the  deep  musings  of 
his  own  heart,  but  not  as  a  philosopher  seeking  for  a  scientific  explanation  of  the 
Wiiivejse,    '    w     bis  deep  digtreis  that  drove  him  to  God,    IJo  miss«4  God  in  life,  in 


404  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxm,  1—17, 

the  providential  control  of  human  affairs.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  see  God  in  this 
strangely  confused  human  world,  where  so  many  things  go  wrong,  and  where  so  little 
seems  to  he  done  to  keep  them  right.  In  his  perplexity  and  distress  man  cries  out, 
"  Where  is  God  ?  If  there  is  indeed  a  God,  why  does  he  not  declare  himself?  why  does 
he  not  put  forth  his  hand  and  rectify  the  world  that  so  greatly  needs  him  ?  "  What- 
ever may  be  the  theoretical  scepticism  that  gathers  round  problems  of  science  and 
philosophy,  the  moral  doubt  that  springs  from  the  experience  of  injustice  and  misery 
is  much  more  keenly  felt. 

III.  The  spieitual  capacity  to  bee  God.  We  cannot  find  him  hy  means  of  our 
philosophy ;  we  miss  him  in  the  dark  struggles  of  man's  world  of  action  and  suffering. 
But  why  ?  Because  we  are  looking  for  him  in  wrong  directions.  The  true  vision  of 
God  is  only  to  he  seen  by  means  of  spiritual  fellowship  with  him.  Meanwhile, 
although  this  is  hard  to  obtain,  we  may  console  ourselves  with  the  knowledge  that  if  he 
does  indeed  exist,  his  being  does  not  become  shadowy  and  unreal  just  because  we  do  not 
see  him.  It  is  desirable  that  we  should  have  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  our 
Father,  but  even  before  we  have  attained  to  this,  even  while  we  are  blundering  and 
stumbling  in  the  darkness,  God  is  truly  existing,  and  is  ruling  over  all.  Our  ignorance 
does  not  limit  God's  being,  our  blindness  does  not  cripple  his  activity.  We  cannot 
see  him ;  we  find  it  hard  to  trace  his  purposes  among  the  tangled  threads  of  life ;  all 
looks  dark  and  aimless.     Yet  God  is  God,  and  therefore  he  will  not  desert  his  creatures. 

"  God's  in  his  heaven, 
Ail's  light  with  the  world." 

(Browning.) 

W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  10. — OocPi  knowledge  and  man's  discipline.  I.  God's  knowledob.  1.  Ths 
/act.  Job  has  just  been  owning  his  difSculty  in  finding  God.  He  searches  in  all  direc- 
tions, forward  and  backward,  on  the  left  hand  and  on  the  right,  and  he  cannot  discover 
God  (vers.  8,  9).  But  although  it  is  so  hard  for  him  to  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  God, 
he  is  quite  certain  that  God  knows  him.  We  are  known  by  God  before  we  think  of 
acknowledging  him,  and  when  we  are  bewildered  with  the  mystery  of  life  all  is  clear 
and  open  to  God.  2.  Its  scope.  God  knows  the  way  that  his  servants  take.  (1)  Past 
experiences.  He  knows  what  we  have  had  to  contend  with,  and  why  our  lives  have  been 
vexed  and  tried.  (2)  Present  circumstances.  At  the  very  moment  when  we  have 
some  new  difficulty  to  face,  some  new  height  to  climb,  or  some  new  snare  to  avoid, 
God  is  with  us,  perfectly  understanding  the  whole  situation.  (3)  Future  scenes.  One 
step  is  enough  for  us,  because  God  knows  all  that  lies  before  us.  Although  our  way 
may  seem  tu  be  leading  to  impossible  regions,  he  who  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning 
can  lead  us  through.  3.  Its  consequences.  If  God  knows  our  way,  we  have  not  to 
travel,  like  Columbus,  over  untried  seas.  The  whole  route  has  been  mapped  out  by  God. 
We  cannot  be  lost  if  he  who  knows  our  way  is  our  Guide.  Gordon's  favourite  passage 
from  Browning  shows  the  right  spirit  of  one  who  trusts  this  truth — 

"  I  go  to  prove  my  soul. 
I  see  my  way  as  birds  their  trackless  way. 
I  shall  Bi-rivel    What  time,  what  circuit  first, 
I  ask  not ;  but  unless  God  send  his  hail 
Or  blinding  fireballs,  sleet  or  stifling  snow. 
In  some  time,  his  good  time,  I  shall  arrive. 
He  guides  me,  and  the  bird,    In  his  good  time." 

II.  Man's  diboiplike.  Job  is  now  confident  that  when  God  has  tried  him  he  will 
come  forth  as  gold.  1.  Its  sov/rce.  The  suffering  man  holds  to  the  idea  that  his  trouble 
comes  from  God.  All  along  he  has  not  perceived  Satan's  share  in  it.  Therefore  his 
faith  is  the  more  remarkable.  He  is  right  to  some  extent,  because  his  trouble  is  only 
what  God  permits.  God  may  not  be  the  direct  agent  of  a  person's  affliction.  Thii 
may  come  from  the  cruelty  of  men  or  from  other  undetected  causes.  Yet  it  is  all 
within  the  restraint  of  God.  2.  Its  process.  Job  perceives  that,  he  is  being  tried  by 
God.  This  is  the  first  time  that  he  has  given  evidence  of  holding  such  an  idea. 
Hitherto  he  has  been  simply  di!>mayed  and  distrusted  at  the  problem  of  suffering.     He 


OH.  mn.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  405 

has  had  no  theory  to  oppose  to  his  friends'  orthodox  notion  that  it  is  the  merited 
punishmeat  of  sin.  That  that  notion  was  wrong,  experience  and  observation  have 
made  him  see  quite  clearly.  But  hitherto  he  has  not  been  able  to  supply  an  alter- 
native idea.  Now  there  dawns  on  him  a  perception  of  the  disciplinary  purpose  of 
suffering.  The  husbandman  purges  the  vine-branch  because  it  is  fiuitfal  (John  xv.  2). 
The  father  chastises  his  son  because  he  loves  him  (Heb.  xii.  6).  God  tries  his  servant, 
not  to  punish  him,  but  because  he  values  him.  3.  Its  aim.  That  the  sufferer  may 
come  forth  as  gold.  Job  will  have  his  innocence  vindicated.  A  deeper  result  than 
vindication,  however,  is  the  perfecting  of  the  soul  through  suffering.  The  fire  not  only 
tests,  it  refines.  4.  Its  success.  The  end  aimed  at  will  be  attained.  The  assurance  of 
this  lies  in  the  previous  thought  of  God's  knowledge.  He  does  not  need  to  assay  the 
soul  in  order  to  discover  for  himself  whether  it  is  of  true  gold.  He  knows  the  worth 
of  his  servants.  He  adapts  their  discipline  to  their  requirements.  It  seems  dispro- 
portionate, but  it  is  suitable ;  for  God  knows  the  way  of  his  people ;  therefore  he  will 
bring  them  forth  as  gold. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  11, 12. — A  faithful  life.  I.  Its  cojirse.  1.  A  course  of  conduct.  Job  speaks 
of  his  foot  holding,  etc.  He  is  reviewing  his  actions.  It  would  have  been  of  little  use 
for  him  to  have  vindicated  his  creed  and  his  sentiments  if  his  conduct  had  been  faith- 
less. The  most  important  question  is  as  to  how  a  man  lives,  not  as  to  what  he  thinks 
or  how  he  feels.  2.  A  continuous  course.  It  is  a  way,  and  Job  has  had  to  keep  to  it.  A 
momentary  spasm  of  virtue  will  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Divine  Law.  To 
achieve  a  single  heroic  deed  that  makes  the  world  ring  with  one's  fame,  and  then  sink 
into  idle  apathy,  is  not  the  way  to  earn  the  commendation,  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant  1 "  3.  A  Divine  course.  It  is  easj'  to  persist  in  one's  own  way.  The 
difiSoulty  is  to  leave  that  and  to  accept  and  follow  faithfully  in  God's  way.  Yet  he  has 
marked  out  the  course  of  service  for  every  one  of  his  people,  and  the  plain  duty  is  to 
find  it  and  follow  it.  4.  An  arduous  course.  It  is  not  easy  to  keep  to  God's  steps. 
The  way  is  narrow  (Matt.  vii.  13,  14).  Many  temptations  urge  us  to  forsake  it  for 
flowery  paths  or  for  the  broad  road.  The  Christian  life  is  a  course  of  self-denial.  The 
path  leads  uphill.  Even  while  we  only  think  of  standing  still  we  are  really  slipping 
back.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  Christian  life  is  necessarily  a  growth  and 
a  progress.  There  is  danger  of  worse  than  stagnation,  of  declension  and  decay.  We 
may  have  done  wesU  in  the  past,  and  yet  have  been  hindered  later  on  in  life.  To  be 
true  Christians  we  must  be  ever  watchful,  earnest,  active  in  pressing  forward  along 
God's  way. 

II.  Its  inspiration.  How  is  it  possible  to  be  faithful,  keeping  continuously  to 
Goil's  way  ?  1.  By  the  guidance  of  revelation.  Job  has  been  following  God's  com- 
mandments. We  cannot  follow  God's  way  without  the  aid  of  light  from  heaven. 
Instinct  and  conscience  are  our  natural  guides ;  but  instinct  is  blind,  and  conscience 
has  been  in  some  cases  perverted.  Therefore  God  has  given  us  "  the  more  sure  word  of 
prophecy."  God's  Word  is  a  lamp  to  the  feet  of  his  people.  This  is  its  chief  object. 
Difficulties  are  felt  as  to  certain  questions  about  the  Bible,  e.g.  how  to  reconcile  Genesis 
with  geology,  how  to  settle  the  relation  of  the  Law  to  the  prophets,  how  to  harmonize 
the  gospel  narratives.  But  these  questions  do  not  touch  the  main  purpose  of  the  Bible, 
which  is  to  be  a  guide  to  conduct.  The  righteousness  of  the  ten  commandments,  the 
blessedness  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and,  above  all,  the  glory  of  Christ,  still 
shine  from  the  sacred  page  as  beacon-lights  undimmed  by  the  clouds  of  controversy 
that  gather  about  quite  secondary  points.  2.  In  the  power  of  affection.  Job  basset 
a  supreme  value  on  the  words  of  God's  mouth.  Their  truth  and  goodness  and  heauly 
won  the  heart  of  the  author  of  the  hundred  and  nineteenth  psalm.  We  have  still 
greater  attractions  in  the  New  Testament.  Christ,  the  living  Word  of  God,  draws 
men  to  himself  by  his  love  and  by  his  sacrifice  of  himself,  so  thiit  when  he  is  known  and 
loved  faithfulness  becomes  possible  for  his  sake.  Christians  are  called  to  walk,  not  only 
in  the  steps  which  God  has  marked  out  for  them,  but  in  those  which  Christ  has 
trodden,  which  he  has  made  sacred  by  his  own  presence. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  13. — The  inflexibility  of  Qod.  I.  The  inflexibility  of  God  is  essential 
ro  Bia  NATUBK.     He  has  not  the  reasons  for  changing  that  we  have,     1.  He  knows  all 


406  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  mn.  1—17. 

things.  Men  decide  from  partial  knowledge,  and  then  fuller  information  leads  them 
to  change  their  minds.  But  God  knows  everything  fiom  the  first.  2.  He  is  strong. 
Men  are  persuaded  against  their  better  judgment,  or  they  weakly  yield  to  temptation. 
But  God  is  perfect  in  will  and  character.  He  cannot  be  urged  to  do  what  he  knows  is 
not  the  absolutely  best.  3.  He  is  good.  It  is  well  that  men  can  and  do  change,  for 
much  of  the  past  course  of  the  world's  history  is  wrong,  and  the  ouly  hope  for  man  is 
in  his  mending  his  ways.  But  God  has  been  faultless  from  the  first ;  there  is  nothing 
for  him  to  repent  of. 

II.  The  inflexibility  of  God  is  a  waenino  against  man's  pbesumption.  The 
danger  is  in  judging  God  by  man's  changeable  standards.  Thus  people  come  to  think 
that  he  will  not  really  perform  what  he  threatens.  They  trust  to  the  influence  of  time 
in  melting  away  the  Divine  purposes  against  sin  ;  or  they  rely  on  their  own  urgency 
in  attempting  to  persuade  God  not  to  accomplish  his  will ;  or  they  imagine  that  in 
some  way  they  shall  be  able  to  elude  the  grasp  of  his  Law.  All  these  courses  show 
a  foolish  misapprehension  of  the  firmness  and  strength  of  God.  They  are  false  because 
he  is  true. 

III.  The  inflexibilitt  of  God  is  an  encoubaoement  fob  faith.  1.  In  his 
Law.  He  has  revealed  bis  will,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  he  will  keep  to  it.  He  is  not 
like  a  fickle  despot,  whose  shifting  moods  baffle  the  watchfulness  of  the  most  sub- 
servient courtier.  When  we  once  know  his  will,  we  may  rely  upon  it  that  this  is  per- 
manent. 2.  In  his  promises.  God  has  revealed  himself  in  gracious  purposes.  These 
purposes  he  will  never  abandon.  The  ingratitude  of  man  does  not  destroy  tne  good 
will  of  God.  A  weaker  being  would  be  worn  out  with  the  constant  rebellion  and  the 
utter  unworthinesB  of  his  children.  But  God  is  infinitely  patient.  In  spite  of  the 
world's  folly  and  sin,  he  holds  inflexibly  to  his  purpose  of  savins  and  redeeming  it.  It 
cannot  be  that  of  all  the  Divine  attributes  mercy  only  is  fragile  and  transitory; 
that  while  God's  truth  and  justice  remain,  this  one  characteristic  may  be  broken  down, 
and  may  vanish  away.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  explicitly  revealed  to  us  over  and  over 
again  that  "  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever." 

IV.  The  inflexibility  of  God  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  varying  treat- 
ment of  us.  He  has  no  rigid,  uniform  method  of  action.  He  adapts  his  treat- 
ment of  us  to  our  conduct  and  our  need.  His  inflexibility  is  in  his  character,  not  in 
details  of  action.  The  very  fact  that  he  is  changeless  in  himself  leads  to  the  result 
that  he  acts  differently  under  different  circumstances.  We  are  governed  not  by  an 
iron  law,  but  by  a  faithful  God.  1.  In  answer  to  prayer.  God  "is  not  changed  or 
bent  by  our  prayer.  But  he  sees  fit  to  do,  in  response  to  our  confidence  in  him,  what 
he  would  not  think  well  to  do  without  it.  2.  In  the  redemption  of  the  world,  i'his  is 
a  new  action.  The  gospel  declares  a  fresh  Divine  movement.  Bui  all  of  it  springs 
from  the  eternal  purposes  of  God ;  and  all  of  it  is  in  accordance  with  his  changeless 
character  of  love  and  righteousness. — W.  F,  A. 

Vers.  15,  16. — Troubled  at  the  presence  of  Ood.  I.  This  is  natueaIi  in  obeat 
DISTRESS.  The  soul  is  plunged  into  grief;  like  Jacob,  the  desponding  sufferer  exclaims, 
"All  these  things  are  against  me  "  (Gen.  xlii.  36).  Then  he  comes  to  regard  God  as 
the  Source  of  his  misfortunes.  God  seems  to  be  his  Enemy,  and  any  approach  of  God 
is  regarded  with  apprehension,  as  bringing  fresh  trouble.  We  have  to  learn  not  to  form 
our  judgment  of  God  in  our  darker  moments.  It  is  diGBcult  to  have  any  well-balanced 
opinion  when  we  are  plunged  in  deep  distress.  While  the  knife  is  in  him  it  is  possible 
that  the  patient  may  think  the  surgeon  rough,  cruel,  evea  malignant.  But  he  is  not 
then  in  a  fit  state  for  forming  an  opinion. 

II.  This  is  bight  m  the  guilt  of  sin.  The  wonder  is  that  people  sin  with  so  little 
reflection  as  to  how  God  regards  them,  and  that  they  are  often  quite  ready  to  meet 
him  without  a  thought  of  their  great  guilt.  Thus  it  is  said  of  a  bad  man's  end,  that 
"  he  died  like  a  lamb  "I  As  though  his  dull  and  senseless  departure  from  this  life  were 
any  guarantee  of  his  spiritual  state.  But  when  conscience  is  roused,  it  shrinks  from 
the  searching  gaze  of  God.  Blind  eyes  may  be  turned  to  the  sun,  at  which  seeing 
eyes  cannot  glance  without  pain.  It  is  not  only  that  God  can  punish  sin.  There  is 
a  sense  of  shame  in  the  thought  that  One  so  good  and  holy  should  ever  see  it.  Then 
it  is  all  adirect  offence  against  him.    When  the  sinner  meets  God,  h«  encouuteri  Oat 


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


407 


whom  he  has  grievously  wronged.    Lastly,  as  Ood  is  our  Father,  there  ia  an  especial 
ground  of  trouble  in  his  rebellious  children  meeting  him. 

III.  This  may  be  overcome  by  a  bbtteb  aoquaintanob  with  Gk)D.  The  fear 
should  not  be  perpetual.  Something  is  wrong,  or  it  would  not  have  arisen,  and  that 
which  caused  the  fear  can  and  ought  to  be  removed.  It  is  not  well  that  any  man 
should  continue  to  live  in  a  chill  fear  of  Ood.  In  the  New  Testament  Ood  is  so 
revealed  that  all  terror  of  him  may  be  dissipated.  1.  As  our  Father.  If  we  thought 
him  hard  and  stem,  we  were  unjust.  Christ  has  revealed  his  true  nature  in  his  Father- 
hood. Therefore  the  idea  that  Gbd's  presence  is  itself  terrible  comes  from  ignorance. 
Following  the  light  of  Christ,  we  discover  that  God  is  the  home  of  our  souls,  and  that 
no  place  is  so  safe,  or  so  peaceful  and  happy,  as  where  his  presence  is  felt.  2.  As  our 
Redeemer.  The  just  fear  that  arises  from  sin  cannot  be  rightly  expelled  until  the 
cause  of  it  is  removed.  As  God  must  be  angry  with  sin,  it  would  only  be  a  dangerous 
deception  that  covered  up  and  hid  the  thought  of  his  wrath.  But  Gorl  himself  has 
provided  the  best,  the  only  right  way  of  dispelling  the  fear  of  bis  presence  by  giving  us 
a  remedy  for  sin.  Now,  as  it  ia  he  who  sends  the  remedy,  we  have  to  know  his 
intentions  in  order  that  we  may  no  longer  live  in  fear  of  him.  The  very  fact  that 
Christ  was  sent  from  heaven  to  save  the  world  from  sin  shows  how  terrible  the  evil 
was ;  but  it  also  shows  how  deep  and  stron:;  the  love  of  God  must  be— deeper  than  his 
wrath,  outlasting  his  chastisements. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XXrV. 


The  geUBral  subject  of  this  chapter  Is  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  whose  proceedings 
and  their  results  are  traced  out  in  detail 
(vers.  2 — 24).  A  single  note  of  perplexity 
(ver.  1)  forms  a  sufficient  introduction ;  and 
a  single  note  of  oballenge  a  saffioient  epi- 
logue (ver.  25). 

Ver.  1. — Why,  seeing  times  are  not  hid- 
den from  the  Almighty.  By  "  times  "  seem 
to  be  meant  God's  special  periods  of  ex- 
hibiting himself  in  action  as  the  moral 
Governor  of  the  world,  vindicating  the 
righteous,  and  taking  vengeance  upon  sin- 
ners. Such  "  times  "  are  frequently  spoken 
of  in  the  prophetical  Scriptures  as  "days 
of  the  Lord"  (see  Isa.  ii.  12 ;  iii.  18;  iv.  1 ; 
xiii.  6,  9;  Joel  L  15;  ii.  1,  11;  Obad.  15; 
Zeph.  1.  7,  14,  etc.).  They  are,  of  course, 
"not  hidden"  from  him,  seeing  that  it  is 
he  who  determines  on  them  beforehand,  and, 
when  their  fixed  date  is  come,  makes  them 
special  "days,"  or  "times,"  different  from 
all  others.  Do  they  who  know  him  not  see 
his  days?  i'.e.  why  are  even  they,  who  know 
and  serve  God,  kept  in  the  dark  as  tu  these 
"  times,"  so  that  they  do  not  foresee  them 
or  know  when  they  are  coming  ?  This  is 
to  Job  a  great  perplexity. 

Ver.  2. — Some  remove  the  landmarks. 
(On  this  form  of  wickedness,  see  Deut.  xix. 
14;  x.ivii.  17;  Prov.  xxii.  28;  xxiii.  10; 
Hos,  T.  10.)  Where  neighbouring  proper- 
ties aro  not  divided  by  fences  of  any  kind, 
as  in  tlie  East  generally,  the  only  way  of 
distitiguishing  between  one  man's  laud  and 


another's  is  by  termini,  or  "landmarks," 
which  are  generally  low  stone  metes  or 
bourns,  placed  at  intervals  on  the  boundary- 
line.  An  easy  form  of  robbery  was  to  dis- 
place these  bourns,  putting  them  further 
back  on  one's  neighbour's  land.  They 
violently  take  away  flocks.  Others  openly 
drive  off  their  neighbours'  flocks  from  their 
pastures,  mix  them  with  their  own  flocks, 
and  say  that  they  are  theirs  (comp.  ch.  i. 
15 — 17).  And  feed  thereof;  rather,  an<{/i?«(i 
fhem  (as  in  the  margin) ;  i.e.  pasture  them. 

Ver.  3. — They  drive  away  the  ass  of  the 
fatherless.  This  was  another  form  of  op- 
pression. "  Whose  ox  have  I  taken  ?  or 
whose  ass  have  I  taken?  or  whom  have  I 
defrauded  ?  whom  have  I  oppressed  ?  "  says 
Samuel,  on  laying  down  his  judgeship  (1 
Sam.  xii.  3).  The  "  fatherless  "  were  par- 
ticularly liable  to  such  ill  treatment,  seeing 
that  they  had  lost  their  natural  protector. 
They  take  the  widow's  ox  for  a  pledge.  It 
may  be  true  that  this  was  nowhere  a  legal 
offence,  not  even  among  the  Hebrews  (Lee) ; 
but  it  was  a  real  act  of  oppression,  and  forms 
a  fitting  counterpart  to  the  injury  done  to 
the  orphan.  (On  the  natural  tendency  of 
selfish  men  to  bear  hard  on  these  two  classes, 
see  Exod.  xxit  22 ;  Deut.  xxiv.  17 ;  xxvii. 
19  ;  Ps.  xciv.  6;  Isa.  i.  23;  i.  2;  Jer.  v. 
28 ;  Zech.  vii.  10.) 

Ver.  4. — They  turn  the  needy  ont  of  the 
way.  Either  "  they  force  poor  men  to  turn 
out  of  the  road  when  tliey  nre  using  it,  and 
wait  till  they  have  passed "  (compare  the 
recent  practice  of  the  Japanese  daimios),  or 
"they  make  the  highways  so  dangerous 
with  their  violence  that  they  compel  the 
poor  and  needy  to  seek  byways  for  safety  " 


408 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xxn.  1 — ^25 


(Jndg.  V.  6).  The  second  hemisticli  favours 
the  latter  interpretation.  The  poor  of  the 
earth  (or,  the  meek  of  the  earth)  hide  them- 
ielves  together.  In  the  East  there  have 
always  been  superior  and  subject  races,  as 
well  as  proud  ncibles  and  down-trodden  men 
of  the  same  race.  It  is  not  clear  of  which 
of  these  two  Job  speaks.  The  former  were 
often  huuted  out  of  all  the  desirable  lands, 
and  forced  to  fly  to  rocks  and  caves  and 
boles  in  the  ground,  whence  they  were 
known  as  "  Troglodytes."  The  latter,  less 
frequently,  banded  together,  and  withdrew 
to  remote  and  sequestered  spots,  where  they 
might  hope  to  live  unmolested  by  their  op- 
pressors (Heb.  xi.  38). 

Yer.  5. — Behold,  as  wild  asses  in  the 
desert,  go  they  forth  to  their  work.  Plun- 
dering bands  of  wicked  marauders  scour  the 
desert,  like  troops  of  wild  asses,  going  forth 
early  to  their  work,  and  late  taking  rest — 
rising  betimes  for  a  prey,  and  generally 
finding  it,  since  the  wilderness  yieldeth 
food  for  them  imd  for  their  children.  They 
are  sure  to  find  some  plunder  or  other  ere 
the  day  is  over. 

Ver.  6. — They  reap  every  one  his  com  in 
the  field.  AiVhen  tliey  liave  scoured  the 
desert,  the  marauders  approach  the  culti- 
vated giound  bordering  on  it,  and  thence 
carry  off,  each  of  tliem,  a  quantity  of  "fod- 
der," or  "  provender  "  (Revised  Version),  for 
tlie  Bustentation  of  their  horses.  And  they 
gather  the  vintage  of  the  wicked;  rather, 
as  in  the  margin,  and  the  wiclted  gather  the 
vintage.  (So  Bosenmiiller  and  Professor 
Lee.)  Sometimes  they  burst  into  the  vine- 
yards, and  rob  them,  carrying  off  the  ripe 
grapes. 

Ver.  7. — They  cause  the  naked  to  lodge 
without  clothing;  rather,  (hey  lie  all  night 
naked,  without  clothing.  The  marauders 
are  still  the  subject  of  the  narratiTe.  When 
engaged  in  their  raids,  they  endure  to  pass 
the  night  without  clothing,  as  the  Bedouins 
are  said  to  do  to  this  day,  so  that  they  have 
no  covering  in  the  cold.  They  are  so  bent 
upon  plunder  that  they  do  not  mind  thess 
inconveniences. 

Ver.  8. — They  are  wet  with  the  showeri 
of  the  mountains,  and  embrace  the  rock  for 
want  of  a  shelter.  Further  unpleasant 
consequences  of  marauding,  but  endured 
without  complaint  by  the  wild  robber- 
tribes. 

Ver.  9. — They  pluck  the  fatherless  from 
the  breast.  Other  oppressors,  not  of  the 
marauding  class,  but  dwellers  in  to^vns(ver. 
12),  are  so  cruel  that  they  tear  the:  unweaned 
child  of  tlie  debtor  from  the  mother's  breast, 
as  satisfaction  tor  a  debt,  and  carry  him  off 
Into  slavery  (comp.  2  Kings  iv.  1 ;  Neh.  v. 
5).  And  take  a  pledge  of  the  poor;  literally, 
take  in  pledge  thai  which  is  on  th^  poor — in 


other  words,  their  clothing.  They  will  not 
lend  to  them  on  any  other  terms,  and  so 
force  them  to  part  with  their  garments,  and 
go  about  naked.  Even  Hebrew  creditors 
seem  to  have  done  this  (Exod.  xxii.  26 ; 
Deat.  xxiv.  12,  13);  and  the  Mosaic  Law 
did  not  forbid  the  practice,  but  only  required 
the  creditor  to  let  the  debtor  have  his  gar- 
ment at  niglit,  that  he  might  sleep  in  it 
(Exod.  xxii.  27 ;  Deut.  xxiv.  13). 

Ver.  10. — They  oaase  him  to  go  naked 
without  clothing;  rather,  tliey  go  ndlced 
without  clothing.  The  effects  of  the  oppres- 
sion on  its  victims  are  now  traced.  First 
of  all,  the  poor  man,  whose  only  wrap  or 
cloak  has  been  taken  in  pledge,  is  com- 
pelled to  go  naked,  or  almost  naked,  both 
day  and  night,  exposed  alike  to  extremes  of 
heat  and  cold.  Secondly,  he  is  compelled 
to  reap  and  bind  and  carry  home  the 
sheaves  of  his  oppressor,  wliile  he  himself 
is  half  famished  with  hunger.  The  second 
clause  of  the  verse  is  wrongly  translated  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  where  we  read, 
and  they  take  away  the  sheaf  from  the 
hungry  ;  the  real  meaning  being,  "and  tliey 
who  are  an  hungered,  carry  the  sheaves" 
(compare  the  Kevised  Version). 

Ver.  11. — Which  make  oil  within  their 
walls,  and  tread  their  wine-presses,  and 
suffer  thirst.  In  the  third  place,  the  same 
unfortunates  are  employed  in  the  home- 
steads of  their  oppressors  to  express  oil  from 
the  olives  and  wine  from  the  rich  dusters 
of  grapes,  while  they  themselves  are  tor- 
mented with  unceasing  thirst. 

Ver.  12. — Men  groan  from  out  of  the 
city.  It  is  not  only  in  the  wild  tracts  bor- 
dering on  the  desert  (vers.  5—8),  or  on  the 
large  farms  of  rich  landholders  (vers.  9 — 
11),  that  oppression  takes  place.  Men's 
groans  are  heard  also  "  from  the  city,"  and 
in  the  midst  of  the  city,  where  murder,  rob- 
bery, burglary,  adultery,  and  other  crimes 
of  the  deepest  dye  abound.  Then  the  soul 
of  the  wounded  crieth  oat.  In  appeals  to 
God  for  help,  or  in  inarticulate  cries,  the 
wounded  spirit  of  the  oppressed  and  injured 
vents  itself.  Yet  God  layeth  not  foUy  to 
them.  Yet  God  seems  to  take  no  notice. 
He  gives  no  sign  of  disapproval,  but  allows 
the  oppressors  to  go  on  in  their  foolish 
courses  unchecked. 

Ver.  13.— They  are  of  those  who  rebel 
against  the  light.  These  city  oppressors 
go  beyond  the  others  in  entirely  rejecting 
the  light  of  reason,  conscience,  and  law. 
They  throw  off  every  restraint.  The  "  light 
which  lighteth  every  man  tliat  cometh  into 
the  world  "is  nothing  to  them.  They  know 
not  the  ways  thereof.  They  will  not  know, 
will  not  have  anything  to  do  with,  the  law 
of  moral  restraint — much  less  will  they 
Abide  in  the  paths  thereof;  i.s.  acknowledge 


OH,  ZZIT.  1 — 26.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


409 


•nd  be  guided  by  Buoh  restraliita  oontinn- 
ally.    On  the  contrary, 

Yer.  14. — The  murderer  rising  with  the 
light  killeth  the  poor  and  needy.  The  mur- 
derer rises  at  the  first  glimpse  of  dawn — the 
time  when  most  men  sleep  most  soundly. 
He  cannot  go  about  his  wicked  business  in 
complete  darkness.  He  has  not  the  courage 
to  attack  the  great  and  powerful,  who  might 
be  well  armed  and  hare  retainers  to  defend 
them,  but  enters  the  houses  of  a  compara- 
tively poor  class,  in  which  he  is  less  afi^tiid 
to  risk  himself.  Here,  in  the  night  he  is 
as  a  thief.  He  has  not  come  into  the  house 
simply  for  murder.  Theft  is  his  main  ob- 
ject. He  will  not  take  life  unless  he  is  re- 
sisted or  discovered,  and  so,  in  a  certain 
sense,  driven  to  it. 

Ver.  IS.^The  eye  also  of  the  adulterer 
waiteth  for  the  twilight,  saying,  No  eye 
shall  see  me.  There  is  an  analogy  between 
moral  and  physical  light,  and  between  moral 
aud  physical  darkness.  The  class  of  men 
here  spoken  of  (vers.  14 — 16),  who  have  re- 
belled against  moral  light  (ver.  13),  and  re- 
fused its  ways,  aud  rejected  its  paths,  are 
no  great  lovers  of  physical  light.  Their 
deeds  of  darkness  are  only  suited  to  be  done 
in  the  dark,  and  they  wait  for  the  evening 
twilight  or  the  dusk  of  davm  to  engage  in 
them  (oomp.  John  iii.  19 — 21,  "  And  tliis  is 
the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into 
the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather 
than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil. 
For  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the 
light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his 
deeds  should  be  reproved.  But  he  that 
doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light,  that  his 
deeds  may  be  made  manifest,  that  they  are 
wrought  in  God."  See  also  John  viii.  12 ; 
xii.  35 ;  Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  Eph.  v.  8—14,  etc.). 
And  he  disguiseth  his  faoe.  As  a  further 
precaution  against  discovery,  the  adulterer 
disguiseth,  or  oovereth  up,  his  faoe.  The 
same  is  often  done  by  thieves  and  mur- 
derers, 

Ver.  16.— In  the  dark  they  dig  through 
houses.  In  ancient  times,  burglary  com- 
monly took  this  form.  Windows  were  few, 
and  high  up  in  the  walla;  doors  were  strongly 
fastened  with  bolts  and  bars.  But  the 
walls,  being  of  clay,  or  rubble,  or  sun-dried 
brick,  were  weak  and  easily  penetrable. 
This  was  especially  the  case  with  party 
walls ;  and  if  burglars  entered  an  unoccu- 
pied house,  nothing  was  easier  than  to  break 
through  the  slight  partition  which  separated 
it  from  the  house  next  door.  The  Greek 
word  for  "burglar"  is  Totx'ipvx<>h"^B  who 
digs  through  a  wall."  Which  they  had 
marked  for  themselves  in.  the  daytime; 
rather,  they  shut  themselvei  up  in  the  day- 
time ;  literally,  they  seal  themselves  up ;  the 
meaning  being  that    they  carefully  keep 


themselves  close.  Professor  Lee,  however, 
defends  the  Authorized  Version.  They 
know  not  the  light ;  i.e.  they  avoid  it, 
keep  away  from  it,  will  hare  nothing  to  do 
with  it. 

Ver.  17. — ^For  the  morning  Is  to  them 
even  as  the  shadow  of  death.  They  hate 
the  morning  light.  It  is  associated  in  their 
minds  with  the  idea  of  detection;  for  when 
it  breaks  in  upon  them  unexpectedly  in  the 
midst  of  their  ill  deeds,  detection  commonly 
follows ;  and  detection  is  »  true  "  shadow 
of  death,"  for  it  commonly  means  the  gal- 
lows. If  one  know  them,  they  are  in  the 
terrors  of  the  shadow  of  death;  rather, 
for  they  know  the  terrors  of  the  shadow  of 
death  (see  the  Revised  Version).  It  is  a 
familiar  experience  to  thorn ;  as,  whenever 
crime  is  severely  punished,  it  is  to  the 
criminal  class  generally. 

Ver.  18. — He  is  swift  as  the  waters.  '*  Lo- 
cus obscurissimus "  (Sclmltens).  Scarcely 
any  two  commentators  agree  even  as  to  the 
subject  on  which  Job  proceeds  to  speak. 
Some  regard  him  as  giving  his  own  judg- 
ment on  the  ultimate  fate  of  the  wicked; 
others,  as  anticipating  what  his  opponents 
will  say  on  the  point.  One  recent  exposi- 
tor takes  the  passage  as  referring  to  the 
efforts  made  by  the  malefactors  of  vers. 
14 — 16  to  escape  frum  justice,  and  to  the 
discredit  and  difSoilty  in  which  they  in- 
volve themselves.  Another  suggests  that 
Job  here  calls  attention  to  a  fresh  class  of 
oppressors,  viz.  water-thieves  (see  Strabo, 
xvi.  18),  who,  starting  in  light  boats  from 
some  island  in  a  lake  or  river,  plundered 
the  neighbouring  lands,  making  the  por- 
tions of  the  landholders  wortldesa,  and 
causing  them  to  neglect  the  cultivation, 
even  of  their  vineyards.  If  we  accept  this 
view,  the  proper  translation  of  the  present 
verse  will  be.  Swift  is  he  (i.e.  the  water- 
thief)  upon  the  face  of  the  waters :  then  is  the 
portion  of  them  who  dwell  in  the  land  worth- 
less ;  no  one  turneih  his  face  toward  his  vine- 
yards (see  Professor  Lee's  'Book  of  Job,* 
pp.  1S3,  378,  379). 

Ver.  19. — Drought  and  heat  consume  the 
snow  waters ;  so  dnth  the  grave  those  which 
have  sinned.  This  rendering  is  further  con- 
firmed by  the  next  verse.  Accepting  it,  we 
must  suppose  Job  to  pass  at  this  point  to 
the  consideration  of  the  ultimate  end  of  the 
wicked,  though  in  ver.  21  he  returns  to  the 
consideration  of  their  ill  doings.  The  heat 
and  drought  of  summer,  he  says,  consume 
and  dry  up  all  the  water  which  comes  from 
the  melting  of  the  winter's  snows.  So  does 
Sheol,  or  the  grave,  absorb,  and  as  it  were 
consume,  the  wicked. 

Ver.  20. — The  womb  shall  forget  him. 
Some  regard  this  as  equivalent  to  "  E.arth 
shall  forget  hioti"  but  most  (appose  "th« 


410 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xxrr.  1 — 2li 


womb"  to  mean  "hie  own  mother."  The 
worm  shall  feed  sweetly  on  him  (comp.  ch. 
xvii.  14).  He  shall  be  no  more  remembered. 
Oblivion  shall  fall  upon  him  and  hisdoinge. 
And  wickedness  shall  be  broken  as  a  tree. 
As  a  strong  wind  suddenly  snaps  off  a  tree 
at  the  root,  so  wickedness,  in  the  person  of 
the  wicked  man — the  abstract  for  the  con- 
crete— shall  be  overtaken  by  death,  and 
perish  in  a  moment  (comp.  ver.  24), 

Vor.  21. — He  evil  entreateth  the  barren 
that  beareth  not.  Oppressors  of  another 
class  are  perhaps  here  spoken  of,  or  perhaps 
there  is  a  mere  return  to  the  idea  with 
which  Job's  enumeration  opened  (ver.  3), 
which  was  the  oppression  of  the  weaker  and 
luore  defenceless  classes.  As  barrenness  in 
women  was  considered  the  greatest  possible 
misfortune  (1  Sam.  i.  5 — 8 ;  iii.  1 — 10),  so 
oppressing  one  that  was  barren  indicated 
extreme  cruelty.  And  doeth  not  good  to  the 
widow ;  i.e.  neglects  to  vindicate  her  cause 
— an  admitted  part  of  man's  duty  (see  oh, 
xxii.  9;  xxix.  13;  xxxi.  16). 

Ver.  22. — He  draweth  also  the  mighty 
with  his  power;  i.e.  he  draws  to  his  side, 
and  makes  his  helpers,  those  who  are  mighty, 
attracting  them  or  compelling  them  to  join 
him  by  the  power  which  he  already  has. 
He  riseth  np,  and  no  man  is  sore  of  life. 
This  is  also  the  translation  of  the  Bevised 
Version.  Some  commentators,  however,  pre- 
fer to  render,  "  He  riseth  up,  when  he  has 
despaired  of  life ; "  i.e.  the  wicked  man,  when 
he  has  been  brought  into  trouble,  either 
sickness  or  danger  of  death  at  the  hands  of 
justice,  to  men's  surprise,  "riseth  up" — is 
delivered  from  the  danger,  and  recovers  his 
prosperity. 

Ver.  23. — Though  it  be  given  him  to  be 
in  safety,  whereon  he  resteth ;  rather,  he  (i.e. 
God)  granteth  him  to  he  in  security,  and 
thereon  he  resteth ;  i.e.  God  allows  the  escape 
of  the  wicked  man  &om  his  trouble,  and  lets 


him  live  on,  safe  and  secure,  and  the  mac 
himself  rests  on  the  security  thus  afforded 
him,  quite  contented  with  it.  Yet  his  eyes 
are  upon  their  ways.  God's  eyes  are  still 
upon  the  ways  of  the  wicked :  they  are,  or 
seem  to  be,  the  objects  of  a  special  providen- 
tial care. 

Ver.  24. — ^They  are  exalted  for  a  little 
while,  but  are  gone  and  brought  low;  rather, 
(hey  are  exalted :  after  a  little  while  they  are 
gone,  they  are  brought  low.  Job  has  to  admit 
that  death  comes  upon  wicked  men  at  last ; 
but  he  minimizes  the  terrors  of  their  death, 
and  exaggerates  its  alleviations.  First,  it 
conies  on  them  when  they  have  risen  to 
eminence,  have  gained  themselves  a  reputa- 
tion, and  "  are  exalted."  Next,  it  ii  sudden 
and  painless,  preceded  by  no  long,  lingering 
illness,  but  just  a  sinking  into  non-existence; 
a  tranquil  passing  away.  Thirdly,  it  is  at  a 
ripe  age,  when  they  have  reached  the  full 
term  of  human  life,  and  are  as  ears  of  corn 
ripe  for  the  harvest.  Further,  it  is  the 
common  fate:  They  are  taken  out  of  the 
way  as  all  other  (comp.  ch.  ix.  22 ;  xxi.  13), 
and  cnt  off  as  the  tops  of  the  ears  of  corn. 
We  may  gather  from  this  expression  that 
the  reaping  in  the  land  of  Uz  was  conducted 
in  Job's  time  much  in  the  same  way  as  it 
was  in  Egypt  under  the  eaily  Pharaohs,  viz. 
by  cutting  the  stalk  with  a  sharp  sickle 
almost  immediately  below  the  ear,  and  col- 
lecting the  ears  in  baskets  (see  the  author's 
'  Hist,  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  162 ;  nnd 
his  '  Herodotus,'  vol.  ii.  p.  59,  3rd  edit.), 

Ver.  25. — And  if  it  be  not  bo  now;  i.e.  "if 
these  things  be  not  as  I  say."  Who  will 
make  me  a  liar?  Which  of  yon  will  stand 
forth  and  disprove  (hem,  and  so  "make  me 
a  liar "  ?  And  make  my  speech  nothing 
worth  ?  Show,  i.e.,  my  whole  discourse  to 
be  valueless.  This  bold  challenge  no  one 
attempts  to  take  up. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 12. — Job  to  Eliphat:  i.  An  answer  wanted  to  a  great  question.    I.  An 

IMPORTANT  PROPOSITION  STATED.  That  the  Almighty  does  not  call  wicked  men  before 
his  tribunal  on  earth.  "Why  arenot  times," i.e.  of  reckoningorpunlshmeut,  "reserved," 
or  kept  in  store,  "  by  the  Almighty,  and  why  do  they  who  know  him  see  not  his 
days?"  i.e.  his  doomsdays,  or  days  of  judicial  visitation  on  the  wicked  (ver.  1).  1.  A 
caution.  The  language  does  not  imply  either  that  there  should  not  be,  or  that  there 
do  not  exist,  such  times  of  reckoning  with  the  ungodly,  and  indeed  with  all  men.  On 
the  contrary,  it  tacitly  assumes  that  God  both  ought  to  have,  and  in  point  of  fact  does 
have,  days  of  retribution  which  are  appropriately  described  as  "  his."  That  men  ought 
to  be  judged  for  their  characters  and  lives,  the  moral  instincts  of  humanity  proclaim  • 
that  men  will  be  arraigned  before  Shaddai's  impartial  tribunal,  is  explicitly  asserted  in 
Scripture  (oh.  xxi.  30 ;  xxxi  v.  11 ;  Eccles.  xii.  14 ;  Ps.  xcviii.  9 ;  Dan.  vii.  10 ;  Matt,  xxv 
32 ;  2  Cor.  V.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  1 ;  Heb.  ix.  27).  2.  An  explanation.  What  the  language 
asseits  is  that  such  court-daya  are  not  kept  by  the  Almighty  on  earth,  or  at  least  that 
his  people  do  not  see  them  i  ia  other  words,  that  the  godlessness  of  men  is  permitted  tg 


OH.  xiiT.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  411 

stalk  forth  on  earth  unchallenged  and  unavenged,  without  let  or  hindrance,  pretty 
much  as  if  there  were  no  such  tribunal  in  existence.  And  this  fact,  which  Job  so 
strenuously  affirms,  in  addition  to  having  been  observed  by  Asa^ih  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  5),  David 
(Ps.  1.  21),  the  Preacher  (Eccles.  viii.  11),  Jeremiah  (xii.  1),  Habakkuk  (i.  15,  16),  and 
others,  is  likewise  recognized  in  Scripture  generally  as  coirect. 

II.  A  CONVINCING  DEMONSTRATION  OFFBKED.  That  the  Almighty  does  not  hold  a 
regular  assize  on  earth  established  by  two  patent  facts.  1.  The  most  execrable  wicJced- 
ness  is  suffered  to  rage  voithout  either  punishment  or  restraint.  The  special  form  of 
ungodliness  depicted  is  that  of  ruthless  oppression  of  the  helpless  and  defenceless,  exem- 
plified in  such  crimes  as:  (1)  Secret  fraud.  "They," i.e.  the  tyrannical  oppressors  of  the 
aborigines  of  the  soil,  "  remove  the  landmarks,"  shift  the  stones  or  stakes  which  mark 
the  boundary-line  between  the  poor  man's  plot  and  the  rich  man's  farm,  so  as  to 
diminish  the  one  and  increase  the  other — an  act  of  impiety  denounced  in  the  Law  of 
Moses  as  worthy  of,  and  certain  to  be  punished  by,  the  curse  of  God  (Deut.  xix.  14 ; 
xxvii.  17),  a  crime  practised  in  the  days  of  Solomon  (Prov.  xxiL  28 ;  xxiii.  10)  and  of 
Hosea  (v.  10),  a  form  of  wickedness  not  unknown  to  modern  society.  Every  attempt 
by  covert  fraudulence  to  augment  one's  own  estate  at  the  expense  of  a  neighbour's, 
whether  that  neighbour  be  poor  or  rich,  is  equivalent  to  a  removing  of  the  landmark 
between  meum  and  tuv/m,  and  as  such  incurs  the  Divine  displeasure.  If  one  thing  is 
more  saddening  than  the  prevalence  of  indirect  and  minute  spoliation  amongst  all  ranks 
and  classes,  it  is  that  good  men  should  not  be  able  to  see  that  theft  is  still  theft, 
although  practised  in  infinitesimal  proportions  and  by  underhand  contrivances,  and 
that  even  wicked  men  should  not  be  deterred  from  such  nefarious  actions  by  a  recol- 
lection of  God's  anathemas  against  the  thief.  (2)  Barefaced  robbery.  "  They  violently 
take  away  flocks  and  feed  them  "  (ver.  2),  not  taking  the  trouble  to  dispose  of  the 
stolen  sheep  by  slaughter  or  sale,  hut  openly  and  coolly  retaining  them  amongst  their 
own,  as  the  Sabeans  had  done  with  Job's  oxen  (ch.  i.  14) — ^an  aggravation  of  their 
crime  that  they  were  so  shameless  and  audacious  in  its  commission;  but  they  who 
could  brave  God's  curse  in  order  to  remove  a  landmark  would  not  likely  shrink  from 
enduring  man's  scorn  in  order  to  steal  a  flock.  Sin  inevitably  tends  to  sear  the  con- 
science and  to  petrify  the  feelings.  (3)  Pitiless  exaction.  "  They  drive  away  the  ass 
of  the  fatherless,  they  take  the  widow's  ox  for  a  pledge  "  (ver.  3).  Besides  being  out 
of  all  proportion,  and  therefore  unjust,  to  carry  off  an  ass  or  an  ox  in  payment  of  a 
trifling  loan  or  debt,  it  was  unspeakably  heartless  to  proceed  to  such  extremity  against 
those  whose  friendless  condition  should  have  drawn  forth  sympathy  and  succour.  It 
was  also  a  clear  violation  of  the  Divine  Law  to  appropriate  what  was  so  indispensable 
to  the  subsistence  of  an  orphan  as  the  one  ass  wherewith  he  laboured,  or  so  needful  for 
the  widow  as  the  ox  which  ploughed  her  plot  of  ground.  For  similar  reasons  the 
Mosaic  Law  forbade  the  taking  in  pledge  of  a  widow's  raiment  (Deut.  xxiv.  17),  and 
much  more,  it  may  be  argued,  of  a  widow's  yoke  ox,  or  of  an  orphan's  ass  (Exod.  xxii. 
22).  The  nether  or  the  upper  millstone  also,  for  a  like  cause,  was  an  illegal  pledge 
(Deafc.  xxiv.  6).  (4)  Violent  oppression.  "They  turn  the  needy  out  of  the  way" 
(ver  4),  thrusting  them  out  of  their  accustomed  paths  and  pursuits,  compelling  them 
through  fear  to  abandon  the  highways  and  travel  through  trackless  regions,  ejecting 
them  by  force  from  their  wonted  habitations  and  ancient  possessions  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  8, 
homUetics).  (5)  Merciless  subjugation.  "  They  pluck  the  fatherless  from  the  breast, 
and  take  a  pledge  of  the  poor  "  (ver.  9).  So  pitiless  are  these  inhuman  monsters,  that 
they  distrain  not  the  widow's  ox  merely,  but  her  infant  child  as  well,  plucking  it  from 
her  bosom,  and  carrying  it  off  to  be  reared  in  miserable  iervitude ;  yea,  if  the  second 
clause  may  be  added  to  the  first,  after  robbing  the  broken-hearted  mother  of  her  babe, 
stripping  her  of  her  raiment,  and  turning  her  forth  naked  and  trembling  to  find  food 
anil  clothing  as  best  she  may.  It  is  doubtful  if  any  American  Legree  or  modern  slave- 
driver  ever  eclipsed  these  ancient  child-stealers  in  relentless  barbarity.  2.  The  most 
extreme  misery  is  allowed  to  go  unnoticid  and  tmrelieved.  In  three  affecting  pictures, 
according  to  one  view  of  the  poet's  meaning,  he  "Sketches  the  calamitous  fate  of  the 
unhappy  victims  of  those  remorseless  destroyers.  The  first  (vers.  5 — 8)  depicts  the 
melancholy  fortunes  of  the  poor  of  the  land  (perhaps  the  aboriginal  inhabitants),  who 
being  cast  forth  from  their  ancient  possessions  are  obliged  to  "  hide  themselves  together  " 
(ver.  4),  or  to  slink  away  out  of  sight,  disappearing,  as  inferior  races  have  since  done^ 


412  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  ixiv  1—25. 

because  unable  to  stand  before  the  Tiolence  of  their  invaders.  (1)  Leading  a  gregarious 
and  wandering  life,  like  wild  asses  in  the  desert,  like  the  vagrant  gipsies  of  modern 
times,  rising  up  early  and  going  forth  in  search  of  food  with  an  appetite  as  keen  as  if 
they  were  hunting  prey,  with  infinite  labour  extracting  a  scanty  subsistence  for  them- 
selves and  children  from  the  innutritious  roots  and.  herbs  of  the  inhospitable  steppe. 
(2)  Engaging  in  the  lowest  forms  of  menial  service,  being  obliged  to  hire  themselves 
out  as  day  labourers,  and  the  only  work  available  for  them  being  the  cutting  of  fodder 
for  the  rich  man's  cattle — not  the  better  sorts  of  grain,  lest  they  should  be  tempted  to 
pluck  and  eat ;  or  the  gleaning  of  the  late  ripening  grapes  of  the  rich  man's  vineyard — 
not  the  earliest  and  best,  for  fear  they  should  seek  to  quench  their  thirst  by  devouring 
the  luscious  fruit.  (3)  Seduced  to  the  saddest  state  of  destitution,  being  without 
clothes,  so  that  they  must  pass  the  night  in  a  stripped  and  naked  condition,  exposed  to 
the  "  frequent  and  continuous  storms  that  visit  the  mountains,"  and  without  homes,  so 
that "  they  embrace  the  rock  for  want  of  a  shelter."  The  second  picture  (vers.  10, 11) 
is,  if  possible,  more  excruciatingly  painful  in  the  aspect  of  wretchedness  it  presents.  It 
recites  the  evil  hap  of  those  widows'  children  who  have  been  taken  for  their  mothers' 
debt,  or  of  the  poorer  section  of  the  conquering  clan  themselves  who  in  turn  have  become 
victims  of  the  haughty  tyrants,  and  have  been  reduced  to  a  condition  little  short  of 
abject  slavery.  (1)  Utter  penury.  In  consequence  of  the  oppressive  exactions  of  their 
masters,  they  are  compelled  to  part  with  the  last  stitch  of  clothing,  and  to  slink  away 
in  almost  entire  nudity  like  a  gang  of  slaves  driven  to  the  market  or  the  cotton-field. 
(2)  Unrequited  toil.  Hungry,  they  must  not  pluck  a  handful  of  ears  from  their  over- 
seer's cornfield,  a  privilege  not  denied  to  the  brute  beasts  beside  them  (Deut.  xxv.  4). 
Thirsty,  they  dare  not  moisten  their  parched  tongues  with  the  must  running  from  the 
presses  as  they  squeeze  out  the  oil  and  tread  down  the  grapes.  The  abominable  wicked- 
ness of  exacting  labour  without  remuneration  (and  that  also  adequate),  as  is  done  in 
slavery,  is  severely 'reprehended  in  Scripture  (Lev.  lix.  13;  Deut.  xxiv.  14,  15 ;  Jer. 
xxii.  13 ;  Jas.  v.  4).  The  third  picture  (ver.  12)  alludes  to  the  miseries  of  a  densely 
populated  city,  where  (1)  oppression  reigns  as  fierce  and  intolerable  as  exists  in  the 
country,  causing  men  to  groan  in  anguish — a  description  not  exclusively  applicable  to 
an  ancietit  Arabian  town  suddtnly  invaded  by  hordes  of  freebooters,  but  finding  also 
too  faithful  realization  in  the  great  cities  and  large  centres  of  population  belonging  to 
the  nineteenth  Christian  century,  in  which  the  same  spectacle  is  still  seen,  of  the  strong 
trampling  on  the  weak,  the  rich  on  the  poor,  the  lordly  and  tyrannical  on  the  plebeian 
and  servile ;  and  where  (2)  strife  rages,  leading  not  unfrequently  to  bloodshed  and 
murder,  in  which  the  soul  of  the  wounded  mourns — a  state  of  things  as  often  seen  to- 
day as  it  was  some  five  or  six  thousand  years  ago,  nothing  being  so  characteristic  of  the 
])reseDt  times  as  just  the  internecine  warfare  existing  between  the  various  classes  of 
society,  and  leading  as  a  natural  result  to  a  prolific  development  of  crimes  against  the 
person  and  estate.  And  all  this  sweltering  abomination,  this  moral  putridity,  social 
disorder,  and  civil  corruption  which  infests  both  town  and  country,  the  Almighty 
appears  to  be  as  indifferent  to  as  he  was  in  the  days  of  Job  (Ps.  1.  21). 

HI.-  An  urgent  question  asked.  Why  does  not  God  call  wicked  men  to  account? 
1.  Not  for  want  of  power.  Otherwise  he  would  not  be  Shaddai,  the  Almighty,  the  all- 
powerful  and  all-sufficient  Deity,  whose  ability  to  perform  his  counsel  Job  has  just 
commented  on  (oh.  xxiii.  13).  2.  Not  for  lack  of  knowledge.  Job's  atheistical  con- 
temporaries supposed  that  mundane  atfairs  were  concealed  from  the  gaze  of  him  who 
walked  upon  the  circuit  of  the  heavens,  and  whose  feet  were  wrapped  about  with  clouds 
(ch.  xxii.  13) ;  but  Job  and  his  friends  alike  admitted  that  times,  t.e.  at  any  rate  the 
main  events  and  circumstances  of  terrestrial  history,  were  not  hidden  from  Shaddai's 
omniscient  glance  (ver.  1,  Authorized  Version).  3.  Not  for  want  of  right.  Both  parties 
in  the  present  controversy  recognize  that  such  appalling  wickedness  should  not  be 
Buffered  to  go  for  ever  unchallenged  and  unpunished,  that  such  detestable  criminals  as 
above  described  ought  to  be  arrested  and  brought  before  the  tribunal  of  Heaven.  Nay, 
on  the  theory  of  the  fiiends,  these  workers  of  iniquity  ought  at  once  to  be  called  to 
account.  Yet  notoriously,  says  Job,  they  are  not.  Hence  it  can  only  be:  4.  For  lack 
of  will.  It  is  not  God's  intention  to  hold  a  circuit  court  here  on  earth,  and  try  men 
for  their  misdeeds.  In  other  words,  the  Diviiie  government  is  not,  so  far  as  thi«  wcrl4 
is  concerned,  u  the  friends  contended,  strictly  retributivo. 


«H.  HIT.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  413 

Learn :  1.  The  impunity  of  sinners  on  earth  is  no  proof  that  they  shall  enjby  like 
impunity  hereafter.  2.  That  God's  people  do  not  now  discern  his  judgment  throne  is 
no  argument  that  such  a  throne  does  not  exist.  3.  Little  faults  are  as  really  sins,  and 
as  certain  to  be  punished,  as  great  offences.  4.  Criminals  who  start  with  stealthy  aud 
minute  acts  of  transgression  are  in  danger  of  proceeding  to  large  as  well  as  open  works 
.of  wickedness.  6.  "  Man's  inhumanity  to  man  makes  countless  thousands  mourn,"  6. 
Mighty  despots  may  deprive  the  poor  of  their  estates  by  either  fair  means  or  foul ;  but 
Qod  regards  the  deed  as  spoliation  and  robbery.  7.  It  is  a  wiser  policy  tc  prevent 
pauperism  from  being  developed  in  a  state  than  to  provide  for  it  after  it  has  been 
developed.  8.  Town  and  country  are  much  the  same  in  their  moral  characteristics. 
9.  It  is  a  mistake  to  infer  from  God's  silence  tliat  he  neither  sees  nor  cares  for  the 
wickedness  and  misery  of  man. 

Ver.  8, — A  threefold  rdigiaus  emhlem ;  or,  the  shelter  of  the  rock.  I.  An  ehbleu  of 
THE  sinneb's  misebable  CONDITION.  1.  Exposcd  to  a  storm.  Like  the  unhappy  victims 
of  tyrannical  oppression,  men,  in  their  unconverted  state,  are  liable  to  be  overtaken  by 
the  tempest  of  God's  righteous  wrath  and  indignation  against  sin  (P.s.  xi.  6 ;  Rom.  i. 
18;  Col.  iii.  6;  1  Thess.  L  10;  Eev.  vi.  16,  17),  which  will  not  assail  the  body  merely, 
but  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell  (Luke  xii.  6),  and  that  for  ever.  2.  Destitute 
of  shelter.  Like  the  houseless  and  homeless  wanderers  among  the  mountains, 
unpardoned  souls  are  without  a  refuge  to  which  they  can  betake  themselves  in  the  day 
of  their  calamity.  Driven  forth  from  the  place  of  safety  in  which  they  originally  stood, 
they  have  now  "  no  covering  in  the  cold,"  no  garment  of  righteousness  in  which  they 
can  wrap  their  trembling  spirits.  Nor  can  they  by  any  wisdom,  wealth,  or  labour  of 
their  own  construct  or  discover  for  themselves  a  habitetion  and  defence  against  the 
storm. 

II.  An  emblem  of  the  obeat  salvation  offbbed  in  the  gospel.  As  the  shiver- 
ing outcasts  crept  into  the  rooky  caves  on  the  mountain-side,  so  Christ  has  been  set 
forth  as  a  Bock  and  a  Hiding-place  (Isa.  xxui.  2).  1.  Accessible  by  all ;  the  approach 
to  him  being  hindered  by  no  formidable  barri(^rs,  and  no  stupendous  effort  being  required 
to  reach  his  side  (Bom.  x.  6),  nothing  beyond  a  simple  exercise  of  faith  which  is  within 
the  ability  of  even  a  child.  2.  Sufficient  for  all ;  there  being  room  enough  in  Christ 
for  all  who  come  to  him  in  faith  (Luke  xiv.  22),  yea,  for  the  entire  world  of  mankind 
(Isa.  xlv.  22 ;  John  iii.  16),  if  only  they  sincerely  come  to  him ;  and  perfect  safety  and 
protection  fir  all  who  gain  its  shelter,  complete  defence  against  the  charges  of  the  Law, 
the  accusations  of  conscience,  the  penalties  of  sin,  the  terrors  of  death,  and  of  the  wrath 
to  come  (Rom.  v.  1).  3.  Free  to  ail ;  every  one  who  seeks  his  presence  and  assistance 
being  accorded  a  welcome,  without  money  and  without  price. 

"  All  the  fitness  he  requiieth 
Is  to  feel  our  need  of  lum." 

III.  An  emblem  of  the  act  of  saving  faith.  As  the  miserable  victims  of  the 
strong  man's  oppression  embraced  the  rock  for  a  shelter,  so  must  needy  sinners  em- 
brace Christ  the  Rock.  1.  With  personal  application ;  Christ  being  of  no  more  use 
to  a  sinner  without  individual  appropriation  than  the  mountain  rook  would  have  been 
to  those  who  did  not  cling  to  it.  Faith  is  the  hand  that  lays  hold  of  and  embraces  Christ 
as  he  is  exhibited  in  the  gospel.  2.  With  fervent  gratitude ;  giving  thanks  to  God  for 
his  abundant  mercy  in  providing  such  a  shelter  for  the  soul,  as  no  doubt  the  poor 
creatures  whom  the  mountain-storms  drenched  were  grateful  for  even  the  protection  of 
a  cave.  3.  With  immediate  action  j  allowing  no  delay  to  prevent  the  soul  from  fleeing 
from  the  storm  of  impending  wrath  to  the  hope  set  before  it  in  the  gospeL 

Vers.  13 — 26. — Job  to  Eliphaz :  6.  Ancient  rebeis  against  the  light,  L  Theib  black 
OHABAOTEB.  1.  They  are  hostile  to  the  light.  Tbe  light  alluded  to  is  the  light  of  day. 
The  wicked  persons  spoken  of  regard  that  light  with  aversion,  as  being  unfavourable  to 
the  special  forms  of  ungodliness  they  delight  to  practise.  Distinguished  from  the  pre- 
viously mentioned  sinners  who  transact  their  nefarious  deeds  openly  and  unblushingly 
beneath  the  clear  firmament  of  heaven,  these  night-birds  may  be  taken,  in  their  general 
characteristics  at  least,  as  representatives  of  those  evil-doers  whom  Christ  designates 


414  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxiv.  1— 2& 

(John  iil.  20)  haten  of  the  light.  Light  is  a  frequent  biblical  symbol  for  Divine  truth 
(Prov.  vL  23 ;  Ps.  ciix.  105 ;  Isa.  il.  5),  and  in  particular  for  the  gospel  (Matt.  iv.  16 ; 
Luke  ii.  32 ;  John  xii.  36 ;  Eph.  v.  8).  Hence  the  unbelieving  and  therefore  uncon- 
viTted  wicked  heart  naturally  looks  upon  the  light  of  God's  Law  and  of  Christ's  gospel 
with  repugnance  (Rom.  viii.  7),  and  for  the  same  reason,  that  the  light  condemns  their 
works.  2.  They  know  not  the  ways  of  the  light.  They  have  no  familiarity  with  such 
modes  of  living  as  men  practise  in  open  day.  The  ordinary  avocations  of  law-abiding 
citizens  possess  for  them  no  interest  and  yield  to  them  no  enjoyment ;  in  which  respect 
again  they  fitly  typify  ungodly  men  in  general,  who  neither  know  nor  care  for  the  ways 
of  holiness  and  truth.  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  a  way  of  darkness  (Prov.  iv.  19 ;  Rom. 
xiii.  12),  of  unbslief  (Heb.  iii.  12),  of  disobedience  (Rom.  viii.  7),  of  folly  (Prov.  xii.  15), 
of  sorrow  (Prov.  xiii.  15),  a  way  that  is  displtasing  to  God  (Prov.  xv.  9),  and  that 
leadeth  unto  death  (Matt.  vii.  13 ;  Bom.  vi.  23).  The  way  of  truth  (Ps.  cxix.  30),  of 
understanding  (Isa.  xl.  14),  of  holiness  (Isa.  xxxv.  8),  of  peace  (Isa.  lix.  8 ;  Bom.  iii. 
17),  of  life  (Matt.  vii.  14),  they  do  not  keep,  love,  or  know.  3.  They  shun  the  paths  of 
the  light.  They  remove  themselves  and  their  nefarious  practices  as  far  as  possible  from 
the  light,  lest  they  should  be  seen  of  men.  Even  so  evil  workers  come  not  to  the  light 
lest  their  deeds  should  be  reproved  (John  iii.  20).  Honest  men  fear  not  to  stand  in  the 
sun.  Nor  do  children  of  the  light  require  to  wrap  themselves  in  cloaks  of  darkness. 
But  because  God's  light  (of  the  Law  and  the  gospel)  has  a  singular  power  of  discovering 
men's  wickedness  to  themselves  and  others  (Eph.  v.  13),  the  children  of  darkness  avoid 
the  light. 

IL  Theib  dabk  deeds.  The  poet  sketches  portraits  of  three  of  these  ancient  rebels 
against  the  light.  1.  The  mwderer ;  whose  villainies  are  described  by  a  threefold 
characteristic.  (1)  The  time  of  their  perpetration — "  at  the  dawn,"  «.«.  just  before  the 
breaking  forth  of  the  morning  light,  or  while  it  is  yet  dark,  that  hour  being  selected 
for  (a)  its  adaptation  to  the  works  about  to  be  performed,  works  of  darkness  (Bom.  xiii. 
12),  such  as  robbery  and  murder,  which  cannot  bear  the  light,  and  (6)  the  facilities  it 
afibrds  for  finding  subjects  on  which  to  operate.  (2)  The  victims  of  their  perpetration — 
"  the  poor  and  needy,"  who  by  reason  of  penury  are  obliged  at  that  early  hour  to  be 
afoot,  probably  on  the  road  to  their  daily  tasks.  Murder,  in  itself  an  atrocious  crime, 
is  immensely  aggravated  when,  for  the  petty  spoil  which  can  thereby  be  obtained,  it  is 
committed  against  the  indigent  and  feeble.  (3)  The  manner  of  their  perpetration — ^by 
sudden  ambush.  "  At  dawn  the  manslayer  riseth  up,"  t.e.  out  of  his  concealment, "  and 
killeth  the  poor  and  the  needy ; "  another  aggravation  of  his  wickedness.  The  language 
may  also  indicate  the  alacrity  and  earnestness  with  which  this  son  of  darkness,  this 
child  of  the  devil,  sets  about  his  unhallowed  work;  in  which  respect  his  conduct  may 
administer  rebuke  to  the  children  of  light.  2.  The  adulterer ;  who  Also  is  possessed  of 
the  infernal  sagacity  to  select  the  season  most  appropriate,  and  the  manner  most  effec- 
tive, for  accomplishing  his  diabolic  purpose.  Not  at  early  dawn,  but  with  the  falling 
of  the  evening  twilight,  he  sallies  forth  towards  his  neighbour's  harem,  saying,  "  No 
eye  shall  see  me ; "  to  render  detection  impossible,  putting  a  mask  upon  his  face,  forget- 
ting that  masks  hide  from  men,  but  not  from  God,  who  can  see  as  well  in  darkness  as 
in  light.  But  most  criminals  and  sinners  omit  to  reckon  with  the  invisible  Spectator 
of  their  abominations.  Notoriously  so  did  Cain  (Gen.  iv.  10),  David  (2  Sam.  xi.  4), 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  (Acts  v.  2).  Yet,  again,  from  even  a  teacher  so  unworthy  as 
this  violator  of  marriage  sanctities,  God's  people  may  derive  a  lesson  to  transact  their 
deeds  of  light  with  wisdom  and  efficiency.  3.  The  burglar ;  who,  already  referred  to 
as  the  highwayman  of  the  morning  dawn  (ver.  14),  is  reintroduced  as  the  midnight 
housebreaker  who,  with  pick  and  spade  (Iho  modem  thief  using  crowbar  and  chisel, 
skeleton  keys,  etc.),  digs  beneath  the  mud  walls  of  rich  men's  abodes,  marked  by  him 
during  day  (vers.  16,  17).  The  more  probable  translation,  however,  sets  forth  the 
housebreaker's  horror  of  the  light:  "In  thii  daytime  they  shut  themselves  up,"  because 
"they  know  not,"  i.e.  hate,  "the  light:"  and  "to  them  together  the  morning  is  as 
the  shadow  of  death,"  i.e.  through  fear  of  discovery  ;  "  for  they  are  acquainted  with," 
end  therefore  are  greatly  afraid  of,  "  the  taiTors  of  the  shadow  of  death." 

III.  Theib  terbbstbial  bewabdo.  The  treatment  of  neither  of  the  two  classes 
described  in  the  present  chapter  is  strictly  rotribntive.  1.  The  fate  of  the  petty  criminals; 
i,e.  of  the  murderer,  the  adulterer,  the  thief,  nud  all  included  iu  the  category  of  rebels 


CH.  XDV.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  415 


against  the  light.  According  to  Eliphaz,  these  creatures  of  the  darknesB  ihould  be  over- 
^laken  with  calamities  proportioned  to  their  crimes ;  but,  according  to  Job,  the  contrary 
is  the  case — they  are  (1)  prosperous  in  life,  gliding  down  the  stream  and  current  of  time 
like  a  light  skiff  (ver.  18),  experiencing  no  curse  upon  their  heritages  while  they  live ; 
and  (2)  honoured  in  death,  by  beini;  vouchsafed  (a)  a  quick  and  easy  disappearance  from 
the  eanh,  like  the  passing  away  of  a  light  substance  upon  the  face  of  the  waters  (cf.  ch. 
ix.  26),  instead  of  struggling  towards  the  grave  through  protracted  and  painful  suffering, 
or  like  the  melting  of  snow  before  the  scorching  heats  of  summer  (ver.  19),  going  down 
into  Sheol  suddenly  as  in  a  moment  (ch.  xxi.  13) ;  and  (6)  a  complete  escape  from  the 
just  penalties  of  their  crimes,  the  curse  not  descending  upon  their  heritages  until  they 
themselves  have  departed  from  the  scene  (ver.  18),  and  though  forgotten  by  the  very 
mothers  that  bore  them  because  of  tlieir  wickedness,  yet  not  compelled  to  eat  the 
bitter  fruits  of  their  transgression,  since  by  death  their  iniquity  has  been  broken  off 
like  a  tree,  i.e.  before  it  has  had  time  to  yield  its  appropriate  results.  2.  The  fate  of 
the  rapacicyus  despots;  i.e. of  those  sketched  in  the  preceding  section  (vers.  2 — 12),  who 
are  here  identified  as  the  oppressors  of  barren  and  widowed  women  (ver.  21).  They, 
too,  should  be  aiTested  by  visible  judgments;  but  altogether  different,  according  to 
Job,  is  their  lot.  (1)  They  are  preserved  alive  by  that  very  hand  which  should  rather 
slay  them  (ver.  22).  So  were  God  to  deal  with  any  sinners  on  earth  according  to  their 
iniquities  they  would  instantly  be  cut  down  (Ps.  cxxx.  3).  But  God  magnifies  his  grace 
and  evinces  his  long-suffering  towards  sinful  men  by  upholding  in  existence  those  who 
bid  defiance  to  every  danger,  and  even  to  God  himself,  who  are  not  only  insensible  to 
all  Divine  impulses,  but  flagrant  violators  of  all  Divine  laws.  (2)  They  are  raised  up 
from  sickness  at  the  moment  when  they  seem  to  be  about  to  die  (ver.  22).  The  mercy 
God's  singer  guarantees  to  the  humble  saint  that  considereth  the  poor  (Ps.  xli.  1),  and 
Christ's  servant  promises  to  thti  believing  Christian  (Jas.  v.  15),  is  extended  to  the  poor 
man's  oppressor,  and  the  supreme  God's  denier — another  marvel  of  grace  I  (3)  They 
are  kept  in  security  instead  of  living  in  constant  terror  (ver.  23).  Were  God  not  to 
moderate  the  fears  of  good  men,  much  more  therefore  of  bad  men,  their  lives  would  be 
intolerable.  But  God's  special  providence  watches  over  villains  as  well  as  over  virtuous 
people,  keeping  both  from  danger,  fear,  and  death,  hoping  thereby  to  lead  the  former  to 
repentance,  and  seeking  to  induce  the  latter  to  confide  in  his  grace.  (4)  They  are  exalted 
for  a  season  in  conscious  prosperity  instead  of  being  humbled  and  cast  down  (ver.  24) — 
an  additional  proof  of  God's  kindness  towards  them.  And  (5)  when  the  end  comes  they 
only  share  in  the  common  lot,  being  taken  out  of  the  way  like  all  other  men. 

Learn :  1.  The  unnatural  wickedness  of  those  who  despise  God's  mercies — even  his 
common  gifts  of  providence,  but  much  more  his  grandest  gift  of  grace.  2.  It  is  an 
unmistakable  evidence  of  depravity  when  a  man  loves  the  darkness  rather  than  the 
light.  3.  The  present-day  forms  of  wickedness  are  of  extreme  antiquity,  some  of  them, 
such  as  murder,  being  nearly  as  old  as  the  Fall.  4.  The  soul  that  hates  the  light  has 
the  seed-corn  in  his  heart  out  of  which  the  greatest  crimes  may  be  developed.  5.  The 
truest  security  a  man  can  have  that  he  shall  never  perpetrate  such  wickedness  as 
murder,  adultery,  etc.,  is  to  walk  in  the  light.  6.  The  destruction  of  the  most  powerful 
sinner  that  walks  the  earth  is  a  work  of  perfect  ease  to  God.  7.  A  man's  triumph  or 
superiority  over  his  fellows  terminates  with  the  grave.  8.  That  wickedness  must  be 
great  which  causes  a  mother  to  forget  her  child.  9.  That  mercy  must  be  great  which 
continues  when  human  love  in  its  highest  form  is  exhausted.  10.  Death  inay  seem  to 
remove  the  curse  from  the  sinner,  but  in  reality  it  only  conducts  the  sinner  to  the 
curse.  11.  God's  goodness  and  mercy  may  follow  a  sinner  to  the  grave's  mouth ; 
there  is  no' evidence  that  it  can  pursue  him  further.  12.  It  is  appointed  unto  all  men 
ouce  to  die. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Ygjg^  1 \2.— Examples  of  God's  mcomprehmisible  dealings.    I.  Deeds  op  vroMuoH 

AND  FBAUD.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  "  Why  are  not  times  laid  up,"  i.e.  reserved,  determined 
by  the  Almighty,  "  and  why  do  those  who  know  him  (i.e.  his  friends)  not  see  his  days  ?  " 
—the  days  when  he  arises  to  judgment,  days  of  revelation,  days  of  the  Son  of  man 
(Eaek.  XX*.  3;  Luke  xvii.  22).    Then  comes  a  series  of  acts  cf  violence,  oppression, 


416  THE  BOOK  OP  JOl.  »'-  ^'^'.  1— 26. 


persecution,  permitted  by  God — the  removal  of  landmarks  (Deut.  xix,  14 ;  xxviL  17  j 
Prov.  xxii.  28 ;  xxiii.  10) ;  the  plunder  of  herds  (ch.  xx.  19) ;  the  taking  of  the  property 
of  the  helpless  in  pledge  (Exod.  xxii.  26 ;  Deut.  xxiv.  6);  the  thrusting  of  the  poor 
,  from  the  way  into  pathless  spots,  so  that  the  miserable  of  the  land  are  compelled  to 
hide  themselves  from  the  intolerable  oppression. 

II.  The  mibebt  op  the  persecuted.  (Vers.  5—8.)  Ver.  6  is  an  »pt  description 
of  the  beggarly  vagabond  way  of  life  of  these  Troglodytes,  the  types  of  the  present 
Hottentots  or  Bushmen  in  South  Africa :  "  As  wild  asses  in  the  desert  they  go  forth  in 
their  daily  work,  looking  out  for  booty ;  the  steppe  gives  them  food  for  their  children. 
On  the  field  they  reap  the  fodder  of  the  cattle,  and  glean  the  vineyard  of  the  wicked," 
thievishly  not  labouring  in  his  service.  Naked,  cold,  shelterless,  exposed  to  the  rain 
amidst  the  mountains,  they  cower  for  shelter  among  the  rocks  (vers.  7,  8). 

III.  PuBTHEB  DBSCEIPTIONS  OF  TYBANNT.  (Vers.  9 — 12.)  The  orphan  is  torn  from 
the  mother's  breast  by  cruel  creditors,  who  intend  to  repay  themselves  by  bringing  up 
the  child  as  a  slave.  The  property  of  the  poor  is  seized  in  pledge  (comp.  Amos  ii.  8 ; 
Micah  ii.  9).  Then  follows  another  picture  of  the  victims  of  oppression,  not  now  as 
wanderers  of  the  steppe,  but  as  the  wretched  denizens  of  inhabited  cities  (vers,  10 — 12). 
In  nakedness  and  hunger,  they  carry  sheaves  for  the  supply  of  the  rich  man's  table, 
while  they  themselves  are  starving.  And  thus  the  cry  of  those  whose  wages  have  been 
kept  back  by  liaud  goes  up  to  Heaven  (Deut.  xxv.  4;  1  Tim.  v.  18;  Jas.  v.  4).  We 
have  a  picture  of  ancient  labour  in  the  olive-  and  vine-growing  East.  While  they 
press  the  olive  or  tread  the  wine-press  they  suffer  cruelly  from  thirst.  The  groans  of 
dying  men  fill  the  air, "  and  yet  God  never  speaks  a  word  1 "  "  He  heeds  not  the  folly  " 
with  which  these  impious  tyrants  disregard  and  trample  upon  the  moral  order. — J. 

Vers.  13 — 25. — Pictv/res  of  secret  wtd  unpunished  evil-doers.  L  The  mitbdkreb  and 
THE  ADULTEBBB.  (Vcrs.  13 — 17.)  A  class  of  the  wicked  different  from  the  foregoing 
is  now  placed  before  us ;  rebels,  revolters  against  the  light,  who  refuse  to  know  any- 
thing of  the  ways  of  light,  and  to  abide  in  its  paths.  These  are  the  "children  of 
darkness,"  so  emphatically  contrasted  in  the  New  Testament  with  the  "  children  of 
light "  (Eom.  xiii.  12 ;  Eph.  v.  8,  etc. ;  1  Thess.  v.  5).  Before  the  morning  breaks,  the 
murderer  rises,  to  strike  down  the  poor  and  needy,  and  at  night  he  carrius  on  the  trade 
of  the  thief.  The  adulterer  waits  for  the  dusk,  and  veils  his  face  (Prov.  vii.  9).  In 
the  darkness  houses  are  broken  into  by  men  who  have  shut  themselves  up  during  the 
day — men  who  have  no  affinity  with  the  light,  as  the  description  repeats  (ver.  16).  To 
these  malefactors  the  dense  darkness  is  their  morning ;  for  then,  when  others  sleep 
from  daily  toil,  their  vile  work  and  trade  begin,  "  because  they  know  the  terrors  of 
the  gloomy  darkness "  (ver.  17),  being  as  familiar  with  them  as  others  are  with  the 
bright  daytime.  The  joyous  consciousness,  the  cheerful  spirits  of  the  children  of  the 
light,  are  contrasted  with  the  fear,  the  anxiety,  the  incessant  terrors  of  the  children  of 
darkness.  Conscience,  that  makes  cowards  of  all,  will  not  suffer  the  most  hardened  to 
escape.  "Certain  dregs  of  conscience"  wUl  remain  even  in  the  most  imbruted;  the 
murderer  wiU  start  at  the  shadow  of  a  falling  leaf.  When  the  light  that  is  within  a 
man  has  become  darkness,  the  very  blessed  day  itself  is  turned  to  night.  In  their 
revolt  from  God,  the  eternal  Light,  they  carry  about  night  in  their  bosom,  and  all  their 
terrors  are  present  to  them  in  the  brightness  of  the  day  (Matt.  vi.  23 ;  John  xi.  10). 

II.  Judgment  on  these  evil-doebs  ;  its  obrtaintx.  (Vers.  18 — 21.)  They  pass 
•way  swiftly  as  upon  some  gliding  flood  (ch.  ix.  26  ;  Hos.  x.  7).  His  portion  in  the 
land  being  cursed — either  by  men  or  by  God,  or  by  both — the  wicked  man  no  more 
bends  his  steps  to  his  vineyard  and  his  other  beloved  possessions.  Then — a  powerful 
comparison — as  dryness'  and  heat  carry  away  the  short  snows  of  winter,  so  the  sinner 
evaporates  as  it  were  into  hell  (Ps.  xlix.  14 ;  xxi.  9).  Forgotten  by  a  mother's  womb ! 
Deserted  even  of  the  most  tenacious  affections  the  human  heart  can  know,  worms  make 
a  dainty  repast  upon  his  flesh.  Ho  is  like  a  blasted  tree  upon  the  heath,  or  a  felled  trunk 
in  the  forest  (ch.  xix.  10 ;  Eccles.  xi.  3 ;  Dan.  iv.  10).  For  he  was  rotten  at  the 
core;  the  heart  of  kindly  affections  was  eaten  away  ;  he  had  plundered  the  childless 
and  dealt  cruelly  with  the  widow. 

III.  JcDSMEKT,  THOUGH  CERTAIN,  IS  DELATED.  (Vers.  22 — 24.)  "  God  maintain* 
the  tyrant  for  a  Iodjj  time  by  his  power,"  does  not  execute  judgment  at  once  (Isa.  xiii. 


cii.  XXIV.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  ill 

22 ;  Ps.  xmtL  11 ;  Ixxsv.  6).  Although  the  oppressor  is  sometimes  in  desptur  of  life, 
yet  he  rises  up  and  flourishes  again.  God  grants  him  safety,  and  he  is  supported,  and 
God's  eyes  are  upon  his  ways  to  protect  and  to  bless.  But  it  is  for  a  little  while  only 
that  this  recovery  and  this  security  last — then  they  vanish  (Gen.  v.  24).  Oppressorg 
are  bowed  down,  perish,  pass  away  like  ears  of  corn. 

Conclusion  of  Job's  address.  "  If  it  should  not  be  so,  who  will  punisl#  me  for  lies, 
and  make  my  speech  as  nought?"  It  is  a  triumphant  expression  of  his  superiority, 
maintained  in  these  lessons  of  experience  on  the  incomparable  dealings  of  God  in  the 
deslinies  of  men.  Because  sin  seems  unpunished,  it  is  not  forgotten.  Retribution  is 
certain,  though  it  may  be  delayed.  The  "  treacherous  calm"  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than 
the  "  tempests  overhead."  The  greater  the  forbearance  and  the  long-suffering  shown 
by  God  towards  the  wicked,  the  more  severe  their  punishment  in  the  end. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Apparent  anomalies  in  the  Divine  Judgment.  Job  again  points  to 
the  anomalous  conditions  of  human  life — goodness,  which  has  its  approval  in  every 
brrasf,  and  on  which,  by  universal  consent  of  belief,  a  Divine  blessing  rests,  is  never- 
theless often  overcast  with  the  shadow  of  calamity ;  and,  on  the,  other  hand,  evil-doing, 
which  merits  only  jndgment,  afBiction,  and  correction,  is  often  found  to  prosper.  To  it 
oui  ward  events  seem  to  be  favourable.  Men  sin  witliout  let  or  hindrance.  Apparently, 
•'  God  layeth  not  folly  to  them."  This  aspect  of  human  affairs  is  much  dwelt  upon  in 
the  Book  of  Job ;  it  seems  to  be  one  of  the  central  themes  of  the  book.  It  finds  its 
exemplification  in  the  case  of  Job  himself.  The  principal  idea  of  the  book  is  the 
unravelling  of  this  mysterious  confusion.  Punishment  may  follow  evil-doing,  but  it 
does  not  always  immediately  accompany  it.  Therefore  some  explanation  is  needed. 
It  is  evident — 

I.  That  a  teub  estimate  op  the  Divhtb  jtjdoment  must  not  be  based  on 
M.2RB  INCIDENTS.  Incidents  do  not  always  explain  themselves.  There  are  bidden 
springs  of  events.  We  know  but  little  of  every  incident.  We  cannot  trace  its  rise  or 
its  end.  Other  considerations  must  be  taken  into  view  besides  the  mere  events  on 
which  judgment  is  to  be  passed. 

II.  The   ESTIMATE  OF   THE   DiVINB   JUDGMENT   MUST   NOT   BE   BASED  ON  A   FABTIAL 

VIEW.  All  the  materials  needed  to  enable  one  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  God's  dealings 
in  any  single  instance  are  not  always  immediately  to  hand.  Much  is  hidden.  Many 
purposes  are  to  be  served  as  much  by  the  Divine  inaction  as  by  the  Divine  work.  Men 
expect  judgment  upon  an  evil  work  to  be  presently  executed.  The  Divine  hand  ii 
withheld  for  many  purposes  which  are  not  apparent.  All  judgment,  to  be  true,  must 
take  all  things  into  account.  A  wide  range  of  vision  needed  for  this.  Pew  have 
opportunity  of  making  it;  therefore  judgment  must  be  suspended. 

III.  The   ESTIMATE   OP   THE   DiVINE   JTJD8MENT   CAN   ONLY  BE   TBULT  POHMED  WHBN 

THE  WHOLE  puKPOSBs  OP  GoD  ABE  MADE  KNOWN.  The  One  pufpose  most  vital  to  a 
correct  estimate  may  be  withheld.  It  may  be  beyond  the  power  of  the  human  mind 
to  grasp  all.  Certainly  it  is  not  possible  to  see  all  the  bearings  of  the  conduct  of  men. 
God  alone  can  see  the  end  from  the  beginning.  In  patience  then  must  men  wait  for 
thi!  end.  A  final  judgment  is  needed  to  clear  up  the  apparent  anomalies  of  the  present. 
Judgment  upon  the  wicked  is  mercifully  suspended  that  men  may  repent ;  chastise- 
munt  falls  upon  the  righteous  for  the  perfecting  of  character.  In  due  time  the  chastened, 
sorrowful,  but  good  man  shall  receive  an  ample  reward.  These  latter  truths  are 
especially  illustrated  in  the  history  of  Job. — E.  G. 

Vers.  23,  24. — The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  unsolved.  In  the  midst  of  many  apparent 
anomalies  in  the  method  of  the  Divine  dealing  with  evil-doing,  there  shines  out  one 
obvious  indication  of  the  Divine  judgment  against  the  evil-doer.  "  They  are  exalted 
for  a  little  while,"  but  suddenly  they  "are  gone  and  brought  low."  Patiently  the  gocd 
Buler  waits,  giving  opportunity  for  repentance  and  am  ndment;  but  if  the  wicked  return 
not,  he  will  bend  his  bow  and  make  ready  his  anow  upon  the  string.  Iniquity  shall 
not  go  wholly  unpunished;  nor  shall  that  punishment  be  merely  a  hidden  one — it 
shall  be  made  apparent.  Such  is  the  general  testimony  and  experience ;  but  there  are 
many  striking  instances  which  seem  to  contradict  this  view,  and  Job  adduces  the 
frequent  prosperity  of  the  evil-doer. 

JOB,  *■ 


418  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  rsiv.  1— 25. 

L  The  fbobfebitt  of  the  wicked  is  ah  unbolted  ktstebt.  Even  with  the 
clearer  light  that  now  shines  on  human  life  it  is  not  possible  wholly  to  direst  the  mind 
of  the  feeling  of  surprise  at  the  anomalous  instances  of  prospering  wickedness  and 
suffering  virtue. 

IL  The  pjtosPEEiTT  of  the  wicked  a  fubtheb  bxeeoisb  to  the  patienoe  and 
FAITH  OF  THE  GODLY.  It  demands  that  the  eye  of  faith  be  turned  upwards  to  God. 
Events  do  not  explain  themselves.  Nor  are  men  able  to  find  the  Divine  purposes 
revealed  by  events.  More  and  more  must  the  tried  and  tempted  believer  look  off  from 
the  uncertain  event,  and  place  his  faith  in  God  alone.  That  faith  is  strained,  but  it 
grows  thereby. 

III.  The  pbospeeity  of  the  wicked  is  no  guaeanteb  of  defence  frou  judg- 
ment. Judgment  lingers.  It  is  eveu  hidden.  The  good  Lord  of  all  would  fain 
altogether  restrain  it.  He  rejoices  in  mercy.  Wickedness  often  takes  advantage  of 
the  withholding  of  judgment;  but  in  this  is  no  assurance  that  the  judgment  which 
is  held  back  shall  not  be  revealed. 

IV-.  The  peospebity  of  the  wicked  needs  the  solution  of  the  futdbb.  It 
points  to  a  future  judgment  when  men  must  give  account,  and  seems  to  demand  it. 
In  that  future  what  is  mysterious  in  history  will  doubtless  be  made  plain.  No  work 
can  be  fairly  estimated  until  its  completion.  If  it  ever  please  the  Lord  of  all  to  justify 
bis  dealings  with  men,  he  will  do  it  in  that  dread  judgment  when  each  shall  receive  the 
due  reward  of  his  deeds. 

V.  The  peospebity  of  the  wicked  may  be  a  meboifdl  forbeabance  in  the 
HOPE  OF  bepbntance.  God  is  kind,  and  waiteth  long  for  the  returning  one,  in  hope 
that  even  the  goodi.ess  of  God  may  lead  him  to  repentance.  How  often  is  this  abused ! 
but  such  is  the  spirit  of  wrong  that  it  abuses  the  best  of  God's  gifts,  and  is  indifferent  to 
the  kindest  of  God's  dealings. 

The  Book  of  Job  represents  the  entanglement  of  human  affairs,  but  it  throws  light 
upon  it  and  helps  to  resolve  it.  We  live  in  clearer  light,  but  the  clearest  light  of  all 
has  yet  to  shine  when  we  shall  see  light  in  his  light.  For  this  we  must  prepare  and 
patiently  wait. — B.  G. 

Yer.  1. — Ood^s  special  days.  Job  thinks  that  if  it  may  not  be  always  possible  to  see 
God,  there  may  at  least  be  certain  times  when  he  can  be  found.  If  he  cannot  be  always 
giving  an  audience  to  his  people,  can  he  not  be  like  a  judge  on  circuit,  allowing  a  day 
for  those  who  would  seek  his  aid  at  each  part  of  his  dominions  ? 

I.  Theeb  ABE  TIMES  OF  SPECIAL  DiviNB  MANIFESTATION.  God  does  give,  in  some 
manner,  what  Job  is  asking  for.  There  is  the  "  day  of  the  Lord,"  when  he  breaks  through 
the  settled  order  of  the  world,  and  sets  his  court  as  the  Judge  of  all  men.  Such  a  day 
was  often  spoken  of  by  the  Hebrew  prophets.  It  came  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  and  again  in  the  later  overthrow  of  the  city  by  Titus  and  the  Eomau 
legions.  It  is  predicted  in  the  great  final  judgment  of  the  world.  So  also  there  is 
a  "  day  of  the  Lord  "  for  individual  men,  when  God  breaks  up  the  normal  condition  of 
life,  and  in  the  upheaval  and  confusion  a  Divine  coming  to  judgment  may  be  recognized. 
But  God  also  has  gracious  seasons  of  visitation,  "  times  of  refreshing  from  the  Lord." 
Then  the  soul  perceives  his  nearness,  and  enters  into  the  joy  and  light  of  his  presence. 

II.  God  is  peesbnt  when  he  does  not  manifest  himself.  Although  when  thus 
simply  stated  this  is  a  truism,  it  is  certainly  not  commonly  recognized  in  the  world. 
Nobody  denies  it;  yet  many  ignore  it.  God's  presence  being  invisible,  and  not  gene- 
rally evidenced  by  startling  signs,  men  come  to  pass  it  by  in  their  full  absorption  in 
secular  pursuits.  The  practical  question  then  arises — How  may  the  constant  unseen 
presence  of  God  come  to  be  more  fully  recognized?  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we 
should  learn  to  withdraw  ourselves  more  from  the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal. 
If  the  pressure  of  worldly  pursuits  is  allowed  to  crowd  the  thought  of  God  out  of  the 
soul,  the  result  must  be  a  perfect  deadness  in  regard  to  his  presence — a  practical 
atheism,  a  living  as  though  there  were  no  God.  When'  the  desolation  and  dreariness 
of  this  life  is  perceived,  we  may  well  start  back  in  horror  from  such  a  condition  of 
spiritual  decay. 

III.  It  is  foolish  to  wait  fob  a  new  manifestation  of  God.  Job  seemed  to 
need  this  because  his  position  was  peculiar,  and  he  was  set  to  work  out  new  problems 


CH.  xxir.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OK   JOB.  41« 

ofproridenoe.  But  we  have,  what  he  had  not,  the  fuller  revelation  of  God  in  Christ. 
What  we  now  need  is  not  a  fresh  revelation,  but  eyes  to  read  and  hearts  to  perceive 
the  Christian  revelation.  External,  visible  manifestations  of  God  are  not  to  be  looked 
for  now.  Miracles  were  useful  in  the  childhood  of  the  race  and  in  the  infancy  of  the 
Church,  but  we  have  no  right  to  expect  miracles  to  make  God  better  known  to  us. 
With  us  the  need  is  of  an  interior  illumination.  So  long  as  our  spiritual  sympathies 
are  blind  to  God,  no  external  manifestation  will  satisfy  our  needs.  At  the  same  time, 
we  may  well  pray  for  God's  hand  to  be  stretched  forth  in  action.  There  are  huge 
wrongs  in  the  world  and  sorrowful  miseries.  The  Church  cries  out  for  the  fuller  coming 
of  Christ  in  his  kingdom. — W.  F.  A. 

Yer.  2. — Removing  the  landmarks.  This  wag  an  old  offence  under  the  Jewish  Law 
(Deut.  xix.  14).  Here  it  appears  first  in*  a  list  of  unjust  actions.  It  introduces  us  to 
questions  concerning  the  ethics  of  property. 

L  Private  pbopeety  is  eecoqnizbd  by  Sobiptuee.  We  cannot  say  that  this 
indubitable  fact  is  a  complete  answer  to  the  proposals  of  the  socialist,  because  it  is  not 
the  function  of  revelation  to  determine  social  systems.  It  comes  in  to  regulate  our 
conduct  under  existing  arrangements.  Still,  the  recognition  of  private  property  shows 
that  it  is  not  in  itself  an  evil  tUng.  It  may  be  urged  that  similar  arguments  would 
apply  to  polygamy  and  slavery,  both  of  which  are  recognized  and  regulated  in  the  Bible. 
There  is  this  difference,  however,  that  an  enlightened  Christian  conscience  perceives 
that  the  last-named  practices  are  evil,  and  could  only  have  been  tolerated  for  a  time  to 
prevent  greater  evils ;  but  the  Christian  conscience  does  not  repudiate  the  idea  of 
private  property.  Socialism  may  be  fairly  presented  and  argued  about  on  grounds  of 
expediency ;  but  it  cannot  claim  Christian  teaching  as  favouring  it  rather  than  a  wise 
and  brotherly  exercise  of  the  rights  of  property.  The  short,  temporary  experiment  at 
Jerusalem,  when  the  disciples  held  all  things  in  common,  whatever  this  was  (and  it  was 
far  short  of  socialism),  soon  broke  down.  It  was  never  urged  on  apostolic  authority  ; 
it  cannot  be  quoted  as  the  model  for  all  Church  life.  . 

II.  Peivate  peopertt  needs  cleae  definition.  There  must  be  landmarks,  or  there 
will  be  trespassing,  springing  from  misunderstanding,  leading  to  quarrelling.  Wars 
between  nations  arise  often  out  of  disputes  about  boundaries,  and  private  differences 
most  frequently  originate  in  a  want  of  common  agreement  in  the  definition  of  rights. 
This  is  true  of  abstract  as  well  as  concrete  rights.  Nothing  is  more  necessary  for  the 
maintenance  of  social  order  than  that  each  individual  in  the  state  should  know  the 
limits  that  the  just  claims  of  others  put  upon  his  liberty.  Absolute  freedom  is  only 
possible  on  the  prairie,  or  for  a  Eobinson  Crusoe  on  his  solitary  island.  Directly  we 
come  to  live  in  society  we  have  to  study  mutual  harmony,  and  to  adjust  the  chiims  of 
neighbours.  The  perfect  state  becomes  a  sort  of  mosaic  in  which  each  individual  has 
his  place  without  overlapping  that  of  his  neighbour. 

III.  OmiT  Cheistian  pbinoiplb  will  peevent  the  abuse  of  private  peopertt. 
Each  man  is  tempted  to  enlarge  upon  his  rights.  Without  considering  himself  a  thief, 
he  is  urged  to  remove  the  landmarks  to  his  own  advantage.  State  justice  and  the 
strong  arm  of  the  law  prevent  this  wrong  as  far  as  possible.  But  real  justice  between 
man  and  man  can  never  be  perfectly  established  by  government.  There  are  innumer- 
able ways  in  which  the  strong  can  oppress  the  weak,  and  the  cunning  impose  upon  the 
unwary,  without  any  interference  by  the  law.  We  must  have  a  spirit  of  justice  in  the 
people  to  prevent  these  evils.  Now,  it  is  the  glory  of  the  Old  Testament  that  it  con- 
stantly impresses  on  us  the  duty  of  justice  and  the  sin  of  injustice.  This  grand  lesson 
is  not  the  less  imperative  because  we  live  in  New  Testament  times.  The  grace  of 
Christ  is  the  inspiration  of  all  goodness.  No  one  can  be  a  true  Christian  who  is  not 
upright  in  business,  and  straightforward  in  his  dealings  with  his  neighbours.  Christian 
charity  does  not  dispense  with  the  primitive  duty  of  justice. — W.  P.  A. 

Yer,  i.—Op]K-essmg  the  poor.  I.  A  oomhon  pbaotioe.  The  Old  Testament  rings 
with  denunciations  of  this  evil,  showing  that  it  was  rife  in  the  days  of  ancient  Israel. 
The  New  Testament  repeats  the  denunciations  of  the  Old.  John  the  Baptist  and  Christ 
himself  had  to  speak  against  unjust  exactions.  St.  James  suggests  that  the  practice 
vas  even  found  in  Christian  Churches  (Jas.  v.  4).    It  has  not  disappeared  in  our  own 


OO  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxir.  1— 2& 

day,  thoagh  it  often  assumes  subtle  and  deceptive  forms.  Many  things  contribute  to 
an  unfair  treatment  of  the  poor.  1.  Their  ignorance.  They  do  not  always  know  their 
rights,  nor  perceive  where  cunning  men  have  an  advantage  over  them.  Thus  they  are 
not  able  to  protect  themselves  fairly.  2.  Their  obscurity.  It  is  difficult  for  a  poor 
person  who  has  been  wronged  to  attract  attention.  Nobody  knows  him.  He  has  no 
influential  friends.  3.  Their  inability  to  obtain  legal  redress.  Theoretically  the  law  is 
equal  in  its  treatment  of  rich  and  poor.  Practically  it  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  For 
the  law  is  proverbially  costly,  and  a  poor  man  cannot  afford  to  put  its  machinery  in 
motion.  4.  Their  prejudiced  position.  People  look  askance  at  shabby  clothes.  If  a 
man  is  low  in  the  iiocial  scale,  a  certain  stigma  attaches  to  him  in  the  eyes  of  money- 
worshippers.  His  poverty  is  a  reproach.  Our  own  day  has  seen  the  emancipation  of 
labour.  The  organized  working  classes  can  exact  their  rights.  But  the  very  poor  are 
beneath  the  help  of  the  new  trades  imion  rbachinery.  The  tendency  of  the  sweating 
system  and  of  other  forms  of  selfishness  is  to  grind-  down  and  oppress  the  most  helpless 
and  needy. 

II.  A  GREAT  BIN.  The  commonness  of  the  practice  does  not  lessen  its  guilt.  Because 
many  of  the  well-to-do  people  who  manage  affairs  combine  to  get  as  much  as  they  can 
for  themselves  out  of  the  less  fortunate  people  beneath  them,  they  are  not  individually 
innocent.  The  law  regards  combination  to  do  a  wrong  as  conspiracy,  and  therefore 
as  an  aggravated  offence ;  and  conspiracy  to  oppress  the  poor  is  an  aggravated  offence 
io  the  sight  of  God.  1.  Against  justice.  Poor  men  have  their  rights,  even  if  the  law 
cannot  help  them  to  exact  them.  A  right  is  not  the  less  morally  inviolable  because 
means  cannot  be  found  to  put  it  in  force.  This  may  not  be  recognized  now.  But  the 
righteous  government  of  God  cannot  ignore  the  sin  of  trampling  on  the  just  claims  of  the 
helpless.  2.  Against  Christian  brotherhood.  Christ  has  taught  us  to  rise  above  the  plea 
of  Cain,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  He  has  shown  that  we  are  not  to  regard  our- 
selves as  self-contained,  or  as  liaving  no  interest  in  our  neighbours.  The  parable  of 
"  the  good  Samaritan  "  has  set  before  us  for  all  time  the  pattern  of  the  conduct- that 
he  approves  of.  All  who  need  have  claims  upon  us — claims  springing  directly  out  of 
their  need  and  our  neighbourhood  in  regard  to  them.  Christ's  own  life  and  work  teach 
us  that  the  helpless  are  our  brothers.  To  oppress  them  is  to  commit  an  outrage  against 
members  of  our  own  family.  It  is  the  mission  of  Christianity  to  spread  the  spirit 
of  brotherhood  among  men,  and  so  to  substitute  brotherly  kindness  for  heartless 
oppression. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  12. — The  bitter  cry  of  the  city.  An  ominous  characteristic  of  the  social  con- 
dition of  modern  England  is  the  continuous  draining  of  the  population  out  of  the  rural 
districts  into  the  cities.  No  greater  scandal  exists  than  the  coiidition  of  the  crowded 
multitudes  in  these- great  centres.  Prom  time  to  time  we  are  roused  by  some  prophet- 
voice  that  draws  our  attention  to  the  misery  and  degradation  of  the  city  poor,  and 
warns  us  of  the  danger  that  lurks  therein.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  be  periodically 
startled,  and  to  make  occasional  spasmodic  efforts  to  remedy  the  evil.  Continuous 
study  and  patient,  unremitting  toil  are  called  for  to  cope  with  the  dark  problem.  The 
bitter  cry  is  shrill  and  penetrating,  and  of  many  voices. 

I.  Poverty.  This  is  the  first  visible  cause  of  the  misery.  The  poor  regard  London 
as  an  Eldorado.  It  seems  as  though  they  must  get  some  employment  in  the  vast, 
busy  city.  So  they  pour  into  it  in  shoals.  There  individually  they  are  lost  sight  of. 
The  very  multitude  of  them  drowns  their  separate  claims  and  appeals.  A  huge  mass 
of  poverty  does  not  touch  personal  sympathies.  It  is  a  horror  of  misery,  but  it  does 
not  call  for  the  aid  that  the  distress  of  one  person  whose  exact  circumstances  and 
history  are  known  elicits. 

II.  OvBKOEOwDiNG.  Tliis  cvil  meaus  more  than  wretchedness.  It  is  a  distinct 
cause  of  moral  deterioration,  a  direct  source  of  dark  vices.  Herded  like  beasts,  is  it 
wonderful  that  men  live  like  beasts  ?  The  decencies  of  life  are  impossible.  All  the 
finer  feelings  are  crushed  by  coarse  surrotmdings.  The  gracious  influences  of  silence  and 
privacy  are  unknown.  People  are  forced  to  live  and  move  and  have  their  being  in  the 
midst  of  a  noisy  mob.  The  certain  result  is  a  break-duwn  of  civilization,  and  a  corrupt 
civilization  is  worse  than  barbarism.  The  savagery  of  city  slums  is  of  a  more  degraded 
type  than  that  of  African  fureuta. 


m.  xii».  1— M.]  tHB  BOOK  or  JOB.  421 

HI.  Dbine.  All  who  have  looked  carefully  into  the  condition  of  the  miserably  poor 
of  great  cities  are  driven  to  the  one  conclusion  that  the  most  proliiic  source  of  evil 
Is  intemperance.  No  doubt  the  overcrowding,  the  misery,  the  absence  of  all  other 
resources  drive  people  to  this  one  desperate  consolation.  We  must  remove  the  causes 
of  intemperance  if  we  would  sweep  away  the  vice.  Still,  it  is  a  vice.  Indulgence  in 
it  is  morally  degrading.  So  huge  a  vice  demands  exceptional  treatment.  It  is  the 
duty  of  Christian  people  not  merely  to  enjoy  their  sesthetic  worship,  but  also  to  follow 
Christ  in  saving  the  lost.  Temperance  work  must  take  a  prominent  place  in  the  activities 
of  the  Church. 

IV.  Naebownbss  of  life.  The  town  life  is  dingy  aud  compressed.  The  influences 
of  nature  are  not  felt.  The  School  Board  has  not  yet  brought  the  spirit  of  culture 
vrithin  the  horizon  of  the  crowded  people  in  the  lower  parts  of  great  cities.  Beligion  is 
little  more  than  a  name  to  too  many  of  these  unhappy  people.  Such  a  cramped  and 
crushed  life  cannot  grow  and  bear  fruit  in  the  graces  of  human  experience.  Here,  then, 
is  a  bitter  cry  that  all  Christians  sliould  hearken  to  for  Christ's  sake.  It  is  humiliating 
to  a  Christian  nation  that  such  a  cry  should  be  heard  in  our  land ;  it  will  be  a  sign  that 
our  religion  is  but  hypocritical  Pharisaism  if  the  cry  is  unheeded. — W.  F.  A. 

Yer.  19. — Z%e  death-penalty  of  sin.  Job  admits  this  as  freely  as  his  friends.  Sin 
must  lead  to  the  grave.  It  may  not  do  this  so  swiftly  as  the  friends  assume ;  nor  may 
the  course  thither  be  what  they  anticipate.  But,  in  the  long  run,  a  man's  sin  must  be 
his  death. 

L  The  sfeoific  penalty  of  bin  is  death.  Sin  may  fulfil,  and  more  than  fulfil, 
some  of  its  promises  first ;  but  the  end  is  death.  This  dreadful  fact,  which  is  made 
clear  to  us  from  the  story  of  Adam  and  Eve,  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments,  is  obscured  by  popular  conceptions  of  the  future.  The  Church  has 
regarded  pain  as  the  main  consequence  of  sin.  The  gruesome  medieval  hell  has  been 
presented  to  the  trembling  sinner  as  the  goal  of  his  evil  course.  Now  suffering,  bitter 
and  grievous,  is  in  store  for  the  impenitent,  for  Christ  speaks  of  "wailing  and  gnashing 
of  teeth."  But  suffering  is  not  the  only  end  of  sin.  Much  more  frequent  than  any 
references  to  the  suffering  of  the  wicked  are  th:  Scripture  warnings  of  death  and 
destruction.  Whatever  interpretation  we  put  upon  these  warnings — whether  we  take 
them  as  denoting  absolute  extinction  of  being,  pure  annihilation,  or  whether  we  regard 
them  as  pointing  to  some  corrupting,  dissolving  influence— they  mean  something  else 
than  keen,  wakeful  pain. 

II.  The  death-penalty  is  a  nathbal  consequence  of  sin.  Job  tells  us  that  the 
effect  is  like  that  of  drought  and  heat  consuming  the  snow-waters.  No  destroying  angel 
need  be  sent  forth  with  flaming  sword  to  cut  down  the  army  of  sinners.  They  are 
their  own  destroyers.  The  sword  is  in  their  own  conduct.  This  is  often  seen  in  the 
physical  effects  of  vice,  which  sows  seeds  of  disease,  and  hastens  premature  decay.  It  is 
always  present  in  the  moral  consequences  of  evil.  The  spiritual  natvure  is  diseased,  cor- 
rupted, lowered.  Powers  and  faculties  fade  and  wither  away.  The  true  self  shrinks 
and  shrivels.  Existence  in  the  body  on  earth  becomes  a  living  death.  When  the  life 
of  the  body  is  gone  it  is  difiScult  to  see  what  life  is  left,  for  this  life  seemed  to  be  all 
that  was  possessed. 

IIL  The  death-penalty  can  only  be  avoided  by  the  qbnebation  of  a  new  life. 
Sentence  has  gone  out  against  us ;  the  sentence  is  in  our  own  constitution.  Here  is  the 
difficulty.  If  it  were  external,  an  external  process  might  abolish  it ;  but  seeing  that 
it  is  internal,  it  must  be  dealt  with  internally.  No  mere  decree  of  pardon  will  be  suffi- 
cient, for  the  poison  is  in  the  blood,  the  death  is  already  at  work  there.  A  simple  order 
of  forgiveness  can  do  nothing.  The  pressing  need  is  for  an  antidote  within.  Nay,  the 
old  self  has  been  so  injured  and  corrupted  by  sin,  that  a  new  life  is  needed.  We  are 
beyond  cure ;  we  are  like  lepers  who  have  lost  limbs  in  their  disease.  Healing  is  not 
enongh ;  a  new  creation  is  necessary.  Now,  this  is  just  what  Christ  effects.  He  does 
not  only  give  external  pardon,  he  is  not  satisfied  to  manipulate  legal  points ;  he  regene- 
rates. He  says,  "  Ye  must  be  bom  again  "  (John  iii.  3)j  and  St.  Paul  tells  us  that 
"  he  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  is  a  new  creature  "  (2  Cor.  v.  17). — W.  P.  A. 

Ter.  24. — "  A  little  while."    Job  is  here  taking  a  step  towards  the  solution  of  th« 


4sa 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xxt.  1 — Si 


problem  that  his  misfortunes  have  raised.  Bejecting  the  hackneyed  doctrine  of  his 
friends  that  trouble  comes  as  the  temporal  panishment  of  ain,  and  seeing  that  bad  men 
often  escape  trouble,  he  concludes  that  all  the  Injustice  is  but  temporary.  The  pros- 
perity of  the  wicked  is  but  for  "  a  little  while."  Before  long  there  will  be  a  fair  treat- 
ment of  all. 

I,   WlOKXDNGSS   MAY   BE   AOOOMPAinED  BT  TEMFOBABT   PBOSPERITT.      1.    ThtS   is  ati 

obvious  fad.  Only  the  extraordinary  blindness  of  bigotry  could  have  allowed  the  three 
friends  to  deny  it.  Job  has  only  to  point  to  events  which  are  open  to  the  eyes  of 
all,  to  show  that  there  are  bad  prosperous  men.  This  is  always  admitted  when  it  is 
approached  from  another  point  of  view,  i.e:  when  the  sins  of  the  rich  are  denounced. 
2.  This  should  not  dismay  us.  All  faith  has  grown  up  in  face  of  the  obvious  fact  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked.  If  we  have  not  considered  it,  others  have  in  bygone  ages. 
Yet  faith  has  flourished  and  triumphed,  although  she  could  not  explain  the  mystery. 
Therefore  faith  may  still  find  ground  to  stand  on,  even  when  one  more  person  discovers 
to  his  sui-prise  what  has  always  been  patent  to  all  who  would  take  the  trouble  to 
observe  it.  3.  This  cannot  Justify  wickedness.  Earthly  prosperity  is  not  the  seal  of 
heavenly  approval.  The  assumption  that  it  is  so  only  originated  in  a  mistake.  Here 
ancient  orthodoxy  has  proved  to  be  in  error.  If  the  notion  is  erroneous  when  used 
{gainst  a  man  in  misfortune,  it  is  equally  erroneous  when  claimed  by  one  who  is  tem- 
porarily prosperous. 

II.   The  PE08PEEITT  THAT  ACCOMPAHIES  WICKEDNESS  OAH  OKLT  ENDUEB  FOB  A  LITTLE 

•WHILE.  1.  It  does  not  outlast  death.  By  the  nature  of  things  it  cannot  do  so,  because  it 
simply  springs  from  accidental  circumstances  and  earthly  influences,  which  are  confined 
to  this  life.  It  has  not  its  source  in  a  deep  and  enduring  spiritual  experience.  The  veiy 
triumph  of  it  rests  on  the  score  of  the  spiritual.  But  though  the  spiritual  may  be  trampled 
on  now,  it  cannot  be  pretended  that  the  material  will  continue  after  death.  Kiches, 
pleasures,  pomp,  and  prowess  are  all  left  behind  on  this  side  of  the  grave.  2.  Its  earthly 
existence  is  brief.  The  careless  man  may  postpone  all  consideration  of  his  end.  He 
may  be  satisfied  that  he  has  enough  and  to  spare  for  the  present.  Nevertheless,  the 
present  is  rushing  away  from  him.  As  he  looks  back,  all  past  years  seem  to  be  but  a 
brief  period,  and  coming  years  will-  accelerate  their  speed.  What,  then,  is  this  short 
tenure  of  prosperity  for  which  he  is  selling  himself?  A  passing  shadow !  3.  It  is  of 
no  worth  even  while  possessed.  The  temporary  character  of  this  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
is  a  sign  that  it  is  a  hollow  deception.  Its  charms  are  proved  to  be  meretricious  by  the 
fact  that  it  will  not  remain  with  us.  So  ephemeral  a  good  cannot  be  substantial.  The 
seeds  of  decay  are  in  it  fl-om  the  first.  And  what  is  its  joy  but  a  deceitful  mockery  ? 
There  is  a  dreadful  doom  in  the  very  quietness  of  this  hopeless  life.  All  that  is  worth 
living  for  is  gone  out  of  it.    Bich,  gay,  outwardly  prosperous,  the  soul  is 

"  Left  in  Gh>d's  contempt  apart, 
With  ghastly  smooth  life,  dead  at  heart." 

W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Vers.  1 — 6. — Far  from  accepting  Job's 
challenge,  and  grappling  with  the  difficulty 
involved  in  the  frequent,  if  not  universal, 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  Bildad,  in  his  weak 
reply,  entirely  avoids  the  subject,  and  limits 
himself  to  briefly  touching  two  old  and  well- 
worn  topics — the  might  of  God  (vers.  2,  3) 
and  the  universal  sinfulness  of  men.  On 
neither  of  these  two  points  does  he  throw 
any  fresh  light.  He  avoids,  however,  the 
reckless  charges  of  Eliphaz  (oh.  xxii.  5—9) 
as  well  as  the  coarse  menaces  of  Zophar  (oh. 
XX.  fr-29> 


Vers.  1,  2.— Then  answered  Bildad  the 
Shnhite,  and  said.  Dominion  and  fear  are 
with  Mm  (i.e.  with  GoJ).  God  is  the  abso- 
lute Sovereign  of  the  universe,  to  whom, 
therefore,  all  crciited  beings  must  perforce 
submit  themselves.  He  is  also  terrible  in 
his  might,  so  that  for  their  own  sakes  men 
should  submit  to  his  decrees.  Through  his 
active  sovereignty,  nud  the  fear  which  he 
inspires,  he  mi^etb  peace  in  his  high  places. 
The  meaning  may  be  that,  through  these 
high  attributes,  God  maintains  peace  among 
the  dwellers  in  the  supernal  regions ;  but 
beyond  this  there  is  a  possible  allusion  to  a 
time  in  which  pjace  was  disturbed,  and  the 
Almighty  had  to  "make"  it,  or  re-establish 
it.    (On  the  subject  of  the  "war  in  heaven," 


CH.  XXV.  1 — e.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


42S 


and  the  defeat  and  subjection  of  the  rebels, 
see  the  comment  on  oh.  ix.  13.) 

Ver.  3. — Is  there  any  number  of  his 
armies  1  (comp.  Ps.  Ixviii.  17,  "The  chariots 
of  God  are  twenty  thousand,  even  thousands 
of  angels;"  and  Dan.  vii.  10,  "Thousand 
thousands  ministered  unto  him,  and  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood  before 
him;"  see  also  2  Kings  vi.  16, 17;  Matt.  xxvi. 
53 ;  Heb.  xii.  22 ;  Eev.  ix.  16).  The  number 
of  the  angels  at  any  given  time  must  be  a 
definite  one.  But  as  there  is  nothing  to 
limit  the  further  exercise  of  creative  power 
in  this  direction,  the  possible  number  is 
indefinite.  And  npon  whom  doth  not  his 
light  arise  1  Upon  what  being  among  all 
the  countless  thousands  whom  he  hath 
created,  or  will  create,  does  not  the  bright- 
ness of  his  effulgence  shine  in  such  sort 
that  they  are  illumined  by  him,  and  them- 
selves shine  with  a  mere  reflected  splendour? 
Ver.  4. — How  then  can  man  be  justified 
with  God  ?  If  Ood's  creatures  have  no 
brightness  of  their  own,  and,  when  they 
shine,  shine  only  with  a  reflected  radiance, 
then  certainly  can  uo  man  be  justified  by 
his  own  merits.   "All  have  sinned,  and  come 


short  of  the  glory  of  God"  (Bom.  iii.  23). 
Or  how  can  he  ba  clean  that  is  born  of 
k  woman  t  (comp.  ch.  xir.  4,  "  Who  shall 
bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not 
one ; "  and  the  comment  ad  loo.}, 

Yer.  5. — Behold  even  to  the  moon,  and  it 
shineth  not.  Observe,  i.e.,  all  that  is  purely 
bright  in  creation,  "  even  to  the  moon,"  the 
most  purely  bright  object  of  all,  and  con- 
sider that  in  God's  sight,  compared  to  his 
radiance,  it  has  no  brightness — "it  shineth 
not."  Or  turn  your  attention  from  the  moon 
to  the  stars,  rivals  of  the  moon  in  purity  and 
brilliance,  and  reflect  that  the  stars  are  not 
pure  in  his  sight.  A  sort  of  dusky  veil 
overspreads  them. 

Yer.  6. — How  much  less  man,  that  is  a 
wormi  and  the  son  of  man,  which  is  a 
worm  1  (comp.  Ps.  xxii.  6).  How  much  less 
can  man  be  pure  in  God's  sight  I  An  un- 
doubted truth,  or  rather,  perhaps,  a  truism, 
but  not  to  the  point,  for  Job  has  never  really 
maintained  that  he  is  without  sin  (see  ch. 
vii.  20,  21 ;  ix.  2,  20,  etc.).  He  has  only 
maintained  that  his  sins  have  not  been  of 
such  a  character  aa  to  account  for  hia 
Bofferings. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 6. — JBUdad  to  Job :  The  grea'ness  of  Ood  and  the  littleness  of  man :  an  old 
mrmon  reproduced.  I.  Thb  greatness  of  God.  To  impress  Job  with  suitable 
conceptions  of  the  ineffable  majesty  of  that  Divine  Being  before  whom  he  desired  so 
confidently  and,  as  it  appeared  to  the  speaker,  so  irreverently  to  come  (ch.  xxiii.  3 — 5), 
Bildad  depicts  God's  dominion  as :  1.  Absolute  in  its  character.  "  Dominion  is  with 
him  "  (ver.  2);  t.e.  as  it  is  with  no  other.  Earthly  potentates  derive  their  sovereignty 
from  him  (Prov.  vili.  15 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  14).  He  also  is  the  Fountain  of  authority  for 
whatever  principalities  and  powers  exist  in  the  heavenly  places  (Col.  i.  16).  But 
dominion  exists  in  God  essentially,  absolutely,  permanently.  The  uncreated,  unde- 
rived,  and  governmental  supremacy  of  God  is  exhibited  in  Scripture  with  singular 
lucidity  and  fulness  (Gen.  xiv.  19;  Deut.'x.  14;  2  Kings  xix.  15;  1  Chron.  xxix.  11 ; 
Ps.  xov.  3 ;  Matt.  xi.  25 ;  Eev.  xix.  6).  2.  Awe-inspiring  in  its  influence.  "  Dominion 
and  fear  are  with  him  "  (ver.  2),  the  term  "  fear "  defining  the  effect  produced  upon 
the  creaturely  imagination  by  the  sublime  majesty  of  the  unnamed  Deity,  Bildad's 
omission  of  that  Deity's  name  being  a  striking  illustration  of  the  precise  import 
of  his  words.  Reverential  awe  is  the  proper  attitude  for  a  creature  to  assume  in 
presence  of  (jod  (Deut.  v.  29;  x.  12;  Josh.  xxiv.  14;  2  Kings  xvii.  36;  Ps.  ii.  11); 
who  should  be  feared  by  the  inhabitants  of  earth  generally  (Ps.  xxxiii.  8),  by  his 
redeemed  ones  especially  (Bxod.  xv.  11 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  17),  by  such  as  would  serve  him 
acceptably  (Heb.  xii.  28),  by  those  who  would  dwell  with  him  continually  (Eev.  xi.  18), 
by  angelic  hosts  (Isa.  vi.  2)  and  glorified  saints  (Eev.xv .  4).  JThis  fear  should  be  based 
on  the  majestical  government  of  God,  as  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  3.  Peaceful  in  its 
effidency.  "He  maketh  peace  in  his  high  places"  (ver.  2),  i.e.  "among  the  celestial 
beings  immediately  surrounding  him  "  (Delitzsoh) ;  producing  (1)  harmony  instead  of 
discord,  quenching  all  symptoms  of  internal  dissension,  and,  where  internecine  warfare 
may  have  broken  oiit,  restoring  the  contending  combatants  to  a  state  of  tranquil  amity ; 
(2)  reconciliation  instead  of  estrangement,  pointing  probably  to  some  sublime  act  of 
mediation  by  which  the  holy  angels  were  confirmed  in  obedience  (e.y.the  enthronement 
of  Christ  as  Mediator:  Candlish,  'The  Fatherhood  of  God,'  p.  279);  and  (3)  subjuga- 
tion instead  of  revolt,  exhibiting  his  power  so  effectively  against  the  rebel  angels  that 


424  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oa.  xxv.  1—6, 

they  are  completely  prevented  from  working  harm  against  his  throne  or  empire,  but 
are  kept  in  chains  against  the  judgment, of  the  great  day.  As  God  rules  in  heaven,  so 
also  does  he  reign  on  earth  in  and  through  Christ,  who  is  our  Peacemaker  (Eph.  ii.  14), 
having  by  his  incarnation  made  peace  (unity  instead  of  division)  between  Jew  and 
Gentile,  by  his  cross  produced  at-one-ment  (the  reconciliation  of  both  in  one  body 
unto  God),  and  by  his  power  will  ultimately  effect  the  complete  subjugation  of  his  foes 
(1  Cor.  XV.  24 — 28).  4.  Illimitable  in  its  sway,  "Is  there  any  number  of  his 
armies  ? "  (ver.  3).  The  armies  alluded  to  are  (1)  the  angels  (Ps.  ciii.  21),  who  are 
represented  in  Scripture  as  an  innumerable  (Ps.  Ixviii.  17 ;  Heb.  xii.  22 ;  Bev.  v.  11) 
host,  arrayed  in  military  order  (Dan.  iv.  35),  whose  shining  legions  are  led  on  by  the 
power  of  the  supreme  Creator  (Ps.  civ.  4 ;  Matt.  xxv.  31),  every  individual  member 
thereof  being  promptly  obedient  to  that  Creator's  will  (Zeoh.  vi.  5 ;  Matt,  xxiv,  21 ; 
Heb.  i.  14).  (2)  The  stars,  which  also  are  in  Scripture  depicted  as  an  army 
(Isa.  xl.  26),  are  discovered  by  modern  science  to  be  immensely  more  numerous  than 
ever  entered  into  the  mind  of  Bildad  to  conceive.  Though  not  intended  by  Bildad, 
God's  armies  may  be  said  also  to  include  (3)  the  creatures  generally,  which  are  all  in 
his  hand  and  under  his  control.  6.  Beneficent  in  its  administration.  "And  upon 
whom  doth  not  his  light  arise?"  (ver.  3).  (1)  The  light  of  his  material  sun,  whose 
cheering  beams,  created  (Gen.  i.  16)  and  directed  by  him,  diffuse  themselves  abroad 
upon  the  face  of  earth  (Ps,  xix.  6),  awaking  life,  imparting  health,  producing 
beauty,  inspiring  joy,  blessing  all  creatures  animate  and  inanimate,  rational  and 
irrational,  good  and  bad  alike  (Matt.  v.  45).  A  sunless  earth  would  be  an  arctic 
region  of  perpetual  ice,  a  dismal  chamber  of  horrors,  a  prison-house  of  misery,  a 
cheerless  sepulchre  of  death.  Besides  being  signal  demonstrations  of  God's  creative 
wisdom  and  power,  the  making  of  light  and  the  disposition  of  it  in  a  central  orb  are 
striking  tokens  of  his  goodness.  (2)  The  light  of  his  providential  favour,  in  respect  of 
which  he  is  styled  "the  Father  of  lights"  (Jas.  i.  17).  The  goodness  of  God,  Uke 
the  light  of  the  sun,  is  freely  flowing  (Jas.  L  5),  far-extending  (Ps.  xxxiii.  5),  all- 
enriching  (Ps.  cxlv.  9),  never-failing  (Ps.  c.  5).  As  the  Divine  beneficence  blesses  all 
God's  terrestrial  creatures,  we  may  rest  assured  it  does  not  forget  his  celestial  armies 
of  saints  and  angels.  (3)  The  light  of  his  gracious  truth,  which  is  also  set  forth  in 
Scripture  under  the  emblem  of  light  (Isa.  ii.  5;  ix.  2;  John  xii.  35;  2  Cor.  iv.  4). 
Christ,  in  whom  that  light  is  embodied  (John  i.  4;  ix.  5),  is  characterized  as  the  true 
Light  (John  i.  8,  9),  being  designed  for  the  saving  illumination  of  the  spiritually 
benighted,  collectively  and.  individually.  The  light  of  his  gospel  is  destined  to  circle 
round  the  earth  like  the  sun  (Ps.  xix.  4;  Rom.  x.  18).  6.  All-transcending  in  its 
splendour.  "  Whom  doth  not  his  light  surpass  1 "  (Delitzsch).  The  resplendent  Ruler 
of  the  numberless  legions  of  heaven  is  One  whose  glory,  i.e.  as  a  personal  Sovereign,  out- 
shines in  radiance  that  of  each  and  all  of  those  beings  of  light  over  whom  he  reigns. 
These  latter  have  no  light  they  derive  not  from  him,  as  the  moon  and  planets  have  none 
they  receive  not  from  the  sun,  and  Christians  none  that  does  not  come  to  them  from 
Christ,  round  whom  they  revolve  like  attendant  satellites ;  and  so  the  glory  which  the 
angels  or  other  creatures  have  is  as  no  glory  by  reason  of  "  the  glory  that  excelleth." 

II.  The  littleness  op  man.  With  a  painful  lack  of  originality,  Bildad,  the  master 
of  ancient  laws  and  popular  traditions,  quietly  appropriates  a  sentiment  which  already 
Eliphaz  had  uttered  (oh.  iv.  17 — 21 ;  xv.  14 — 16),  and  to  which  even  Job  had  assented 
(ch.  ix.  2 ;  xiv.  4),  that  in  comparison  with  so  transoendently  glorious  a  Being  man 
must  for  ev«r  be  immeasurably  insignificant  and  mean.  1.  Guilty.  "  How  then 
can  man  be  justified  with  God?"  (ver.  4).  The  argument  is  a  fortiori:  If  ihese 
radiant  beings  constituting  God's  celestial  armies  would  never  think  of  contending 
with  him  in  order  to  establish  the  faultless  purity  of  their  characters,  it  is  simplj' 
monstrous  to  suppose  that  a  frail  man,  whose  feebleness  is  the  result  of  a  depraved 
moral  constitution,  would  ever  succeed  in  securing  acquittal  before  the  bar  of  a  holy 
God.  The  language  implies  (1)  that  no  man  can  be  justified  by  works — a  doctrine 
pervading  both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  (oh.  ix.  2 ;  Ps.  cxliii.  2 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  12 ; 
Eom.  iii.  23 ;  Eph.  ii.  9 ;  Titus  iii.  5) ;  (2)  that  if  a  man  is  to  be  justified,  it  must  be 
by  grace  (Gen.  xv.  6 ;  Ps.  xxxii.  2 ;  Eom.  iii.  24 ;  v.  21 ;  Titus  iii.  7),  i.e.  without 
works  and  by  faith ;  while  it  seems  also  to  teach  (3)  that  the  legal  standing  of  the 
wagda  before  the  throne  is  not  of  works  any  more  than  man's — a  doctrine  of  which 


m.  xtv.  1-4.3  ME  BOOK  Of  JOS.  m 

obscure  hints  are  believed  to  be  found  in  Scripture  (cf.  Candllah's  '  Fatherhood  of  God,' 
leot.  vi.  p.  250).  2.  Impure.  "  How  can  he  be  clean  that  is  bom  of  a  woman  ?  " 
(ver.  4).  In  Bildad's  estimation  the  moral  defilement  of  man  is  (1)  involved  in  his 
origin,  as  being  the  child  of  woman — a  sentiment  in  which  Job  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  1,  4)  and 
Elipliaz  (ch.  xv.  14)  alike  concur  (of.  homiletics,  in  loo.) ;  (2)  proved  by  his  station : 
"  Behold  even  to  the  moon,  and  It  shineth  not;  yea,  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight: 
how  much  less,  then,  man  ?  "  (vers.  5,  6).  Bildad,  soaring  at  a  lower  altitude  than 
Eliphaz  (ch.  iv.  18),  contrasts  the  glory  of  God  with  the  purity  of  his  I ligh  est  creatures. 
The  incomparable  brilliance  of  an  Oriental  evening  sky  is  attested  by  travellers ;  yet  the 
palo,  clear,  silver  whiteness  of  the  moon's  light,  and  the  sparkling  lustre  of  the  starry 
orbs,  become  dimmed  beside  the  insufferable  radiance  of  the  Divine  glory  (1  Tim.  vi. 
16).  The  imperfection  of  the  highest  creatures  being  thus  established,  it  follows  that 
man,  one  of  the  lowest  (physically  considered),  cannot  be  pure.  3.  Feeble.  "  Man 
that  is  a  worm,  and  the  son  of  man  that  is  a  worm  "  (ver.  6).  Man  is  compared  by 
Eliphaz  to  a  dweller  in  a  mud  hut  (ch.  iv.  19),  and  by  Job  to  a  flower  springing  up 
from  the  soil  (ch.  xiv.  2).  He  is  here  likened  to  a  worm  bred  by  putrefaction,  «.e.  a 
mean,  despicable,  and  insignificant  creature  (Ps.  xxiL  6),  which  he  is  (1)  in  comparison 
with  the  rest  of  creation  (Ps.  viii.  3,  4 ;  Isa.  zli.  24),  but  much  more  (2)  in  comparison 
with  the  God  of  creation  (Isa.  xl.  22). 

Learn  :  1.  The  claim  God  has  on  the  reverential  homage  of  his  creatures.  2.  The 
antiquity  of  the  gospel  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  3.  The  humility  man 
should  cultivate  in  thinking  of  himself.  4.  The  infinite  condescension  of  him  who  is 
the  Lord  of  all  the  armies  of  light  in  becoming  a  worm  and  no  man.  5.  The  tran- 
Bcendent  glory  of  Divine  grace  which  contemplates  the  elevation  of  "  man  that  is  a 
worm,  and  the  son  of  man  that  Is  a  worm,"  to  a  position  higher  than  the  stars  or  the 
angels ;  yea,  to  a  partnership  in  that  very  dominion  (Bev.  iii.  21)  which  belongs  to 
God. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa 

Vera.  1 — 6. — The  majesty  of  Qod  and  the  weakness  of  man.  Leaving  untouched  the 
perplexing  question  of  the  prosperity  of  bad  men,  Bildad  makes  the  point  of  his  attack 
upon  Job  his  assertions  of  innocence  (ch.  xxiii.  10 — 12j.  His  object  is  to  insist  that, 
the  distance  between  man  and  God  being  infinite,  man  cannot  enter  into  controversy 
with  God,  nor  can  he  be  pure  in  his  eyes.  The  address  of  Bildad  consists  mainly  of 
repetitions  from  the  previous  discourses  of  Eliphaz  (ch.  iv.  17,  sqq. ;  xv.  14,  sjg.) — 
descriptions  of  the  majesty  and  sublimity  of  God.  In  reply.  Job  seizes  the  o]iportunity 
ofi'ered  by  his  antagonist,  and,  alter  a  few  bitter  words  of  self-vindication,  proceeds  to 
outvie  and  far  surpass  Bildad  in  his  description  of  the  greatness  of  God. 

I.  (Jod'b  majesty  ;  and  application.  (Vers.  2 — 4.)  1.  Absolute  power,  carrying 
with  it  overwhelming  awe  into  the  minds  of  his  subjects — a  power  which  ha<i  quelled 
the  earlier  discord  of  heaven  and  made  peace  in  those  heights — is  associated  with  God 
(ver.  2).  He  is  "  Lord  of  hosts,"  and  those  hosts  are  innumerable — the  stars  of 
heaven,  the  angels  who  inhabit  and  guide  them  (oh.  xv.  15) ;  and  all  the  marvellous 
forces  of  nature — winds,  lightnings,  waves  (ch.  xxxviii.  19 — 21 ;  Ps.  civ.  4),  which  do 
his  bidding  (ver.  3).  2.  He  is  the  absolute  Li/jht,  from  which  all  others  are  but 
reflected  and  derived.  It  is  his  garment  and  his  glory  (Pb.  civ.  2 ;  Ezek.  i.  27,  28  ; 
1  Tim.  vi.  16).  It  blesses  and  cheers  all  that  lives  (Matt.  v.  45).  No  living  creature 
is  exempt  from  its  all- pervading  beams.  Then  how  can  a  mortal  be  just  with  God? 
How  can  man,  in  his  feebleness,  enter  into  court  and  contend  with  absolute  Power 
(comp.  ch.  ix.  2)?  Thus  the  speaker  would  convict  Job  of  folly.  And  then  comes 
the  second  member  of  \  er.  4  leading  to  the  second  great  thought  of  the  speech  :  "  How 
can  he  be  pure  that  is  born  of  a  woman  ?  " 

II.  God's  pubitt  ;  and  application.  (Vers,  5, 6.)  The  bright  silver  lustre  of  the 
moon  seems  pale,  the  stars  are  dimmed,  when  compared  with  Ihe  essential  and  eternal 
splendour  of  the  Highest — to  say  nothing  of  man,  the  maggot,  the  worm !  The  stars 
are  but  the  outer  adornments  of  the  palace  and  abode  of  God ;  and  how,  then,  shall 
man,  living  on  this  dim  .spot  that  men  call  earth,  think  to  meet  God  on  equal  terms 
and  dispute  with  him  ?    If  he,  like  moon  and  stars,  keeps  to  his  rank  and  older,  he 


426  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxv.  1— a 

may  enjoy  the  benefit  of  Qod ;  if  he  attempts  to  travel  beyond  it,  he  will  be  crushed 
by  the  weight  of  the  Divine  majesty  (Cocceius).  The  view  of  yonder  glory  reminds 
man  of  bis  sin  and  corruption.  The  celestial  lustre  is  the  sign  of  celestial  purity  in 
the  inhabitants  of  heaven ;  his  frailty  and  mortality  are  the  evidence  of  ,his  sin.  The 
time  has  not  yet  come  when,  life  and  immortality  being  brought  to  light,  nan  is  con- 
scious of  the  grandeur  of  his  inward  faith  and  of  his  spiritual  destiny,  when  be  refuses 
to  be  crushed  by  the  dazzling  might  and  splendour  of  the  material  universe  because 
conscious  of  aflSnity  to  the  creative  thought. — J. 

Ver.  4. — Condemnation,  li,  in  the  course  of  Job's  replies  to  his  friends,  he  has 
sought  to  exculpate  himself  from  all  blame,  and  to  aver  his  righteousness  in  the  sight 
of  God,  he  is  now  answered  by  a  brief  speech  of  his  friend,  "  How  can  man  be  justified 
in  the  sight  of  Grod  ?  "  True,  Job  holdoth  fast  his  integrity ;  true,  he  may  be  free  from 
the  accusations  brought  against  him  by  his  friends,  who  are  unable  in  any  other  way 
to  explain  his  suflering  lot ;  yet,  although  he  is  so  far  clear,  he  shares  the  deep  humilia- 
tion which  attaches  to  all,  of  standing  before  the  Divine  throne  a  condemned  criminal. 
He  is  unjust.  Alas  I  the  very  "stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight ;  how  mnch  less  man, 
that  is  a  worm  ?  "    This  condemnation  and  inability  of  man  to  justify  himself — 

I.  Puts  an  end  to  all  boastful  sblf-oonfidbnob  before  God.  How  shall  the 
condemned  and  sinful  even  enter  into  controversy  with  the  Most  High?  How  shall 
the  frail  child  of  earth — earth-born  and  earthly— contend  with  God.  Not  Job  only, 
but  every  one,  must  be  silenced  in  presence  of  this  truth,  which  has  its  witness  in  each 
man's  breast. 

II.  Is  A  CAUSE  FOE  PENITENT  HUMILLA.TI0N  BEFORE  Gk)D.  Truly  the  place  of  man 
— sinful  man — is  the  dust.  How  shall  the  unclean  dare  to  draw  nigh  unto  the  Holy 
One  ?  Human  feebleness  and  imperfectnesa  should  be  sufficient  to  put  men  as  in  the 
dust ;  but  if  sinfiilness,  if  a  sense  of  condemnation  before  God,  be  added  to  this,  how 
much  greater  cause  for  self-abasement  is  there?  In  penitence  man  has  ground  of 
hope,  for  the  Lord  lifteth  up  the  meek ;  but  in  presumed  self-justification  he  can  only 
meet  with  confusion. 

III.  Is    A    REASON    FOB   THE    EAGER    EMBBACB    OF    THE    UESOT   OF    QoD    IN    CHRIST. 

Whither  shall  a  sinner  fly?  Where  is  true  safety  for  him?  In  the  revelation  of  the 
mercy  of  God  to  the  penitent  sinner  there  is  an  assured  hope.  This  graciousness  on 
the  part  of  the  Most  High  holds  out  the  utmost  encouragement  to  the  self-condemned 
to  return ;  while  the  inability  to  justify  himself  is  in  itself  the  highest  reason  why  the 
gracious  overture  of  God  should  receive  from  man  an  eager  response. 

IV.  Is  A  HIGH  MOTIVE  TO  STRICTNESS  OF  LIFE.  With  how  much  csrefulness  and 
lowliness  and  effort  ought  not  he  to  live  who  by  his  very  nature  is  so  prone  to  err  I 
"  The  son  of  man,  which  is  a  worm,"  ought  to  seek  to  order  his  course  before  God  with 
the  utmost  lowliness  and  care.  A  pensioner  upon  the  Divine  bounty,  a  criminal  at  the 
Divine  bar,  he  has  no  warrant  for  rude  self-assumption,  but  has  need  to  seek,  in 
patient,  humble  efifort,  to  avoid  deeper  condemnation. — R.  G. 

Ver.  2.—"  Peace  in  high  places."  Bildad  tries  to  overawe  Job  by  presenting  what 
is  indeed  a  true  idea  of  God,  although,  if  he  had  known  the  patriarch,  he  would  have 
seen  that  there  was  nothing  in  it  that  was  likely  to  be  accepted  as  a  specific  rebuke. 
Job  had  maintained  his  innocence,  and  had  cried  out  for  God  to  vindicate  it :  "  Oh 
that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him ! "  Bildad  replies  that  God  is  a  great  Ruler  in  the 
heavenly  heights,  maintaining  peace  among  his  angelic  armies ;  how  can  man  be  justified 
with  One  so  great  ?  It  is  meant  to  be  a  rebuke  to  Job's  presumption  in  appealing  to 
BO  awful  a  Judge.  Tet,  if  Job  is  innocent,  why  should  he  not  dare  to  do  so  ?  Bildad  is 
right  in  saying  that  God  is  so  holy  that  none  can  stand  before  him  without  being 
abashed  by  shame.  The  unfairness  is  in  making  this  truth  a  ground  for  accusing  Job, 
not  of  the  general  evil  of  fallen  creatures,  but  of  exceptional  enormities  of  guilt, 

L  God  rulks  over  all,  1.  Ee  is  above  all.  We  rise  through  the  hierarchy  of 
being  from  one  stage  to  another,  and  at  the  head  of  all  we  find  God.  None  can  equal 
him,  none  can  reach  up  to  his  might  and  holiness.  Supreme  in  solitary  perfection,  he 
crowns  the  temple  of  being.  2.  He  includes  all  in  his  sway.  His  exaltation  does  not 
iiT<dve  his  separation  from  bis  creatures.    On  the  contrary,  it  givas  him  a  wide  scope ; 


OE.  xxT.  1— «.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  i27 

from  his  exalted  position  he  surveys  the  whole  panorama  of  existence,  and  administers 
the  affairs  of  the  universe.  3.  He  exerts  active  influence  over  all.  God  is  not  an 
ornamental  figure-head.  He  not  only  reigns,  he  rules.  His  government  i«  absolute ; 
not  despotic,  only  because  it  is  paternal. 

II.  God's  kulb  is  a  necessitjt  of  the  univeebb.  The  worlds  could  not  go  on 
without  it.  Confusion  and  chaos  would  follow  if  he  withdrew  his  hand.  1.  It  is 
needed  in  heaven.  Even  there  it  is  God  who  keeps  the  peace.  The  best-tempered 
society  needs  order  and  government  to  save  it  from  falling  into  confusion.  Heaven 
would  become  a  babel  of  disorder  if  no  regulating  power  were  supreme  there.  The 
highest  intelligences  and  the  purest  spirits  require  a  regulative  influence  to  keep  them 
all  in  harmony.  However  well  its  harps  are  tuned,  and  however  perfect  is  its  music, 
the  celestial  orchestra  needs  one  great  leader.  2.  Much  more  is  it  needed  on  earth.  If 
heavenly  beings  cannot  live  aright  without  Divine  guidance  and  rule,  much  more  is 
this  the  case  with  earthly  creatures,  who  are  weak,  ignorant,  and  sinful.  If  God  makes 
his  rule  felt  in  maintaining  the  perfect  order  of  heaven,  assuredly  he  must  make  it  felt 
in  rectifying  the  wild  disorder  gf  earth. 

III.  God's  hxtle  seoubbs  pbacb.  1.  It  maintains  "peace  in  high  places."  There 
is  peace  above,  though  at  present  there  may  be  confusion  below.  The  heavens  are 
calm,  though  the  earth  is  storm-tossed.  The  changeless  blue  sky  is  above  the  shifting 
rack  of  clouds.  Stars  keep  to  their  spheres.  Angels  perform  their  functions.  The 
blessed  dead  are  at  rest.  If  we  do  but  look  high  enough  we  shall  see  peace.  2.  It 
mil  bring  '■'peace  on  earth."  When  heaven  touches  earth  the  peace  of  heaven  comes 
down  among  men.  If  God  can  keep  peace  among  the  greatest  beings,  surely  he  can 
establish  it  among  puny  mortals.  He  can  reconcile  all  enmity  or  crush  all  opposition. 
Christ  has  come  from  the  peace  of  heaven  to  be  "  our  Peace  "  (Bph.  ii.  14). — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  3. — The  innumerable  armies  of  God.  I.  Thbib  vast  numbees.^  We  can  see 
no  limit  to  the  physical  universe.  The  starry  hemisphere  dazzles  us  with  its  multi- 
tudinous splendour,  but  the  telescope  greatly  increases  our  idea  of  its  vastness,  resolving 
fleecy  mist  into  galaxies  of  worlds,  and  discovering  distant  suns  invisible  to  the  naked 
eye ;  and  photography  carries  the  process  much  further,  and  peoples  the  interstellar 
spaces  of  the  telescope  with  hosts  of  still  more  remote  stars.  It  is  not  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  all  these  worlds  are  destitute  of  life,  that  our  little  planet  is  the  solitary 
home  of  living  creatures  in  a  terrific  desert  of  dead  worlds.  But  if  the  material  world 
be  peopled,  this  may  be  but  a  small  part  of  the  universe.  There  may  be  other  realms 
of  existence  unseen  by  the  eye  of  sense ;  there  may  be  material  worlds  that  do  not 
contain  properties  that  can  be  detected  by  any  of  our  five  senses,  although  they  are 
perceptible  to  the  different  senses  of  different  orders  of  beings;  and  there  may  be 
creatures  of  God  existing  in  regions  that  are  not  material,  spirits  that  do  not  require 
what  we  understand  by  bodies.  The  revelation  of  Scripture  gives  us  glimpses  of 
inhabitants  of  other  worlds  than  ours.  It  is  reasonable  to  think  that  the  great  God 
rules  over  hosts  of  such  beings. 

II.  Their  obderlt  aeeat.  They  are  armies,  not  mobs.  As  the  physical  universe 
is  regulated  by  law  and  maintained  in  order,  it  is  most  probable  that  the  same  is 
true  of  the  unseen  universe.  All  that  is  revealed  about  God's  heavenly  hosts  shows 
them  to  US  in  obedience  to  God's  will.  It  is  a  human  figure  of  speech  that  represents 
them  as  constituting  armies.  Milton's  poetry,  added  to  the  visions  of  the  Apoca- 
lypse, have  impressed  our  imaginations  with  military  conceptions  of  the  angelic  hosts. 
But  we  do  not  know  what  tasks  may  be  laid  upon  those  armies  of  God  in  subduing  the 
evil  of  the  universe.  We  may  be  sure  that  the  vulgar  thirst  for  glory,  the  pride  of 
brute  strength,  and  the  cruel  rage  of  bloodshed  that  characterize  our  hideous  wars, 
cannot  be  found  among  the  hosts  of  heaven.  Therefore  the  military  idea  of  the  angels 
needs  to  be  received  with  caution.  We  are  directed  rather  to  the  higher  warlike 
qualities,  e.g.  discipline  and  obedience  joined  to  courage  and  strength. 

III.  Thbib  Divine  light.  They  all  have  their  light  from  Cud.  On  wh»t  earthly 
multitudes  does  the  sun  rise  every  day  1  Yet  there  is  light  for  all.  But  an  infini- 
tesimal proportion  of  the  sunlight  and  heat  is  received  by  our  world ;  by  far  the 
greater  quantity  of  it  is  scattered  through  realms  of  space.  God's  light  of  love  reaches 
aU  bis  creatures.    There  we  no  remote  and  dark  regions  of  the  universe  that  lia 


428  TfiE  BOOK  OP  30K  f™  KVi.1— 14 

beyond  hii  care.  As  there  seems  to  be  no  end  to  tbe  radiation  of  light  when  this  is 
not  hindered  by  obstructing  objects,  so  no  limit  can  be  discovered  to  the  radiation  of 
God's  lore.  Though  the  hosts  of  beings  are  innumerable,  there  is  a  share  of  God's 
gooduesi  for  each. 

"  Its  strRams  the  whole  creation  reach, 
Bo  plenteous  is  the  store ; 
Enough  for  all,  enough  for  eooh, 
Enough  for  evermore." 

W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  S,  6. — 27te  awe  of  God's  holinest,  I.  The  inoomparablb  holiness  of  God. 
This  is  a  thought  that  cannot  be  described  in  human  language.  When  oonsoience  is 
aroused,  some  thrill  of  the  awe  of  it  may  open  our  minds  to  its  sublime  meaning.  We 
start  from  the  conception  of  the  absolute  sinlessness  of  God.  Not  a  spot  of  evil  can 
be  found  on  all  he  is  or  does.  But  holiness  is  more  than  negative  freedom  from  sin. 
It  is  a  real  excellence,  and  on  its  positive  side  it  expands  into  infinity.  We  do  not 
know  how  far  goodness  may  go.  It  is  like  light.  No  one  can  conceive  how  intense 
this  may  be ;  after  a  short  time  it  becomes  too  brilliant  for  our  eyes,  and  we  are  only 
blinded  when  we  look  at  it ;  but  it  is  conceivable  that  its  intensity  may  be  increased 
a  thousandfold  beyond  the  highest  degree  that  we  are  capable  of  perceiving.  There 
may  be  a  brilliancy  of  light  compared  with  which  the  glare  of  a  tropical  noon  is  as 
dull  and  gloomy  as  an  English  November.  So  there  may  be  a  holiness  which  in  its 
positive  character  rises  above  all  we  can  conceive  or  imagine  of  goodness  into  infinite 
regions  of  perfection.  We  can  see  no  limit  to  the  strength  and  depth  of  love.  Human 
love  may  be  strong  as  death.  Yet  compared  to  God's  love  it  is  but  as  a  feeble,  flickering 
flame  lost  in  the  full  sunlight.  No  one  can  conceive  how  full  and  rich  God's  love  is. 
All  the  attributes  of  the  Divine  holiness  expand  into  infinity.  Their  greatness  is 
immeasurable  and  inconceivable. 

II.  Its  ovbbawino  influence.  It  is  as  though  the  moon  cannot  shine  before  such 
a  Divine  light.  Even  that  silver  shield  seems  to  be  tarnished  when  set  by  the  side  of 
the  brightness  of  God's  holiness.  The  stars,  which  are  far  above  the  filth  and  corrup- 
tion of  earth,  and  move  in  heavenly  spheres,  do  not  seem  to  be  pure  in  the  light  of 
God.  This  impression  is  natural,  though  of  course  it  is  thrown  into  the  form  of  poetic 
imagery.  It  leads  to  the  humiliation  of  all  human  pride.  If  what  is  brightest  looks 
dark  in  comparison  with  the  splendour  of  God's  holiness,  what  must  man  be  in  his 
sight  ?  Now,  it  is  possible  to  abuse  these  conceptions,  as  Bildad  was  doing.  God  does 
not  make  men  out  to  be  worse  than  they  are.  He  does  not  blame  his  creatures  for  not 
being  equal  to  himself.  He  does  not  judge  them  by  his  own  perfection,  but  only  by 
their  capacities.  There  is  also  a  foolish  way  of  depreciating  humanity.  There  may  be 
much  pride  in  the  heart  of  a  man  who  calls  himself  "  a  worm."  Such  language  is  only 
natural  and  right  when  it  is  wrung  out  of  the  soul  by  a  deep  consciousness  of  sin,  and 
by  an  overwhelming  perception  of  God's  holiness.  On  the  other  hand,  when  this  is 
the  case,  there  is  no  ground  for  despair.  The  last  stronghold  of  pride  being  abandoned, 
there  is  room  for  the  mercy  of  God  to  come  in.  God's  holiness  is  just  the  perfection 
of  his  love.  The  error  has  been  in  the  separation  of  the  two  attributes.  In  the  present 
day  a  shallow  conception  of  holiness  is  tempting  men  to  think  lightly  of  sin,  for  it  is 
the  awe  of  God's  holiness  that  impresses  on  us  the  feeling  of  our  own  guilt.  Out  (if 
the  humiliation  thus  produced  springs  our  only  hope — the  hope  of  free  pardon  and 
gracious  renewal.  Then  the  holiness  of  God  beo^mes  our  inspiration ;  we  are  called  to 
be  perfect,  as  our  Father  iu  heaven  is  perfect. — W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 
r    APTBH  XXVL 


The  long  discourse  of  Job  now  begins, 
which  forms  the  central  and  most  solid  mam 
of   the   book.     It  continnes   through    six 


chapters   (oh.    xxvi. — zxxi.).      In    it  Jots 

after  hastily  brushing  aside  Bildad's  last 
speech  as  superfluous  and  nut  of  place  (vers. 
1 — 4),  proceeds  to  deliver  his  real  senti- 
ments apart  froiv  oontwversial  iuues.    U« 


CM.  XXVI.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


429 


gets  forth,  first  of  all,  the  might  and  majesty 
of  God  (vers.  5 — 14),  after  which  he  proceeds 
to  deal  with  tlie  qnestions  whioh  concern 
his  own  integrity,  and  God's  dealings  with 
mankind.  The  farmer  he  still  maintains; 
with  respect  to  the  latter,  he  recants  his 
earlier  argumentative  contention  (ch.  xxiv. 
2 — ^24),  and  admits  that  retribution  always 
or  almost  always  comes  upon  the  wicked  at 
last  (oh.  xxvii.).  In  oh.  xxviii.,  after  paying 
a  deservid  tribute  of  admiration  to  man's 
intelligence  and  ingenuity  in  regard  to 
earthly  things  and  physical  phenomena,  he 
pronounces  the  spiritual  world  and  the 
principles  of  the  Divine  government  to  be 
inscrutable  by  him,  and  his  only  true  wisdom 
to  be  right  conduct.  Finally,  he  returns  to 
himself,  and  having  given  a  pathetic  de- 
scription of  his  old  life,  with  its  prosperity 
and  honour  (ch.  xxix.),  and  contrasted  it 
with  his  actual  life  of  degradation,  con- 
tempt, and  suffering  (oh.  xxx.),  he  concludes 
with  a  solemn  protestation  of  his  integrity 
in  all  the  various  duties  and  obligations 
imposed  upon  man  by  natural  law  and 
natural  religion  (ch.  xxxi.).  In  this  way 
he  brings  to  its  termination  the  colloquy 
begun  with  his  three  friends  in  oh.  iii.,  and, 
emphatically  to  mark  that  here  he  closes 
his  own  part  in  the  debate,  he  winds  up 
with  the  statement,  "  The  words  of  Job  are 
ended"  (oh.  xxxi.  40). 

Vers.  1,  2. — But  Job  answered  and  said, 
How  hast  thou  helped  him  that  is  without 
power  1  Assuming  Bildad's  benevolent  in- 
tentions towards  himself.  Job  asks,  how  iie 
can  suppose  that  what  he  has  said  will  in 
any  way  be  helpful  to  a  person  in  so  help- 
less a  condition?  He  had  told  Job  nothing 
that  Job  had  not  repeatedly  allowed.  How 
savest  thou  the  arm  that  hath  no  strength  1 
It  could  not  invigorate  Job's  arm,  any  more 
than  it  oonlil  cheer  his  heart,  to  be  told 
that  man  was  a  worm,  or  that  he  was  wholly 
unclean  in  God's  sight  (ch.  xxv.  4,  6). 

Ver.  3.— How  hast  thou  counselled  him 
that  hath  no  wisdom  I  What  counsel  or 
advice  is  there  in  anything  tliat  thou  hast 
said,  by  following  which  I  might  be  bene- 
fited ?  Admitting  my  own  want  of  wisdom, 
how  hast  thou  bettered  my  case?  And  how 
hast  then  plenteously  declared  the  thing  as 
it  is  t  rather,  Boie  hast  thou  plenteously  de- 
clared sound  Imowledgei  What  can  there 
be  said  to  have  been  in  tlio  way  of  sound 
knowledge,  or  good  practical  common  sense 
(ifK'in),  in  the  discourse  which  thou  hast 


addressed  to  me? — a  dlsoonne  made  up  of 
truisms. 

Ver.  4. — ^To  whom  hast  thou  uttered 
words  t  Whom  didst  thou  intend  to  ad- 
dress? Surely  not  me,  since  thy  words 
touch  none  of  my  arguments.  And  whose 
spirit  came  from  theef  Who  prompted  thy 
speech?  Was  it  Eliphaz  (oomp.  ch.  iv. 
17—19)? 

Vers.  5 — 14. — Job  now  turns  fitom  con- 
troversy to  the  realities  of  the  case,  and 
begins  with  a  full  acknowledgment  of 
Goil's  greatness,  might,  and  inscrutableness. 
As  Bildad  seemed  to  have  supposed  that 
he  needed  enlightenment  on  these  points 
(ch.  xxvi.  2 — 4),  Job  may  have  thought  it 
right  to  make  once  more  a  plain  profession 
of  his  belief  (oomp.  ch.  ix.  4 — 18;  xii.  9 — 25, 
etc.). 

Yer.  5. — ^Dead  things  are  formed  from 
under  the  waters;  rather,  the  dead  from 
under  the  waters  tremble.  Hebraists  gene- 
rally are  agreed  that  one  of  the  meanings 
of  Bephaim  (D'^«§^)  is  "the  dead"  or  the 
departed,  considered  especially  as  inha- 
bitants of  Hades  (comp.  Pa.  Ixixviii.  11 ; 
Prov.  ii.  18 ;  Isa.  xiv.  9 ;  xxvi.  14).  And 
if  so,  this  meaning  is  certainly  appropriate 
here.  Bildad  had  illustrated  God's  domi- 
nion from  his  power  in  heaven.  Job  shows 
that  it  exists  alike  in  heaven  and  earth 
(vers.  7 — 13),  and  in-  the  region  under  the 
earth  (vers.  5,  6).  There,  in  Bheol,  under 
the  waters  of  the  ocean,  the  dead  tremble 
at  the  thought  of  the  Most  High ;  they 
tremble  together  with  other  inhabitants 
thereof,  as  evil  spirits,  rebel  intelligences, 
cast  down  to  Hades,  and  there  held  in 
durance  (Jude  6). 

Ver.  6. — Hell  is  naked  before  him;  i.e. 
"  can  hide  nothing  from  his  eyes  " — shows 
all  its  inmost  recesses.  And  destruction 
hath  no  covering ;  rather,  Abaddon  hath  no 
covering  (see  the  Kevisetl  Vtrsion).  Abaddon 
is  sometimes  "destruction,"  sometimes  "the 
angel  of  the  bottomleB.s  pit"  (Rev.  ix.  11), 
sometimes  "  the  bottomless  pit  itself"  (Prov. 
XV.  11).  Here  the  last  of  these  three  senses 
seems  to  suit  best — "  the  deepest  depth  of 
the  boitomlesB  pit  is  no  secret  to  God,"  but 
"naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him 
with  whom  we  have  to  do  "  (Heb  iv.  13). 

Ver.  7. — He  stretoheth  out  the  north  over 
the  empty  place.  Over  what  was  "  empty 
space"  or  "chaos"  (inn)  God  stretches 
out  "the  north" — a  portinn  of  his  orderly 
creation — perhaps  the  northern  portion  of 
the  heavens,  where  are  the  grandest  con- 
stellations visible  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
world's  northern  half.    And  hangeth  the 


430 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  XXVI.  1 — 14 


earth  upon  nothing,  "Takes,"  i.e.,  "the 
huge  ball  of  the  earth,  and  suspends  it  in 
Tacancy,  with  nothing  to  support  it  but  his 
own  fixed  will,  his  own  firm  laws."  This  is 
an  Idea  scarcely  reached  by  astronomers  in 
general,  at  any  rate  till  the  time  of  Hiplpar- 
chua ;  and  it  has,  not  without  reason,  been 
regarded  as  "  a  very  remarkable  instance  of 
anticipation  of  the  discoveries  of  science" 
(Stanley  Leathes). 

Yer.  8. — He  bindeth  up  the  waters  in  bis 
thick  clouds ;  i.e.  he  makes  the  clouds,  that 
we  see  floating  in  the  atmosphere,  contaiu 
and  hold  the  waters  on  which  the  productive- 
ness of  the  earth  depends,  and  which  he 
restrains,  or  allows  to  fall  ia  fertilizing  rain, 
at  his  pleasure  (comp.  1  Kings  xvii.  1).  And 
the  cloud  is  not  rent  under  them.  The 
metaphor  is,  no  doubt,  drawn  from  those 
water-skins,  so  well  known  in  the  East,  and 
especially  in  Arabia,  ia  which  men  stored 
the  water  for  their  journeys  and  other  needs, 
which  were  liable  to  be  "  rent "  by  the 
weight  of  the  liquid  within  them. 

Ver.  9. — He  holdeth  back  the  face  of  his 
throne ;  rather,  he  covereth  up.  He  makes 
the  clouds  to  gather  in  the  vault  of  heaven, 
above  which  is  his  throne,  and  in  this  way 
conceals  it  and  covers  it  np.  And  spreadeth 
his  cloud  upon  it ;  or,  over  it,  so  blotting  it 
out  from  sight.  Beliind  the  more  obvious 
meaning  lies  one  which  is  deeper  and  more 
spiritual.  God  withdraws  himself  from  sight, 
gathers  clouds  and  darkness  around  him  to 
be  the  habitation  of  his  seat,  hides  from  men 
the  principles  of  his  government  and  ad- 
ministration, makes  himself  unapproachable 
and  inscrutable,  is  a  mystery  and  an  enigma 
which  man  cannot  hope  to  understand  or 
solve  (eomp.  1  Kings  viii.  12 ;  Ps.  xviii.  11 ; 
xcvii.  2). 

Ver.  10. — He  hath  compassed  the  waters 
with  bounds.  God  restrains  within  limits 
alike  the  "  waters  that  are  above  tlie  firma- 
ment" and  those  that  are  beneath  it  (ch. 
xxxviii.  11).  The  boundary  is  placed,  some- 
what vaguely,  "  at  the  confines  of  light  and 
darkness."  Until  the  day  and  night  oome 
to  an  end  is  a  mistranslation. 

Ver.  11. — The  pillars  of  heaven  tremble. 
The  "pillars  of  heaven  "  are  the  mountains, 
on  which  the  sky  seems  to  rest.  Tliese 
"tremble,"  or  seem  to  trem'ule,  at  the 
presence  of  God  (Ps.  xviii.  7  ;  cxiv.  4  ;  Isa. 
V.  25)  when  lie  visits  the  earth  in  storm 
and  tempest,  either  because  the  whole  atmo- 
sphere is  full  of  disturbance,  and  the  outline 
of  the  mountains  shifts  and  clianges  as  rain 
and  storm  tveep  over  them,  or  because  the 


reverberations  of  the  thunder,  which  shake 
the  air,  seem  to  shake  the  earth  also.  And 
are  astonished  at  his  reproof.  To  the  mind 
of  the  poet  this  "trembling"  is  expressive 
of  astonishment  and  consternation.  He  re- 
gards the  mountains  as  hearing  the  voice 
of  God  in  the  storm,  recognizing  it  as  raised 
in  anger,  and  so  trembUng  and  cowering 
before  him. 

Vex,  12. — He  divideth  the  sea  with  his 
power,  "  Divideth "  is  certainly  a  wrong 
translation.  The  verb  used  (j)J-)  means 
either  "stirreth  up"  or  "stilfeth,"  In 
favour  of  the  former  rendering  are  Bosen- 
miiller,  Schultens,  Delitzsch,  Merx,  and 
Canon  Cook ;  in  favour  of  the  latter,  the 
LXX.,  Dillmann,  and  Dr.  Stanley  Leathes, 
In  eitber  case  the  general  seutiment  is  that 
God  has  full  mastery  over  the  sea,  and  can 
regulate  its  movements  at  his  pleasure.  And 
by  his  understanding  he  smiteth  through 
the  proud;  literally,  he smiieth  through  llahab. 
(On  Bahab,  as  the  great  power  of  evil,  see 
the  comment  on  ch.  ix.  13.)  God  is  said  to 
have  "  smitten  him  through  by  his  under- 
standiiig,"  since  in  the  contest  between  good 
and  evil  it  is  rather  intelligence  than  mere 
force  that  carries  the  day.  Power  alone  is 
sufBcient  to  control  zhe  sea, 

Ver.  13. — ^By  his  spirit  he  hath  garnished 
the  heavens ;  or,  by  his  spirit  the  heavens  are 
brighttteas ;  i.e,  at  a  breath  from  his  mouth 
the  heavens,  lately  all  cluud  and  storm 
(vers,  8 — 11),  recover  their  serenity,  are 
calm  and  clear  and  bright.  Our  experi- 
ence says, "  After  a  storm  comes  a  calm." 
Job  notes  that  both  alike  are  from  God, 
His  hand  hath  formed  the  crooked  serpent ; 
rather,  his  hand  hath  pierced  the'swi/t  serpent 
(see  the  Bevised  Version),  The  reference 
is  probably  to  "  the  war  in  heaven,"  already 
suggested  by  the  mention  of  "  Bahab  "  (ver. 
12).  In  that  war,  according  to  the  tradition 
that  had  reached  Job,  a  great  serpent,  like 
the  Egyptian  Apepi  (Apophis),  had  Ijome 
a  part. 

Ver.  14.— Lo,  these  are  parts  of  his  ways ; 
literally,  ends  of  his  ways ;  i.e.  the  mere  out- 
skirts and  fringe  of  his  doings.  But  how 
small  a  pertion  is  heard  of  him?  rather, 
how  small  a  whisper  ?  But  the  thunder  of 
his  power  who  can  understand?  or,  the 
thunder  of  Ms  mighty  deeds.  Job  implies 
that  he  has  net  enumerated  one-half  of 
God's  great  woies— he  has  just  hinted  at 
them,  just  whispered  of  them.  If  they  were 
all  thundered  out  in  the  ears  of  mortal 
man.  who  could  receive  them  or  coinpr» 
heud  them  ? 


CH.  XXVI.  1—14.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  431 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Vew.  1 — ^14. — Jdb  to  BUdad  :  a/nother  sermon  on  the  foregoing  text.  I.  The  frefaoh 
TO  THE  SERMON ;  OB,  THE  DisoouBSE  OF  BiLDAD  CRITICIZED.  In  Job's  estimation  it 
was ;  1.  Wholly  unserviceable.  With  stinging  irony  Job,  according  to  our  view, 
represents  it  as  having  been  extremely  helpful  to  him  in  his  feebleness,  as  having 
imparted  strength  to  his  powerless  arm  and  wisdom  to  his  ignorant  mind  (vers.  2,  3) ; 
meaning,  of  course,  the  opposite — that  in  these  respects  the  brief  but  pompous  harangue 
to  which  he  had  listened  had  been  of  no  use  whatever  to  him  in  the  way  of  assisting 
him  either  to  bear  his  own  misfortunes  or  to  understand  the  mysterious  enigma  of 
Divine  providence.  Not  only  should  a  good  man  by  his  words,  and  a  Christian 
minister  by  his  sermons,  always  aim  at  the  edification  of  his  hearers  (1  Cor.  xiv.  3), 
but  the  same  duty  is  incumbent  upon  all  (Eph.  iv.  29).  The  world  and  the  Church 
are  full  of  sorrowful  hearts  requiring  comfort,  and  ignorant  minds  in  need  of  counsel. 
It  is  sad  when  neither  the  disconsolate  can  find  a  word  of  cheer  nor  the  uninstructed 
hear  a  note  of  direction,  to  help  them  on  in  life's  battle.  The  lips  of  the  wise  should 
disperse  knowledge  (Prov.  xv.  7),  and  the  tongue  of  the  wise  should  prove  health  to 
the  feeble  and  diseased  (Prov.  xii.  18).  2.  Extremely  superficial.  Bildad  had  plenti- 
fully declared  the  thing  as  it  was  (ver.  3) ;  i.e.  while  imagining  he  had  dived  into  the 
heart  of  a  great  subject,  he  had  merely  skimmed  along  its  surface.  Yet  superficial 
and  shallow  views  of  men  and  things  are  not  to  be  despised.  To  the  mass  of  man- 
kind, who  are  themselves  commonplace  in  their  capacities,  only  commonplace  ideas 
are  of  use.  What  is  called  profound  or  original  thinking  belongs  to  another  sphere  from 
that  which  they  usually  inhabit.  Hence  to  the  extent  to  which  it  is  unfamiliar  to 
their  minds  it  fails  to  make  an  adequate  impression  on  their  hearts.  Still,  superficial 
views  of  truth  cannot  satisfy  souls  of  nobler  faculty  than  the  uneducated  crowd  possess ; 
neither  can  they  fully  represent  the  deep  things  of  God  on  the  subject  either  of  religion 
or  of  providence.  It  is,  however,  doubtful  whether  all  men's  thoughts,  those  of  a  Job 
no  less  than  of  a  Bildad,  are  not,  in  comparison  with  the  unfathomable  profundity  of 
Divine  trath,  at  the  best  superficial.  3.  Utterly  irrelevant.  Correct  enough  in  them- 
selves so  far  as  they  went,  Bildad's  views  were  inappropriate  to  the  theme  under  dis- 
cussion, were  in  truth  so  little  pertinent  to  the  great  subject  by  which  the  thoughts  of  Job 
were  engrossed,  that  Job  felt  constrained  to  ask  to'  whom  they  had  been  addressed  (ver. 
4).  Bildad  is  not  the  only  person  against  whom  the  charge  of  irrelevant  talking  can  be 
advanced.  Modem  controversialists,  lecturers,  preachers,  orators,  writers,  are  as  prone 
to  commit  this  fault  as  were  their  brethren  of  antiquity.  Discoursing  wide  of  the  mark, 
whether  in  the  pulpit,  at  the  bar,  or  on  the  bench,  in  Parliament,  or  in  common  life, 
usually  results  from  ignorance,  want  of  capacity,  lack  of  preparation,  too  great  fluency 
in  speech  or  composition,  or  from  deliberate  design.  Fitness  is  a  higher  excellence  in 
speech  or  writing  than  eloquence  or  elegance  (1  Cor.  xiv.  19).  "  The  heart  of  the 
righteous  studieth  to  answer"  (Prov.  xv.  28);  and  "a  word  spoken  in  due  season,  how 
good  it  is !  "  (Prov.  xv.  23).  "A  word  fitly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of 
silver  "  (Prov.  xxv.  11).  4.  Entirely  second-hand.  Whatever  Job  was,  he  was  always 
original ;  whereas  Bildad  could  only  cite  proverbs  and  quote  traditionary  maxims. 
Here  Job  rather  wickedly  asks  him  from  whom  he  had  borrowed  his  last  brief  oration 
(ver.  4).  Since  it  could  not  be  from  God — Bildad  always  swore  by  the  fathers — ^it  must 
have  been  either  from  him  (Job)  or  from  Eliphaz,  both  of  whom  had  already  twice 
descanted  on  the  subject  of  man's  insignificance  as  contrasted  with  the  majesty  of  God. 
It  is  not  wrong  to  borrow  good  thoughts  or  to  repeat  them  to  others,  provided  their 
authorship  bs  carefully  acknowledged-  Good  thoughts  at  second  hand  are  distinctly 
better  than  poor  thougtits  at  first  hand.  Still,  ministers  and  preachers  should  aim  to 
set  forth  their  own  views  of  Divine  truth  rather  than  those  of  other  men.  A  clergyman 
who  has  no  ideas  of  his  own  to  set  forth  has  mistaken  his  calling.  Much  can  be  done 
by  earnest  study  and  prayer  to  improve  the  feeblest  capacity,  and  to  enable  it  to  look 
at  truth  for  itself. 

11.  The  body  of  the  beemon  ;  ob,  the  majesty  of  God  extolled.  Catching  up 
the  anthem  which  Bildad  had  commenced  (ch.  xxv.  2),  Job  continues  in  a  strain  of  lofty 
adoration  to  dilate  upon  the  transcendent  greatness  of  God  as  absolute  and  universal' 


•SSE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  ixvi.  1—14. 


Buler,  tracing  his  governmental  power  and  authority  through  every  department  of 
creation.  1.  In  the  realm  of  sha/les.  (Vera.  5,  6.)  Bildad  had  said  that  God's  dominion 
pervaded  "  the  heiglita,"  or  heavenly  places  (ch.  xiv.  2).  Job  adds  that  it  also  extends 
to  the  dark  underworld  of  departed  spirits ;  concerning  which  may  be  noted :  (1)  The 
names  given  to  this  mysterious  region — Sheol  and  Abaddon  ;  the  first  a  subterranean 
abode,  full  of  Tartarean  darkness  (ch.  x.  21,  22),  to  which  are  attributed  gates  (Isa. 
xxxvi'ii.  10)  and  abysmal  depths  (Prov.  ix.  18) ;  and  the  second  a  trackless  waste,  iu 
which  wanderers  having  lost  their  way  stumble  forward  to  destruction  (Rev.  ix.  11). 
On  the  exact  import  of  the  two  terms  which  are  here  used  as  synonyms  for  the  disem- 
bodied state,  the  Exposition  may  be  consulted.  (2)  The  situation  assigned  to  this 
invisible  region— under  the  waters,  i.e.  beneath  the  ocean  (cf.  Luke  viii.  31),  or  in  the 
lowest  parts  of  the  earth  (Eph.  iv.  9),  at  the  remotest  distance  from  heaven  (Ps.  cxxxix. 
8);  and  therefore,  as  such,  a  fitting  receptacle  for  the  dead  (Bom.  x.  7),  and  a  proper 
place  of  confinement  for  the  wicked  (Ps.  Iv.  15).  (3)  The  persons  who  inhabit  this 
sunless  region.  While  departed  spirits  generally  are  commonly  represented  as  descend- 
ing into  Sheol  (ch.  xiv.  13 — 15 ;  xvii,  15,  16),  it  is  here  the  shades  of  the  wicked  that 
are  spoken  of  as  tenanting  its  chambers.  The  Bephaim  alluded  to  by  Job  were  not 
the  people  of  that  name,  but  the  pale,  flaccid,  bloodless  ghostsof  dead  persons  (Isa.  xiv.  10), 
in  particular,  it  is  supposed,  of  the  giants,  or  mighty  ones  (Gen.  vi.  4),  who  perished  in 
the  Deluge,  since  the  word  "  Bephaim  "  may  also  signify  heroes  of  colossal  stature.  (4) 
The  misery  experienced  in  this  doleful  region.  Besides  being  a  place  of  darkness  (ch. 
X.  21,  22 ;  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  12)  and  of  pain  (ch.  xiv.  22)  generally,  it  is  here  exhibited  as 
being  specially  a  place  of  anguish  for  the  wicked,  whose  marrowless  and  bloodless 
phantoms  shiver  and  writhe,  as  if  they  were  undergoing  the  pains  of  parturition  every 
time  the  majesty  of  God  is  felt  by  them,  "  as  perhaps  by  the  raging  of  the  sea,  or  the 
quaking  of  the  earth "  (Delitzsoh).  And  certainly  in  other  Scriptures  the  Hadeaa  or 
disembodied  state  is  set  forth  as  a  place  of  woe  for  the  ungodly  (Matt.  v.  29 ;  xviii.  8, 9 ; 
Mark  ix.  43 ;  Luke  xvi.  25).  So  the  ancient  Egyptians  celebrated  Ba  as  "  the  supreme 
power  who  cuts  off  the  head  of  those  who  are  in  the  infernal  regions  "  {vide  '  Becords  of 
the  Past,'  vol.  viii.  p.  111).  (5)  The  supreme  Lord  of  this  subterranean  region ;  he  is 
not  the  Abaddon  of  the  Apocalypse  (Bev.  ix.  11),  but  Shaddai,  whose  majesty  Job 
depicts,  since  his  eyes  penetrate  to  its  darkest  depths,  and  his  arm  reaches  to  its  remotest 
corners.  As  David  testifies  to  God's  presence  in  Sheol  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8),  so  Job  aflSrms  that 
presence  to  be  the  true  cause  of  the  misery  of  the  lost,  as  John  afterwards  declares  it  to 
be  the  secret  source  of  happiness  to  the  saved  (Bev.  vii.  15).  2.  In  the  reaZm  of  creation. 
(Vers.  7 — 13.)  Bising  from  the  dark  underworld,  Job  expatiates  on  the  great  power  of 
God  as  displayed  in  the  world  of  light.  (1)  In  spreadiog  out  the  northern  firmament 
above  the  self-poised  earth  (ver.  7).  That  Job  here  alludes  to  the  northern  hemisphere 
of  the  sky  which  he,  in  common  with  the  ancients  generally,  believed  to  be  a  vast 
arch,  vault,  or  canopy  extended  above  the  earth,  and  folding  it  in  like  a  tent,  is  more 
certain  than  it  is  that  he  anticipated  the  discoveries  of  modern  astronpmy  concerning 
the  sphericity  and  revolutions  of  the  earth,  although  there  is  some  reason  for  believing 
that  these  were  understood  by  the  ancient  Egyptians.  But  whether  or  not  Job  had 
attained  to  a  dim  guess  of  the  earth's  form,  he  distinctly  understood  that  it  rested  with 
its  aerial  canopy  on  no  material  prop,  but  was  supported  solely  by  the  power  of  God. 
The  continual  upholding,  not  of  this  globe  merely,  but  of  innumerable  worlds,  of  sung 
and  systems  past  reckoning,  by  the  word  of  his  power,  is  a  signal  demonstration  of  God's 
almightiness.  (2)  In  appointing  the  meteorological  laws  of  the  atmosphere  (vers.  8,  9), 
by  which  first  rain  is  collected  in  the  clouds,  then  the  clouds  are  preserved  from  bursting 
before  the  proper  moment  beneath  the  weight  of  the  watery  particles  they  contain,  and 
thirdly,  the  dark  masses  are  spread  around  God's  throne,  i.e.  distributed  over  the  face 
of  the  sky  previously  to  bursting  forth  upon  the  thirsty  soil.  The  clouds  are  pre- 
eminently his  clouds,  t'.e.  God's ;  since  he  hath  ordained  the  wonderful  mechanism  by 
which  they  are  formed,  preserved,  dispersed,  distributed,  and  emptied ;  sine*  he  employs 
them  in  accordance  with  his  own  sovereign  will,  e.g.  to  shut  off  the  face  of  his  throne 
from  the  gaze  of  man  whensoever  it  may  please  him ;  and  since  when  they  descend  upon 
the  earth  they  seem  to  proceed  from  his  throne.  (3)  In  establishing  a  bound  between 
light  and  darkness  (ver.  10).  Job  perhaps  imagined  that  the  globe  was  encompassed 
by  ftn  ocean,  out  of  which  the  sun  rose  in  Oriental  splendour,  and  into  which  again  it 


CH.  xivi.  1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  483 

descended  with  Occidental  glory,  passing  at  the  end  of  day  into  a  dark  world,  which  ita 
golden  beams  could  not  illumine,  and  emerging  at  thn  call  of  mom  into  the  clear  bright 
realm  of  light.  Passing  by  the  misconception  as  to  the  sun's  movements  and  function, 
which  science  better  enables  us  to  understand,  the  truth  remains  that  the  boundaries 
of  old  ocean  have  been  as  firmly  fixed  (Prov.  viii.  29),  and  the  alternations:  of  day  and 
night  as  securely  determined  (Gen  i.  14),  hy  the  power  of  the  omnipotent  Creator,  as 
have  been  the  habitations  and  the  times  of  man  (Acts  xvii.  26).  (4)  In  producing  the 
phenomena  connected  with  storms  upon  land,  sea,  and  sky  (vers.  11 — 13).  Such  a  storm 
depicted  by  the  poet  in  three  different  stages.  At  its  commencement,  •'  the  pillars  of 
the  heavens,"  i.e.  the  mountains  towering  to  the  sky,  appear  to  tremble,  to  sway  back- 
wards  and  forwards  as  if  struck  by  some  sudden  impact,  by  the  violent  agitations  of  the 
wind,  or  by  the  crashing  blow  of  a  fiery  thunderbolt.  Personified,  they  are  pictured 
as  filli  d  with  consternation  at  the  token  of  Jehovah's  anger  displayed  in  the  commotion 
of  the  elements  (Ps.  xxix.  3 — 8 ;  civ.  32 ;  Nah.  i.  5 ;  Ha,b.  iii.  10).  Duiing  its  continu- 
ance, "  he  divideth  the  sea  with  his  power."  The  fierce  hurricane  let  loose  among  the 
mountains  sweeping  down  upon  the  calm,  still  ocean,  cleaves  it  to  its  inmost  depths. 

"  The  fire,  and  craclcs 
"  Of  sulphurous  roaring,  the  most  mighty  Neptune 
Seem  to  besiege,  and  make  his  bold  wavfs  tremble. 
Yea,  his  dread  trident  shake." 

(*  Tempest,'  act  1.  so.  2.) 

The  spirit  of  evil  (Rahab),  awakened  by  the  hurly-burly,  bellows  forth  its  indignant 
rage,  "lifting  up  its  voice  on  high,  and  thundering  back  to  the  thundering  mountains," 
but  is  again  wounded  to  the  quick  by  the  stroke  of  the  tempest;  for  "by  his  under- 
standing he  breaketh  Hahab  in  pieces  "—words  which  are  understood  by  many  to  point 
rather  to  the  power  of  Grod  in  calming  the  troubled  waters  of  the  sea.  At  the  close  of 
the  storm,  he  once  more  brightens  up  the  sky  with  his  breath  (ver.  13),  dispersing  the 
storm-clouds  with  his  wind,  and  fixing  the  fugitive  Diagon.  This  may  perhaps  be 
understood  of  the  const'  Uation  of  that  name  which  seems  to  wind  itself  in  like  a  sinuous 
serpent  between  the  Greater  and  Lesser  Bears,  as  if  endeavouring  to  make  its  escape 
from  its  appointed  orbit,  where,  however,  God  fixes  it,  wounding  it  or  slaying  it,  so  that 
its  flight  is  arrested — a  poetical  representation  of  the  sublime  truth  that  it  is  God's  hand 
that  hath  beautified  the  evening  sky  with  stars,  and  that  keeps  all  the  stellar  world 
moving  on  in  harmony,  and  order.  Or  the  idea  may  be,  in  accordance  with  ancient 
mythology,  that  this  gliding  serpent,  winding  itself  round  the  sun,  seeks  to  eclipse  its 
li'ht;  but  that  God  wounds  it,  and  so  liberates  the  sun  to  renew  his  shining  on  the 
earth.  So  viewed,  the  poet's  language  suggests  the  thought  wiiich  reappears  in  other 
parts  of  Scripture  (Matt.  xiii.  39  ;  Eom.  viii.  19 — 23 ;  Eev.  xii.  4) — that,  in  the  great 
conflict  which  is  continually  going  on  between  the  powers  of  light  and  darkness,  victory 
will  eventually,  through  God's  help,  incline  to  the  side  of  the  former. 

III.  The  lesson  fbom  the  sermon;  ob,  the  tbhth  it  contains  applied.  Job 
concludes  his  lofty  anthem  in  celebration  of  the  majesty  of  God  by  two  remarks.  1. 
That  man's  knowledge  of  the  power  of  God  is  mfinitesirrtaily  smalt.  The  magnificent 
pictures  which  had  been  given  of  the  mysterious  operation  of  the  Almighty's  haml 
were  only  as  the  edges,  frinaies,  or  extremost  end-points  of  the  glorious  garment  in 
which  the  incomparable  Worker  was  arrayed,  as  the  faintest  whisper  of  a  voice  which  in 
the  fulness  of  i*s  tones  is  as  the  roaring  of  the  thunder  or  the  grand  diapason  of  the 
sea.  What  Job  asserts  about  his  own  representations  of  the  transcendent  greatness  fjf 
God  is  equally  correct  about  the  richest  and  most  impressive  that  have  ever  yet  been 
given.  Man's  understanding  of  God's  power  in  nature  is  at  best  fragmentary  and 
imijei'fect  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9).  2.  That  the  wonder-working  power  of  Ood  is  infinitely  great. 
So  great,  in  fact,  that  it  passes  human  comprehension.  If  those  stupendous  phenomena 
be  only  the  whispers  of  his  almighty  voice,  what  must  be  the  thunder-roar  of  its  fully 
uttered  tones  ?  If  these  be  occasioned,  as  it  were,  by  the  mere  flutterings  of  the  extnjme 
end  of  his  garment,  what  must  be  power  residing  in  his  Almighty  arm  ?  If  the  i  he- 
nomena  of  nature,  as  witnessed  in  this  lower  sphere,  are  sufSQient  to  impress  the 
human  mind  with  exalted  conceptions  of  the  greatness  of  God,  how  much  more  sublime 
should  our  ideas  be  of  the  incomparable  glory  of  him  who  presides  over,  and  works  in, 

JOB.  2  F 


434  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxn.  1    14. 


a  universe,  in  which  this  globe  on  which  man  dwells  is  but  as  the  small  dust  of  the 
balance  to  the  huge  forms  of  the  mountains,  as  a  drop  of  water  to  the  ocean,  as  a  spark 
of  iire  to  the  blazing  sun ! 

Learn :  1.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  men  to  seek,  entertain,  and,  as  opportunity  offers. 
set  forth,  lofty  conceptions  of  the  supreme  God.  2.  If  God's  power  extends  to  the 
underworld  of  spirits,  it  cannot  be  withdrawn  from  the  upper  world  of  men.  3.  If  the 
eye  of  the  Omniscient  can  explore  the  caverns  of  hell  and  the  caves  of  the  sea,  it  must 
also  be  able  to  search  the  chambers  of  the  heart.  4.  The  Almighty's  hand  that  can 
hold  up  a  world,  yea,  a  universe,  will  not  surely  fail  in  sustaining  one  who  is  at  best 
but  a  worm.  5.  He  who  prepares  and  distributes  the  clouds  of  rain  for  the  earth  can 
also  provide  and  dispense  clouds  of  spiritual  blessing  for  the  souls  of  men.  6.  When 
God  draws  a  cloud  before  his  throne,  it  is  partly  for  his  glory  and  partly  for  man's 
good.  7.  He  who  hath  set  a  bound  to  the  sea  is  able  also  to  restrain  the  wrath  of 
man.  8.  If  God  has  divided  light  from  darkness  in  the  physical  world,  much  more 
will  he  do  so  in  the  intellectual  and  spiritual.  9.  If  things  inanimate,  as  well  as  blood- 
less spirits,  tremble  at  God's  reproof,  men  possessed  of  reason  should  not  be  callous 
or  indifferent  to  the  same.  10.  Those  who  are  proud  God  is  able  to  abase.  11.  The 
power  of  God  in  nature  is  only  an  emblem  and  shadow  of  a  higher  power  which  God 
wields  in  the  I'ealm  of  grace,  12.  The  fullest  knowledge  of  God  which  a  saint  attains 
to  on  earth  is  small  and  insignificant  when  compared  with  that  which  awaits  him  in 
heaven. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Praises  of  the  Sternal.  I.  Eepabteb  and  beproof.  (Vera.  2 — 4.) 
The  tone  seems  to  be  ironical:  "How  well  hast  thou  helped  feebleness,  supported  the 
arm  of  him  that  has  no  strength,  counselled  unwisdom,  and  in  fulness  given  utterance 
to  good,  sense !  To  whom  hast  thou  offered  words,  and  whose  breath  went  forth  from 
thee  ?  By  whose  inspiration  ?  "  possibly  pointing  to  the  borrowed  character  of  Bildad'g 
speech.  Words  may  be  good  in  themselves,  yet  not  pleasant  or  profitable  if  not 
spoken  in  good  season.  It  would  have  been  more  to  the  purpose  had  Bildad  spoken 
to  the  wounded  spirit  of  his  friend  of  the  tenderness  and  the  compassion  rather  than 
tlie  majesty  and  greatness  of  God.  The  minister  of  God  should  know  how  to  speak  a 
word  in  season  to  the  weary  (Isa.  1.  4).  "  We  are  often  disappointed  in  our  expectations 
of  our  friends  who  should  comfort  us ;  but  the  Comforter,  who  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  never 
mistakes  in  his  operations,  nor  misses  his  ends."  Job  takes  a  noble  revenge  by 
painting  in  far  more  glowing  and  noble  language  the  sublime  greatness  of  God,  thus 
showing  how  true  in  faith  was  his  heart  at  botiom.  His  petulance  and  outcries  are 
the  involuntary  irritation  of  i3ain ;  they  are  su|ierficial ;  at  the  core  of  his  being  piety 
lives  in  all  its  intensity. 

II.  Job's  suEPASsiNa  debceiption  of  the  majesty  op  God.  (Vers.  5 — 14.) 
"  Truth,  like  a  torch,  the  more  it's  shook,  it  shines."  "  It  were  well  if  all  disputes 
about  religion  might  end  thus,  in  glorifying  God  as  Lord  of  all,  and  our  Lord,  with 
one  mind  and  one  mouth  (Rom.  xv.  6),  for  in  that  we  are  all  agreed."  1.  Bell  and 
heaven.  (Vers.  5 — 7.)  Job  begins  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  great  scale  of  creation  from 
that  with  which -Bildad  began ;  with  the  lower  world,  the  region  of  shadows,  thence  to 
rise  to  the  heavenly  world.  "  The  shadows  are  made  to  tremble  below  the  water  and 
its  inhabitants"  (ver.  5).  By  the  shadows  are  meant  the  ghostly,  bloodless  forms  as 
Homer  has  described  them  in  the  eleventh  book  of  the  'Odyssey,'  leading  a  joyless, 
melancholy  existence,  deprived  of  the  light  of  the  sun  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  11 ;  Prov.  ii.  18- 
ix.  18;  Isa.  xxvi.  14,  19;  comp.  ch.  xiv.  9,  10).  Even  in  Hades  the  vast  power  of  the 
Almighty  is  felt,  and  its  inhabitants  own  it  and  tremble  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8;  Prov.  xv.  11  • 
Jas.  ii.  19).     This  lower  world  is  naked  to  the  eyes  of  God  (Heb.  iv.  13),  and  the 

chasm  of  Hades  has  no  covering  (Prov.  xv.  11 ;  ver.  6).     The  Northern  heaven taken 

here  by  a  figure,  as  the  part  for  the  whole — ^is  stretched  over  the  void,  and  the  earth 
hangs  upon  nothing  (ver.  7).  The  expression  "  nothing"  here  denotes  the  same  as  the 
"void" — the  vast  emptiness  of  space  in  which  the  earth  with  its  heavenly  canopy  la 
placed.  Compare  the  classical  parallels  in  X^ucret.,  ij.  CQO,  aqo.  ;  Ovid,  'Fast.,'  yi,  ;:3& 
(gq,    A  Persian  poet  says— »  *  ' 


OH.  xxTi.  1— 14.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  43« 

*•  He  stretchea  out  the  heaven  without  pillars  as  the  tent  of  the  earth,  .  .  . 
What  doth  the  air  bear?  it  beareth  nothing,  and  uothiag  on  nothing,  and  Absolutely 
nothing." 

And  an  Arab  poet,  "  He  has  made  the  heaven  out  of  smoke."  And  in  the  Koran, 
"It  is  Allah  who  has  built  high  the  heaven,  without  supporting  it  on  visible  pillars." 
The  poets  say  that  Atlas  bore  the  heaven  on  his  shoulders ;  but  we  confess  the  true 
Atlas,  the  Lord  our  God,  who  by  his  word  upholds  both  heaven  and  earth  (Brenz). 
As  the  work  witnesses  of  the  master,  so  does  the  universe  testify  of  its  Creator, 
Sustainer,  and  Grovernor  (Ps.  xix.  1 — 6) ;  and  no  faint-hearted  one  has  contemplated 
the  eternal  order  which  here  confronts  him  and  its  secret  but  ever-blessed  sway,  and  no 
sinner  longing  for  salvation  has  tarried  in  the  halls  of  this  great  temple  of  God,  without 
being  richly  blessed  with  heavenly  blessings  (Wohlfarth).  2.  Tka  douds  and  the 
heavenly  region.  (Vers.  8 — 10.)  Waters  are  firmly  bound  up  in  the  clouds  as  in  vast 
water-skins,  according  to  the  conception  of  the  poet,  without  their  bursting  with  the 
weight,  if  God  wills  to  retain  the  rain  (ver.  8 ;  Gen.  vii.  11 ;  viii.  2).  God  veils  the 
"outer  side"  of  his  heavenly  throne,  the  side  turned  towards  earth,  by  drawing  the 
clouds  between  (ver.  9).  He  has  drawn  a  circling  boundary  over  the  water's  surface 
to  the  crossing  of  the  light  with  the  darkness  (ver.  10 ;  Prov.  viii.  27).  In  both 
passages  the  idea  is  that  the  earth  is  surrounded  by  water  (in  Homer,  by  the  flowing 
stream  of  ocean).  Above  is  the  circle  of  the  hemisphere,  where  sun  and  stars  run 
their  course.  Within  this  circle  is  the  region  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  of  light,  and 
outside  it  begins  the  realm  of  darkness.  3.  Mountains ;  the  sea ;  constellations.  (Vers. 
11 — 13.)  The  heaven's  pillars — that  is,  the  great  mountains,  conceived  as  bearing  up 
the  firmament — fall  into  trembling,  and  the  earthquake  is  represented  as  caused  by 
their  affright  at  his  reproof  (ver.  11 ;  comp.  Ps.  xxix. ;  civ.  7 ;  Isa.  1.  2 ;  Nah.  i.  4 ; 
Kev.  vi.  12 — 14 ;  xx.  11).  He  terrifies  the  sea  by  his  power,  and  by  his  understanding 
breaks  in  pieces  Eahab  (ver.  12).  Eahab  being  here  not  Egypt,  as  in  other  places, 
but  some  huge  monster  of  legendary  fame.  His  breath  makes  the  heaven  bright  and 
clear ;  and  his  hand  has  pierced  through  the  flying  serpent  (ver.  13).  This  may,  perhaps, 
allude  to  the  mythical  representation  of  eclipses  of  sun  or  moon  as  the  attempt  of  a 
monstrous  dragon  to  swallow  up  the  heavenly  bodies.  The  ceremony  is  practised, 
among  the  Turks  and  others,  of  beating  off  this  dragon  at  the  time  of  eclipses  by  cries 
and  noises.  These  descriptions  of  the  Creation  are  founded  on  astronomical  myths 
belonging  to  the  childhood  of  the  world ;  but  our  better  knowledge  of  the  mechanism 
of  the  heavens  need  not  destroy  our  sense  of  the  reverence  and  awe  which  pervade 
these  descriptions.  The  wonder  of  ignorance  is  replaced  by  the  nobler  wonder  of 
intelligence,  of  reason. 

Conclusion.  (Ver.  14.)  "  Lo,  these  are  ends  of  his  ways  " — ^but  the  outlines  or 
sketches — the  nearest  and  most  familiar  evidences  of  his  government  of  the  world; 
"and  what  a  gently  whispering  word  it  is  that  we  hear! — but  the  thunder  of  his 
omnipotence  who  can  understand?"  The  full  unfolding  of  his  power,  the  thundering 
course  of  the  heavenly  spheres,  what  mortal  ear  could  bear  ? 

"  If  nature  thundered  in  our  opening  ears, 
And  stunned  us  with  the  music  of  the  spheres. 
How  should  we  wish  that  Heaven  had  left  us  still 
The  gentle  zephyr  and  the  purling  rill  1 " 

The  whole  contemplation  is  fitted  to  teach  us  our  ignorance,  and  to  lead  to  humility, 
to  wonder,  to  adoration.  We  see  but  a  small  part  of  the  immeasurable  kingdorn  of 
God.  We  play  with  a  fewfpebbles  on  the  verge  of  the  infinite  ocean  of  existence.  The 
knowledge  of  the  greatest  philosopher  is  but  the  short-sighted  glance  of  a  tiny  insect  1 
Our  earth  is  but  a  grain  of  sand  in  the  vast  whole,  a  drop  in  the  bucket.  Thus  the 
discoveries  made  of  God  lead  us  to  the  depth  and  height  of  the  undiscovered  and 
unkuown.  A  modem  philosopher  says  that  religion  and  science  find  their  point  of 
union  and  reconciliation  here — in  the  recognition  of  the  unknown,  unknowable  Power 
in  the  universe.  This  recognition  stills  vain  rivalries  and  idle  controversies,  "  When 
we  have  eaid  all  we  can  concerning  God,  we  must,  even  as  St.  Paul  (Rom.  xi.  33), 
despair  to  find  the  bottom ;  we  must  sit  down  at  the  brink  and  adore  the  depth : 
•Olj  the  depth  of  the  righps  botb  of  tbe  wisdom  ^n4  t}ie  knowledge  of  God}' "  (compi. 


436  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxvi.  1—14 


1  Oor.  xiii.  9 — 12).  But,  again,  the  sense  of  what  is  unknown  should  lead  us  to  hold 
the  more  firmly  to  that  which  is  known,  especially  through  the  gospel  of  his  grace 
and  love.  There  he  speaks  to  us  from  out  tiie  vastness  and  splendour  of  the  creation 
with  a  voice  that  we  can  understand,  that  touches  the  heart — "My  child!"  This 
everlasting  God  is  ours — our  Father  and  our  Love,  Without  the  knowledge  of  bis 
grace  and  mercy  in  Christ,  the  knowledge  of  his  majesty  and  purity  must  drive  us  to 
despair.— J, 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Oritd  reproof  help$  not  the  sufferer.  Job  has  endured  the  reproaches 
of  his  would-be  friends.  Their  words,  instead  of  calming  and  comforting  his  wounded 
spirit,  have  only  irritated  and  tried  him.  He  has  sought  in  vain  for  the  refreshment  of 
sympathji.  One  prolonged  attempt  to  prove  his  guiltiness,  and  to  establish  the  justice 
of  his  afBiction  on  that  ground,  he  has  had  to  meet  by  protestations  of  innocence. 
But  the  ill-judged  and  imperfectly  instructed  comforters,  mistaking  the  ground  of  Job's 
afQiction,  had  poured  gall  into  his  troubled  spirit.  The  testimony  of  the  book  is  to  the 
insufficiency  of  human  consolation,  and  to  the  great  truth  that  there  are  afflictions 
which  come  upon  men  for  other  reasons  than  as  punishments  of  offence.  The  picture 
of  Job  suffering  bodily  pain  is  sad  enough,  but  it  is  heightened  by  tlie  cruel  manner  in 
which  the  professed  words  of  comfort  are  turned  into  keen  reproofs.  Such  reproofs 
are  powerless  to  help  the  sufferer,  for — 

I.  There  is  no  element  of  real  consolation  in  them.  The  wise  consoler  may 
take  opportunity  to  lead  the  sufferer  to  a  just  penitence  for  his  sin ;  but  merely  to  dwell 
upon  wrong,  and  to  pniiit  to  it  as  the  sole  cause  of  suffei  ing,  is  to  leave  the  sufferer 
devoid  of  all  true  consolation.  There  is  no  word  of  hope,  no  promise  of  relief,  no  bracing 
of  the  &[>  rit,  by  the  whisper  of  lofty  principles. 

II.  Thet  but  serve  to  irritate  the  already  tried  spirit.  Bowed  down  by 
manifold  sufferings,  the  afflicted  one  is  sensitive  to  every  word,  even  every  look,  of  those 
around  him.  Their  tender  patience,  even  their  very  silence,  gives  them  some  assurance 
of  kindly  feeling;  but  to  speak  words  of  reproof  when  the  spirit  is  weak  and  oppressed 
with  anguish  is  to  add  weight  to  weight,  and  to  subject  tlie  sufferer  to  greater  pain. 
He  needs  the  balmy  word  of  friendship,  the  touch  of  the  tender  1  and ;  not  to  be  rudely 
taunted  with  keen  thrusts  of  acousntion  which  are  as  the  bite  of  an  adder,  nor  to  be 
scourged  by  the  severities  of  an  antagonist, 

III.  Thet  afford  no  evidence  of  that  sympathy  which  is  the  basis  of  all 
true  consolation.  With  the  words  of  inspiriting  brotherly  love  the  truly  afflicted 
one  has  borne  the  heaviest  calamity  and  remained  calm  under  the  severest  trials. 
Pain  has  lost  its  power  in  presence  of  sympathy.  To  lay  the  aching  head  upon  the 
shoulder  of  a  strong  friend  gives  might  to  the  weak.  The  truest  succour  for  the 
wounded  is  tender  sympathy,  whether  the  wounds  pierce  the  flesh  or  the  spirit.  But 
sympathy  knows  nothing  of  severity  or  harsh  accusation.  It  hides  offence  and  soothes 
the  self-accused  spirit  until  it  has  gained  strength  to  bear  the  weight  of  condemnation. 
But  no  sign  of  this  is  present  in  the  words  of  Job's  friends;  no  sympathy  is  expressed 
by  cruel  reproof:  "How  hast  thou  helped  him  that  is  without  power?" 

IV.  To  all  they  add  the  painful  recall  op  the  frailties  of  the  boul  at 

THE    TIME    WHEN    IT    IS    OVERBURDENED    AND    UNABLE    TO    MAKE    ANSWER.       This    iS 

not  the  appropriate  time  to  speak  accusingly.  When  the  soul  is  in  its  strength  it  is 
hard  to  reply  to  either  just  or  unjust  accusation,  but  in  its  weakness  and  sorrow  it  is 
utterly  incapable  of  reply.  It  is  adding  weiglit  to  weight, and  taking  unfair  advantage 
of  feebleness.  This  is  neither  neighbourly,  nor  brotherly,"  nor  even  kind.  It  shows  a 
faulty  judgment  and  an  unsympathetic  spirit.— R.  Q'. 

Vers.  6- — 14. — The  Divine  ways  hut  partially  revealed.  Bildad  had  given  Job  no 
comfort.  And  Job  at  first  (vers.  1 — 3)  retorts  upon  him  a  reproof  for  his  unhelpful 
words.  He  then  bursts  into  an  impressive  representation  of  the  wonderful  works  of  God 
to  whom  Bildad  had  referred.  The  works  of  God  in  the  heavens,  the  earth,  and  the 
deep  sea  are  great  and  manifold;  so  are  his  works  amongst  the  creatures  of  his  power, 
of  wliom  the  sei'pent  alone  is  mentioned.  But  the  hidden  hand  of  God  Job  confesses, 
and  the  greatness  of  the  Divine  works  and  ways,  of  which  only  a  part  v  revealed.  Wf 
joa^  take  %  wider  sweejp  than  evea  Job  does,  and  say — 


<fe.  txvi,  1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  437 


I.  Parts  of  the  Divine  ways  are  revealed  in  the  visible  obbation.  His  wonderful 
works. 

II.  In  his  ways  to  the  children  of  men.  In  the  working  of  that  providence  that 
ever  guards  the  interests  of  the  human  life. 

III.  In  the  revelations  oif  Holy  Sobiptubb.  Here  light  falls  especially  (1) 
on  the  Divine  Name;  (2)  on  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  providence;  (3)  (jn  the 
spiritual  future — on  God,  on  human  life  and  duty,  on  immortality.  Yet  with  all  the 
teachings  it  must  still  he  said,  "  How  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him  ? "  We  have 
heard  the  whisper ;  "  but  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  can  understand  ?  "  A  plain 
duty  is  to  judge  of  that  which  is  hidden  by  that  which  is  made  known.  And  the 
question  instantly  arises  to  our  lips — Are  the  revelations  which  God  has  made  of  himself 
and  of  his  ways  in  nature,  in  human  life,  in  the  Holy  S'jriptures,  such  as  encourage  us  to 
trust  in  those  ways,  and  in  him,  where  all  is  covered  with  clouds  and  thick  darkness  ? 
If  the  revealed  things  are  good  and  trustworthy,  it  is  most  reasonable  to  demand  faith  in 
the  hidden  and  unseen.  Faith  in  the  unseen  is  warranted  by  (1)  the  beauty,  (2)  utility, 
(3)  perfectness,  (4)  beneficence  of  the  Divine  ways,  as  they  are  traceable  in  the  works 
of  the  Divine  hand ;  but  faith's  highest  warrant  is  in  the  Divine  Name — the  absolutely 
good,  pure,  just,  and  beneficent  One.--E.  G. 

Ver.  2.— BeZpinjr  the  weak.  Job  returns  to  the  old  complaint,  more  than  ever  justi- 
Sed  by  the  obstinacy  of  his  friends.  They  came  to  sympathize  ami  help  in  the  time  of 
trouble;  how  have  they  carried  out  their  self-appointed  task  ? 

I.  It  is  a  Christian  duty  to  help  the  weak.  The  worldly  maxim  is  "  each 
for  himself."  This  seems  to  be  natural ;  but  it  is  not  true  to  our  better  nature.  The 
higher  self  is  required  to  rectify  the  cruel  impulses  of  the  lower  regions  of  nature.  1. 
Becaiise  of  the  solidanty  of  the  race.  We  are  members  one  of  another,  and  when  one 
member  suffers  all  the  members  suflfer.  It  is  not  good  for  us  that  any  of  our  fellow- 
men  should  fail.  2.  Because  of  the  brotherhood  of  Ohristians.  We  are  called  to  more 
than  a  care  for  the  whole  body ;  individual  needs  appeal  to  our  sympathy,  and  the 
special  cases  of  those  who  are  known  to  us  come  before  us  wit'i  peculiar  claims.  We 
have  to  remember  our  family  relationship  as  children  of  our  Piither.  3.  Because  of  the 
work  of  Christ.  He  came  to  help  the  weak,  and  our  standing  is  only  on  the  ground 
that  he  has  done  so  for  us.  If  all  had  come  to  us  by  self-seeking  and  personal  exclu- 
siveness,  we  should  not  have  had  the  power  to  help  others,  for  that  power  was  given 
to  us  in  our  weakness  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ. 

II.  Help  to  the  weak  should  be  by  aiding  them  to  become  strong.  There 
is  an  excessive  helplessness  that  can  only  be  relieved  by  direct  aid.  But  in  the  main 
it  is  not  wise  to  make  people  simply  dependent  on  us.  While  we  help  them  materially 
we  may  hurt  them  morally.  It  is  a  more  difficult  task  to  lift  men  than  to  dole  out 
chnrity  while  they  grovel  in  destitution;  but  it  is  a  much  more  tjuly  helpful  (hing. 
When  we  deal  with  men  in  spiritual  work  the  same  principle  applies.  It  is  not  enough 
to  bring  consolation  and  peace  and  other  spiritual  blessings.  The  more  important  work 
is  to  lead  feeble,  broken-down  creatures  to  the  Source  of  new  life  and  strength,  that  they 
may  be  renewed  and  converted.  It  is  well  to  help  the  weak  in  their  weakness,  but  it 
is  better  to  help  them  out  of  it. 

III.  It  is  possible  to  fail  misbrablt  in  attempting  to  help  the  weak 
This  is  one  of  the  most  obvious  lessons  of  the  Book  of  Job,  and  it  is  constantly 
recurring  to  us  from  Hiiferent  points  of  view.  Few  tasks  are  more_  difficult,  and  there- 
fore it  is  not  surprising  that  failure  is  frequent,  but  the  surprising  thing  is  that  it 
is  not  anticipated.  We  are  astounded  at  the  confidence  of  Job's  comforters,  'i'heir 
self-assurance  is  perfectly  amazing.  They  persevere  in  their  conventional  assertions 
without  perceiving  how  utterly  useless,  how  vexatiously  mischievous,  their  whole 
method  of  procedure  is.  Not  understanding  Job,  they  cannot  help  him.  Too  often 
blundering  attempts  at  doing  good  only  aggravate  the  evil  they  would  alleviate.  We 
must  study  social  problems  ;  we  must  understand  the  people;  we  .must  come  to  know 
the  individual  persons  we  desire  to  help.  A  large  part  of  the  duty  of  Christian  angels 
oi'  mercy  is  to  visit  the  afflicted,  to  enter  into  their  condition,  see  their  homes,  heai 
their  troubles,  know  their  circumstances  and  the  cause  of  their  misery.  The  Story  oJ 
Christian  charity  is  full  of  most  disheartening  failures  which  arise  simply  from  n«g> 
lecting  these  first  conditions  of  success. — W.  F.  A. 


438  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [on.  xsvi  1—14. 

Ver.  6. — Qod's  vision  of  death.  Bildad  has  just  spoken  of  the  exalted  dominion  of 
God  that  reaches  to  heavenly  heights,  overawing  the  very  moon  and  stars.  J  oh  now 
replies,  turning  his  eyes  downward,  and  noticing  how  the  dim  underworld  is  all  open 
to  the  inspection  of  God. 

L  The  dead  abb  not  beyond  the  vision  of  God.  He  lives  in  light,  and  they  lie 
in  darkness;  yet  lie  sees  them.  There  is  no  escaping  from  his  presence.  "If  I  make 
my  bed  in  Hades,  hehold,  thou  art  there  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8).  1.  There  is  no  eluding  his 
observation.  A  man  cannot  flee  from  God  by  dj'ing.  Indeed,  is  not  suicide  rightly 
regarded  as  rushing  into  the  presence  of  God?  No  darkness  hides  from  God,  for  day 
and  night  are  alike  with  him,  and  no  change  of  sphere  removes  from  the  reach  of  him 
who  rules  through  all  the  spheres.  2.  There  is  no  loss  of  his  notice.  No  one  can  be 
beneath  the  attention  of  God — too  low,  too  degraded,  in  too  dark  and  desolate  a  region 
to  be  seen  by  him.  Perhaps  this  was  Job's  thought.  He  was  longing  for  God  to  come 
and  vindicate  his  cause ;  but  he  could  not  but  admit  that  death  might  come  first,  for 
his  disease  was  making  fearful  inroads  on  his  constitution.  Still,  he  would  not  lose  the 
chance  of  meeting  God.  If  not  on  earth,  then  it  should  be  after  death.  God  will 
follow  his  children  wherever  they  go  in  the  next  world,  as  he  follows  them  in  this  world. 

II.  God's  vision  of  the  dead  is  of  geeat  consequence  to  them.  If  Hades  and 
destruction  have  no  covering  before  God,  this  n;eans  very  much  to  Hades  and  destruc- 
tion. It  cannot  be  the  same  thing  whether  we  are  looked  upon  by  God  or  not.  Surely 
it  means  much  to  know  that  the  abode  of  death  is  not  deserted  by  God.  God  cannot 
look  down  into  this  dark  region  as  a  mere  spectator.  He  is  everywhere  a  Life,  a 
Power,  an  Authority.  Therefore  we  must  conclude  that  the  rule  of  God  extends  over 
the  unseen  world.  Certain  important  consequences  flow  from  this  truth.  1.  Justice 
will  he  done  there.  God  will  not  allow  injustice  to  go  on  for  ever.  The  process  of 
rectification  is  slow ;  but  God  is  infinitely  patient,  and  he  has  eternity  before  him.  The 
unpunished  sinner  will  meet  his  dreadful  deserts  in  the  next  world,  and  the  ill-used  and 
misunderstood  good  man  will  be  vindicated  there.  2.  lAfe  will  he  given  there.  God 
cannot  look  on  the  dead  and  leave  Uiem  in  their  natural  darkness.  His  gaze  quickens. 
If  he  visits  the  realm  of  the  dead  he  will  bring  about  a  resurrection.  The  dead  are  not 
cast  out,  forgotten,  left  to  fade  and  melt  out  of  all  being.  God  touches  them,  and  they 
awake,  like  the  frost-bound  earth  at  the  touch  of  spring.  3.  Mercy  will  extend  to  them, 
How  and  to  what  extent  this  may  be  received  by  the  dead  is  a  mystery  concerning 
which  we  have  little  or  no  light.  But  we  know  that  "  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  endureth 
for  ever."  We  know  that  God  is  changeless.  His  love  is  unfailing.  He  must  ever 
desire  the  recovery  of  his  children.  Yet  dogmatic  universalism  is  as  false  to  human 
nature  as  it  is  to  the  warnings  of  Scripture.  For  men  may  harden  themselves  against 
the  mercy  of  God  ;  if  they  do  so  on  earth,  how  can  we  say  that  they  will  not  do  so 
after  death  ?— W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  8. — Clouds.  As  we  proceed  through  the  poem  we  cannot  hut  be  struck  with 
the  wonderful  wealth  of  its  nature-imagery,  which  continues  to  open  out  with  ever- 
increasing  luxuriance  till  it  reaches  its  fulness  in  the  burst  of  .splendour  that  accom- 
panies the  final  theophany.  Bach  aspect  of  nature  touched  by  the  poet  has  its  special 
lessons.  Now  he  calls  us  to  look  at  the  gorgeous  pageantry  of  the  clouds.  Here  truths 
of  Divine  order  and  government  are  displayed  before  our  eyes. 

I.  .Clouds  are  op  Divine  origin.  God  bindeth  up  the  waters ;  the  thick  clouds  are 
his.  Whenever  we  touch  nature  we  should  move  with  reverence,  for  we  are  in  the 
temple  of  God.  Whether  we  understand  the  clouds,  whether  we  can  see  the  wisdom 
by  which  they  are  shaped  and  led  out  over  the  heavens  or  not,  at  least  we  must  discuss 
them  with  the  humility  that  becomes  a  consideration  of  the  works  of  the  infinitely 
Wise  and  the  perfectly  Good. 

II.  Clouds  are  beneficiai,  to  the  world.  In  Southern  countries  they  are 
greatly  valued  both  for  their  shade  and  for  the  much-needed  showers  they  bring  to  the 
parched  land.  The  arrangement  by  which  they  float  overhead,  and  then  descend  on 
broad  areas  in  finely  distributed  drops  of  water,  makes  man's  most  advanced  system  of 
irrigation  look  childish  and  clumsy.  Great  masses  of  water  are  stored  aloft  and  driven 
through  the  air,  and  made  to  descend  so  that  every  minute  plant  is  watered,  and  not;  a 
blade  of  grass  is  crushed.     Here  is  the  perfection  of  the  art  of  distribution. 


OH.  xxYL  1— 14,]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOtt  489 

IIL  Glodos  illustbate  the  MUTUAii  HiNisTEiEB  OF  NATDBB.  Drawn  up  from 
the  sea  in  invisible  vapour,  driven  over  the  land  by  strong  winds,  condensed  against  th« 
mountains  or  in  cool  currents  of  the  upper  air,  descending  in  gentle  rain  over  fields  and 
gardens,  over  woods  and  hills  and  plains,  trickling  through  the  soil,  breaking  out  in 
little  springs,  streaming  down  the  slopes  in  minute  rills,  gathering  supplies  from  all 
directions  in  the  valleys,  and  flowing  back  to  the  sea  in  full-fed  rivers,  the  water  of  the 
clouds  moves  through  a  circuit,  every  stage  of  which  is  of  use  in  the  economy  of  nature, 
while  the  whole  is  completed  by  the  help  of  many  furces  and  circumstances. 

IV.  Clouds  oomb  as  mbeoibs  in  DisauisB.  Thick  clouds  are  black  and  ugly,  hiding 
the  blue  sky,  and  casting  gloom  on  the  earth.  They  do  not  always  have  a  silver  lining. 
They  may  be  heavy  and  lowering,  sombre  and  threatening.  Yet  they  burst  in  refreshing 
showers.  When  shall  we  believe  that  it  is  the  same  with  those  apprehensions  of 
trouble  which  are  really  the  chariots  in  which  God's  love  rides? 

V.  Clouds  are  beautiful  in  the  sunlight.  It  is  only  a  difference  of  light,  and 
their  gloom  is  turned  into  splendour.  When  the  sun  touches  the  clouds  it  sets  them 
on  fire.  Morning  and  evening  unroll  leagues  of  rose  and  gold  curtains  on  the  distant 
horizon.  When  God's  love  touches  our  clouds,  by  a  magic  alchemy  they  pass  into 
heavenly  beauty. 

VI.  Clouds  ake  fleeting  and  tbansient.  Moulded  out  of  invisible  vapours,  they 
melt  while  we  gaze  at  them.  Their  high  bastions  and  clustered  domes,  their  silvery 
lakes  and  purple  mountains,  are  in  rapid  dissolution.  For  they  must  serve  their  purpose. 
They  must  vanish  to  fulfil  their  mission.  Earthly  joys  like  palaces  of  cloudland, 
earthly  terrors  like  its  gloomy  shadows,  both  melt  away,  and  must  do  so  to  serve  their 
purpose  of  blessing  and  discipline.  But  beyond  the  clouds  is  the  blue  sky.  We  are 
thankful  for  the  clouds.  But  we  must  neither  cling  to  them,  nor  shrink  from  them. 
Standing  on  the  solid  earth,  our  lasting  hope  is  in  the  eternal  heavens. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  14. — "  The  thunder  of  his  power."  We  only  see  the  edges  of  God's  ways;  we 
hear  but  a  slight  whisper  of  him ;  the  thunder  of  his  power  is  beyond  our  compre- 
hension. 

I.  In  nature.  We  can  see  but  a  small  part  of  God's  works.  Astronomy  hints  at 
vast  regions  of  unexplored  space.  Even  in  limited  regions  the  variety  of  teeming  life 
goes  beyond  our  comprehensifln.  We  cannot  see  the  infinitely  small.  Further,  we 
only  use  our  five  senses.  Who  can  tell  but  that  a  sixth  sense  would  reveal  much  more 
of  the  wonderful  works  of  God?  We  can  conceive  of  an  indefinite  multiplication  of 
senses.  Suppose  there  were  ten  senses,  or  fifty,  or  any  number  more ;  who  can  say  but 
that  they  would  discover  corresponding  objects  that  are  quite  unknown  to  us  because 
we  have  not  the  faculty  of  perceiving  them?  Next  consider  how  small  a  period  of 
time  our  observation  extends  over.  Geology  stretches  back  a  long  way,  but  with  how 
meagre  a  record  of  immense  ages  I  Then  note  that  all  these  observations  deal  with 
the  material  universe.  But  what  of  the  spiritual  ?  How  far  may  this  extend?  What 
are  its  contents  ? 

II.  In  pbovidence.  The  mistake  of  Job's  friends  was  that  they  were  both  short- 
sighted and  narrow  in  their  vision.  They  could  see  but  a  very  small  part  of  God's 
work  and  purpose ;  yet,  they  drew  universal  conclusions,  and  dogmatized.  Their 
mistake  is  only  too  common.  We  have  to  recollect  that  we  have  not  the  materials 
with  which  to  form  a  judgment  of  God's  actions.  In  our  own  lives  we  see  a  very 
small  part  of  the  Divine  plan.  All  may  look  dark  and  dreadful.  But  we  are  only  at 
the  early  seed-sowing.  We  have  to  see  the  harvest  before  we  can  judge  of  the  crop. 
And  the  harvest  is  not  yet. 

III.  In  revelation.  This  was  true  of  the  Old  Testament  in  comparison  with  the 
New.  But  a  fringe  of  the  grace  afterwards  revealed  in  Christ  was  made  known  to  the 
ancient  Jews.  Now  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  much  more  of  the  nature  and  thought 
of  God  still  lies  beyond  the  region  of  revelation.  We  have  enough  to  guide  us, 
sufficient  for  salvation  and  for  duty.  But  we  dare  not  limit  God  to  his  revelations  of 
himself.  AH  attempts  to  define  God,  to  draw  a  circle  about  the  Divine,  refute  them- 
selves, for  they  would  make  out  that  the  Infinite  is  finite. 

IV.  In  judgment.  Whispers  of  God's  judgment  make  us  tremble ;  and  we  hav« 
only  heard  whispers  as  yet.    What,  then,  must  the  thunder  of  his  power  be  ?    At  a 


440 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xxvn.  1 — ^23. 


mere  touch  from  "  the  Traveller  iiaknown "  the  sinew  of  Jacob's  thigh  shrank  (Gen. 
xxxli.  25).  What  would  have  been  the  result  if  the  mysterious  Wrestler  had  put 
forth  his  full  power?  Earthly  troubles  are  hard  to  bear  j  these  afe  but  whispers  com- 
pared to  the  thunder  of  doom  I 

V.  In  redemption.  There  is  a  bright  side  to  this  picture.  "  God  is  love,"  and  the 
half  has  not  been  told  us  of  God's  nature.  Future  ages  have  yet  to  explore  its 
marvellous  wealth  of  grace.  Throughout  eternity  it  will  still  stretch  beyond  all  human 
experience.  With  the  grace  is  a  corresponding  blessing.  The  future  blessedness 
that  God  offers  to  his  children  is  also  beyond  all  present  estimates.  "  Beloved,  now 
are  we  children  of  God,  and  it  is  not  yet  made  manifest  what  we  shall  be "  (1  John 
iii.  2).— W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


Vets.  1 — 23. — This  chapter  divid'  s  itself 
into  three  distinct  portions.  In  the  first, 
which  extends  to  the  end  of  ver.  6,  Job  is 
engaged  in  maintaining,  with  the  utmost 
possible  solemnity  (ver.  2),  both  his  actual 
integrity  (ver.  6)  rind  his  determination  to 
hold  fast  his  integrity  as  long  as  be'  lives 
(vers.  4 — 6).  lu  the  second  (vers.  7—^10) 
he  imprecates  a  curse  upon  his  enemies. 
In  the  third  (vers.  11—23)  he  returns  to 
the  consideration  of  God's  treatment  of  the 
wicked,  and  retracts  the  View  which  he  had 
maintained  controversirtlly  in  ch.  xxiv.  2 — 
24,  with  respect  to  their  prosperity,  impu- 
nity, and  equalization  with  the  righteous  in 
death.  The  retractation  is  so  complete,  the 
concessions  are  so  large,  that  some  have 
been  induced  to  question  whether  they  can 
possibly  have  been  made  by  Job,  and  have 
been  led  on  to  suggest  that  we  have  here 
a  tliird  speech  of  Zophar's,  such  as  "the 
symmetry  of  the  general  form"  requires, 
which  by  accident  or  design  has  been  trans- 
ferred from  him  to  Job.  But  the  improba- 
bility of  such  a  transfer,  considering  how  in 
the  Book  of  Job  the  speech  of  each  separate 
interlocutor  is  introduced,  is  palpable ;  the 
dissimilarity  between  the  speech  and  the 
other  utterances  of  Zophar  is  striking!  and 
the  judgment  of  two  sUch  liberal  critics 
as  Ewald  and  Beiian,  that  the  passafje  is 
rightly  placed,  and  rightly  assigned  to  Job, 
should  set  all  doUbt  at  rest,  and  tnako  an 
eud  of  controversy  (s6e  Mr.  PrOude's  '  Short 
Studies  on  Great  Subjects,'  vol.  i.  pp.  315, 
^16;  and  Canon  Cook's  "  Introduction  to  the 
Book  of  Job,"  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commen- 
fery '  vol.  iv.  p.  7). 

Vw,  1.  —  Moreover    Job    continued   his 


parable,  and  said.  The  word  translated 
"  parable  "  f  Wd)  is  only  used  previously  in 
Numb,  xxiii.  and  xxiv.  It  is  thought  to 
'■  cemprehend  all  discourses  in  which  the 
results  of  discursive  thought  are  concisely 
6r  figuratively  expressed"  (Cook).  The 
introduction  of  a  new  term  seems  to  imply 
that  the  present  discourse  occupies  a  posi- 
tion different  frotn  that  of  all  the  preceding 
ones.  It  is  not  tentative,  controversial,  or 
emotional,  but  expresses  the  deliberate 
judgment  of  the  patriarch  on  the  subjects 
discussed  in  it.  Note  the  repetition  of  the 
term  in  oh.  xxix.  1. 

Ver.  2. — As  God  liveth,  who  hath  taken 
away  itty  judgment.  Job  has  not  previously 
introduced  any  form  of  adjuraiaon.  His 
"  yea  has  been  yea,  and  his  nay  nay." 
Now,  however,  under  the  solptein  circum- 
stances of  the  occasion,  when  he  is  making 
his  last  a(Tpeal  to  his  fl-iemls  for  a  favour- 
able judgment,  he  thinks  it  not  inappro- 
priate to  preface  what  he  is  about  to  say  by 
an  appeal  to  God  as  his  Witness.  "  As  God 
liveth,"  or  "As  the  Lord  liveth,"  was  the 
customary  oath  of  pious  Israelites  and  of 
God-fearing  men  generally  in  the  ancient 
world  (see  Judg.  viii.  19;  Euth  iii.  13;  1 
Sam.  xtv.  39;  XX.  3;  2  Sara.  iv.  9;  xii.  5; 
1  Kings  il.  24 ;  xvii.  21 ;  2  Kings  v.  20 ;  2 
Chron.  xviii.  13;  Jer.  xxxviii.  16).  Job 
adds  that  the  God  to  Wliom  he  appeals  is 
lie  who  has  "taken  away,"  or  "withheld," 
his  judgment,  i.e.  who  has  declined  to  enter 
with  him  into  a  controversy  as  to  the  justice 
of  his  doings  (ch.  ix.  32—85 ;  xiii.  31 ;  xxiii. 
8—7).  And  the  Almighty,  wlio  hath  vexed 
toy  soul;  or,  made  my  soul  bitter.  Though 
he  slays  him,  yet  does  Job  trust  in  God  (oh. 
xiii.  15).  He  is  his  Witness,  his  Helper,  his 
Kedeemer  (ch.  xix.  25). 

Ver.  8. — All  the  wliile  my  breath  is  in  me. 
This  verse  is  parenthetic.  Job  daims  in  it 
to  be  in  possession  of  all  his  faculties,  not- 
withstanding his  sufferings.  The  riglit 
translation  would  seem  to  be,  "For  my  life 
is  yet  whole  within  me"  (see  the  Bevised 
Version).  And  the  spirit  of  God  is  in  my 
nostrils.      The    spirit   of   God,    originally 


on.  xxvn.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


441 


breathed  into  man's  nostrili,  whereby  he 
became  a  living  soul  (Gen.  ii.  7),  is  still, 
Job  says,  within  him,  and  makes  him  capable 
of  judging  and  declaring  what  is  right. 

Ver.  4. — My  lips  shall  not  speak  wicked- 
ness, Nothing  shall  induce  him,  Job  says, 
to  speak  knowingly  wicked  words.  Nor  my 
tongue  utter  deceit.  Neither  will  he  be  in- 
duced, whatever  happens,  to  utter  untruth. 
A  confession  of  guilt,  such  as  his  fiieuds 
have  endeavoured  to  extort  from  him,  would 
be  both  wicked  and  false. 

Ver.  5.— God  forbid  that  I  should  justify 
you;  i.e.  allow  that  you  have  been  right  all 
along,  and  that  I  have  drawn  these  judg- 
ments down  upon  me  by  secret  sins.  Till  I 
die  I  will  not  remove  mine  integrity  from 
'  me.  So  long  as  he  continues  to  live«  Job 
will  not  oeasu  to  maintain  his  innocence.  It 
has  been  repeatedly  pointed  out  that  he 
does  not  mean  to  declare  himself  absolutely 
without  sin,  but  only  to  deny  such  heinous 
guilt  as  his  friends  imputed  to  him  (see  ch. 
xxii.  5 — 9). 

Ver.  6.^—VLy  righteousness  I  hold  fast, 
and  will  not  let  it  go.  Not  only  will  Job 
never  cease  to  miiintain  his  iiitegvity  in  the 
past,  but  he  will  hold  fast  to  the  same 
coarse  of  blameless  life  in  the  future.  He 
will  uuf  "  curse  God,  and  die."  Resolutely 
be  will  maintain  his  faith  in  God,  and 
his  dependence  on  him.  "  Though  he  slay 
me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him,"  Uy  heart 
shall  not  reproach  me  so  long  as  I  live. 
This  is  probably  the  true  meaning,  thougli 
some  suggest  "My  heart  dotli  not  reproach 
me  for  any  of  my  days."  Job  determines 
to  "  liave  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence, 
both  toward  God  and  toward  man "  (Acts 
xxiv.  16 ;  oomp.  Acts  xxiii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  4 ; 
2Tiin.  i.  3;  1  John  iii.  21). 

Ver.  7. — 'Let  mine  enemy  be  as  the  wioked. 
The  nexux  of  this  passage  with  what  goes 
before  is  uncertain.  Some  suppose  Job's  full 
thought  to  have  been,  "  Ye  try  to  persuade 
me  to  act  wickedly  by  making  a  false  repre- 
sentation of  my  feelings  and  convictions; 
but  I  absolutely  refuse  to  do  so.  Let  tliat 
rather  be  the  act  of  my  enemy."  Others 
regard  him  as  simply  so  vexed  by  his  pre- 
tended friends,  who  are  his  real  enemies, 
that  lie  is  driven  to  utter  an  imprecation 
against  them.  And  he  that  riseth  up  against 
ma  as  the  unrighteous.  This  is  another  in- 
stance of  a  mere  pleonastic  hemistich— a  re- 
petition of  the  preceding  clause  in  different 
words. 

Ver.  8.— For  what  is  the  hope  of  the  hypo- 
crite, though  he  hath  gained.  The  hypo- 
crite and  liar  may  get  advantage  in  this  life 
by  his  lies  and  his  hypocrisy.  He  may  de- 
ceive men;  lie  may  raise  himself  in  their 
opinion ;  he  may  derive  worldly  advantage 
bora  having  secured  tbejjt  Approval.    But 


what  will  he  have  to  look  forward  to  in  the  end, 
when  God  taketh  away  (i.«.  removeth  from 
earth)  his  soul  t  Job  evidently  regards  the 
soul  that  is  "  taken  away  "  or  removed  from 
earth  as  still  existing,  still  conscious,  still 
capable  of  liopp  or  of  despair,  and  asks  What 
hope  of  a  happy  future  could  the  man  who 
had  lived  a  hypocrite  entertain,  when  God 
re(juired  his  soul,  aiid  he  fell  under  God's 
judgment.  The  question  reminds  us  of  those 
words  of  our  blessed  Lord,  "  What  shall  it 
profit  a  man,  it  he  gain  the  whole  world,' and 
lose  his  own  soul  1  or  what  shall  a  imm  give 
in  exchange  for  his  soul?"  (Slark  viii.  36, 
37). 

Ver.  9. — Will  God  hear  his  cry  when 
trouble  cometh  upon  him  ?  Can  he  expect 
that  in  the  day  of  trouble,  "  when  distress 
and  anguish  come  upon  him  "  (Prov.  i.  27), 
God  will  hear  his  cry,  and  respond  to  it, 
and  give  him  relief?  No;  conscious  hypo- 
crisy— living  a  lie — outs  off  from  God,  severs 
between  a  man  and  his  Maker,  makes  all 
prayers  for  help  vain,  until  it  is  repented  of 
and  put  away  from  us.  The  man  who  dies 
in  it  is  in  a  desperate  case. 

Ver.  10. — Will  he  delight  himself  in  the 
Almighty  ?  A  further  ill  result  of  hypocrisy 
is  noted.  Not  only  does  it  alienate  God 
from  us,  but  it  alienates  us  from  God.  The 
hypocrite  cannot  "delight  in  the  Almighty." 
He  must  shrink  from  him,  fear  liiui,  dislike 
to  dwell  on  the  thought  of  .Ida  presence  and 
realize  it.  His  natural  inclination  must  be 
to  withdraw  his  thoughts  from  God,  and 
give  himself  up  to  the  worldlioess  which  lias 
been  his  attraction  to  assume  the  hypocrite's 
part.  Wm  he  always  call  upon  God  ?  Can 
be  even  be  depended  on  not  to  renounce  the 
service  of  God  altogether?  The  mutual 
alienation  above  spoken  of  must  tend  to 
check  communion,  to  disincline  to  prayer 
and  calling  upon  God,  to  erect  a  barrier 
between  the  hypocrite  and  the  Almighty, 
which,  though  for  a  while  it  may  be  insuf- 
ficient to  withstand  the  force  of  use  and 
wont,  will  yet,  in  the  long  run,  be  sure  to 
tell,  and  will  either  put  an  end  to  prayer 
altogether,  or  reduce  it  to  a  formality. 

Vers,  ll — 23. — It  is  impossible  to  deny 
that  this  passage  directly  contradicts  Job's 
former  utterances,  especiallyoh.  xxiv.  2^24. 
But  the  hypotheses  which  would  make  Job 
irresponsible  for  the  present  utterance  and 
fix  on  him,  as  his  steadfast  conviction,  the 
opposite  tlieory,  are  unsatisfactory  and  have 
no  solid  basis.  To  suppose  that  Zophar  is 
the  real  speaker  is  to  imagine  the  absolute 
loss  and  suppression  of  two  entire  verses- 
one  between  vers.  10  and  11,  assigning  the 
speeob  to  him,  and  another  at  the  beginning 


442 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[cH.  xxvn.  1 — 23. 


of  oh.  xxviii.,  reintroducing  Job  and  mak- 
ing him  once  more  the  interlocutor.  That 
this  should  have  happened  by  accident  is 
inconceivable.  Ti  kotA  rixtv  oi  irdvv  trvv 
SvaCerat.  To  ascribe  it  to  intentional  cor- 
ruption by  a  Hebrew  redactor,  bent  on  main- 
taining the  old  orthodox  view,  and  on  falsely 
and  wickedly  giving  the  authority  of  Job  to 
it  (Froude,  '  Short  Studies  on  Great  Sub- 
jects,' vol.  i.  p.  316),  is  to  take  away  all  au- 
thority from  the  existing  text  of  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures,  and  to  open  a  door  to  any  amount 
of  wild  suggestion  aad  conjectural  emenda- 
tion. The  other  hypothesis — that  of  Eich- 
horn — ^that  Job  is  here  simply  anticipating 
what  his  adversaries  will  say,  though  a  less 
dangerous  view,  is  untenable,  since  Job 
never  does  this  without  following  up  his 
statement  of  the  adversaries'  case  with  a 
reply,  and  here  is  no  reply  whatever,  but  a 
simple  turning  away,  after  ver.  23,  to  another 
subject.  The  explanation  of  the  cuntraiUc- 
tion  by  supposing  that  Job's  former  state- 
ment was  tentative  and  controversial,  or 
else  hasty  and  ill-considered,  and  that  now, 
to  prevent  misconception,  he  determines  to 
set  himself  right,  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
thoroughly  defensible,  and  receives  a  strong 
support  from  the  remarkable  introduction  in 
ver.  11,  which  "  prepares  us,  if  not  for  a  re- 
cantation, yet  (at  any  rate)  for  a  modllica- 
tiou  of  statements  wrung  from  the  speaker 
when  his  words  flowed  over  from  a  spirit 
drunk  with  the  poison  of  God's  arrows " 
(see  the  remarks  of  Canon  Cook,  in  the 
•  Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  iv.  p.  90,  which 
are  in  substantial  agreement  with  those  of 
Bwald  and  Dillmann). 

Ver.  11. — I  will  teach  yon  by  (or,  conoern- 
ing)  the  hand  of  Ood.  Job  is  now  at  last 
aboutto  deliver  his  real  sentiments  respecting 
God's  dealings  with  men  in  the  world,  and 
prefaces  his  remarks  with  this  solemn  intro- 
duction, to  draw  special  attention  to  them. 
He  is  aware  tliat  his  previous  statements  on 
the  subject,  especially  in  ch.  ixiv.  2 — 24, 
have  been  overstrained  and  exaggerated, 
and  wishes,  now  that  he  is  uttering  his  last 
words  (ch.  xxxi.  40),  to  correct  his  previous 
hasty  utterances,  and  put  on  record  his  true 
views.  That  which  is  with  the  Almighty 
will  I  not  conceal.  By  "  that  which  is  with 
the  Almighty"  Job  means  the  Divine 
principles  of  action. 

Ver.  12. — Behold,  all  ye  yourselves  have 
seen  it.    The  true  Divine  scheme  of  action 


has  been  so  long  and  so  frequently  made 
manifest— openly  set  forth  in  the  sight  ot 
men — that  Job  cannot  believe  that  those 
whom  he  addresaes  are  ignorant  of  it  They 
must  themselves  have  seen  the  scheme  at 
work.  Why  then  are  ye  thus  altogether 
vain?  Why,  then,  do  they  not  draw  true 
inferences  from  the  facts  that  come  under 
their  notice? 

Ver.  13. — This  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked 
man  with  God.  In  "  this  "  Jcb  includes  all 
that  follows  from  ver.  14  to  ver.  23— "this, 
which  X  am  going  to  lay  down."  He 
pointedly  takes  up  the  words  of  Zophar  in 
ch.  XX.  29,  admitting  their  general  truth. 
And  the  heritage  of  oppressors,  which  they 
shall  receive  of  the  Almighty.  Eetribution 
is  "their  portion,"  " theii heritage"  i.e.  the 
natural  result  and  consequence  of  their  pre- 
cedent sin. 

Ver.  14. — If  his  children  be  multiplied,  it 
is  for  the  sword.  Among  the  items  of  pros- 
perity which  Job  had  assigned  to  tlie  wicked 
man  in  one  of  his  previous  discourses  (eh. 
xxi.  8,  11)  was  a  numerous  and  ilourish- 
ing  offspring.  Now  he  feels  forced  to  admit 
that,  frequently  at  any  rate,  this  flourishing 
offsprin;?  is  overtaken  by  calamity  (cli.  xxi. 
19) — ^it  falls  by  the  sword,  either  in  predatory 
warfare,  to  which  it  was  bred  up,  or  as  tha 
consequence  of  a  blood-feud  inherited  from 
its  progenitor.  They  who  "take the  sword," 
either  in  their  own  persons  or  in  their 
posterity,  "perish  with  the  sword."  And 
his  offspring  shaU  not  he  satisfied  with 
bread.  If  they  escape  this  fate,  then, 
mostly,  they  fall  into  poverty,  and  suffer 
want,  no  one  caring  to  relieve  them,  since 
they  have  an  ill  reputation,  the  memory  cl 
their  parent's  wickedness  clinging  to  them 
long  after  his  decease. 

Ver.  15. — Those  that  remain  of  him  shall 
be  buried  in  death.  Not  simply  "  shall  die," 
but  shall  "  be  buried,"  i.e.  lost  sight  of,  and 
forgotten,  "  in  death."  And  his  widows  shall 
not  weep  (eomp.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  61).  The 
deaths  of  his  offspring  shall  not  be  lamented 
by  their  widows — a  very  grievous  omission 
in  the  eyes  of  Orientals. 

Ver.  16.— Though  he  heap  up  silver  as 
the  dust.  The  city  of  Tyre,  we  are  told  by 
Zechariah,  "  heaped  up  silver  a«  the  dmt " 
(Zech.  ix.  3),  i.e.  in  vast  quantities,  beyond 
count.  So  might  the  wicked  man  do.  He 
might  also  prepare  raiment  as  the  clay;  ».«. 
fill  his  house  with  rich  dresses,  partly  for 
his  own  wear,  partly  to  be  given  as  robes 
of  honour  to  his  friends  and  boon  com- 
panions (comp.  Gen.  xlv.  22 ;  2  Kings  v.  22; 
X.  22 ;  Matt.  vi.  19 ;  Jas.  v.  2).  Eobes  *f 
honour  are  still  kept  in  store  by  Eastern 
monarchs,  and  presented  as  marks  of  favour 
to  visitors  of  importance. 

Ver.  17  — He  may  prepare  it,  but  the  jut 


OH.  xsvn.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


443 


shall  put  it  on.  The  raiment  thus  accumu- 
lated shall  pass  from  the  wicked  into  the 
hands  of  the  just,  who  at  his  death  shall 
enter  upon  his  inheritance  (ch.  xx.  18,  20, 
28).  And  the  insocent  shall  divide  the 
silver  (see  the  first  clause  of  ver.  16). 

Ver.  18. — He  buildeth  his  house  as  a 
moth.  The  moth  is  the  symbol  of  fragility, 
decay,  and  weakness.  The  wicked  man's 
attempt  to  build  himself  up  a  house,  and 
establish  a  powerful  family,  is  no  butter 
than  a  moth's  attempt  to  make  itself  a 
permanent  habitation,  As  moths  do  not 
construct  dwellings  for  themselves,  it  has 
been  proposed  (Merx)  to  read  ti''33j;3,  "  as 
a  spider,"  lor  e>yD,  "  as  a  moth ; "  but  the 
change  is  too  great  to  be  at  all  probable. 
May  not  the  cocoon,  from  which  the  moth 
issues  as  from  a  house,  have  been  in  Job's 
mind  ?  The  hawk-moth  buries  itself  in  a 
neat  cave  for  the  pupa  stage ;  and  there 
may  have  been  even  better  examples  in 
Uz.  But  we  ouiselves  haVe  not  known 
these  facts  long,  and  therefore  we  need  not 
be  surprised  to  find  Job  making  a  mia- 
take  in  natural  history.  And  as  a  booth 
that  the  keeper  maketh.  Huts  or  lodges 
of  boughs  were  set  up  in  vineyards  and 
orchards  by  those"  who  had  to  watch  them 
(see  Isa.  i.  8;  Lam.  ii.  6).  They  were 
habitations  of  the  weakest  and  frailest 
kind. 

Ver.  19. — ^The  rich  man  lieth  down; 
rather,  he  lieth  dovm  rich  (see  the  Eevised 
Version).  But  he  shall  not  be  gathered. 
If  we  accept  the  present  text,  we  may 
translate.  But  it  (i.e.  his  wealth)  shall  not 
he  gathered,  and  suppose  his  wealth  to  have 
consisted  in  agricultural  produce.  Or  we 
may  alter  bdn'  into  fl'DV,  and  translate.  He 
lieth  dnvm  rich,  but  he  ihall  do  so  no  more — 
a  correction  to  which  the  ou  irpo(r6^(rei  of  the 
Septuagint  points.  He  openeth  his  eyes, 
and  he  is  not.  Some  translate,  "  It  is  not ; " 
t.«.  the  harvest,  in  which  his  wealth  con- 
sisted, is  not — it  has  been  all  destroyed  by 
blight  or  robbers.     Those  who  render,  "  He 


is  not,"  generally  suppose  that  he  opens  hii 
eyes  only  to  find  himself  in  the  hands  of 
murderers. 

Ver.  20. — Terrors  take  hold  on  him  as 
waters  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  11).  Terrors  sweep 
over  the  wicked  man  like  a  flood  of  waters 
— vague  terrors  with  respect  to  the  past,-  the 
present,  and  the  future.  He  fears  the 
vengeance  of  those  whom  he  has  oppressed 
and  injured,  the  loss  of  his  prosperity  at  any 
moment  by  a  reverse  of  fortune,  and  a  final 
retribution  at  the  hand  of  God  commensu- 
rate with  his  ill  desert.  He  is  at  all  times 
uneasy ;  sometimes  he  experiences  a  sudden 
rush  upon  him  of  such  gloomy  thoughts, ' 
which  overwhelms  him,  and  sweeps  him 
away  like  a  mighty  stream.  A  tempest 
stealeth  him  away  in  the  night.  While  he 
is  off  his  guard,  as  it  were,  in  the  night,  a 
sudden  storm  bursts  on  him,  and  removes 
him  from  his  place. 

Ver.  21. — The  east  wind  carrieth  him 
away,  and  he  departeth.  The  khamsin  wind, 
coming  with  all  its  violence  and  burning 
heat,  drives  him  before  it,  and  is  irresistible 
(see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  482). 
And  as  a  storm  hnrleth  him  ont  of  his 
place.  This  is  little  more  than  a  repetition 
of  the  previous  hemistich.  The  man  is 
swept  from  the  earth  by  a  storm  of  calamity 

Ver.  22. — For  God  shall  oast  upon  him, 
and  not  spare.  Some  commentators  regard 
the  storm  as  still  the  subject,  and  translate, 
"  For  it  shall  cast  itself  upon  him  [or, 
'  rush  upon  him '],  and  not  spare  " 
(Schultens,  Merx).  The  difference  is  not 
great,  since  the  storm  represents  God's 
judgment.  He  would  fain  fiee  out  of  bis 
hand ;  or,  if  the  storm  is  meant,  out  of  its 
hand. 

Ver.  23. — Men  shall  clap  their  hands  at 
him.  Applauding,  i.e.,  the  just  judgment  of 
God  upon  him.  And  shall  hiss  him  out  of 
his  place.  Accompany  with  hisses  his 
final  ruin  and  downfall — hissing  him,  while 
they  applaud  the  action  of  God  in  respect 
to  him. 


HOMILETICJa 

Yers.  1 10. — Joh's  first  parable ;    1.  2%e   transgressions  of  a  godly  man.    I.  A 

DABING  ACCUSATION.  1.  Against  whom  directed?  Against  Eloah,  the  All-sufflcient 
One;  Shaddai,  the  All-powerful  One,  the  Self-existent,  Living  Cue,  whose  universal 
dominion,  resistless  might,  and  ineffable  majesty  Bildad  (oh.  xxv.  1—3)  and  Job 
himself  (ch.  xxvi.  5 — 14)  had  eloquently  pictured.  With  exalted  conceptions  of  the 
transcendent  greatness  of  the  invisible  Supreme,  whose  continual  presence  also  he 
▼ividly  realized  (ch,  xxiii.  8,  9,  15),  Job  should  have  feared  to  speak  rashly,  much 
more  accusingly,  before  him  (Deut.  xxviii.  58 ;  Ps.  Ixxvi.  7,  11 ;  Jer.  v.  22).  But 
clear  and  accurate  notions  of  Divine  truth  do  not  always  possess  that  moral  force,  even 
over  "ood  men,  that  they  should.  Job  a  little  while  ago  was  afraid  of  God  and 
troubled  at  his  presence  (ch.  xxiiL  15);  now,  having  lost,  perhaps,  his  former  luminous 
sense  of  the  Divine  presence,  he  hesitates  not  to  bring  against  him  aserioui  accusation. 


444  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxvn.  1— 23, 

2.  By  whom  uttered  f  Job,  a  man  who  had  not  only  been  fashioned  by  the  hands  of 
Bhaddai  (ob.  x.  8,  9),  but  depended  for  life  every  moment  on  the  breath  of  Eloah  in 
his  nostrils  (ver.  3),  and  therefore  should  have  paused  ere  he  called  into  question  the 
conduct  of  a  Being  virho  could  any  instant  cause  him  to  return  to  the  dust ;  a  feeble 
mau,  vyasted  into  a  skeleton,  shivering  on  the  edge  of  the  tomb,  expecting  every  second 
to  pass  into  God's  presence  In  the  world  of  spirits — hence  one  who  should  have  feared 
to  affront  the  Eternal ;  a  guilty  man,  i.e.  a  man  who,  however  conscious  of  integrity, 
was  yet  sinful  in  God's  sight,  and  whom  accordingly  it  ill  became  to  question  the  pro- 
ceedings of  God;  and  likewise  a  pardoned  man,  whom  God  hal  accepted  as  right- 
eous, in  proof  thereof  sending  answers  to  his  prayers  (ver.  9),  which  only  added  to 
the  rashness  of  Job  in  impeaching  Eloah  as  he  did.  3.  0/  what  composed  f  The 
charge  preferred  against  God  was  twofold  in  appearance,  vexing  Job's  soul,  and  taking 
away  Job's  judgment,  though  in  reality  the  two  things  were  connected  as  cause  and 
effect.  What  irritated  and  inflamed  the  patriarch's  spirit  was  the  thought  which  he 
here,  indirectly  indeed  but  none  the  less  really  on  that  account,  utters,  viz.  that  God, 
the  righteous  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  had  denied  him  justice.  Already  had  he  com- 
plained that  God  seemed  to  treat  him  as  an  enemy  (ch.  ix.  28;  xiii.  24;  xiv.  16, 17); 
never  until  now  does  he  in  terms  so  explicit  accuse  God  of  withholding  from  him 
justice.  For  this  sin  Job  was  afterwards  reproved  by  Blihu  (ch.  xxziv.  5)  and  by 
God  (ch.  xl.  8). 

II.  An  overweening  assumption.  1.  To  declare  the  truth  about  himself.  There  was 
nothing  wrong  or  extravagantly  self-asserting  in  the  declaration  that  "  his  lips  should 
not  speak  wickedness,  nor  his  tongue  utter  deceit "  (ver.  4 ;  of.  2  Cor.  xi.  31 ;  Gal.  i.  20). 
Not  only  should  good  men  tell  no  lies  (Exod.  xx.  16 ;  Lev.  xix.  11 ;  P».  xxxiv.  13), 
though,  alas!  they  sometimes  do  (Gen.  xii.  13;  xxvi.  7),  but  they  should  so  hate 
untruthfulness  (Prov.  xiii.  5)  as  to  render  the  utterance  of  falsehoods  impossible 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  8 ;  Col.  iii.  9).  Job,  however,  claimed  that  he  would  state  the  exact  truth 
about  his  own  inward  integrity,  forgetting  that  "the  heart  of  man  is  deceitful  above 
all  things,  and  desperately  wicked  "  (Jer.  xvii.  9),  that  God  alone  is  competent  to 
pronounce  an  accurate  verdict  on  Its  character  (Jer.  xvii.  10 ;  ch.  xxxvi.  4 ;  Ps.  vii. 
9 ;  Prov.  XV.  11),  and  that  not  even  a  saint  can  be  trusted  to  deliver  a  perfectly 
unbiassed  judgment  about  himself. 

"  If  Self  the  wavering  balance  shake, 
It's  rarely  right  adjusted." 

(Burns.) 

2.  To  reveal  the  mind  of  Ood  concerning  others.  With  an  air  of  authority  Job  avows 
his  ability  to  give  what  he  had  often  stormed  at  his  friends  for  professing  to  deliver — 
an  oracular  exposition  Of  the  Divine  m^  de  of  action  in  dealing  with  ungodly  men 
(ver.  11).  Though  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  witli  thtm  that  fear  him"  (Ps.  xxv.  14; 
Prov.  iil.  32),  it  is  not  absolutely  certain  that  good  men  do  not  sometimes  mistake 
their  own  cogitations  for  Heaven's  inspirations.  Under  any  .circumstances  good  men, 
in  setting  forth  what  they  believe  to  be  Divine  truth,  should  avoid  the  appearance 
and  tone  of  dogmatical  assertion.  Least  of  all  should  they  speak  dictatorially  to 
those  whom  they  have  already  charged  with  the  same  offence  (Rom.  ii.  21). 

III.  An  OVERBOLD  raoTESTATiON.  1.  With  Solemn  adjuration.  That  Job  should 
have  maintained  his  integrity  against  the  calumniations  of  his  friends  was  both  legitimate 
and  reasonable.  That  he  should  even  have  exhibited  a  degree  of  warmth  in  repelling 
their  accusations  was  perhaps  excusable.  But  that  he  should  have  deemed  it  fitting 
to  preface  his  self-vindication  by  an  oath  betrayed  a  degree  of  confidence,  if  not  of  self- 
righteonsness,  which  was  unbecoming  in  a  humble-hearted  and  truly  pious  man. 
The  matter  was  one  that  did  not  require  more  than  calm,  quiet,  modest  affirmation. 
Yet  Job,  in  at  least  two  different  forms,  adds  an  oath  forconfirnjation  (vers.  2,  5),  as  if 
the  vindication  of  his  (i.e.  the  creature's)  righteousness  were,  and  ought  to  be,  the 
supreme  end  of  his  existence,  and  not  rather  the  maintenance  of  the  unchallengable 
righteousness  of  God.  Nevertheless,  Job's  conduct  in  thus  asserting  With  an  oath  that 
he  faithfully  (oUowed  God  compares  favoiirahly  with  that  of  Pettr,  who  with  curses 
affirmed  that  he  knew  not  the  Man  (Mark  xiv.  71).  2.  With  vehement  repetition. 
Not  content  with  one  affirmation  of  his  integrity,  Job  insists  upon  it  with  a  fourf<rid 


OH.  XXVII.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  4a 

asseveration  (vers.  5,  6),  declaring  (1)  that  he  could  not  justify  his  friends,  <.e.  admit 
the  truth  of  their  contention  with  regard  to  himself  without  profanity ;  (2)  that  he 
would  continue  to  asseit  his  innocence  while  he  lived;  (3)  that  his  righteousness  he 
would  on  no  account  let  go;  and  (4)  that  his  heart  should  not  reproach  him  even  one  of 
his  days.  So  Paul  protested  to  the  Sanhedriu  that  he  had  lived  in  all  good  conscience 
before  God  up  till  then  (Acts  xxiii.  1),  and,  writing  to  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  i.  12), 
rt'joiced  in  the  testimony  of  his  conscience  that  in  simplicity  and  godly  sin(Jerity  he 
had  had  his  conversation  in  the  world.  The  words,  "  not  with  fleshly  wisdom^  but  by 
the  grace  of  God,"  exhibit  the  difference  between  St.  Paul's  assertion  of  his  personal 
integrity  and  Job's. 

IV.  A  WICKED  iMPBECATioN.  1.  The  persons  upon  whom  it  is  'pronounced.  Job's 
"enemy;"  not  the  ungodly  in  general,  but  the  men  who  rose  iip  against  him  to 
impeach  his  integrity  (ver.  7).  While  it  is  well-nigh  certain  that  a  good  man  will  have 
enemies  (Matt.  x.  22;  John  xv.  19),  who  hate  him  because  they  first  dislike  his 
principles  (1  Pet.  iii.  16  ;  iv.  4),  it  is  a  splendid  testimony  to  a  good  man's  character 
when  he  has  no  enemies  except  the  ungodly.  The  mere  fact,  however,  that  his 
integrity  is  challenged  by  another  is  no  proof  tliat  that  other  is  eit)ier  wicked  in  him- 
self or  hostilely  disposed  toward  him.  Though  keenly  resenting,  therefore,  the  unjust 
imputations  of  his  friends,  it  was  wrong  in  Job  to  denounce  them,  as  they  had  denounced 
him,  as  inherently  ungodly.  2.  The  malediction  of  which  it  consists.  Nothing  is  really 
gained  by  endeavouring  to  soften  down  Job's  language  into  a  prediction.  Supposing 
him  to  merely  signify  that  the  man  who  spoke  against  him  was  a  wicked  person  who 
would  eventually  meet  the  wicked  i^erson's  recompense,  he  asserts  it  with  a  degree  of 
confidence  which  was  not  warranted  by  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  which  painfully 
suggests  that  the  wish  was  father  to  the  thought.  The  language  of  Job  towards 
Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar  finds  an  echo  in  the  terrific  outburst  of  David  against  his 
adversaries  in  the  imprecatory  psalms  (Ixix.  22 — 28 ;  cix.  6 — 15  ;  cxl.  8 — 11),  whichj 
in  so  far  as  it  was  directed  against  individuals,  we  are  not  required  to  regard  as  entirely 
free  from  blame. 

V.  A  SELF-EXALTINO  COMPARISON.  In  order  further  to  set  forth  his  integrity.  Job 
tacitly  contrasts  his  own  case  with  that  of  the  hypocrite,  indirectly  exhibiting  himself 
as  possessed  of:  1.  A  letter  hope.  However  prosperous  the  wicked  man  may  be  in  life, 
however  successful  in  heaping  up  wealth,  when  he  comes  to  die  he  has  no  hope  whatever 
to  sustain  him  (cf.  ch.  viii.  13 ;  xx.  5,  homiletics),  no  expecta*  ion  of  acceptance  with  God  ; 
while  he.  Job,  though  standing  on  the  verge  of  the  grave,  has.  Worldly  success  cannot 
provide,  and  will  not  suffice  as  a  substitute  for,  hope  in  death.  Accumulated  wealth 
prevents  not  death's  approach.  If  God  does  not  cut  off  a  man's  gains  before  death,  he 
will  certanly  out  off  a  wicked  man's  soul  at  death.  It  is  a  poor  bargain  to  gain  the 
world  which  one  must  soon  leave,  and  lose  the  soul  which  one  cannot  regain  throughout 
eternity  (Matt.  xvi.  26).  2.  A  better  privilege.  When  trouble  comes  upon  the  wicked 
man  so  seviTely  as  to  make  him  cry  unto  the  Lord,  the  Lord  turns  a  doaf  ear  to  his 
entreaty  (Prov.  i.  28).  But  the  good  man,  i.e.  Job,  can  reckon  that  his  prayer  will 
find  ail  entrance  into  God's  ear  (Ps.  xxxiv.  17;  1.  15;  cvii.  13  ;  oxiv.  18,  19);  the 
good  man's  supplication  being  breath  d  forth  in  penitence,  humility,  and  faith,  the 
outcry  of  the  hypocrite  being  merely  an  exclamation  of  alarm.  3.  A  better  spirit. 
The  imperilled  hypocrite  may  cry  to  God  when  the  fear  of  death  is  on  him,  or  when 
trouble  crushes  him ;  but  he  has  no  true  delight  in  fellowship  with  God.  The  good 
man  derives  his  principal  felicity  from  such  communion  with  Heaven  (laa.  Iviii.  14; 
1  John  i.  3),  as  Eliphaz  had  alrea^ly  admitted  (oh.  xxii.  15);  and  such  a  good  man  Job 
distinctly  claims  to  be.  Delight  in  God  expresses  itself  in  happy  meditation  on 
and  cheerful  obedience  to  God's  Law  (Ps.  cxix.  16,  35,  47,  70) ;  it  is  an  indispensable 
condition  of  receiving  answers  to  prayers  (Ps.  x\xvii.  4).  4.  A  better  practice.  The 
devotion  of  the  hypocrite  is  only  exceptional,  whereas  Job's  was  habitual  (ver.  10).  An 
occasional  prayer  is  no  true  mark  of  piety.  The  child  of  God  should  he  instant  in 
prayer  (Hom.  xii.  12),  and  should  pray  without  ceasing  (E[ih.  vi.  18 ;  Pliil.  iv.  6 ;  1 
Thess.  V.  17),    Chiist's  disciples  should  pray  always,  and  not  faint  (Luke  xviii.  1). 

Learn':  1.  That  the  most  eminent  saints  are  not  beyond  the  danger  of  falling  into 
grievous  sin's.  2.  That  good  men,  while  conscious  of  their  integrity,  should  guard 
igwai  self-exaltfttiou  oa  that  account.    3.  That  jiiety  aa  little  aa  impiety  stands  ia 


446  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxvn.  1—23. 


need  of  oatha  to  support  it.  4.  That  good  men  should  never  renounce  their  integrity 
while  they  live,  however  they  may  sometimes  forbear  from  asserting  it.  5.  That 
however  much  a  wicked  man  may  gain  on  earth,  he  loses  all  at  death.  6.  That  that 
hope  only  is  good  which  extends  beyond  the  grave.  7.  That  Grod  delights  in  them 
who  delight  in  him.  8.  That  a  rafin's  piety  can  be  pretty  accurately  gauged  by  the 
intensity  and  frequency  of  his  prayers. 

Vers.  11 — 23. — JoVs  first  parable :  2.  7%e  portion  of  a  wicked  man  with  God. 
I.  Job's  language  explained.     The  lof,  or  earthly  inheritance,  of  the  ungodly  Job 
exhibits  in  three  particulars.     1.  The  wicked  man's  family.     However  numerous  the 
children  that  gather  round  a  sinner's  hearth,  they  will  all  be  overwhelmed  in  eventual 
destruction.    (1)  Designed.     If  his  sons  and  daughters  multiply,  it  is  not  because  of 
any  special  favour  with  which  they  are  regarded  by  Heaven,  but  only  to  meet  their 
appointed  portion.     If  the  wicked  send  forth  their  little  ones  like  a  flock  (ch.  xxi.  11), 
it  is  purely  that,  like  oxen,  they  may  be  fattened  for  the  slaughter.     (2)  Violent. 
Instead  of  dying  peacefully  in  the  course  of  nature  after  long,  prosperous,  and  happy 
lives,  they  shall  perish  by  the  sword,  by  famine,  or  by  pestilence — the  three  most  usual 
forms  of  calamity  in  the  East,  and  the  three  customary  modes  of  inflicting  Divine 
punishment  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  13 ;    Jer.  liv.  12).    Job's  children  were  not  removed  in 
either  of  these  ways.     (3)  Humiliating.     Such  indignity  will  fall  upon  his  offspring, 
when  they  in  turn  follow  him  to  the  grave,  that  they  shall  be  "  buried  in  death," 
meaning  either  left  unburied,  or,  as  is  more  probable,  totally  forgotten  the  instant 
they  are  dead.     Contrast  the   picture  of  the  wicked  man's  funeral  in  a  previous 
oration  (ch.  xxi.  9,  32).     (4)   Appalling.     Either  so  complete  will  the  ruin  of  this 
ungodly  person's  family  be  that  no  widows  shall  remain  to  mourn  for  himself  and 
children  ;  or  so  sudden  will  be  the  shock  of  bereavement,  that,  paralyzed  with  grief, 
they  will  be  unable  to  weep ;  or  so  attended  with  indications  of  Divine  displeasure 
that  they  will  fear  to  indulge  in  outward  tokens  of  sorrow.     2.   The  wicked  man's 
wealth.     This  also  shall  be  dissipated.     (1)  His  money.     Should  it  be  plentiful  as 
the  dust  (Zech.  ix.  3;   cf.  1  Kings  x.  27),  he  must  leave  it  behind  him,  but  not 
to  his  children,  for  "his  silver  the  innocent  shall  divide"  (ver.  17).     The  dying 
millionaire  cannot  calculate,  or  secure,  that  his  accumulated  treasures  will  be  enjoyed 
by  his  family  (Ps.  xxxix.  6 ;    Luke  xii.  20).     God  can  scatter  a  n;an's  wealth  as 
easily  as  destroy  a  man's  life  or  extinguish  a  man's  house.    (2)  His  raiment.     This 
is  another  form  of  Oriental  wealth  (vide  Exposition),  which,  though  abundant  as  the 
mire,  must  share  the  same  f-ite,  and  become  the  property  of  the  righteous.     (3)  His 
palace.     Strongly  built  and  gorgeously  decorated,  it  yet  is  frail  and  brittle,  as  easily 
destroyed  and  as  quickly  removed  as  a  moth-web  (ch.  viii.  15)  or  a  watchman's  hut 
(Isa.  i.  8).     3.  Tlie  wicked  man's  person.    Equally  with  his  family  and  possessions, 
the  wicked  man  himself  is  engulfed  in  an  awful  doom.     (1)  Surprised   by  sudden 
death.     At  night  retiring  to  bed  rich,  he  knows  not  that  before  morning  he  shall  be 
removed  from  life  and  riches  at  a  stroke  ;  or,  if  permitted  to  see  the  dawn,  he  is  quite 
unconscious  that  he  does  so  for  the  last  time,  and  that,  ere  the  night  fall-,  he  shall  be 
no  more  (ver.  19).     Death,  which  comes  to  all  men  suddenly  (Matt.  xxiv.  44),  is  no 
surprise  to  them  who  habitually  look  for  its  approach  (2  Tim.  iv.  6),  but  a  fearful 
awakening  to  them  who  live  in  careless  unconcern  about  their  latter  end  (1  Thess.  v. 
3).    (2)  Terrified  by  impending  judgment.    While  the  violent  surprise  with  which 
death  seizes  on  the  sinner  is  represented  by  three  more  metaphors — of  a  flood  from 
which  it  is  impossible  to  run  (Ps.  xviii.  4),  a  tempest  or  whirlwind  which  stealeth  one 
away  by  night  (ch.  xxi.  18 ;  Prov.  x.  25),  and  an  east  wind  accompanied  by  destructive 
storms  (Isa.  xli.  16),  sometimes  "  so  severe  as  to  smite  down  whole  villages  and  uproot 
the  largest  trees  "  (Cox) — the  effect  produced  upon  the  sinner's  mind  is  depicted  as  one 
of  paralyzing,  overwhelming,  devouring  consternation  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  19).    This  fear  is  pro- 
bably the  apprehension  of  something  after  death  (cf. '  Macbeth,'  act  i.  sc.  7).  (3)  Over- 
taken by  merited  punishment.     Upon  the  head  of  this  unhappy  wretch  God  shall  rain 
down  calamities  so  fast  and  furious  that  every  attempt  to  escape  his  doom  will  be  in 
vain.   Such  also  David  thought  would  be  the  portion  of  the  wicked  (Ps.  xi.  6) ;  and  such 
St.  Paul  asserts  will  be  the  ultimate  reward  of  the  unbelieving  and  impenitent  (Rom.  ii. 
8).    (4)  Pursued  by  unlverssvl  eyecr»tio)J.    Eveft  if  yv^  re^d  (Cwey)  it, ».«.  the  wift(i 


3n.  xxvii.  1— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  447 

shall  clap  its  hands  at  him,  and  whistle  at  him  in  derision,  the  image  must  bo  inter- 
preted to  mean  that  the  storm-chased  sinner  will  be  beheld  with  malignant  joy  and 
withering  scorn ;  that,  in  fact,  inen  will  clap  their  hands  with  infinite  delight  over  his 
tragic  fate,  and  hunt  his  guilty  spirit  from  the  world  with  expressions  of  hitter  hatred 
and  contempt. 

II.  Job's  meaning  cleared.  1.  The  difficulty.  The  ahove  exposition  of  the  wicked 
mail's  portion  bears  so  close  a  resemblance  to  the  pictures  already  sketched  hy  the 
friends,  that  much  perplexity  has  been  occasioned  by  Job's  seeming  inconsistency,  in 
at  this  stage  admitting  the  very  dogma  he  had  so  powerfully  assailed  in  his  previous 
contendings.  If  this  were  true,  it  would  only  prove  that  great  men  sometimes  change 
their  minils  and  modify  their  opinions.  But  the  contradiction  is  more  apparent  than 
real.  2.  Th«  solution.  For  a  detailed  statement  of  the  different  schemes  proposed 
with  a  view  to  either  bridge  over  or  remove  this  difficulty,  the  Exposition  may  be 
consulted.  Here  it  may  suffice  to  say  that  either  we  may  understand  Job  as  recapitu- 
lating the  theory  of  the  friends,  which  he  has  just  characterized  as  "  foolish  notions" 
(ver.  12)  ;  or,  holding  that  the  sentiments  he  delivers  are  his  own,  we  may  affirm  that 
in  previously  painting  the  prosperous  fortunes  of  the  ungodly  (e.g.  ch.  xii.  6 ;  xxi.  7) 
he  was  merely  placing  exceptional  cases  against  the  exclusive  theory  of  the  friends, 
that  ungodly  men  have  always  evil  fortunes,  which  was  aU  that  strict  logic  required 
as  its  refutation,  but  that  here  he  desires  to  intimate  his  acquiescence  in  the  main 
element  of  their  dogma,  viz.  that  as  a  rule  "  the  retributive  justice  of  God  is  manifest 
in  the  case  of  the  evil-doer  "  (Delitzsch). 

JLearn :  1.  That  every  man's  portion  from  God  is  twofold,  relating  to  the  life  that 
is  to  come  as  well  as  to  that  which  now  is.  2.  That  the  higher  a  wicked  man  rises 
in  worldly  prosperity,  the  more  ignominious  will  be  his  final  overthrow.  3.  That  God 
can  effect  sudden  and  surprising  transfers  of  property  on  earth.  4.  That  sudden  death 
may  overtake  the  person  who  appears  best  secured  against  it.  5.  That  sudden  death  is 
not  the  same  thing  to  a  wicked  man  that  it  is  to  a  good  one.  6.  That  the  wicked 
man  cannot  face  the  future  without  a  fear.  7.  That  if  a  wicked  man's  death  is  a  cause 
of  joy  to  the  world,  the  departure  of  a  saint  should  be  a  source  of  lamentation. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Vers.  1 — ^23. — Job  a  victor  in  the  controversy.  After  the  last  speech  of  Job  the  friends 
appear  to  be  completely  overcome  and  silenced,  and  the  third  of  them  does  not  venture 
to  renew  the  attack.  The  sufferer  therefore  continues,  in  a  speech  of  high  poetic  beauty, 
to  instruct  the  friends,  while  once  more  insisting  on  his  own  innocence. 

].  Innocence  maintained.  (Vers.  2 — 10.)  1.  Conscious  rectitude  of  resolve.  (Vers. 
2 — 4.)  In  the  profoundest  sense  that  his  thoughts  are  open  to  the  ej'e  of  the  all-seeing 
God,  and  that  he  need  not  fear  to  have  his  vfords  overheard.  Job  speaks.  He  declares 
tl  at  he  has  still  strength  and  sanity  enough  to  know  what  he  is  saying,  and  to  speak 
as  a  responsible  witness  on  this  question  of  his  innocence.  And  although  it  has  pleased 
God,  as  he  thinks,  to  withhold  justice  from  him,  and  to  distress  his  soul,  the  light  of 
duty  and  of  conscience  shines  as  brightly  as  ever.  He  will  be  true  in  word  and  deed 
to  the  last.  Truth  is  the  supreme  duty  we  owe  to  ourselves,  to  our  fellows,  to  our 
God,  to  eternity.  The  resolve  to  be  true  should  be  inseparable  from  the  resolve  to 
live;  and  we  should  part  with  life  sooner  than  with  truth.  And  no  suffering  should 
be  allowed  to  disturb  our  genuine  convictions  about  ourselves.  The  discouragement 
of  others'  harsh  opinion  may  well  lead  us  to  cast  more  searching  glances  into  the  state 
of  our  heart,  but  ought  not  to  extort  confessions  of  guilt  which  are  exaggerated  and 
unreal.  It  is  only  Superstition  which  can  suppose  such  to  be  acceptable  to  God.  But 
this  is  the  language  of  a  man  who  has  found,  deep  below  all  his  doubts,  an  immovable 
ground  of  confidence  in  God.  This  makes  him  bold  in  the  presence  of  his  fellow-men. 
Happy  those  whose  hearts  condemn  them  not,  and  who  have  confidence  with  God. 
A  false  humility  is  an  affectation  of  being  worse  than  we  really  are.  A  genuinf 
hvtnility  teaches  us  to  see  ourselves  as  we  are ;  and  every  recognition  of  facts  as  facts, 
trr  ths  as  truths,  gives  confidence.  2.  The  steadfastness  of  a  good  conscience.  (Vers. 
§-  -7.)  Job  will  ^ev«^  giv*  way  to  his  fripnds,  por  ^wp  them  w  tj»e  right,  Tb«  Isnguags 


448  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxvii.  1—23. 

of  dogged  egotism  and  stupid  obstinacy  imitates  that  of  conscious  right :  "  I  will  never 
give  in ! "  But  the  one  is  the  mark  of  folly  and  weakness,  the  other  is  the  evidence 
of  vitality  and  strength.  Ho  wUl  not  part  with  the  sense  of  his  integrity ;  it  is  as  the 
jewel  for  which  he  has  sold  everything,  which  represents,  amidst  poverty  and  suffering 
and  shame,  all  the  property  he  has  in  the  world.  "  Conscience  is  the  great  magazine 
and  repository  of  all  those  pleasures  that  can  afford  any  solid  refreshment  to  the  soul. 
When  this  is  calm  and  serene  and  absolving,  then  properly  a  man  enjoys  all  things, 
and  what  is  more,  himself;  for  that  he  must  do  before  he  can  enjoy  anything  else. 
But  it  is  only  a  pious  life,  led  exactly  by  the  rules  of  a  severe  religion,  tliat  can 
authorize  a  man's  conscience  to  speak  comfortably  to  him ;  it  is  this  that  must  word 
the  sentence  before  the  conscience  can  pronounce  it,  and  then  it  will  do  it  with  majesty 
and  authority ;  it  will  not  whisper,  but  proclaim  a  jubilee  to  the  mind ;  it  will  not 
drop,  but  pour  in  oil  upon  the  wounded  heart"  (South).  3.  Inwctrd  peace  and  joy 
denied  to  the  wicked.  (Vers.  8 — 10.)  This  is  a  further  argument  of  innocence.  How 
can  Job  be  numbered  amongst  the  wicked?  No  hypocrite  can  possibly  enjoy  this 
serenity  and  unshaken  hope  in  God  which  have  been  the  portion  of  his  soul  amidst  all 
calamities,  and  in  the  approach  of  death  (oh.  xvii.  and  xix.).  When  the  cords  of  his 
life-tent  are  cut  (oomp.  ch.  iv.  21),  the  wickid  man  has  nothing  more  to  hope  for.  His 
prayers  will  receive  no  answer,  and  joyous  and  trustful  intimacy  with  God  is  denied  him. 
Whatever  disturbs  innocence,  in  the  same  degree  makes  inroad  upon  the  comfort  of  the 
soul.  To  be  in  the  dark  ;  to  find  that  the  gate  of  prayer  is  closed ;  to  carry  about  a 
sick,  ulcerated  mind;  to  be  harassed  by  the  returning  paroxysms  of  diffidence  and 
despair;  to  be  haunted  with  the  dismal  apparitions  of  a  reviving  guilt — the  old  black 
sores  of  past  forgotten  sins;  to  have  the  merciless  handwriting  against  him,  presented 
in  new  and  flowing  characters  to  his  apprehension — ^is  the  case  and  condition  of  the 
sinner.  But  "  why  should  a  man  choose  to  go  to  heaven  through  sloughs  and  ditches, 
briars  and  thorns,  diffidence  and  desertion,  trembling  and  misgiving,  and  by  the  very 
borders  of  hell,  with  death  staring  him  in  the  face,  when  he  might  pass  from  comfort 
to  comfort,  and  have  all  his  way  paved  with  assurance,  and  made  easy  and  pleasant 
to  him  by  the  inward  invaluable  satisfaction  of  a  well-grounded  peace"  ?  (South). 

II.  Instedotion  on  the  fate  of  the  wicked.  (Vers.  11 — 23.)  1.  Introduction. 
(Vers.  11 — 13 ;  comp.  ch.  xx.  29 ;  ivi.  20.)  The  theme  of  discourse  is  to  be  the 
"hand  of  God" — his  power  and  his  mode  of  moral  government  as  seen  by  daily 
examples  in  the  lives  of  men  ;  and  the  "  sense  "  or  mind  of  the  Almighty — the  contents 
of  his  thoughts  and  counsels  (ch.  x.  13;  xxiii.  10).  And  experience  is  to  furnish  the 
evidenca  and  the  illustrations  (ver.  12).  The  facts  are  open  to  the  view  of  all,  but 
what  was  wanting  in  the  friends  of  Job,  as  in  many  others,  is  a  correct  understanding 
and  appreciation  of  them.  Wisdom  to  mark  the  signs  of  the  times,  the  hint=i  of  God's 
will,  his  meanings,  his  judgments,  not  only  in  the  course  of  nations,  the  great  crises 
of  history,  but  in  the  smaller  sphere  of  every  day,  is  what  we  need.  Then  the  theme 
is  announced  (ver.  13):  "the  lot  of  the  wicked  man — the  heritage  of  the  tyrant." 
Compare  the  words  of  Zophar  (ch.  xx.  29).  2.  The  instabiliiy  of  the  wicked  man'$ 
condition.  (Vers.  14 — 18.)  His  household  and  family  are  first  mentioned.  The  cor- 
ruption working  outward  is  first  felt  in  the  nearest  circle  and  surrounding  of  his  life. 
The  sins  of  the  father  are  visited  upon  the  children.  The  sword,  or  famine,  or  pesti- 
lence makes  them  a  prey.  All  mcjdern  as  well  as  ancient  experience  confirms  this 
law.  The  doctrine  of  "  heredity "  throws  light  upon  many  diseases,  many  vices, 
many  woes.  The  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge  because  the  fathers  have  eaten  sour 
grapes.  And  this  law  of  eternal  retribution  would  seem  intolerably  stem  and  harsh 
did  we  not  perceive  that  it  is  thus  God  constantly  warns  the  world.  The  connection 
of  causes  and  effects,  constant,  unbroken,  alike  in  the  physical,  the  moral,  and  the 
spiritual  sphere,  is  the  natural  revelation  of  the  will  of  God.  But 'there  are  compen- 
sations, redeeming  agencies  at  work  for  the  individual.  He  suffers  often  as  the  scape- 
goat of  others'  sins  externally ;  he  is  the  victim  of  a  solemn  necessity ;  but  in  the 
large  realm  of  inward  freedom  he  may  he  emancipated,  redeemed,  and  blessed.  "  His 
widows  weep  not "  (ver.  15)  behind  his  bier,  perhaps  because  in  the  fearful  ravages  of 
the  pestilence  the  funeral  rites  are  suspended.  The  plural  is  used  to  indicate  the 
wives  of  the  heads  of  other  families  and  relatives  of  the  deceased  generally.  Then, 
not  only  ig   the  wicked  cursed  in  his  family,  but  in  his  property,     A  picture  of 


CH.  xxvn.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  449 

immense  wealth  and  profuse  display  follows  (ver.  16) — his  silver  being  heaped  up 
like  dust,  and  fine  raiment  being  as  common  as  dirt.  Yet  there  is  no  more  real 
subBtantiality  in  all  this  than  in  the  frail  cocoon  of  the  moth,  or  the  hut  which  the 
watchman  puts  up  in  the  vineyard  or  orchard  (Isa.  i.  8).  The  striking  story  is  told 
by  Herodotus  (vi.  86)  of  one  Glauous,  the  son  of  Epioydes,  who  was  requested  by  a 
man  of  Miletus  to  take  charge  of  the  half  of  his  ibrtune.  When  the  sons  of  the 
Milesian  claimed  the  money,  Glaucus  denied  all  knowledge  of  it,  and  consulted  the 
oracle  as  to  the  results  of  perjury,  and  whether  he  could  safely  reiain  the  money.  The 
oracle  replied,  "Glauous,  son  of  Bpicydes,  for  the  jiresent  moment,  indeed,  it  is  more 
profitable  to  prevail  by  an  oath,  and  to  make  the  money  thy  booty.  ,  Swear ;  for 
death  in  truth  awaits  the  man  who  is  true  to  his  oath.  But,  on  the  other  band,  the 
child  of  the  oath  is  nameless,  and  hath  neither  hands  nor  feet ;  yet  he  swiftly  comes 
on,  uatil  he  has  ruined  and  destroyed  thy  whole  race,  yea,  all  thy  house.  With  the 
race  of  the  faithful  man  it  shall  fare  better  hereafter."  He  restored  the  money,  but 
was  told  it  was  too  late ;  and  Leotychides,  who  related  the  story  to  the  Athenians, 
says,  "  There  is  now  no  descendant  of  Glaucus  living,  no  hearth  that  owns  his  name; 
he  has  beeu  utterly  rooted  out,  and  has  passed  away  from  Spaita."  3.  Insecwity  of 
life.  (Vers.  19 — 23.)  "  He  lies  down  rich,  and — doth  it  not  again,"  according  to  the 
best  reading.  This  is  a  picture  of  the  evening.  The  next  is  a  picture  of  the  imorning, 
"  Opens  his  eyes,  and — is  gone ! "  Both  depict  the  suddenness  of  the  wicked  man's  end 
(ver.  19).  A  multitude  of  terrors  rusli  in  upon  him,  like  the  waters  of  an  inundation 
(ver.  20 ;  comp.  ch.  xx.  28 ;  Ps.  xviii.  5 ;  Jer.  xlvii.  2),  ami  fill  his  death'bed  with 
horror  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  14 ;  xx.  25),  and  the  east  wind  carries  him  away  (ver.  21) — the 
east  wind  being  often  mentioned  as  one  of  great  violence  (ch.  i.  19 ;  xv.  2  ;  xxxviii.  24 ; 
Isa.  xxvii.  8 ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  26).  God  slings  without  sparing  tlie  bolts  of  his  wrath  against 
him,  and  he  must  flee  before  his  hand  (ver.  22).  The  fearful  scene  closes  amidst  the 
scornful  laughter  and  clapping  of  hands  of  those  who  exult  in  the  tyrant's  doom  (ver.  23 ; 
comp.  ch.  xxxiv.  37 ;  Lam.  ii.  15  ;  Nab.  iii.  19),  and  he  departs  from  his  place  amidst 
the  hisses  of  execration.  The  powerful  picture  of  the  L;reat  moraliBt,  Juvenal,  may  be 
compared  with  this  passage^;  Sat.,'  xiii.  210,  sqq.).  Alter  depicting  the  sufferings  of  a 
guilty  conscience,  he  proceeds,  "  What,  then,  if  the  sinner  has  achieved  his  purpose  ? 
A  respiteless  anxiety  is  his,  that  ceases  not,  even  at  the  hours  of  meals  ;  his  jaws  are 
parched  as  though  with  fever,  and  the  food  he  loathes  swells  between  his  teeth.  AU 
wines  the  miserable  wretch  spits  out;  old  Alban  wine,  of  highly  prized  antiquity, 
disgusts  him.  At  night,  if  anxious  care  has  granted  him  perchance  some  brief  slumber, 
and  his  limbs,  that  have  been  tossing  over  the  whole  bed,  at  length  are  at  rest,  imme- 
diately he  sees  in  dreams  the  temple  and  altar  of  the  deity  he  has  insulted ;  and, 
what  weighs  upon  his  soul  with  especial  terror,  he  sees  thee  [the  wronged  one]!  Thy 
awful  form,  of  mor«  than  human  bulk,  confounds  the  trembling  wretch,  and  wrings 
confession  from  him ! "  These  pictures  of  the  doom  of  the  godless  are  fitted  to  teach 
patience  to  all  the  ill-used  and  the  suffering  in  this  world.  God  forgets  nothing ; 
neither  the  work  of  ftuth  and  laT)our  of  love  of  his  children,  nor  the  rank  offences  of 
the  rebels  against  his  laws.  In  due  time  he  will  both  reward  and  punish,  commonly 
even  in  this  life  (Exod.  xxxii.  34 ;  Rom.  ii.)_.  Calamity  is  not  a  mere  accident,  as  the 
worldly  and  the  infidel  think.  It  follows  sin,  according  to  a  fixed  connection,  by  the 
will  of  God  (Amos  iii.  6). — J. 

Vers.  5,  6. Determined  integrity.    Job  is  resolved  to  retain  his  integrity  in  spite 

of  every  rude  assault.  He  will  not  suffer  himself  to  be  withdrawn  fiom  his  fixed 
resolve.  By  firm  resolution  integrity  may  be  preserved,  though  a  boastful  spirit 
exposes  itself  to  temptation.  Between  the  perils  of  presumptuous  boasling  on  the  one 
hand  and  timid  irresolution  on  the  other,  lies  the  path  of  safety  in  a  lowly,  humble 
determination. 

I.  Kesolution  fobtifies  the  mind  against  the  attacks  op  temptation.  Evil 
find's  its  easiest  prey  iu  the  irresolute  and  undetermined.  Subtle  and  sudden  «ue- 
gestions  of  wrong  are  instantly  rejected  by  the  determined  mind.  They  are  cast  off. 
There  is  a  spirit  of  antagonism — a  cherished  antipathy  to  wrong ;  and  before  tempta- 
tion has  power  to  draw  away  the  feet  of  the  unwary,  the  determined  one  casts  back  the 
offe^din"  presence.  He  waits  not  to  paiiey.  There  is  a  law  established  to  cleave  to 
job!  2  a 


460  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  [oh.  xxvn.  1— ML 

the  right ;  and  the  presence  of  the  wrong  becomes  the  watchword  for  an  uprising  ot 

the  whole  strength  against  the  usurper. 

II.  Resolution,  by  its  decisions,  pbbvents  the  mind  feom  the  injubious  effects 
OF  vacillation.  The  mind  is  kept  hraced  up  to  its  duty.  Its  judgments  are  formed 
beforehand.  It  has  not  to  wait  for  any  mental  process.  The  instant  wrong  is  sug- 
gested, that  instant  its  reply  is  at  hand.  While  the  wavering  and  uncertain  are  being 
overcome,  tlie  resolute  man  walks  on  his  plain  path  fearlessly  and  safe. 

III.  Ebsolution  to  maintain  intbqkity  arising  out  of  a  just  estimate  of  its 
wobth  peesbbves  from  deception  by  False  views.  Low  estimates  of  the  worth  of 
personal  integrity  make  a  man  the  sport  of  the  trafficker  in  evil.  Personal  rectitude 
being  held  cheaply  would  be  bartered  away  for  any  gilded  bait. 

IV.  The  encoubagembnt  of  besoldtbness  of  spibit  becomes  an  obvious  and 
pbessing  duty.  No  one  can  be  neglectful  of  this  without  doing  great  wrong  to 
himself.  To  stand  firm,  entrenched  by  a  strong  will,  guards  the  soul  from  the 
delusions  that  are  rife  enough  ;  but  that  the  will  may  be  well  supported,  it  is  needful 
to  encourage  the  spirit  of  resolute,  un}  ielding  determination.  Then,  with  a  high  sense 
of  the  preciousness  of  conscious  integrity,  and  with  a  mind  adjusted  to  an  attitude 
of  purposed  resistance  against  whatever  would  threaten  to  impair  that  integrity,  the 
faithful  one  holds  fast  to  his  possession,  and  gains,  in  addition  to.  his  own  quiet 
approval,  that  of  all  observers,  and,  above  all,  that  of  the  great  Judge  of  human  con- 
duct. In  this  Job  succeeds,  and  becomes  a  pattern  to  all  tempted  ones.  From  the 
depth  of  his  acute  and  prolonged  suffering  arises  the  cry  of  holy  resolve,  "  Till  I  die 
will  I  not  remove  mine  integrity  from  me."  So  that  from  his  inmost  heart  cometh  no 
reproach  upon  his  days. 

He  that  thus  acts  secures  (1)  peace  of  mind ;  (2)  consciousness  of  the  Divine 
approval;  (3)  the  benefit  of  daily  growth  in  goodness;  (4)  the  final  reward  of 
fidelity.— R.  G. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — 2%«  hope  of  the  hypocrite.  Job,  the  man  of  integrity,  who  was  deter- 
mined to  hold  fast  his  integrity  until  death,  saw  plainly  that  the  hypocrite  had  no 
ground  of  confidence,  and  he  boldly  makes  the  demand,  "  What  is  the  hope  of  the 
hypocrite  f  "  It  is  an  appeal  that  can  receive  no  satisfying  answer.  There  is  no  hope 
for  him,  indeed  ;  whatever  he  may  imagine  it  to  be,  it  is  as  a  bubble  that  floats  on  the 
water  for  a  short  time,  then  bursts,  and  no  trace  is  left  of  it.  His  confidence  is  placed 
on  an  unsafe  foundation ;  he  may  build  his  expectations  upon  it,  but  the  inevitable 
flood  of  time  will  wash  it  away.  It  is  a,  vain,  groundless,  lost,  disappointed  hope. 
Job  directs  his  inquiry  into  one  channel — What  is  the  hypocrite's  hope  as  towards 
God?  The  earthly  hopes  of  the  hypocrite  are  not  safe,  though  for  a  time  he  may 
prosper.  But  his  hopes  towards  God  are  vain  indeed.  The  hypocrite  is  estranged 
from  God. 

I.  He  has  no  hope  in  God  in  death.  When  the  righteous  man  fiUeth  his  bosom 
with  sheaves,  the  hope  of  the  wicked  is  found  to  be  cut  off.  Beyond  the  grave  all  is 
darkness. 

II.  He  cannot  tubn  to  God  in  time  of  teoublb.  When  affliction  falls  upon 
the  humble  and  righteous  one,  he  whom  he  has  sought  to  know  and  obey  proves  to 
be  a.  reality  to  him.  But  the  hypocrite  has  made  God  to  be  a  sham.  He  has  no* 
known  or  obeyed  him,  or  acted  towards  him  as  though  he  were  a  reality.  To  him 
indeed,  there  is  no  God.  How  can  he  call  on  him  in  trouble  whom  he  has  denied  in 
health? 

III.  He  cannot  find  in  God  a  speino  of  joy.  He  cannot  delight  himself  in  him 
whom  he  has  represented  to  himself  as  an  unreality.  God  has  not  been  really  God 
in  the  estimate  of  the  hypocrite.  The  man  who  is  himself  conscious  of  being  false 
makes  all  false  around  him.  He  does  not  live  in  a  real  but  a  deceitful  world.  He  has 
deceived  himself  in  respect  of  it. 

IV.  He  cannot  call  upon  God  in  pkaybb.  Thus  the  hope  of  the  hypocrite 
perishes.  It  is  vain.  In  the  exigencies  of  life,  when  he  most  needs  help,  the  false 
foundation  which  he  has  laid  for  himself  fails  him.  The  man  who  acts  falsely  towards 
God  really  acts  falsely  towards  himself,  and  turns  the  most  substantial  grounds  ol 
hope  into  airy  nothingness. — B.  G. 


OH.  ixvu.  1— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  461 

Vers.  13 — 23. — The  reward  of  iniquity.  Job's  eye  had  been  open  to  behold  the 
ways  of  Qod  with  men.  He  had  seen  the  effects  of  righteous  living  and  of  wickedness. 
His  own  suffering,  coupled  with  his  consciousness  of  integrity,  would  quicken  his 
inquiries  and  his  observations  on  the  relative  results  of  these  two  methods  of  living. 
He  now  pronounces  his  judgment  on  the  fruits  of  ungodly  living :  "  This  is  the  portion 
of  a  wicked  man."  Whatever  may  be  the  temporary  prosperity  of  the  wicked  (and  of 
such  prosperity  Job  had  already  spoken),  yet  it  lacks  permanence,  and  it  is  associated 
with  much  sorrow.     He  traces  the  sorrow  in  the  following  particulars. 

I.  Affliction  upon  his  family.  A  curse  is  upon  his  home.  The  sword,  the 
famine,  the  pestilence,  carry  off  his.  children,  even  if  they  be  multiplied, 

II.  Inseodrity  of  his  wealth.  Yea,""  though  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  dust." 
The  Divine  retributions  are  everywhere  acknowledged  to  extend  to  ill-gotten  gain. 
Job  is  speaking  of  "  the  wicked  man  "  and  of  "  oppressors."  They  have  an  earthly 
"  heritage,"  but  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth,  and  there  is  a  "  heritage  " 
also  which  they  shall  receive  of  the  Almighty. 

III.  The  instability  of  his  house.  That  in  which  man  takes  so  great  a  pride. 
To  establish  a  name  in  the  earth,  to  be  distinguished  as  a  family,  a  house,  is  a  marked 
aim  on  the  part  of  most  men.  The  effort  and  hope  of  the  wicked  are  out  off!,  The 
very  "  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot." 

IV.  He  is  the  victim  of  soebow,  unhapmness,  and  feab.  That  which  sustains 
the  righteous  in  his  afflictions,  viz.  his  conscious  integrity,  is  wanting  in  the  wicked, 
and  he  becomes  filled  with  fear. 

V.  He  is  finally  uprooted  and  oast  away.  He  leaves  no  permanent  memorial. 
His  name,  his  works,  his  memory,  are  not  cherished  by  any.  "  The  east  wind  carrieth 
him  away,"  and  he  is  hurled  "  out  of  his  place."  He  is  judged  of  Qod ;  he  is  despised 
of  man  (vers.  22,  23).  This,  in  Job's  view,  is  the  lot  of  the  ungodly  ;  and  though  he 
himself  has  suffered  many  things  at  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  he  is  conscious  of  his  right- 
eousness, and  has  confident  hope  of  final  vindication. — B.  G. 

Vers.  1 — 1. — Moral  honesty.  Job  now  almost  loses  sight  of  his  vexatious  friends  as 
he  breaks  out  into  a  long  discourse.  His  first  thought  is  to  assert  his  integrity, 
without  flinching  before  the  charges  that  have  been  so  recklessly  flung  at  him.  He 
will  not  confess  sins  of  which  he  is  not  guilty.  It  required  some  courage  for  him  to 
take  this  stand,  for  he  was  sorely  pressed  to  yield  to  insincerity, 

I.  The  temptation  to  insincerity.  This  is  many-sided,  springing  from  various 
sources.  1.  The  desire  to  conciliate  Ood.  Job  is  persuaded  that  it  is  the  Almighty 
who  has  vexed  his  soul.  If  he  will  abase  himself  and  confess  his  utter  unworthiness, 
it  would  seem  that  perhaps  God  would  be  propitiated.  2.  The  persuasive  urgency  of 
others.  Each  of  the  three  friends  had  set  before  Job  the  same  picture,  and  had  suggested 
that  the  only  security,  the  only  hope,  lay  in  abject  penitence.  It  is  difficult  to  hold 
to  our  course  when  it  is  resisted  and  reprobated  by  our  friends.  3.  The  true  humility 
of  a  good  man.  Job  knew  that  he  was  a  frail  creature,  and  that  he  was  as  nothing 
before  the  might  and  holiness  of  God  (ch.  vii.  1 — 8).  Good  men  are  more  or  less 
conscious  of  their  own  littleness.  It  seems  a  mark  of  modesty  to  depreciate  one's  self. 
Job  must  have  been  deeply  pained  at  the  unfairness  that  drove  him  to  take  the  opposite 
course  and  vindicate  his  own  uprightness.  We  are  all  tempted  to  insincere  confession 
of  guilt  which  we  do  not  feel  in  order  to  please  God  or  men,  or  as  a  sign  of  humility. 

II.  The  weakness  of  yielding  to  this  temptation.  All  the  inducements  that 
may  be  brought  to  urge  a  person  to  insincerity  are  just  temptations  to  sin.  They  are 
attacks  upon  the  conscience.  To  yield  to  them  is  a  sign  of  weakness.  The  important 
point  is  that  insincerity  is  always  wrong,  even  when  it  is  in  the  direction  of  self- 
humiliation.  There  may  be  a  hypocritical  penitence  as  well  as  a  hypocritical  pride. 
We  cannot  be  too  deeply  humble ;  when  the  thought  of  our  sin  dawns  upon  us  we 
cannot  grieve  over  the  guilt  and  shame  of  it  too  intensely.  But  if  we  do  not  feel  this 
profound  penitence  it  is  nothing  but  falsehood  and  empty  pretence  to  make  a  confession 
of  it  with  our  lips.  For  the  language  of  penitence  to  exceed  the  feeling  of  it  is  not  a 
mark  of  real  humility.  Any  insincerity  is  injurious  to  the  conscience  and  wrong  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  the  fact  that  it  tends  to  self-depreciation  rather  than  to  self- 
exaltation  does  not  alter  its  essential  character. 


462  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxvii.  1—23. 

in.  The  moral  honesty  op  besistino  thk  tbmptatiok  to  htstncbritt.  We 
cannot  but  admire  the  manliness  of  Job.  It  was  difBcult  for  him  not  to  be  cowed 
before  the  array  of  adverse  influences  brought  to  bear  upon  him.  His  sickness  of  body, 
his  mental  distress  and  perplexity,  and  the  unanimous  opinion  of  his  friends,  might 
well  have  deprived  him  of  all  courage.  Yet  he  holds  up  his  head  and  asserts  the  right. 
On  what  is  such  moral  honesty  based  ?  1.  Reverence  for  truth.  Truth  is  imperious 
and  must  be  respected  at  any  cost.  2.  Belief  in  justice.  In  the  end  right  mtist 
prevail.  It  cannot  be  well  to  renounce  it  in  favour  of  temporary  appearances.  3. 
Trust  in  God.  Job  still  clings  to  his  faith,  although  he  believes  that  all  his  troublea 
come  from  God.  Now,  no  insincerity  can  please  God  or  deceive  him.  If  we  think  of 
our  standing  in  his  si^ht,  rather  than  our  position  in  the  eyes  of  men,  we  must  be  true 
and  honest — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — An  empty  hope.  The  wicked  man  may  have  gained  much  of  earthly 
goods.  But  all  he  has  is  temporal  and  external.  Therefore  it  is  useless  to  him  at 
death,  and  in  regard  to  all  his  spiritual  needs.  We  can  see  the  dark  features  of  his 
miserable  prospect  in  the  picture  that  Job  has  drawn. 

I.  He  has  earthly  possessions.  The  foolish  man  has  made  gain  ;  but  it  is  useless 
to  him.  He  is  like  the  rich  man  in  the  parable,  who  was  about  to  build  new  barns  for 
his  goods  when  his  life  was  taken  and  all  bis  wealth  lost  at  a  stroke.  If  a  person 
trusts  to  his  earthly  prosperity  he  is  not  prepared  to  confess  his  true  needs.  He  thinks 
he  is  rich  when  he  is  miserable  and  blind  and  naked  (Rev.  iii.  17).  If  he  has  acquired 
his  wealth  for  himself,  if  it  is  his  gain,  he  is  in  the  greater  danger  of  over-estimating 
it.  Self-made  men  are  tempted  to  think  too  much  of  what  they  have  won  by  their 
own  hard  toil. 

II.  He  has  no  claim  on  the  hbavknlt  inhbritanob.  There  is  nothing  for  the 
future.  Yet  life  is  brief  and  uncertain.  It  must  end  soon  ;  it  may  end  at  any  moment. 
Riches  may  have  been  g  't  by  a  man's  own  energy  ;  but  life  is  dependent  on  the  will 
of  God.  Thus  a  man  gains  earthly  thiugs ;  but  God  disposes  of  his  life.  The  greater 
concerns  are  altogether  outside  his  powers,  as  they  are  beyond  the  region  of  his 
calculations. 

III.  He  has  mo  access  to  Gk)D  in  pbayeb.  The  wicked  man  has  no  right  to  expect 
God  to  hear  him  in  trouble.  1.  He  will  have  trouble.  All  his  prosjierity  cannot 
exclude  the  possibility,  nay,  the  certainty,  of  adversity.  2.  He  will  need  Ood.  In 
trouble  he  may  shriek  to  Heaven  for  help,  though  he  never  dreams  of  acknowledging 
God  in  times  of  prosperity.  Prayer  is  so  natural  to  man  that  it  is  forced  out  of  the 
most  unaccustomed  lips  by  the  pressure  of  great  distress.  3.  Se  will  not  be  heard. 
Job  is  right.  There  are  men  whose  prayers  God  will  not  hear.  The  reason  is  simply 
that  they  do  not  fulfil  the  necessary  conditions  of  successful  prayer.  No  man  can  fall 
so  low,  but  that  if  he  humble  himself  and  turn  ami  repent,  God  wUl  hear  him.  But 
God  will  not  hear  the  prayer  of  the  impenitent.  When  the  wicked  man  falls  into 
trouble,  very  naturally  he  will  desire  to  be  saved  from  it.  But  possibly  he  may  not 
repent  of  his  sin  nor  desire  to  be  saved  from  that ;  then  all  his  prayer  comes  from 
a  low,  selfish  desire  to  escape  what  hurts  him.     Such  a  prayer  cannot  be  heard. 

IV.  He  has  no  delight  in  God.  1.  Ee  misses  the  one  Source  of  perfect  good. 
Though  he  gains  much,  his  possessions  are  external;  they  do  not  help  or  feed  his  souL 
They  ore  but  temporal ;  when  he  dies  he  will  leave  them  all  behind.  But  God,  as 
the  Portion  of  his  people,  is  a  satisfying  and  permanent  possession.  He,  and  he  alone, 
both  fills  all  their  real  need  now  and  endures  for  ever.  To  miss  God  in  pursuit  of  any 
other  aim  is  to  light  on  an  empty  hope.  2.  Ee  will  not  continue  to  seek  Ood.  In  the 
agony  of  the  moment  a  miserable,  selfish  cry  to  Heaven  is  wrung  from  his  heart.  But 
when  the  trouble  is  past  he  forgets  his  prayer.  He  will  not  "  always  call  upon  God." 
So-called  death-bed  repentances  are  justly  viewed  with  suspicion.  Too  often  the  dying 
man  is  only  afraid  of  the  dread  unknown,  naturally  desirous  of  being  delivered  from 
its  terrors.  Too  often,  if  he  recovers,  his  penitence  is  forgotten  witii  his  fears  of  death, 
and  he  lives  his  old  evil  life  again. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  11. — Teachings  concerning  God.  I.  The  hiohbst  TEACHiNas.  Our  thoughts 
are  t(X)  much  chained  to  the  earth,  and  too  much  centred  in  self.     Even  in  religion  we 


ea.  xivn.  1— 23.]  ME  BOOK  Of  JOB.  4&S 

tend  to  subjective  feelings  rather  tlian  to  worship — the  contemplation  and  the  service 
of  God.  Now,  the  chief  end  of  revelation  is  to  make  God  known  to  us,  and  the  highest 
occupation  for  our  minds  is  to  rise  to  the  thought  of  God.  The  character  of  God  should 
make  this  clear  to  us.  1.  Ets  greatnesi.  Knowledge  should  seek  a  worthy  object. 
We  should  desire  to  know  what  is  greatest,  rather  than  petty  details.  2.  Sii  holiness. 
Teachings  about  God  are  teachings  about  goodness.  Here  we  come  to  the  source  of 
true  ethics.  We  cannot  study  "  the  good  "  till  we  know  God.  3.  His  love.  That  is 
supreme  in  God,  and  it  is  supreme  in  the  universe.  To  kuow  the  love  of  God  is  to 
know  what  is  highest  and  best  of  all  things. 

II.  Pbaotioal  teaohinos.  It  may  be  urged  that  we  cannot  afford  to  spend  our 
time  in  contemplation,  that  we  want  to  know  how  to  live  our  present  life,  and  that 
therefore  earthly  and  human  knowledge  is  the  most  important  knowledge.  But  this 
is  a  mistake.  For  God  is  not  separated  from  this  world  and  the  affairs  of  daily  life. 
The  knowledge  of  God  is  not  abstract  theology.  God  is  our  Father,  our  Master,  our 
G-uide.  To  know  God  is  to  know  how  to  live ;  it  is  to  know  what  character  and 
conduct  are  in  harmony  with  the  mind  of  our  supreme  King.  We  cannot  live  aright 
without  knowing  him.  Moreover,  it  is  a  matter  of  profound  interest  to  know  how  God 
is  disposed  towards  ns.  Is  he  gracious  and  forgiving  ?  how  may  we  best  please  him  ? 
These  are  practical  questions.  But  apart  from  the  ends  of  knowledge,  the  knowledge 
of  God  is  itself  a  source  of  blessedness.    To  know  God  is  eternal  life  ( Johu  xvii.  3). 

III.  Difficult  tbachinqb.  Experience  shows  how  grievously  men  have  erred  in 
their  teachings  about  God.  Not  only  has  heathenism  gone  astray  in  its  manifold  and 
monstrous  perversions  of  Divinity,  but  Christiana  have  set  forth  the  most  erroneous 
conceptions  of  God.  With  some  he  has  been  regarded  as  a  stem  despot,  an  arbitrary 
autocrat ;  with  others  he  has  been  represented  as  a  mere  personification  of  amiable  and 
compliant  good  will,  without  regard  to  moral  considerations.  It  is  not  wonderful  that 
the  teachings  are  difiBcult,  considering :  1.  The  greatness  of  God.  Que  can  know  but 
a  very  little  of  so  awful  a  Being.  We  see  but  "  parts  of  his  ways ;  "  "  but  the  thunder 
of  his  power  who  can  understand  ?  "  2.  7%e  blindness  of  men.  Sin  blinds  us;  prejudice 
perverts  our  notions  of  God  instead  of  allowing  us  to  see  the  truth  about  him. 

IV.  Possible  teachings.  1.  From  revdation.  God  has  not  hidden  himself  in  the 
thick  darkness.  He  has  made  himself  known  in  his  works,  by  the  inspiration  of 
prophecy,  and  above  all  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  Agnosticism  is  only  defensible  if  all 
revelation  is  discarded,  and  agnosticism  cannot  account  for  Christ.  2.  By  spiritual 
grace.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  an  inward  revelation.  We  can  only  read  nature,  the 
Bible,  and  Christ  aright  when  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  our  hearts.  By  the  gift  of  his 
Spirit  God  opens  our  eyes  to  the  knowledge  of  himself. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  13 — 23. — The  portion  of  a  wicked  man.  Job  seems  to  be  echoing  the  teaching 
of  his  friends  which  he  has  previously  repudiated.  Now  he  urges  that  the  wicked  man 
does  meet  with  trouble  as  the  wages  of  his  misdeeds.  But  Job  looks  further  than  hia 
friends.  He  does  not  associate  particular  and  immediate  troubles  with  guilt  as  they  do; 
he  takes  a  large  view  of  life ;  he  embraces  the  whole  career ;  and  from  that  he  draws  his 
conclusions.  The  striking  thing  about  this  picture  is  that  success  is  converted  into 
disappointment.  The  wicked  man  prospers.  He  is  not  poor  and  miserable,  as  the  old, 
conventional,  orthodox  creed  assumed.  But  his  very  wealth  and  success  are  turned 
to  failure  and  wretchedness. 

L  Familt  disappointments.  (Vers.  13 — 15.)  The  wicked  man  is  not  childless. 
He  has  children  who  are  to  be  regarded  as  "a  heritage  from  the  Lord."  His  family 
grows  up  about  him.  But  wait  for  the  end.  Clouds  gather  and  break  over  the  home. 
Brave  sons  are  slain  by  the  sword.  Famine  visits  the  land,  or  business  failure 
impoverishes  the  store,  and  then  many  children  only  mean  many  mouths  to  feed.  If 
the  calamity  does  not  always  come  in  this  visible  way,  in  some  way  or  other  the  bad 
man  must  miss  the  true  blessings  of  family  life,  for  he  has  not  the  pure  and  generous 
spirit  out  of  which  they  are  produced. 

IL  Useless  wealth.  (Vers.  16, 17.)  He  may  heap  up  iilver  as  the  dust,  but  he 
will  not  be  able  to  enjoy  it.  Mere  money  is  not  happiness.  Money  may  be  married 
to  misery,  while  peace  may  dwell  with  poverty.  The  wealth  may  not  be  forfeited ; 
jt%  the  life  of  it*  owner  ii  but  brief.    After  he  has  gone  another  will  enjoy  the  product 


454  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xivn.  1—23. 


of  his  labours.     Thus,  while  he  has  it,  it  will  not  satisfy  his  deepest  wants,  and  at  best 
his  tenure  of  it  is  temporary  and  hazardous. 

III.  Dakgee  in  the  midst  of  seoubitt.  (Vers.  18,  19.)  He  has  built  him  a 
house.  But  in  tbe  day  of  trial  this  will  prove  flimsy  as  a  silken  cocoon  spun  by  a 
moth,  frail  as  a  booth  of  green  boughs.  Thus  he  deceives  himself.  If  he  had  not  been 
prosperous  he  would  have  been  more  ready  to  confess  his  helplessness.  But  his  very 
success  has  blinded  him,  and  lulled  him  to  sleep  in  a  false  sense  of  ease  and  safety. 
Yet  his  ruin  is  preparing  for  him,  and  it  will  burst  over  him  when  he  least  expects  it. 
Such  a  sudden  and  startling  surprise  must  be  overwhelming.  The  miserable  man  will 
be  crushed  by  it. 

IV.  Tebrobs  and  irresistible  dbstbuotion.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  When  the  day  of 
reckoning  comes  there  wiU  be  no  possibility  of  mistaking  it.  All  signs  of  prosperity 
now  disappear.  There  is  only  an  awakening  to  terror  and  tempest.  The  fierce  east 
wind  sweeps  the  wicked  man  away.  No  one  can  resist  the  judgment  of  God.  It  is 
sudden,  swift,  complete,  like  the  desolating  hurricane. 

V.  Eepbobation  instead  of  popularity.  (Vers.  22,  23.)  In  his  prosperity  the 
wicked  man  was  fawned  upon  by  flatterers.  Then  he  had  society  and  admirers.  Now 
he  has  lost  all,  and  is  desolate.  God  is  against  him.  Men  mock  at  him.  A  miserable, 
hunted  creature,  he  has  no  hope  and  no  refuge.  Around  and  before  him  are  only  foes 
and  dangers.     He  can  but  despair. 

This  awful  fate  is  set  forth  as  a  warning.  It  is  possible  for  the  wicked  man  to  repent 
and  find  deliverance  in  the  grace  of  Christ. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  17. — The  wicked  working  for  the  good.  This  is  not  intentional.  But  it  is  a 
fact  of  observation  and  experience.  Let  us  consider  first  the  fact,  and  then  how  it  is 
brought  about. 

I.  That  the  woek  of  the  wicked  ib  fob  the  advantage  of  the  good.  First 
there  is  the  negative  side  of  the  truth.  Bad  people  do  not  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their 
own  misdeeds.  They  may  heap  up  riches,  but  they  are  not  able  to  keep  possession  of 
them ;  for  even  if  they  meet  with  no  reverse  of  fortune,  they  must  forsake  all  when 
they  die.  But  now  we  are  carried  a  step  further.  What  becomes  of  the  forsaken 
wealth  ?  Job  says  that  it  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  just,  who  put  on  the  raiment 
which  the  wicked  have  prepared.  This  does  not  always  happen  in  the  direct  manner 
that  Job's  words  indicate,  though  sometimes  his  statement  is  literally  verified.  But 
in  indirect  ways  it  has  a  much  wider  application.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good 
to  them  that  love  God  "  (Bom.  viii.  28).  The  earth  helps  the  woman  (Rev.  xii.  16). 
The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth  (Matt.  v.  5).  Nebuchadnezzar  fought  for  his  own 
advantage  only.  Yet  he  was  used  as  God's  servant  (Jer.  xxv.  9),  and  his  achievements 
were  turned  to  the  real  advantage  of  the  devout  remnant  of  Israel.  Persecution  has 
spread  the  gospel,  as  when  the  Church  was  scattered  at  the  death  of  Stephen,  and  bo 
became  missiimary.  Thus  "  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church." 
Modern  wars  have  opened  up  countries  to  the  gospel  of  Christ — ^not  wars  of  the  cross 
in  the  interests  of  Christianity,  but  selfish,  wicked  wars,  the  leaders  of  which  had  no 
good  end  in  view.  So  it  may  be  that  all  sin  and  Satanic  evil  will  be  utilized,  like 
offensive  manure  out  of  which  spring  beautiful  and  fragrant  flowers. 

II.  How  the  woek  of  the  wicked  comes  to  be  for  the  advantage  of  the  good. 
This  thing  is  not  aimed  at  by  the  wicked,  nor  do  they  imagine  that  it  will  come  about. 
How,  then,  is  it  produced  ?  1.  By  the  overruling  providence  of  God.  God  governs 
even  through  the  wicked  deeds  of  bad  men.  He  "  shapes  our  ends,  rough-hew  them 
how  we  will."  "  Man  proposes,  and  God  disposes."  We  are  not  like  pawns  on  the 
chess-board,  because  we  have  free-will.  But  God  is  infinitely  greater  than  a  skilful 
chess-player.  He  does  more  than  manipulate  inert  things.  He  works  among  the  wild 
and  wayward  wills  of  men,  and  so  acts  that  they  result  in  accompUshing  his  great 
purposes.  Thus  God  employs  unconscious  agents  and  brings  good  out  of  evil.  2. 
Through  human  fitness.  The  good  must  be  fit  to  profit  by  God's  providential  use  of 
the  work  of  the  wicked.  That  work  tends  to  their  advantage  just  in. proportion  as 
they  are  capable  of  being  benefited.  (1)  Moral  fitness.  This  is  a  condition  of  the 
special  favour  that  is  indicated  by  the  providential  action.  God  will  give  as  a  favour 
what,  indeed,  is  not  earned,  but  what  is  in  a  measure  the  reward  of  fidelity.    (2)  Personal 


OH.  xxvin.  1 — 28.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


455 


fitness.  We  can  only  receive  real  good  in  proportion  to  our  capacity  for  it.  There  are 
men  who  cannot  take  God's  blessings,  simply  because  they  have  no  susceptibility  for 
them.  Now,  the  real  gooil  even  of  property  is  not  in  the  thing  itself,  but  in  the  right 
use  of  it.  God  will  make  things  a  blessing  to  those  who  are  in  the  condition  to  use 
them  well.— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  21. — The  east  wind.  Kingsley  wrote  an  ode  to  the  east  wind.  But  few  men 
have  a  good  word  for  it.  We  in  England,  however,  have  quite  our  share  of  the  presence 
of  this  unwelcome  visitor.     Has  the  east  wind  any  religious  significance  to  us  ? 

I.  Thbbb  akb  dbstkuctive  forces  in  nature.  The  east  wind  is  destructive.  It 
brings  blight  to  plants  and  illness  to  men.  We  might  have  expected  that  a  perfect 
world  would  have  only  fresh,  healthy  west  winds.  Yet  we  must  recognize  the  fact 
that,  like  the  east  wind,  lightning,  tempest,  earthquakes,  drought,  and  deluge  are 
naturally  hurtful  influences.  We  need  not  resort  to  a  Maniohsean  explanation,  and 
suppose  that  a  malignant  being  is  at  the  root  of  these  things.  For  scientific  research 
teaches  us  that  the  destroying  agencies  of  nature  minister  to  its  progress.  The  biting 
east  wind  that  cuts  off  the  more  tender  plants  leaves  the  hardier  ones  to  flourish  with 
greater  freedom,  and  so  tends  to  promote  their  growth  and  propagation.  The  buffeting 
of  the  world  helps  to  develop  robustness  of  character. 

II.  Influence  partakes  or  the  character  of  its  OKiaiN.  The  east  wind  is 
gendered  on  the  dreary  steppes  of  Russia.  Arid  plains  suck  out  of  it  all  its  exhilarating 
properties.  Cold  regions  lend  it  cruel  barbs  of  ice.  Even  in  beautiful,  smiling  P'ngland, 
the  east  wind  comes  as  a  blast  from  Siberia,  and  the  desolation  of  the  land  o£  exilo 
accompanies  it.  Spiritual  influence  is  like  its  origin.  Cruel  natures  can  only  spread  an 
atmosphere  of  cruelty  and  distress  about  them.  No  man  can  influence  others  excepting 
through  what  he  possesses.  We  cannot  permanently  disguise  our  characters.  As  we 
are  in  our  hearts  and  homes,  so  shall  we  be  ultimately  in  our  work  and  in  the  outcome 
of  our  lives. 

III.  Childhood  determines  manhood.  Leagues  away  beyond  whole  empires  the 
east  wind  is  born  in  the  far-off  Eussian  solitude.  Yet  when  it  flies  over  our  fields 
and  rushes  in  at  our  doors  it  is  true  to  the  character  it  received  in  the  land  of  its  birth. 
Not  only  is  its  influence  true  to  its  origin,  but  the  wind  itself  continues  of  the  same 
harsh  character,  although  it  is  now  surrounded  by  very  genial  circumstances.  The 
tone  and  set  of  life  are  determined  in  youth.  Some  asperity  may  be  softened  and 
mellowed  by  the  discipline  of  later  years ;  but  in  the  main  most  men  are  of  the 
character  of  their  youth.     Hence  the  great  importance  of  a  right  life  at  the  start. 

IV.  East  winds  abb  confined  to  earth.  There  are  none  in  heaven.  The  storms 
and  terrors  of  life  that  beset  God's  children  are  peculiar  to  this  brief  time  of  discipline. 
The  fruits  of  the  heavenly  Eden  are  not  touched  by  frost  or  blighting  blast.  Those 
people  who  have  no  portion  in  the  better  land  may  well  dread  the  destructive  agencies 
of  nature,  which  tear  away  all  that  they  have  to  live  for.  But  true  Christians  should 
learn  to  face  the  east  wind  of  cutting  calamity,  knowing  that  they  have  but  to  cross 
the  moor,  and  a  cheerful  home  will  welcome  them  on  the  other  side—  W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVin. 


Vers.  1 — 28.— The  connection  of  this 
chapter  with  the  preceding  is  somewliat 
obscure.  Probably  we  are  to  regard  Job  as 
led  to  see,  even  while  he  is  justifying  God's 
ways  with  sinners  (oh.  xxvii.  8 — 23),  how 
many  and  how  great  are  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  forming  a  single  consistent  theory 
of  the  Divine  action,  which  shall  be  appli- 
cable to  all  cases.     Hence  he  coues  to  the 


conclusion  that  God  is  ineomprehensible  by 
man  and  inscrutable ;  and  that  it  is  only 
given  to  man  to  know  him  sufficiently  for 
his  practical  guidance.  To  impress  this  on 
his  hearers  is  his  main  object  (vers.  12 — 28) ; 
and,  to  impress  it  the  more,  he  introduces 
it  by  a  sharp  contrast.  Wonderful  as  is 
man's  cleverness  and  ingenuity  in  respect 
of  earthly  things  and  physical  phenomena 
(vers.  1 — 11),  with  respect  to  heavenly 
things  and  the  spiritual  world — wherewith 


454 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOR 


foH.  xxna.  1—28. 


true  wisdom  la  eoncemed — he  knows  next 
to  nothing.  All  that  he  knows  is  just 
enough  to  guide  his  conduct  aright  (ver.  28). 

Ver.  1. — Snrely  there  is  a  vein  for  the 
iilver ;  literally,  cm  iuue  for  tilver ;  i.e.  a 
pliice  or  places  whenoB  it  is  drawn  forth 
from  the  earth.  The  silver-mines  of  Spain 
were  very  early  worked  by  the  Phoenicians, 
and  produced  the  metal  in  greiit  abundance 
(see  the  author's  '  History  of  PUcenioia,'  p. 
314).  But  Asia  itself  was  probably  the 
source  whence  silver  was  obtained  in  primi- 
tive times.  And  a  place  for  gold  where 
they  fine  it;  or, /use  it.  Gold  is  very  widely 
spread  over  the  earth's  surface,  and  in 
ancient  times  was  especially  abundant  in 
Arabia  (Piod.  Sic,  ii.  1 ;  iii.  42 ;  Strabo,  xvi. 
4.  §  18;  Pliny,  'Hist.  Nat.,'  vi.  32,  etc.);  so 
that  Job  might  easily  have  bptn  acquainted 
with  the  processes  of  fusing  and  refining  it. 
Two  processes  of  refining  are  mentioneil  by 
Diodorus  aa  practised  by  the  Egyptians 
(iii.  11). 

Ver.  2. — Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  xx.  24).  Iron  was 
found  in  the  hills  of  Palestine  (Dent.  viii.  9), 
in  the  trans-Jordanic  region  (Josephus,*  Bell. 
Jud.,'  iv.  8.  §  2),  in  the  sandstone  of  the 
Lebanon  ('  Hist,  of  Phoenicia,'  p.  47),  and  in 
Egypt  ('  Hist,  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p. 
93),  probably  also  in  many  other  places. 
It  is  scarcely  ever  found  except  in  the  shape 
of  iron  ore,  and  so  has  to  be  "  taken  out  of 
the  eartli."  And  brass  is  molten  out  of  the 
stone.  By  "brass"  wo  must  understand 
copper,  since  the  amalgam  brass  is  never 
found  in  a  natural  state.  Copper  was  yielded 
abundantly  in  very  early  times  by  the  mines 
wliioli  the  Egyptians  worked  in  the  Sinaitio 
peninsula  ('  Hist,  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  93,  94).  It  was  also  obtaiuable  from 
Palestine  (Deut.  viii.  9),  Cyprus  ('  Hist,  of 
Phcenicia,'  p.  311),  and  Armenia  (Ezek. 
xxvii.  13).  Sometimes  it  is  found  pure,  but 
generally  in  the  shape  of  copper  ore,  wliich 
has  to  be  "  molten "  for  the  puru  metal  to 
run  oif. 

Yer.  3. — He  setteth  an  end  to  darkness. 
Man,  in  his  desire  to  obtain  these  metals, 
"setteth  an  end  to  darkness,"  f.e.  letteth  in 
the  light  of  day,  or  the  artificial  light  which 
be  carries  with  him,  upon  the  natural  abode 
of  darkness,  the  loner  parts  of  the  earth. 
The  miner's  first  operation  is  to  pierce  the 
ground  with  a  shaft,  perpendieular,  liori- 
zontal,  or  oblique,  as  suits  his  purpose. 
Through  this  the  light  enters  into  what  was 
previously  pitch  darkness.  And  searoheth 
out  all  perfection:  the  stones  of  darkness,  and 
the  shadow  of  death ;  rather,  and  searcheth 
out  to  the  furthest  hound  the  stones  of  thieJc 
darkness  and  of  th«  shadow  of  death;  ex- 
plores, •'.«.,  the  entire  murky  region  within 


the  earth,  notwithstanding  its  fearful  gloom 
and  obscurity. 

Ver.  4. — The  flood  breaketh  out  from  the 
inhabitant.  This  passage  is  very  obscure  ; 
but  recent  critics  suggest,  as  its  probable 
meaning,  "He  (i.e.  the  miner)  breaketh 
open  a  shaft,  away  from  where  men  inhabit " 
(see  the  Eevised  Version).  The  miner  does 
not  wish  to  be  interfered  with,  and  therefore 
sinks  his  shaft  in  some  wild  spot,  far  from 
the  habitations  of  men.  Even  the  waters 
forgotten  of  the  foot ;  rather,  they  are  for- 
giitlen  nf  the  foot ;  i.e.  no  one  visits  them ; 
they  are  left  alone ;  they  are  "  forgotten  of 
tlie  foot "  of  the  passer-by.  They  are  dried 
up,  they  are  gone  away  from  men ;  rather, 
they  hang  swinging  to  and  fro,  far  from 
men.  The  descent  of  the  shaft  is  made  by 
a  rope,  to  which  they  "hang  swinjjing"  all 
tlie  time  that  they  descend.  As  they  have 
sought  secrecy,  all  this  takes  place  far  ftom 
the  haunts  of  men. 

Ver.  5. — As  for  the  earth,  out  of  it  cometh 
bread.  Man's  cleverness  is  such  that  he 
turns  the  earth  to  various  uses.  By  tillage 
of  its  surface  he  causes  it  to  produce  the 
staff  of  life,  bread  ;  aid  by  his  mining  opera- 
tions the  under  part  of  It  is  turned  up  as  fire, 
or  rather,  as  by  fire.  Fire  was  used  in  some 
of  the  processes  whereby  masses  of  material 
were  detached  and  forced  to  yield  their 
treasures  (see  Pliny, '  Hist.  Nat.,'  xxxiii.  4. 
§73). 

Ver.  6. — The  stones  of  it  are  the  place  of 
sapphires.  Among  tlie  rocks  and  stones 
wherenf  the  interior  of  the  earth  is  mainly 
composed  are  found  gems  of  inestiniable 
value,  for  instance,  sapphires.  It  is  doubtful 
whether  the  Hebrew  sapphire  (tsd)  was 
the  gem  which  bears  that  name  among  our- 
selves, or  the  lapis  lazuli.  In  either  case 
it  was  highly  esteemi  d,  and  appeared  in 
kins^s'  crowns  (Ezek.  xxviii.  13),  and  in  the 
high  priesi/s  breastplate  (Exod.  xxviii.  18). 
Job  notes  its  high  value  in  ver.  16.  And  it 
(i.e.  the  earth)  hath  dust  of  gold ;  literally, 
dusls ;  i.e.  a  multitude  of  small  specks  or 
atoms.  In  the  auriferous  rocks  gold  is  com- 
monly scattered  in  such  specks. 

Ver.  7. — There  is  a  path  which  no  fowl 
knoweth;  or,  his  is  a  path  which  no  Mrd 
of  prey  knoweth  (see  the  Eevised  Version). 
■The  miner's  path  through  Ihe  bowels  of  the 
earth  is  intended.  And  which  the  vulture's 
eye  hath  not  seen.  The  vulture  is  probably 
the  most  keen-sighted  of  birds,  but  it  cannot 
even  get  a  glimpse  of  the  subterraneous 
path  wbioh  the  miner  treads. 

Ver.  8. — The  lion's  whelps  have  not  trod- 
den it ;  literally,  the  sons  of  the  fieree — the 
whelps  of  lions,  tigers,  or  leopards  may 
be  intiiided.  These  beasts  would  haunt 
the  mountains  and  penetrate  into  natural 
caverns,  but  would  never  adventure  them- 


cH.  xtvm.  1 — ^28.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB, 


487 


selves  in  the  shafts  and  adits  of  miners. 
Not  the  fieroe  lion  passed  hy  it;  rather, 
passed  thereby  (see  the  Revised  Vereion). 

Ver,  9. — He  putteth  forth  his  hand  upon 
the  rook.  Our  Bevisera  translate,  upon  the 
flinty  rock;  whUe  Canon  Cook  maintains 
that  "the  word  used  means  either  granite  or 
quartz."  Probably  Job  meant  no  more  than 
that  man  does  not  shrink  from  attacking 
any — even  the  hardest — rock ;  but  will  sub- 
due it,  and  out  his  way  through  it,  if  he 
has  occasion  so  to  do.  He  overturneth  the 
mountains  by  the  roots,  Herudotus,  in  de- 
scribing what  he  had  seen  of  the  Phoenician 
mining  operations  in  the  island  of  Tiiasos, 
observes, "  a  huge  mountain  lias  been  turned 
upside  down  in  the  search  for  ores  "  (Herod., 
vi.  47).  Pliny  says  of  the  process  employed 
for  detaching  huge  masses  from  the  metalli- 
ferous hills  in  Spain,  "They  attack  the 
rook  with  iron  wedges  and  hammers.  When 
this  work  is  complete,  they  destroy  the  sup- 
ports, and  notify  by  signal  that  the  fall  is 
about  to  take  place.  A  watchman,  stationed 
on  the  mountain-top,  alone  understands  the 
signal;  and  he  proceeds  at  once  to  have  all 
the  workmen  called  in,  and  himself  makes 
a  hurried  retreat.  Then  the  mountain  falls 
m  upon  itself  with  a  crash  that  cannot  be 
imagined,  and  an  incredible  concussion  of 
the  air.  The  successful  engineers  contem- 
plate the  ruin  which  they  have  achieved  " 
('  Hist.  Nat.,'  xxxiii.  4.  §  73). 
'   '  Ver.  10. — He  cutteth  out  rivers  among 

the  rocks.  Some  understand  this  of  man's 
general  ability  to  out  canals  and  tunnels, 
and  change  the  course  of  rivers.  But  the 
allusion  is  more  probably  to  the  works 
undertaken  in  mines  for  the  carrying  off  of 
the  water  from  them.  Diodorua  says  that 
when  subterranean  springs  were  tapped  in 
mines,  wliich  threatened  to  flood  them,  it 
was  usual  to  construct  ducts,  or  tunnels,  by 
which  the  inconvenient  liquid  might  be 
carried  off  to  a  lower  level  (Diod.  Siculua, 
V.  37.  §  3).  And  his  eye  seeth  every  pre- 
cious thing.  Nothing  escapos  his  notice. 
Even  as  he  constructs  these  ductj  he  has 
his  eye  open  to  note  any  signs  of  mineral 
wealth,  of  metals  or  of  precious  stones,  that 
occur  along  the  line  of  his  excavation. 

Ver.  11. — He  bindeth  the  floods  from  over- 
flowing. This,  agiiin,  may  be  either  taken 
generally  of  man's  ability  to  create  dams, 
dykes,  and  embankments,  whereby  the 
overflow  of  waters  is  prevent 'd;  or  spe- 
cially of  suoh  works  when  connected  with 
mines,  from  which  it  is  possible,  in  some 
instances,  to  dam  out  water  that  would 
otherwise  interfere  with  their  woiking.  The 
word  translated  "overflowing"  means  pro- 
,  bably  "weeping,"  and  seems  to  point  to 
that  leakage  from  the  roofs  and  sides  of 
galleries  and  adits  which  is  more  diiflcult 


to  control  and  stop  than  even  subterranean 
springs  or  rivers.  And  the  thing  that  is 
hid  bringeth  he  forth  to  light.  This  is  the 
final  result  of  mining  operations.  Things 
useful  or  beautiful  that  are  hiddden  deep 
down  in  the  heart  of  the  earth,  and  that 
might  have  seemed  wholly  inaccessible,  are 
brought  out  of  the  pit's  mouth  into  the 
light  of  day  for  the  service  and  delectation 
of  mankind. 

Vera.  12 — 28. — Here  we  come  on  an 
abrupt  change.  From  human  ingenuity 
and  contrivance  Job  turns  to  the  con- 
sideration of  "  wisdom  "  —  that  wisdom 
which  has  been  defined .  as  "  the  reason 
which  deals  with  principles  "  (Canon  Cook). 
"  Where,"  he  asks,  "  is  this  to  be  found  ?  " 
It  is  a  wholly  diiferent  thing  from  clever- 
ness and  ingenuity.  It  inquires  into  causes 
imd  origins,  into  the  ends  and  purposes  of 
things;  it  seeks  to  solve  the  riddle  of  the 
universe.  Perfect  wisdom  can,  of  course, 
only  dwell  with  God  (ver.  23).  Man  must 
be  content  with  something  much  below  this. 
AVith  him  "the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  ia 
wisdom,  and  to  depart  from  evil  ia  under- 
standing "  (ver.  28). 

Ver.  12. — But  where  shall  wisdom  bo 
found  J  "  Wisdom  is  ihe  principal  thing," 
says  Solomon  (Prov.  iv.  7);  and  again, 
"It  is  better  to  get  wisdom  than  gold" 
(Prov.  xvi.  16).  But  where  is  it  to  be 
found  ?  Job's  three  friends  thought  that 
it  dwelt  with  them  (oh.  xii.  2) ;  but  this 
was  a  mistake,  since  God  reproaches  thera 
with  their  "folly  "  (oh.  xlii.  8).  Job  does 
not  claim  to  possess  it  (oh.  xxvi.  3) ;  he  only 
desires  it.  It  is  his  deep  conviction  that  it 
is  only  possessed,  in  tiie  true  sense  of  the 
word,  by  God.  And  where  is  the  plaoe  of 
understanding!  It  is  not  quite  clear 
whether  Job  intends  to  make  any  distinc- 
tion between  "  wisdom  "  (naan)  and  "under- 
standing" (mo).  Canon  Cook  suggests 
that  "wisdom"  is  "the  reason  which  deals 
with  principles,"  ami  "understanding" 
"  the  faculty  which  discerns  and  appreciates 
their  application,"  But  refined  distinctions 
of  this  kind  are  scarcely  suitable  to  the  age 
of  Job.  Dean  Plumptre,  in  his  comment 
on  Proverbs  ('  Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol. 
iv.  p.  529),  accepts  the  distinction  implied 
in  the  Septuagiut  translation  of  that  book, 
which  renders  nosn  by  (ro^fo,  and  nra  by 
<t>p6i'ri(ns.  This  is  a  much  simpler  and  more 
easily  understood  distinction,  being  that 
which  separates  between  scientific  know- 
leilge  and  the  practical  intelligence  which 
directs  oonduot,     Bnt  it  may  be  doubted 


468 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XXVIII.  1—28, 


whether  Job  does  not  qso  the  two  words  as 
Rjmonyms. 

Ver.  13. — Man  knoweth  not  the  price 
thereof.  The  real  value  of  wisdom  cannot 
be  estimated  in  terms  of  ordinary  human 
calculation.  It  transcends  figures.  Neither 
is  it  found  in  the  land  of  the  livingr.  True 
wisdom,  such  as  Job  is  speaking  of  (see  the 
comment  on  vers.  12 — 28),  does  not  exist 
among  men.  It  transcends  human  faculties, 
and  is  among  the  peculiar  possessions  of 
the  Most  High  (ver.  23).  Hence  the  Most 
High  is  altogether  inscrutable  by  man — 
"  his  ways  are  past  finding  out." 

Ver.  11. — The  depth  saith,  It  is  not  in 
me :  and  the  sea  saith,  It  is  not  with  me. 
1'he  deep  abysses  of  the  ocean  declare  that 
it  is  not  with  tliem;  and  the  wide  reaches 
of  the  far-extending  sea  proclaim  that  it  is 
not  with  them  either. 

Ver.  15. — It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold. 
No  amount  of  gold  can  purchase  it ;  no,  not 
of  the  purest  and  most  refined  quality 
(1  Kings  vl.  20,  21),  for  it  is  not  a  thing  that 
can  be  bought  or  sold.  God  must  grant  it, 
and  find  a  way  of  imparling  it;  which  he 
certainly  will  not  do  for  a  sum  of  money. 
Neither  shall  silver  be  weighed  for  the  prioe 
thereof  If  gold  cannot  purchase  it,  much 
less  can  silver — the  less  valuable  medium 
of  exchange.  (On  the  weighing  of  silver, 
in  iiales,  see  Gen.  xxiii.  16 ;  Jer.  xxxii.  9 ; 
Ezra  viii.  26.) 

Ver.  16. — It  cannot  be  valned  with  tke 
gold  of  Ophir.  The  locality  of  Ophir  has 
been  much  contested,  but,  on  the  whole,  the 
weight  of  evidence  would  seem  to  be  in 
favour  of  Arabia,  on  the  south-east  coast 
(see  the  article  on  "  Ophir"  in  Smith's  *  Diet, 
of  the  Bible,'  which  exhausts  all  that  can  be 
said  on  the  subject).  The  high  estimation 
in  which  "gold of  Ophir"  was  held  appears 
not  only  in  this  passage,  but  also  in  ch. 
xxii.  24 ;  Fs.  xlv.  9 ;  and  Isa.  xiii.  12.  It 
is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  imperfection 
of  all  the  anciently  known  processes  of 
refining,  which  left  the  best  refined  gold 
inferior  to  the  natural  product  of  the  Ophir 
mines  or  washings.  Witb.  the  precious  onyx, 
or  the  sapphire.  (On  the  latter  of  these 
two  stones,  see  the  comment  upon  ver.  6.) 
The  "onyx"  is  probably  tlie  stone  now 
known  as  the  "sardonyx,"  which  was  highly 
prized  by  the  ancients.  It  liad  »  place  in 
the  breastplate  of  the,  high  priest  (Exod, 
xxviii.  20),  and  is  mentioned  among  the 
treasures  of  the  King  of  Tyre  (Ezek.  xxviii. 
13).  The  sardonyx  presents  layers  vari- 
ously coloured,  as  blue,  black,  white,  and 
vermilion. 

Ver.  17. — The  gold  and  the  crystal  cannot 
equal  it;  rather,  gold  and  crystal.  This 
second  mention  of  gold  (see  ver.  15)  seems 
superfluous,  but  perhaps  the   patriarch  is 


thinking  of  some  goblet  or  ornament  In 
which  crystal  and  gold  were  combined  to- 
gether. Ornaments  of  this  kind  have  been 
found  in  Phoenicia  ('Hist,  of  Phoenicia,' 
pp.  362, 370).  And  the  exchange  of  it  shall 
not  be  for  jewels  of  fine  gold ;  or,  vessels 
of  fine  gold.  Both  in  Egypt  and  Phoenicia 
vessels  of  gold  were  common. 

Ver.  18. — No  mention  shall  be  made  ol 
coral.  The  word  translated  "  coral "  (niONi) 
means  properly  "things  that  are  high." 
It  occurs  only  here  and  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  16. 
The  rabbinical  interpretation  of  the  word  as 
"  coral "  is  doubtful,  since  it  was  unknown 
to  the  LXX.  Or  of  pearls.  The  word 
gdbish  (»'3J)  occurs  only  in  this  place. 
Some  identify  it  with  rock-crystal.  For  the 
price  of  wisdom  is  above  rubies.  Here  we 
have  another  obscure  word  (d':'3d),  which 
is  variously  rendered  by  "  rubies,"  "  pearls," 
"  carbuncles,"  and  "  red  coral."  The  balance 
of  authority  is  in  favour  of  pearls. 

Ver.  19. — The  topaz  of  Ethiopia  shall  not 
equal  it.  It  is  generally  allowed  that  the 
pithdath  (nil??)  is  either  the  "  topaz "  or 
the  "chrysolite."  In  favour  of  its  beiiig 
the  chrysolite  is  the  passage  of  Pliny  which 
mentions  its  being  esteemed  for  its  green 
tints  ('Hist.  Nat.,'  xxxvii.  8).  Otherwise 
"  topaz  "  might  have  appeared  to  be  the  best 
rendering.  By  "Oush,"  hero  translated 
"Ethiopia,"  is  probably  meant  Cushite 
Arabia,  or  the  southern  and  south-eastern  k 
regions  (see  the  author's  'Origin of  Nations,' 
pp.  206—209).  Neither  shall  it  be  valued 
with  pure  gold.  Of  the  four  words  used 
for  "gold  "  in  this  passage  (vers.  15 — 17),  one 
(3nt)  seems  to  be  the  common  name,  and 
to  designate  the  metal  by  its  colour,  "yel- 
low," since  anx  means  "  to  be  yellow." 
Another  ("lui;)  means  properly  "  what  is 
treasured,"  or  "shut  up,"  from  njij,  "to 
shut."  The  third  (IB)  seems  to  be  the 
name  for  "native  gold,"  or  that  found  in 
river-washings  and  nuggets,  which  was 
regarded  as  the  purest.  The  fourth  (oris) 
is  a  poetical  name  only,  and  designates  gold 
of  extreme  purity  (Cant.  v.  11),  whether 
highly  refined  or  native.  Job  uses  them  all, 
to  show  that  there  was  no  gold  of  any  kind 
wherewith  it  was  possible  to  purchase 
wisdom. 

Ver.  20. — Whence  then  cometh  wisdom  1 
and  where  is  the  place  of  understanding  1 
This  is  a  repetition  of  ver.  12,  with  a  mere 
variant  of  the  verb  in  the  first  line.  Job's 
elaborate  inquiry  of  vers.  14 — 19  having 
thrown  no  light  on  the  subject,  the  original 
question  recurs — Where  does  wisdom  come 
from? 

Ver.  21. — Seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes 
of  all  living.  Man  cannot  see  it,  because 
it  is  immakirial,  but  he  cannot  even  con- 


OH.  xTm.  1—28.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


459 


conceive  of  it,  because  its  nature  ti  anscenda 
bim.  Aud  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the 
air  (comp.  ver.  7).  The  sight  of  birds  is 
far  keener  than  that  o(  man ;  but  even  birds 
cannot  detect  where  wisdom  is. 

Ver.  22. — Destruction  and  death  say,  We 
have  heard  the  fame  thereof  with  our  ears. 
"Death  and  destruction"  seem  to  repre- 
sent the  inhabitants  of  Sheol — the  world  of 
the  deparied.  Job  personifies  them,  and 
represepts  them  as  Baying,  that  in  their 
gloomy  and  remote  abode  (oh.  x.  21,  22) 
they  have  heard  some  dim  rumour,  some 
vague  report,  of  the  "  place  "  of  wisdom  and 
understanding,  the  nature  of  which,  how- 
ever, they  do  not  communicate  to  him.  His 
idea  seems  to  be  that  their  knowledge  on 
the  subject  does  not  much  transcend  the 
knowledge  of  living  men,  whom  he  regards 
as  profoundly  ignorant  with  respect  to  it. 
He  thus  prepares  the  way  for  his  assertion 
in  the  next  verse.  Man,  neither  living  nor 
dtad,  can  make  any  answer  to  the  great 
question  raised ;  but— 

Ver.  23.— God  understandeth  the  way 
thereof,  and  he  khoweth  the  place  thereof. 
God  only  understands  what  true  wisdom  is. 
It  is  a  part  of  his  being,  an  essential  element 
of  his  nature.  He  knows  "  the  way  "  of  it, 
i.e.  how  it  works  and  manifests  itself ;  and 
lie  knows  "the  place"  of  it,  i.e.  where  it 
dwells,  what  limits  it  has,  if  any,  and  how 
far  it  is  communicable  to  any  beside  himself. 
The  highest  knowledge  is  all  hid  in  God 
(Col,  ii.  3) ;  and,  except  so  far  as  God  im- 
parts it  to  him,  man  cau  know  nothing  of  it. 

Ver.  21. — For  he  looketh  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth. '  Man  is  conditioned.  God  is  un- 
conditioned. Man's  knowledge  has  strict 
aud  narrow  limits.  God  "looketh  unto  the 
$nda  of  the  earth,."  It  is  the  universality  of 
God's  knowledge  that  makes  each  item  of 
it  perfect.  Where  knowledge  is  circum- 
scribed, it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  that  some 
truth  outside  the  circle  of  the  person's 
cognizance  has  not  a  bearing  on  that  which 
is  within  his  cognizance — a  bearing,  which, 
if  he  were  aware  of  it,  would  give  the  truth 
B  different  aspect.  \Vith  God  alone  there 
are  no  such  limits,  everything  being  within 
his  cognizance.  And  seeth  under  the  whole 
heaven.  As  his  knowledge  of  earthly  things 
is  unlimited,  so  is  his  knowledge  of  heavenly 
things  also ;  and  not  only  of  heavenly  things 
in  a  material  sense,  as  of  sun,  moon,  stars, 
comets,  planets,  nebulas,  etc.,  but  also  of 
causes,  principles,  ends,  laws,  and  the  like, 
whereby  both  material  and  immaterial  things 
are  governed,  ordered,  and  maintained  in 
being.  Of  matters  of  this  kind  and  character 
man  can  only  say,  "  Such  knowledge  is  too 
wonderful  for  me ;  I  cannot  attain  unto  it " 
(Ps.  cxxxix.  6). 
Yer.  23.— To  make  the  wMglit  for  the 


winds.  God  by  his  wisdom  gives  to  winds 
their  exactly  fitting  degree  of  force  and 
violence,  so  that  they  perform  the  work  in 
the  world  which  they  were  intended  to  per- 
form, and  which  would  not  be  performed, 
were  they  either  of  a  less  or  of  a  greater 
intensity.  And  he  weigheth  the  waters  by 
measure  (comp.  Isa.  xl.  12,  "Who  hath 
measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his 
hand,  and  meted  out  heaven  with  a  span, 
and  comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in 
a  measure,  and  weighed  the  mountains  in 
scales,  and  the  hills  in  a  balance  ?").  Every- 
thing in  creation  is  duly  proportioned  to 
every  other  thing.  All  is  ordered  "by 
weight  and  with  care." 

Ver.  26. — When  he  made  a  decree  for  the 
rain.  God  "  made  a  decree  for  the  rain  " 
when  he  placed  the  fall  of  rain  under  fixed 
and  unalterable  laws.  In  some  countries 
rainy  seasons  begin  almost  regularly  on  a 
fixed  day  in  the  calendar,  while  for  several 
mouths  in  the  year  it  is  almost  certain  that 
rain  will  not  fall.  Even  where  there  is  no 
such  exact  regularity  as  this,  the  rainfall 
has  ils  laws,  since  there  are  maxima  and 
minima  whicif  are  never  exceeded.  And  a 
way  for  the  lightning  of  the  thunder.  God 
gave  laws  to  the  electric  current,  aud  pre- 
scribed the  "way"  that  it  should  take  in 
its  passage  from  heaven  to  earth,  or  from 
cloiid  to  cloud,  or  from  earth  to  heaven. 
Everything  was  ruled  beforehand  by  In- 
finite Wisdom. 

Ver.  27. — Then  did  he  see  it,  aud  declare  it. 
From  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  before 
it,  God  foresaw  all  that  was  necessary  to 
maintain  his  universe  in  the  perfect  order 
and  the  perfect  beauty  that  he  designed  for 
it.  At  the  Creation  he,  in  a  certain  sense, 
"  declared  it,"  or  set  it  forth,  before  such  in- 
telligences as  then  existed.  Subsequently, 
in  part  to  Adam,  in  part  to  Noah,  in  part  to 
Moses,  he  further  declared,  by  revelation, 
at  any  rate  a  portion  of  the  design  of  his 
creation,  and  of  the  laws  by  which  it  was 
regulated.  He  prepared  It,  yea,  and  searched 
it  out.  This  is  an  inversion  of  what  seems 
to  us  the  natural  order,  whereof  there  are 
many  examples.  God  must  first  have  in- 
vestigated and  searched  out,  in  his  own 
secret  counsels,  the  entire  scheme  of  creation, 
and  afterwards  have  proceeded  to  the  "  pre- 
paration "  or  "  establishment "  of  it. 

Ver.  28.— And  unto  man  he  said.  Not  in 
so  many  words,  not  by  any  written  or  spoken 
revelation;  but  by  the  nature  which  he 
implanted  in  man,  and  especially  by  the 
conscience  wherewith  he  endowed  him. 
Man  feels  in  his  heart  of  hearts  that  what- 
ever wisdom  may  be  in  the  abstract,  hit 
true  wisdom  is  "  the  fear  of  God,"  his  true 
understanding  "  to  depart  from  evil."  No 
amount  of  intelligence,  no  amount  of  clever- 


466 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xxTm.  1- 


ness,  or  of  infonnatlon,  or  of  knowledge,  or 
of  worldly  or  scientiflo  wisdom,  will  be  of 
any  avail  to  him,  unless  he  starts  with  this 
"begianing"  (Ps.  oxi  10;  Prov.  i  7),  and 


builds  on  this  foundation.  This  foundation, 
at  any  rate.  Job  had,  since  God  bore  him 
witness  that  he  had  it  (ch.  ii  8). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 28. — JoS's  flmt  paraNe :  3.  A  discourse  upon  true  wtsriom.  I.  Trtte 
WISDOM  DNDisoovERABLE  BY  HUMAN  GENIUS.  Among  the  Stupendous  ctfuits  of  human 
industry  and  skill  with  which  Job  was  acquainted,  nothing  was  better  fitted  to  impress 
the  mind  with  a  sense  of  man's  illimitable  daring,  resistless  might,  and  wonderful 
success  in  searching  out  all  perfection  (ver.  3),  and  bringing  hidden  things  to  light  (ver. 
11),  than  the  operations  of  the  miner.  These,  a  knowledge  of  which  may  have  been 
derived  from  mines  then  being  worked  in  Egypt,  the  Sinaitio  peninsula,  and  Arabia  {vide 
Exposition ;  and  cf.  Delitzsch,  in  loco),  are  with  much  accuracy  and  vividness  portrayed. 
1.  The  treasures  the  miner  seeks.  These  are  set  forth  by  their  names  and  the  places 
where  they  commonly  are  found.  (1)  Silver  from  the  issuing  place,  i.e.  from  the  mine ; 
and  gold,  virbich  men  refine,  from  its  place,  i.e,  also  from  the  mine.  Expositors  generally 
remark  upon  the  accuracy  of  these  statements,  which  speak  of  silver  as  being  found  in 
a  vein  or  "  issue "  at  some  depth  below  the  ground,  and  gold  as  obtained  near  the 
surface ;  of  the  silver  as  requiring  to  he  dug  from  the  earth,  and  of  gold  as  needing  to 
be  washed  out  from  the  pulverized  rock.  The  first  mention  in  Scripture  of  "gold 
and  silver"  is  in  connection  with  Abraham's  return  out  of  Egypt  (Gen.  xiii.  2),  though 
gold  afterwards  abounded  in  Arabia  and  Judtea  in  the  time  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  x.  2, 
21,  27).  If  "the  use  of  gold  and  silver  commonly  precedes  the  discovery  of  iron' 
(Barnes),  then  it  is  probable  that  those  precious  metals  were  not  unknown  to  Tubal- 
Cain  and  his  contemporaries  (Gen.  iv.  22).  It  is  impossible  to  say  to  what  extent  the  art 
of  metal-working  had  advanced  in  Job's  time,  but  the  mention  of  ear-rings  and  bracelets 
in  the  days  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxiv.  30),  and  of  silver  cups,  gold  rings,  and  gold  chains 
in  the  age  of  Joseph  (Gen.  xli.  42;  xliv.  2),  makes  it  obvious  that  considerable 
proficiency  had  been  attained  prior  to  the  era  of  Moses.  In  the  estimation  of  Job  the 
procuring  and  preparing  of  these  precious  metals  were  signal  illustrations  of  the  power 
and  skill  of  man.  (2)  Iron  from  the  dust,  i.e.  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  copper 
from  the  stone,  i.e.  from  the  ore  by  smelting.  Tubal-Cain  is  the  first  known  worker  in 
brass  (copper)  and  iron  (Gen.  iv.  22).  Iron  is  afterwards  mentioned  in  the  time  of  Og 
King  of  Bashan,  b.o.  1350.  The  working  of  iron  and  copper  mines  is  more  difficult  than 
those  of  gold  or  silver ;  hence  the  use  of  the  former  metals  indicates  a  more  advanced 
state  of  civilization.  (3)  Stones  of  darkness  and  of  the  shadow  of  death.  These  may 
be  the  copper  and  iron  ores  which  are  fetched  up  from  the  lowest  depths  of  the  earth ; 
the  miner  in  pursuit  of  them  penetrating  into  the  remotest  regions,  making  an  end  of 
darkness,  lighting  up  the  lightless  interior  of  the  earth,^and  carrying  his  search  into 
every  extremity,  i.e.  into  every  nook  and  corner  (ver.  3).  Or  they  may  include  all 
kinds  of  precious  stones,  such  as  the  sapphire  (ver.  6),  lying  buried  in  the  dark  recesses 
of  the  earth,  which,  in  order  to  appease  man's  insatiable  thirst  of  acquisition,  are  turned 
up  as  it  were  bj  fire,  although  out  of  it,  i.e.  from  the  surface  of  the  earth,  there  cometh 
forth  bread  (ver.  5).  'i.  The  path  the  miner  follows.  A  solitary  path.  (1)  Eemote  from 
human  ken  (ver.  4).  Out  amid  the  solitudes  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  the  miner  sinks 
his  shaft  down  beneath  the  surface  of  tlie  ground,  leaving  behind  him  the  homes  and 
habitations  of  men.  There,  forgotten  by  travellers  overLiad,  he  swings  himself  down 
the  pit-shaft  by  a  rope,  descending  to  his  lonely  toil ;  or,  perhaps,  silting  suspended 
at  his  work,  he  swings  to  and  fro,  far  removed  from  human-kind.  (2)  Withdrawn 
from  creature-observation  (vers.  7,  8).  Sweeping  far  and  wide  in  search  of  prey,  the 
eagle's  or  the  vulture's  eye  cannot  gaze  on  the  hidden  path  by  which  the  miner  presses 
towards  his  spoils ;  nay,  in  quest  of  earth's  treasures  he  travels  by  a  road  inaccessible 
to,  and  even  imperceptible  by,  the  lion  and  other  proud  beasts  of  prey.  That  man 
can  penetrate  to  secret  retreats  in  pursuit  of  wealth,  where  neither  quick-sighted  bird 
nor  keen-scented  beast  can  follow,  is  a  striking  testimony  to  man's  superiority  over 
the  brute  creation, "  3.  The  works  the  miner  eaecutesr  Some  of  these  hare  been  men- 


OH.  xxvm.  1— 28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOR  461 


tioned  already,  but  for  the  Rake  of  continuity  may  be  here  repeated.  (1)  Sinking  a 
Bhaft  (ver.  4),  down  which  he  descends  by  a  rope.  (2)  Exploring  the  interior  of  tlie 
earth's  crust  (ver.  6),  turning  it  up  as  it  were  by  fire.  (3)  Blasting  and  clearing  away 
the  rock  that  contains  no  ore  (ver.  9),  laying  his  hand  upon  the  quartz  and  turning 
up  the  mountains  by  the  roots.  That  blasting  was  practised  in  ancient  times  is  stated 
by  Pliny  (vide  Exposition ;  and  cf.  Delitzsch).  (4)  Cutting  channels,  or  galleries,  in 
the  rock  to  diain  off  the  water  (ver.  10),  or,  according  to  another  view,  to  bring  in 
water  to  wash  the  gold  ore.  (5)  Guarding  against  the  flooding  of  the  mine  (ver.  11), 
by  binding  up  the  watercourses  that  they  weep  not  (a  technical  term  still  used  among 
colliers),  i.e.  damming  up  the  water  that  percolates  through  the  roof  and  sides  of  the 
pit,  which  would  otherwise  interfere  with  the  operations  of  the  miner,  but  which,  being 
restrained,  enables  him  to  bring  to  light  whatever  precious  things  the  bowels  of  the 
earth  conceal.  And  now,  having  finished  this  vivid  and  instructive  sketch  of  the  enter- 
prise, skill,  and  power  with  which  the  miner  explores  the  deep  places  of  the  earth  in 
search  of  wealth,  the  poet  turns  to  ask  in  triumph — ^Where  are  man's  corresponding 
successes  in  the  pursuit  of  wisdom  ?  Man  can  dig  and  cut  and  blast  his  way  tijrough 
rocks  and  mouulains  till  he  reaches  the  place  of  sapphires  ;  but  the  haunt  of  wisdom, 
i.e.  of  the  true  principles  of  the  Divine  administration,  and  the  place  of  understanding, 
i.e.  the  faculty  of  applying  these  to  particular  cases,  are  and  must  remain  for  ever 
beyond  his  ken. 

II.  Teue  wisdom  mcoMPARABLB  IN  ITS  VALUE.  Picturing  a  pearl-merchant  anxious 
to  purchase  this  heavenly  treasure  (of.  Matt.  xiii.  45,  46),  Job  remarks :  1.  That  it 
cannot  he  discovered  in  order  to  he  valued.  Should  one  roam  through  the  land  of  the 
living,  i.e.  traverse  the  face  of  earth  in  every  direction  in  pursuit  of  it,  it  would  still 
elude  his  observation.  Should  he  "  take  the  wings  of  the  morning,  and  flee  to  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  sea "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  9),  inquiring  after  it,  the  sea  with  every  ^ 
rippling  billow  would  reply,  "It  is  not  with  me."  Nay,  should  he  dive  into  the^ 
subterranean  abyss  of  waters  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8),  still  prosecuting  his  research  after  wisdom, 
up  from  those  dark  depths  would  sound  the  answer,  "  Not  in  me."  2.  That,  even  if 
it  could  he  discovered,  man  cannot  estimate  its  worth.  "  A  mortal  knoweth  not  its 
price"  (ver.  13).  So  transcendent  in  its  excellence  is  this  heavenly  wisdom,  so  far 
surpassing  man's  ordinary  conceptions,  that  the  task  of  appreciating  its  essential  value 
is  beyond  the  capacities  of  his  finite  understanding.  "  Man  is  the  measure  of  the 
universe,"  said  Pythagoras.  "  Be  it  so,"  is  Job's  thought;  "here  is  something  outside 
of  the  universe  of  which  the  vastest  human  intelligence  is  not  the  measure" — the 
Divine  wisdom,  in  accordance  with  which  it  has  been  framed,  and  by  which  it  is 
continually  governed,  including  the  Divine  intelligence  that  devised  the  ideal  plan  of 
the  woild,  the  ideal  plan  or  pattern  itself,  and  the  combined  wisdom  and  power  by 
which  that  plan  is  carried  forward  into  minute  and  complete  reaUzation.  3.  That,  eoen 
if  its  price  could  he  told,  its  equivalent  could  not  he  found  by  man.  "  The  poet  lays 
everything  under  contrihution  to  illustrate  the  thought  that  the  worth  of  wisdom 
exceeds  the  worth  of  the  most  valuable  earthly  thing  "  (Delitzsch).  Nothing  that  the 
miner  can  bring  up  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  nor  aught  that  the  merchant  can 
import  from  foreign  climes;  nay,  not  all  of  these  together  can  be  set  in  comparison 
with  heaven's  jewel  of  eternal  wisdom  (Prov.  iii.  14,  15)-  Gold  and  silver  of  the 
rarest,  purest,  brightest  quality ;  costly  pearls  of  most  delicate  hue  and  of  fabulous 
worth;  the  entire  wealth  of  a  world,  cannot  purchase  it  (Prov.  viii.  10,  11).  What 
Job  asserts  of  the  wisdom  which  enables  one  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  principles 
of  Divine  government  on  earth  is  more  true  of  that  wisdom  which  raaketh  wise  unto 
salvation.  It  also  is  in  itself  undiscoverable  by  man  (1  Cor.  i.  21).  Its  true  worth 
cannot  properly  be  appreciated  by  man  (Rom.  xi.  33).  Its  mercantile  equivalent  cannot 
be  ofiered  or  even  found  by  man  (Matt.  xvi.  26).  The  price  of  him  who  is  the  Wisdom 
of  God  (1  Cor.  i.  24)  is  above  rubies. 

III.  Teue  wisdom  possessed  by  God  alonb.  Since  wisdom  can  neither  be  dis- 
covered by  man's  intelligenoe  nor  purchased  by  man's  gold,  the  question  naturally 
recurs,  "  Whence  then  cometh  wisdom  ?  and  where  is  the  place  of  understnnding  ?  "  in 
response  to  which  Job  affirms :  1.  That  true  wisdom  is  the  secret  of  Ood  alone.  God's 
exclusive  knowledge  of  wisdom  is  impressively  represented  by  a  renewed  declaration 
of  the  utter  ignorance  of  all  created  beings  concerning  this  trautcendeut  themo.    (1) 


462  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xXTm.  1— 2a 


Man  is  absolutely  powerless  to  speak  a  profitable  word  upon  the  subject,  "  seeing  it  i» 
hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living  "  (ver.  21),  So  the  Divine  plan  of  redemption  is  ona 
which  it  never  would  have  entered  into  the  mind  of  man  to  conceive  (1  Cor.  ii.  8,  9). 
And  hence  human  schemes  of  salvation  have  ever  proved  insufficient  and  worthless. 
(2)  The  creatures  generally  are  unable  to  afford  information  on  this  lofty  question. 
Even  the  far-seeing  birds,  to  which  ancient  diviners  were  wont  to  turn  in  their 
perplexities,  have  no  oracle  to  utter,  seeing  it  is  "  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the 
air"  (ver.  21).  (3)  The  inhabitants  of  the  underworld  are  equally  at  a  loss  on  this  - 
high  matter.  "  Destruction  and  death  say,  We  have  heard  the  fame  thereof  with  our 
ears  "  (ver.  22).  That  is  to  say,  the  dwellers  in  the  realms  of  the  dead  are  aware  of 
its  existence,  but  can  communicate  no  knowledge  of  its  nature  and  worth.  And, 
having  thus  shut  off  all  created  beings  from  participation  in  this  wisdom,  the  poet 
ends  by  solemnly  declaring:  2.  That  true  vnsdom  is  the  property  of  Ood  alone.  "  God 
understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and  he  knoweth  the  place  thereof"  (ver.  23).  Besides 
stating  that  God  knows  whence  true  wisdom  is  to  be  obtained,  Job  designs  to  convey 
the  thought  that  God  alone  is  in  possession  of  this  wisdom.  Looking  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth  and  searching  under  the  whole  heaven,  he  not  only  comprehends  with  his 
omniscient  glance  "  where  wisdom  dwelleth ; "  but,  in  virtue  of  that  knowledge,  he 
is  himself  the  infinituly  wise  and  understanding  One  (ch.  xii.  13).  3.  That  true  wisdom 
has  leen  exemplified  hy  Ood  alone.  The  creation  of  the  world  was  a  sublime  manifes- 
tation of  this  wisdom  (Prov.  viii.  27 — 31).  In  particular  the  establishment  of  those 
laws  which  regulate  the  force  of  the  wind,  the  distribution  of  land  and  water,  the 
collecting  and  emptying  of  the  rain-clouds,  and  the  origin  and  course  of  the  lightning, 
was  a  signal  display  of  celestial  intelligence  (vers.  25,  26).  Nay,  when  the  almighty 
Artificer  fashioned  the  universe,  then  did  he  search  out  this  wisdom,  assign  to  it  a 
place  and  function  in  his  grand  creative  work,  and  commit  to  it  the  production, 
preservation,  and  providential  government  of  all  finite  things  (ver.  27).  With  this 
unbeginning  Wisdom  St.  John  (i.  1 — 4)  identifies  the  Word  of  God,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

IV.  Tbue  wisdom  divinely  bbvbalbd  to  man.  Though  undiscoverable  by  human 
genius,  and  unpurchaseable  by  human  gold,  true  wisdom  has  not  been  withheld  from 
man.  He  has  received  it  by  revelation.  1.  27ie  Divinity  of  this  revelation.  It  has 
not  been  imparted  by  nature.  The  material  fabric  of  creation  is  a  product  and  a  display 
of  celestial  wisdom ;  but  it  is  not  sufficient  for  man  as  a  law  by  conforming  to  which  he 
too  may  attain  unto  wisdom.  Nor  has  man  himself  discovered  it,  either  by  physical 
or  scientific  research,  or  by  philosophical  or  religious  speculation,  or  by  heathen  and 
superstitious  divination.  The  law  which  should  constitute  man  a  participator  in 
eternal  wisdom  was  and  is  something  distinct  from  the  laws  which  regulate  matter. 
It  was  a  something  communicated  to  man  over  and  above  all  that  God  said  to  him 
indirectly  through  the  medium  of  nature.  2.  I%e  antiquity  of  this  revelation.  At 
various  subsequent  periods,  as  e.g.  at  Sinai,  and  again  at  the  Advent,  repeated  and 
enlarged,  it  was  yet  first  delivered  in  the  day  of  man's  creation,  when  God,  having 
made  man  an  intelligent  and  responsible  creature,  placed  him  under  the  law  of  right, 
engraven  on  the  fleshy  tablets  of  his  heart.  3.  TTie  import  of  this  revelation.  That 
heavenly  wisdom  has  for  man  an  inward  essential  principle,  and  an  outward  permanent 
expression.  (1)  The  inward  essential  principle :  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (^Adonai).'' 
This  fear  is  not  a  slavish  dread,  but  a  filial  and  reverential  awe,  based  upon  a  just  con- 
ception of  God's  greatness  (ch.  xxv.  2),  and  of  man's  relation  to  him  as  moral  Governor 
(Ps.  xxxiii.  8).  Such  fear  is  the  root  and  mainspring  of  all  piety  in  souls  (Dent.  v.  29  ; 
X.  12 ;  2  Kings  xvii.  36 ;  Ps.  icvi.  4,  9 ;  cxlvii.  11 ;  Eccles.  xii.  13 ;  Matt.  x.  28 ; 
1  Pet.  i;  17).  It  is  also  the  true  source  and  commencement  of  all  genuine  wisdom  (Ps. 
cxi.  5 ;  Prov.  i.  7 ;  ix.  10).  Hence  "  wisdom  "  and  "  piety  "  "  or  religion  "  are  synonymous 
terms.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that  for  a  human  soul  to  fear  God,  in  the  comprehensive 
and  exalted  sense  above  referred  to,  is  supremely  reasonable  in  itself,  and  incontestably 
wise  as  a  principle  for  the  regulation  of  life.  The  term  briefly  defines  the  attitude 
intelligent  beings  should  maintain  towards  God,  the  aU-glorious  moral  Governor  ol 
the  universe.  Originally  implanted  in  man  at  creation,  and  afterwards  obliterated  by 
the  Fall,  it  Is  now  being  reimplanted  or  reawakened  in  man  by  the  gospel.  (2)  The 
outward  permanent  expression  :  "  to  depart  from  evil."    To  fear  God  and  yet  continut 


on.  xxvm.  1—28.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB  463 

in  sin  is  a  tnoial  contradiction.  The  soul  that  reveres  God's  majesty  and  trembles  at 
God's  power,  much  more  that  admires  God's  character  and  loves  God's  Person,  will  of 
necessity  find  its  highest  happiness  in  respecting  God's  Word  and  doing  God's  will. 
Hence  a  prompt,  earnest,  decisive,  complete,  and  final  separation  firom  evil  (i.e.  from 
errors  both  in  doctrine  and  practice)  of  eveiy  kind  is  largely  insisted  on  as  the  only 
satisfactory  evidence  of  genuine  religion  (ch.  xi.  14;  xxii.  23;  Ps.  iv.  4;  Isa.  i.  16; 
Prov.  iii.  7 ;  viii.  13 ;  xvi.  6),  while  the  truly  pious,  whose  hearts  are  really  possessed 
by  holy  fear,  are  ever  characterized  by  a  more  or  less  resolute  determination  to  keep 
the  Divine  Law  (Ps.  cxii.  1 ;  cxix.  63  ;  Prov.  xiv.  2,  16 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  Bph.  v.  21 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  17).  Of.  the  language  of  an  ancient  religious  hymn  to  Amen :  "  I  cry.  The 
beginning  of  wisdom  is  the  way  of  Amen  "  (vide  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  vi.  p.  99). 
Learn :  1.  To  admire  God's  wisdom  and  goodness  in  the  construction  and  arrange- 
ment of  this  material  globe.  Besides  being  fashioned  by  Divine  wisdom,  the  earth  is 
also  full  of  the  Divine  riches.  2.  To  see  in  the  monuments  of  man's  engineering  skill, 
mechanical  industry,  commercial  enterprise,  and  scientific  research  at  once  a  striking 
testimony  to  man's  dominion  over  the  creatures,  and  an  admirable  confirmation  of  the 
truth  of  Scripture.  3.  To  rate  material  wealth  at  its  true  value,  observing  both 
its  weakness  and  its  power.  While  contributing  largely  to  man's  physical  comfort 
and  social  influence,  it  cannot  impart  either  wisdom  or  happiness,  and  still  less  can 
it  serve  as  a  substitute  for  religion  and  salvation.  4.  To  reason  that  the  same  Divine 
wisdom  which  placed  the  material  creation  under  law  would  not  forget  to  institute 
a  rule  of  life  for  man.  Hence  morality  and  religion  are  not  accidental  and  relative, 
but  absolute  and  eternal,  being  inseparably  bound  up  with  man's  constitution  as  an 
intelligent  and  responsible  creature.  6.  To  recognize  the  inborn  foolishness  of  those 
who  neither  fear  God  nor  depart  from  evil.  "  The  law  of  the  wise  is  a  fountain  of 
life,  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  death."  6.  To  gratefully  acknowledge  the  Divine 
loving-kindness  in  making  known  to  man  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  in  Christ  and 
his  salvation.  The  secret  of  the  Divine  administration  which  Job  could  not  fathom 
has  been  clearly  discovered  in  the  gospel.  7.  To  perceive  that  ever  since  the  Fall  the 
world  has  been  governed  on  substantially  the  same  principles.  Christ  conducts 
mundane  affairs  to-day  as  he  did  in  Job's  time  by  the  law  of  grace  and  in  the  interests 
of  holiness. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers.  1 — 28. — Praises  of  Divine  wisdom.  Amidst  the  darkness  of  suffering,  and 
tt3  isep  sense  of  the  mysteries  of  life,  inexplicable  by  human  wisdom.  Job  rises  to 
the  contemplation  of  that  Divine  wisdom  which  has  founded  all  things,  which  knows 
all  things,  and  in  the  reverent  acknowledgment  of  which  man  may  find  for  himself 
the  true  path  both  of  wisdom  and  of  power.  Already  the  spirit  of  Job,  purified  by 
long  suffering  and  experience,  is  rising  into  that  presence  where  there  is  light  and  no 
darkness  at  all ;  and  from  this  height  of  calm  contemplation  is  fitted  to  become  the 
teacher  of  his  teachers,  the  "  instructor  of  many." 

L  Tbue  wisdom  to  be  Foxrao  NowHBtiB  ON  EARTH.  (Vers.  1 — 11.)  To  illustrate 
this,  we  are  pointed,  in  a  fine  description,  to  the  art  of  mining,  by  which  man  lays 
open  the  costly  treasures  of  the  earth  (Deut.  viii.  9),  but  cannot  gain  possession  of 
this  highest  and  best  treasure  of  all.  Gold,  silver,  iron,  and  copper  are  dug  out  of  the 
bowels  of  the  earth,  and  melted  from  their  ores ;  the  miner's  lamp  dispels  the  darkness, 
as  in  every  direction  he  searches  for  the  "  ore  of  darkness  and  deadly  night."  It  is  a 
picture  of  the  eager,  industrious,  untiring  toil  with  which  men  in  all  ages  in  the  mines 
of  Egypt,  of  Palestine,  of  the  old  and  the  new  worlds,  have  sought  to  gather  and  to  lay 
up  treasures  on  earth  for  themselves.  There  is  often  even  a  frenzy,  a  reckless  disregard 
of  health  and  of  life,  in  this  passionate  pursuit.  With  what  eagerness  should  we  rather 
pursue  the  quest  of  the  heavenly  treasures,  the  inward  blessings  which  make  men  truly 
rich  and  happy  (Matt.  xvi.  26) !  The  description  proceeds.  The  shaft  (ver.  4)  is  broken 
away  from  those  who  dwell  above ;  the  miners  plunge  deeply  into  the  earth,  further 
and  further  from  the  habitations  of  men,  so  that  they  are  forgotten  by  the  step  of  every 
one  who  walks  above.  They  are  depicted  as  hanging  far  from  mortals  by  ropes, 
on  the  perilous  descent  of  the  shaft  in  their  way  tc  obtain  the  ore  (Pliny, '  Hist.  Nat..' 


464  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxvm,  1—28. 

sxxiii.  4.  21).  Above,  upon  the  bright  earth,  the  bread-corn  is  growing,  while  below 
men  are  stirring,  and  rummaging  in  its  bowels,  using  sometimea  the  distnrbing  and 
destructive  force  of  fire  (ver.  5).  Precious  stones  as  well  as  metals,  sapphires  as 
well  as  golden  ore,  fall  a  prize  to  the  diligent  miner  (ver.  6).  Then,  to  heighten  the 
description,  the  inaccessibility  of  these  subterranean  ways  is  depicted.  The  all-roaming 
birds  and  beasts  of  prey  have  not  discovered  them  (ver.  8).  But  undaunted  man  lays 
his  hand  on  the  flint,  uproots  the  mountains,  and  bursts  open  paths  through  the 
rocks,  and  the  fire  of  eager  desire  glitters  in  his  eye  as  it  falls  on  each  precious 
thing.  He  toils  to  keep  the  water  out  of  his  shafts,  by  which  they  are  so  rendily 
overflowed  and  spoiled ;  and  thus  he  brings  the  hidden  treasures  to  light  (ver.  11). 
Such  are  the  i^pl  ndid  capabilities  of  man — the  courage,  the  eneigy,  the  defiance  of 
danger — called  vat  by  his  desires.  His  reward  comes;  but  does  it  correspond  to  his 
exertions?  Having  passed  the  best  of  his  days  in  these  severe  toils  and  anxieties  and 
dangers,  he  thinks  to  sit  down  and  solace  his  age  with  the  acquisitions  of  his  younger 
and  more  daring  years;  but  does  the  enjoyment  of  the  poor  remainder  of  life  balance 
these  struggles  which  perhaps  brought  age  upon  him  before  his  time,  and  cut  him  ofl' 
from  pleasure  in  the  proper  days  of  pleasure,  and  from  the  youthful  satisfactions  that 
were  then  denied ?  "I  am  this  day  fourscore  years  old,  and  can  I  yet  taste  what 
I  eat  »nd  what  I  drink?  "  (2  Sam.  xix.  35).  "  Whoever  lives  to  Barzillai's  years  shall 
not  be  able,  with  all  Barzillai's  wealth  and  greatness,  to  procure  himself  a  quicker  and 
better  relish  of  what  shall  be  set  before  him  than  Barzill  li  bad  "  (South). 

II.  Wisdom  no  outwabd  good,  and  by  no  outward  means  to  be  FonND.  (Vers. 
12 — 22.)  Practical  wisdom,  the  principle  of  right  conduct,  and  theoretical  wisdom,  or 
insight, — where  in  all  the  wide  world  shall  they  be  found  (ver.  12)  ?  None  knows  the 
purchase-price,  nor  the  market  for  wisdcm  in  all  the  wide  land  of  the  living.  "  Put 
money  in  thy  purte  "  is  the  one  maxim  which  applies  in  everything  but  this.  "  Money 
acswereth  all  things ; "  but  there  are  exception^,  and  this  is  one.  Gold  and  silver  have 
no  more  power  than  stones  and  clods  in  this  spiritual  commerce.  Cross  the  seas;  visit 
the  great  cities ;  enter  the  churches ;  study  at  the  schools ;  see  and  hi  ar  all ;  yet  still 
the  aching  heart  will  cry,  "  Where  is  wisdfjm  to  be  found  ?  and  what  is  its  pr  ce ?  "  All 
the  gold  and  jewels  of  the  Indies  cannot  buy  it.  Its  worth  is  incomparable.  Weight 
nor  measure  can  be  applied  to  it;  it  has  no  place  in  the  business  and  exchange  of  the 
world  (vers.  13^ — 19).  Again,  then,  and  again  the  question  recurs,  "  Whence  comes 
wisdom?  where  is  the  place  of  understanding?"  Science  cannot  answer,  with  all  her 
keenness  of  vision  and  wealth  of  knowledie ;  no  brightest  eagle-eye  has  searched  out  its 
locale.  Neither  the  living  nor  the  kingdom  of  the  dead  can  bring  us  news  of  its  site 
(vers.  20 — 22).  It  must,  then,  be  immaterial.  And  being  leal,  it  must  be  sought  for 
and  found  by  that  which  is  real  and  spiritual  in  ourselves.  The  things  which  eye  hath 
not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  imagination  conceived,  God  reveals  to  the  spirit.  We  must 
be  conscious  of  a  spiritual  life  and  of  spiritual  needs ;  of  a  destiny  for  hea^  only  as  well 
as  earthly  things ;  we  must  yield  to  the  spiritual  impulse,  and  labour  for  the  satisfaction 
of  the  spiritual  liunger  as  well  as  for  the  bread  that  perisheth,  if  this  great  question 
is  ever  for  us  to  be  answered. 

III.  Wisdom  is  in  the  feab  of  God.  (Vers.  23 — 28.)  1.  The  question  answered. 
God  knows  the  way  to  wisdom,  for  he  knows  its  seat  and  place.  (Ver,  23.)  He  is 
himself  the  All-wise  One.  His  wisdom  is  s(eu  in  the  marvellous  construction  and 
arrangement  of  the  natural  world.  He  regulates  the  winds  and  the  waters  (Isa.  xl.  12), 
the  rain,  the  lightning,  and  the  thunder  (vers.  24—26).  And  his  absolute  wisdom  is 
the  rule  for  the  inward  life  of  man,  the  still  more  wonderful  world  of  the  spiritual  life. 
In  the  creation  as  a  whole  he  announces  typically  his  eternal  will  to  all  rational  creatures 
(ver.  27).  2.  The  Divine  declaration.  (Ver.  28,  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  wisdom, 
and  to  depai  t  from  evil  is  understanding.")  God  would  not  keep  his  wisdom  altogether 
secret.  He  reveals,  as  well  as  is,  wisdom.  This  is  the  original  eternal  command,  the 
law  that  "  is  not  of  yesterday,"  and  which  has  never  been  unknown  in  any  generation 
of  mankind. 

Lessons.  1.  The  eternal  wealth  of  God's  nature.  He  needed  no  model  or  copy  from 
which  to  frame  his  world.  "  He  spake,  and  it  w  as  done ;  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast " 
(ver.  27).  2.  There  is  a  wisdom  which  is  an  example  and  end,  anrl  a  wisdom  which  is 
a  shadow  and  means.    The  former  is  in  God,  the  latter  from  God  in  us.    So  are  we 


en.  xxvni.  1—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  465 

"partakers  of  the  Divine  nature"  in  reflection  from  him,  union  with  him,  and  enjoy- 
ment of  him  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  3.  Wisdom  is  the  nature  of  Grod  (Prov.  viii.  25,  sqq.), 
uncreated,  essential ;  with  us  it  is  an  acquisition,  a  derivation.  4.  True  wisdom  for  us 
depends  on  the  living,  moral  communion  of  the  heart  with  God.  Without  this  it  'm 
vain  to  seek  to  know  him.  An  Eastern  proveih  says,  "He  who  would  learn  the 
secrets  of  the  mighty,  must  diligently  keep  watch  at  his  doors."  Blessed  they  who 
thus  wait  continually  at  God's  doois!  5.  True  wisdom  is  not  to  be  obtained  without 
its  price.  It  must  be  wrought  for  by  the  endeavour  of  a  holy  and  pious  life.  The 
departing  from  evil,  the  mortification  of  sin,  the  weeding  out  of  vices,  lays  out  work 
enough  lor  us  in  this  life,  and  makes  the  toils  of  man  for  perishable  good  seem  small  in 
comparison.  "  But  the  end  is  noble,  and  the  reward  is  great."  6.  The  energy  of  man 
in  the  pursuit  of  earthly  good  should  be  a  constant  reminder  to  us  of  the  need  for  like 
zeal  in  the  pursuit  of  the  eternal  good  (Matt.  vi.  19,  sqq.;  1  Tim.  vi. ;  Jas.  v.). — J. 

Vers.  1 — 12. —  The  path  of  true  wisdom.  With  singular  fulness  Job  describes  the 
early  methods,  of  mining,  and  the  knowleds^e  man  had  already  gained  of  the  hidden 
treasures  of  the  earth,  and  the  power  he  could  wifld  over  them.  In  this  recognition  of 
the  power  of  man,  and  of  his  deup  insight  into  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  earth, 
and  its  many  .treasures  and  processes,  he  prepares  the  way  for  a  setting  forth  of  the 
limits  beyond  which  man  cannot  go.  With  all  his  searching  he  finds  not  out  the  path 
of  "  wisdom,"  and  with  all  his  getting  he  lails  to  get  "  understanding."  And  this  further 
prepares  for  a  setting  forth  of  the  true  sources  of  wisdom  and  the  place  of  understanding. 
The  path  of  true  wisdom  does  not  lie  in  those  dark  recesses  of  the  earth  where  the 
vein  of  the  silver  lies  hidden.  It  is  a  path  which  no  fowl  l<tioweth,  and  which  the 
vulture's  keen  eye  hath  not  seen,  and  over  which  the  beasts  of  prey  have  not  trodden; 
nor  hath  the  fierce  lion  passed  by  it.  God  alone  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and 
he  alone  knoweth  its  path.  The  plain  inference,  then,  is — Man  must  ask  wisdom  of 
God. 

I.  The  ebboe  of  sxjpposing  that  a.  knowledge  of  the  peocesses  of  natube 
GIVES  A  TEUE  AND  PERFECT  WISDOM.  In  all  these  man  may  be  deeply  learned,  and  yet 
there  be  a  path  bidden  from  him.  The  danger  of  this  day  is  a  supposing  that  science 
truly  so  called  is  a  sufficient  knowL  dge  for  man.  An  accurate  acquaintance  with  "  the 
laws  of  nature  "  still  leaves  man  ignorant  of  many  necessary  truths.  For  the  right  use 
of  material  substances,  a  knowledge  of  those  substances  and  the  laws  of  their  combi- 
nation is  necessary ;  and  for  the  safety  of  the  animal  life,  a  knowledge  of  its  structure 
and  processes — the  laws  of  animal  life— is  equally  needful.  But  the  total  idea  of  the 
human  life  is  not  reached  by  these.  He  who  is  capable  of  moral  a  id  spiritual  acts  has 
a  moral  and  spiritual  nature ;  and  he  has  need  of  the  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the 
moral  government  under  which  he  is  placed,  and  of  the  spiritual  nature  with  which  he 
is  endowed. 

II.  The  lowi.y  sbabchinq  fob  this  hidden  wisdom  will  lead  men  to  a  con- 
viction OF  theie  inamuty  to  aebivb  at  a  pbrfbot  acqdaintancb  with  it. 
It  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living.  Very  humbling  is  this  to  the  proud  heart  of  him 
who  has  obviously  a  supreme  position  amidst  the  works  of  God — who  is  above  all 
creatures,  subduing  them  to  his  authority ;  and  above  "  nature,"  compelling  it  to  be 
subservient  to  his  wish.  To  knuw  that  he  knows  not,  and  to  know  that  by  searching 
he  cannot  find  out  the  knowledge  he  desires,  brings  down  his  high  looks.  Here  he 
must  sit  in  the  seat  of  the  scholar ;  here,  confessing  his  ignorance,  ask. 

III.  The  tbub  seabcheb,  baffled  in  his  many  epfoets,  tubus  at  last  to  God, 
AND  FINDS  THE  SO0BCE  OF  WISDOM  IN  HIM ;  and  leams  thut  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the 
possession  of  the  true  wisdom,  and  the  careful  keeping  of  the  path  of  righteousness  the 
true  understanding.  That  is  to  say,  the  highest  wisdom  is  a  moral  state,  and  the  truest 
understanding  a  religious  obedience. 

From  how  many  is  this  "  hidden,"  and  how  unwilling  are  the  ignorant  to  ask,  and 
the  proud  to  acknowledge  their  need!  While  he  who  consciously  lacks  this  highest 
wisdom,  and  asks  of  God,  proves  that  he  giveth  to  all  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not  any 
for  asking.— R.  G. 

Yers    20 27. — Wisdom  hidden  from  man.     Skilful  is  the  hand  of  man.      His 

)0Q.  2  a 


466  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxviir.  1—28 


researches  are  profound.  He  has  digged  deep  into  the  earth.  He  tracks  the  vein  of 
the  silver  and  the  place  for  the  gold.  He  taketh  iron  ont  of  the  earth,  and  hrass  he 
melteth  from  the  stone.  He  searcheth  amidst  the  stones  of  darkness  and  the  very 
shadow  of  death.  His  eye  seeth  what  escapes  the  eye  of  the  vulture,  and  he  knoweth 
the  path  which  no  fowl  knoweth.  His  power  is  over  the  hills,  for  he  putteth  his  hand 
upon  the  rook,  and  overturneth  the  mountains  by  the  roots.  Rocks  and  rivers  and 
flood  are  under  his  power,  and  the  hidden  things  he  bringeth  to  light.  But  with  all 
his  powers  of  research  he  is  ba£9ed  in  the  pursuit  of  wisdom,  and  he  knows  neither  the 
place  nor  the  price  of  understanding.  The  perfect  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  things, 
and  the  hi^rh  wisdom  to  guide  in  the  proper  use  of  things,  is  not  within  the  human 
grasp.  Such  knowledge  is  too  high  for  mm.  It  belongs  unto  God.  It  cannot  be 
gotten  for  gold,  nor  purchased  with  the  price  of  silver.    This  reflection  may— 

I.  Profitably  tdbn  away  odb  hopes  of  oainikq  wisdom  fbom  man.  We  cannot 
gain  it  there ;  for  "  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living." 

II.  It  is  a  becominq  ocoasiok  fob  humilitt  on  the  pabt  of  man.  Vain  man,  who 
can  do  so  much,  is  baflBed  here.  ■• 

III.  It  is  a  motive  foe  thankfully  eecbivino  the  teachinos  of  the  wise. 
There  are  men  to  whom  God  has  discovered  the  hidden  springs  of  wisdom.  Happy 
they,  and  happy  all  who  learn  of  them. 

IV.  But  its  supbbme  lesson  is  to  dbivb  us  in  oub  seaboh  for  wisdom  to  God, 
to  whom  alone  it  appertains.  "  God  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and  he  knoweth 
the  place  thereof"— even  the  wisdom  that  it  "hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living,  and  kept 
close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air." — R  G. 

Ver.  28. — The  true  wisdom.  Wisdom — the  "  principal  thing  " — ^wisdom  that  "  cannot 
be  gotten  for  gold,"  or  valued  with  "  the  precious  onyx,  or  the  sapphire,"  which  "  the 
topaz  of  Ethiopia  shall  not  equal" — w.isdom  "belongeth  unto  God,"  and  must  lie 
taught  us  by  him,  for  we  are  ignorant.  Wisdom  consists  in  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  and 
in  departing  from  evil.  This  wisdom  man  fiudeth  not  in  the  rocks  nor  in  the  depth 
of  the  sea.  This  is  to  man  his  truest,  his  highest,  wisdom.  This  is  the  wisdom  for 
the  price  of  which  "  silver  cannot  be  weighed."  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  very 
beginning  and  end  of  wisdom  to  man — 

I.  Because  it  is  founded  in  a  just  eboognition  of  the  Divine  supebmact, 
authority,  and  power.  The  most  foolish  thing  a  man  can  do  is  to  deny,  either  by 
word  or  by  conduct,  the  authority  of  God.  He  who  truly  acknowledges  the  Divine 
supremacy  will  humble  himself,  and  take  his  rightful  place,  free  from  presumption  and 
self-asserting  independence,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  disobedience. 

II.  Because  it  affords  him  the  tbubst  basis  fob  faith  and  hope.  He  who 
fears,  and  therefore  reverences  God,  will  learn  how  to  commit  himself  into  the  Divine 
hands  for  all  needful  blessing.  As  far  from  presumption  as  from  fear,  he  will  be  able 
calmly  to  trust  in  God  and  do  good.  He  can  have  no  real  hope  towards  G«d  who  in 
irreverence  and  self-conceit  cherishes  not  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  in  his  heart. 

III.  Because  without  the  fbab  of  the  Lobd  there  can  be  no  true  lote 
FOR  the  Divine  Name.  That  cannot  be  loved  which  is  not  respected  and  honoured. 
The  true  respect  towards  God  is  holy  fear — the  sacred  reverence  for  the  majesty,  sanc- 
tity, and  authority  of  the  Divine  Name. 

IV.  Because  it  is  the  most  effectual  barrier  against  evil-doing. 

V.  Because  of  the  special  promises  of  blessing  made  to  them  that  fear 
his  Name.  Prom  all  this  springs  the  duty  of  cherishing  due  regard  for  all  things  sacred, 
that  the  heart  may  be  suitably  and  profitably  impressed  by  them.  "  Behold,  the  fear  of 
the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom ;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  understanding." — B.  O. 

Vers.  1 — ^11. — The  miner.  This  passage  is  justly  famous  for  its  graphic  description 
of  ancient  mining.  It  gives  us  a  picture  of  the  miner's  toil  and  peril,  his  industry, 
his  skill,  and  his  adventure.  Let  us  see  what  lessons  may  be  learnt  from  the  miner 
and  his  craft. 

I.  God  has  laid  up  great  riches  fob  wan.  People  talk  foolishly  aboatexhaubdng 
the  mines.  Particular  mines  may  come  to  an  end,  and  certain  lodes  may  be  worked 
out.    But  the  earth  is  not  one  wine  or  one  English  county.    Ifo  one  can  calculate 


OH.  XXVIII.  1—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  467 


what  vast  stores  of  metal  lie  under  the  surface  of  the  ground.  The  great  treasury  has 
-scarcely  been  touched ;  ages  upon  ages  will  not  suffice  to  ransack  its  stores.  When  wa 
learn  about  Australia,  Asia  Minor,  South  America,  etc.,  we  discover  that  there  is  still 
boundless  wealth  under  the  soil.  Thus  God  has  made  ample  provision  for  the  wants 
of  his  children. 

II.  These  riches  ake  hidden  beneath  the  earth.  Men  must  sink  shafts  and 
blast  rocks.  God  gives  us  great  possessions,  but  we  must  put  forth  energy  in  acquiring 
them.  Thus  Israel  had  to  fight  for  Canaan.  Wisdom  is  got  through  toil  and  effort. 
Spiritual  wealth  is  won  at  the  cost  of  spiritual  conflict.  Though  the  chief  conflict 
was  Christ's,  and  though  the  best  treasures  are  Ireely  given,  we  must  seek  if  we  would 
find  (Matt.  viL  7). 

III.  The  miner's  work  is  toilsome.  Few  men  have  so  disagreeable  or  hard  a  task. 
In  dark  subterranean  regiuns,  often  breathing  a  close,  unwholesome  atmosphere,  suffer- 
ing from  tremendous  heat,  labouring  with  axe  and  shovel,  the  miner  has  no  idle  lot. 
He  may  be  forgotten  by  those  who  tread  the  greensward  over  his  head.  But  we  all 
profit  by  his  industry.  It  is  only  right  that  his  brave  and  arduous  work  should  be 
generously  recognized.  In  our  happy  homes  and  beautiful  churches  we  should  do  well 
to  think  of  the  miner,  and  pray  for  him  just  as  we  pray  for  "  those  in  peril  on  the  sea." 

IV.  Ingenditt  and  enterprise  characterize  the  work  of  the  miner.  What 
thought  and  effort  and  daring  are  put  into  mining !  Surely  this  is  nobler  work  than 
the  killing  which  all  the  world  honours  in  the  soldier  ?  We  can  understand  why  God 
has  hidden  the  precious  metals  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  when  we  see  what  manly 
traits  are  evolved  in  the  work  of  obtaining  them.  But  if  so,  should  not  the  same 
high  qualities  be  brought  forth  in  the  search  for  the  hidden  treasure  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  ?  If  gold,  and  silver,  and  iron,  and  copper  are  worth  so  much  trouble,  are  not 
wisdom  and  goodness  and  eternal  life  deserving  of  the  most  strenuous  efforts  ? 

V.  There  is  peril  in  the  miner's  life.  Mining  disasters  are  more  fatal  than 
shipwrecks.  The  miner  needs  to  know  a  refuge  more  secure  than  any  that  art  or 
science  can  contrive.  He,  indeed,  should  have  his  trust  in  God.  But  for  others  his 
peril  is  an  occasion  to  rouse  interest  and  deepen  sympathy.  We  all  profit  by  his 
labours ;  at  least,  then,  let  us  all  do  what  we  can  to  protect  him  from  the  dangers 
which  carelessness  and  selfishness  create. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  minert's  path.  The  vulture's  eye  is  keen,  the  lion's  whelps  are 
daring ;  yet  a  path  which  these  wild  creatures  never  saw  is  known  to  the  miner,  and 
climbed  by  him  in  his  search  for  precious  metals.  He  penetrates  into  fearful  ravines, 
climbs  dizzy  cliffs,  follows  dark  passages  far  into  the  mountain-side,  descends  deep 
shafts  down  to  the  hidden  regions  of  the  earth. 

I.  The  superiority  of  mind  to  instinct.  The  senses  of  animals  are  keener  than 
those  of  men ;  the  sight  of  the  bird  and  the  scent  of  the  wild  beast  greatly  exceed  our 
seeing  and  smell.  Animals  are  stronger  than  men ;  we  cannot  emulate  the  vulture's 
flight  or  the  stroke  of  the  lion's  paw.  Yet,  with  duller  senses  and  weaker  muscles, 
we  can  rule  over  the  animals;  we  can  ^ven  beat  them  on  their  own  ground.  The 
superiority  of  man  is  the  superiority  of  mind.  Therefore,  if  he  would  retain  and  perfect 
this  superiority,  he  must  not  sink  down  to  the  level  of  the  beasts  that  perish.  Sottish 
sensuality  robs  man  of  his  supremacy.  If  it  is  by  the  mind  that  man  conquers,  it  is 
disgraceful  to  live  for  the  sake  of  the  body.  Only  mental  power  gives  so  weak  a 
creature  as  man  any  chance  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  Then  it  is  most  incongruous 
that  bodily  appetite  should  be  permitted  to  enslave  this  power  for  its  own  low  pleasures. 
Moi  eover,  if  the  inner  man  is  the  higher  man,  that  which  is  highest  within  is  our  truest 
and  best  self.     The  highest  powers  scale  the  highest  peaks. 

II.  The  triumph  op  energy.  The  miner  knows  his  secret  path  and  climbs  it, 
because  he  is  determined  to  search  out  the  precious  metals,  no  matter  where  he  may 
have  to  go  in  pursuit  of  them.  Here  is  manly  vigour.  Now,  it  is  just  this  vigour 
joined  to  intelligence  that  gives  man  success  in  the  battle  of  life.  No  one  deserves  to 
be  prosperous  without  it.  It  is  only  ao  artificial  state  of  society  that  allows  the  idle 
to  be  pampered  in  luxury.  The  healthy  rule  is  that  of  St.  Paul,  "If  any  would  not 
work,  neither  should  he  eat "  (2  Thess.  iii.  10).  In  the  miner's  path  we  have  an  evidence 
of  what  effort  can  do.    This  same  effort  is  needed  in  every  branch  of  life.    Industry  is 


468  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xxviii.  1— 28. 

healthy  and  fruitful,  and  the  old-fashioned  duty  can  never  be  lessened  by  any  change 
of  circumstances.  If  men  shrink  from  work  they  proclaim  that  their  better  nature  is 
conquered  in  them.  It  will  be  a  bad  day  for  England  wheu  her  old  spirit  of  enterprise 
is  given  up.  In  the  Christian  life  there  is  a  call  for  the  miner's  daring  and  energy. 
Here,  too,  heroic  enterprises  are  undertaken  by  the  nobler  spirits.  There  are  patlis 
in  spiritual  experience  that  no  one  with  a  merely  animal  nature  can  ever  see;  but 
the  brave  sous  of  God  walk  thereon  and  find  rare  treasures  by  the  way.  Browning 
tells  us— 

"  Life  is — to  wake,  not  sleep ; 
Bise,  and  not  rest ;  but  press 
From  earth's  level,  where  blindly  creep 

Things  perfected,  more  or  less. 
To  heaven's  height,  far  and  steep." 

W.  P.A. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  search  for  wisdom.  I.  Wisdom  is  supeemblt  dbsieablb.  Men 
sink  gliafts  and  traverse  hazardous  paths  in  search  of  the  precious  metals  simply  because 
of  their  value.  The  costly  and  difBcult  processes  of  mining  would  not  be  carried  ou 
imless  an  adequate  reward  were  expected.  Unless  men  appreciate  wisdom  they  will 
not  take  much  trouble  in  attempting  to  acquire  it.  The  first  thing  is  to  see  that  "  the 
price  of  wisdom  is  above  rubies "  (ver.  18).  Knowledge  is  good,  as  the  food  of  the 
intellect.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  most  precious  as  the  food  of  the  soul.  Practical 
knowledge  is  essential  for  guidance  in  life.  Wisdom  is  more  than  the  satisfaction  of 
curiosity ;  it  is  the  light  of  life. 

II.  Wisdom  does  not  lib  on  the  suefacb  op  the  world.  It  is  like  the  treasures 
of  deep  mines,  and  therefore  it  is  not  seen  by  the  superficial.  God  does  not  cast  his 
pearls  before  swine.  There  are  blessings  that  all  men — even  the  most  heedless — have 
a  share  in.  But  the  greatest  blessings  are  not  stumbled  on  unawares.  These  are  for 
all  who  will  seek  them ;  but  they  must  be  sought.  Hidden  treasures  are  sometimes 
dug  up  from  beneath  ancient  ruins — ^vessels  of  gold  and  silver  that  have  lain  for  ages 
buried  under  heaps  of  rubbish.  So  Divine  treasures  have  been  hidden  beneath  piles 
of  earthly  and  comparatively  worthless  things.  Sin  and  worldliness  have  buried  thum. 
They  need  to  be  rediscovered.  Thus  man  has  both  to  recover  lost  spiritual  riches  and  to 
mine  in  virgin  soil  for  new  wisdom. 

III.  Wisdom  is  not  easily  found.  It  is  not  enough  to  sink  a  mine,  for  perhaps  we 
may  not  strike  a  lode ;  we  must  discover  where  the  pn  cious  metal  lies.  The  mining 
engineer  must  bring  his  science  and  experience  to  bear  on  the  great  problem  as  to 
where  the  shaft  is  to  be  made,  and  if  he  makes  a  mistake  all  the  costly  work  of  pre- 
paring the  mine  will  be  thrown  away.  Now,  we  want  some  divining-rod  to  show  us 
where  to  seek  for  the  Divine  wisdom.  Philosophers  have  dug  their  mines  in  various 
regions  of  life  and  thought.  No  doubt  they  have  brought  much  precious  ore  to  the 
surface.  But  the  great  treasure  of  Divine  knowledge  lias  not  been  struck  by  any 
human  inquiry  without  the  guiding  of  a  special  heavenly  revelation.  Seas  may  be 
dredged  and  strange  wbnders  of  the  deep  brought  to  light,  but  tliese  additions  to 
natural  history  do  not  help  us  much  in  coming  to  know  spiritual  truth. 

IV.  Wisdom  cannot  be  bought.  Precious  stones  may  be  purchased  for  money. 
Knowledge  may  be  obtained  in  classes  for  which  fees  are  charged ;  and  yet  the  fees 
cannot  purchase  real  education,  and  unless  the  scholar  uses  his  mind  he  cannot  profit 
by  his  lessons.  No  subscriptions  to  churches  and  missions  and  charities  can  buy 
Divine  wisdom. 

V.  Wisdom  is  a  Divine  gift  fob  be  eking  souls.  It  is  like  the  precious  metals 
in  the  earth  which  God  has  given  to  man  freely.  The  treasures  of  God  are  for  all, 
without  money  and  without  price.  Moreover,  God  shows  us  where  to  find  these 
treasures.  Christ  " is  made  unto  us  wisdom"  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  When  we  receive  Christ, 
we  have  the  Treasure  for  which  philosophers  and  saints  toiled  and  mined.  He  brings 
the  Divine  wisdom  to  the  surface,  to  our  very  doors.  If  we  would  acquire  wisdom,  we 
have  but  to  open  our  hearts  to  welcome  Christ. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  18. — The  high  p-ice  of  wisdom,.    In  the  main,  prices  »re  determined  by  two 


CH.  xxvni.  1— 28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  4»i 


causes — by  the  value  set  on  things  on  account  of  thoii-  utility  aiil  attractiveness,  and 
by  the  difficulty  of  acquiring  them.  Both  these  elements  enter  into  the  high  price  of 
wisdom. 

I.  Wisdom  is  valuable  on  account  of  its  utility  and  attbaotivbnbss.  People 
will  not  give  a  high  price  for  what  is  not  valued  highly.  Appreciation  implies  the 
perception  of  some  equivalence  in  value.  If  wisdom  is  sought  at  a  great  price,  wisdom 
is  highly  prized.  Otherwise  it  would  be  left  alone  as  not  worth  purchasing.  Let  us, 
then,  observe  the  elements  of  value  in  wisdom.  1.  Guidance.  We  need  knowledge 
to  save  us  from  blundering.  Right  principles  are  charts  by  which  to  steer.  Moral 
folly  plunges  men  headlong  down  to  ruin ;  moral  wisdom  is  the  safe  guide  to  life.  We 
must  know  the  heavenly  way,  we  must  see  how  to  climb  the  steep  hill,  we  must  have 
skill  to  navigate  the  vessel  of  life.  2.  Sustenance.  Divine  wisdom  feeds  the  soul  like 
heavenly  manna,  and  refreshes  it  like  water  from  the  rook.  It  is  reviving  and  nourish- 
ing as  wine  and  milk  (Isa.  Iv.  1).  Thn  soul  is  starved  without  the  truth  of  God.  That 
truth  is  its  meat  and  drink.  3.  Satisfaction.  Much  that  men  feed  on  spiritually  is 
like  chaff  and  sawdust;  it  does  not  really  satisfy,  though  it  seems  to  fill.  But  the 
knowledge  of  God  is  restful ;  it  meets  the  deep  needs  and  answers  to  the  true  desires 
of  the  inner  life.  4.  Culture.  The  effect  of  this  heavenly  possession  is  to  elevate  and 
transform  the  soul  itself.  It  is  more  than  a  guide,  a  food,  a  satisfaction ;  it  is  a 
moulding  influence.  By  a  subtle  alchemy  it  brings  the  soul  round  to  its  own  cha- 
racter. He  who  has  wisdom  is  wise.  The  possession  of  Divine  grace  makes  us  sons 
of  Gud. 

II.  Wisdom  is  costly  bboausb  op  the  difficulty  of  acquieino  it.  People  will 
not  give  a  high  price  unnecessarily  even  for  what  they  value  highly.  What  is  both 
plentiful  and  easily  accessible  is  necessarily  cheap,  however  useful  and  attractive  it 
may  be.  When  the  supply  is  fully  equal  to  the  demand,  the  price  is  low.  But  wisdom 
ig  not  only  inherently  valuable;  it  is  also  only  got  at  a  great  cost.  Note  the  reasons 
for  its  dearness.  1.  A  difficult  search.  There  may  be  an  abundance  of  precious  metals 
far  under  the  S'lil,  but  if  mines  have  to  be  constructed  some  expenditure  must  be  incurred 
before  the  treasures  can  be  acquired.  Hence  their  costliness.  Now,  men  have  been 
seeking  wisdom  with  great  toil  and  weariness  through  all  the  ages.  2.  Rarity.  Prices 
mount  high  in  times  of  scarcity.  Famine  may  make  corn  more  precious  than  rubies. 
When  the  world  had  fallen  far  from  God  down  into  the  night  of  sin  and  ignorance, 
true  wisdom  became  scarce.  3.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Christ  has  become  wisdom  to 
us, but  at  what  a  cost?  First  there  was  the  condescension  of  his  incarnation,  when  he 
emptied  himself  and  became  of  no  reputation,  and  took  on  him  the  form  of  a  servant. 
Then  his  arduous  life  was  spent  in  bringing  the  knowledge  and  grace  of  God  to  men. 
His  midnight  watches,  and  his  days  full  of  work  and  conflict,  were  spent  for  this  object. 
Lastly,  his  cross, marks  the  supreme  gift  of  himself  in  death  to  purchase  for  us  the  Divine 
wisdom.  That  wisdom  is  more  costly  than  rubies;  it  is  acquired  by  us  at  the  cost  of 
the  blood  of  our  Lord.— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  23. — Ood's  access  to  wisdom.  Wisdom  is  rare,  precious,  and  costly.  Men  are 
skilful  and  enterprising  in  mining  for  the  precious  metals ;  but  the  search  for  wisdom, 
though  carried  on  with  the  utmost  assiduity,  seems  to  be  more  difiBcult.  Nevertheless, 
what  is  inaccessible  to  man  is  quite  within  the  reach  of  God.  We  may  fail  in 
attempting  to  find  wisdom,  but  God  possesses  it.  He  knows  where  it  lies  hidden  from 
us ;  he  can*tread  the  labyrinth  of  the  mine  that  leads'  to  it. 

I.  This  is  a  ground  of  faith.  If  God  has  true  wisdom,  we  can  be  content  to  leave 
with  him  those  issues  of  life  which  we  cannot  understand  ourselves.  1.  In  nature. 
To  us  many  of  the  processes  of  nature  are  unintelligible.  Not  only  cannot  we  under- 
stand the  "how,"  but  we  are  also  perplexed  about  the  "why."  Apparently  aimless 
and  seemingly  hurtful  processes  fill  nature  with  dark  mysteries.  But  these  mysteries 
are  all  open  to  God.  Of  his  works  we  can  say,  "  In  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them  all." 
The  world  was  not  created  by  a  blundering  Demiurge,  but  by  an  all-wise  God.  2.  In 
prmndence.  Our  own  lives  are  enigmas  to  us.  We  cannot  understand  why  our  plana 
are  broken,  our  hopes  scattered,  our  joys  turned  to  bitterness.  It  all  looks  wild,  chaotic, 
aimless,  sometimes  even  crueL  We  can  but  rest  in  the  thought  that  Qoi  is  higher 
and  wiser  than  w*  an. 


470  BOOK  OF  JOR  [oh.  xxviu.  1—2 


"Deep  in  nnfathomable  mines 
Of  never-failing  skill. 
He  tieasnieB  up  hia  bright  designs. 
And  works  lua  sovereign  will." 

Therefore — 

"  Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense." 

3.  In  redemption.  It  may  not  be  possible  for  us  to  understand  the  atonement. 
Theories  are  all  inadequate.  There  is  a  mystery  at  the  root  of  Christianity.  But 
when  God  devised  his  great  idea  of  salvation  he  had  access  to  all  wisdom.  It  must  be 
wise.    Our  part  is  to  follow  it  as  far  as  we  can  see  it,  and  to  trust  God  for  the  rest. 

IL  This  is  a  key  to  wisdom.  God  knows  where  the  treasure  is  hidden;  he  is 
familiar  with  the  path  that  leads  to  it.  Then  he  must  be  the  Guide  to  wisdom.  If 
we  would  attain  to  it  we  must  seek  it  from  God.  1.  By  prayer.  St.  James  has  said, 
"  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and 
upbraideth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given  him"  (Jas.  i.  5).  It  is  not  only  that  wisdom  is 
a  boon  bestowed  in  answer  to  prayer;  prayer  itself  is  the  road  to  wisdom.  St.  Paul 
could  see  things  in  a  new  light  when  it  could  be  said  of  him,"  Behold,  he  prayeth." 
The  spirit  of  prayer  opens  the  windows  of  heaven  and  reveals  the  wisdom  of  God.  2. 
By  godliness.  We  must  be  like  God  if  we  would  share  in  God's  wisdom.  Sympathy 
with  God  will  give  us  eyes  to  see  as  God  sees.  Nearness  to  him  will  introduce  us  to 
the  path  that  he  treads.  When  we  walk  with  God  we  shall  be  led  to  those  deep  mines 
of  wisdom  to  which  he  penetrates.  Thus  true  wisdom  is  closely  allied  to  true  religion. 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom  "  (ver.  28).— W.  F.  A. 

Yer.  28. — 2%e  revelation  of  wisdom.  Man  has  searched  for  wisdom,  but  in  vain. 
Then  God,  who  has  access  to  it,  has  revealed  it  to  him,  and  has  shown  that  it  consists 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  in  departure  from  evil  The  existence  of  a  Divine  revelation 
is  here  distinctly  affirmed.  Gk>d  speaks  through  nature.  Scripture,  and  conscience,  and 
especially  in  Christ.  Now,  the  Divine  revelation  of  wisdom  is  here  presented  to  us  in 
two  aspects — a  positive  and  a  negative.  The  first  of  these  consists  in  religion;  the 
second  is  of  a  moral  character. 

I.  The  positively  beliqious  aspect  of  revealed  wisdom.  When  God  reveals 
wisdom  to  man  it  first  appears  as  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  Job  says,  like  Solomon, 
that  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge  "  (Prov.  i.  7) ;  it  is  wisdom ; 
the  two  are  identified.  Now,  the  expression,  "  fear  of  the  Lord,"  is  the  Old  Testament 
name  for  religion.  Therefore  wisdom  is  religion.  When  we  have  found  true  religion 
we  have  discovered  true  wisdom.  1.  The  highest  knowledge  is  obtained  through  spiritual 
experience.  Science  comes  through  the  study  of  nature,  and  history  is  learnt  by  reading 
of  past  deeds ;  certainly  religion  will  not  dispense  with  the  laboratory  and  the  library. 
StiU,  even  in  these  matters  the  truth-loving  spirit — which  is  the  spirit  of  science — is 
nourished  and  strengthened  by  communion  with  the  eternal  Truth.  The  highest  know- 
ledge, however,  is  of  a  different  order ;  it  is  the  knowledge  that  reaches  to  the  meaning 
and  purpose  of  life,  and  is  not  satisfied  with  the  phenomena  and  processes  that  are  the 
materials  of  science.  This  can  only  be  had  by  the  experience  of  the  truth  of  G«d  in 
religion.  2.  2%e  lest  course  of  life  is  that  which  is  pursued  in  obedience  to  the  will  of 
Ood.  It  is  the  function  of  practical  wisdom  not  so  much  to  reveal  mysteries  as  to 
show  us  the  path  in  which  we  should  walk.  God  has  made  known  that  path ;  he  has 
shown  us  that  the  perfect  way  is  one  of  Christ-like  obedience.  We  live  wisely  when 
we  acknowledge  our  Creator,  obey  our  Father,  loyally  serve  our  Ring.  Any  other 
way  must  be  foolish,  because  it  will  involve  ingratitude  and  rebellion,  and  must  there- 
fore end  in  ruin.     No  wise  man  would  choose  to  ruin  himself. 

II.  The  negatively  moral  aspect  op  eevealed  wisdom.  "  To  depart  from  evil  is 
understanding."  1.  Sin  must  be  abandoned  before  truth  can  be  received.  Sin  blinds 
the  spiritual  vision.  It  is  a  moral  lie,  and  the  enemy  to  all  truth.  Bad  passions  and 
corrupt  desires  cloud  the  judgment  and  distort  the  understanding.  They  are  the 
pure  in  heart  who  see  God,  and  all  the  truth  of  God  is  open  to  the  eye  of  goodness, 
but  shut  up  and  hidden  from  the  prying  curiosity  of  wickedness.  A  bad  man  cannot 
be  n  tme  philosopher.  He  may  know  many  things ;  be  cannot  know  real  truth.  The 
deluils  and  the  worldly  ideas  may  be  acquired  by  him ;  but  the  deeper  meaning  of 


ea.  ixa.  1—25.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


471 


everything  is  lost  to  such  a  person.  2.  A  right  wnd&i'standmg  of  life  prompts  to 
repentance.  When  the  light  of  God  begins  to  fall  on  the  soul,  sin  is  seen  for  the  first 
time  in  its  hideous  natural  character.  Then  we  wonder  how  we  could  have  fondled  so 
loathsome  an  object.  Its  disgusting  features  drive  us  from  it  with  horror.  3.  The  life 
of  sin  is  ruinously  foolish.  It  offers  great  delights,  but  its  promises  are  lies.  Even 
its  pleasures  do  not  satisfy,  and  they  soon  give  place  to  bitter  regrets.  The  wise  way 
of  living  is  the  path  of  purity  and  integrity — the  path  which  can  only  be  followed  in 
godly  fear  and  Christian  faith. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Vers.  I — 25. — ^From  these  deep  musings 
upon  the  nature  of  true  wisdom,  and  the 
contrast  between  the  ingenuity  and  clever- 
ness of  man  and  the  infinite  knowledge  of 
God,  Job  turns  to  another  contrast,  which 
he  pursues  through  two  chapters  (cb.  xxix. 
and  xxz.) — the  contrast  between  what  he 
was  and  what  heli — between  his  condition 
-ifi'  tbe  period  of  his  ^riOirpeiT^ahd  that  fo 
whieh-he-barlSeenreduceS'bylEiiB  afflictions. 
^KwT)Teseiit"ctecptBr  is  conoetned'tmlywith 
the  former  period ;  and  gives  a  graphic  de- 
scription of  the  life  led,  in  Job's  time  and 
country,  by  a  great  chieftain,  the  head  of  a 
tribe,  not  of  mere  nomads,  but  of  persons 
who  had  attained  to  a  considerable  amount 
of  civilization.  The  picture  is  one  primitive 
in  its  features,  but  not  rude  or  coarse.  It 
is  entirely  un-Jewish,  and  has  its  nearest 
parallel  in  some  of  the  early  Egyptian  re- 
cords, as  the  SteW  of  Beka,  and  the  Instruc- 
tions of  Amen-em-hat  ('Records  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  11—16 ;  vol.  x.  pp.  7—10). 

Ver.  1.  —  Moreover  Job  continued  his 
parable,  and  said  (see  the  comment  on  cb. 
xxvii.  1). 

Ver.  2. — Oh  that  I  were  as  in  months  past  I 
or,  in  the  months  of  old.  To  Job  the  period 
of  his  prosperity  seems  long,  long  ago — some- 
thing far  away  in  the  mist  of  time,  which 
he  recalls  with  difiSculty.  As  in  the  days 
when  God  preserved  me.  Job  never  forgets 
to  refer  his  prosperity  to  God,  or  to  be  grate- 
ful to  him  for  it  (see  ch.  i.  21 ;  ii.  10 ;  x. 
8—12,  etc.). 

Ver.  3. — When  his  candle  shined  upon  my 
head  (comp.  Ps.  xviii.  28,  "  For  thou  wilt 
light  my  candle:  the  Lord  my  God  will 
enlighten  my  darkness").  A  "candle,"  or 
"lamp,"  is  a  general  symbol  in  Scripture 
for  life  and  prosperity.  God  is  said  to  light 
men'p  candles  when  he  blesses  them  and 
makes  his  countenance  to  shine  upon  them ; 
<KinTarsely,  when  he  withdraws  hu  favour 


he  is  said  to  put  their  candles  out  (ch.  xviii. 
6;  xxi.  17).  And  when  by  his  light  I 
walked  through  darkness.  The  light  of 
God's  countenance  shining  about  a  man's 
path  enables  him  to  walk  securely  even 
through  thick  darkness,  t.e.  through  trouble 
and  perplexity. 

Ver.  4. — As  I  was  in  the  days  of  my 
youth ;  literally,  in  the  days  of  my  autumn 
— by  which  Job  probably  means  the  days 
of  his  "  ripeness  "  or  "  full  manhood  " — 
which  he  had  reached  when  his  calamities 
full  upon  him.  Wben  the  secret  of  God  was 
upon  my  tabernacle ;  or,  the  counsel  of  God ; 
when,  t.e.,  in  my  tent  I  held  sweet  counsel 
with  God,  and  communed  with  him  as  friend 
with  friend  (comp.  Ps.  xxv.  14,  "  The  secret 
of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him; 
and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant ; "  and 
Prov.  iii.  32,  "For  the  froward  is  abomi- 
nation to  the  Lord:  but  his  secret  is  with 
the  righteous  ").  ; 

Ver.  5. — When  the  Almighty  was  yet  with  ' 
me.  These  are  terribly  sad  words.  Job,  iq  , 
his  afflictions,  has  come  to  look  on  the  Al- 
mighty as  no  longer  "  with  him  " — ^no  longer  . 
on  his  side;  but  rather  against  him,  atf^; 
enemy  (see  ch.  vi.  4 ;  vii.  19 ;  ix.  17 ;  x.  16;^ 
etc.).  When  my  children  were  about  me 
(comp.  ch.  i,  2,  4,  5).  ^ 

Ver.  6. — When  I  washed  my  steps  with 
butter.  Trod,  as  it  were,  upon  fatnesa 
moved  amid  all  that  was  gladsome,  joyfuL 
and  delicious.  And  the  rock  poured  me  oqSi 
rivers  of  oil.  "  The  rock  "  is  probably  the 
ground,  rugged  and  stony,  on  which  hisi|; 
olives  grew.  "Olives,"  says  Dr.  CuDning|j 
ham  Geikie,  "flourish  best  on  sandy  oi( 
stony  soil "  ('  The  Holy  Land  and  the  Bible,' 
vol.  i.  p.  138).  They  brought  him  in  so 
great  a  quantity  of  oil  that  the  rock  seemed 
to  him  to  flow  with  rivers  of  it. 

Ver.  7. — When  I  went  out  to  the  gate 
through  the  city ;  rather,  hy  the  city,  or  over 
against  the  city.  The  "  gate  "  was  the  place 
where  justice  was  administered,  and  public 
business  generally  despatehed.  It  would  be 
"over  against"  the  city,  separated  from  it 
by  a  large  square  or  place  (3ini),  in  which 
a  multitude  might  assemble  (see  Neh.  viii. 
1).    Hither  Job  was  accustomed  to  proceed 


472 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xhx.  1 — 2&, 


from  time  to  time,  to  act  as  judge  and  ad- 
minigtrator.  When  I  prepared  my  seat  in 
the  street.  On  auch  occasions  a  eeat  wonid 
be  brought  out  and  "  prepared,"  where  the 
judge  would  sit  to  hear  causes  and  deliver 
sentences  (comp.  Neh.  iii.  7). 

Ver.  8. — The  young  men  saw  me,  and  hid 
^themselves ;  retired,  i.e.  withdrew  to  corners, 
jthat  they  might  not  obtrude  themselves  on 
jono  so  much  their  superior.    Compare  the 
I  respect  paid  to  age  by  the  Spartans.    And 
ithe  aged  arose,  and  stood  up.     Here  the 
i  respect  paid  was  not  to  age  so  much  as  to 
dignity.    Men  as  old  as  himself,  or  older, 
paid  Jub  the  compliment  of  standing  up 
until  he  was  seated,  in  consideration  of  his 
rank  and  high  offi(«.     So,  in  many  assem- 
blies, as  in  our  own  courts  of  justice,  in 
Convocation,  and  elsewhere,  whun  the  pre- 
sident enters,  all  rise. 

•Ver.  9. — The  princes  refrained  talking. 
?;The  other  head-men  of  the  tribe,  recognizing 
Job's  superior  rank  and  dignity,  refrained 
;&om  words  as  soon  as  he  made  his  appear- 
iance,  and  in  silence  awaited  what  he  would 
iay.  Perhaps  we  are  scarcely  to  understand 
literally  the  further  statement  that  they 
laid  their  hand  on  their  month,  which  is 
probably  as  much  an  idiom  as  our  phrase, 
"  they  held  their  tongues  "  (comp.  ch.  xxi.  5). 
Ver.  10. — The  nobles  held  their  peace. 
The  other  leading  men  followed  the  example 
of  the  "  princes,"  and  equally  kept  silence 
till  Job  had  spoken.  And  their  tongue 
cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth.  A  pleo- 
nastic repetition.  The  meaning  is  simply 
they  said  nothing,  they  stood  in  rapt  atten- 
tion. 

Ver.  11. — When  the  ear  heard  me,  then 
it  blessed  me.  Job,  having  described  his 
reception  by  the  nobles  and  chief  men  of 
the  oity,  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  behaviour 
of  the  common  people.  The  former  were 
respectful  and  attent,  the  latter  rejoiced 
and  made  acclamation.  Being  of  the  class 
most  exposed  to  oppression  and  wrong,  they 
hailed  in  the  patriarch  a  champion  and  a 
protector.  They  wire  sure  of  redress  and 
justice  where  he  was  the  judge.  And  when 
the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave  witness  to  me. 
The  eye  of  the  poor  man  lighted  up  with 
joy  and  rejoicing  as  Job  sat  down  upon  the 
seat  of  judgment,  thus  ijearing  witness  to 
his  fairness,  candour,  and  integrity. 

Ver.  12. — Because  I  delivered  the  poor 
that  cried  (compare  the  Instructions  of 
Araen-em-hat :  "  Because  I  have  made  the 
afflicted  ones  frue  from  their  afflictions,  so 
that  their  cries  are  heard  no  more  "  ('  Records 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  p.  12).  And  again  the 
Inscription  of  Ameni-Ameneml\a :  "  No 
little  child  have  I  injured;  no  widow  have 
I  oppressed ;  no  fisherman  have  I  hindered ; 
no  shepherd  have  I  detained;  no  foreman 


have  I  taken  from  his  gang  to  employ  him 
in  forced  labour  "  (ibid.,  vol.  xii.  63).  And 
the  fatherless,  and  him  that  bad  none  to 
help  him  (compare  what  is  said  of  the  ideal 
king  in  Ps.  Ixxii.  12 — 14,  "  He  shall  deliver 
the  needy  when  he  crieth ;  the  poor  aLiO, 
siad  him  that  hath  no  helper.  He  shall  spars 
the  poor  and  needy,  and  shall  save  the  souls 
of  the  needy.  He  shall  redeem  their  soul 
from  deceit  and  violence  :  and  precious  shall 
their  blood  be  in  his  sight").  Champion- 
ship of  the  poor  was  anciently  regarded  as 
characteristic  of  the  wise,  good,  strong  ruler. 
Ver.  13. — The  blessing  of  him  that  was 
ready  to  perish  came  upon  me  (comp. 
ver.  11).  Oppression  in  the  East  sometimes 
drives  its  victims  to  actual  starvation  or  to 
suicide.  Isaiah  calls  the  oppressors  against 
whom  he  inveighs  "  murderers  "  (Isa.  i.  21). 
uThese  "  perisliing "  ones  Job  often  saved, 
land  they  "  blessed"  him.  And  I  caused  the 
mridow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy.  How  cold 
'are  the  words  of  Ameni,  "  No  widow  have 
I  oppressed,"  compared  with  these  I    Job 


was  not  content  with  mere  abstinence  from 
,  evil,  mere  negative  virtue.     He  so  actively 
f},a,nd  effectually  relieved  distress  that  aiflic- 
l|  tiou  was  turned  into  happiness,  and  lamen- 
tation into  rejoicing. 

Ver.  14. — I  put  on  righteousness,  and  it 
«lothed  me  (comp.  Isa.  Ixi.  10;  Fs.  cxxxii. 
9,  etc.).  Job  "  put  on  righteousness ;  "  i.e. 
made  it  as  the  garment  wherewith  he  clothed 
himself  withal  (Pa.  cix.  18,  19),  covered  up 
with.it  all  his  own  natural  imperfections, 
and  made  it  part  and  parcel  of  his  being. 
It  was  a  beautiful  covering,  and,  when  once 
he  had  put  it  on,  it  clung  to  him,  and  could 
not  be  removed.  It  "clothed  him,"  or 
rather,  if  we  translate  the  Hebrew  literally,, 
"clothed  itself  with  him,"  putting  him  on, 
as  he  had  put  it  on.  It  was  not  merely 
external ;  it  was  internal,  a  habit  of  his  soul 
and  spirit.  My  judgment  was  as  a  robe  and 
a  diadem ;  rather,  my  justice  (see  the 
Revised  Version).  My  "justice,"  or  "  right- 
e  jusness  **  (for  the  words  are  synonymous), 
was  at  once  my  robe  and  my  crown,  my 
necessary  clothing  and  my  ornament  (comp. 
Isa.  Ixi.  10,  "  He  hath  clothed  me  with  the 
garment8ofsalvation,hehath  covered  me  with 
the  robe  of  righteousness,  as  a  bridegroom 
deoketh  himself  with  ornaments,  and  as  a 
bride  adorneth  herself  with  her  jewels"). 

Ver.  15. — I  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet 
was  I  to  the  lame,  The  Persian  kings  had 
officials,  whom  they  called  their  "eyes"  and 
their  "  ears  " — observers  who  were  to  inform 
them  of  all  that  wont  on  in  the  provinces 
('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iii.  p.  213). 
Job  aot«d  us  "eyes"  to  the  blind  of  hig 
time,  giving  them  the  information  which 
their  infirmity  hindered  them  from  obtain- 
ing. He  was  also  "  feet "  to  the  lame,  taking 


ca.  xx;nc.  1—28.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


478 


messages  for  them,  going  on  their  erranda, 
and  the  like.  He  was  kind  and  helpful  to 
his  fellow-men,  not  only  in  great,  but  also 
in  little  matters, 

Ver.  16.— I  was  a  father  to  the  poor  (oomp. 
ver.  12,  and  see  below,  ch.  xxxi.  16—22) : 
aud  the  oause  which  I  knew  not  I  searohed 
out ;  rather,  the  muse  of  Mm  that  Iknew  not 
I  searched  out  (see  the  Eevised  Version),! 
When  men  were  quite  unknown  to  him,  JoW 
Btill  gave  to  their  causes  the  utmost  possible 
attention,  "  searching  them  out,"  or  inves-l 
tigating  them,  as  diligently  as  if  they  had 
been  the  causes  of  his  own  friends. 

Ver.  17.— And  I  brake  the  jaws  of  the 
wicked  (comp.  Ps.  Iviii.  6).    It  is  scarcely 
meant,  as  Canon  Cook  supposes,  that  Job 
was  himself  the  executioner.    «  Quod  faoit 
per  aliura  facit  per  se."    Job  would  regard 
as  his  doing  what  he  ordered  to  be  done. 
And  plucked  the  spoil   out  of   his  teeth*. 
Either  by  disappointing  him  of  a  prey  whicli 
he  was  on  the  verge  of  making  his  own,  or 
by  compelling  him  to  make  restitution  of  It 
prey  that  he  had  actually  laid  hold  of.        ' 
Ver.  18. — Then  I  said,  Ishall  die  in  my  nest. 
The  metaphor  of  "nest "  for  "  d  welliug-place  " 
occurs  in  Numb.  xxiv.  21;  Jer.  xlix.  16; 
Chad.  4 ;  and  Hab.  ii.  9.   It  is  also  employed 
by  Hesiod  ('  Op.  et  Di.,'  i.  301).  And  I  shaU 
multiply  my  days  as  the  sand.     Some  trans- 
late,  "I  shall  multiply  my  days    as  tlie 
phoenix,"  the  fabulous  bird  which  was  sup- 
posed to  live  for  Ave  hundred  years  (Herod.,  ii. 
72),  to  burn  itself  on  a  funeral  pile  of  spices, 
and  then  to  rise  again  from  its  ashes.     But 
the  view  seems  to  be   a   mere  rabbinical 
tradition,  and  is  unsupported  by  etymology. 
Kh6l  (hSn)  means  "  sand  "  in  Gen.  xxii.  17; 
Jur.  xxxiii.  22 ;  and  elsewhere.    It  is  taken 
in  this  sense  by  Bosenmiiller,  SchuUens, 
Professor  Lee,  Canon  Cook,  and  our  Bevisers. 
Ver.  19, — My  root  was  spread  out  by  the 
waters  (comp.  Ps.  i.  3;  Jer.  xvii.  8);  rather, 
to  the  waters— so  that  the  waters  reached  it 
and  nourished   it.     And  the  dew  lay  all 
night  upon  my  branch.     Job  compares  him^ 
self,  in  his  former  prosperous  state,  to  a  tref 
growing  by  a  river-side,  which  receives  « 
double  nourishment — from  the  aciual  wateK 
of  the  stream,  which  reaches  its  roots,  ancffl 
from    the    moisture    evaporated    from   the 
stream,  which  hangs  in  the  air,  and  descends 
in  the  shape  of  dew  upon  ita  leaves  and 
branches.      Both   sources  of    refreshment 
represent  the  grace  and  favour  of  God.         * 
Ver.  20. — My  glory  was  fresh  in  me ;  i.e. " 
"my  glory  remained    fresh" — received  no 
tarnish,  continued  as  bright  as  it  had  been 
M  the  first.    And  my  bow  was  renewed  in 


my  hand.  My  strength  did  not  fail.  When 
It  seemed  on  the  point  of  failing,  it  was 
secretly  and  mysteriously  "  renewed."  Some 
commentators  regard  vers.  19  and  20  as  a 
portion  of  the  speech  begun  in  ver.  18,  and 
view  the  verbs,  not  as  past  tenses,  but  as 
futures  (compare  the  translation  of  the 
Eevised  Version).  The  general  meaning  is 
much  the  same,  whichever  of  the  two  views 
we  take. 

yer.  21. — TTnto  me  men  gave  ear,  and 
waited,  and  kept  silence  at  my  counsel 
(oomp.  vera.  9,  10).  Job,  however,  does  not 
repeat  himself,  since  in  the  previous  passage 
he  is  speaking  of  his  work  and  office  as 
judge,  whereas  now  he  declares  the  position 
which  he  had  occupied  among  his  country- 
men as  statesman  and  counsellor. 

Ver.  22 — After  my  words  they  spake  not 
again.  When  Job  had  spoken,  the  debate 
commonly  came  to  an  end.  It  was  felt 
that  all  had  been  said,  and  that  further 
remark  would  be  superfluous.  And  my 
speech  dropped  upon  them  (comp.  Dent, 
xxxii.  2,  "My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the 
rain,  my  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew "). 
The  silent,  penetrating  influence  of  wise 
counsel  is  glanced  at. 

Ver.  23.— They  waited  for  me  as  for  the 
rain ;  t.«.  "  they  were  as  eager  to  hear  me 
speak  as  the  parched  ground  is  to  receive , 
the  winter  rain,  which  it  expects  and  waits! 
for  and  absorbs  greedily."  And  they  opened  j 
their  mouth  wide  as  for  the  latter  rain.f 
They  drank  in  my  discourse  as  the  spring* 
vegetation  drinks  in   the  spring   showers, 
known  in  the  East  generally  as  "  the  latter 
rains." 

Ver.  24.— If  I  laughed  on  them,  they 
believed  it  not;  lather,  if  I  emiled  on  them:. 
If,  as  a  mark  of  favour,  I  smiled  on  anyj!  I 
they  thought  it  such  graciousness  and  con|  ; 
descension  that  they  could  scarcely  believe 
it  possible.  And  the  light  of  my  countenance 
they  oast  not  down.  They  never  put  mW 
out  of  countenance,  or  made  me  sad  an<J 
gloomy,  by  opposing  my  views  and  ranging 
themselves  against  me. 

Ver.  25.— I  chose  out  their  way,  and  sat 
chief.  Though  not  an  absolute  monarch, 
but  only  a  patriarchal  head,  I  practically 
determined  the  course  which  the  tribe  toola 
since  my  advice  was  always  followed.  I  thul 
"sat  chief" — nay,  dwelt  as  a  king  in  thl 
army  (or,  in  the  host,  i.e.  among  the  people); 
as  one  that  comforteth  the  mourners;  i.e. 
as  one  to  whom  all  looked  for  comfort  in 
times  of  distress  and  calamity,  as  much  as 
for  counsel  and  guidance  at  other  timei 
(vers.  21— 23}. 


4?4  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxix.  1— 2S. 


HOMILKTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 2B. — Job's  second  parable :  1.  Eegretful  memoriea  of  bygone  days.  I.  Datb 
OF  RELiGiouB  HAPPINESS.  In  tender  elegiac  strains  Job  resumes  his  m<njologue  of 
sorrow,  casting  a  pathetic  glance  uijon  "  the  times  of  yore,"  already  faded  in  the  far 
past  and  gone  beyond  recall ;  not  the  days  of  his  youth  (Authorized  Version),  but  the 
autumn  season  of  his  mature  manhood,  when,  like  a  field  that  the  Lord  had  blessed 
(Gen.  xxvii.  27),  groaning  beneath  the  exuberance  of  its  harvest  fruits,  he  was  loaded 
with  an  abundance  of  good  things  (Ps.  ciii.  1 — 5).  Heaven's  blessings  were  so  many 
and  so  varied,  so  ripe  and  so  ready,  that  it  seemed  to  him  like  a  very  time  of  vintage 
for  his  soul.  But,  alas  I  these  bright  days  of  golden  sunshine  were  departed,  carrying 
with  them  all  the  treasures  of  felicity  they  had  brought ;  and  of  these  that  which  by 
its  loss  now  struck  the  keenest  pang  of  anguish  into  his  melancholy  soul  was  the  blessed 
fellowship,  the  familiar,  confiding,  unreserved  intercourse  which  he  then  enjoyed  with 
Eloah,  who,  in  the  threefold  capacity  of  Guardian,  Guide,  and  Friend,  was  an  habitual 
Visitor  at  his  tent.  1.  As  a  Oitardian.  Then  Eloah  preserved,  or  protected,  him,  as 
Satan,  in  the  opening  of  the  fundamental  controversy  of  the  poem,  complained  (ch.  i. 
10),  and  as  Eliphaz  (ch.  v.  H — 21;  xxii.  25),  followed  by  Zophar  (ch.  xi.  18),  assured 
him  God  would  again  do,  if  he  returned  in  penitential  submission  to  Bloah's  ways. 
This  Divine  guardianship  must  not  be  limited  to  the  setting  up  of  a  fence  around  the 
patriarch's  estate,  but  extended  to  that  of  which  it  was  a  symbol,  the  casting  of  a 
shield  around  the  patriarch's  soul.  In  the  happy  days  of  old  Job  nestled  beneath  the 
shadow  of  the  Almighty's  wings  (Kuth  ii.  12 ;  Ps.  xci.  1),  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 
feeling  himself  secure  against  calamity  of  every  sort,  inward  or  outward,  spiritual  or 
material.  What  God  was  to  Job  he  likewise  proved  himself  to  be  to  David  and  other 
Old  Testament  saints,  and  to-day  offers  himself  to  be  to  all  Christ's  believing  followers — 
a  Defender  against  the  charges  of  the  Law,  of  conscience,  or  of  Satan  (Ps.  xxxii.  1 — 5 ; 
Ixv.  3  ;  Ixxxv.  2,  3 ;  Isa.  xliv.  22 ;  Eom.  viii.  1,  31,  33) ;  a  Protector  against  the  ills 
and  temptations  of  life  (Ps.  xlvi.  1 ;  xlviii.  3 ;  cxxi.  3 ;  Prov.  iii.  6,  23,  24 ;  Isa.  liv. 
14^-17;  Zech.  ix.  8;  2  Thess.  iii.  3;  1  Pet.  iii.  13).  2.  As  a  Ouide.  Job  also 
recollects  that,  in  the  bright  days  whose  departure  he  laments,  Eloah's  candle  (or 
lamp)  shone  above  his  head,  enabling  him  to  walk  with  perfect  safety  even  in  nights 
of  thickest  darkness.  The  allusion  probably  is  to  the  custom  of  suspending  lamps  in 
rooms  or  tents  over  the  head  (Carey) ;  and  the  meaning  is  that,  while  rejoicing  in 
Heaven's  favour  and  fellowship,  Job's  feet  never  stumbled  in  the  path  of  duty.  If 
perplexities  arose  around  or  before  him,  through  Divine  grace  he  was  always  able  to 
resolve  them,  threading  his  way  through  the  deepest  intricacies,  and  moving  straight 
on  in  an  even  path.  This  was  no  doubt  owing  partly  to  the  circumstance  that  his 
consciousness  of  inward  peace  and  sincerity  permitted  him  to  make  the  best  possible 
use  of  his  natural  faculties,  and  partly  to  the  fact  that  he  enjoyed  the  special  illumi- 
nation of  Heaven.  If  piety  does  not  confer  new  powers,  it  enables  old  ones  to  be  turned 
to  the  best  advantage.  Then  the  singleness  of  aim  which  a  good  man  possesses  largely 
facilitates  the  discovery  of  light  in  times  of  darkness.  And,  finally,  saints  have  special 
promises  guaranteeing  providential  guidance  when  placed  in  situations  of  perplexity 
or  peril  (Ps.  xxv.  8,  9 ;  xxxii.  8 ;  xxxvii.  23  ;  cxii.  4).  3.  As  a  Friend.  More  particu- 
larly Job  mentions  that,  in  the  times  of  blessedness  referred  to,  "the  secret,"  or  favour 
(Cox),  or  blessed  fellowship  (Delitzsch),  or  counsel  (Pry)  of  Eloah  was  upon  his  tent. 
Whether  Job  was  honoured  like  Abraham  to  receive  theophanies  (Gen.  xviii.  1,  2), 
so  that  he  might  actually  speak  of  God  being  a  Visitor  at  his  tent  (Carey),  the  language 
(literally,  "  in  the  seat  or  cushion  of  God  being  at  my  tent")  obviously  points  to  an 
intercourse  of  the  most  friendly  and  familiar  kind  between  him  and  God — such  a 
dwelling  together  as  Eliphaz  aflirmed  should  take  place  (ch.  xxii.  21)  if  Job  and  God 
were  to  be  at  peace.  The  friendship  here  depicted  as  having  existed  between  Job  and 
Eloah  was  realized  in  the  case  of  Abraham  and  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xx.  .7 ;  Isa.  xli.  8 ; 
Jas.  ii.  23),  and  is  in  a  certain  sense  still  realized  in  the  experience  of  Christians  and 
the  Saviour  (John  xv.  15).  _  As  one  result  of  this  friendly  intercourse  between  Eloah 
and  Job,  Job  became  acquainted  with  Eloah's  counsel  or  secret  purpose,  as  Abraham 
was  informed  of  Jehovah's  determination  concerning  Sodom  (Gen.  xviii.  17V  as  tLa 


oa.  xxot.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  4?S 

prophets  generally  were  afterwards  instructed  about  the  mind  of  God  (Amos  iii.  7),  as 
"*he  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him  "  (Ps.  xxv.  14";  Prov.  iii.  32),  and 
as  on  believers  is  conferred  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  enabling  them  to  know  all 
things  (1  John  ii.  20,  27 ;  v.  20),  but  more  particularly  the  mind  of  Christ  (John  xvi. 
13—15 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  16). 

II.  Days  op  dombstio  felicity.  It  is  a  special  mark  of  piety  in  Job  that,  enume- 
rating his  lost  blessings,  he  begins  with  what  the  worldly  or  wicked  man  would  have 
placed  last,  viz.  the  Divine  friendship.  As  to  David  (Ps.  Ixiii.  3)  and  to  Asaph  (Ps. 
Ixxiii.  25),  so  to  Job  the  favour  and  fellowship  of  God  constituted  the  principal 
ingredient  in  his  full  cup  of  blessing.  But  next  to  fellowship  with  a  God  of  mercy  and 
salvation,  no  earthly  happiness  can  be  compared  to  a  home  illnmined  by  the  sunshine 
of  ge  nuine  religion,  and  gladdened  by  the  cheery  voices  of  loving  and  obedient  children. 
Job  cannot  recall  the  time  when  the  Almighty  was  still  with  hiia  (ver.  5)  without 
remembering  that  then  also  his  children  (his  young  men,  his  boys)  were  about  him — a 
numerous,  happy,  loving,  united,  and,  it  may  be  hoped,  a  pious  family  (ch.  i.  1 — 5 ; 
vide  homileties).  It  is  contrary  to  religion  for  a  good  man,  or  any  man,  to  prize  his 
wife  and  children  above  his  Saviour  and  his  God  (Matt.  x.  37) ;  it  is  contrary  to  nature 
to  behold  them  taken  from  his  side  by  the  hand  of  death  without  weeping  (Gen.  xxiii. 
2;  John  xi.  31,  33,  35);  it  is  contrary  to  neither  nature  nor  religion  to  cherish  them 
with  fondest  affection,  and  to  mourn  for  their  death  with  sincere  lamentation. 

III.  Days  of  material  prosperity.  Guarded  by  Divine  care  and  guided  by  Divine 
light,  like  Jacob  in  Padan-aram  (Gen.  xxxi.  5,  7,  11,  12, 42),  Job  attained  to  extensive 
wealth,  the  poetic  imagery  employed  (ver.  6)  to  depict  it  meaning,  when  converted 
into  unadorned  prose,  that  his  flocks  became  so  abundant,  and  their  yield  of  milk  so 
rich  and  plentiful,  that  he  might  almost  be  said  to  wash  his  steps  in  butter,  which 
among  the  Arabs  was  mostly  a  liquid  preparation,  and  that  everywhere  throughout 
his  domain  the  crags  were  clothed  with  olive  trees  so  prolific  that  the  very  rooks 
appeared  to  pour  forth  oil.  It  was  another  mark  of  Job's  fervent  piety  and  well- 
balanced  judgment  that  he  preferred  his  children  to  his  flocks  and  trees,  giving  these 
latter  only  the  third  place  in  his  esteem,  and  that  he  ascribed  his  material  prosperity, 
no  less  than  his  domestic  felicity,  to  the  circumstance  that  then  the  Almighty  was 
with  him.  So  did  Jacob  when  serving  with  Laban  (Gen.  xxxi.  5),  and  Joseph  when 
ruling  for  Pharaoh  (Gffi.  xlv.  8),  recognize  God  as  the  Author  of  their  temporal 
advancement.  So  does  Scripture  habitually  trace  to  God  every  blessing  which  the 
saint  enjoys  (Ps.  Ixxv.  6,  7 ;  Jas.  i.  17). 

IV.  Days  of  civic  honour.  A  .saint  of  eminent  piety,  the  father  of  a  numerous 
family,  and  the  proprietor  of  vast  possessions,  Job  had  likewise  been  the  cliief  magis- 
trate, or  supreme  dispenser  of  law  and  justice,  in  his  clan.  Passing  beyond  the  bounds 
of  his  own  private  domain,  and  entering  the  adjacent  city,  when  'he  took  his  seat 
among  the  elders  in  the  broad  way,  t.e.  in  the  open  space  usually  reserved  in  Oriental 
cities,  either  in  front  of  the  gate  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  6 ;  Neh.  viii.  1,  3,  16),  or  in  the 
vaulted  recesses  beneath  the  archway  (Gen.  xix.  1 ;  1  Kings  xxii.  10),  for  the  trans- 
action of  business  (Ruth  iv.  1),  the  dispensiuig  of  justice  (Prov.  xxxi.  23),  or  the 
conducting  of  other  negotiations,  he  was  salutedwith  marked  tokens  of  respect.  The 
younger  men,  conscious  of  his  greatness,  retired  into  the  background ;  the  old  men 
amongst  the  councillors  received  him  standing;  the  voice  of  the  greatest  magnate 
amongst  them  was  silent  until  he  had  uttered  his  opinion.  A  remarkable  testimony  to 
the  high  esteem  in  which  Job  was  held  for  his  personal  qualities  and  commanding  abilities. 

V.  Days  of  public  philanthropy.  What  Eliphaz  once  admitted  (ch.  iv.  3,  4), 
Job  is  now  constrained  to  avow,  that  his  whole  by-past  career  had  been  one  of 
unwearied  benevolence.  In  his  magisterial  capacity  he  had :  1.  Espoused  the  came  of 
the  poor  and  needy.  In  conspicuous  contradiction  to  Eliphaz,  who  had  charged  him 
(ch.  xxii.  5 — 9)  with  intolerable  oppression  and  cruelty,  with  robbing  the  poor,  and 
inhumanly  suffering  the  naked  and  hungry  to  perish,  he  had  taken,  it  might  be  said, 
the  whole  family  of  the  unfortunate  under  his  protection.  When  a  poor  man  oppressed 
by  his  neighbour  had  cried  out  for  help,  when  an  orphan  had  poured  into  his  ear  a  tale 
of  pitiful  distress,  when  a  miserable  outcast  half-dead  through  cold  and  nakedness,  or 
through  hunger  and  thirst,  had  found  the  way  to  his  door,  when  a  broken-hearted 
widow  had  appealed  to  him  for  assistance,  he  had  had  an  ear  for  every  cry,  a  heart  for 


476  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxix.  1—25: 

every  sorrow,  and  a  hand  for  every  need.  Job's  sympathies  had  inclined  him  to  feel 
for  the  defenceless  and  the  poor.  And  in  this  Job  had  shown  himself  to  be  a  good 
man  (Ps.  xl.  1),  and  an  eminent  type  of  Olirist  (Ps.  Ixxii.  4;  Matt,  viii.  16,  17).  Nay, 
Job  had  considered  no  care  or  trouble  too  much  to  expend  on  behalf  of  his  clients.  He 
had  both  taken  pains  to  understand  their  complaint,  and  had  not  been  satisfied  till  he 
had  rectified  their  grievance.  And  with  such  skill,  energy,  and  perseverance  had  he 
conducted  their  causes,  that  he  commonly  carried  them  forward  to  success,  delivering 
the  poor  and  fatherless  who  cried  to  him  (ver.  12),  causing  the  widow's  heart  to  sing 
for  joy  (ver.  13),  breaking  the  jaws  of  the  wicked  and  plucking  the  spoil  out  of  his  teeth 
(ver.  17).  And  in  all  that  Job  hail  said  or  done  in  his  magisterial  capacity  he  had: 
2.  Acted  with  the  most  scrupulous  regard  to  justice.  He  had  not  met  chicanery  and 
oppression  by  resorting  to  the  same  dishonest  weapons.  If  he  had  stood  forth  for  justice 
to  the  poor,  he  had  not  attempted  to  withhold  it  from  the  rich.  So  unchallengeably 
just  had  been  his  decisions,  and  so  unimpeachable  the  principles  of  equity  by  which 
these  were  guided,  that  he  felt  himself  entitled  to  say  he  had  literally  clothed  himself 
in  righteousness,  and  assumed  integrity  as  a  robe  and  turban ;  in  this,  again,  typifying 
strikingly  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Ps.  Ixxii.  2 ;  xcvi.  13).  And  so  successful  had  Job 
been  in  his  determination  to  combine  "  mercy  and  truth,  righteousness  and  peace,"  in 
his  magisterial  capacity,  that  he  had :  3.  Gained  the  good  opinion  and  respect  of  all. 
Unlike  Aristides,  whom  his  fellow-countrymen  ostracized  because  they  could  not  longer 
bear  to  hear  him  called  the  "just,"  the  fellow-citizens  of  Job  had  saluted  him  on  every 
gide  with  words  and  looks  of  commendation  and  esteem  (ver.  11). 

VI.  Days  op  trNANTiciPATED  evil.  Pious,  rich,  honoured,  useful,  trusted,  revered, 
Job  was  unconscious  of  a  single  gloomy  foreboding.  All  round  him,  above  him,  before 
him,  the  prospect  was  clear  and  exhilarating.  Not  a  speck  of  cloud  lay  upon  the  bright 
horizon  that  encompassed  him.  Job  had  no  thought  but  that  he  should  live  a  long, 
prosperous,  and  honoured  life,  multiplying  his  days  like  the  sand,  or  like  the  phoenix, 
the  fabulous  bird  of  Egyptian  mythology,  or,  perhaps,  like  the  palm  tree,  and  at 
last  dying  calmly  in  hio  nest,  i.e.  like  Abraham  (Gen.  xxv.  8),  in  the  bosom  of  his 
family.  Two  things  contributed  to  foster  such  a  pleasing  anticipation  in  the  mind  of 
Job.  1.  The  apparent  stability  of  his  outward  or  material  prosperity.  Comparing 
himself  to  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  waters — a  frequent  biblical  emblem  of  a  good 
man  (Ps.  i.  3 ;  xcii.  12 ;  Jer.  xvii.  8) — he  had  hoped  that,  since  his  roots  were  open  to 
the  waters,  whence  they  could  always  draw  a  plentiful  supply  of  moisture,  and  since 
his  branches  were  nightly  laden  with  dew  (ver.  19),  nothing  ever  would  or  even  coiJd 
occur  to  interrupt  the  outward  course  of  his  temporal  greatness.  The  sources  of  his 
wealth  appeared  so  permanent  and  inexhaustible  that  he  never  imagined  they  could 
either  be  diminished  or  dried  up.  His  honours  were  so  fresh  upon  him  (of.  '  Henry 
VIII.,'  act  iii.  sc."  2)  that  he  dreamt  not  of  their  decline.  And  his  manly  vigour,  hii 
capability  of  warding  off  danger,  represented  by  the  bow  which  he  carried  in  his  hand, 
was  so  full  and  so  easily  renewed  that  he  feared  not  an  overthrow  to  his  unexampled 
fortune,  or  an  eclipse  to  the  shining  splendour  of  his  honourable  name.  2.  Hie 
unlimited  extent  of  his  authority  and  influence.  The  autobiographical  fragment 
introduced  in  vers.  21 — 25  is  not  designed  as  a  continuation  or  resumption  of  the 
theme  treated  of  above  (vers.  7,  8),  but  is  intended  to  explain  how  dark  forebodings 
never  crossed  the  mind  of  Job  when  reposing  in  the  brilliant  sunshine  of  his  earthly 
glory.  The  profound  veneration  in  which  his  countrymen  held  him,  causing  them 
with  patient  silence  and  eager  expectation  to  wait  for  his  counsel  (vers.  21,  23) ;  the 
awful  respect  in  which  they  held  his  words,  regarding  them  as  final  on  every  subject 
they  handled  (ver.  22) ;  the  effect  which  his  decisions  never  failed  to  produce  upon 
those  who  heard  them,  his  speech  distilling  upon  them  with  reviving  and  enlivening 
influences,  and  being  welcome  to  their  hearts  as  the  early  and  the  latter  rains  (ver.  23); 
the  influence  he  wielded  over  them  by  his  kindly  manners,  his  very  smile  being 
regarded  as  an  act  of  gracious  condescension  which  they  could  hardly  believe  was 
meant  for  theui,  but  whicli,  nevertheless,  they  were  loth  to  lose,  and  which  seemed  to 
have  a,  talismanic  power  in  dispelling  their  sadness  (ver.  24)  ;  and  the  unquestioning, 
"ay,  joyous,  submission  with  which  they  hailed  his  instructions,  his  position  among 
them  being  at  once  that  of  a  monarch  and  a  friend  (ver.  25) ; — all  these  consideraUoni 
rendered  it  difficult  for  Job  to  think  that  ever  foi:  him  an  evil  day  should  dawn. 


OH.  XXIX.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  477 

Learn:  1.  The  propriety  and  profit  of  recalling  and  reviewing  the  past.  8.  In 
enumerating  blessings,  much  depends  upon  assigning  to  each  its  exact  'place  \a  the 
order  of  importance.  3.  To  a  good  man  the  things  of  God  ever  stand  iu  the  front  rank. 
4.  Having  first  obtained  He;ivt!n's  favour,  a  man  may  legitimately  aspire  to  acquire  the 
riches  of  the  world  and  the  good  opinions  of  his  fellow-men.  5.  An  upright  and  useful 
life  seldom  fails  to  moet  its  recompense,  even  upon  earth.  6.  He  whom  God  has 
enriched  with  wealth,  ability,  and  iufiuence  should  devote  them  to  the  service  of  the 
poor  and  needy.  7.  The  blessings  of  those  whom  a  good  man  relieves  are  greater 
riches  than  accumulated  gold  and  silver.  8.  The  retrospect  of  a  well-spent  life  is  a 
great  consolation  in  the  season  of  adversity.  9.  It  is  dangerous  to  look  for  permanence 
in  anything  on  earth.  10.  It  is  well  when  great  men  can  combine  love  witU  authority, 
and  sympathy  with  power. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers,  1 — 26. — Wistful  retrospect  of  past  happy  days.  I,  Piotuhbs  op  memobt; 
HAPPINESS  FOUNDED  ON  THE  FRIENDSHIP  or  God.  (Vers.l — 10.)  1.  Friendship  vtith  Oo^ 
the  source  of  happiness.  (Vers.  1 — 5.)  This  is  beautifully  indicated  in  figurative  express 
sions.  He  thinks  of  the  days  when  Ood's  light  beamed  upon  his  brow,  by  God's  lighffl 
he  walked  through  the  darkness ;  the  days  of  his  ripe  and  mellow  age  (rather  than  of*! 
his  "youth"),  when  the  secret,  i.e.  the  intimacy,  of  the  Almighty  was  a  shelter  and  a 
blessing  to  his  home.  The  wotd  "  secret "  means  "  intimacy,"  confidential  intercourse 
(see  ch.xix.  19 ;  Ps.  xxv.  14;  Iv.  15 ;  Prov.iii.  32).  God  was  near  to  him,  and  the  next 
greatest  blessing  to  that  favour  of  God,  viz.  the  blessing  of  children,  was  granted  to  him. 
(Compare  on  the  blessing  of  children,  Ps.  cxxvii.  3,  sqq. ;  cxxviii.  3.)  The  outward  bless- 
ings of  life  are  chiefly  to  be  valued  as  signs  of  the  deeper,  the  inward  good ;  the  con- 
stant nearness  of  God,  the  consciousness  of  his  approval,  the  certainty  of  his  guidance. 
2.  Features  of  outward  happiness.  (Vers.  6 — 10.)  (1)  Ahmdance  of  means.  Here  the 
favourite  Oriental  figures  are  employed.  He  bathed  his  steps  in  bufier,  and  the  rock 
at  his  side  gushed  with  streams  of  oil  (comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  13).  (2)  J^«sjoeoi  and  dignity. 
When  he  went  to  the  gate  of  the  city,  the  great  public  place  of  aSsemBly  ia-Ofients^ 
cities,  corresponding  to  the  agora  of  the  Greeks,  the  forum  of  the  Romans,  and  the 
market-place  of  our  old  •towns  (ch.  v.  4;  xxxi.  21;  Prov.  i.  21;  viii.  3);  when  he 
placed  his  seat  in  the  market — the  wide  open  place  close  by  the  gates — the  young  men 
retired  in  reverential  respect  before  him,  and  the  old  men  rose  and  remained  standing 
until  he  had  taken  his  seat ;  while  princes  ceased  their  conversation,  laying  the  hand 
upon  the  mouth  (ch.  xxi.  5);  the  voice  of  persons  of  consideration  was  hushed,  their 
tongue  cleaving  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth.  The  possession  of  the  respect  of  others  is 
one  of  the  noblest  kinds  of  wealth,  as  the  consciousness  of  being  despised,  looked  down 
upon,  scouted,  and  flouted  is  an  element  of  the  deepest  misery.  Out  of  the  daik  present 
Job  looks  back  to  those  sunny  days.  His  life  is  "  in  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf,"  and  his 
is  "the  crown  of  sorrow^"  the  "  remembering  happier  things."  '*  It  is  the  pensive  autumn 
feeling,  the  sensation  of  half-aadness  tbat  we  experience  when  the  longest  day  of  the 
year  in  past,  and  every  day  that  follows  is  shorter,  and  the  light  fainter,  and  the  feebler 
shadows  tell  that  Nature  is  hastening  with  gigantic  footsteps  to  her  winter  grave."  As 
Christians,  we  should  learn  to  look  forward,  and  forget  the  past,  in  so  far  as  its  recol- 
lection paralyzes  or  depresses  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14).  (Read  F.  W.  Robertson's  sermon  on 
this :  '  Christian  Progress  by  Oblivion  of  the  Past.') 

"Not  backward  are  our  glances  bent. 
But  onwards  to  our  Father's  home." 

The  past  is  gone  for  ever ;  but  there  is  a  present  and  a  future  which  is  still  our  own. 

II.  The  sottroe  of  happiness  in  goodness.  (Vers.  11 — 17.)  His  benevolence  and 
his  strict  integrity  were  mediately  the  cause  of  his  prosperity.  For  although  God  is 
the  one  and  only  Cause  of  all  things,  the  gracious  Author  of  our  bliss,  yet  his  dis- 
pensations are  not  arbitrary.  Blessing  is  conditioned  by  faith  ;  and  faith  is  proved 
by  conduct.  Job's  public  and  private  life  was  known  and  seen,  and  elicited  approval 
from  alL    He  was  the  succourer  of  the  poor  and  the  helpless  orphan ;  the  blessing  of 


478  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xxa.  1— 25. 

the  forlorn  and  the  wretched  was  breathed  forth  on  Ms  behalf.  He  had  clothed  him- 
self with  rectitude  (compare  for  this  figure,  Isa.  xi.  5 ;  li.  9 ;  lix.  17 ;  Ps.  cxxxli.  9).  It 
was  to'him  like  a  robe  and  a  turban.  He  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  to  the  lame ;  a 
father  to  the  needy.  He  searched  out  the  cause  of  unknown  men,  to  help  them  as  surety 
or  otherwise  if  their  cause  was  good.  He  put  down  men  of  violence  and  oppression,  and 
recovered  their  ill-gotten  booty  from  them,  as  one  snatches  the  prey  from  the  jaws  of 
the  wild  beast.  Despite  the  mournful  mood  of  Job,  what  solace  is  there  not,  even  in  the 
greatest  affliction,  through  the  memory  of  having  been  permitted  to  do  some  good  and  reap 
some  reward  of  affection  from  others  in  the  world?  And,  looking  to  the  sequel  of  the 
story,  let  us  remember  that  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  the  labour  of  love.  Every 
cause  has  its  effect  j  every  act  of  benevolence  will  be  followed  in  due  time  by  its  bright 
flowers  of  peace  and  joy  in  the  conscience  and  the  memory.  Go  on,  then,  in  the  work 
of  doing  good,  steadfast  and  immovable  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Be  like  fountains 
watering  the  earth  and  spreading  fertility.  "Subdue  discord,  mutiny,  widespread  despair 
by  manfulness,  justice,  mercy,  and  wisdom.  Chaos  is  dark,  deep  as  hell ;  let  light  be, 
and  there  is  instead  a  green,  flowery  world.  Oh,  it  is  great,  and  there  is  no  other 
greatness  1  To  make  some  work  of  God's  creation  a  little  more  fruitful,  better,  more 
worthy  of  God ;  to  make  some  human  hearts  a  little  wiser,  more  manful,  happier,  more 
blessed ;  it  is  a  work  for  God  1 "  (Carlyle). 

HI.  The  memory  of  bright  hopes  ;  the  ebspect  and  influence  in  fobmeb  days. 
(Vers.  18 — 25.)  1.  Everything  in  that  happy  period  pointed  with  seeming  prophetic 
power  to  a  long  life,  to  a  blessed  old  age.  He  thought  within  himself  that  he  should 
end  his  days  in  his  nest,  in  the  bosom  of  his  family,  in  peace  and  security ;  and  like 
the  sand  (or  the  days  of  the  phoenix)  would  be  their  number.  If  the  word  be  taken  as 
denoting  the  phoenix,  then  the  allusion  is  to  the  legend  of  the  bird  living  five  hundred 
years,  then  burning  in  its  nest,  and  rising  from  t^e  ashes.  Peace  and  prosperity  bred  in 
his  mind  great  hopes.  Like  a  well-watered  tree,  be  thought  his  life  would  spread,  the 
refreshing  dew  resting  by  night  upon  its  branches,  and  that  his  honour  would  ever 
freshly  remain  with  him ;  that  his  bow — the  symbol  of  lusty  manhood  and  strength 
(1  Sam.  ii.  4 ;  Ps.  xlvi.  9 ;  Ixxvi.  3 ;  Jer.  xlix.  35 ;  li.  56) — would  renew  itself  in  his 
hand.  We  learn  here,  in  passing,  the  lesson  not  to  build  on  the  constancy  of  earthly 
things,  not  to  lay  up  treasures  of  hope  here.  If  it  be  well  with  us  now,  let  us  be 
prepared  for  reverses  (Sirach  xi.  25).  This  lesson  comes  back  to  us  from  many  a  saying 
of  the  ancient  world,  mixed  no  doubt  with  much  of  superstition,  and  ignorance  of  the 
nature  of  God,  but  still  in  the  main  expressed  with  the  truth  of  experience.  "  There 
is  nothing  secure  in  the  world,  no  glory,  no  prosperity.  The  gods  toss  all  life  into 
confusion,  mix  everything  with  its  reverse,  that  all  of  us,  from  our  ignorance  and  uncer- 
tainty, may  pay  them  the  more  worship  and  reverence  "  (Euripides, '  Hec.,'  957).  "  God 
hath  power  to  change  the  lowly  for  the  lofty ;  he  weakens  the  distinguished,  he  brings 
the  obscure  to  the  light ;  Fortune  with  shrill  sound  here  removes  the  iwwering  crest, 
and  here  she  sets  it  up"  (Horace,  'Od.,'  i.  35).  The  brief  sum  of  life's  days  forbids 
us  to  cherish  a  long  hope  (ibid.,  i.  4).  We  must  learn  in  a  Christian  sense  to  "pluck 
the  day,  and  have  the  smallest  confidence  in  what  is  to  come  "  (ibid.,  L  11).  What 
the  morrow  may  bring  we  should  shun  to  inquire,  and  count  as  a  gain  every  day  that 
may  be  given  us  (ibid.,  i.  9).  '.'Too  late  is  the  life  of  to-morrow;  live  to-day!" 
(Martial).  2.  A  further  picture  of  the  social  esteem  and  respect  in  which  his  past  day» 
had  been  spent.  The  members  of  his  tribe  or  clan  all  looked  up  to  him,  listened  in 
silence  to  his  address,  and  had  nothing  to  add  after  he  had  spoken.  His  speech  fell 
upon  them  like  the  refreshing  rain  for  which  the  thirsty  pastures  long — the  late  rain 
which  in  March  or  April  blesses  the  ripening  crops  (comp.  Deut.  xi.  14;  Jer.  iii.  3;  v. 
24;  Joel  ii.  23 ;  Hos.  vi.  3).  His  cheerful  smile  dismissed  men's  rising  fears,  the  light 
of  his  countenance  was  like  the  sun  dispelling  the  clouds  of  doubt  or  alarm.  He  sat 
in  the  midst  of  the  assembly  of  his  tribe,  guiding,  commanding,  directing,  like  a  king  in 
the  midst  of  his  battle-host ;  or,  as  if  this  picture  were  too  warlike  and  remote  from 
the  peaceful  scenes  of  the  patriarch's  life,  he  sat  among  them  as  a  general  consoler, 
a  comforter  of  the  mourners.     Thus — 

"Remembrance  wakes  with  all  her  busy  train. 
Sucks  at  his  breast,  and  turns  the  past  to  pain." 

But  we  have  a  power  over  this  "  bosom-spring,"  and  may  cheer  or  sadden  ourselvet 


OH.  XHX.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  47« 

with  retrospect,  according  as  we  take  the  golden  key  of  faith  or  the  iron  key  of 
despondency  wherewith  to  unlock  the  door  of  the  past.  Do  not  these  bright  memories 
of  a  well-spent  past  afford  solace  to  the  afflicted  hero,  though  they  also  touch  the 
nerves  to  paia?  Let  it  be  ours  so  to  use  memory  that  it  still  yield  instructive  joy 
and  hope.  As  we  turn  over  her  mixed  records,  let  us  say  to  ourselves,  "  The  joys  we 
have  possessed  are  ever  ours — out  of  the  reach  of  chance  and  change.  Let  past  years, 
so  far  as  they  are  marked  with  the  greatness  of  God,  with  acts  of  piety,  works  of  love, 
breed  in  us  perpetual  benedictions." — J. 

Vers.  1 — 25. — A  mournful  reflection  upon  a  happy  past.  Job  had  lived  in  honour 
aud  great  respect.  He  was  "  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the  East."  The  Divioe 
testimony  concerning  him  was,  "  There  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth."  Job's  was  an 
enviable  condition,  and  his  own  words  indicate  how  sensible  he  was  of  it.  In  his 
mournful  utterance,  made  as  he  looks  back  upon  a  dead  past,  we  see  wherein  consisted 
his  happiness ;  and  we  learn  what  are  the  elemental  conditions  of  the  highest  felicity 
in  human  life — at  least  at  that  period  of  the  world's  history.  Nor  can  we  think  of 
loftier  conditions  to-day.  The  conditions  of  happiness  on  the  loss  of  which  Job  mourn- 
fully reflected  are — 

I.  The  absubed  fatocb  of  Jehovah.  The  proof  of  this  to  Job  was  in  his  abounding 
prosperity. 

II.  DoMBSTio  PEUoiTY.    If  the  joy  of  home  be  destroyed,  all  joy  must  wither. 

III.  The  BE8PE0T  OF  suBEOUNDiNO  SOCIETY.  It  is  always  painful  to  a  right-minded 
man  not  to  be  held  in  respect  by  his  fellow-men ;  and  although  it  may  minister  to 
pride  in  the  imwary,  it  is  to  the  prudent  a  source  of  the  greatest  satisfaction,  especially 
when  it  is  subordinatrd  to  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God  only. 

IV.  The  honodbablb  beoabd  even  or  the  obeat.  The  very  princes  and  nobles 
held  silence  when  he  spake.  He  who  is  so  highly  honoured  cannot  but  honour  himself. 
Happy  the  man  whose  self-respect  so  ripens. 

V.  The  exekcisk  of  chabitt,  without  which  the  heart  would  become  selfish. 

VI.  The  responsive  blessings  of  uen,  sweet  as  nard  of  great  price. 

VIL   CONBOIOUSNESS     OF     INTEGRITY     AND     BIOHTEOUSNESS — a     COnSCienCe    VOld    Ot 

offence. 

VIII.  The  EXEBOIBE  of   bib   power  and  WEALTH   FOE  THE  DEFENCE  OF  THE  NEEDY 

AND  OPPRESSED.     Every  kind  act  leaves  a  fragrance  on  the  hand  of  him  who  does  it. 

IX.  The  possession  of  hope.  It  might  be  said  the  hope  of  the  permanence  of  these 
precious  possessions. 

X  A  OAUBE  OF  BLESSING  TO  OTHEBB.  In  these  lies  the  secret  of  the  truest  happiness , 
bat  many  deserve  them  not,  and  having  them  are  not  able  to  retain  their  integrity 
and  simplicity.  Hence  how  ofien  are  they  withdrawn!  The  absence  of  these  Job  is 
called  to  mourn.  To  hold  fast  his  integrity  in  the  loss  as  truly  as  amidst  the  possession 
of  these  things  marks  the  true  greatness  and  goodness  of  the  man,  and  ultimately 
brings  him  the  highest  honour. — R.  Q. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Regrets  far  the  happy  past.  I.  It  ib  natural  to  look  back  with 
BEGBET  ON  THE  HAPPY  PAST.  The  memory  of  past  joy  is  not  wholly  pleasant.  If 
the  joy  is  gone,  the  memory  only  adds  pain  to  the  present  sense  of  loss.  Several  things 
contribute  to  give  intensity  to  the  feeling  of  regret.  1,  Many  of  the  best  blessings  are^ 
not  appreciated  while  we  possess  them.  We  have  to  lose  them  to  learn  their  valueJ 
This  is  especially  true  of  great  common  blessings,  such  as  the  buoyancy  of  youth,', 
health,  affluence.  When  all  goes  well  with  us  we  do  not  consider  how  many  gifts  of 
God  we  are  enjoying.  The  charm  of  summer  is  appreciated  when  dull  November 
makes  us  look  back  on  the  lost  days  of  brightness.  We  wake  up  to  the  value  of  our 
loved  ones  when  they  have  been  taken  from  us  by  the  hand  of  death.  Adversity 
reveals  the  privileges  of  prosperity.  Declining  years  teach  the  value  of  youth.  2, 
Reflection  grows  viith  years.  It  has  been  remarked  upon  as  a  misfortune  that  so  many 
of  the  best  things  in  life  seem  to  be  lavished  upon  an  age  that  is  carelessly  negligent 
of  them.  Strength,  energy,  health,  happiness,  in  abundance  are  enjoyed  in  youth 
without  a  thought.  When  these  treasures  are  more  scarce  they  are  carefully  economized 
Aod  highly  valu^.    In  later  years  the  habit  of  looking  backward  grows  upon  us,  and 


480  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxix.  1—25. 

reflection  takes  the  place  of  heedless  activity.  Thus  we  consider  and  appreciate  with 
regret  in  the  later  years  of  life  what  we  disregarded  in  the  earlier  times  of  pos- 
session. 3.  Memory  throws  a  deltisive  glamour  over  the  past.  The  distant  hills  are 
beautiful ;  we  see  their  purple  shadows,  we  do  not  observe  their  stony  paths.  Youth 
is  not  so  sunny  as  age  paints  it.  Keen  pains  of  youth  are  forgotten  in  after-yeara, 
especially  if  those  years  have  brought  with  them  the  fortitude  that  despises  such 
Bufferings.  For  there  is  a  gain  in  years,  and  this  very  gain  leads  to  an  over-valuation 
of  youth.  Patience  and  self-control  are  acquired  by  experience,  and  while  they  help 
us  to  bear  much  that  would  be  intolerable  to  youth,  they  also  lead  us  to  smile  at  and 
under-estimate  the  wild  distresses  of  earUer  years. 

II.  It  is  good  to  appbbciatb  the  Divine  blessings  op  the  happy  past.  Job 
acknowledged  that  Grod  had  preserved  hin]  in  past  days.  The  candle  of  the  Lord  had 
then  shone  upon  his  head.     He  enjoyed  God's  friendship  when  be  came  to  maturity, 

1.  This  adds  poignancy  to  the  grief  of  regret.  God  has  not  been  sufficiently  appre- 
ciated. His  blessings  have  not  been  acknowledged  with  merited  gratitude.  Or  if  no 
self-accusations  aiise  on  these  points,  still  the  loss  of  God's  favour  seems  to  accompany 
the  loss  of  his  gifts.  The  regret  has  deeper  thoughts  than  those  concerning  earthly 
good  things.    Apparently  deserted  by  God,  the  troubled  man  cries,  with  poor  Cowper— 

"  Wliere  is  the  blessednesB  I  knew 
AVhen  first  I  saw  the  Lord  ? 
Where  is  tlie  Boul-refresblDg  view 
Of  Jesus  and  his  Word?" 

2.  This  should  really  inspire  hope.  God  is  not  fickle.  His  constancy  is  deeper  than 
appearances.  We  may  have  lost  hold  of  his  goodness  through  our  own  sin  or  distrust. 
Perhaps,  however,  we  are  deluding  ourselves;  he  is  really  nearer  to  us  in  adversity 
than  he  was  iu  prosperity,  only  we  cannot  understand  the  mysteries  of  his  providence. 
Assuredly,  if  God  once  loved  and  cared  fur  his  children,  he  will  never  forsake  them, 

3.  This  should  urge  the  young  to  appreciate  their  privileges.  It  is  not  desirable  that 
any  should  reflect  overmuch  on  their  present  happy  condition,  because  the  charm  of 
it  is  its  unconscious  freedom  and  activity.  But  it  is  only  right  to  acknowledge  the 
goodness  of  God  with  thankfulness ;  and  to  so  use  early  privileges  that  we  shall  not 
afterwards  look  back  with  regret  on  a  misspent  youth, — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — The  character  that  wins  respect.  Job  paints  a  glowing  picture  of  his 
honoured  condition  in  past  days.  Then  he  was  more  than  jrosperous.  He  was  treated 
with  great  deference.  Let  us  gather  up  the  traits  of  the  character  that  wins  respect, 
and  in  order  to  do  so  let  us  distinguish  them  from  false  grounds  of  deference. 

I.  False  grounds  of  deference.  1.  Power.  Multitudes  cringe  before  mere  power, 
either  in  fear  of  giving  offence  or  with  a  hope  of  gaining  some  advantage.  The 
Oriental  makes  his  humble  salaam  to  the  infidel  whom  in  his  heart  he  despises.  This 
deference  is  no  credit  to  either  party,  2.  Wealth.  The  worship  of  mammon  may  be 
less  visibly  cruel  than  the  worship  of  Mars,  and  yet  in  some  respects  it  is  more 
degrading,  for  it  calls  out  no  heroic  qualities.  The  deference  shown  to  the  rich  simply 
because  they  are  rich  is  one  of  the  most  unworthy  characteristics  of  human  weakness. 
It  is  not  peculiar  to  our  own  age ;  this  miserable  sycophantic  spirit  was  ridiculed  by 
Roman  satirists  and  reprobated  by  New  Testament  writers  (e.g.  Jas.  ii.  2).  Its  sordid 
ni(ariness  humiliates  all  who  are  enslaved  by  it.  3.  Self-assertion.  The  world  is 
often  too  easy  in  taking  men  at  their  own  valuation  of  themselves.  Because  a  great 
claim  is  made  it  is  often  tacitly  assented  to,  simply  because  people  are  too  indolent 
or  too  cowardly  to  question  it.  But  self-importance  is  not  greatness,  4.  Success. 
There  is  more  in  this  when  it  is  not  merely  a  business  matter,  when  it  indicates 
sterling  qualities  of  ability  and  energy.  Still,  good  fortune  may  have  much  to  do 
with  it,  and  conscientious  scruples  may  have  been  trampled  down  in  the  fierce  deter- 
mination to  win  it  at  auy  cost.  Then  the  failure  that  would  not' stoop  to  the  lower 
and  more  easy  means  of  success  is  infinitely  inore  worthy  of  honour. 

II.  The  true  character  that  wins  respect.  It  is  portrayed  in  Job's  description 
of  his  own  happy  past.  Why  was  this  hushed  deference  of  old  men  as  well  as  young, 
pf  princes  and  nobles?    The  answer  is  to  be  found  ip  tlie  conduct  of  Job.     I.  Active 


CH.  XXIX.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  481 

benevolence.  "  ^ob  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,"  etc.  Here  wai  more  than  princely 
generosity.  It  costs  a  man  absolutely  nothing  to  leave  a  big  legacy  to  the  poor,  and 
it  does  not  hurt  him  much  to  give  freely  during  his  lifetime  out  of  his  superfluous 
cash.  On  the  contrary,  the  money  may  be  profitably  laid  out,  even  from  a  purely 
worldly  and  selfish  point  of  view,  in  the  honour  of  standing  well  in  subscription-lists. 
But  the  greater  honour  is  due  to  those  who  exert  themselves  for  the  good  of  their 
brother-men.  Lord  Shaftesbury  was  a  man  of  small  means.  His  fame  is  not  founded 
on  money  ^ifts;  it  rests  on  the  more  solid  foundation  of  self-denying  labours.  2. 
Integrity.  Job  put  on  righteousness,  and  it  clothed  him.  Without  this,  beuevolence  is 
of  little  value.  We  must  be  just  before  we  are  generous.  A  Christian  man  of  business 
should  see  to  it  that  his  name  is  without  reproach  in  the  commercial  world.  Truth  and 
honesty  are  primary  conditions  of  respect.  3.  Wisdom,  "  Unto  me  men  gave  ear, 
and  waited,  and  kept  silence  at  my  counsel "  (ver.  21).  Had  Job  been  a  foolish, 
though  a  well-meaning  man,  deference  to  his  counsel  would  have  been  a  sigu  of  weak- 
ness on  the  part  of  others.  But  he  proved  himself  to  be  a  man  of  strung  mental 
power  and  of  true  wisdom.  We  owe  respect  to  the  "  men  of  light  and  leading  "  when 
their  leading  is  determined  by  their  light. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  13. — "  The  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  periih."  I.  Wht  it  m  valuable. 
We  cannot  but  be  struck  with  this  beautiful  trait  in  Job's  autobiographical  sketch. 
It  is  better  than  all  renown.  The  clamours  of  the  multitude  are  poor  plaudits  com- 
pared with  the  blessing  of  the  poor.  Many  people  may  be  indifferent  to  it.  They  may 
be  satisfied  if  only  they  can  grasp  power,  and  compel  the  homage  of  the  great,  although 
their  path  is  followed  by  "cmrses  not  loud,  but  deep."  Cruel  conquerors,  ruthless 
tyrants,  hard-hearted  men  of  the  world,  know  nothing  of  the  blessing  Job  here 
describes.  Tet  it  is  solid  and  real.  1.  It  springs  from  true  appreciation.  This  is  no 
superficial  praise  required  by  custom  or  prompted  by  shallow  motives.  It  arises  out  of 
a  genuine  perception  of  goodness.  2.  It  is  characterized  by  gratilude.  Thus  it  con- 
tains warmer  feelings  than  those  of  admiration.  An  element  of  awakening  affection 
enters  into  it.  Now,  it  is  better  to  be  loved  by  the  obscure  than  to  be  merely  honoured 
by  the  great;  it- is  better  to  be  loved  by  a  few  than  to  be  applauded  by  a  multi- 
tude. 3.  It  is  accompanied  by  the  approval  of  Christ.  He  tells  us  that  what  we 
do  to  one  of  the  least  of  his  brethren  we  do  to  hini.  He  commends  the  good 
Samaritan  to  us  as  an  approved  example.  Therefore  the  gratitude  of  the  humble 
poor  carries  with  it  the  smile  of  Heaven.  4.  It  is  powerful  for  good.  Men  try  to 
win  the  favour  of  the  great  who  can  do  much  for  them,  and  selfishly  disregard  the 
opinions  of  the  poor  who  seem  to  have  power  to  do  tliem  but  little  good  or  harm. 
Yet  the  blessings  of  the  helpless  are  prayers  to  the  great  Friend  of  the  helpless. 
They  bring  down  the  blessings  of  Gk>d.  Happy  is  the  man  who  livei  under  these 
conditions! 

II.  How  IT  IS  EARNED.  1.  By  meaus  of  genuine  goodness.  Clamours  of  applause  may 
be  won  by  very  equivocal  conduct.  Superficial  things  may  excite  extraordinary  admi- 
ration. People  rush  to  stare  and  shout  alter  any  celebrity.  But  they  want  to  know  mora 
before  they  will  bless  one.  This  devout  well-wishing  and  praying  for  a  person  which 
we  call  blessing  can  only  be  earned  by  real  and  solid  goodness.  2.  Through  the  exercise 
of  sympathy.  The  helpless  and  perishing  may  be  constrained  to  avail  themselves  of 
favours  tossed  to  them  from  a  distance  by  a  hand  of  proud  patronage,  and  perhaps  even 
of  scornful  contempt.  But  if  there  is  no  grace  in  the  gift  there  will  be  little  gratitude 
in  the  reception  of  it.  If  we  would  earn  the  blessing  of  the  helpless  we -must  win  their 
love,  and  in  order  to  do  that  we  must  manifest  love  to  them.  Sympathy  unlocks  the 
fountains  of  the  heart.  3.  In  deeds  of  active  helpfulness.  If  the  sympathy  is  genuine 
it  will  lead  spontaneously  to  such  deeds.  We  cannot  truly  sympathize  with  a  person 
in  trouble  without  desiring  to  help  him.  Now,  the  active  helpfulness  will  be  the  sign 
and  seal  of  the  sympathy.  This  it  was  that  secured  Job's  place  in  the  heart  of  the 
poor.  Men  have  heaped  honours  on  the  head  of  the  "  Happy  Warrior."  The  time  has 
come  when  we  should  revive  the  better  glories  of  Job's  days.     If  we  desire  to  win  a 

Cition  in  the  world,  let  us  save  our  ambition  from  sordid  or  even  wicked  aims.     Let 
1  be  first  in  love  and  service  who  would  be  first  in  honour.    This  is  Clirist's  rule 
(Mark  ix.  35).— W.  F.  A, 

JOB.  8 1 


482  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxix.  1— 25. 

Ver.  14. — Ohthed  wifh  righteousnets.  L  Biqhteoushebb  clothes  a  mar  as  with  a 
GARMENT.  1.  It  covcrs.  If  a  man  has  but  a  good  character,  we  can  pardon  much  else 
in  him.  He  may  be  weak,  foolish,  unfortunate.  He  may  have  failed  in  the  world,  and 
have  come  down  to  poverty.  Yet  he  is  not  in  rags.  A  royal  robe  covers  him,  and,  in 
the  eyes  of  those  who  can  appreciate  true  worth,  this  is  the  one  thing  seen  about  him. 
2.  It  protects.  The  garment  is  to  keep  off  the  chill  winds  and  damping  mists  and 
scorching  sun.  Righteousness  is  more  than  a  stout  garment.  It  is  a  piece  of  armour — 
a  breastplate,  protecting  the  heart  (Eph.  vi.  14).  When  once  a  man  is  assured  of  the 
integrity  of  his  cause  he  can  look  the  whole  world  in  the  face ;  he  can  dare  to  go 
through  fire  and  water;  he  is  strong  and  safe  where  one  with  an  evil  conscience  may 
well  tremble  and  cower.  3.  It  adorns.  This  righteousness  is  not  only  decent  and 
comforting,  like  a  thick,  warpi,  homespun  garment ;  it  is  more  beautiful  than  a  king's 
clothing  of  purple  and  silk  and  gold  embroidery.  There  is  no  beauty  so  fair  as  that  of 
goodness.  4.  It  cannot  he  hidden.  It  is  not  a  secret  confined  to  the  heart.  It  must 
be  there  first,  it  must  spring  from  the  heart.  But  it  is  not  hidden  within.  Character 
is  visible,  like  a  garment  worn  in  the  street. 

II.  The  bishteousness  which  thus  olotheb  must  be  reai..  It  is  only  the  per- 
versity of  an  erroneous  theology  that  could  ever  make  it  necessary  to  utter  so  obvious 
a  sentence  as  this.  There  is  a  way  of  referring  to  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ  as 
though  this  dispensed  with  the  necessity  of  our  being  ourselves  righteous.  Surely  such  a 
doctrine  would  be  immoral.  In  what  respects  could  this  so-called  robe  of  righteousness 
be  distinguished  from  the  hypocrite's  cloak  ?  If  Christ's  righteousness  were  only  to 
hide  our  unrighteousness  without  curing  it,  not  only  would  a  great  deception  be 
practised,  but  no  real  good  would  be  done.  The  result  would  be  an  unmitigated  evil. 
For  what  is  our  curse  and  our  ruin?  Is  it  not  our  .sin?  If  so,  nothing  can  benefit  us 
that  does  not  destroy  that  sin.  Therefore  an  attempt  to  cover  it  np  and  leave  it 
unaltered  will  do  us  no  good,  but  will  injure  us  by  drugging  our  conscience  and  giving 
us  a  false  assurance.  In  Eastern  cities  an  open  drain  runs  down  the  middle  of  the 
street,  and  is  not  so  offensive  as  one  might  think,  because  it  is  always  being  oxidized 
and  purified  by  the  fresh  air.  We  cover  over  our  drains,  but  make  ventilating  holes  in 
our  streets,  through  which  gases  of  concentrated  foulness,  unmixed  with  pure  air,  are 
continually  rising  among  the  passers-by.    Have  we  gained  much  ? 

III.  Only  Christ  can  clothe  us  with  righteousness.  Self-righteousness  is  a 
delusion.  We  cannot  make  ourselves  righteous,  nor  can  any  law  put  us  light  with 
God.  St.  Paul  demonstrated  this  in  the  opening  chapters  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans. 
But  he  also  showed  that  God  had  given  us  righteousness  in  Christ  (Rom.  iii.  21,  22). 
Now,  this  comes  first  of  all  in  forgiveness.  We  are  then  put  in  a  right  relation  with 
God,  before  we  have  overcome  all  the  sin  that  dwells  within  us.  Christ  is  the  promise 
of  our  future  righteousness.  In  this  way  his  righteovssness  means  mufch  to  us.  God 
cannot  be  taken  in  by  any  fiction.  He  can  only  regard  us  just'  as  we  are.  But  he  can 
treat  us  for  Christ's  sake  better  than  we  deserve.  So  through  Christ  we  are  placed  in 
right  relations  with  God,  and  those  right  relations  are  the  channels  through  which  i-eal 
righteousness  comes  into  us. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  18. — The  phoenix.  Accepting  the  rendering  that  is  now  adopted  by  most  of  the 
abler  commentators — that  which  is  given  in  the  margin  of  the  Revised  Version — we 
see  Job  comparing  himself  in  his  earlier  days  to  the  phcenix,  which,  "  according  to  the 
Egyptian  legend,  lived  five  hundred  years,  and  then,  setting-fire  to  its  nest,  renewed  its 
youth  in  the  funeral  pyre."  Youth  cannot  believe  in  death,  unless,  indeed,  it  falls  into 
a  sentimental  mood,  or  is  startled  by  the  ugly  fact  itself.  Naturally,  when  health  is 
unbroken,  and  all  goes  well,  life  seems  to  open  up  an  endless  vista  of  days  to  the  youn" 
man.    This  view  contains  both  a  foolish  delusion  and  a  Divine  truth. 

I.  The  foolish  delusion.  The  phoenix  was  only  a  fabulous  bird ;  no  such  creature 
exists  in  nature.  No  one  has  ever  found  the  elixir  of  life.  Tlje  idea  that  life  is  long 
is  a  delusion  of  youth.  It  springs  in  part  from  the  freshness  of  things,  and  in  part 
from  the  overflowing  vitaliLj  of  youth.  In  his  address  to  a  butterfly,  Woidsworth 
says — 

"Sit  near  us  on  the  bough  ! 
We'll  talk  of  sunshine  and  of  evag. 


OH.  TTO.  1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  48t 

And  snmmer  days,  when  we  were  young; 
Sweet  childish  days,  that  were  an  long' 
Am  twenty  days  are  now." 

Perhaps  thwe  is  no  reason  to  shatter  this  delusion.  Why  should  we  «poU  the  sunshine 
of  youth  with  the  shadow  of  coming  years  ?  The  world  could  not  go  on  without 
young  enthusiasm,  and  hope  is  essential  to  young  enthusiasm.  Yet  it  is  possible  to  be 
led  into  practical  mistakes  by  this  delusion.  The  young  may  think  that  there  is  plenty 
of  time  before  them,  and  the  thought  may  be  used  as  an  excuse  for  indolence,  negli- 
gence, and  the  postponement  of  duty.  Then  a  sudden  awakening  comes  with  a  shock 
of  alarm,  as  it  is  perceiyed  only  too  late  that  the  golden  opportunities  of  youth  are  gone — 
for  ever  1 

II.  The  DivmK  tkdth.  Clement  of  Rome  appealed  to  the  phoenix  as  a  witness  for 
the  resurrection.  We  smile  at  his  credulity.  But  may  we  not  appeal  to  the  legend  of 
the  phcenix  as  an  evidence  of  the  instinct  of  immortality?  Why  is  it  so  natural  to  us 
to  believe  that  life  will  go  on  for  ever  ?  Shall  we  put  this  idea  down  entirely  to  the 
delusion  of  circumstances  and  of  our  own  vitality  1  Does  it  not  spring  from  some- 
thing deeper  in  our  nature  ?  Be  that  as  it  may,  however,  Christ  has  come  to  satisly 
the  desire  and  to  confirm  the  hope.  Job  confessed  the  foolishness  of  his  youthful 
dreams,  yet  even  he  in  those  old-world  days  had  occasional  glimpses  of  the  life  beyond 
the  grave,  and  we  have  a  grand  assurance  of  that  life  in  Christ  and  his  resurrection. 
The  mistake  is  to  dream  of  an  earthly  Immortality.  The  old  man  who  cherishes  fond 
hopes  of  living  a  little  longer  is  not  much  better  off  than  the  drowning  man  catching 
at  a  straw.  But  he  who  has  a  hold  on  the  life  eternal  can  afford  to  see  the  years 
rushing  away,  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shuttle.  He  must  make  the  best  of  them 
while  he  has  them ;  for  this  life  is  with  him  but  once,  and  he  will  have  to  give  an 
account  of  it  hereafter ;  for  there  is  a  hereafter — a  great  day  of  Qod'a  eternity  that 
knows  no  sunset. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  21 — ^23. — Welcome  comisel.  Among  the  happy  circumstances  of  Job's  sunny 
days  of  prosperity,  he  recalls  the  welcome  that  was  accorded  to  his  words  of  advice. 
Too  often  advice  is  more  freely  offered  than  thankfully  received.  Let  us,  then,  consider 
the  quality,  the  utility,  and  the  acceptance  of  welcome  counsel. 

I.  The  quality  of  welcome  counsel.  What  conditions  must  be  fulfilled  to  make 
advice  worthy  of  acceptation?  1.  It  must  iefull  of  knowledge.  A  glib  tongue  is 
ready  enough  to  offer  gratuitous  advice,  but  we  want  to  ascertain  whether  a  full  mind 
is  inspiring  it.  Beligious  teachers  must  know  for  themselves  before  they  can  safely 
lead  others.  The  doubt  that  is  pardonable  in  the  private  person  may  be  fatal  to  the 
public  instructor.  2.  It  must  he  based  on  experience.  Evidently  Job  was  a  man  of 
wide  experience.  He  spoke  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  own  observation  of  the  world. 
Armchair  counsellors  are  not  much  valued.  An  apprenticeship  must  be  served  to  the 
affairs  on  which  we  would  give  advice.  3.  It  must  he  accompanied  by  practical  wisdom. 
Knowledge  and  experience  may  find  a  man  very  foolish,  and  leave  him  so.  We  have 
to  learn  how  to  apply  our  acquisitions.  We  need  practical  tact  in  dealing  with  men 
and  affairs.  4.  It  must  he  offered  in  sympathy.  It  is  very  little  good  to  give  preaching 
advice.  We  must  talk  to  a  man  as  a  brother.  We  must  let  people  see  that  we  care 
for  them,  and  that  we  are  truly  studying  their  good.  A  suspicion  that  the  advice  is 
not  disinterested  vitiates  it  entirely. 

II.  The  utility  of  welcome  oouksel.  Bushels  of  advice  have  to  be  thrown  on 
one  side  as  so  much  burdensome  rubbish.  Nevertheless,  the  rare  value  of  really  good 
advice  is  beyond  all  reckoning.  1.  Bight  living  is  supremely  important.  Counsel 
deals  with  life  rather  than  with  opinions.  It  touches  conduct.  Now,  as  Matthew  ArnoM 
quaintly  says,  "  conduct  is  three  parts  of  life."  Anything  that  really  helps  conduct 
must  be  valuable.  2.  Bight  living  is  not  easy.  We  are  often  perplexed  and  in  uncer- 
tainty. Our  prejudices  and  interests  warp  our  judgments.  3.  External  advice  hringn 
new  light.  It  may  not  be  better  than  what  we  already  possess ;  but  it  is  an  addition. 
The  wise  counsellor  helps  us  to  look  at  our  affairs  from  a  fresh  point  of  view.  At  the 
same  time,  he  comes  with  a  certain  calmness  and  detachment  that  enable  him  to  take 
a  fair  view  of  the  situation. 

III.  The  accbptasoe  or  welcome  advice.    1.  It  needs  humility  to  receive  it.    Wa 


484 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XXX.  1 — 81. 


•re  all  ready  to  receive  the  advice  that  concurs  with  our  prevloas  opinions ;  but  that 
advice  is  scarcely  needed.'  The  diflSoulty  is  to  accept  the  advice  that  contradicts  our 
notions  or  wishes.  Pride  resents  it ;  yet  it  may  be  most  needful  to  us.  2.  It  should 
be  taken  vnth  discrimination.  Well-meant  advice  may  be  very  foolish ;  even  wise 
advice  is  not  infallible.  We  have  to  select  what  conimeuds  itself  to  our  judgment. 
3.  It  ought  not  to  supersede  independent  thought  and  choice.  We  may  be  advrsed  by 
counseUors;  but  we  have  no  business  to  let  ourselves  be  ruled  by  them.  Afti  r  all,  it 
is  we  and  not  they  who  will  be  responsible  for  what  we  do.  Let  us,  then,  preserve  inde- 
pendence of  judgment,  and  cultivate  strength  of  will.  4.  It  deserues  to  be  treated  with 
gratitude.  For  the  sake  of  its  value.  Also  because,  if  it  is  worth  much,  it  must  have 
cost  our  counsellor  time  and  pains.  Too  often  giving  advice  is  a  very  thankless  task. 
N.B. — All  earthly  counsel  is  useful  only  in  so  far  as  it  follows  the  heavenly,  of  which 
it  is  a  type.  The  most  welcome  courisel  should  be  that  which  comes  through  the  voice 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  hearts.— W.  F.  A, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Vers.  1 — 31. — The  contrast  is  now  com- 
pleted. Having  drawn  the  portrait  of  him- 
self as  ho  was,  rich,  honoured,  blessed  with 
children,  flourishing,  in  favour  with  both 
God  and  man,  Job  now  presents  himself  to 
us  as  he  is,  dospiped  of  men  (vers.  1^10), 
afflicted  of  God  (ver.  11),  a  prey  to  vague 
terrors  (Ver.  15),  tortured  with  bodily  pains 
(vers.  17,  18),  cast  off  by  God  (vera.  19,  20), 
with  nothing  but  death  to  look  for  (vers.  23 
— 31).  The  chapter  is  the  most  touching  in 
the  whole  book. 

i ,  Ver.  1. — But  now  they  that  are  younger 
T^han  I  have  me  in  derision.  As  Job  bad 
Tjben  speaking  last  of  the  houour  in  which 
Ire  was  onoe  held,  he  begins  his  contrast  by 
ghowins  how  at  present  he  is  disgiaced  and 
derided.  Men  who  are  outcasts  aqd  solitary 
themselves,  poor  dwellers  in  eave^  (ver.  6), 
who  have  much  ado  to  keep  body  and  soul 
together  (vers.  3,  4),  and  not  meu  only,  but 
youtliB,  mere  boys,  scoff  at  him,  make  him 
a  song  and  a  byword  (ver.  9),  nay,  "  spare 
not  to  spit  in  his  face"  (ver.  10).  There 
seem  to  have  been  in  his  vicinity  weak 
Bud  debased  tribes,  generally  contemned  and 
looked  down  upon,  regarded  as  thieves  (ver. 
fi)  by  their  neighbours,  and  considered  to  be 
of  base  and  vile  origin  (ver.  8),  who  saw  in 
Job's  calamities  a  rare  opportunity  for  insult- 
ing and  triumphing  over  a  member  of  the 
superior  race  wliioh  had  crushed  them,  and 
thus  tasting,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  sweet- 
ness of  revenge.  Whose  fathers  I  would 
have  disdained  (rather,  /  disdained)  to  have 
Bet  with  the  dogs  of  my  flock.  Job  hnd.  not 
thought  their  fathers  worthy  of  employ- 
ing even  as  the  lowest  class  of  heidsmeu, 
those  reckoned  00  a  par  with  the  sheep- 
duga 


Ver.  2. — Tea,  whereto  might  the  strength 
of  their  hands  profit  me  ?  Men,  who  bad  no 
such  strength  in  their  hands  as  to  yield  an 
employer  any  profit — ^poor,  weak  creatures, 
in  whom  old  age  (rather,  manly  vigour)  was 
perished.  An  effete  race  seems  to  be  pointed 
at,  without  strength  or  stamina,  nerveless, 
spiritless,  "  destined  to  early  decay  and  pre- 
mature death ; "  but  how  they  had  sunk 
into  such  a  condition  is  not  apparent.  Too 
often  such  remanents  are  merely  tribes 
phy&ically  weak,  whom  more  powerful  ones 
have  starved  and  stunted, '  Iriving  them  into 
the  least  pjoduotive  regions,  and  in  every 
way  making  life  hard  for  them. 

Ver.  3. — For  want  and  famine  they  were 
solitary;  rather,  they  were  gaunt  (see  the 
Bevised  Version).  Oompare  the  desci  iptiona 
given  to  us  of  the  native  races  of  Central 
Africa  by  Sir^.  Baker,  Speke,  Grant,  Stanley, 
and  others.  Tleeing  into  the  wilderness; 
rather,  gnawing  the  wUdernett ;  Le.  iieeding 
on  such  dry  and  sapless  roots  and  fruits  as  the 
wiUlernesB  produces.  In  former  time  desolate 
and  waste;  or,  on  the  eve  of  wastenest  and 
desolation. 

Ver.  4. — Who  out  up  mallows  by  the 
bushes.  One  of  the  plants  on  which  they 
feed  is  the  malluach,  not  really  a  "  mallow," 
but  probably  the  Atriplex  halimus,  wliioh  is 
"  a  shrub  from  four  to  five  feet  high,  with 
many  thick  branches ;  the  leaves  are  rather 
sour  to  the  taste;  the  flowers  are  purple, 
mid  very  small;  it  grows  on  the  sra-coast 
in  Greece,  Arabia,  Syria,  etc,  and  belongs 
to  tho  natural  order  Chenopodiaces "  (see 
Smith's  '  Diet,  of  tho  Bible,'  vol.  ii.  p.  215). 
And  juniper  roots  fur  their  meat.  Most 
moderns  regard  the  rothen  as  the  Genista 
monotperma,  which  is  a  kind  of  broom.  It 
is  a  leguminous  plunt,  having  a  white  flower, 
and  grows  plentifully  in  the  Sinaitio  desert, 
in  Palestine,  Syria,  and  Arabia.  "The  root 
is  very  bitter,  and  would  only  be  used  as 
food  under  extreme  pressure,  but  the  fruit 


OH.  XXX.  I— 31.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


48.1 


ii  readily  eaten  by  ehepp,  and  the  roots 
would,  no  doubt,  yield  Bome  nouTishmetit 
(see  Dr.  Cunningham  Geikie's  work,  ■  The 
Hnly  Land  and  the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  p.  258). 

Ver.  5. — They  were  driven  forth  from 
among  men.  Weak  races  retreat  before 
strong  ones,  who  occupy  ttieir  lauds,  and 
whose  will  they  do  not  dare  to  dispute. 
They  are  not  intentionally  "driven  out," 
for  the  strong  races  would  gladly  make  them 
their  drudges  ;  but  they  retire  into  the  most 
inaccessible  regions,  as  the  primitive  popula- 
tion has  done  in  India  and  elsewhere.  They 
cried  after  th:m  as  after  a  thief.  Outcast 
tribes  naturally,  and  almost  necessarily,  be- 
come robber-tribes.  Deprived  of  their  pro- 
ductive lands,  and  driven  into  rooky  deserts, 
want  makes  them  thieves  and  marauders. 
Then  those  who  have  made  them  what  they 
are  vilify  and  decry  them. 

Ver.  6.— To  dwell  in  the  cliffs  of  the 
valleys ;  or,  in  the  clefts  (Revised  Version). 
Western  Asia  is  full  of  rooky  regions, 
seamed  with  deep  gorges  and  clefts,  the 
walls  of  which  rise  abruptly  or  in  terraces, 
and  are  themselves  pierced  with  caves  and 
cracks.  The  tract  about  Petra  is,  perhaps, 
the  most  remarkable  of  these  regions ;  but 
there  are  many  others  which  closely  resemble 
it.  These  places  afford  refuges  to  weak  and 
outcast  tribes,  who  hide  in  them,  either  in 
caves  of  the  earth,  or  in  the  rooks.  The 
Greeks  called  these  unfortunates  "  Troglo- 
dytes"(Herod.,iv.  183 ;  Strabo,xvi.  p.  1102; 
Diod.Sic.,iii.  14,etc.),  the  Hebrews  "Horim," 
from  nin,  "  a  hole." 

Ver.  7.— Among  the  hushes  they  brayedg 
The  sounds  which  came  from  their  mouthlj 
sounded  to  Job  less  like  articulate  speeclf 
than  like  the  braying  of  asses.  Compare* 
what  Herodotus  says  of  his  Troglodjftes : 
"  Theii-  language  is  unlike  that  of  any  otlier 
people;  it  sounds  like  the  screeching  of 
bats."  Under  the  nettles  (or,  loild  vetches') 
they  were  gathered  together;  TsAhei,huddled 
together. 

Ver.  8. — They  were  children  of  fools.  The: 
physical  degeneracy  whereof  Job  has  beeif 
spi'aking  ir  accompanied  in  most  instance^ 
by  extreme  mental  incapacity.  Some  of  the 
degraded  races  cannot  count  beyond  four  or 
five;  others  have  not  more  than  two  or  three 
hundred  words  in  their  vocabulary.  They  are 
all  of  low  intellect,  though  occasionally 
extremely  artful  and  cunning.  Yea,  children 
of  base  men ;  literally,  children  of  no  name. 
Their  race  had  never  made  for  itself  any 
name,  but  was  unknown  and  insignificant. 
They  were  viler  than  the  earth;  rather,  they 
were  tcowrged  oat  of  the  land.  This  must 
not  be  understood  literally.  It  is  a  rhetorical 
re  petition  of  what  had  been  already  said  in 
ver.  8.  The  expression  may  be  compared 
with  the  tale  in  Herodotus,  that  when  the 


Scythian  slaves  rebelled  and  took  up  arms, 
the  Scythians  scourged  them  into  subjection 
(Herod.,  iv.  3,  i). 

Ver.  9.— And  now  am  I  their  songi  yea,  I 
am  their  byword  (see  above,  ch.  xvii.  6 ;  and 
oomp.  Ps.  Ixix.  12). 

Ver.  10.— They  abhor  me,  they  flee  far  from 
me  J  rather,  they  abhor  me,  they  stand  aloof 
from  me  (see  the  Revised  Version).  And 
spare  not  to  spit  in  my  face.  Tliis  has 
generally  been  taken  literally,  as  it  si  ems 
to  have  been  by  the  LXX.  But  it,  perhaps, 
means  no  more  than  that  they  did  not 
refrain  from  spitting  in  Job'e  presence  (see 
Professor  Lee's  '  Book  of  Job,'  p.  422). 

Ver.  11. — Because  he  hath  loosed' my  cord. 
"  He,"  in  this  passage,  can  only  be  God  j 
and  thus  Job  turns  here  to  some  extent  from 
his  human  persecutors  to  his  great  A£9icter, 
the  Almighty.  God  has  "loosened  his 
cord,"  t.e.  has  relaxed  his  vital  ti  bre,  taken 
away  his  strength,  reduced  him  to  helpless- 
ness. Hence,  and  hence  only,  do  the  perse- 
cutors dare  to  crowd  around  him  and  insult 
him.  And*afflieted  me.  God  has  afflicted 
him  with  blow  after  blow— with  impoverish- 
ment (ch.  i.  14 — 17),  with  bereavement  (ch. 
i.  18,  19),  with  a  sore  malady  (ch.  ii.  7). 
They  have  also  let  loose  the  bridle  before  me. 
This  has  given  his  persecutors  tlie  courage 
to  cast  aside  all  restraint,  and  load  him  with 
insult  after  insult  (vers.  1,  9,  10). 

Ver.  12. — Upon  my  right  hand  rise  the 
youth;  literally,  the  hrood;  i.e.  the  rabble— 
a  crowd  of  half-grown  youths  and  boys,  such 
as  collects  in  almost  any  town  to  hoot  and 
insult  a  respectable  person  who  is  iu  trouble 
and  helpless.  In  the  East  such  gatherings 
are  very  common  and  exceedingly  annoying. 
They  push  away  my  feet;  i.e.  they  try  to 
throw  me  down  as  I  walk.  They  raise  np 
against  me  the  ways  of  their  destruction. 
They  place  obstacles  iu  my  way,  impede  my 
steps,  thwart  me  in  every  way  that  they  find 
possible. 

Ver.  13.— They  mar  my  path ;  «'.«.  interfere 
with  and  frustrate  whatever  I  am  bent  on 
doing.  They  set  forward  my  calamity.  Pro- 
fessor Lee  translates,  "  They  profit  by  my 
ruin."  They  have  no  helper.  If  the  text 
is  sound,  we  must  understand,  "They  do 
all  tliis,  they  dare  all  tliis,  even  though  they 
have  no  powerful  men  to  aid  them."  But  it 
is  suspected  that  there  is  some  corruption  in 
the  passage,  and  that  the  original  gave  the 
sense  which  is  found  in  the  Vulgate, "  There 
is  none  to  help  me." 

Ver.  14. — They  came  upon  me  as  a  wide 
breaking  in  of  waters ;  i.e.  with  a  force  like 
that  of  water  wlien  it  has  burst  through  a 
bank  or  dam.  In  the  desolation  they  rolled 
themselves  upon  me.  Like  the  waves  of  the 
sea,  which  follow  one  after  another. 
Ver.   15. — Terrors  are  turned  upon  me> 


486 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  XXX.  1 — 81 


Job  seems  to  paes  here  from  his  buDian 
persecutors  to  his  internal  sufferings  of 
mind  and  body.  "  Terrors  "  take  hold  upon 
him.  He  experiences  in  his  sleep  horrible 
dreams  and  visions  (see  oh.  vii.  14),  and  even 
in  his  waking  hours  he  is  haunted  by  fears. 
The  "  terrors  of  God  do  set  themselycB  in  array 
against  him"  (ch.  vi.  4).  God  seemsto  him 
as  One  that  watches,  and  "  tries  him  every 
moment"  (ch.  vii.  18),  seeking  occasion 
against  him,  and  never  leaving  him  an 
instant's  peace  (oh.  vii.  19).  These  terrors, 
he  says,  pursue  my  soul  as  the  wind ;  literally, 
pursue  mine  honowr,  or  my  dignity.  They 
flutter  the  culm  composure  that  befits  a 
godlji  man,  disturb  it,  shake  it,  and  for  a  time 
at  any  rate,  cause  terrors  and  shriukings  of 
soul.  Under  these  circumstances,  my  wel- 
fare passeth  away  as  a  cloud.  It  is  not 
only  my  happiness,  but  my  real  welfare, 
that  is  gone.  Body  and  soul  are  equally  in 
suffering — the  one  shaken  with  fears  ard 
distiii'bed  with  doubts  and  appieherisions; 
the  other  smitten  with  a  sore  disease,  bO  that 
there  is  no  soundness  in  it. 

Ver.  16. — And  now  my  soul  is  ponred  out 
upon  me  (comp.  Fs.  xlii.  4).  My  very  soul 
seems  to  be  gone  out  of  me.  "  I  faint  and 
swoon  away,  because  of  my  fears "  (Lee). 
The  days  of  affliction  have  taken  hold  upon 
me.  All  my  prosperity  is  gone,  and  I  am 
come  to  "the  days  of  affliction."  These 
"  take  hold  on  me,"  and,  as  it  were,  possess 
me. 

Yer.  17. — My  hones  are  pierced  in  me  in 
the  night  season.  In  Eleplmntiasis  anxsthe- 
tica,  says  Dr.  Erasmus  Wil.on.  "  when  the 
integument  is  insensible,  there  are  deep- 
seated  burning  pains,  sometimes  of  a  bone 
or  joint,  and  sometimes  of  the  vertebral 
column.  These  pains  are  greatest  at  night; 
they  prevent  sleep,  and  give  rise  to  rest- 
lessness and  frightful  dreams"  (Quain's 
•Dictionary  of  Medicine,'  vol.  i.  p.  817). 
And  my  sinews  take  no  rest ;  rather,  my 
gnawings,  or  my  gnawing  pains  (see  the 
Kevised  Version ;  and  comp.  ver.  3,  where 
the  same  word  is  properly  rendered  by 
"pnaioing  [the  wilderness]"). 

Ver.  18. — By  the  great  force  of  my  disease 
is  my  garment  changed;  or,  disfigured.  The 
purulent  discharge  from  his  ulcers  disfigured 
and  miide  filthy  his  garment,  which  stiffened 
as  the  discliargo  dried,  and  clung  to  his 
frame.  It  hindeth  me  about  as  the  collar 
of  my  coat.  The  whole  garment  clung  to 
his  body  as  closely  as  it  is  usual  for  a  man's 
collar,  or  "neck-hole"  (Professor  Lee),  to 
cliiiK  about  his  throat. 

\ny.  19. — He  (i.e.  God)  hath  oast  me  into 
the  mire.  "  The  mire  "  here  is  the  lowest 
dejith  of  misery  and  degradation  (comp. 
is.  xl.  2;  Ixix  2,  14).  Job  feels  himself 
Ciist  into  it  by  God,  but  nevertheless  does 


iK>t  forsake  him  nor  cease  to  call  upon  him 
j^ers.  20 — 23).  And  I  am  become  like  dust 
and  ashes;  i.e.  unclean,  impure,  offensive 
%>  my  fellow-men,  an  object  of  dislike  and 
disdain. 

Ver.  20.— I  ciy  onto  thee,  and  thon  dost 
not  hear  me.  It  is  the  worst  of  all  calamities 
to  be  God-forsaken,  as  Job  believed  himself 
to  be,  because  be  had  no  immediate  answer 
to  his  prayers.  The  bitterest  cry  upon  the 
cross  was  "Bli,  Eli,  lama  sabaohthani  ? " 
But  no  good  man  is  ever  really  God-forsaken, 
and  no  rightful  and  earnest  prayers  are  ever 
really  unieard.  Job  "had  need  of  patience  " 
(Heb.  X.  36),  patient  as  he  was  (Jas.  v.  11). 
He  should  have  trusted  God  more,  and 
complained  less.  I  stand  up,  and  thou 
regardest  me  not ;  rather,  I  stand  up,  as  the 
manner  of  the  Jews  usually  was  in  prayer 
"juke  xviii.  11),  and  thou  lonjcest  at  me  (see 
ke  Revised  Version).  Job's  complaint  is 
jKi|at,  when  he  stands  up  and  stretches  out 
W3  hands  to  God  in  prayer,  God  simply 
looks  on,  does  nothing,  gives  him  no  help. 

Ver.  21. — Thou  art  become  cruel  to  me ; 
literally,  thou  art  turned  to  be  cruel  to  me. 
In  other  words,  "  Thou  art  changed  to  me, 
and  ait  become  cruel  to  me."  Job  never 
forgets  that  for  long  years  God  was  gracious 
and  kind  to  him,  "  made  him  and  fashioned 
him  together  round  about,"  "clothed  him 
with  skin  and  flesh,  and  fenced  him  with 
bones  and  sinews,"  "granted  him  life  and 
favour,  and  by  his  visitation  preserved  his 
spirit"  (oh.  x.  9—12);  but  the  recollection 
brings,  perhaps,  as  much  of  pain  as  of 
pleasure  with  it.     One  of  our  poets  says — 

"  Joy's  recollection  is  no  longer  joy ; 
But  sorrow's  memory  is  a  sorrow  still." 

At  any  rate,  the  contrast  between  past  joy 
and  present  suffering  adds  a  pang  to  the 
latter.  With  thy  strong  hand  thou  opposest 
thyself  against  me ;  htera,\\y,  vjith  the  might 
of  thy  hand  dost  thou  persecute  me  (see  the 
Revised  Version).  "  Hceo  noster  irreve- 
rentius  "  (Schultens);  comp.  ch.  six.  6—13. 

Ver.  22. — Thou  liftest  me  np  to  the  wind; 
thou  causest  me  to  ride  upon  it ;  i.e.  thou 
makest  me  to  be  storm-tossed.  I  am  as  it 
were  a  straw  caught  up  by  a  whirlwind, 
and  borne  hither  and  thither  in  the  wide 
regions  of  space,  unknowing  whither  I  go. 
I  am  treated  as  I  have  described  the  wicked 
man  to  be  treated  (ch.  xxvii.  20,  21).  And 
dissolvest  my  substance.  "Dissolvest  me 
entirely  "  (Professor  Lee) ;  dissolvest  me  in 
the  storms  (Revised  Version). 

Ver.  23.— For  I  know  that  thou  wilt  bring 
me  to  death.  Job  has  all  along  expressed 
his  conviction  that  he  has  nothing  to  look 
for  but  death.  He  feels  within  himself  the 
seeds  of  a  mortal  malady ;  for  such,  practi- 
cally, was  elephantiasis  in  Job's  time.     Hr 


OS.  XXI.  1—31.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


487 


is  devoid  of  any  expectation  of  recovery. 
Death  must  come  upon  liim,  he  thinka,  ere 
long ;  and  then  God  will  bring  him  to  the 
house  appointed  for  all  living.  Thia,  aa  he 
haa  already  explained  (oh.  x.  21,  22),  is 
"the  land  of  darkness  and  the  ahadow  of 
death,  a  land  of  darkness,  as  darkness  itself; 
and  of  the  shadow  of  death,  without  any 
order,  and  where  the  light  is  as  darkness." 
It  is  a  melancholy  prospect;  but  we  must 
regard  it  as  cheered  by  the  hope  of  an  ulti- 
mate resurrection,  such  as  seems  indicated, 
if  not  absolutely  proclaimed,  in  eh.  xix. 
25  —27  (see  the  comment  on  that  passage). 

Ver.  24. — Howbeit  he  will  not  stretch 
out  his  hand  to  the  grave,  though  they  cry 
in  his  destruction.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
obscure  passages  in  the  entire  Book  of  Job, 
and  scarcely  any  two  independent  com- 
mentators understand  it  alike.  To  give  all 
tlie  different  renderings,  and  discuss  them, 
would  be  an  almost  endless  task,  and  one 
over- wearisome  to  the  reader.  It  will,  per- 
haps, suffice  to  select  the  one  which  to  the 
present  writer  appears  the  most  satisfactory. 
Thia  is  the  rendering  of  Professor  Stanley 
Loathes,  who  suggests  the  following:  "How- 
beit God  will  not  put  forth  his  hand  to 
bring  a  man  to  death  and  the  grave,  when 
there  is  earnest  prayer  for  them,  not  even 
when  he  himself  hath  caused  the  calamity." 
The  same  writer  further  explains  the  passage 
as  follows :  "  I  know  that  thou  wilt  dissolve 
and  destroy  me,  and  bring  me  to  the  grave 
(ver.  23),  though  thou  wilt  not  do  so  when 
I  pray  to  thee  to  release  me  by  death  from 
my  suQiBrings.  Thou  wilt  surely  do  so  [some 
time  or  other],  but  not  in  my  time,  or 
accordinof  to  my  will,  but  only  in  thine  own 
appointed  time,  and  as  thou  seest  fit." 

Ver.  25. — Did  not  I  weep  for  him  that 
was  in  trouble  1  i.e.  do  I  claim  a  sympathy 
which  I  do  not  deserve  ?  When  men  wept 
and  entreated  me,  did  not  I  do  my  best  to 
give  them  the  aid  which  they  requested? 
Did  not  I  weep  for  them,  and  intercede 
with  God  for  them?  Was  not  my  soul 
grieved  for  the  poor  %  (comp.  ch.  xxix.  12 — 
17;  xxxi.  16-22). 

Vur.  26. — When  I  looked  for  good,  then 
evil  came  unto  me.  Job  was  "  looking  for 
gond,"  expecting  fully  the  continuance  of 
his  great  wealth  and  prosperity,  when  the 
sudden  shock  of  calamity  fell  upon  him  It 
was  wholly  unexpected,  and  therefore  the 
harder  to  bear.  And  when  I  waited  for 
light,  there  came  darkness.  This  may  refer 
to  periods,  after  his  calamities  began,  when 


he  had  hopes  that  Ms  prayers  would  be 
answered,  and  a  rest  or  pause,  an  interval 
of  repose,  be  granted  him  (oh.  ix.  34;  x.20), 
but  when  his  hopes  were  disiippointed,  and 
the  darkness  closed  in  upon  him  thicker  and 
murkier  than  ever. 

Ver.  27. — My  bowels  boiled,  and  rested 
not ;  rather,  boil  and  rest  iiat  (see  the  Hevised 
Version).  It  is  liis  present  condition  of 
which  Job  speaks  from  ver.  27  to  ver.  31. 
His  "entrails,"  i.e.  hia  whole  innermost 
nature,  is  disturbed,  tormented,  thrown  into 
confusion.  The  days  of  affliction  prevented 
me;  rather,arecomet«^»»nie(corap. ver.  16). 

Vers.  28,  29. — I  went  mourning  without 
the  sun;  rather,  1  go  about  blackened,  but 
not  by  the  sun.  Grief  and  suffering,  accord- 
ing to  Oriental  notions,  blackened  the  face 
(see  Lam,  iv.  8;  v.  10;  Ps.  cxix.  83;  and 
below,  ver.  30).  I  stood  up,  and  I  cried  in 
the  congregation;  rather.  Island  up  in  tlte 
assembly,  and  cry  for  help  (see  the  Bevised 
Version).  Job  feels  this  as  the  most  pitiable 
feature  in  hii  case.  He  is  broken  down ; 
he  can  no  longer  endure.  At  first  he  could 
sit  in  silence  for  seyeii  days(ch.  ii.  13);  now 
he  is  reduced  to  uttering  complaints  and 
lamentations.  He  is  a  brother,  not  to 
dragons,  but  to  ja/ikaU.  His  laments  are 
like  the  long  melancholy  cries  that  those 
animals  emit  during  the  silence  of  the  night, 
so  well  known  to  Eastern  travellers.  He 
adds  further  that  he  is  a  oompanion,  not 
to  owls,  but  to  ostriches;  which,  like  jackals, 
have  a  mehincholy  cry  (see  Micah  i.  8 ;  and 
comp.  Dr.  Hooker's  article  in  Smith's  'Diet. 
of  the  Bible,'  vol.  ii.  p.  650). 

Ver.  30. — My  skin  is  black  upon  me  (see 
the  comment  on  vers.  28,  29,  ad  init.),  and 
my  bones  are  burned  with  heat.  The 
"burning  pains"  in  the  bones,  which 
characterize  at  least  one  form  of  elephan- 
tiasis, have  been  already  mentioned  (see  tlie 
comment  on  ver.  17).  In  ordinary  elephan- 
tiasis there  is  often  "intense  pain  in  the 
lumbar  region  and  groin,"  which  the  patient 
might  think  to  be  in  his  bones. 

Ver.  31. — My  harp  also  is  turned  to 
mourning.  The  result  of  all  is  that  Job's 
harp  is  laid  aside,  either  literally  or  figura- 
tively. Its  music  is  replaced  by  the  sound 
of  mourning  (see  vers.  28,  29).  And  my 
organ  (or  rather,  my  pipe)  into  the  voice  of 
them  that  weep.  The  pipe  also  is  no  longer 
sounded  in  his  presence ;  he  hears  only  the 
voice  of  weeping  and  lamentation.  Thus 
appropriately  ends  the  long  dirge  in  which 
he  has  bewailed  his  miserable  fate. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — Job's  second  parable :  2.  A  lamentation  over  fallen  greatness.     I.  Thb 
OHABACTiiB  OF  Job's  debiders.     1.  JiMiioTS  in  respect  of  age-.    (Ver.  1.)    These  were 


488  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [OH.  xxx.  1—31, 


not  the  young  pritioes  of  the  city  (ch.  xxix.  8),  by  whom  he  had  formerly  been  held  in 
reverential  regard,  but  "  the  young  good-for-notliing  vagabonds  of  a  miserable  class 
of  men  "  (Delitzsch)  dvsrelling  in  the  neighbourhood.  Job's  inferiors  in  point  of  years, 
they  should  have  treated  him  with  honour  and  respect  (Lev.  xix.  32),  especially  when 
they  beheld  his  intense  wretchedness  and  misery.  That  they  failed  to  accord  him 
snoh  veneration  as  was  due  to  seniority  in  age,  and  much  more  that  they  made  him 
the  butt  of  their  contemptuous  derision,  was  not  only  an  express  violation  of  the  dictates 
of  nature  and  religion  (of.  the  Egyptian  moral  precept,  "  Do  not  mock  the  venerable 
man  who  is  thy  superior; "  vide  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  viii.  p.  160),  but  a  special 
mark  of  depravity  in  themselves,  as  well  as  a  certain  index  to  the  social  and  moral 
degradation,  of  the  race  to  which  they  belonged.  The  good  qualities  of  an  advancing 
and  the  bad  qualities  of  a  retrograding  people,  infallibly  discover  themselves  in  the 
moral  characteristics  of  the  youthful  portion  of  the  community.  2.  Base  in  respect 
of  ancestry.  (Vers.  1,  8.)  The  foregoing  inference  from  the  ribald  behaviour  of  the 
younger  men  job  confirms  by  describing  them  as  "children  of  fools,  yea,  children  of 
base  men,"  literally,  "of  men  without  a  name,"  and  as  men  "whose  sires"  he  "would 
have  disdained  to  set  with  the  dogs  of  his  flock."  It  is  doubtful  if  Job  does  not  in 
this  and  other  expressions  of  this  passage  (vers.  1 — 8)  repay  the  contempt  of  his 
scornful  assailants  with  fourfold  liberality,  thereby  failing  to  evince  that  meekness  in 
resenting  injuries  which  good  men  should  study  to  display,  and  perpetrating  the  same 
offence  which  he  imputes  to  others,  as  well  as  talking  about  his  fellow-men  (God's 
creatures  and  Hod's  children  no  less  than  himself)  in  a  way  that  was  scarcely  excusable 
even  in  a  patriarchal  sage.  Nevertheless,  what  he  purposes  to  convey  through  the 
medium  of  his  heated,  it  also  poetic,  language  is  that  his  revilers  were  the  offspring  of 
a  vile,  worthless,  degraded,  brutalized  race,  who  had  well-nigh  sunk  to  the  level  of  the 
beasts  that  perish.  3.  Worthless  in  respect  of  service.  (Ver.  2.)  Like  their  fathers 
whom  Job  would  have  disdained  to  rank  with  the  dogs  of  his  flock,  i.e.  whom  ha 
regarded  as  not  worthy  of  being  compared  to  these  wise  and  faithful  animals  who 
watched  his  sheep,  they  (i.e.  these  younger  vagabonds)  were  idle  and  effeminate  triflers, 
lazy,  worthless  rascals,  as  little  able  to  work  as  willing,  the  ethnic  deterioration  they 
were  undergoing  revealing  itself  in  enervated  physical  constitutions  no  less  than  in 
depraved  moral  dispositions.  The  truth  here  enunciated  with  regard  to  nations  and 
communities  is  alsu  true  of  individuals,  that  sin,  vice,  immorality,  has  a  tendency  to 
impair  the  bcidily  strength,  mental  vigour,  and  moral  power  of  such  as  yield  to  its  fatal 
fascinations.  4.  Famished  in  respect  of  food.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  Strangely  blending  pity 
with  scorn,  Job  informs  us  that  in  great  part  the  feebleness  of  those  wretched  creatures, 
who  "could  bring  nothing  to  perfection"  (Oox),  and  were  not  worth  employing  to  do 
the  work  of  a  shepherd's  dog,  was  due  to  the  difficulty  they  had  in  finding  nourish- 
ment. Lean  and  haggard,  benumbed  from  want  and  hunger,  they  literally  gnawed  the 
desert,  picking  up  such  scanty  sustenance  as  the  barren  steppe  afforded,  plucking 
mallows  in  the  thicket,  t.e.  "the  salt-wort  from  off  the  stalk"  (Fry),  the  salt-wort,  or 
rea-purslain,  being  a,  tall  shrubby  plant  which  thrives  in  the  desert  as  well  as  on  tha 
coast,  "  the  buds  and  young  leaves  of  which"  also  "are  gathered  and  eaten  by  the 
poor  "  (Delitzsch) ;  and  taking  the  roots  of  broom  for  their  bread,  the  broom  abounding 
in  the  deserts  and  sandy  places  of  Egypt  and  Arabia,  and  growing  to  a  height  sufficient 
to  afford  shelter  to  a  person  sitting  down.  A  melancholy  picture  of  destitution,  which 
has  its  counterpart  not  only  among  expiring  races,  effete  desert  tribes,  and  wretched 
Troglodytes,  but  also  in  many  a  centre  of  modem  civilization.  It  is  hardly  question- 
able that  in  the  lower  strata  of  society  in  our  large  cities  there  are  thousands  for 
whom  the  physical  conditions  of  life  are  as  severe  as  those  just  depicted  by  the  poet 
5.  Outcasts  in  respect  of  society.  (Ver.  5.)  In  consequence  of  their  pilfering  and 
marauding  habits,  they  were  banished  forth  from  the  pale  of  the  organized  community. 
Nay,  when  it  happened  that  they  ventured  near  the  precincts  of  civilizfd  life,  they  at 
once  became  the  objects  of  a  hue  and  cry,  men  hallooing  after  them  as  they  did  after 
a  thief,  and  chasing  them  away  to  their  own  miserable  haunts  of  poverty  and  vice.  It 
is  clear  they  were  the  criminal  classes  of  patriarchal  times,  and  were  regarded  with 
much  the  same  abhorrence  as  the  pariahs  of  modern  society,  who  wage  war  against  all 
constituted  authority,  prey  upon  the  industry  of  the  virtuous  and  law-abiding,  and  as 
a  consequence  live  in  a  perpetual  state  of  social  ostracism.     6.  Troglodytes  in  respect 


OH.  xn.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  489 

of  hahitation.  (Ver.  6.)  Driven  beyond  the  pale  of  civilized  society,  they  were  com- 
pelled "  to  dwell  in  the  ciiffB  of  the  valleys,"  literally,  "  in  the  horror  of  gleus,"  i.e.  in 
dismal  and  gloomy  gorges,  like  the  Horites  (or  cave-men)  of  Mount  Seir  (Gen.  xiv.  6), 
betaking  themselves  fur  shelter  to  the  caves  of  the  earth  and  the  holes  in  the  rocks. 
According  to  modern  scientific  theory,  they  would  exemplify  man  in  the  earliest  or 
lowest  stage  of  his  development ;  according  to  the  testimony  of  revelation,  the  Troglo- 
dytes would  attest  man's  degeneracy  Irom  a  primeval  standard  of  perfection.  And  lo 
persistent  is  this  downward  tendency  in  man  apart  from  Divine  grace,  that  almost 
every  civilized  community  has  its  social  and  moral  Troglodytes,  who  dwell  in  dismal 
valleys — ^its  wretched  outcasts,  children  of  sin  and  shame,  whose  lurking-places  are  dens 
of  infamy  and  haunts  of  vice.  7.  Dehumanized  in  respect  of  nature.  (Ver.  7.)  Having 
previously  (ch.  xxiv.  5)  described  these  evicted  aborigines  as  leading  a  gregarious 
life,  like  wild  assea  roaming  the  desert  under  the  guidance  of  a  leader  (ch.  xxxix.  5), 
Job  recurs  to  the  comparison  to  indicate,  not  the  eager  ferocity  with  which  they  scour 
the  steppe  for  fodder,  but  how  near  to  the  brutes  they  have  been  brought  by  their 
misery,  representing  them  as  huddling  themselves  together  under  the  bushes,  and 
croaking  out,  in  unintelligible  jargon  like  the  brayings  of  an  ass,  a  doleful  lamentation 
over  their  miserable  condition.  Herodotus  compares  the  language  of  the  Troglodyte 
Ethiopians  to  the  screeching  of  bats.  The  speech  of  savage  races  is  mostly  composed 
of  "  growling  gutturals  and  sharp  clicks  "  (Cox).  As  a  nation  advances  in  civilization 
its  tongue  purifies  and  refines.  Like  the  cave-men  of  Western  Asia  and  Ethiopia,  the 
moral  Troglodytes  of  society  have  a  jargon  of  their  own ;  e.g.  the  language  of  thieves. 

II.  The  bbhavioub  of  Job's  debidbrs.  1.  Mockery  and  contempt.  (Vers.  1, 9, 10.) 
Physically  and  morally  degraded,  this  worthless  rabble  of  marauders,  half  men  aad 
half  beasts,  having  falln  in  with  Job  in  their  wanderings,  were  so  little  touched 
by  sympathy  for  his  misfortunes,  that  they  turned  his  miseries  into  merry  jests,  and 
made  bywords  of  his  groans.  It  is  a  special  mark  of  depravity  when  youth  mocks  at  aga 
(2  Kings  ii.  3)  and  laughs  at  affliction.  The  experience  of  Job  was  reproduced  in  the 
cases  of  David  (Ps.  xxxv.  15 ;  Ixix.  12),  Jeremiah  (Lam.  iii.  14,  63),  and  Christ  (Matt, 
xxvii.  43  ;  Luke  xxiii.  35).  2.  Insult  and  outrage.  (Ver.  10.)  They  gave  open  and 
undisguised  expression  to  the  abhorrence  with  which  they  regarded  him,  by  fleeing  far 
from  him,  or  standing  at  a  distance,  and  making  their  remarks  upon  him.  If  they 
ventured  to  come  near  him  it  was  either  to  spit  in  his  presence,  "  the  greatest  insult 
to  an  Oriental "  (Carey),  or  perhaps  to  spit  in  his  face  (cf.  Niimb.  xii.  14 ;  Dent.  xxv.  9), 
thus  carrying  their  contempt  and  scorn  to  the  lowest  depth  of  indignity.  Joh  had 
fallen  low  indeed  to  be  thus  outraged  by  the  vilest  dregs  of  society ;  but  not  lower  than 
did  Christ,  who  was  similarly  treated  by  the  rabble  of  Judaea  (Matt.  ixvi.  67 ;  xxvii. 
30),  as  long  belore  it  had  been  predicted  that  he  should  be  (Isa.  1.  6).  Ko  doubt  in  all 
this  Job's  sufferings  were  typical  of  Christ's.  3.  Hostility  and  violence.  (Vers.  12 — 15.) 
Not  content  with  words  and  gestures,  the  young  vagabonds  proceeded  to  acts  of  open 
violence.  Having  found  the  poor  fallen  prince  groaning  in  wretchedness  and  misery  upon 
the  ash-heap  outside  his  house,  they  abstained  not  from  direct  hostility.  Like  a  crowd 
of  witnesses  starting  up  on  his  right  hand,  they  overwhelmed  him  with  accusaiifus; 
like  an  army  of  assailants  thrusting  his  feet  away,  they  dfsputed  with  hira  every  inch 
of  ground,  compelling  him  to  retire  ever  further  and  further  back  ;  pressing  on  like  a 
tumultuous  besieging  host,  they  cast  up  their  ways  of  destruction,  i.e.  their  military 
causeways,  against  him,  tearing  down  his  path  so  as  to  render  escape  impossible, 
breaking  in  upon  him  as  through  a  wide  breach,  and  causing  him  to 'flee  in  terror 
before  their  irresistible  approach,  so  that  his  nobility  was  dispersed  like  the  wind,  and 
his  prosperity  swept  away  like  a  cloud. 

III.  The  motive  op  Job's  deridbks,  1.  Not  Job's  unkivdness.  It  was  true  that 
these  insolent  vagabonds,  with  their  fathers,  had  been  summarily  evicted  from  their 
pristine  settlements — ^had  been  compelled,  not  without  cruel  oppression  and  intolerable 
hardship,  to  retire  before  the  superior  race  who  had  dislodged  them;  it  may  also  be  that 
of  that  conq  uering  Arat  trib<!  Job  was  a  conspicuous  member,  and  might  on  that  account 
be  hold  responsible  for  the  indignities  and  wrongs  that  had  been  heaped  upon  the 
wretched  aborigines;  but,  in  point  of  fact,  Joh  disclaims  having  taken  part  in  those 
ruthleiB  acts  of  tyranny  which  caused  the  poor  of  the  land  to  slink  away  and  hide  them- 
aelvea,  naked  and  shivering,  in  the  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  in  the  holes  and  cievicea 


490  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oi.  xxX.  1— 31. 


of  the  rocks  (ch.  xxiv.  4 — 8),  and  rather  indicates  that  he  regarded  their  sorrowful  lot  with 
compassion,  even  while,  with  disgust  and  aversion,  he  shrank  from  any  contact  with- 
themselves.  But :  2.  Their  own  wichedness.  They  simply  saw  that  he,  whom  they  once 
knew  as  a  powerful  prince,  was  overtaken  by  evil  fortune,  and  they  turned  upon  him 
accordingly.  That  they  traced  Job's  calamities,  as  Job  himself  did,  to  the  hand  of 
God  (ver.  11),  was  unlikely.  Yet  the  result  was  the  same.  God,  according  to  Job — 
according  to  them,  fate — had  unloosed  his  bow  and  sent  a  shaft  through  the  heart  nf  this 
iuiperious  autocrat,  or  had  loosened  the  cord  which  upheld  the  tent  of  his  hicherto 
vigorous  body,  and  had  laid  him  prostrate  beneaih  a  loathsome  and  painful  disease ; 
and  £0  they,  casting  off  restraint,  assailed  him  with  unbridled  arrogance,  acting  out, 
in  these  early  times,  the  familiar  story  of  the  kicking  ass  and  the  dead  L'on. 

**  But  yesterday  the  word  of  Caesar  might 
Have  stood  against  the  world ;  now  lies  he  there, 
And  none  so  poor  to  do  him  reverence." 

('  Julius  Caesar,'  act  ill.  sc.  2.) 

Learn  :  1.  The  certainty  that  man  may  degrade  himseli  beneath  the  level  of  the 
beasts.  2.  The  right  of  society  to  protect  itself  against  the  lawless  and  depraved.  3. 
The  tendency  of  all  wickedness  to  lead  to  misery  even  on  earth.  4.  The  infallibility 
with  which  moral  depravity  perpetuates  itself.  5.  The  instability  which  attemis  all 
human  greatness.  6.  The  length  to  which  wicked  men  will  go  in  persecuting  and 
oppressing  others  when  God  grants  permission.  7.  The  inevitable  approach  of  a  nation'i 
doom  when  its  youth  has  become  corrupt  and  depraved. 

Vers.  16 — 31. — JoVs  second  paraole:  3.  A  sorrowful  survey  of  present  misery. 
I.  Job's  bouilt  affliction.  1.  Overpowering.  It  was  no  trifling  ailment  that  wrung 
from  the  heart  of  this  fallen  great  man  the  exquisitely  plaintive  lament  of  tlie  present 
section.  The  malady  which  had  struck  its  fangs  into  his  vitals  was  one  that  made  his 
bowels  boil,  and  rest  not  (ver.  27) ;  that  caused  his  heart  to  melt  like  wax  in  the  midst 
of  his  bowels  (Ps.  xxii.  14);  yea,  that  dissolved  his  soul  in  tears  (ver.  16).  Most  men 
have  leasou  to  be  thankful  that  the  afflictions  they  are  called  to  endure  are  not 
absolutely  intolerable ;  for  which  the  praSse  is  due  to  God's  mercy  alone.  Yet  not  unless 
the  soul  is  suitably  affected  by  the  ilia  that  assail  the  body  do  these  latter  bring  forth 
their  designed  results,  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  The  case  of  Job  suggests 
that  through  the  union  and  sympathy  of  soul  aud  body  man  possesses  an  almost  infinite 
capacity  for  suffering  pain ;  while  the  fact  that  pain  may  minister  to  man's  improvement 
is  a  testimony  to  man's  superiority  over  the  creatures.  2.  Sudden.  This  was  one  of 
the  circumstances  that  rendered  Job's  affliction  so  unmanning.  It  had  sprung  npnn  him 
unawares,  apprehending  him,  and  holding  him  fast  as  a  detective  might  do  a  criminal 
(ver.  16),  at  the  very  moment  when  he  had  been  saying  to  himself,  "  I  shall  die  in  my 
nest,  and  I  shall  multiply  my  days  as  the  8and"(ch.  xxix.  18),  and  offering  congratulations 
to  himself  on  the  apparently  permanent  as  well  as  inexhaustible  sources  of  his  wealth, 
and  on  the  palpably  stable  !(nd  unfading  character  of  his  glory.  3.  Wasting.  A  second 
circumstance  which  tended  to  dissolve  the  soul  of  Job  as  he  reflected  on  his  ph\sioal 
tiuuble  was  the  revolting  character  of  the  disease  by  which  he  had  been  overtaken. 
According  to  one  view.  Job  by  a  strong  poetic  figure  personifies  the  nightj  (ver.  17 ;  cf. 
ch.  iii.  2)  as  a  wild  beast,  which  had  leapt  upon  him  in  ihe  darkness,  and  rent  him 
limb  from  limb — the  allusion  being  to  the  terrible  nature  of  the  Lepra  Arabica,  which 
"  feeds  on  the  bones  and  destroys  the  body  in  such  a  manner  that  single  limbs  are  com- 
pletely detached  "  (Delitzsch).  To  this,  also,  the  wasting  character  of  the  disease  (ver. 
18)  is  believed  by  the  just-named  commentator  to  refer.  4.  Unsightly.  An  additional 
source  of  grief  to  the  patriarch  in  thinking  over  his  malady  was  the  disfigurement  of  his 
person  which  it  had  occasioned.  "  By  its  great  strength  the  garment  (of  his  skiu)  was 
changed"  (Geseuius),  probably  through  frequent  purulent  discharge,  or  through  the  foul 
incrustations  which  covered  his  body  ;  his  skin  also  had  become  black,  and  was  peeling 
off  from  his  emaciated  skeleton,  while  his  bones  within  him  were  being  consumed  by  a 
parching  heat  (ver.  30).  It  is  a  special  cross  when  God,  through  disease,  reuders  a  man 
ol  displeasing  aspect  to  his  fellows.  5.  Incessant.  The  pain  which  Job  suffered  was 
seemingly  continuous,  and  without  interruption.     Already  frequently  insisted  on  in 


OH.  XXX.  1-31.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  491 

previous  discourses  (ch.  iii.  24 ;  vii.  3,  4,  13,  15 ;  x.  20,  etc.),  it  is  here  presented  in  a 
fresh  series  of  images,  Job  describing  his  sinews  as  taking  no  rest  (ver.  17),  literally, 
"  my  gnawers,"  meaning  either  his  tormenting  pains  (Gesenius),  or  the  gnawing  worms 
formed  in  his  ulcers  (Delitzsch), "  rest  not,"  aad  speaking  of  bis  disease  as  binding  him 
fast,  and  sticking  closely  to  him  like  the  collar  of  his  coat  (ver.  18),  and  finally  adding 
that  his  bowels,  as  the  seat  of  pain,  boiled  and  rested  not  (ver.  27).  6.  Manifold.  In 
this  his  last  lament  Job  confines  not  his  attention  to  the  one  point  of  his  bodily  ailment, 
,  but  makes  a  survey  of  the  whole  course  of  his  afSiction — from  the  day  when,  bereft  of 
his  family  and  possessions,  he  went  about  the  streets  as  a  mourner,  arrayed  in  sackcloth, 
without  the  sun  (ver.  28),  i.e.  in  such  a  state  of  grief  and  dejection  that  even  the  glad- 
dening sunshine  failed. to  give  him  pleasure,  to  that  moment  when  he  had  become  as 
"  a  brother  to  dragons  and  a  companion  to  owls  "  (ver.  29).  7.  Degrading.  By  reason 
of  this  terrible  disease  he  had  been  cast  into  the  mire,  and  had  become  like  dust  and 
ashes  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  15,  16) ;  nay,  lower  even  than  that,  he  had  been  reduced  to  the  level 
of  jackals  and  ostriches,  creatures  whose  dolorous  bowlings  fill  men  with  shuddering 
and  dejection. 

II.  Job's  mental  ANoniSH.  The  thought  which  most  keenly  lacerated  Job's  bosom 
was  the  fixed  and  immovable  idea  which  had  fastened  on  his  soul,  that  the  Grod  whom 
he  had  loved  and  served  had  become  to  him  a  changed  God,  who  treated  him  with 
unsparing  cruelty  (ver.  21).  Of  this  the  proof  to  Job's  mind  lay  in  several  con- 
siderations. 1.  That  God  was  the  real  Author  of  Job's  sufferings.  It  was  he  and  no 
other  who  had  cast  Job  into  the  mire  (ver.  19).  In  a  very  real  sense  this  was  true, 
since  Job's  malignant  and  unsleeping  adversary  could  have  had  no  power  over  him, 
except  it  had  been  given  him  from  above ;  but  in  the  sense  which  Job  meant  it  was  a 
hideous  misconception,  Satan  and  not  Gkid  having  been  the  enemy  who  had  touched 
his  bones  and  his  flesh.  Saints  should  be  careful  not  to  impute  to  God  the  blame  of 
what  he  only  permits.  2.  T%at  Ood  remained  deaf  to  JoVs  entreaties.  "  I  cry  unto 
thee,  and  thou  dost  not  hear  me :  I  stand  up,  and  thou  regardest  me ; "  i.e.  lookest 
fixedly  at  me  (ver.  20),  meeting  my  earnest  reverential  upward  glance  with  a  stare  of 
Btony  indifference,  if  not  of  hostile  intent  (cf.  ver.  24).  A  fearful  perversion  of  the 
truth  which  Job's  prolonged  misery  cannot  justify.  God  is  the  enemy  of  no  man  who 
does  not  first  make  himself  an  enemy  of  God.  "The  face  of  God  is  set  against  them 
that  do  evil ; "  but  "  God's  eyes  are  ever  towards  the  righteous"  with  looks  of  love  and 
benignant  compassion.  Even  when  he  forbears  to  help,  and  seems  to  bo  deaf  to  the 
good  man's  supplications,  he  hears  and  pities.  If  God  answers  not,  it  is  in  love  rather 
than  in  hate.  Whatever  befalls  a  saint  he  should  hold  fast  by  the  unchanging  and 
unfaltering  love  of  the  Divine  Father.  Believers  under  the  gospel  should  find  this 
easier  to  do  than  Job  did.  3.  That  Qod  was  insensible  to  JoVs  feebleness.  With  the 
strength  of  his  omnipotent  arm  he  appeared  to  be  making  war  upon  one  who  was 
insignificant  and  frail,  heedless  of  the  agonies  he  inflicted  or  the  teirors  he  inspired, 
lifting  up  his  victim  upon  the  fierce  hurricane  of  tribulation,  causing  him  to  drive 
along  before  its  howling  blasts  and  to  vanish  in  the  crashing  of  tlie  storm,  as  a  thin 
cloud  is  caught  by  the  whirling  tempest,  "  blown  with  restless  violence  round  about 
the  pendent  world,"  and  finally  dispersed  by  the  violent  agitation  it  endures  (vers.  21, 
22).  4.  That  Ood  had  fixedly  resolved  on  Job's  destruction.  In  Job's  anguish-laden 
mind  it  was  a  foregone  conclusion  that  Gtod  had  determined  to  pursue  him  to  the  grave, 
to  bring  him  down  to  the  dust  of  death ;  to  shut  him  up  in  the  house  of  assembly  for 
all  living  (ver.  23).  Job's  conception  of  the  grave  was  sublimely  true.  It  was  and 
is  "  the  great  involuntary  rendezvous  of  all  who  live  in  this  world."  Job's  belief 
that  God  would  eventually  conduct  him  thither  was  likewise  correct.  "  It  is  appointed 
unto  all  men  once  to  die."  Joi's  apprehension  that  his  immediate  dissolution  was 
decreed  was  wrong.  The  times  of  all  are  in  the  hand  of  G^d ;  and  it  is  not  given  to 
any  to  anticipate  with  certainty  the  day  and  the  hour  of  departure  from  this  sublunary 
scene.  So  also  was  Job's  inference  erroneous  that  prayer  was  unavailing  when  God 
had  determined  on  a  creature's  destruction  (ver.  24).  It  was  not  so  in  the  case  of 
Eezeliiah    to  whom  God,  in  answer  to  his  fervent  supplication,  added  fifteen  years 

(2  Kings 'xx.  1 7;  Isa.  xxxviii.  1 — 5).     But  even  should  God  decline  to  move  the 

shadow  on  the  dial  backward,  it  is  still  not  in  vain  for  dying  men  to  call  aloud  to  him 
in  prayer,  inasmuch  as  he  can  help  them  by  his  grace  to  meo*  that  which  by  his  hand 


492  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [cH.  xxx.  1— 31. 

he  will  not  avert.  5.  TTiat  Qod  took  no  accnunt  of  JoVs  philanthropies.  .Job  liad 
wept  for  him  that  was  in  trouble  or  whose  day  was  hard,  and  his  soul  had  been 
grieved  for  the  needy  (oh.  xxix.  12, 13).  Yet  God  was  to  all  appearance  indifferent. 
This,  however,  was  only  another  misconception  on  the  part  of  Job.  The  Almighty 
notes  with  loving  eye  every  kind  deed  performed  by  his  servants  on  earth,  and  will 
reward  even  a  crust  of  bread  or  a  cup  of  cold  water  given  in  his  name  to  a  poor  one. 
Only  the  time  of  recompense  will  be  hereafter.  Hence  no  one  is  entitled  to  expect, 
like  Job,  that  his  good  actions  shall  be  rewarded  here.  "Do  good,  hoping  foi  nothing 
again,"  is  the  maxim  prescribed  to  Christ's  followers.  Acted  upon,  it  will  save  them 
from  the  disappointment  which  almost  crushed  the  soul  of  .Job  (ver.  26). 

Learn:  1.  The  absolute  impossibility  of  avoiding  days  of  suffering.  2.  The  ease 
with  which  God  can  remove  happiness  from  the  lot  of  man.  3.  The  inability  of  any 
one  to  sustain  the  burden  of  affliction  without  Divine  help.  4.  The  foolishness  of 
glorying  in  either  strength  or  beauty,  since  both  can  at  a  word  be  transformed  into 
dust  and  ashes.  5.  The  extreme  danger  of  allowing  affliction  to  pervert  the  mind's 
views  of  Glod.  6.  The  error  of  supposing  that  Grod  can  regard  any  creature,  much  less 
any  child  of  his  own,  with  hate.  7.  The  propriety  of  frequently  considering  where  life's 
journey  terminates.  8.  The  certainty  that  death  cannot  be  turned  aside  by  either 
piety  or  prayers.  9.  The  evil  cage  of  him  who  can  find  no  enjoyment  in  Heaven's 
mercies.  10.  The  sinfulness  of  giving  free  course  to  one's  complaint,  especially  against 
God,  in  the  time  of  affliction.  11.  The  inevitable  tendency  of  trouble  to  deteriorate 
and  debase  those  whom  it  does  not  exalt  and  refine.  12.  The  possibility  of  one  who 
thinks  himself  a  brother  of  jackals  and  companion  of  ostriches  becoming  a  son  of  God 
and  fellow  of  the  angels.  13.  The  certainty  that  for  all  saints  mourning  will  yet  be 
turned  into  joy. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 31. — The  trouUes  of  the  present.  In  contrast  to  the  happy  past  of  honour 
and  respect  on  which  he  has  been  so  wistfully  dwelling  in  the  previous  chapter,  Job 
sees  himself  now  exposed  to  the  scorn  and  contempt  of  the  meanest  of  mankind ;  while 
a  flood  of  miseries  from  the  hand  of  God  passes  over  him.  From  this  last  chapter 
we  have  learned  the  honour  and  authority  with  which  it  sometimes  pleases  God  to 
crown  the  pious  and  the  faithful.  From  the  present  we  see  how  at  other  times  he 
crucifies  and  puts  them  to  the  proof.  They  must  be  tried  on  "  the  right  hand  and  on 
the  left "  (2  Oor.  vi.  7 ;  comp.  Phil.  iv.  12).  We  are  reminded,  too,  of  the  transiency 
of  all  worldly  good.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  perish;  how  much  more  the 
glory,  power,  and  happiness  of  the  flesh  (Isa.  xl.)l 

I.  The  contempt  of  men.    (Vers.  1 — 10.)    The  yoimg  men,  who  were  wont  to  rise 

in  his  presence,  laugh  him  to  scorn ;  youths  whose  fathers,  the  lowest  of  mankind 

thievish,  faithless,  and  worthless — were  of  less  value  than  the  watch-dogs  of  his  flock 
(vi  r.  1).  Themselves,  the  young  men  had  been  of  no  service  to  him ;  they  had  failed 
uf  the  full  strength  of  manhood;  dried  up  with  want  and  hunger,  they  had  derived 
their  scanty  subsistence  from  the  desolate  and  barren  steppe  (vers.  2,  3) ;  plucking  up 
the  salt  herbs  and  bushes  and  juniper  roots  for  food  (ver.  4).  These  wretches  led  the 
life  of  pariahs;  driven  forth  from  the  society  of  men,  the  hunt-cry  was  raised  after 
ihem  as  after  thieves.  Their  place  of  dwelling  was  in  horrid  ravines  and  caves  and 
rocks  (vers.  5,  6).  Their  wild  shouts  were  heard  in  the  bush ;  they  lay  and  formed 
their  plots  of  robbery  among  the  nettles  (ver.  7).  Sons  of  fools  and  base  men,  they 
were  scourged  out  of  the  land  (ver.  8).  A  fearful  picture  of  the  dregs  of  human  life"! 
I'crhaps  those  Troglodytes  (comp.  oh.  xxiv.  4)  were  the  Horites,  the  original  inhabitants 

of  the  mountainous  countiy  of  Seir,  conquered  by  the  Edomites  (Gen.  xxivi.  6 8  • 

Deut.  ii.  12,  22).  Of  these  degraded  beings  Job  has  now  become  the  8oofflng-song| 
the  derisive  byword  (vor.  9).  They  show  towards  him  every  mark  of  abhorrence, 
retreating  from  him,  or  only  drawing  near  to  spit  in  his  face  with  the  silent  coarse 
language  of  contumely  and  disgust  (ver.  10;  comp.  Matt.  xxvi.  67;  xxvii.  30).  Had 
Job  in  anyway  brought  this  treatment  upon  himselt  from  the  vilest  of  mankind? 
Certainly  there  is  nothing  in  the  story  which  leads  us  to  cHt  the  blame  of  haughty  or 


OH.  XXX.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  493 

heartless  conduct  upon  the  hero.  Still,  it  is  ever  true  that  we  reap  as  we  sow ;  but  the 
sower  and  the  reaper  may  be  different  persons.  The  cruel  measure  meted  out  to  these 
unfortunates  is  now  measured  to  the  innocent  Job.  It  is  not  in  human  nature  to 
requite  love  with  hatred  or  to  give  loathing  in  return  for  kindness.  The  responsibility 
of  society  for  its  outcasts  is  a  deep  lesson  which  we  have  only  begun  in  modern  times 
to  learn.  All  men,  however  fallen  and  low,  mu.st  be  treated  as  the  creatures  of  God. 
If  we  treat  them  as  wild  beasts,  we  can  but  expect  the  wild-beast  return.  Said  Babbi 
Ben  Azar, '_'  Despise  not  any  man,  and  spurn  not  anything.  For  there  is  no  man  that 
hath  not  his  hour,  nor  is  there  anything  that  hath  not  its  place."  Say*  our  own 
Wordsworth— 

"He  who  feels  oontempt 

For  any  living  thing,  hath  faculties 

That  he  bath  never  used,  and  thought  with  hlai 

I*  in  its  in&noy." 
And  »gaift — 

"  Be  assured 

That  least  of  all  can  anght  that  ever  owned 

The  heaven-regarding  eye  and  front  sublime 

Which  man  is  bom  to,  sink,  howe'er  depressed. 

Bo  low  as  to  be  scorned  without  a  sin, 

Without  offence  to  God,  cast  out  of  view." 

"  Condescend  to  men  of  low  estate,"  Gentleness  and  compassion  to  our  inferiors  is  one 
of  the  chief  lessons  of  our  holy  religion. 

II.  Abandonment  to  misbbt  bt  God.  (Vers.  11 — 16.)  Health  and  happiness  are 
ours  when  God  holds  us  by  his  hand;  sickness,  languor,  and  mental  misery  when  he 
loosens  his  grasp.  Job's  nerves  are  relaxed.  The  war-bands  of  the  Almighty  have 
loosed  the  bridle;  angels  and  messengers  of  ill,  diseases  and  plagues,  hunt  the  unhappy 
sufferer  down  (ver.  11).  This  dark  throng  seems  to  rise  up  at  his  right  hand — the 
place  of  the  accuser  (Ps.  oix.  6) — and  to  push  away  his  feet,  driving  him  into  a  narrow 
space,  laying  open  before  him  their  ways  of  destruction,  heaping  up  against  him 
besieging  ramparts,  thus  tearing  down  his  own  path,  his  formerly  undisputed  way  of 
life.  They  help  forward  his  ruin,  needing  no  assistance  from  others  in  the  pernicious 
work  (vers.  12, 13).  On  comes  this  terrible  besieging  host,  as  through  a  wide  breach 
in  the  wall  of  life — rolls  on  with  loud  roar,  while  the  defences  fall  into  ruin  (ver.  14). 
Terrors  turn  against  him,  sudden  horrors  of  death  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  11,  14 ;  xxvii.  20) 
hunting  after  his  honour — the  honour  depicted  in  ch.  xxix.  20,  seq.  His  happiness, 
in  consequence  of  these  violent  assaults,  passes  away  suddenly  and  tracklessly  as  a 
cloud  from  the  face  of  heaven  (ver.  15 ;  comp.  ch.  vii.  9 ;  Isa.  xliv.  22).  If  God  la;/  s 
his  hand  upon  the  body  or  outward  happiness  of  his  children,  there  will  seldom  be 
release  without  inward  conflict,  auguish,  fear,  and  terror.  It  is  with  such  persons  as 
with  St,  Paul ;  without  is  conflict,  and  within  is  fear  (2  Cor.  vii.  5). 

III.  Inconceivable  inwaud  distkebs.  (Vers.  16—23.)  His  soul  is  melted  and 
poured  out  within  him ;  his  frame  is  dissolved  in  tears.  Days  of  pain  hold  him  in  their 
grasp,  refuse  to  depart  and  leave  him  in  peace  (ver.  16).  The  night  racks  and  pierces 
his  bones,  and  allows  his  sinews  norest  (ver.  17).  By  the  fearful  power  of  God  he  is 
so  withered  up  that  his  garment  hangs  loose  about  him,  wraps  him  like  the  collar  of  a 
coat,  nowhere  fitting  his  "body  (ver.  18).  God  has  cast  him  upon  the  ash-heap — a  sign 
of  the  deepest  humiliation  (ch,  xvi.  15)— till  his  skin  resembles  dust  and  ashes  iu  its 
hue  (ver.  19).  In  this  nerveless  condition  prayer  itself  seems  unable  to  stir  its  loftiest, 
most  hopeful  energies.  He  can  but  cry,  grievously  and  in  supplication,  but  without 
the  hope  of  being  heard,  "I  stand,  and  thou  lookest  fixedly  at  me" — no  sign  of 
attention  in  thy  g&nce,  of  favour  in  thine  eye  (ver.  20).  The  aspect  of  the  almighty 
Father,  seen  through  the  medium  of  intense  suffering,  becomes  one  of  cruelty  and 
horror  (ver.  21).  Lifting  him  upon  the  storm-wind  as  upon  a  chariot  (comp.  2  Kings 
ii,  11),  God  causes  him  to  be  carried  away,  and  dissolved  as  it  were  in  the  yeasty 
surging  of  the  storm  (ver.  22).  He  knows  that  God  is  carrying  him  to  death,  the  place 
of  assembly  for  all  the  living  (ver.  23). 

IV.  Faildrb  of  all  his  H0PK8.  (Vers.  24 — 31.)  According  to  human  calculation, 
he  must  despair  of  life.    But  can  the  unhappy  man  be  blamed  if  he  stretches  out  his 


494  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxx.  1—31. 

hand  for  help  amidst  the  ruin  of  his  fall,  and  sends  forth  his  cry  as  he  passes  into 
destiuction ?  Is  not  this  a  law  for  all  living  creatures  (ver.  24) ?  Did  not  Joh  show 
compassion  in  all  the  misfortunes  of  others,  and  has  he  not,  therefore,  a  right  to  com- 
plain, and  expect  compassion  in  his  own  (ver.  25)^?  All  the  suffering  of  Job  is 
condensed  in  the  thought  that,  after  the  happiness  of  former  days  had  bred  hopes  of 
the  like  future,  he  was  visited  by  the  deepest  misery,  and  cast  into  the  lowest  distress 
(vers.  26—31).  The  light  of  former  days  glances  upon  him  again,  and  so  his  address 
reverts  to  its  beginning  (oh,  xxix.).  Hoping  for  good,  there  ensued  evil  (Isa.  lix.  9  ; 
Jer.  xiv.  19) ;  waiting  for  the  light,  deeper  darkness  came  on.  There  is  an  inward 
geething  of  the  mind.  Days  of  affliction  have  fallen  upon  him.  He  goes  darkened, 
without  the  glow  of  the  sun  ;  his  swarthy  appearance  is  due  to  another  cause — he  is 
smeared  with  dust  and  ashes.  He  stands  in  the  assembly,  giving  loud  vent  to  his 
lamentation  amidst  the  mourning  company  who  surround  him.  A  "  brother  to  the 
jackals,  a  comrade  of  the  ostriches,"  these  desert  creatures  of  the  loud  and  plaintive  cry, 
is  he.  His  black  skin  parts  and  falls  from  him ;  his  bones  are  parched  by  a  consuming 
heat.  And  then,  in  one  beautiful  poetic  touch,  the  whole  description  of  his  woe  is 
summed  up,  "  My  harp  became  mourning,  and  my  shalm  mournful  tones."  But  he 
will  yet  learn  to  tune  his  harp  again  to  gladness  and  praise.  Now,  however,  his 
melancholy  haunts  him ;  and  not  one  kindly  glance  pierces  the  gloom  of  his  dark 
thoughts  t(i  give  him  comfort.  But  despair  of  self  has  never  led  Job  to  despair  of  God. 
There  is  still,  therefore,  a  glimmering  spark  of  hope  amidst  this  wild  storm.  He 
carries  in  his  hand  a  bud  which  will  yet  unfold  into  a  flower.  This  is  no  example  of 
the  fatal  sorrow  of  the  world,  but  of  the  life-giving  power  of  the  sorrow  that  is  after 
God  (compare  Eobertson's  sermon  on  the  '  Power  of  Sorrow,'  vol.  ii.). — J. 

Vers.  1 — 31. — A  sorrowful  contrast.  Job's  condition  has  become  one  of  sorrowfulness, 
the  hiimiliatinn  of  which  stands  in  direct  contrast  to  his  former  state.  He  graphically 
expresses  it  in  a  few  words :  "  But  now  they  that  are  younger  than  I  have  me  in 
derision,  whose  fathers  I  would  have  disdained  to  have  set  with  the  dogs  of  my  flock." 
The  picture  of  sorrowful  humiliation,  standing  in  contrast  to  previous  honour,  wealth, 
and  power,  is  very  striking.  It  is  a  typical  example,  showing  to  what  depths  the  loftiest 
may  be  reduced.     The  details  are  as  follows. 

I.  The  contemptuous  treatment  or  mean  and  tjnwoetht  men.  "  They  were 
children  of  fools,  yea,  children  of  base  men  :  they  were  viler  than  the  earth.  And  now 
am  I  their  song,  yea,  I  am  their  byword.  They  abhor  me,  they  flee  far  from  me,  and 
spare  not  to  spit  in  my  face."  It  requires  the  utmost  strength  of  righteous  priociple, 
and  the  most  complete  self-command  and  self-restraint,  to  endure  such  treatment 
without  violent  outbreaks  of  passion. 

II.  Great  mental  affliction.  "  Terrors  are  turned  upon  me ; "  "My  soul  is  poured 
out  in  me." 

HI.  Great  bodily  pain.  "  My  bones  are  pierced  in  me  in  the  night  season :  and 
my  sinews  take  no  rest." 

IV.  Appabent  indifference  or  God  to  his  pbater.  Saddest  hour  of  all  the  sad 
hours  of  the  human  life  is  that  when  the  one  unfailing  Helper  closes  his  ear.  The 
lowest  depth  of  sorrow  reached  by  the  Man  of  sorrows  found  expression  in  "  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

V.  To  this  is  added  the  fear  that  God  himself  turns  his  hand  against  him. 
"  Thou  art  become  cruel  to  me."  His  afflictions  appear  to  him  as  Divine  judgments  ; 
yet  he  knoweth  not  why  he  is  afflicted. 

VI.  The  oloomt  apprehension  that  all  will  end  in  death.  "Thou  wilt  bring 
me  to  death."  No  brightness  in  the  afar-off  cheers  the  sufferer.  There  is  no  prospect  of 
light  at  eventide. 

VII.  To  all  is  added  the  bitter  painfulnbss  of  exclusion.  He  is  an  outcast. 
There  is  no  help  for  him  in  man.  "I  am  a  brother  to  dragons,  and  a  companion  to 
owls."  Bitter,  indeed,  is  the  cup  mixed  of  such  ingredients.  Strong  the  heart  that  can 
thus  suffer  and  not  break. — B.  G. 

Vers.  1— 10. — The  fall  from  honour  to  contempt.  I.  Misfortune  brings  contempt. 
Job  has  just  been  reciting  the  honours  of  his  happier  days.    With  the  loss  of  prosperity 


OH.  XXX.  1—81.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  496 

bas  come  the  loss  of  those  honoun.  He  who  was  slavishly  flattered  in  wealth  and 
success  is  cruelly  scorned  in  the  time  of  adversity.  This  is  monstrously  unjnst,  and 
Job  feels  it  to  be  so.  Nevertheless,  it  is  only  true  to  life.  Men  do  judge  by  the  out- 
ward appearance.  Therefore  any  who  experience  in  some  proportion  what  Job  experi- 
enced need  not  be  taken  by  surprise.  The  judgment  of  the  world  is  of  little  worth. 
The  good  opinion  of  men  may  shift  like  a  weathercock.  We  need  to  look  for  a  higher, 
more  sure  and  true  and  lasting  glory  than  that  of  man's  honour. 

II.  Pbide  pbbparbs  fob  contempt.  There  is  a  note  of  pride  in  ver.  1,  "  Whose 
fathers  I  would  have  disdained  to  have  set  with  the  dogs  of  my  flock."  A  relio  of 
aristocratic  hauteur  creeps  out  in  this  utterance  of  the  humiliated  patriarch.  If  we  treat 
men  like  dogs,  we  may  expect  that,  when  they  get  the  chance  to  do  so,  they  will  turn 
on  us  like  dogs.  They  may  cower  and  cringe  when  we  are  strong,  but  they  will  be 
eager  to  snap  at  us  when  our  time  of  weakness  comes. 

III.  MzAit  NATOEBS  JUDGE  SUPERFICIALLY.  As  Job  describes  them,  the  miserable 
creatures  who  turned  upon  him  were  the  very  dregs  of  the  populace.  They  were  out- 
laws and  thieves  and  worthless  people  who  had  been  driven  to  mountain-caves — idlers 
and  degraded  beings  who  grubbed  up  weeds  to  live  on.  Plainly  these  men  are  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  poor  whose  only  defect  is  their  want  of  means.  Yet  among 
them  may  have  been  some  of  those  who  in  his  more  prosperous  days  blessed  Job  for 
helping  them  when  they  were  ready  to  perish  (see  ch.  xxix.  1.3).  Ingratitude  is  only 
too  common  among  all  men,  and  we  cannot  be  surprised  at  finding  it  in  persons  of  low 
and  brutal  habits. 

IV.  It  is  painful  to  buffeb  feom  contempt.  In  his  prosperity  Job  would  have 
despised  the  opinion  of  those  who  now  vex  him  with  their  insults.  Yet  he  could  never 
have  been  complacent  under  contempt.  It  has  been  well  said  that  the  greatest  man  in 
the  world  would  receive  some  discomfort  if  he  came  to  know  that  the  meanest  creature 
on  earth  despised  him  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart.  The  pride  that  is  quite  indiffeient 
to  the  good  or  ill  opinion  of  others  is  not  a  virtue.  Humility  will  set  some  value  on 
the  favour  of  the  lowest.  If  we  have  a  spirit  of  brotherliness  we  cannot  but  desire  to 
live  on  good  terms  with  all  our  neighbours. 

V.  It  is  possible  to  then  fbom  the  contempt  or  man  to  the  approval  of  God. 
The  Christian  should  learn  to  bear  contempt,  since  Christ  bore  it.  He  was  "  despised 
and  rejected  of  men"  (Isa.  liii.  3).  Like  Job,  he  was  insulted  and  spat  upon.  Yet  we 
feel  that  all  the  insults  with  which  he  was  loaded  did  not  really  humiliate  him.  On 
the  contrary,  he  never  appears  to  us  so  dignified  as  when  "  he  opened  not  his  mouth  "  in 
the  midst  of  contumely  and  outrage.  In  that  awful  scene  of  the  night  before  the  cruci- 
fixion, it  is  the  enemies  of  Christ  who  appear  to  us  as  lowered  and  degraded.  Now  we 
know'that  the  cross  was  the  ground  of  Christ's  highest  glory.  "  Wherefore  God  also 
hath  highly  exalted  him  "  (Phil.  iL  9).  The  Church  crowned  the  memories  of  her 
martyrs'^ with  honour.  Despised,  suffering  Christians  may  learn  to  possess  their  souls 
in  patience  if  they  are  walking  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  16.— TOe  thraldom  of  affliction.  Job  is  not  only  passing  through  the  waters  of 
affliction ;  he  feels  that  he  is  laid  hold  of  and  overpowered  by  his  troubles.  Let  us 
see  what  this  condition  involves — the  state  of  thraldom  and  its  effects. 

I.  The  state  or  thraldom.  This  simply  results  from  the  fact  that  the  affliction 
has' mounted  to  such  a  height  that  it  has  overpowered  the  sufferer.  1.  The  trouble 
cannot  le  throvm  off.  There  are  troubles  from  which  we  can  escape.  Oft»n  we  can 
beat  down  our  adverse  circumstances.  We  can  face  our  enemy  and  defeat  him.  But 
other  troubles  cannot  be  driven  back.  When  the  enemy  comes  in  like  a  flood,  no 
human  effort  can  stem  the  torrent.  2.  The  distress  cannot  be  calmly  endwred.  Mildel 
troubles  may  be  simply  borne  in  patience.  We  cannot  drive  them  away,  but  we  can 
learn  to  treat  them  as  inevitable.  There  is  a  strength  that  is  born  of  adversity.  The 
oak  grows  sturdy  in  contending  with  the  storm.  The  muscles  of  the  wrestler  are 
strong  as  iron.  But  distress  may  reach  a  point  beyond  which  it  cannot  be  mastered. 
Patience  is  broken  down.  3.  The  affliction  absorbs  the  whole  life.  The  pain  rises  to 
such  a  height  that  it  dominates  consciousness  and  excludes  all  other  thoughts.  The 
man  is  simply  possessed  by  his  agony.  Huge  waves  of  anguish  roll  over  his  whole 
being  and  drown  every  other  feeling.     The  sufferer  ii  then  nothing  but  a  Tictim. 


496  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxx.  1— 3L 

Action  is  lost  in  fearful  pain.    The  martyr  is  stretclied  on  the  rack.    His  torturer  has 

deprived  him  of  all  energy  and  freedom. 

II.  The  bffectr  of  this  condition.  Such  a  state  of  thraldom  must  be  an  evil. 
It  is  destructive  of  personal  effort.  It  excludes  all  service  of  love  and  submission  of 
patience.  And  yet  it  may  he  a  means  to  a  good  end.  1.  It  should  he  a  wholesome 
chastisement.  Fur  the  time  being  it  is  grievous.  In  its  acutest  stage  it  may  not  allow 
us  to  learn  its  lessons.  But  when  it  begins  to  abate  its  fury,  and  we  have  some  calm- 
ness with  which  to  look  back  upon  it,  we  may  see  that  the  storm  has  cleared  the  air 
and  swept  away  a  mass  of  unwholesome  rubbish.  2.  It  should  he  a  motive  to  drive  us 
to  Ood.  Such  a  tremendous  affliction  requires  the  only  perfect  refuge  for  the  distressed. 
So  long  as  we  can  bear  our  troubles  we  are  tempted  to  trust  to  our  own  strength ;  but 
tlie  miserable  collapse,  the  utter  break-down,  the  humiliating  thraldom,  prove  our  help- 
lessness and  our  need  of  One  who  is  mightier  than  we  are.  Now,  the  very  possibility 
of  such  overwhelming  troubles  is  a  reason  why  we  should  seek  the  refuge  of  God's 
grace.  It  is  hard  to  find  the  haven  when  the  tempest  is  raving  around  us.  We  need 
to  be  fortified  beforehand  by  the  indwelling  strength  of  God.  3.  It  should  make  us 
sympathetic  with  others.  If  we  have  escaped  from  the  thraldom,  it  is  our  part  to  help 
those  who  are  io  it.  We  know  its  teiTors  and  its  despair.  4.  It  should  lead  us  to  make 
the  best  use  of  prosperous  times.  Then  we  can  learn  the  way  of  Divine  strength. 
Martyrs  have  triumphed  where  weaker  men  have  been  in  bondage.  The  life  of 
unselfish  service,  loyalty,  and  fiaith  is  a  life  of  freedom.  God  will  not  permit  such  a 
life  to  be  utterly  enthralled  by  aifliction.  That  awful  fate  is  the  doom  of  the  lost.— 
W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  21. — Charging  God  with  cruelty.  At  the  first  onset  of  his  afflictions  it  could 
be  said  of  the  patriarch,  "In  all  this  Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  God  foolishly"  (ch. 
i.  22).  But  the  aggravation  of  his  troubles,  followed  by  the  vexatious  advice  of  his 
friends,  has  since  then  more  than  once  forced  unwise  words  firom  his  lips,  and  now  he 
is  directly  charging  God  with  becoming  cruel  to  him, 

I.  God's  action  may  appeab  cruel  to  man.  God  permits  or  infiicts  pain.  When 
man  cries  for  relief,  relief  does  not  come — at  least  in  the  way  expected.  It  is  not  easy 
to  see  why  the  suffering  is  sent.  To  us  it  seems  unnecessary.  We  think  we  could 
have  done  our  duty  better  without  it.  There  appears  to  be  an  iron  fate  bearing  down 
upon  us  regardless  of  our  needs,  or  deserts,  or  helplessness.  This  is  brought  home  to 
us  with  peculiar  poignancy,  under  the  most  trying  circumstances.  1.  An  accumulation 
of  troubles.  One  man  has  more  than  his  share  of  them.  Blow  follows  blow.  The  fallen 
is  crushed.  Tender  wounds  are  chafed.  This  was  Job's  experience.  2.  The  suffering 
of  the  innocent.  Bad  men  are  seen  to  be  flourishing  while  good  men  are  in  distress. 
This  looks  like  indifference  to  moral  claims.  3.  The  overthrow  of  the  useful.  Job  had 
been  a  most  helpful  man  in  his  time;  his  downfall  meant  the  cessation  of  his  kind 
services  for  many  people  in  trouble.  We  see  valuable  lives  cut  off  or  made  useless, 
while  mischievous  people  thrive  and  grow  fat.  4.  The  refusal  to  deliver.  Job  had  not 
been  proud,  unbelieving,  self-contained.  He  had  prayed.  But  God  appeared  not  to 
hear  or  regard  him  (ver.  20). 

II.  Gou  is  nbvbk  cruel  to  man.  Job  was  now  charging  God  foolishly.  We  have 
to  judge  of  a  man's  character  by  his  deeds  till  we  know  him.  Then,  if  we  become  fully 
assured  that  he  is  good,  we  reverse  the  process,  and  estimate  any  dubious-looking  con- 
duct by  the  clear  character  of  the  man.  In  the  same  way,  after  we  have  come  to  know 
that  God  is  a  true  Father,  that  his  nature  is  love,  our  wisest  course  is  not  to  fling  off 
our  faith,  and  charfje  God  with  cruelty  when  he  duals  with  us  in  what  looks  to  us  like 
a  harsh  manner.  He  cannot  be  false  to  hia  nature.  But  our  eyes  are  dim  ;  our  sight 
is  short ;  our  self-centred  experience  perverts  our  judgment.  Wo  have  to  learn  to  trust 
the  con-iiant  character  of  God  when,  we  cannot  understand  his  present  conduct. 

III.  Narrow  religious  views  lead  to  unjust  charoes  against  God.  Job's  three 
friends  were  to  a  largj  extent  responsible  for  the  patriarch's  condition  of  mind,  in  which 
he  was  driven  to  charge  God  with  cruelty.  They  had  set  up  an  impossible  rule,  and 
the  evident  falsehood  of  it  had  driven  Job  to  desperation.  A  harsh  orthodoxy,  is 
responsible  for  very  much  unbelief.  Self-elected  advocates  of  God  have  thus  a  good 
deal  of  mischief  to  answer  for.     In  aitempting  to  defend  the  Divine  government  some 


OH.  XXX.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  497 


of  these  people  have  presented  it  in  a  very  ugly  light.  Whilst  they  have  been  dinning 
their  formal  precepts  into  men's  ears  on  what  they  regard  as  the  authority  of  revela- 
tion, they  have  been  rousing  a  spirit  of  revolt,  till  what  is  most  Divine  in  man,  his 
conscience,  has  lisen  up  and  protested  against  their  dogmas.  From  the  days  of  Job  till 
our  own  time  theology  has  too  often  darkened  the  woi-ld's  idea  of  God.  If  we  turn 
from  man  to  God  himself,  we  shall  discover  that  he  is  better  than  his  advocates  repre- 
sent him  to  be.  When  it  is  our  duty  to  speak  of  religion,  let  us  be  careful  not  to  fall 
into  the  error  of  Job's  friends,  and  generate  hard  thoughts  of  God  by  narrow,  un-Christ- 
like  teachings. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  23. — The  house  of  death.  Job  expects  nothing  better  than  death,  which  he 
regards  as  "  the  house  appointed  for  all  living,"  or  rather  as  the  house  for  the  meeting 
of  all  living. 

I.  Thk  journey  or  life  ends  in  the  house  of  death.  The  living  are  marching  to 
death.  In  a  striking  passage  of  '  The  City  of  Gud,'  St.  Augustine,  following  Seneca, 
describes  how  we  are  always  dying,  because  from  the  first  moment  of  life  we  are  draw- 
ing nearer  to  death.  We  cannot  stay  our  chariot-wheels.  The  river  will  not  cease  to 
flow,  and  it  is  bearing  us  on  to  the  ocean  of  death.  It  is  difficult  for  the  young  and 
strong  to  take  in  the  idea  that  they  will  not  live  for  ever,  and  we  come  upon  the 
thought  of  death  with  something  of  a  shock.  But  this  only  means  that  we  cannot  see 
the  end  of  the  road  while  it  winds  through  pleasant  scenery  that  distracts  our  attention 
from  the  more  distant  prospect. 

II.  The  house  of  death  is  in  dark  contrast  with  the  journey  of  life.  It  is 
the  living  who  are  destined  to  enter  this  dreadful  house.  Here  is  one  of  the  greatest 
possible  contrasts — life  and  death  ;  here  is  one  of  the  most  tremendous  transitions — from 
life  to  death.  All  our  revolutions  on  earth  are  as  nothing  compared  with  this  tremen- 
dous change.  Death  is  only  the  end  and  cessation  of  life,  while  all  other  experiences, 
even  the  gieateat  and  most  upsetting,  are  but  modifications  of  the  life  which  we  still 
retain.  It  is  not  wonderful,  then,  that  this  dark  house  of  death  has  strongly  affected 
the  imagination  of  men.    The  surprising  thing  is  that  so  many  should  be  indifferent  to  it. 

III.  The  house  of  death  is  for  every  living  man.  No  truism  is  more  hackneyed 
than  the  assertion  that  all  men  are  mortal.  Here  is  a  commonplace  which  cannot  be 
gainsayed,  yet  its  very  evident  character  should  emphasize  its  significance.  Death  is 
the  great  leveller.  In  life  we  go  many  ways ;  at  last  we  all  go  the  same  way.  Now 
some  pass  through  palace  gates  and  others  through  dungeon-portals;  at  the  end  all 
must  go  through  the  same  narrow  door.  Should  not  this  commonness  of  destiny  help 
to  bring  all  mortals  nearer  together  in  life? 

IV.  The  house  of  death  is  a  place  of  mbetino.  It  is  described  by  Job  as  a 
house  of  assemblage.  Multitudes  are  gathered  there.  They  who  depart  thither  go  to 
"join  the  majority."  There  dwell  many  whom  we  have  known  on  earth,  some  whom 
we  have  loved.  Much  mystery  surrounds  the  house  of  death ;  but  it  cannot  be  an 
utterly  strange  place  if  so  many  who  have  been  near  to  us  on  earth  are  awaiting  us 
there.  The  joy  of  reunion  should  scatter  the  darkness  of  death.  Every  dear  one  lost 
to  earth  makes  for  us  more  of  a  home  in  the  unseen. 

V.  'I'hb  house  of  death  leads  to  the  realm  of  life  for  all  who  blekp  in 
Christ.  It  is  no  gloomy  prison.  It  is  but  a  dark  ante-chamber  to  a  realm  of  light 
and  blessedness.  Indeed,  death  is  not  an  abode,  but  a  passage.  We  have  no  reason 
for  thinking  that  death  is  a  lasting  condition  in  the  case  of  those  whose  souls  do  not 
die  in  sin;  for  the  impenitent,  indeed,  it  is  a  fearful  doom  of  darkness.  But  for  such 
as  have  the  new  life  of  Christ  in  them  death  may  be  but  the  momentary  act  of  dying. 
Certainly  it  is  not  their  eternal  condition.  We  talk  of  the  blessed  dead;  we  should 
think  of  the  glorified  living,  born  into  the  deathless  state  of  heavenly  bliss. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  26. — Disappointment.  Job  was  disappointed  in  meeting  with  _  fearful  evils 
when  he  was  looking  for  good.  Disappointment  such  as  his  is  rare ;  yet  in  some  form 
it  is'  the  frequent  experience  of  all  of  us.  Let  us  consider  the  significance  of  dis- 
appointment. 

I.  Disappointment  is  one  ok  the  inevitable  trials  of  life.  We  should  not 
be  overwhelmed  with  despair  when  we  meet  with  it.     It  is  part  of  the  common  lot  of 

JOB.  2  K 


498  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xxx  1— 31. 

man,  part  of  the  common  fate  of  nature.  How  many  blossoms  of  spring  fall  to  the 
ground  frost-bitten  and  fruitless !  How  many  hopes  of  men  are  but  "  castles  in.  Spain"! 
If  all  we  had  dn  »med  of  attaining  had  become  ours,  earth  would  not  be  the  world  we 
know,  but  some  rare  paradise. 

II.  Disappointment  aggravates  trouble.  Its  inevitability  does  not  draw  its  sting. 
To  be  expecting  good  and  yet  to  meet  with  ill  is  doiilily  distressing.  It  gives  a  shock  like 
that  which  i-;  experienced  in  coming  upon  a  descending  step  where  one  was  preparing 
to  take  an  ascending  step.  All  sense  of  secuiity  is  losi,  and  a  painful  surprise  is  felt. 
Feeling  is  just  exierienced  in  the  transition  from  one  condition  to  another,-and  the 
violence  of  the  transition  intensifies  the  sensation-.  When  the  eye  is  adjusted  to  see  a 
bright  lighi,  the  gloom  of  a  dark  place  is  all  the  deeper.  The  sanguine  suffer  from 
pangs  of  di'^tress  which  duller  natures  are  not  prepared  to  experience. 

III.  Disappointment  spkings  from  ignouanob.  There  must  have  been  an  error 
somewhere.  Either  we  judged  by  mere  a|)pearances,  or  we  trusted  too  much  to  the 
desires  of  our  own  hearts.  God  can  never  be  disappointed,  for  God  knows  all  and  sees 
the  end  from  the  beginning.  Hence  his  patience  and  long-suffering.  It  is  well  to  see 
that  God  who  thus  knows  everything  is  supremely  blessed.  No  disillusions  can  dispel 
his  perfei  t  joy.  Therefore  not  evil  and  pain,  but  good  and  gladness,  must  be  ultimately 
supreme  in  the  universe. 

IV.  Disappointment  is  a  wholesome  disoiplinb.  God  suffers  us  to  be  disap- 
pointed that  we  may  profit  by  the  painful  experience.  Sometimes  we  have  been  trust- 
ing to  an  unwoithy  hope  ;  then  it  is  best  that  the  idol  should  be  shattered.  If  any 
earthly  hope  has  been  idolized,  the  loss  of  it  may  be  good,  driving  us  to  our  true  God. 
It  is  possible,  however,  to  be  the  worse  for  disappointment,  which  may  embitter  the 
soul  and  lead  to  misanthropy  and  despair.  We  need  a  stout  faith  to  stand  up  against 
the  blows  of  unexpected  trouble. 

v.  Disappointment  will  never  dbstrot  the  trdb  Christian  hope.  Earthly 
hopes  may  vanish  in  smoke,  but  the  hope  in  Christ  is  sure.  Even  this  may  be  lost 
sight  of  as  the  beacon-light  is  obscured  by  the  driving  storm;  but  it  is  not  extin- 
guished. For  our  Christian  hope  rests  on  the  eternal  constancy  of  God,  and  it  con- 
cerns not  fading  and  fragile  earthly  things,  but  the  everlasting  verities  of  heaven. 
Browning  describes  the  man  whose  heart  and  life  are  strong  against  disappointment — 

"  One  who  never  turned  his  back,  but  marched  breast  forward ; 
Never  doubted  clouds  would  break ; 

Never  dreamed,  though  right  were  worsted,  wrong  would  triumph ; 
Held  we  fall  to  rise,  are  baffled  to  fight  better. 
Sleep  to  wake." 

W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  31. — The  harp  turned  to  momming.  This  is  disappointing  and  incongruoua 
The  harp  is  i  ot  like  the  pipes  used  at  Oriental  funerals  for  lamentation.  It  is  sa 
instrument  for  joyous  music.     Yet  Job's  harp  is  turned  to  mourning. 

I.  Man  has  a  natural  faculty  of  jot.  Job  had  his  harp,  or  that  in  him  of 
which  the  harp  was  symbolical.  Some  people  are  of  a  more  melancholy  disposition 
than  others,  but  nobody  is  so  constituted  as  to  be  incapable  of  experiencing  gladness. 
We  rightly  regard  settled  melancholy  as  a  form  of  insanity.  Joy  is  not  only  our 
heritage ;  it  is  a  needful  thing.    The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength  (Neh.  viii.  10). 

II.  The  sad  were  once  joyous.  Job's  harp  is  turned  to  mourning.  Then  its 
use  had  to  be  peiveited  before  it  could  be  thought  of  as  an  instrument  of  "lamentation. 
It  was  then  put  to  a  new,  unwonted  employment.  This  implies  that  it  had  been 
familiarly  known  as  a  joyous  instrument.  In  sorrow  we  do  not  sufficiently  consider 
how  much  gladness  we  have  had  in  life,  or,  if  we  look  back  on  the  brighter  scenes  of 
the  past,  too  often  this  is  simply  in  order  to  contrast  them  with  the  present,  and  so  to 
deepen  our  feeling  of  distress.  But  it  would  be  more  fair  and  grateful  for  us  to  view 
our  lives  in  their  entirety,  and  to  recognize  how  much  gladness  they  have  contained 
as  a  ground  for  thank  fulness  to  God. 

III.  Life  is  marked  by  alternative  experiences.  Few  lives  are  without  a 
gleam  of  sunshine,  and  no  lives  are  without  some  sha-low  of  sorrow.  The  one  form  of 
experjeqce  passes  over  to  the  other— often  with  a  ghock  of  surprise.     We  are  all  too 


OH.  XXXI.  1 — 40.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


499 


easily  accustomed  to  settle  down  in  the  present  form  of  experience,  as  though  it  were 
destined  to  he  permanent.  But  the  wisest  course  is  to  take  the  vicissitudes  of  life,  not 
as  unnatural  convulsions,  as  revolutions  against  the  order  of  nature;  but,  like  the 
changing  seasons,  as  occurring  in  the  ordered  and  regular  course  of  events. 

IV.  It  is  possible  to  have  music  in  badness.  Joh  does  not  descdbe  himself  as 
like  those  captives  of  Babylon  who  hung  their  Ijarps  upon  the  willows  (Ps.  cxxxvii. 
2).  His  harp  is  sounding  still,  but  the  music  must  agree  with  the  feelings  of  the  time, 
and  gaiety  must  give  place  to  plaintive  notes.  Therefore  the  tune  is  in  a  minor  key. 
Still  there  is  melody.  The  Book  of  Job,  which  deals  largely  with  sorrow,  is  a  poem — 
it  is  composed  in  musical  language.  Sorrow  is  a  great  inspiration  of  jioetry.  How 
much  music  would  be  lost  if  all  the  harmonies  that  have  come  from  sad  subjects 
were  struck  outl  If,  then,  sorrow  can  inspire  song  and  music,  it  is  natural  to 
conclude  that  suitable  song  and  music  should  console  sorrow.  Feeble  souls  wail  in 
discordant  despair,  but  strong  souls  harmonize  their  griefs  with  their  whole  nature  ; 
and  though  they  may  not  perceive  it  at  the  time,  when  tliey  reflect  in  after-days  they 
hear  the  echo  of  a  solemn  music  in  the  memory  of  their  puinful  experience.  When  the 
angel  of  sorrow  takes  up  the  harp  and  sweeps  the  strings,  strange,  awful,  thrilling 
notes  sound  forth,  far  richer  and  deeper  than  any  that  leap  and  dance  at  the  touch  of 
gladness.  The  Divine  mystery  of  sorrow  that  gathers  about  the  cross  of  Christ  is  not 
harsh,  but  musical  with  the  sweetness  of  eternal  love. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXL 


The  conclusion  of  Job's  long  speech  (oh. 
xxvi. — xxxi.)  la  now  reached.  He  winds  it 
up  by  a  solemn  vindication  of  himself  from 
all  the  charges  of  wicked  conduct  which 
have  been  alleged  or  insinuated  against 
him.  Perhaps  it  may  be  said  that  he  goes 
further,  maintaining  generally  his  moral 
rectitude  in  respect  of  all  the  principal 
duties  which  a  man  owes  either  to  God 
(vers.  4—6,  24—28,  35—37)  or  to  his 
fellows  (vers.  1—3,  7—23,  29—34,  38— 
40).  He  protests  that  he  is  innocent  of 
impure  thonglits  (vers.  1 — 4) ;  of  false  seem- 
ing (vers.  5—8) ;  of  adultery  (vers.  9—12) ; 
of  injustice  towards  dependants  (vers.  13 — 
15);  of  hardness  towards  the  poor  and 
needy  (vers.  16—23) ;  of  covetousness  (vers. 
24,25);  ofidolatry  (vers.  26— 28);  of  male- 
volence (vei  s.  29, 3i  I) ;  of  want  of  hospitality 
(vera.  31,  32) ;  of  hiding  his  transgressions 
(vers.  33,  34) ;  and  of  injustice  as  a  landlord 
(vers.  38 — 40).  In  conclusion,  he  once  more 
makes  a  solemn  appeal  to  God  to  pronounce 
judgment  on  bis  caae  (ver.  35),  promising 
to  give  a  complete  account  of  every  act  in 
his  life  (ver.  37),  and  calmly  to  await  his 
sentence.  An  accidental  dislocation  of  the 
last  three  verses  disturbs  the  order  here 
assumed  to  bo  the  proper  oa».  This  will 
to  further  oons:'^:rr3  iu  the  comment. 


Yer.  1. — ^t  made  a  covenant  with  mine 
eyes;  rather, /or  mirie  eyes.  The  covenant 
must  have  been  with  himself.  Job  means 
that  he  came  to  a  fixed  resolution,  by  which 
he  thenceforth  guided  his  conduct,  not  even 
to  "  look  upon  a  woman  to  lust  after  her " 
(Matt.  V.  28).  We  must  suppose  this  reso- 
lution come  to  in  his  early  youth,  when  the 
passions  are  strongest,  and  when  so  mauy 
men  go  astray.  How  then  should  I  look 
upon  a  maid  1  Having  ujade  such  a  reso- 
lution, how  could  I  possibly  break  it  by 
"  looking  upon  a  maid  "  ?  Job  assumes  that 
he  could  not  be  so  weak  as  to  break  a 
solemn  resolution. 

Ver.  2. — For  what  portion  of  God  is 
there  from  above  ?  The  meaning  seems  to 
be,  "  For  what  portion  in  God  would  there 
be  to  me  from  above,  if  I  were  bo  to  act  ?  " 
i.e.  if  I  were  secretly  to  nurse  and  indulge 
my  lusts.  Impurity,  perhaps,  more  than 
any  other  sin,  cuts  off  from  God,  who  is  "of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  "  (Hab. 
i.  ]  3).  And  what  inheritance  of  the  Almighty 
from  on  high  1  What  should  I  inherit,  i.e. 
what  should  I  receive,  from  on  high,  if  I 
were  so  sinful  ?  The  next  verse  gives  the- 
answer. 

Ver.  3. — Is  not  destruction  to  the  wicked  1 
The  inheritance  of  the  wicked  is  "  destruc- 
tion " — ruin  both  of  soul  and  body.  This  ia 
what  I  should  have  to  expect  if  I  .yielded 
myself  to  the  bondage  of  lust  and  concupi- 
scence. And  a  strange  punishment  to  the 
workers  of  iniquity  ?  The  rare  word  neker 
(133),  translated  here  by  "  strange  punish- 
ment," seems  to  mean  "  alienatiou  from 
God  "—being  turned  from  God's  frioud  into 


600 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB, 


[OB.  ssxi.  1 — 40. 


his  enemy  (domp.  Bnstoif,  'Lexicon  lle- 
braicnm  et  Chftldaicum,'  who  explains  "iDl 
by  '*  alienatio ; "  and  the  comment  of  Schul- 
tens  on  ch.  xxxi.  3,  "Necer,  »  Deo  alien- 
atio "). 

Vor.  4. — Doth  not  he  see  ay  ways,  and 
count  all  my  steps  I  (see  above,  ch,  vii.  18 — 
20 ;  and  below,  ch.  xxxiv.  21.  Cotap.  also 
Fs.  cxxxix.  3 ;  Prov.  v.  21 ;  xv.  3,  et».). 

Ver-  5.— If  I  have  Walked  With  vauny,  or 
if  my  foot  bath  hasted  to  deceit.  "  If  I  have 
bein  a  living  lie,  i.e.  if,  under  a  fair  show  of 
piety  and  righteousness  of  life,  I  have,  as 
you  my  friends  suppose,  been  all  along  a 
deceiver  and  a  hypocrite,  cloaking  my  secret 
Bins  under  a  mere  pretence  of  well-doing, 
then  the  sooner  I  am  exposed  the  better. 
Let  me  be  weighed,"  etc.  The  painful 
Suggestion  of  hypocrisy  has  been  made  by 
Job's  fliehds  repeatedly  during  the  colloquy 
((5h.  iv.  7— &;  Viii.  6,  12;  xi.  4— 6,  11—14; 
XV.  30—35;  xviii.  5—21;  xx.  5—29;  eta.), 
and  has  deeply  aiHicted  the  patriarch.  It  is 
a  charge  so  easily  made,  and  so  impossible 
to  refute.  AH  that  the  righteous  man,  thus 
falsely  aocuserl,  can  do  is  to  appeal  to  God  : 
"Thou,  God,  knowest.  Thou,  God,  wilt 
one  day  show  forth  the  truth." 

Ver.  6. — Let  me  be  weighed  in  an  even 
balance;  literally,  let  him  (i.e.  God)  weigh 
me  in  the  bataneei  of  justice.  The  use  of 
this  imagery  by  the  Egyptians  lias  been 
already  noted  (see  the  comment  on  ch,  vi. 
2).  It  is  an  essential  part  of  every  Egyptian 
representation  of  the  final  judgment  of  souls 
by  Osiris.  Bach  man's  merits  are  formally 
weiglied  iii  a  bahince,  which  is  carefully 
depicted,  and  lie  is  judged  acoortUngly. 
Job  auks  that  this  may  be  done  in  his  case, 
eitlier  Immediately  or  at  any  rate  ultimately. 
He  would  have  the  act  performed,  that  God 
may  know  his  integrily;  or  rather,  may 
recognize  it.  (So  Professor  Lee.)  Job  has 
no  doubt  that  a  thorough  investigation  of 
his  case  will  lead  to  an  acknowledgment 
and  pfuclamation  of  his  innocence. 

Ver.  7. — If  my  step  hath  turned  out  of 
the  way.  I^  i.e.,  I  have  at  any  time  know- 
ingly and  voluntarily  departed  from  the 
way  of  thy  commandments,  as  made  known 
to  me  eii.her  by  godly  men  or  by  thy  law 
written  in  ray  heart,  then  let  the  conse- 
quences follow  that  are  mentioned  in  the 
next  \el'S0.  Or  if  mine  heart  hath  walked 
after  mine  eyes,  and  if  consequently  any 
blot  hath  cleaved  to  mine  hands;  t.«.  if  I 
have  been  guilty  of  any  plain  act  of  sin.  It 
is  to  b3  reniurabered  that  Job  has  the  tcsti- 
mimy  of  God  himself  to  tiie  fact  that  he 
wris  "a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one 
that  feared  God,  and  eschewed  evil"  (oh. 
ii,  M). 

Vir.  8.— Then  let  me  sow,  and  let  another 
eat  (comp.  ch.  v.  5;  Lev.  xxvi.  16;  Deut. 


XX viii.  33,  51,  etc.).  The  expression  is 
proverbial.  Tea,  let  my  offspring  be  rooted 
out ;  rather,  my  'produce,  or  <fte  produea  of 
my  field  (see  the  Revised  Version). 

Ver.  9. — If  mine  heart  have  been  dse^ifed 
hy  a  woman  \  father,  enticed,  at  allured  unto 
0,  woman.  If,  that  is,  I  have  sofTei'ed  my- 
self at  itny  timd  to  be  enticed  by  the  wiles 
of  a  "  strange  woman  "  (Prov.  v.  3 1  vi.  24, 
etc.),  and  have  so  far  yielded  as  to  go  after 
her;  and  if  I  have  laid  wait  at  my  neigh- 
bour's door — watching  for  an  opportunity  to 
enter  unseen,  while  the  goodman  is  away 
(Prov.  vii.  19).  Job  is  not  speaking  of  what 
he  has  done,  but  of  what  men  may  suspect 
him  of  having  done. 

Ver.  10. — Then  let  my  wife  grind  unto 
tinother ;  it.«.  "  let  the  wife  of  my  bosom  be 
brought  so  low  as  to  be  compelled  to  do  the 
servile  work  of  grinding  the  com  in  the 
household  of  anothelr  woman,"  The  con- 
dition of  the  female  slaves  who  gjound  the 
corn  was  regarded  as  the  lowest  point  in 
domestio  slavery  (see  Exod.  xi.  5;  Isa. 
xlvii.  2).  And  let  others  bow  down  upon 
her.  Let  them,  i.e.,  claim  the  master's 
right,  and  reduce  her  to  the  extremest 
degradation.  There  would  be  a  just  nemesis 
in  this  punishment  of  an  adulterer  (see  2 
Sam.  xli.  11). 

Ver,  11, — For  this  is  an  heinous  crime. 
The  crime  of  adultery  subverts  the  family 
relation,  on  which  it  has  pleaseil  God  to 
erect  the  entire  fabric  of  human  society. 
Hence,  in  the  Jewish  Law,  adultery  was 
made  a  capital  offence  (Lev.  xx,  10 ;  Dent, 
xzii.  22),  both  in  the  Woman  and  in  the 
man.  Among  other  nations  the  adulteress 
was  commonly  punished  with  death,  but 
the  adulterer  escaped  scot-free.  In  modem 
Communities  adulfery  is  inostly  regarded, 
not  as  a  crime,  but  as  a  civil  wrong,  tin 
aooount  of  which  an  action  lies  against  the 
adulterer.  It  is  an  iniquity  to  be  punished 
by  the  judges;  litcially,  it  is  an  iniquity  of 
judges ;  i.e.  one  of  which  judges  take  cogni- 
zance. 

Ver.  12.— For  it  is  a  flre  that  oonsumeth 
to  destruction;  i.e.  it  is  a  thing  which 
brings  down  the  wrath  of  God  upon  a  man, 
so  that  "  a  flre  is  kindled  in  his  anger,  which 
shall  bum  unto  the  lowest  hell"  (Deut. 
xxxii.  22).  Compare  the  sentence  on  DaVid 
for  his  great  transgressito  (2  Sam.  xii.  9— 
12).  And  would  root  out  all  mine  increase ; 
i.e.  "  would  destroy  all  my  estate  ; "  either 
by  leading  me  to  waste  my  subbtance  upon 
my  companion  in  sin,  or  by  bringing  doWn 
God's  judgments  upon  me  to  my  temporal 
ruin. 

Ver.  13.— If  1  did  despise  the  cause  of  my 
manservant  or  of  my  maidservant.  Job  now 
disclaims  a  fourth  sin — the  oppression  of  his 
dependants.     Eliphaz  had  taxed  him  gene- 


OB.  XXXI.  1—40.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


501 


rally  with  barshness  and  cruelty  in  his  rela- 
tions towards  those  weaker  than  himself 
(ch.  xxii.  5 — 9),  but  had  not  specially  pointed 
to  this  kind  of  oppressiveness.  Ae,  however, 
this  was  the  oommonest  form  of  the  vise, 
Job  deems  it  right  to  disclaim  it,  before 
addressing  himself  to  the  several  charges 
brought  by  Blipbaz-  He  has  not  ill  used 
bis  slaves,  either  male  or  female.  He  has 
not "  despised  their  cause,"  but  given  it  full 
consideration  and  attention ;  he  has  beard 
them  when  they  ooutended  with  him ;  he 
lias  allowed  them  to  "contend;''  he  heus 
been  a  just,  and  not  a  hard  master.  The 
slavery  of  which  he  speaks  is  evidently  of 
a  kind  under  which  the  slave  had  certain 
rights,  as  was  the  ease  also  under  the  Mosaic 
Law  (Bxod.  xxi.  2-^11). 

Vera.  14,  IS.^-What  then  shall  I  do  when 
God  riseth  up?  Job  regards  Qod  as  the 
Avenger  and  Champion  of  all  the  oppressed. 
If  he  had  been  harsh  and  cruel  to  his  depen- 
dants, he  would  have  provoked  God's  anger, 
and  God  would  assuredly  "rise  up"  one 
day  to  punish.  What,  then,  could  he  (Job) 
do?  What  but  submit  in  silence?  When 
he  visiteth,  what  shall  I  answer  him  I 
There  could  be  no  valid  defence.  The  slave 
was  still  a  man,  a  brother-  God's  creature, 
equally  with  his  master.  Did  not  he  that 
made  me  in  the  womb  make  him!  and  did 
not  one  foshion  us  in  the  womb?  God 
"hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of 
men,"  and  all  individual  n:ieri,  ''  to  dwell 
on  the  face  of  the  earth"  (Acts  xvii.  26). 
All  have  rights — in  a  certuin  sense,  equal 
rights.  All  are  entitled  to  just  treatment, 
to  kind  treatment,  to  merciful  treatment. 
Job  is  before  his  age  in  recognizing  the 
substantial  equality  of  the  slave  with  the 
ficcman,  which  otherwise  was  scarcely  taught 
by  uny  until  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel 
(see  1  Tim.  vi.  2 ;  Philem.  16). 

Ver.  16. — If  I  have  withheld  the  poor  from 
their  desire.  As  Elipliaz  had  maintained 
(uh.  xxii.  6,  7),  and  as  Job  hod  already 
deuied  (ch.  xxix.  12,  16),  The  duty  of  re- 
heviug  the  poor,  solemnly  enjoined  upon 
tiie  people  of  Israel  in  the  Law  (Deut.  xv. 
7—11),  was  generally  admitted  by  the 
civiiizeil  nations  of  antiquity.  In  Egypt 
it  was  especially  insisted  on.  ''The  Egyp- 
tiiin's  duties  to  mankind,"  says  Dr.  Bircli, 
"  vierf.  comprised  in  giving  bread  to  the 
hungry,  drink  to  the  thirsty,  clothes  to  the 
naked,  oil  to  the  wounded,  and  burial  to 
the  dead"  ('  Egypt  from  the  Earliest  Times,' 
p.  id).  Or  h^ve  caused  the  eyes  of  the 
widow  to  fail.  "  Thou  liast  sent  widows 
away  tmpty,"  was  one  of  the  accusations  of" 
Eliphaz  (ch.  xxii.  9).  "I  caused  the 
widow's  heart,"  replied  Job,  "to  sing  for 
joy "  (ch.  xxix.  la).  I'ho  widow's  weak- 
BCW8  has  always  been  felt  i<.  give  her  a 


special  ekim  on  man's  benevolence  (see 
Exnd.  xxii.  22;  Deut.  xiv.  29;  xvi.  11,  14; 
xxiv.  19 ;  xxvi.  12,  13 ;  Ps.  cxlvi.  9 ;  Prov. 
XV.  25 ;  Isa.  i.  17 ;  Jer.  vii.  6 ;  Mai.  iii.  5 ; 
1  Tim.  v.  16 ;  Jas.  i.  27). 

Ver.  IT.^Or  have  eaten  my  morsel  my- 
self alone,  and  the  fatherless  hath  not  eaten 
thereof.  With  the  widow,  the  fatherless  is 
usually  conjoined,  as  an  equal  object  of 
compassion  (see  Exod.  xxii,  22 ;  Deut  x. 
18 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  5 ;  Isa.  i.  17 ;  Jer.  xxii.  3 ; 
Ezek.  xxii.  7;  Zech.  vii.  10,  etc.),  Eliphuz 
had  specially  charged  Job  with  oppression 
of  the  fatherless  (ch.  xxii.  9), and  his  ciiarge 
had  been  deuied  by  Job  (ch.  xxix.  12).  Ho 
now  claims  to  have  always  shared  his  bread 
with  orpiians,  and  made  them  partakers  of 
his  abundance. 

Ver.  18. — For  from  my  youth  he  was 
brought  up  with  me,  as  with  a  father,  and 
I  have  guided  her  fr.m  my  mother's  womb; 
t.e.  I  have  always,  so  long  as  I  can  remera- 
btr,  protected  the  orphan  and  done  my  best 
to  help  the  widow.  It  has  been  my  habit 
from  my  earliest  years  so  to  act.  The  lan- 
guage is  exaggerated  j  hut  it  had,  no  doubt, 
a  basis  of  fact  to  rest  upon.  Job  was  brought 
up  ill  these  pi  iueiples. 

Ver.  19. — If  I  have  seen  any  perish  for 
want  of  clothing  (coinp.  ch.  xxii.  6,  where 
tliphaz  taxes  Job  with  so  acting;  and,  on 
the  duty  of  clothing  the  naked,  see  Isa.  Iviii. 
7;  Ezek.  iviii.  7,  16;  Matt.  xxv.  36),  Or 
any  poor  without  covering.  A  pleonastic 
parallelism. 

Ver.  20.^If  his  loins  have  not  blessed 
me  (see  above,  ch.  xxix.  11,  13),  and  if 
he  were  not  warmed  with  the  fleece  of  my 
sheep.  Olotlied,  i.e.,  with  a  garment  spun 
from  wool  yielded  by  my  own  sheep.  A 
great  sheikh  like  Job  would  keep  in  store 
many  such  garments,  ready  to  be  given  to 
such  as  were  naked  or  poorly  dad,  when 
they  came  under  his  observation  (Isa. 
Iviii.  7). 

Ver.  21.— If  I  have  lifted  np  my  hand 
against  the  fatherless ;  i.e.  if  I  have  in  any 
way  oppressed  him.  When  I  saw  my  help 
in  the  gate ;  i.e.  when  I  had  the  power  to 
do  so — when  I  saw  my  friends  and  hangers- 
on  mustered  in  force  at  the  gate  wliere 
causes  were  being  tried.  The  wrong  and 
robbery  which  the  poor  suffer  in  the  East 
have  always  been  caused,  to  a  large  extent, 
by  feiluie  of  justice  in  the  courts,  where 
might,  and  not  right,  carries  the  day. 

Ver.  22. — Then  let  mine  arm  (rather,  my 
ehoulder)  fall  from  my  shoulder-blade,  Job 
was,  perhaps,  led  to  make  this  rather  strange 
imprecation  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  disease 
from  which  he  was  suffering,  portions  of 
bone  sometimes  detach  themselves  and  eome 
away.  And  mine  arm  be  broken  from  the 
bone.    My  fore-arm,  t'.e.,  detach  itself  from 


602 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXI.  1 — 40. 


the  bone  of  the  upper  arm,  and  come  away 
from  it. 

Ver.  23. — For  destruction  from  God  was  a 
terror  to  me,  I  could  not,  i.e.,  have  acted  in 
the  way  charged  against  me  by  Eliphaz, 
since  I  was  always  God-fearing,  and  slionld 
hnve  been  deterred,  if  by  nothing  else,  at 
any  rate  by  dread  of  the  Divine  vengeance. 
And  by  reason  of  his  highness  I  oould  not 
endure.  God's  majesty  and  excellency  are 
sucli  that  I  could  not  have  had  the  face  to 
resist  them.  If  I  had  begun  such  a  course 
of  life  as  Eliphaz  laid  to  my  charge  (oh. 
xxii.  5 — 9),  I  oould  not  have  persisted  in  it. 

Ver.  24. — If  I  have  made  gold  my  hope. 
This  is  a  sin  with  which  the  patriarcli  had 
not  been  directly  charged.  But  it  had  been 
more  or  less  insinuated  (see  ch.  xv.  28 ; 
XX.  10,  15, 19 ;  xxii.  24,  etc.).  He  may  also, 
perhaps,  have  felt  some  inclination  to  it. 
Or  have  said  to  the  fine  gold.  Thou  art  my 
confidence.  (On  the  wicked  man's  trust 
in  riches,  see  Fs.  xlix.  6;  liL  7;  Ixii.  10; 
Mark  x.  24 ;  Luke  xii.  16—19.) 

Ver.  25. — If  I  rejoiced  because  my  wealth 
Iras  great,  and  because  mine  hand  had 
gotten  much,  Job  feels  that  it  is  wrong 
even  to  care  greatly  for  wealth.  He  seems 
almost  to  anticipate  the  saying  of  St.  Paul, 
that  "  covetousness  is  idolatry  "  (Col.  lii.  5); 
and  hence  he  passes  on  without  pause  from 
this  sort  of  creature-worship  to  others  com- 
mon in  his  day  (vers.  26,  27),  which  he 
likewise  disclaims. 

Ver.  26. — If  I  beheld  the  sun  when  it 
shiued;  lit  rally,  the  light;  i.e.  the  great 
light,  wliich  God  made  to  rule  the  day 
(Gen.  i.  16).  Sun-worship,  the  least  ignoble 
form  of  idolatry,  was  widely  spread  in  the 
East,  and  in  Egypt,  fiom  a  very  early  date. 
According  to  tlie  views  of  some,  the  religion 
of  the  Egyptians  was  little  else  than  a  com- 
plicated sun-worship  from  its  earliest  incep- 
tion to  its  very  latest  phase.  "  The  religious 
notions  of  the  Egyptians,"  says  Dr.  Birch, 
"  were  chiefly  connected  with  the  worship  of 
the  sun,  with  whom  at  a  later  period  all  the 
principal  deities  were  connected.  As  Har, 
or  Harmachis,  he  represented  the  youthful 
or  rising  sun ;  as  Ea,  the  midday ;  and  as 
Tum,  the  setting  suu.  According  to  Egyp- 
tian notions,  that  god  floated  in  a  boat 
through  the  sky  or  celestial  ether,  and 
doscendt'd  to  the  dark  regions  of  night,  or 
Hades.  Many  (ieities  attended  on  his  pas- 
sage or  were  connected  with  his  worship, 
and  the  gods  Amen  and  Khepr,  who  repre- 
sented the  invisible  and  self-produced  god, 
were  identified  with  the  sun  "  ('  Egypt  from 
the  Earliest  Tiijies,'  Introduction,  pp.  ix.,  x.). 
Even  Ihos.;  who  do  not  go  these  lengths 
admit  that  the  solar  worship  was,  at  any 
rate,  a  very  main  element  in  the  cult  of 
Egypt     (see    the     author's     'History     of 


Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  pp.  342—364).  In 
the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  religion  the 
position  of  the  sun-god  was  less  prominent, 
but  still,  as  San,  or  Shamas,  he  held  an 
important  place,  and  was  the  main  object 
of  religions  veneration  to  a  large  body  of 
worshippers  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,*  vol.  i. 
pp.  126—128;  vol.  ii.  pp.  17,  18).  In  the 
Vedic  system  the  sun  figured  as  Mitra,  and 
in  the  Zoioastrian  as  Mithra,  in  both  holding 
a  high  position.  Among  the  Arabians  the 
suu,  worshipped  as  Orotal,  is  said  to  have 
been  anciently  the  only  god,  though  he  was 
accompanied  by  a  female  principle  named 
Alilat  (Herod.,  iii.  8).  Or  the  moon  walking 
in  brightness.  The  worship  of  the  moon 
has,  in  most  countries  where  it  has  pre- 
vailed, been  quite  secondary  and  subordinate 
to  that  of  the  sun.  In  Egypt,  while  nine 
gods  are  more  or  less  identified  with  the 
solar  luminary,  two  only,  Khons  and  Thoth, 
can  be  said  to  represent  the  moon.  In  the 
Vedic  and  Zorotistrian  systems  the  moon, 
called  Soma,  or  Homa,  almost  dropped  out  ot 
the  popular  religion,  at  any  rate  as  a  uioon- 
god.  In  the  Arabian,  Alilat,  a  goddess, 
probably  represented  the  moon,  as  did  Ash- 
toreth,  a  goddess,  in  the  Phoenician.  In 
Assyria,  however,  and  in  Babylonia,  moon- 
worship  held  a  higher  position.  Sin,  the 
moon-god,  taking  precedence  over  Shamas, 
the  sun-god,  and  being  a  very  mucli  more 
important  personage  (see  'Ancient  Mon- 
archies,' vol.  i.  pp.  123 — 126;  vol.  ii.  pp. 
16,  17).  Thus  both  moon-worship  and  sun- 
worship  were  prevalent  among  all,  or  almost 
all.  Job's  neighbours. 

Ver.  27.— And  my  heart  hath  been  secretly 
enticed,  or  my  mouth  hath  kissed  my  hand. 
The  sin  of  the  heart  is  placed  first,  as  the 
font  et  origo  mali,  the  spiritual  root  of  the 
matter.  On  this  naturally  follows  the  out- 
ward act  which,  in  the  case  of  idolatry,  was 
commonly  the  act  exactly  expressed  by  the 
word  ''  adore  "—the  movement  of  tlie  hand 
to  the  mouth  in  token  of  reverence  and 
honour  (see  Pliny,  '  Hist.  Nat.,'  xxviii.  2, 
''Inter  adorandum  dexteram  ad  oseulum 
re/erimiit,  et  totum  corpus  circumagimus ; " 
and  Minuoius  Felix,  '  Octav.,'  ii.,  "  Csecilius, 
simulaoro  Serapidis  denotato,  ut  vulgus 
superstitiosum  solet,  manum  ori  admovens 
oseulum  labiis  pressit "). 

Ver.  28. — This  also  were  an  iniquity  to  be 
punished  by  the  judge  (see  the  comment 
on  ver.  11,  ad  fin.).  It  is  rightly  concluded 
from  this  expression  that,  in  the  country 
and  age  of  Job,  the  sort  of  idolatry  which 
is  here  mentioned  was  practised  by  some, 
and  also  that  it  was  legally  punishable. 
For  I  should  have  denied  the  God  that  is 
above.  The  worship  of  any  other  god 
besides  the  supreme  God  is,  practically, 
:dheism,    since    "  D'>    iian  can   serve   two 


oa.  XXXI.  1 — to.] 


THR   BOOK   OP  JOB. 


603 


m&stera."  MoreoTer,  to  wt  np  two  inde- 
pendent goda  is  to  destroy  the  idea  of  God, 
which  implies  supremacy  over  every  other 
being. 

Ver.  29. — If  I  rejoiced  at  the  destruction 
of  him  that  hated  me.  "  If  at  any  time  I 
was  malevolent,  if  I  wished  evil  to  others, 
and  rejoiced  when  evil  came  upon  them, 
beinj?  (as  the  Greeks  expressed  it)  i-Trixaip- 
{kclkos — if  I  so  acted  even  in  the  case  of 
my  enemy — then,"  etc.  The  apodosis  is 
wanting,  but  may  be  supplied  by  any  suit- 
able imprecation  (see  vers.  8,  10,  22,  40). 
Or  lifted  up  myself — i.e.  was  puffed  up  and 
exulted — when  evil  found  him.  In  the  old 
world  men  generally  regarded  themselves 
as  fully  entitled  to  exult  at  the  downfall 
of  an  enemy,  and  to  triumph  over  him  with 
words  of  contumely  and  scorn  (comp.  Judg. 
V.  19—31 ;  Ps.  xviii.  37—42;  Isa.  x.  8—14, 
etc.).  There  appears  to  be  but  one  other 
passage  in  the  Old  Testament,  besides  the 
present,  in  whiuh  the  contrary  disposition 
is  sliown.  This  is  Frov.  xvii.  5,  where  the 
writer  declares  that  "he  who  is  glad  at 
calamities  shall  not  be  unpunished." 

Ver.  30. — Neither  have  I  suffered  my 
mouth  to  sin  by  wishing  a  ourse  to  his  soul. 
Mucli  less,  Job  means,  have  I  gone,  beyond 
the  thought  to  the  woid,  and  imprecated 
a  curse  upon  him  with  my  mouth,  as  the 
manner  of  most  men  is  towards  their  enemies 
(see  2  Sain.  xvi.  5;  1  Sam.  xvii.  43;  Neh. 
xiii.  25 ;  Ps.  cix.  28 ;  Jer.  xv.  10,  etc.). 

Ver.  31.— If  the  men  of  my  tent  said  not, 
Oh  that  we  had  of  his  flesh !  we  cannot  be 
satisfied.  A  very  obscure  passage,  bat 
probably  to  be  connected  with  the  following 
verse,  in  which  Job  boasts  of  his  liospitality. 
Translate,  If  the  men  of  my  tent  did  not  say. 
Who  can  find  a  man  that  has  not  been  satis- 
fied with  his  meat  f  The  apodosis  is  wanting, 
as  in  ver.  28. 

Ver.  32.— The  stranger  did  not  lodge  in 
the  street ;  t.e.  "  I  did  not  suffer  any  stranger 
who  came  under  my  notice  to  lodge  in  the 
street,  but,  like  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  2 — 8), 
went  out  to  him,  and  invited  him  in,  to 
partake  of  my  hospitality."  This  is  still  the 
practice  of  Arab  slieikhs  in  Syria,  Palestine, 
and  the  adjacent  countries  (see  Dr.  Cun- 
ningham Geikie's '  Holy  Land  and  the  Bible,' 
vol.  i.  p.  283).  But  I  opened  my  doors  to 
the  traveller;  literally,  to  the  way;  i.e.  "my 
house  gave  on  the  street,  and  I  kept  my 
house  door  open."  Compare  the  Mishna, 
"Let  thy  house  be  open  to  the  street" 
('PirkeAboth,'§5). 

Ver.  33. — If  I  covered  my  transgressions 
as  Adam ;  or,  after  the  manner  of^  tfien.  It 
does  not  seem  to  me  likely  thaf  Juh  had 
such  a  knowledge  of  Adam's  conduct  in  the 
garden  of  Eden  as  would  have  made  an 
allusion  to  it  in  this  place  natural  or  .pro- 


bable.   The  religious  tradition!  of  the  Ohal> 

dees,  which  note  the  war  in  heaven,  the 
Deluge,  the  building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel, 
and  tlie  coufusiun  of  tongues,  contain  uo 
mention  of  Adam  or  of  Paradise.  Nor,  so 
far  as  I  am  aware,  is  there,  among  other 
ancient  legends,  any  near  parallel  to  the 
story  of  the  Fall  as  related  in  Gen.  iv. 
Much  less  does  the  subordinate  detail  of 
Adam  hiding  liimself  miike  its  appiaranco 
in  any  of  them.  The  marginal  rendering, 
"after  tlie  muimer  of  men,"  is  therefore,  I 
think,  to  be  preferred.  By  hiding  mine  ini- 
quity in  my  bosom.  This  is  not  particularly 
apposite  t'l  the  case  of  Adam,  who  "  hid  him- 
self from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  among 
the  trees  of  the  garden  "  (Gen.  iv.  8). 

Ver.  34. — Did  I  fear  a  great  multitude  1 
rather,  because  I  feared  the  great  multitude, 
or  the  great  assembly ;  i  e.  the  gathering  of 
the  people  in  the  gate  on  occasions  of  public 
bueiuess.  If  Job  had  been  conscious  of  any 
great  and  heinous  sins,  he  would  not  have 
led  the  open  and  public  life  which,  pre- 
viously to  his  calamities,  he  had  always  led 
(ch.  xxlx.  7—10,  21 — 25);  he  would  have 
been  afraid  to  make  his  appearance  at  public 
meetings,  lest  his  sins  should  have  become 
known,  and  should  draw  upon  him  sour.i 
and  contempt,  instead  of  the-  respect  aud 
acclamations  to  which  he  was  accustomed. 
Or  did  the  contempt  of  families  terrify  me  1 
nither,  and  the  contempt  of  families  terrified 
me.  The  contempt  of  the  absembled  tribes 
and  families,  which  might  have  been  poured 
out  upon  him  at  such  meetings,  would  have 
been  quite  sufficient  to  prevent  his  attending 
them.  If  by  any  accident  he  had  found 
himself  at  one,  and  had  seen  that  he  was 
looked  upon  with  disfavour,  he  must  have 
kept  silence  in  order  to  avoid  observation. 
Prudence  would  have  counselled  that  more 
complete  abstention  which  is  implied  in  the 
phrase,  and  went  not  out  of  the  door ;  i.e. 
"stayed  at  home  in  mine  own  house." 

Ver.  35. — Oh  that  one  would  hear  me !  t.e. 
Oh  that  I  had  an  opportunity  of  pleading 
my  cause  before  a  just  judge  1  of  having 
charges  openly  brought  against  mi',  and 
having  "one"  to  hear  my  reply  to  themi 
Job  does  not  regard  his  "  comforters "  as 
such  persons.  They  are  prejudiced ;  they 
have  even  made  themselves  his  accusers. 
Behold,  my  desire  is,  that  the  Almighty 
would  answer  me;  rather,  behold,  here  is 
my  signature  I  let  the  Almighty  answer  me. 
This  passage  is  parenthetic.  Job  would 
prefer  to  be  judged  by  God,  if  it  were 
pussible,  and  therefore  throws  out  the  wish. 
Here  is  his  plea  in  ch.  xxix. — xxxi. ;  aud 
hei'e  is  his  attestation  by  word  of  mnutii, 
which  is  equivalent  to  his  signature.  And 
that  mine  adversary  had  written  a  book; 
01',  had  penned  an  indictntent  against  me. 


604 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXI.  1 — 40. 


Job  would  have  matters  brought  to  an  i^^sne. 
In  default  of  a  Divine  trial  and  eentence, 
which  he  cannot  expect,  it  would  suffice 
for  liim  that  his  arraigner  should  formally 
draw  out  hia  liot  of  charges,  and  present 
him  with  a  copy,  and  so  give  him  an  oppor- 
tunity of  milking  answer  to  it.  If  this  were 
done,  then  (lie  Buys)— 

Ter.  36. — Surely  I  would  take  it  upon  my 
shoulder — the  pluce  of  honour  (see  Isa.  ix. 
6 ;  xxii.  22)— and  bind  it  as  a  crown  to  me ; 
i.e.  adorn  my  head  with  it,  as  with  a  diadem. 

Ver.  37.^1  would  declare  unto  him  the 
number  of  my  steps;  i.e.  I  would  conceal 
nothing.  I  would  willingly  divulge  every 
act  of  my  lite.  I  would  miike  fuU  and  com- 
plete answer  to  the  indictment  in  every 
particular.  As  a  prince  would  I  go  near 
unto  him.  Tliere  elumld  be  no  timWity  or 
cringing  on  iny  pait.  I  would  face  my 
accuser  boldly,  and  bear  myself  as  a  prince 
in  his  prefince. 

Vers.  38 — 40. — It  is  generally  supposed 
that  these  verses,  with  the  exception  of  the 
last  clause  of  ver  40,  are  misplaced.  As  a 
termination,  they  form  an  anti-climax,  and 
greatly  weaken  the  peroration.  Their  proper 
phi.ce  would  seem  to  be  between  Ter«.  32 
and  33. 


Ter.  38. — If  my  land  ory  against  me;  i.e. 
if  my  land  disclaim  my  ownership,  as  having 
been  acquired  by  wrong  or  robbery.  If  the 
furrows  likewise  thereof  complain;  or,  weep, 
as  having  been  torn  from  their  rightful 
proprietors,  and  seized  by  a  stranger.  The 
apodosis  is  iu  ver.  40. 

Ver.  39. — If  I  have  eaten  the  fruits  thereof 
without  money  j  i.e.  without  acquiring  a  titlo 
to  them  by  purchase.  Or  have  caused  the 
owners  thereof  to  lose  their  life.  Either  by 
actual  violence  or  by  depriving  them  of  the 
means  of  support  (see  the  comment  on  oh. 
xxlx.  13).  Job  had  been  accnsed  of  robbery 
and  oppression  both  by  Zophar  (ch.  xx. 
12—19)  and  Eliphaz  (ch.  xxii.  5—9).  He 
had  not,  howerer,  been  accused  of  actual 
murder. 

Ver.  40.— Let  thistles  grow  instead  of 
wheat,  and  cookies  instead  of  barley.  Then 
let  me  be  appropriately  punished  by  finding 
the  land,  whereof  I  have  wrongfully  become 
possessed,  produce  nothing  but  thistles  (or 
thorns)  and  noxious  weed;^,  such  as  cockles 
(Authorized  Version)  or  hemlock  (  Professor 
Lee).  The  words  of  Job  are  ended.  This 
may  be  regarded  either  as  Job's  own  con- 
clusion of  his  long  speech,  or  as  a  remark 
of  tlie  author's.  On  the  whole,  the  former 
view  is  to  be  preferred. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 40. — Job's  second  parable :  4.  A  sohmn  protestation  of  innocence.  I.  With 
BKSPEOT  TO  THE  LAW  OF  CHASTITY.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  1.  The  wickedness  lie  eschewed. 
Not  alone  the  crim^  of  seduction,  or  the  actual'  defilement  of  virginal  innocence,  but 
even  the  indulgence  of  so  much  as  a  lascivious  desire  in  connection  with  an  unmarried 
female,  was  an  ungodliness  which  Job  regarded  with  abhorrence  and  indignation. 
Job's  morality  cm  this  point,  as  also  upon  some  others,  is  a  rpmarkable  anticipation  of  the 
sermon  on  tlie  mount,  which  forbids  the  unchaste  lool;,  the  unclean  imagination,  the 
impure  desire,  as  well  as  the  lewd  and  incontinent  act  (Matt.  v.  28).  Job^  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Law  of  God  is  like  St.  Paul's  (Eom.  vii.  14)— the  precepts  of  the  Decalogue 
covered  the  entire  realm  of  the  inner  no  less  than  of  the  outer  life.  2.  The  ride  he 
observed.  That  he  might  the  better  guard  against  the  uprise  within  his  heart  of  any 
prurient  desire  or  lustful  imagination.  Job  "  made  a  covenant  with  his  eyes,"  as  their  lord 
and  master  prescribed  for  them  a  law  that  they  should  not "  fixedly  gaze  upon  a  maiden." 
Considering  how  much  of  evil  enters  by  the  eye  (e.g.  the  cases  of  Eve,  Gen.  iii.  6 ;  of 
the  wife  of  Lot,  Gen.  xix.  26 ;  of  Achan,  Josh.  vii.  21),  the  wisdom  of  Job's  resolution 
cannot  be  qiiestinno'l.  In  particular  the  eye  has  often  proved  itself  "  the  inlet  of  lust " 
(Robinson),  or,  according  toaTalraudic  proverb,  "the  procuress  of  sin;"  as,  for  instance 
It  did  with  Judnh  (Gen.  xxxviii.  6),  Samson  (Judg.  xvi.  1),  David  (2  Sam.  xi.  1—5)' 
Amnon  (2  Sam.  xiii.  1—20).  Tew  things  are  more  dangerous  to  an  unprincipled,  or 
indeed  a  principle  d,  mind,  than  the  too  ardent  contemplation  of  female  beauty,  which 
besides  being  a  deceitful  vanity  in  itself  (Prov.  xxxi.  30),  is  prone  to  inflame  the  heart 
with  unlawful  passions.  Hence  the  propriety  of  the  royal  preacher's  counsel  (Prov  ri, 
25),  the  Hebrew  psalmist's  prayer  (Ps.  cxix.  37).  and  the  Divine  Savbur's  warning 
(Matt,  xviii.  9).  3.  The  motives  he  possessed.  In  thus  habitually  eiercisiii"  sslf- 
restraint,  Job  was  actuated  by  two  considerations.  (1)  Fear  of  the  Divine  power. 
"  It  was  no  fear  of  man,  no  <lread  of  temporal  consequences,  no  respect  for  public  order 
and  well-being,  no  pure  and  stately  self-respect  even,  which  made  and  kept  him  pure  " 


DH.  xxH.  1— 40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  605 

(Cox).  It  wa»  the  calm,  clear,  doliberate  conviction  that  such  wickedness  could  not 
escape  the  just  and  righteously  allotted  punishment  of  Eloah,  and  that  sooner  or  later, 
if  he  should  enter  on  such  a  course  of  impiety,  he  would  find  himself  overwhelmed  by 
gome  strange,  startling,  intolerable  cfdamity ;  nay,  that  he  should  deserve  to  be  so  over- 
whelmed (vers.  2,  3).  Job  was  manifestly  no  milk-and-water  moralist,  like  some  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  who  regard  fornication  and  seduction  as  indiscretions,  ai  d 
uncleanness  generally  aa  an  infirmity  rather  than  a  sin.  Instead  of  being  leniently 
judged  and  softly  scolded, if  not  lovingly  caressed,  as,  alas!  ifi  too  frequently  his  por- 
tion and  inheritance  from  modern  society,  the  violator  of  virgin  innocence,  in  Job's 
estimation,  was  a  monster  of  iniquity,  who  deserved  to  be  castigated  by  some  horrible 
and  degrading  punishment,  and  who,  he  believed,  would  ultimately  get  his  desemiigs. 
Nor  was  Job  too  spiritual,  on  the  other  hand,  to  admit  that  this  formed  one  of  the  argu- 
ments which  drove  him  to  Btdct  watchfulness  over  his  heart  and  eyes.  He  was  afraid 
of  the  just  judgment  of  Almighty  God  upon  them  that  committed  such  appalling  wicked- 
ness; and  accordingly  he  acted  on  the  principle  of  resisting  its  lirst  beginnings.  So  St 
Paul,  knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  persuaded  men  (2  Oor.  v.  11)  j  and  Christ  coun- 
selled his  apostles  to  fear  him  who  could  destroy  both  soul  and  budy  in  hell  (Luke  xii. 
5).  If  not  the  highest  motive  for  leading  a  chaste  and  virtuous  life,  it  is  still  a  soimd 
and  good  one,  and  the  only  one  by  which  many  are  capable  of  b'ing  impressed.  (2) 
Respect  for  the  Divine  omniscience.  Job  knew  that,  though  it  uii^ht  be  possible  to 
elude  the  utmost  vigilance  of  man,  he  could  not  evade  him  who  leheld  all  his  ways, 
and  counted  all  his  steps  (ver.  4).  The  Divine  omniscience  is  not  dipendeat  on,  but 
co-ordinate  with,  the  Divine  omnipresence.  God's  minute  and  universal  knowledge  of 
mundane  affairs,  and  in  particular  of  all  that  enters  into  the  comiilicated  texture  of 
a  human  life,  frequently  denied  by  the  ungodly  (ch.  xxii.  13),  and  sometimes  forgotten 
by  the  pious  (Isa.  xl.  27),  is  em[ihatically  asserted  in  Scripture  (1  Kings  viii.  39;  Ps. 
xi.  4 ;  cxxxix.  1 — 4),  and  nowhere  more  so  than  in  this  book  (ch.  xxi.  22 ;  xxiii.  10 ; 
xxiv.  1,  23 ;  xxviii.  24 ;  xxxiv.  21,  22,  25).  Rightly  viewed,  it  operates  as  a  powerful 
deterrent  from  sin,  not  only  by  proving  the  certainty  of  detection,  and  therefore  the 
impossibility  of  escaping  punishment,  but  also  by  filling  the  mind  with  a  constant  sense 
of  the  Divine  presence,  forgetfulness  of  which  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  frequent 
causes  of  sin. 

II.  With  respect  to  the  law  of  justice.  (Vers.  6—8.)  1.  An  explicit  dedara- 
tion.  Hypothetical  in  form.  Job's  language  amounts  to  a  vehement  assertion  that  his 
life  was  as  unimpeachable  with  regard  to  equity  as  with  regard  to  chastity.  With 
falsehood  in  every  shape  and  guise  he  had  lived  at  open  war.  With  deceit  and  imposi- 
tion in  either  word  or  deed  he  had  had  no  dealings  whatever.  From  the  straight  path  of 
integrity  he  had  never  turned  aside.  Never  once  under  the  dominion  of  secret  avarice 
had  he  suffered  his  heart  to  be  beguiled  into  hankering  aiter  his  neighbour's  property,- 
as  Ahab  coveted  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  (1  Kings  xxi.  2).  Not  so  much  as  a  speck 
of  defilement  cleaved  to  his  palm  after  any  transaction  in  which  he  Lad  been  engaged. 
No  living  man  could  accuse  him  of  underhand  dealings  or  extoi  tioiiate  practices.  So 
Samuel  called  his  countrymen  (1  Sam.  xii.  3),  and  St.  Paul  challinged  the  eldera  of 
Miletus  (Acts  xx.  33 — ^35),  to  attest  his  personal  integrity.  So  are  Christ's  people 
exhorted  to  renounce  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty  (2  Cor.  iv.  2),  to  provide  things 
honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men  (2  Cor.  viii.  21),  aiid  to  carefully  maintain  a  good  con- 
science, in  all  tilings  willing  to  live  honestly  (Hebi  xiii.  18).  2.  A  solemn  invocation.  So 
confident  does  Job  feel  that  he  has  not  swerved  a  hair's  breadth  from  the  law  of  equity, 
that  he  does  not  hesitate  to  appeal  to  God,  challenging  Eloah,  as  few  men  besides 
would  have  done  (Ps.  cxxx.  3),  to  weigh  him  in  an  even  balance,  literally,  in  the  scales 
of  righteousness,  when  his  integrity,  or  moral  perfection,  would  becume  apparent.  If 
Job  meant  this  absolutely,  it  was  presumption  and  self-iigliteousness ;  but  the  proba- 
bility is  he  understood,  by  preferring  such  a  claim,  no  more  than  God  himself  did  when 
he  declared  Job  to  be  ije;fect  and  upright;  though  the  vehemence  with  which  he 
asserted  aiid  protested  his  blaraelessuess  insensibly  obscured  his  vision  of  the  truth  which 
he  at  other  times  acknowledged,  that  in  God's  sij;ht  no  flesh  living  could  be  justified. 
3,  A  dreadful  imprecation.  Not  content  with  calmly  submitting  the  question  of  his 
iunocence  to  the  siivere  and  impartial  arbitrament  of  lieaven,  he  invokes  upon  himself 
a  curse  of  extrenM  severity.    If  by  legal  chicanery  or  violent  extortion  he  has  robbed 


508  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxi.  1—40. 


another  of  his  land,  the  commonest  and  most  valuable  sort  of  property,  then  he  desires 
that  he  himself  may  be  made  the  victim  of  a  like  oppression,  that  he  may  sow  and 
another  reap,  and  that  his  "  things  which  spring  up,"  not  his  descendants  or  children,  aa 
elsewhere  the  word  is  employed  (ch.  v.  25 ;  xxi.  8 ;  xxvii.  14),  but,  as  the  parallelism 
demands,  the  produce  of  his  ground,  his  harvest,  may  be  rooted  up.  God's  punish- 
ments are  often  similar  in  kind  tb  the  offences  they  follow.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap  "  (Gal.  vi.  7). 

III.  With  respect  to  the  law  of  marriage.  (Vers.  9 — 12.)  Different  from  the 
opening  section,  which  treated  of  seduction,  the  present  stauzii.  alludes  to  the  sin  of 
adultery.  In  the  former  instance  it  is  an  unmarrieii  virgin,  in  the  latter  i*  is  a  wedded 
wife,  that  is  sinned  against.  The  adulterous  enterprise,  which  Job  for  himself  disavows, 
is  described  in  detail.  1.  By  its  origin.  It  tnkes  it.s  vise  in  a  bewitched  or  befooled 
heart.  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  adulteries  "  (Matt.  xv.  19).  Tlierefore  "  keep  the 
heart  with  all  diligence"  (Prov.  iv.  23).  This  brguilement  of  the  heart  may  be 
deliberately  effected  by  the  adulterous  woman  displaying  her  charms  so  as  to  fascinate 
her  lover's  eye  (Prov.  vii.  10 — 21);  or,  as  in  the  case  of  David,  it  may  result  from 
lascivious  admiration  of  the  married  woman's  beauty.  2.  By  its  practice.  The 
adulterous  lover,  waiting  for  the  twilight,  disguiseth  his  face,  and  lieth  in  wait  at  his 
neighbour's  door,  obviously  a  common  crime  in  Job's  time  (oh.  xxiv.  15),  as  it  after- 
wards was  in  David's  and  Solomon's  (Ps.  1. 18 ;  Prov.  vi.  24 — 29 ;  vii.  5 — 9),  Jeremiah's 
(v.  8)  and  Ezekiel's  (xviii.  6),  Christ's  (John  viii.  3 — 9)  and  the  apostles'  (ICor.  vi.  9; 
2  Pet.  ii.  10).  3.  By  its  criminality.  Job  stigmatizes  it  as  an  act  of  infathy,  and  an 
iniquity  to  be  brought  before  the  judges  (ver.  11),  meaning  that,  besides  being  a 
violation  of  the  moral  law  (Exod.  xx.  17),  it  is  likewise  an  offence  falling  within  the 
penal  code  of  the  land.  Punished  by  death  under  Moses  (Lev.  xx.  10 ;  Deut.  xxii.  22), 
in  patriarchal  times  it  was  visited  by  burning  (Gen.  xxxviii.  24).  Probably  this  was 
the  penalty  attached  to  it  in  the  land  of  Uz  (ver.  12).  Most  heathen  nations  of 
antiquity  pronounced  it  a  capital  offence.  4.  By  its  demerit.  The  sinner  who  deSled 
his  neighbour's  wife  deserved  to  have  the  same  sorrow  njeted  out.to  himself— a  thouj<ht 
euphemistically  expressed  in  ver.  10  (vide  Exposition).  So  David's  sin  against  Uriah's 
wile  \\as  punished  by  Absalom's  wickedness  in  lying  with  his  father's  concubines 
(2  Sam.  xvi.  22).  5.  By  its  results.  In  addition  to  civil  penalties  and  providential 
retributions,  its  ultimate  issue  is  widespread  sorrow,  if  not  fatal  ruin.  Like  a  con- 
suming fire,  if  persevered  in,  it  has  nothing  but  physical,  moial,  and  eternal  destruction 
for  the  perpetrator  (Prov.  vi.  32 ;  vii.  23,  26,  27  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  18 ;  Heb.  xiil  4 ;  Rev. 
xxi.  8).  Even  a  solitary  act  is  like  the  taking  of  a  hot  coal  into  one's  bosom  (Prov.  vi. 
27 — 29).  Not  only  does  it  demoralize  the  nature  of  him  who  commits  it,  but  it  spreads 
sorrow  and  desolation  through  the  heart  of  lier  against  whom  it  is  committed  It 
breaks  the  peace  of  otherwise  happy  families.  It  awakens  the  demon  of  jtilousy,  even 
when  it  is  not  discovered*    Detected  or  concealed,  it  is  a  secret  fountain  of  death. 

IV.  With  respect  to  the  law  of  master  akd  servant.  (Vers.  13 — 15.) 
1.  The  case  supposed.  Job  instances  a  state  of  matters  that  might  readily  have 
occurred  in  his  household,  viz.  the  existence  of  some  ground  of  comjjlaint  agjainst  him, 
the  master,  on  the  part  of  his  manservant  or  maidservant,  i.e.  his  bondman  or  bond- 
woman. _  Such  contendlngs  and  disputings  between  inaster  and  servant,  which  are  not 
unusual  in  modern  free  society,  were  much  more  likely  to  arise  in  ancient  times  when 
servants  were  simply  slaves.  2.  The  course  pursued.  In  the  event  of  any  such  charge 
or  complaint  being  preferred  against  him.  Job  protests  that  he  neither  crushed  it  out  by 
the  strong  hand  of  oppression  nor  tossed  it  aside  with  contemptuous  indifference,  but 
gave  it  the  most  kindly  attention  and  the  most  patient,  careful,  and  impartial  examina- 
tion. If  hie  accusers  proceeded  to  impeach  him  at  a  bar  of  justice,  he  did  not  deny 
them  the  right  of  public  redress,  as  other  masters  might  have  done  and  as  the  Israelitish 
master  was  entitled  by  the  Law  to  do.  But  counting  them  as  persons,  not  as  goods  and 
chattels,  he  accorded  to  them  equal  rights  in  this  matter  with  himself.  Slavery  in  Job's 
house,  as  also  in  Abraham's,  was  a  widely  different  thing  from  that  practised  in  modern 
times.  3.  The  reasons  alleged.  (1)  He  was  answerable  to  God  for  the  treatment  hr 
accorded  to  his  servants.  He  should  tremble  when  God  arose  to  judgment,  and  be  speech- 
less when  God  came  round  as  an  Inspector,  to  examine  into  the  controversy  pending 
between  him  and  his  servants,  unless  he  acted  on  the  principlesof  strictest  ec^uity.   That 


OH.  XXXI.  1—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  607 

God  will  one  day  hold  such  a  court  of  inquiry,  in  which  masters  and  servants,  rulers  and 
ruled,  will  be  judged,  is  announced  in  Scripture  (Ps.  xcvi.  13 ;  Eccles.  xi.  9 ;  Acts  xvii. 
31;  2  Cor.  v.  10).  Hence  masters  are  responsible  for  their  treatment  of  servants 
(Col.  iv.  1);  and  this  thought  should  deter  them,  as  it  did  Job,  from  inflicting  upon 
those  who  serve,  or  are  dependent  upon  them,  either  injustice  or  severity  (Eph.  vi.  9). 
(2)  His  servants  were  possessed  of  the  same  human  nature  with  himself.  They  had 
been  fashioned  by  the  same  Divine  power  as  himself.  Both  alike  were  God's  handi- 
work (oh.  xxxiv.  19 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  15),  God's  creatures  (Isa.  xlv.  12),  God's  offspring 
(Mai.  ii.  10;  Acts  xvii.  29).  Both  had  been  produced  by  the  same  human  agency. 
Botli  had  been  curiously  and  secretly  elaborated  in  a  woman's  womb  (Ps.  oxxxix.  13). 
Both  had  been  made  of  one  blood  (Acts  xvii.  26).  Hence  both  belonged  to  a  common 
brotherhood.  Physically,  intellectually,  morally,  the  slave  is  the  fellow  of  his  master, 
liaviug  on  the  ground  of  a  common. humanity  equal  rights  with  that  master  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  before  men.  The  language  of  Job  is  a  powerful  condemnation  of  the 
modern  kind  of  slavery. 

y.  With  kespeot  to  the  law  op  kindness.  (Vers.  16 — 22.)  1.  The  objects  of 
JoVs  compassionate  regard.  The  poor  and  the  needy,  the  hungry  and  the  naked,  the 
fatherless  and  the  widow.  The  care  of  such  persons  is  a  dictate  of  nature,  which,  how- 
ever, is  frequently  powerless  to  enforce  obedience  to  its  own  precepts.  Among  heathen 
nations  generally  the  helpless  and  the  destitute  have  been  neglected  and  left  to  perish,  if 
not  openly  oppressed  and  destroyed.  Religion,  however,  both  natural  and  revealed,  pre- 
scribes kindness  to  the  poor  and  needy  as  one  of  its  essential  virtues.  The  Mosaic  code 
provided  special  legislation  for  the  poor  (Lev.  xix.  10,  13 ;  xxiii.  22  ;  Exod.  xxiii.  11 ; 
Deut.  XV.  7 — 11 ;  xiv.  28,  29),  for  the  widow  (Exod.  xxii.  22 ;  Deut.  xxiv.  17 ;  xxvii.  19), 
for  the  orphan  (Exod.  xxii.  22 ;  Deut.  x.  18  ;  xiv.  29).  In  the  Hebrew  Church  these  were 
the  objects  of  God's  peculiar  care  (Ps.  Ixviii.  5 ;  cxlvi.*9 ;  Jer.  xlix.  11 ;  Mai.  iii.  5). 
In  the  Christian  Church  they  are  regarded  as  Christ's  brethren  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  The 
care  of  them  a  special  duty  of  the  pious  (Jas.  i  27).  2.  Job's  habitual  behaviour 
towards  the  poor  and  needy.  Previously  desorilied  (ch.  xxix.  11 — 17),  it  is  liere  again 
set  foi  th  both  negatively  and  positively.  (1)  Negatively,  by  reciting  the  special  acts 
of  unkindness  towards  the  poor  which  he  was  careful  to  avoid,  such  as  (a)  withholding 
the  poor  from  their  desire  (ver.  16),  it  might  be  from  the  wages  for  which  they  h^d 
toiled  or  the  alms  which  they  had  craved;  (6)  causing  the  eyes  of  the  widow  to  lail, 
by  denying  her  assistance  or  refusing  her  redress  against  her  powerful  oppressor 
(oh.  xxiv.  3);  (c)  eating  his  morsel  alone,  "in  misery  and  grudging  seclusion,"  lest  the 
fatherless  should  see  it  and  require  to  bo  invited  to  paitake  (ver.  17);  (d)  lookiug  un 
with  heartless  unconcern  while  the  naked  shivered  in  their  rags,  and  perished  for  want 
of  clothes  (ver.  19) ;  (e)  shaking  the  hand,  i.e.  using  a  threatening  gesture  towards  the 
orphan  who  sued  him  in  a  court  of  justice,  the  njoment  he  recognized  the  judges  to  be 
his  friends  (ver.  21).  (2)  Positively,  by  sketching  the  manner  of  life  towards  them 
which  from  his  youth  up  he  had  pursued  (ver.  18),  and  which  in  large  measure  liad 
become  a  second  nature  to  him ;  according  to  which  Job  had  been  a  father  to  the 
orphan  and  a  son  to  the  v\  idow  (ver.  18),  training  up  the  one  with  paternal  solicitude 
and  comforting  the  other  with  filial  devotion,  while  the  hungry  never  failed  to  find  a 
meal  at  his  hospitable  board  (ver.  17),  or  the  naked  to  exchange  their  rags  for  the 
warmest  fleeces  of  his  sheep  (ver.  20),  his  own  heart  fimling  its  truest  joy  and  amplest 
reward  in  the  happiness  he  conferred  on  others.  3.  The  Spirit  that  inspired  Job  in 
his  charitahle  deeds.  He  was  afraid  of  the  Divine  retribution,  and  he  stood  iii  awe  of 
the  Divine  majesty.  It  was  the  fear,  not  of  man,  but  of  God,  that  deterred  him;  the 
ap|.rehension,  not  of  unpleasant  consequences  in  time,  if  he  acted  otherwise,  but  of  the 
all-divouriijg  wrath  of  the  Almighty  in  the  future.  4.  The  -proof  that  Job  offtred  of 
his  veracity  in  what  he  said.  He  invoked  upon  himself  a  curse  if  he  had  sinned  in  any 
of  the  ways  above  named,  but  more  particularly  if  he  had  lifted  up  his  hand  against 
the  orphan ;  he  desired  that  his  shoulder  might  fall  from  its  shoulder-blade,  and  that 
his  arm  might  be  broken  from  its  bone  (ver.  22). 

VI.  With  respect  to  the  law  of  worship.  (Vers.  24 — 28.)  1.  The  twofold 
idolatry  from  which  Job  had  abstained.  (1)  Mammonism,  or  the  worship  of  money. 
Formerly  possessed  of  great  wealth  (ch.  i.  3;  cf.  xxii.  24),  Job  had  ciirefully  avoided 
those  particular  sins  which  great  wealth  is  prone  to  foster,    (o)  He  had  not  allowed  his 


S06  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxi.  1— 40. 


confidence  for  time  or  for  eternity  to  rest  in  the  abundauce  of  his  gold.    Probably 
money,  in  consequence  of  tlie  seeming  almigbtiness  which  belongs  to  it  (Eocles.  vii.  2 ; 
X.  W),  is  the  most  formidable  rival  God  eueounters  in  his  demands  up'n  the  human 
heart  (Matt.  vL  24),  which  almost  universally  betiays  a  disposition  to  trust  in  uncertain 
riches  rather  than  in  the  living  God  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).    But  Job  had  never  permitted  his 
gold  to  usurp  the  throne  of  his  affections,  had  never  even  esteemed  it  as  the  chief  good, 
and  certainly  had  not  accorded  it  the  homage  due  to  tlie  Supreme,    The  all-absorbing 
devotion  of  a  human  soul  to  the  pursuit  or  possession  of  wealth  is  idolatry  (Bph,  v.  5; 
Col.  iii.  6),  is  incompatible  with  true  piety  (Mark  x.  24 ;  I  John  ii.  15),  and  should  be 
carefully  eschewed  by  all  followers  of  Christ.     (6)  He  had  not  exultmgly  rejoiced  in 
tbe  greatness  of  his  wealth.     A  person  might  stop  short  of  actually  reposing  his  heart's 
trust  in  his  money,  and  yet  be  guilty  of  excessive  delight  therein.     But  not  even  of  the 
common  sin  of  setting  too  high  an  estimate  upon  his  gold  and  silver,  of  looking  on 
with  inward  gratification  at  the  growing  pile  of  his  material  goods,  was  Job  guilty. 
Having  the  Almighty  as  his  gold  and  his  silver  of  strength  (ch.  xxii.  25),  i.e.  esteeming 
the  Divine  favour  and  fellowship  as  greater  riches  than  any  earthly  treasures,  it  was 
impossible  that  the  mere  increase  of  material  possessions  could  fill  him  with  extravagant 
rejoicing.    The  most  effectual  way  to  prevent  tlie  soul  from  delighting  in  a  creature  is 
to  teach  it  to  delight  in  the  Creator,     (c)  He  had  not  even  arrogantly  taken  credit  to 
himself  for  achieving  his  immense   fortune.     No  doubt  his  personal  industry  and 
sagacity  had  contributed  to  the  grand  result  (Prov.  x.  4;  xiil.  41),  but  he  piously 
refrained  from  saying,  "  My  power  and  the  might  of  my  hand  hath  gotten  me  this 
wealth  "  (Deut.  viii.  17),  probably  remembering,  as  the  Israelites  were  counselled  to  do 
(Deut.  viii.  18),  that  it  was  the  Divine  blebsing  alone  which  enabled  him  to  become  rich 
(Prov.  X.  22).     (2)  Sabaeism,  or  the  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies.     "  The  oldest 
and  also  comparatively  the  purest  form  of  heathenism  "  (Delitzsch),  the  adoration  of 
the  stars,  prevailed  amongst  the  Chaldeans  in  the  time  of  Abraham,  Uruk,  one  of  the 
early  monumental  kings  of  Babylonia,  having  founded  at  Ur  a  temple  of  the  moon, 
at  Larsa  a  temple  of  the  sun,  and  at  Ertch  a  temple  of  Venus,  called  Bit-anna,  or 
the  house  of  heaven  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  voL  iiL  p.  9).    It  was  practised  by  the 
ancient  Arabians,  who   "  adored  the  sun  and  the  moon  as  Divine,"  ancient  testi- 
monies being  witness.     It  was  diffused  throughout  Syria  in  the  time  of  Moses,  so  that 
the  Israelites,  prior  to  their  oecu)  ation  of  Canaan,  were  specially  warned  against  it 
(Deut.  iv.  19).     Nevertheless,  under  the  monarchy,  Israel  frequently  relapsed  into 
this  abomination  (2  Kings  xxiii.  5, 11).     In  later  Babylonia  it  was  rampant  (E/,ek. 
viii.  16),  as  again  the  monuments  attest,  Nebuchadnezzar  having  erected  in  the  centre 
of  Babylon  "  a  great  temple  of  Ninharissi  (wife  of  the  sun),"  "  to  the  moon-god  a 
large  house  of  alabaster  as  his  teniple,"  and  "  to  the  sun  a  house  of  cement  and  brick  " 
('  Becordfi  of  the  Past,'  vol.  v.  p.  122).    The  customary  method  of  paying  homage  to 
these  stellar  deitieg  was  by  kissing  the  hand  to  them  (1  Kings  xix.  18 ;  Hos.  xiii.  2), 
which,  it  may  be  noticed,  is  the  literal  import  of  the  English  verb  "  to  adore."    The 
early  and  widespread  diffusion  of  this  particular  form  of  idolatry  affords  a  striking 
testimony  to  man's  need  of  a  God  outside  of  himself.     Perhaps  also,  in  the  absence  of 
revelation,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  human  heart,  impressed  with  the  brilliance  of 
the  sun,  the  great  light,  shining  in  meridian  splendour,  and  the  exceeding  beauty  of  the 
moon,  the  solemn  and  majestic  night-wanderer,  should  ascribe  to  them  supernatural 
power  and  dignity.     Yet  man's  position  at  the  crown  and  summit  of  creation  readers 
all  devotion  offered  to  the  creatures  not  only  sinful,  but  absurd.   From  such  impiety  Job 
declared  that  he  had  kept  himself  free.     2.   Tlie  two/old  argument  by  which  Job  had 
been  deterred.    Had  Job  been  addicted  to  either  of  the  above  specified  forms  of  idolatry, 
he  would  have  been  guilty  (1)  of  a  punishable  crime.     Probably  Job  means  that  in 
his  day  sun-worship  was  an  offence  aiiainst  the  statute  law  of  the  iaud  (vide  on  ver.  11), 
as  under  the  M'saic  code  in  Israel  it  cordd  be  expiated  only  by  death  (Deut.  xvii. 
2 — 7) ;  but  possibly  the  phrase,  "  an  iniquity  for  judges,"  may  only  signify  a  transgies- 
sion  deserving  to  be  punished,  in  which  case  it  will  hold  good  of  both  forms  of  idolatry. 
Job  shrank  from  making  a  god  to  himself  out  of  either  ihe  gold  and  silver  which  he 
possessed,  or  the  celestial  luminal  ies  which  he  beheld,  because  of  the  penal  consequences 
to  which  he  knew  such  a  misdeed  would  lead.    And  also  because  he  felt  that  he  would 
be  guilty  (2)  of  a  detestable  hypooiisy  in  professing  to  worship  God  while  secretly  h« 


CH.  xKi.  1— 40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  609 


was  adoritig  the  sim  and  kissing;  hands  to  the  moon.  A  noble  testimony  to  Job's 
spiritnality  of  micd  and  sincerity  of  heart  1  He  ootid  easily  have  offered  homage  to 
the  host  of  heaven  without  exposing  himself  to  observation  by  his  fellows;  or  if, 
wantiDg  Conrage  to  risk  detection,  he  liad  refrained  from  outward  gestures  of  devotion, 
he  might  have  inwardly  with  his  heart  acknowledged  their  supremacy.  But  Jobunder- 
stood  that  God  could  read  the  heart  as  well  as  interpret  the  outward  act,  and  that  only 
that  was  acceptable  worship  which  was  inwardly  sincere  as  well  as  outWMdly  correct. 
Here,  again,  the  doctrine  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount  (Matt.  vi.  6)  and  of  the  New 
Testament  generally  (John  iv.  23,  2-1)  has  been  marvellously  anticipated. 

VII.  With  eespeot  fo  tub  law  op  love.  (Vers.  29,  30.)  Job  declares  his 
manner  of  life  in  dealing  with  his  enemies.  1.  Their  treatment  of  him.  '  They  bated 
him.  Their  eniriity  was  in  all  likelihood  excited  and  fostered  by  his  piety.  Good  men 
seldom  pass  through  the  world  without  meeiing  adveisaries  and  opponents.  David  did 
not  (Ps.  xxxviii.  19,  20).  St.  Paul  did  not  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9).  Even  Christ  did  not  (John 
XV.  18).  Neither  can  Christ's  followers  expect  to  live  wilhuut  molestation  (John  xv. 
20).  They  that  will  live  godly  shall  suffer  persecution  (2  Tim.  iii.  12).  2.  Eia  treat- 
ment if  them.  Not  only  did  he  not  rejoice  in  their  destruction  when  evil  fortune 
overtook  them  (ver.  29),  but  he  was  Conscious  of  never  having  wished  that  such  evil 
fortune  should  overtake  them  (ver.  30).  To  exult  in  the  downfall  of  an  enemy,  if 
natural  to  the  sinful  heart,  is  yet  heathenisli,  fiendish,  diabolic  (Micah  vii.  8);  it  was 
sorely  punished  in  the  case  of  Edom  when  she  rejoiced  over  Judah  (Obad.  12, 13);  it  is 
explicitly  oundemned  in  theOld  Testament  (Prov.xxi  v.  17, 18);  and  is  directly  antago- 
nistic to  the  spirit  of  tlie  Mosaic  Law  (Exod.  xsiii,  4 ;  Lev.  xix.  18),  and  much  more  to 
that  of  Christ's  gospel  (Matt.  xix.  19 ;  Eom.  xiii.  9 ;  Gal.  v.  14 ;  Jas.  ii.  8),  which  enjoins 
not  only  a  negative  abstinence  from  wishing  harm  to  one's  enemies,  the  virtue  which 
Job  claimed  (ver.  30),  but  the  positive  bestowment  on  them  of  acts  of  kindness  (Matt. 
V.  44  s  Rom.  xii.  20),  which  also  we  may  be  sure  Job  practised.  Job's  doctrine  is  here 
again  a  striking  approximation  towards  the  teaching  of  Christ,  and  Job's  conduct  a 
lofty  exhibition  of  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  wliich  will  only  shine  out  with  brighter 
lustre  if  the  reading  (ver.  81)  be  adopted  wliich  supposes  Job  was  urged  by  the  men 
of  his  tabernacle  to  avenge  himself  upon  his  adversary. 

VIII.  With  bbspeot  to  the  law  of  hospitality.  (Vers.  31,  32.)  This  also  Job 
maintained  he  had  obuetved :  1.  With  conspicuous  publicity.  So  open-handed  had 
been  his  beneficence  that  with  trinnipliant  coniidence  he  appealeJ  to  the  members  of 
his  vast  household  to  give  witness  in  his  behalf.  They  could  testify,  he  was  certain, 
that  they  had  never  seen  a  poor  man  depart  unsatisfied  from  his  mansion  gate,  but 
rather  that  they  bad  every  day  btheld  the  contrary.  So  Job  allowed  his  light  to  shine 
before  men.  2.  With  tmrestricted  Uherality.  So  lavish  had  been  his  hospitality  that 
his  doinestics  could  fairly  ask — Where  wa^i  the  man  whom  their  master  had  not  sump- 
tuously entertained  ?  His  lable  had  stood  open  for  all  comers^for  friends  and  relatives, 
as  a  matter  of  course,  but  also  for  strangers  and  travellers  of  every  sort  and  degree, 
bo  (i  d  Abraham  and  Lot  invite  travellers  and  strangers  to  iheir  tents  (Gen.  xviii. 
1_^4;  xix.  1);  so  are  Christians  exhorted  to  be  given  to  hospitality  (Rom.  xii.  13; 
Heb-  Xiii.  2).  3.  With  unstinted  generosity.  Not  simply  had  lie  practised  hospitality, 
but  he  had  done  so  with  no  niggard  hand.  The  stranger  he  had  Welcomed  to  a  lodging 
in  his  house.  To  the  hungry  traveller  by  the  way  he  had  extended,  not  a  crust  of 
bread  merely,  but  a  full  meal,  yea,  a  rich  feast.  So  are  Christians  commanded  to  use 
hospitality  without  grudging  (1  Pet.  iv.  9). 

IX.  With  ebspbct  to  the  law  of  sikcbeitt.    (Vers.  33—37.)    The  language  may 
'  be  tmderstood  as  conveying :  1.  An  important  admission:    Job's  use  of  the  phrase, 

"  my  transgressions,"  is  by  some  (Canon  Cook)  regarded  as  tantamount  to  an  acknowledg- 
ment that,  notwithstanding  his  blameless  charactei  and  hfe,  he  was  not  free  from  sin— 
a  statement  which  waa  certainly  correct  in  itself,  since  "  there  is  not  a  just  man  on 
earth,  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth  not "  (Ecclos.  vii.  20),  and  hopeful  as  an  mdication 
of  the  mind  of  Job,  inasmuch  as  it  proved  la  wns  not  depending  on  his  virtues  for 
salvation,  as  well  as  comforting  for  those  who  should  afterwards  peruse  the  story  of  his 
life  atid  who  but  for  this  recognition  of  the  fact,  of  sin  niiglit  be  prone  to  think  that 
Job's  morality  was  beyond  their  reach.  Still,  it  is  open  to  grave  question  whether  Job 
really  intended  to  make  this  admission,  or  whether  he  did  not  rather  design  to  Convey 


510  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxi.  1—40. 

an  opposite  Idea,  viz.  that,  as  he  had  perpetrated  no  open  crime,  so  neither  was  he 
hidino;  any  secret  wickedness.  In  either  case  his  words  contain:  2.  An  emphatic  pro- 
testation. He  was  not  attempting,  and  never  had  attempted,  to  [ilay  the  hypocrite  by 
either  denying  his  guiltiness  in  general,  or  concealing  his  wicked  acts  in  particular.  In 
all  he  had  &aid  to  them  about  the  manner  of  his  life,  as  in  all  the  approaches  he  had  ever 
made  to  God,  he  had  acted  with  transparent  sincerity.  There  was  no  secret  stain  upon 
his  soul  which  he  had  not  confessed  to  God ;  there  was  no  undivulged  crime  which  he 
feared  to  make  known  to  man.  Pre-eminently  Joh  claimed  to  be  one  in  whose  spirit 
there  was  no  guile  (Ps.  xxxii.  2).  Job's  accents  contain  a  ring  of  defiance,  which  seems 
to  ask  whether  he  was  likely  to  be  afraid  of  either  the  hootings  of  the  mob  or  the 
contempt  (5f  the  aristocratic  families  of  the  land,  that  lie  required  to  skulk  within  doors, 
and  keep  silent  about  anything  that  he  had  ever  done.  Doubtless  Job  was  universally 
recognized  as  a  man  of  courage ;  and,  because  it  was  so,  he  could  appeal  to  that  in 
proof  of  his  sincerity.  But  beyond  this  his  utterance,  if  really  intended,  exhibits:  3. 
An  instructive  comparison.  The  contrast  which  Job  institutes  between  liimself  and 
Adam,  if  the  translation  of  the  Authorized  Version  be  followed,  is  a  valuable  authenti- 
cation of  the  biblical  tradition  of  the  Pall.  It  proves  that  the  writer  of  the  Book  of 
Job,  to  whatever  age  he  belonged,  accepted  the  story  in  Genesis  concerning  Adam  as 
historically  correct.  By  putting  the  name  Adam  into  the  mouth  «{  one  who  flourished 
in  pre-Mosaic  times,  it  also  demonstrates  that,  in  the  judgment  of  the  author  at  least, 
the  contents  of  the  Hebrew  narrative  were  credited  beyond  the  bounds  of  Palestine 
at  a  time  when  the  First  Book  of  Moses  was  probably  not  yet  composed.  And  now, 
having  strenuously  asserted  that  he  was  guilty  of  no  concealment,  he  adds,  in  authenti- 
cation of  his  truthfulness  :  4.  A  personal  subscription.  "Belioid  my  signature  1"  he 
exclaims,  alluding  to  the  practice  in  ancient  courts  of  law  of  submitting  a  defence  in 
writing,  attested  by  the  signature  or  niark  of  the  accused  party,  and  meaning  that,  so 
far  as  he  was  concerned,  so  confident  did  he  feel  in  his  own  integrity,  and  so  well  pre- 
pared was  he  to  reply  to  any  indictment  that  might  be  brought  against  him,  that  he 
was  willing  to  see  the  case  go  to  trial  without  delay.  Nay,  having  tendered  his 
defences,  he  closes  with  a  shout  of  triumph,  throwing  out  as  his  ultimatum:  5.  A 
suWime  proclamation,  in  v\hich  he  challenges  his  unseen  adversary,  God  (ch.  ix.  15' 
xvi.  9),  to  draw  up  an  indictment  against  him  (Carey,  Cox),  or,  according  to  another 
interpretation  (Delitzsch),  in  which  he  draws  attention  to  the  already  prepared  indict- 
ment of  his  opponents,  viz.  the  three  friends.  In  either  case  he  ofl'ers,  if  only  God  will 
allow  the  matter  to  go  to  trial,  nut  to  shrink  from  the  ordeal  of  examination,  but 
binding  the  indictment  (Gi  d's  or  that  of  the  I'riends)  on  his  shoulder  as  a  badge  ol  dis- 
tinction, "winding  it  around  his  head  like  a  magnificent  crown  of  diadems"  (Delitzsch), 
to  approach  God  with  all  the  princely  majesty  of  one  who  is  conscious  of  innocence, 
and  to  lay  bare  before  his  searching  gaze,  with  the  most  assured  confidence  of  ultimate 
vindication,  every  step  in  his  by-past  career. 

X.  With  BEsrEOT  to  the  law  of  propbett.  (Vers.  38 — 40.)  1.  2%e  crime  which 
Job  disowns.  The  fraudulent  appropriation  of  land,  by  either  withhuhiing  the  stipu- 
lated rent  or  murdering  the  legal  proprietor,  was  apparently  not  unknown  in  the  days 
of  the  patriarch,  as,  alas  I  in  our  time  it  is  both  known  and  practised.  But  of  any  such 
iniquity  Job's  hands  were  clear.  For  every  rood  of  soil  he  cultivated  he  had  honestly 
paid  the  market  price  ;  and,  of  course,  he  had  never  dreamt  of  killing  his  landlord  to 
get  his  faim,  as  Jezebel  despatched  Naboth  to  secure  his  vineyard.  2.  The  curse  which 
Job  invoices.  Had  Job  been  guilty  of  any  such  wickedness,  not  only  would  his  fields 
have  cried  out  against  him,  and  the  furrows  which  he  ploughed  have  wept  over  his 
ungodliness,  but  he  would  have  richly  desei^ved  that  Heaven's  blight  should  descend 
upon  his  acres ;  and  such  a  blight  he  prays  to  descend  upon  his  broad  domain  if  he  has 
been  guilty  of  any  such  wickedness  as  that  which  he  has  just  disowned.  "  May  thistles 
sjiring  up  instead  of  wheat,  and  darnel  instead  of  barley ! " 

Learn :  1.  That  the  Law  of  God,  i.e.  the  moral  Law,  or  the  law  of  holiness,  has  been 
the  same  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  until  now.  2.  That  the  spirituality  of  the 
Law  ol  God  is  onl\  concealed  from  them  who  make  no  attempt  to  keep  it.  3.  That 
the  Law  of  God  lakes  cognizance  of  man  in  every  department  of  his  being  and  every 
sphere  of  his  life.  4.  That  the  Law  of  God  is  as  certain  and  severe  in  its  penalties  as 
it  is  stern  and  imperative  in  its  requiri-ments,     6.  That  the  Law  of  God  is  the  on« 


OH.  xxxi.  1—40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  611 


absolute  and  invariable  rule  of  life  for  men  under  the  Christian  as  well  as  under  the 
Mosaic  or  patriarchal  dispensation,  for  the  jiardoned  believer  no  less  than  for  the 
unconverted  sinner.  6.  That  the  true  gauge  of  a  soul's  piety  is  the  earnestness  with 
which  it  endeavours  to  keep  the  Law  of  Gud  in  all  its  precepts.  7.  That  the  loftiest 
incentive  to  such  a  keeping  of  the  Law  of  God  is  a  reverential  regard  for  the  Law- 
maker, especially  as  he  is  seen  in  Christ.  8.  That  no  mere  man  is  able  to  keep  the 
Law  of  God  perfectly,  even  Job's  performances  being  not  altogether  unmixed  with 
sin.  9.  That  the  most  dangerous  thing  a  man  can  do  with  his  transgressions  of  the 
Law  of  God  is  to  cover  them.  10.  That  that  man  is  grossly  deceived  who  imagines 
God  could  not  indict  him  for  violations  of  his  Law,  because  he  (the  man)  cannot  indict 
himself.  11.  That  those  who  are  advancing  in  holiness,  or  sincere  keeping  of  the  Law 
of  God,  should  guard  against  being  either  too  proud  of,  or  too  reliant  on,  their  own 
attainments.  12.  That  the  loftiest  morality  attainable  on  earth  will  not  enable  man  to 
dispense  with  the  services  of  a  Daysman  or  Mediator. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 40. — Solemn  assurances  of  innocence.  Job  can  discover  no  connection 
between  his  present  suffnrings  and  those  well-founded  hopes  of  his  former  life  to  which 
he  has  been  referring ;  but  there  remains  the  assumption  of  his  guilt  as  an  explanation. 
In  his  intense  longing  Tor  redemption  he  is  led,  in  conclusion,  to  affirm  in  the  most 
solemn  and  sacred  manner  his  innocence,  invoking  the  sorest  punishments  upon  him- 
self if  his  words  are  untrue.  Thus,  in  effect,  he  makes  a  final  appeal  to  God  as  his 
Judge.  In  this  solemn  assurance  of  innocence,  he  begins  with  that  which  is  the  root 
and  source  of  sin — evil  lust ;  he  then  touches  on  the  sins  proceeding  from  it,  and 
explains  the  rule  of  life  and  the  disposition  of  heart  which  rendered  him  incapable  of 
the  commission  of  such  sins. 

I.  Lust  resisted  :  the  heart  given  to  vibtue.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  1.  He  had 
governed  the  eye  and  restrained  its  lust.  He  had  guarded  that  noble  organ,  which 
may  be  either  the  avenue  of  purest  pleasures  or  the  tempter  to  most  shameful  vice.  He 
had  prescribed  to  the  eye  its  conduct  and  its  law.  The  eye  seems  almost  as  much  the 
receptacle  and  seat  of  our  passions,  appetites,  and  inclinations  as  the  mind  itself ;  at 
least  it  is  the  outward  portal  to  introduce  them  to  the  mind  within,  or  rather  the 
common  thoroughfare  to  let  our  affections  pass  in  and  but.  Love,  anger,  pride, 
avarice,  all  visibly  move  in  those  little  orbs  (Addison).  It  is  not  enough  to  watch 
over  the  heart,  the  inner  citadel  of  the  man,  but  all  its  avenues — the  eye,  the  ear, 
the  hand,  the  foot — ^must  be  guarded  against  the  approach  of  sin.  2.  He  had  referred 
himself  in  this  to  the  jud^mient  and  the  all-seeing  eye  of  God  (compare  Joseph,  Gen. 
xxxix.  9;  and  Ps.  cxxxix.  2,  sqq.).  The  thought  of  men's  knowledge  is  often  a  more 
powei  ful  deterrent  from  actual  crime ;  it  is  the  thought  of  God  which  alone  can  sanctify 
and  keep  in  safety  the  heart.  Job  rises  abi  ive  the  mere  commandments  of  the  Law. 
Law  forbids  the  desire  of  others'  goods  (Exod.  xx.  17 ;  Deut.  v.  21)— a  negative  virtue ; 
Christ  carries  us  directly  to  God,  and  bids  us  be  pure  in  heart  that  we  may  behold  him. 
To  live  consciously  in  the  eye  of  God  is  to  have  a  pure  and  right  direction  for  our  own. 

II.  First  protestation  :  EVir^  desires  have  not  been  yielded  to.  (Vers.  5 — 8.) 
He  did  not  "  go  about  with  falsehood,"  nor  did  his  foot  hasten  to  deceit.  May  God, 
he  says,  pausing,  weigh  him  in  a  just  balance,  and,  instead  of  being  found  wanting 
like  Belahazzar  (Dan.  v.  27),  may  his  integrity  be  known  and  proved  I  Among  the 
Greeks,  Themis,  or  Dik6,  held  the  .scales  symbolical  of  judgment;  the  Arabs  speak 
of  judgment  as  the  "  balance  of  works."  Every  man's  work,  every  man's  character, 
shall  finally  be  tried,  proved,  made  known ;  and  many  that  are  last  shall  be  first,  and 
the  first  last.  His  steps  had  not  turned  out  of  the  right  way,  the  way  marked  out  and 
appointed  by  God;  no  stain  of  ill-gotten  wealth  had  cleaved  to  his  hands  (Ps.  ci.  5; 
Deut.  xiii.  17).  Another  imprecation,  ratifying  his  assurances  of  innocence :  "  Then  let 
me  sow  and  let  another  eat" — let  another  enjoy  the  fruit  of  his  ill-spent,  dishonest 
toil  (coinp.  ch.  xxvii.  16,  17;  Lev.  xsvi.  16;  Deut.  xxviii.  33;  Amos  v.  11);  and  let 
his  shoots— the  plants  of  the  earth  which  he  has  set— be  rooted  out! 

\Y\.  His  ppRJi  Asp  right  conduct  W  domestic  hfb.    (Vers,  9—15.)    1.  Ei» 


512  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  ixxi.  1—4  /. 


thMtity.  (Vers.  9—12.)  He  had  not  been  lefooled  into  any  gross  sin  against^  the 
mai-riage-tie.  He  expresses  the  utmost  detestation  of  such  sin.  "  It  would  be  a  crime, 
and  a  sin  before  the  judges."  It  would  be  as  a  devouring  fire,  resting  not  in  its  course 
until  it  had  brought  the  criminal  to  the  pit  of  hell,  and  all  his  property  had  been 
rooted  out  (comp.  Prov.  vi.  27,  et  seq. ;  vii.  26,  27  ;  Jas.  iii.  6).  2.  Hh  conduct  UyWarda 
his  domestic  slaves.  He  had  not  abused  ihe  rights  of  his  menscrvants  or  maidservants. 
His  relation  to  them  was  patiiarchal,  like  that  of  Abraham  to  Eliezer  of  Damascus 
(Gen.  XV.  2;  xxiv.  2,  et  seq.).  He  felt  that  he  and  they,  masters  and  slaves,  were  of 
one  blood,  the  children  of  one  Father,  offspring  of  one  Creator ;  how  could  he,  were  he 
•iuilty  of  sin  against  them,  face  the  dread  tribunal  of  God?  "  Have  we  not  all  one 
Father?  Hath  not  one  God  create.l  us?"  (Mai.  ii.  10).  Eefer  to  St.  Paul's  exhorta- 
tion to  masters  (Eph.  vi.  9).  The  relations  of  masters  and  servnnfs,  emiJoyers  and 
employed,  have  undergone  vast  changes  since  those  ancient  days.  W'e  all  live  under 
the  equal  protection  of  the  laws  of  the  land,  and  the  general  spirit  of  the  law  is  to 
protect  the  weaker  against  the  stronger,  the  poor  against  the  encroachment  of  the  rich. 
But  in  Christianity  this  relation  receives  a  new  meaning  and  sanctity  by  being  brought 
undar  the  great  central  relation  In  which  we  stand  to  Christ.  And  we  have  a  beautiful 
example  of  the  Christian  treatment  of  the  servant  in  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  Philemon. 
To  set  our  servants  good  examples,  and  to  care  for  their  moral  and  spiritual  welfare,  is 
the  duty  of  a  Christian  master  or  mistress. 

IV.  HiB    JUST    AND    COMPASSIONATE    OONDtTCT    IN    SOCIAL     LIFE.      (VetS.    16—23; 

comp.  ch.  xxix.  12—17.)  He  did  not  refuse  his  inferiors  their  wishes  when  it  was  In 
his  power  to  gratify  them;  did  not  withhold  what  he  had  the  ability  to  give,  nor 
shut  up  his  compassions  towards  his  poor  brother ;  did  not  leave  the  widow  to  languish 
in  longing  expectation  of  help.  He  had  not  eaten  alone  in  solitary  greed  a  rich 
repast,  like  Dives;  he  had  sliared  his  bread  with  the  orphan.  All  his  life  long  he  had 
been  a  father  to  the  fatherless,  a  support  to  the  widuw,  thus  seeking  to  follow  and 
imitate  the  all-compassionate  God  ;  to  reproduce  his  heavenly  pity  in  a  gentle  life  on 
earth  (Pa.  Ixviii.  5).  He  had  clothed  the  neglected  and  the  poor,  and  earned  their 
thanks  and  blessing.  In  his  capacity  as  ruler  and  judge  he  had  not  lifted  up  his  hand 
with  the  purpose  of  violence ;  he  had  not  perverted  his  great  influence  in  the  gate,  or 
place  of  justice,  to  do  them  wrong.  Forced  to  self-defence,  he  sets  the  seal  of  a  most 
solemn  imprecation  upon  his  testimony  concerning  the  past.  And,  further,  he  again 
sets  forth  the  deep  religious  ground  on  which  all  his  conduct  to  his  neighbours  was 
built.  It  was  the  fear  of  God,  which  is  the  beginning  of  all  piety,  the  root  of  all 
morality,  the  great  deterrent  from  sin.  It  was,  therefore,  morally  impossible  for  him  to 
have  committed  the  sins  laid  to  his  charge  (ver.  23).  Here  from  the  ancient  patri- 
archal world  shines  out  upon  us  a  picture  of  those  social  virtues  which  are  essentially 
the  same  in  every  age  and  every  land.  These  are  the  primal  duties  which  gleam  aloft 
like  stars,  or  adorn  the  earth  like  flowers.  Our  duties  to  our  inferiors  in  wealth  and 
slatus  are  an  essential  part  of  Christian  piety.  We  are  to  do  good  when  we  can  hope 
for  nothing  again.  The  poor  cannot  recompense  us,  but  we  shall  be  recompensed  at 
the  resurrection  of  the  just  (Luke  xiv.  14;  Matt.  xxv.  36).  Much  conversj  with  the 
weak  and  the  lowly  produces  simplicity  of  heart,  and  chastens  our  feverish  ambition  to 
shine  among  our  equals  or  superiors. 

"  Far  other  aims  our  hearts  will  learn  to  prize, 
More  bent  to  raise  the  wretched  than  to  rise." 

Compare  the  whole  picture  of  the  village  pastor  in  Goldsmith's  '  Deserted  Village.' 
The  contemplation  of  these  pictures,  in  the  poet's  description  or  in  actual  life,  sweetens 
the  heart,  calms  our  thoughts ;  above  all,  we  are  thus  led  to  dwell  with  still  more 
delight  (in  the  sacred  pictuie  of  him  who  went  about  doing  good,  the  Divine  Type  of  all 
compassion  and  condescension. 

V.  Job's  INWARD  life:  THE  FiNEB  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  (Vcrs.  24 — 4;0.)  He  proceeds  to 
mention  several  sins  of  a  more  depraved  and  base  character,  defending  himself  against 
the  charge  of  complicity  with  them.  1.  The  lust  of  gold.  (Vers.  24,  25.)  He  had  not 
put  his  trust  in  riches.  The  deadliness  of  tlie  sin  of  covetousness  has  been  among  the 
lessons  of  all  moralists,  sacred  and  profane.   The  "  accursed  hunger  for  gold,"  the  "  root 

if  all  evil ; "  "  Thy  money  perish  with  thee ;  "  "  Tliou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be 


en.  xxxr.  1—40.]  THE   BOOK  OP  JOB.  613 


required  of  thee ;  "  "  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetousness ; "  are  sayings  that  occur  to 
us  all.  This  is  roally  the  most  fruitful  source  of  all  the  darker  crimes  and  sius,  because 
there  is  no  passion  so  unsocial,  so  anti-social.  Men  lose  their  souls  to  save  their  pelf. 
"  Covetousness  is  the  alpha  and  omega  of  the  devil's  alphabet ;  the  first  vice  in  corrupt 
nature  which  moves,  anil  the  last  which  dies."  It  is  an  "  immoderate  desire  and  pursuit 
of  even  the  lawful  helps  and  supports  of  nature."  "  Holding  last  all  it  can  get  in  one 
hand,  and  reaching  at  all  it  can  desire  with  the  other."  "  It  has  enriched  its  thousands, 
and  damned  its  ten  thousands."  2.  Idolatry  and  blind  worship  of  power.  (Vcr.  26,  et 
seq.)  As  he  had  kept  his  heart  with  all  diligence  in  presence  of  the  temptations  o( 
gold,  so  he  had  watched  against  the  inducements  of  false  religion.  In  presence  of  the 
glorious  objects  of  nature,  the  worship  of  which  so  extensively  prevailed  in  the  East, 
and  at  one  period  probably  over  the  whole  world,  he  had  retrained  from  throwing 
towards  them  the  kiss  which  was  the  gesture  of  reverence.  For  his  heart  had  been 
touched  with  true  reverence  tor  its  alone  worthy  Object,  the  Glod  who  is  a  Spirit ;  and 
to  have  declined  to  these  beggarly  elements  would  have  been  a  cr.ime  against  conscience, 
a  practical  infidelity,  a  denial  of  the  God  above.  If  we  have  ever  been  taught  and 
trained  in  a  spiritual  faith,  we  cannot  lapse  into  mere  formalism — a  confusion  of  the 
external  symbol  with  the  living  reality — without  a  denial  of  our  spiritual  conscience,  a 
turning  of  the  light  within  us  into  darkness.  To  bow  before  the  mere  power  and  beauty 
revealed  in  nature,  ignoring  God  as  the  Author  both  of  nature  and  of  tVie  moral  law;  or 
to  make  worship  a  mere  sensuous  enjoyment  rather  than  a  spiritnal  exercise ;  are  subtle 
temptations  of  our  time  analogous  to  those  of  Job.  Our  view  of  Nature  is  only  religi-ius 
when  we  seek  through  her  sensuous  medium  for  the  supersensuous,  the  moral,  tho  Divine 
(compare  Mozley's  noble  sermon  on  "  Nature  ").  3.  Hatred  of  enemies.  (Ver.  29,  et  geq.) 
He  had  lived  in  the  light  of  a  most  lofty  morality.  The  general  principle  of  ancient 
morality  was,"  Love  thy  neighbour  and  hate  thine  enemy,"among  both  Jews  and  Gentiles. 
"  An  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  was  the  maxim  of  the  s.ivage  justice  of  the 
early  times.  Even  tho  great  Aristotle  says,  in  his  '  Ethics,'  "  They  who  are  not 
enraged  when  they  ought  to  be,  seem  to  be  weak  creatures;  to  endure  insults  and 
neglect  one's  friends  is  the  part  of  a  slave"  ('Bth.  Nio.,'  iv.  5).  "The  first  duty  of 
justice,"  says  Cicero,  "is  to  injure  no  one,  unless  provoked  ly  a  wrong"  ('Otf.,'  i,  7). 
T^et  us  contrast  with  this  the  gentle  morality  of  Heaven.  The  Law  of  Moses  ordained 
that  if  a  man  should  meet  his  enemy's  ass  or  his  ox  going  astray,  he  should  surely 
bring  it  back  to  him  again  (Exod.  xxiii.  4).  Men  were  not  to  avenge,  nor  bear  any 
grndge  against  others,  but  to  love  their  neighbours  as  themselves  (Lev.  xix.  18). 
Especially  do  wc  find  this  doctrine  preached  in  the  Buok  of  Proverbs,  "  Say  not  thon, 
I  will  recompense  evil;  but  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  will  save  thee"  (xx.  22); 
"Rejoicenot  when  thiueenemv  falleth,  and  let  not  thy  heart  be  glad  when  he  atumbleth  " 
(xxiv.  17)  J  "  If  thine  enemy  he  hungry,  give  him  bread  to  eat ;  and  if  he  be  thirsty,  gi  ve 
him  water  to  drink  "  (xxv.  21).  Job  had  not  defiled  his  mouth  with  curses  imprc- 
catinii  death  upon  his  foes.  Nor  had  his  morality  been  negative  merely,  which  is  all  that 
many  seem  able  to  conceive  of  one's  duties  to  one's  neighbours.  He  had  been  hfspitable 
and  generous  (vers.  31,  32).  The  "  people  of  his  tent,"  th.;  inmates  of  his  dwelling,  had 
never  to  complain  of  scant  fare,  of  short  commons,  at  his  table.  He  did  not  leave  the 
stranger  to  pass  the  night  in  the  street,  but  opened  his  doors  to  the  wanderer. 

«  No  surly  porter  stood  in  guilty  state, 
To  spurn  imploring  famine  from  the  gate.  ... 
His  house  was  known  to  all  the  vagrant  train  ; 
He  chid  their  wanderings,  but  relieved  their  pain." 

Compare  the  stories  of  Abraham's  hospitality  at  Mamre,  Lot's  at  Sodom,  of  the  old  man 
at  Gibeah  (Gen.  xviii.  [Heb.  xiii.  2] ;  Judg.  xix.  15,  et  seq.).  Among  peoples  who  led 
an  unsettled,  wandering  life,  hospitality  necessarily  became  one  of  the  foremost  ol  duties 
to  one's  neighbour  ;  and  there  are  many  Arab  popular  anecdotes  of  Divine  punislinn-nt 
of  the  inhospitable.  Wetsrein  says  that  while  exploring  the  lake  Bdm,  the  fountain  of. 
the  Jordan,  the  Bediuins  asked  him  if  he  had  not  heard  of  the  origin  of  tke  lake  ;  and 
related  that  many  centuries  ago  a  flourishing  village  once  stood  there.  One  evening 
a  poor  traveller  came  while  the  men  were  sitting  together  in  the  open  place  of  the 
village,  and  begged  fir  a  supper  and  lodging.  They  refused;  and  when  he  said  he  was 
starving,  an  old  woman  reached  out  to  him  a  clod  of  earth,  and  drove  him  from  the 

JOB.  2  L 


514  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxi.  1—40. 


village.  The  man  went  to  the  village  of  Nimra  hard  by,  where  he  was  taken  in.  The 
next  morning  a  lake  was  found  where  the  neighbouring  village  had  stood.  The 
conditions  of  modern  life  are  different.  The  place  of  hospitality  in  the  scale  of  social 
duties  is  changed.  But  for  all  who  have  enough  and  to  spare  of  this  world's  goods, 
there  remains  open  a  wide  field  of  Christian  beneScenoe  and  of  refined  culture  in  the 
practice  of  a  sincere  and  discriminating  hospitality.  The  model  lesson  on  this  subject  is  in 
Luke  xiv.  It  is  a  deep  lesson  that  no  man  is  poorer  for  all  the  expense  of  love.  It  is 
the  habit  of  needless  hoarding  that  empties  the  heart.  When  the  affections  are  centred 
on  the  granary,  or  the  counting-house,  or  the  bank,  or  the  fields,  the  man's  wealth  is 
imaginary,  not  real.  Eeal  wealth  lies  in  the  power  of  self-sufBciency  for  our  outward  con- 
dition, and  of  having  something  over  for  others.  "  Use  hospitality  without  grudging ; " 
"  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  "  The  world  teaches  me  that  it  is  madness  to  leave  what  I 
may  carry  with  me ;  Christianity  teaches  me  that  what  I  charitably  give  while  I  live 
1  may  cajrry  with  me  after  death  ;  experience  teaches  me  that  what  I  leave  behind  I 
lose.  I  will  carry  with  me  by  giving  away  that  treasure  which  the  worldling  loses 
by  keeping ;  and  thus,  while  his  corpse  shall  carry  nothing  but  a  winding-sheet  to  his 
grave,  I  shall  be  richer  underground  than  I  was  above  it"  (Bishop  Hall).  4.  Hypo- 
crisy and  concealment  of  sins.  (Vers.  33 — 40.)  The  way  of  man  (or  of  "  Adam  ") 
is  to  hide  guilt,  and  bear  a  hypocritical  front.  The  motive  of  such  concealment  is 
suggested  in  ver.  34 — the  fear  of  the  great  multitude,  or  of  the  nobler  families  who 
were  one's  equals  and  associates.  So  may  a  guilty  conscience  lay  a  weight  upon  the 
tongue ;  as  in  Plutarch's  story  of  Demosthenes,  who,  having  taken  a  bribe,  refused  to 
speak  in  the  assembly,  appearing  there  with  his  throat  muffled  up,  and  complaining  of 
a  quinsy ;  whereupon  one  crieri  out, "  He  is  not  suffering  from  a  throat-quinsy  but 
from  a  money-quinsy."  "  Garments  once  rent  are  liable  to  be  torn  on  every  nail  and 
every  brier,  and  glasses  once  cracked  are  soon  broken ;  such  is  a  good  man's  name,  once 
tainted  with  just  reproach.  Next  to  the  approbation  of  God,  and  the  testimony  of  my 
own  conscience,  I  will  seek  for  a  good  reputation  among  men ;  not  by  concealing  faults 
lest  they  should  be  known  to  my  shame,  but  by  avoiding  all  sins  that  I  may  not 
deserve  it.  It  is  difficult  to  do  good,  unless  we  be  reputed  good  "  (Bishop  Hall).  5. 
Benewed  protestations.  Would  that  he  had  one  to  hear  this  his  assurance  of  innocence ! 
He  is  thinking  of  God,  and  he  desires  his  judicial  interference  in  his  favour.  "  Behold, 
there  is  my  handwriting;  let  the  Almighty  answer  me."  As  if  he  should  say, "  Here  is 
the  original  of  my  justification,  with  my  signature  attached.  This  is  my  documentary 
defence;  let  the  Almighty  try  it,  and  let  his  judgment  be  given."  On  the  other  hand, 
would  that  he  had  the  accusation,  the  statement  as  it  were  of  the  prosecution  against  him 
(ver.  35).  He  here  thinks  of  Gk)d  as  his  Accuser,  and  longs  to  know  what  he  has  against 
him!  Had  he  this  document,  he  would  bear  it  like  a  mark  of  honour  upon  his  shoulder 
(for  the  idea,  comp.  Isa.  ix.  4 ;  xxii.  22),  or  like  a  diadem  for  his  head.  Such  is  the  tri- 
umphant consciousness  of  innocence.  He  would  declare  to  God  the  number  of  his  steps 
— would  conceal  nothing,  but  confess  all  to  him.  He  would  approach  him  like  a  prince, 
with  stately  step  and  unabashed  port,  as  becomes  one  whose  conscience  is  clear  (ver.  37), 
Lastly,  by  some  additional  light  of  memory  now  flashing  on  his  mind  at  the  close  ol 
his  protestation,  he  gives  a  special  example  of  his  freedom  from  the  guilt  of  blood.  His 
had  been  no  life  containing  deeds  like  that  of  Ahab  to  Naboth  (1  Kings  xxi.  1).  No 
such  fearful  crime  was  the  cause  of  his  sufferings.  "  If  my  land  cries  against  me  '■ — for 
revenge,  because  of  some  crime  against  a  former  poasessor — "  and  its  furrows  weep;  if  I 
have  wasted  its  power,  its  fruit  and  produce,  without  payment,  and  blasted  the  life  of 
its  possessor,"  by  violence,  "  instead  of  wheat  let  thorns  spring  forth,  and  instead  of 
barley  stinking  weeds."  That  consciousness  of  God's  omniscience,  which  strikes  terror 
into  the  secret  sinner,  is  a  comfort  to  the  heart  of  the  sincoi'e  child  of  God.  The  day- 
break frightens  the  robber,  but  cheers  the  honest  traveller.  Thou  that  art  sincere,  God 
sees  that  sincerity  in  thee  which  others  cannot  discern ;  yea,  he  often  sees  more  sincerity  in 
thy  heart  than  thou  canst  discern  thyself.  This  may  uphold  the  drooping  spirits  of  a 
disconsolate  soul  when  the  black  mouths  of  men,  steeled  with  ignorance  and  prejudice, 
shall  be  opened  in  hard  speeches  against  him.  How  severely,  though  blindly,  dO  they 
judge  of  men's  hearts!  But  here  the  sincere  soul  may  comfort  itself  when  on  the  one 
hand  it  can  reflect  upon  its  own  integrity,  and  on  the  other  upon  God's  infinite  infal- 
lible kuowli-dge,  and  say,  "  Indeed,  men  charge  me  with  this  and  this,  as  false-hearted 


en.  XXXI.  1— 40.J  THE  BOOK-  OF  JOB.  615 

and  a  hypocrite,  but  my  God  knows  otherwise."  As  Daniel,  by  trusting  in  God,  was 
secure  from  the  mouths  of  the  lions,  so  thou,  by  having  faith  in  and  drawing  comfort 
from  God's  omniscience,  mayest  defy  the  more  cruel  mouths  of  thy  persecutors.  When 
a  man  is  accused  of  treason  to  his  prince,  and  knows  that  his  prince  is  fully  assured  of 
his  innocence,  he  will  laugh  all  such  accusations  to  scorn.  It  is  thus  with  God  and  a 
sincere  heart.  In  the  midst  of  all  slanders  he  will  own  thee  for  innocent,  as  he  did  Job, 
when  his  friends,  with  much  specious  piety,  charged  him  with  hypocrisy.  Wherefore 
commit  thy  way  to  the  all-seeing  God— to  that  God  who  is  acquainted  with  all  thy 
ways ;  who  sees  thy  goings  out  and  thy  comings  in,  and  continually  goes  in  and  out 
before  thee,  and  will  one  day  testify  and  set  his  seal  to  thine  integrity.  Comfort  thy- 
self in  the  consideration  of  his  omuiscienue,  from  whence  it  is  that  God  judgeth  not  as 
man  judgeth,  but  judgeth  righteous  judgment;  and  hold  fast  thy  integrity  that  lies 
secret  in  the  heart,  whose  praise  is  of  God,  and  not  of  man  (South). — J. 

Vers.  1 — 40. — The  consciousness  of  integrity.  The  Divine  solution  of  the  riddle 
of  human  life  is  being  wrought  out  in  this  poem,  although  at  times  it  seems  as  though 
the  entanglement  became  more  and  more  confused.  The  case,  as  put  in  these  three 
chapters,  is  the  condensation  of  all  as  far  as  it  has  gone.  It  still  awaits  the  solution. 
Job  was  in  riches,  dignity,  and  honour ;  he  is  now  cast  down  to  ignominy  and  suffering. 
Yet  he  is  righteous — this,  at  least,  is  his  own  conviction;  and  in  this  chapter  he  makes 
his  appeal  to  the  facts  of  liis  history  and  invites  scrutiny,  and  judgment  if  he  be  found 
guilty.  This  is  the  progress  of  the  writing  up  to  the  presrnt  moment.  His  companions 
are  baffled.  They  know  of  no  other  explanation  of  such  suffering  than  deep  and  hidden 
sin.  It  will  yet  be  proved  that  the  godly  suffer — "  he  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick " — 
although  the  world  will  long  wait  for  a  verbal  explanation ;  and  even  now  does  the  cry 
never  ascend  to  heaven, "  Wherefore  dealest  thou  thus  with  me?"  Job's  appeal  to  the 
uprightness  of  his  life  and  to  his  perfect  integrity  relates  to  the  whole  of  his  conduct, 
and  to  the  various  conditions  in  which  he  has  been  placed.  The  outward  Divine 
testimony,  he  is  "  «,  perfect  and  an  upright  man,"  has  its  echo  in  Job's  breast.  Hence 
he  makes  his  appeal — 

I.  To  HIS  CHASTITY.  He  makes  his  appeal  in  the  sight  of  the  all-searching  One— 
to  him  who  seeth  "  my  ways"  and  counteth  "all  my  stepi." 

II.  To    HIS   TRUTHFULNESS   AND  JUSTNESS. 

III.  To    HIS   P0KITT   OF   CONDUCT. 

IV.  To   HIS   FIDELITY. 

V.  To   HIS   EVEN-HANDED  JUBTIOE. 

VI.  To   HIS   UNFLINCHING   BEOTITDDB. 

VII.  To  HIS  OHABITT  AND  COMPABSION. 

VIII.  To   HIS   FREEDOM   FROM   UNDUE   CONFIDENCE   IN   HIS    WTSALTH. 

IX.  To   HIS   FREEDOM    FROM   IDOLATRY. 

X.  To  HIS  FREEDOM   FROM   HATRED  AND  HARSH   TREATMENT,  EVEN  OF   HIS   ENEMIES 

XI.  To   HIS   KINDNESS   AND   HOSPITALITY. 

XII.  To  HIS  EXEMPTION  FROM  COVERT  OB  OPEN  SIN.  He  hid  no  iniquity  in  his 
bosom,  and  therefore  feared  not  the  presence  of  men.  Hypocrisy  was  not  his  failing. 
He  makes  his  final  appeal  to  his  honesty  and  upriglitness  of  deaUng  even  by  a  reference 
to  his  fidelity  to  the  very  fields  which  he  owned.  Well  might  such  a  man  lung  for  a 
true  judgment— for  an  open  ear  into  which  he  could  pour  his  complaint.  Well  may 
such  a  man  commit  himself  to  Jehovah's  judgment,  knowing  "the  Almighty  will 
answer  for  me."  Thus  does  Job  vindicate  his  integrity  and  make  his  appeal  to  the 
highest  tribunal. — R.  G, 

Ver.  4. God^s  watchfulness.    I.  Its  oohoentration  on  cwnduct.    God  sees  Job's 

ways  '  He  is  not  confined  to  the  observation  of  external  deeds,  for  he  reads  the  hearts 
of  men  and  he  judges  by  the  course  of  the  inner  life.  Still,  it  is  by  a  man's  actions, 
including  the  internal  actions,  that  God  judges  a  man  What  is  of  most  concern  to 
our  great  Master  is  how  we  exercise  our  will,  what  way  we  choose  to  walk  in,  how 
we  shape  our  daily  conduct.  He  cares  little  for  our  opinions  and  emotions,  except 
in  so  far  as  these  guide  and  influence  our  behaviour.  If,  then,  God  values  conduct 
chiefly  conduct  should  be  of  primary  importance  with  us.    Whatever  other  thing* 


6ie  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxm.  1—40. 

•we  may  be  anxious  about,  our  first  anxiety  should  be  to  see  that  our  wayt  are 
right. 

II.  Its  absolutk  thokoughnbss.  Job  speaks  of  God  as  counting  all  his  steps. 
Therefore  God  takes  note  of  every  one  of  them.  No  false  step  can  escape  his  notice. 
The  little  slip  is  not  unseen  by  God.  He  sees  ns  stumble  when  we  do  not  fall,  and 
observes  how  we  stray  for  a  brief  time,  even  though  we  afterwards  return  to  the  righ  t 
path.  This  truth  has  an  encouraging  side  to  it.  God  knows  how  many  steps  we  have 
taken;  therefore  if  the  way  ia  ion?;  and  weary  he  has  not  forgotten  us,  and  he  can 
give  us  re.st  ami  strength.  He  knows  how  many  steps  we  have  yet  to  take  ;  therefore 
he  will  give  us  a  sufficient  supply  of  grace,  whether  the  road  be  long  or  short,  and  he 
will  not  expect  more  of  us  than  the  length  or  brevity  of  life  permits. 

III.  Its  PROMiTiNQ  MOTIVE.  God  docs  not  watch  as  a  spy,  like  Satan  when  he 
was  eager  to  detect  some  weakness  in  Job  in  order  to  inform  against  him  (ch.  i.  7 — 10) ; 
nor  with  any  design  of  ruining  like  Satan  who  now  goes  about  as  a  roaring  lion  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour  (1  Pet.  v.  8);  nor  with  cold  curiosity,  amusing  himself  with 
the  frailties  of  his  children;  nor  with  merely  judicial  insight,  seeking  for  truth  and 
dealing  fairly,  but  with  no  sympathy  or  interest  in  his  creatures.  God  watches  with 
the  most  profound  interest — with  the  interest  of  love.  His  watchfulness  is  like  that  of 
the  mother  who  bends  over  the  cradle,  carefully  noting  every  changing  symptom  in 
her  ailing  child. 

IV.  Its  ultimate  results.  God  does  not  watch  for  nothing.  He  is  more  than 
an  inspector;  he  acts  according  to  what  he  sees,  and  his  watching  is  followed  by  his 
doing.  1.  Sin  cannot  go  unpunished.  There  is  no  eluding  the  eye  of  the  great 
Watcher  of  men.  The  foolish  notion  that  secrecy  may  find  a  door  of  escape  is  only 
a  delusion  when  we  have  to  deal  with  one  who  knows  everything,  to  whom  all  secrets 
are  open.  2.  Need  cannot  suffer  from  neglect.  The  poor  and  suffering  are  forgotten 
among  njen,  and  miserable  people  drop  out  of  sight  after  they  have  fallen  into  adversity, 
for  great  cities  liide  multitudes  of  unknown  and  solitary  sufferers.  Yet  God  counts 
every  painful  step  in  the  path  of  disappointment,  and  as  he  knows  all  he  will  assuredly 
give  the  needful  help.  Because  he  saw  the  condition  of  men  he  provided  for  their 
recovery  by  redemption  through  the  gift  of  his  Son. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  6. — An  even  hdance.  Job  only  desires  to  be  weighed  in  an  even  balance.  Ho 
feels  that  his  friends  have  judged  him  in  anything  but  a  fair  manner,  and  he  now 
craves  for  the  true  justice  of  God. 

I.  The  justice  or  an  even  balance  is  gbbatlt  to  be  desiubd.  People  have 
taken  a  very  narrow  view  of  justice,  so  narrow  a  view  as  to  be  practically  false  and 
most  fallacious.  Jusiice  has  been  regarded  as  the  power  that  punishes  sin,  and  while, 
of  courso,  this  is  true,  this  is  not  a  description  of  the  true  nature  and  ultimate  i  haracter 
of  it,  but  only  a  statement  of  one  of  its  special  functions — a  function  which  would  not 
exist  if  sin  hnd  not  entered  the  world.  Yet  justice  would  have  an  ample  field  if  there 
were  no  wickedness.  It  is  not  like  the  executioner,  whose  occupation  would  be  gone 
with  the  cessation  of  lawlessness.  Justice  is  righteousness.  It  is  the  principle  that 
insists  on  seeing  right  done.  Every  lover  of  the  good  must  desire  to  see  such  a  principle 
flourish.  Between  man  and  man  justice  is  fairness.  When  we  say  God  deals  justlv 
we  imply  that  he  deals  fairly.  This  may  not  mean  equality.  For  to  load  a  mule 
with  the  same  burden  we  would  put  on  an  elephant's  back  is  not  fair  dealing  at  all. 
K(]iiity  is  not  equality.  But  it  is  a  suitable  and  proportionate  dealing  with  each 
individual. 

ir.  '1'hb  justice  op  an  even  balance  is  rare  among  men.  Job  did  not  see  it, 
and  therefore  he  greatly  longed  for  it.  Many  things  falsify  the  scales  of  justice.  1. 
Prejudice.  Truth  should  be  on  one  side  of  the  scales — as  in  the  Egyptian  legend  of 
wiighing  the  souls  of  the  dead.  But  prejudice  either  pares  the  weight  of  truth  and 
so  lessens  its  value,  or  adds  its  own  weight.  2.  Self-interest.  Justice  should  be 
impartial;  but  men  are  not.  A  pure  detachment  of  mind  is  very  diflScult  to  acquire. 
Instend  of  considering  merit,  people  take  account  of  what  pleases  them  or  what  may 
be  profitable  to  thtm.  3.  Ignorance.  When  there  is  the  utmost  genuineness  of  desire 
to  weigh  justly,  we  may  make  a  mistake  simply  because  we  do  not  put  all  the  iacUi 
into  the  scale. 


OB.  XXXI.  1—40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  B17 


III.  The  JtTSTioB  of  ah  even  balanob  is  poukd  with  God.  1.  Pure  equity.  He 
allows  no  prejudice  to  warp  his  judgment,  no  self-interest  to  pervert  his  verdict.  God 
is  perfectly  just  in  his  own  character.  Therefore  he  can  judge  men  justly.  Being 
righteous  himself,  he  is  never  prompted  to  act  otherwise  than  righteously.  2.  Know- 
ledge. God  makes  none  of  the  unintentional  mistakes  that  are  so  common  with  men. 
The  whole  tangled  mass  of  events  is  unravelled  by  his  perfectly  penetrating  gaze. 
When  we  despair  of  having  a  case  truly  seen  by  our  fellow-men,  we  can  lift  up  our 
eyes  to  the  iireat  Judge  of  all  the  earth  and  be  assured  that  he  knows  all.  Surely, 
then,  it  is  most  necessary  to  stand  right  with  thu  justice  of  God,  that  this  may  vin- 
dicate and  not  condemn  us.  But  only  the  Qod-giveu  righteousness  in  Christ  can  make 
this  possible  to  us. — W.  F.  A. 

Vet.  11.—^  heinous  crime.  Job  justly  regards  adultery  aa  a  heinous  crime  which 
is  deserving  of  punishment. 

I.  The  great  evil  of  this  crime.  It  contains  within  it  a  combination  of  various 
dreadful  kinds  of  wickedness.  1.  Unfaithfulness.  Husband  and  wife  have  vowed  to 
be  true  to  one  another.  Adultery  is  a  breach  of  marriage  vows.  Even  if  purity  were 
not  originally  binding,  the  voluntary  assumption  of  the  yoke  of  matrimony  would 
have  made  it  so.  The  sin  of  unfaitlifulness  to  the  marriage  tie  is  one  of  breaking  a 
most  solemn  promise.  2.  Crvdty.  This  is  not  a  sin  that  can  be  committed  wholly 
on  one's  own  account.  A  grievous  and  irreparable  wrong  is  done  to  another.  For  the 
sake  of  selfish  pleasure,  a  home,  which  might  have  been  a  centre  of  love  and  joy,  is  torn 
to  pieces  by  outraged  jealousy  and  made  miserable  with  the  total  wreck  of  the  hopes 
of  youth.  3.  Impuriiy.  Some  have  thought  that,  as  happiness  does  not  always 
accompany  marriage,  "  free  love  "  would  be  more  desirable.  It  is  forgotten  that  the 
very  term  is  a  misnomer.  No  true  love  can  exist  without  constancy  and  fidelity. 
When  those  virtues  are  removed,  what  ia  called  love  is  at  best  a  passing  fancy ;  at 
worst  it  is  a  foul  passion.  The  soul  of  the  adulterer  is  stained  and  corrupted.  4. 
Godlessness.  This  great  sin  darkens  the  vision  of  God.  It  involves  a  violation  of  a 
Divine  institution,  and  is  thus  unfaithfulness  to  God  as  well  as  to  a  human  companion. 
1'he  soul  of  the  adulterer  is  lost  to  the  life  of  holiness  and  the  true  service  of  God. 

IL  The  just  treatment  of  this  crime.  1.  Not  by  the  abolition  of  marriage. 
This  is  but  the  refuge  of  despair.  It  is  said  in  some  quarters  that  marriage  is  a  failure. 
But  wherever  it  is  a  failure  some  of  its  necessary  ingredients  have  been  neglected.  If 
there  is  no  true  love,  if  sympathy  is  wanting,  if  mutual  forbearance  is  not  practised, 
the  close  union  of  husband  and  wife  must  lead  to  perpetual  quarrelling.  But  what  we 
want  is  to  raise  the  standard  of  marriage.  The  abolition  of  lifelong  marriage  is 
virtually  the  abolition  of  that  most  sacred  Christian  institution — the  family.  It  must 
open  the  floodgates  of  vice  by  allowing  suggestions  of  licence  that  are  now,  at  least  to 
some  extent,  kejit  in  check  by  the  social  conscience  that  respects  the  marriage  tie.  2. 
By  the  most  effectual  form  of  reprobaiiim.  Job  considered  it  to  be  an  iniquity  to  be 
punished  by  the  judges.  This  was  the  old  Jewish  method,  and  the  Puritans  of 
New  England  attempted  to  revive  it.  But  great  difBoulties  stand  in  the  way  of 
criminal  prosecutions  for  adultery.  Moreover,  it  is  not  the  function  of  the  state  to 
punish  vice,  but  to  prevent  direct  or  indirect  injuries.  Now,  though  adultery  is  an 
injury,  the  course  for  a  legal  treatment  of  it  as  such  is  not  clear.  But  this  does  not 
mean  that  the  vice  should  go  unchecked.  It  deserves  the  severest  social  stigma.  It 
lies  under  the  wrath  of  God.  It  should  be  prevented  as  far  as  possible  by  a  wise  and  pure 
bringing  up  of  the  yovmg  and  the  inculcation  of  principles  of  social  purity. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  24. — The  hope  of  gold.  Job  here  reminds  us  of  the  Egyptian,  •  Book  of  the 
Dead,'  in  which  the  soul,  summoned  before  its  judges,  recites  a  long  list  of  sing,  and 
declares  itself  innocent  of  them  all.  In  this  ohapt<r  the  patriarch  runs  over  many 
kinds  of  wickedness,  and  invokes  just  punishment  if  he  has  been  guilty  of  any  of 
them.  His  self-vindication  has  been  forced  from  him  by  the  repeated  false  accusations 
of  bis  friends.  We  know  that  Job  was  not  without  the  consciousness  of  sin ;  but  he 
was  not  guilty  of  the  crimes  and  of  the  great  deeds  of  wickedness  which  had  been  charged 
against  him.  Among  other  evil  things,  he  honestly  repudiates  resting  his  hope  and 
confidence  in  gold. 


518  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxi.  1—40. 

L  The  fascination  of  the  hope  op  gold.  This  hope  has  a  wide  influence  over 
men.  It  is  not  by  any  means  confined  to  the  owners  of  wealth.  The  poor  make  too 
much  of  the  hope  of  gold  which  they  covet,  while  the  rich  overvalue  that  which  is 
within  their  grasp.  The  passion  for  gold  goes  mad  at  the  diggings  ;  but  it  is  fuund  in 
sober  walks  of  business  life.  Let  us  consider  its  sources.  1.  Wide  pwchasimj  power. 
Gold  is  not  sought  for  its  glitter.  The  old  miser  who  dived  his  hand  into  his  bags  of 
coins  with  wild  ^ilee  is  extinct.  The  modern  gold-worshipper  is  too  wise  to  hoard  his 
money  uselessly.  But  whether  the  money  is  spent  or  not  it  is  held  as  a  potential 
good.  It  buys  all  visible  commodities.  People  come  to  think  that  whatever  they 
want  can  be  had  for  gold.  2.  Materialism.  The  habit  of  engrossing  one's  self  with 
earthly  things  appears  to  enlarge  the  value  of  gold  by  blotting  out  of  vjew  everything 
that  is  above  the  earth.  The  heavens  are  lost  sight  of,  and  the  universe  shrinks  into 
the  circle  of  the  objects  that  can  be  procured  for  money. 

II.  The  fatahtv  of  the  hope  of  gold.  The  fascination  is  fatal;  it  lures  to 
ruin.  1.  It  lowers  the  soul.  .The  worshipper  is  always  being  assimilated  to  his  idol. 
He  who  adores  gold  comes  to  have  a  heart  that  is  as  hard  and  earthly  as  the  metal 
he  is  enslaved  to.  Thus  all  the  finer  spiritual  qualities  are  crushed  and  quenched, 
and  a  sordid  appetite  for  money  dominates  the  inner  man.  2.  It  encourages  selfishness. 
The  hope  is  for  one's  self.  We  see  this  in  the  frightfully  prevalent  vice  of  gambling. 
The  infatuated  gambler  is  intoxicated  with  an  excitement  the  root  of  which  is  pure 
greed,  heartless  selfishness.  His  gains  are  not  productions,  adding  to  the  wealth  of 
the  world,  but  simply  and  solely  what  can  be  got  out  of  other  people's  possessions. 
His  whole  profit  is  made  by  the  loss  of  other  people.  Gambling  is  the  most  anti- 
social vice.  3.  It  leads  to  crime.  Gold  is  thought  more  of  than  truth  or  duty,  or  the 
rights  of  one's  neighbour.  4.  It  is  dishonouring  to  Ood.  God  is  the  true  Hope  of  his 
children.  When  men  turn  from  him  to  gold  they  turn  to  an  idol,  and  are  unfaithful 
to  their  Lord.  6.  It  ends  m  disappointment.  Gold  cannot  buy  the  best  things — 
peace  of  mind,  purity,  love,  heaven.  Midas  is  a  failure  in  the  end.  We  must  learn 
to  see  the  limits  of  the  utility  of  money,  and  look  beyond  them  for  our  true  hope  and 
confidence  in  what  is  better  than  gold — the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  33,  34. — The  shame  of  public  exposure.  Job  asks  whether  he  has  hidden  his 
sin,  and  shrunk  from  public  exposure  for  fear  of  the  multitude?  On  the  contrary,  he 
has  been  frank  and  fearless,  daring  to  face  the  world  because  he  is  true  and  honest. 

I.  The  guiltt  man  is  afbaid  op  public  exposube.  Ti)is  is  a  common  feeling. 
It  is  "  after  the  manner  of  men."  It  was  seen  in  Adam  hiding  in  the  garden.  Shame 
follows  sin.  Guilt  creates  cowardice.  He  who  held  his  head  aloft  in  his  innocence 
dares  not  look  on  his  fellows  when  he  has  committed  a  crime.  Every  eye  seems  to 
follow  him  with  suspicion.  His  imagination  transforms  the  most  unconcerned  passer- 
by into  a  detective.  Pear  magnifies  the  importance  of  trifles,  till  the  smallest  events 
seem  to  be  links  in  a  chain  that  is  dragging  the  miserable  criminal  down  to  ruin.  He 
feels  himself  caught  in  a  net,  and  he  knows  not  which  way  to  turn  for  release. 

II.  Theee  is  no  moral  worth  in  the  feab  op  public  exposure.  The  sinner 
is  not  conscious  of  inward  unworthiness,  or  at  least  this  is  not  his  strongest  feeling. 
All  he  dreads  is  public  exposure.  He  is  not  repentant  of  his  sin  ;  he  is  only  ashamed 
of  its  disgi-ace.  Moreover,  though  he  is  so  fearful  of  discovery  by  man,  he  has'  no 
thought  that  God's  eye  is  on  him,  and  no  concern  that  God  disapproves  of  him.  His 
one  thought  is  of  his  fellow-men,  the  opinion  of  the  world.  This  fear  is  altogether  low 
and  selfish.  It  does  not  spring  from  conscience ;  it  only  concerns  itself  with  the 
consequences  of  wickedness,  not  with  the  wickedness  itself.  It  has  no  regard  for  the 
outraged  law ;  it  only  thinks  of  the  threatening  punishment.  That  punishment  may 
come  in  visible  penalties.  Tiie  criminal  may  have  to  go  to  prison  or  the  gallows,  or 
when  the  mob  seizes  its  victim  it  may  "  lynch  "  him.  The  terror  of  a  miserable  oieature 
who  is  hiding  from  the  expected  vengeance  of  the  people  must  be  an  awful  agony. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  nothing  to  touch  the  higher  nature  in  this.  Possibly,  however, 
the  fear  is  only  of  a  social  stigma.  The  man  who  had  been  in  a  position  of  honour 
finds  himself  an  object  of  universal  contempt.  The  disgrace  is  unbearable.  Ho  hides 
his  head  for  very  shame.     He  is  miserably  selfish  in  his  degradation. 

III.  It  is  A  happt  thing  to  have  no  oooabion  fob  the  shame  of  pubijo 


OH.  XXXI.  i— 40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  6i9 

EXPOSUEE.  Some  men  are  bo  sunken  in  wickedness  that  they  are  beneath  shame,  so 
familiar  with  disgrace  that  they  do  not  feel  it.  No  doubt  it  would  be  a  step  upward 
for  such  men  to  awake  to  a  consciousness  of  their  abject  condition.  But  for  those  who 
are  not  lost  to  all  sense  of  public  decency,  it  certainly  is  well  to  be  able  to  stand  out 
boldly  before  the  world  and  not  dread  investigation.  Yet  even  when  this  can  be 
done  there  may  be  misunderstandings  that  lead  to  false  accusations,  or  there  may  be 
worldly  sins  that  our  fellow-men  do  not  condemn.  Therefore  he  who  remembers  that 
he  has  to  give  account  of  himself  to  God  will  not  be  satisfied  with  winning  the 
approval  of  his  fellows,  nor  cast  down  to  despair  if  he  loses  it,  so  long  as  he  has  the 
smile  of  bis  supreme  Master.  When  a  man's  c^  inscience  is  clear  towards  Heaven,  he 
need  fear  no  public  exposure.  He  may  meet  with  social  contempt,  like  the  martyrs. 
But  though  this  may  be  painful  to  him,  he  can  be  calm  and  patient,  knowing  that  in 
the  end  God  will  vindicate  the  right. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  35. — 2%e  indictment.  Job  desires  something  like  a  legal  indictment.  His 
experience  suggests  confusion,  uncertainty,  irregularity.  He  sets  "  his  mark,"  and 
now  he  wants  his  Adversary — who,  to  Job's  thought,  can  be  none  other  than  his 
Judge,  God — to  draw  up  an  indictment  that  he  may  know  once  for  all  what  charges 
■re  brought  aiiainst  him. 

I.  Man  cannot  understand  God's  dealings  with  him.  This  thought  repeat- 
edly recurs  in  the  Book  of  Job ;  it  is  one  of  the  great  lessons  of  the  poem.  We  can 
now  see  that  Job  was  almost  as  much  misjuiifiint;  God  as  the  three  friends  were  mis- 
judging Job.  But  at  the  time  it  was  not  possible  for  the  patriarch  to  comprehend  the 
Divine  purpose  in  his  sufferings.  Had  he  known  all,  much  of  the  gracious  design  of 
his  trial  would  have  been  frustrated.  The  very  obscurity  was  a  necessary  condition 
for  the  testing  of  faith.  While  we  are  enduring  trial  we  can  rarely  see  the  issue  of  it. 
Our  view  is  almost  limited  to  the  immediate  present.  ^Moreover,  there  are  future  con- 
sequences of  God's  present  treatment  of  us  which  we' could  not  truly  comprehend  if 
they  were  visible  to  us.  The  child  is  not  capable  of  valuing  his  education  and  appre- 
ciaiing  the  good  results  of  it.  The  patient  is  not  able  to  understand  the  medical 
or  snTgi,oal  treatment  he  is  made  to  undergo.  While  we  walk  by  faith,  we  must  learn 
U,  expect  dispensations  of  providence  that  are  quite  beyond  our  comprehension. 

II.  It  is  natural  to  desire  an  explanation  of  God's  tbeatmknt  op  man. 
1.  That  doubts  may  he  removed.  It  is  difficult  not  to  distrust  God  v\hen  he  seems  to 
be  dealing  hardly  with  us.  If  only  he  would  roll  back  the  clouds  we  should  be  at 
rest.  2.  For  our  own  guidance.  Is  God  accusing  us  of  sin?  Are  we  to  take  his 
chastisements  as  punishments  ?  Then  what  are  the  sins  in  us  that  he  most  dis- 
approves of? 

III.  God  does  not  punish  without  allowing  us  to  see  the  grounds  of 
HIS  action.  Job  craved  an  indictment.  He  wanted  to  see  the  charges  against  him  in 
black  and  white.  1.  When  we  are  guilty  conscience  will  reveal  the  fact.  It  would  be 
monstrous  to  condemn  and  punish  the  criminal  without  even  letting  him  know  of  the 
offence  with  which  he  is  charged.  We  dare  not  ascribe  such  injustice  to  God.  He 
has  implanted  within  us  an  accusing  voice  that  echoes  his  accusations.  If  we  seek 
for  light  and  the  guidance  of  conscience,  we  must  be  able  to  see  how  we  have  sinned 
and  come  under  the  wi  ath  of  God.  2.  When  no  consciousness  of  guilt  is  to  be  found, 
the  suffering  cannot  be  for  the  punishment  of  sin.  We  are  all  conscious  of  sin,  but  sin 
may  be  forgiven  ;  we  may  not  be  falling  away  from  God,  but  cleavina  to  him— though 
with  weakness  and  sin  in  our  hearts,  still  with  faithful  adhesion.  Then  God  will  not 
punish.  It,  therefore,  the  blow  falls,  it  is  for  some  other  than  a  penal  reason.  Con- 
sequently, we  need  not  search  about  anxiously  for  some  unseen  and  unsuspected  wicked- 
ness. Job  made  a  mistake  in  asking  for  an  indictment.  There  was  none,  simply 
because  there  was  not  any  ground  for  one.  Over-scrupulous  consciences  suspect  the 
wrath  of  Heaven  when  the  gracious  purging  of  the  fruitful  branch  is  really  a  sign  of 
the  husbandman's  appreciation  of  it. — W.  F.  A. 


520 


THFi  BOOK  OF  JOa 


[CII.  XXX7I.  1-^iia. 


Section  V.    Ch.  xxxii. — ixxvii.    Habanoub  of  Ewhd. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTEK  XXXII. 


A  new  personage  is  now  introduced  upon 
tlie  scene,  wlio  Bpeake  in  u  new  style  and 
almost  in  a  new  language.  No  previouB 
mention  has  been  made  of  him;  no  subse- 
quent notice  is  taken  of  his  arguments ;  and 
nothing  is  said  of  him  in  the  historical 
section  wherewith  the  work  concludes  (ch. 
xlii,  7 — 17)-  It  is  therefore  scarcely  sur- 
piiiiing  that  some  exQeptiou  has  been  taken 
to  the  genuineuesa  of  the  entire  passage  (ch, 
xxxii,— xxsvii.),  or  tliat  it  has  been  re- 
gKrded  by  many  excellent  critics  as  an  in- 
Irrpolation  into  the  Book  of  Job,  made  by 
01KI  who  was  not  the  original  author,  at  a 
ilafe  considerably  later  than  the  rest  of  the 
composition.  A  modification  of  this  ex- 
tr(  me  view  is  suggested  by  M.  Benan, 
wlio  thinks  that  the  original  author  may 
have  added  the  passage  in  his  old  age. 
This  view  is  entitled  to  consideration. 
Tlie  gul^ect  has  been  discussed  at  some 
length  in  the  lutroduotion,  ao  that  no  more 
Dei  d  be  stated  here.  We  are  confronted 
with  the  fact  that  the  passage  has  coiuo 
down  to  us  as  a  substantive  portion  of  the 
Book  of  Job,  in  all  the  Hebrew  manuscripts 
that  have  reached  our  time,  as  well  as  in 
all  the  ancient  versions — the  Septuagint, 
the  Syriac,  the  Chaldee,  the  Arabic,  the 
jEthiupic,  the  Vulgate,  etc.  To  excise  it, 
therefore,  would  be  too  bold  a  measure, 
though  some  moderns  have  not  shrunk 
from  doing  ao. 

Vers,  1—5, — Th«  discourse  of  Elihn  is 
prefaced  by  a  short  introduction  in  plain 
prose,  explaining  who  he  was,  and  giving 
the  reasons  which  actuated  him  in  coming 
forward  at  this  point  of  the  dialogue, 

Ver.  1.— So  these  three  men  ceased  to 
answer  Job.  Zophar  had  been  silenced 
earlier.  Eliphaz  and  Bildad  now  felt  that 
they  haij  no  more  to  eay.  They  had  ex- 
hausted the  weapons  of  their  armonry  with- 
out any  effect,  and  wert  conscious  that 
nothing  would  be  gained  by  mere  reiteration. 
All  their  efforts  had  aimed  at  Suuviuciug 
Job  of  sin;  and  he  w.is  still  unconvinced  — 
lie  remained  righteous  in  his  own  eyes, 

Ver,  2. — Then  was  kindlsd  the  wiath  of 


Xllhn,  The  name  "  Elihu "  was  not  un- 
common among  the  Israelites.  It  is  found 
among  the  ancestors  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  i, 
1),  among  the  Korliite  Levitoa  of  the  time 
of  David  (1  Ohron.  xxvi.  7),  and  as  a 
variant  for  Bliab,  one  of  David's  brothers  (1 
Chron.  xxvii,  8),  The  meaning  of  the  word 
was,  "  He  is  my  God "  (NW^s),  The  son 
of  Barachel,  Barachel  is  also  a  significant 
n.ame.  It  means,  "  Bless,  O  God,"  or  "  God 
blesses  "  ('?«  ")^^).  Both  names  imply  that 
the  new  interlocutor  belonged  to  a  family 
of  monotheists.  The  Bozite,  "Huz"  and 
"Buz"  were  brothers,  the  sons  of  Nalior, 
Abraham's  brother,  by  Milcah,  the  daughter 
of  Haran  (Gen,  xi.  29 ;  xxii.  20,  2IJ,  Of 
the  kindred  of  Earn.  By  "Eam"  we  are 
probably  to  understand  "Aram,"  who  was 
the  son  of  Eemuel,  a  brother  of  Huz  and 
BuK.  (On  the  connection  of  Huz  and  Buz 
with  the  Arabian  tribes  of  Khazu  and  Bazu, 
see  the  comment  on  oh,  i,  },)  Against  Job 
was  his  wrath  kindled,  because  he  justified 
himself  rather  than  Qod.  Elihu  was  well- 
intentioned  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  not  surprising 
that  he  had  been  shocked  by  some  of  Job's 
expressions.  Job  had  himself  apologized  for 
them  (ch.  vi.  26);  and  certainly  tliey  went 
perilously  near  taxing  God  with  injustice 
(see  ch.  xl.  8).  But  it  is  to  be  remembered 
that  finally  God  justifies  Job's  sayings,  while 
condemning  those  of  his  "comforters." 
"My  wrath  is  kindled,"  he  says  to  Eliphaz, 
"  against  thee,  and  against  thy  two  friends ; 
for  ye  have  not  spoken  of  me  the  thing  thai 
it  right,  as  my  lervant  Job  haOi "  (ch.  xlii,  7). 

Ver.  3. — Mac  against  his  three  friends 
was  his  wrath  kindled,  because  they  had 
found  no  answer.  Elihu  thought  that  Job's 
reasonings  and  complaints  admitted  of  being 
satisfaotorily  answered,  and  was  vexed  that 
the  three  "  friends"  had  not  made  the  right 
replies.  It  is  the  main  object  of  his  speech 
to  supply  them.  And  yet  had  condemned 
Job,  They  had  condemned  him  on  wrong 
grounds  and  of  sins  that  he  had  not  com- 
mitted (oh,  xxii,  6—9),  Elihu  ooudemns 
him  as  much  (ch,  xxxiii,  9 — 12;  xxxiv. 
7 — 9,  etc),  but  for  entirely  different  reasons, 

Ver,  4,— Now  Elihu  had  waited  till  Job 
had  spoken ;  rather,  to  tpeali  to  Job  (see  the 
Eevised  Version),  He  had  waited  impa- 
tiently until  the  three  special  "friends" 
had  said  their  say,  and  he  might  come  for- 
ward without  manifest  presumption.  Be- 
cause they  were  elder  than  he,  (On  the  re- 
spect paid  to  age  at  this  time  iu  the  land 
wherein  Job  lived,  see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xxix.  8,) 


CH.  xxxn.  1—  22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


621 


Ver.  5. — When  Elihu  saw  that  there  waa 
no  answer  in  the  mouth  of  these  three  men, 
then  his  wrath  was  kindled  (comp.  ver.  3 
and  the  comiueut). 

Vera.  6— 22.— The  speech  of  Elihu  now 
begins.  In  the  present  chapter,  after  a 
short  apologetic  exordiun),  excusing  his 
youth  (vera,  6 — 9),  he  addresses  himself  ex- 
cluaively  to  Jrb's  friends.  Ho  has  listened 
attentively  to  them,  and  weighed  their 
words  (vers.  11,  12),  but  bus  found  nothing 
in  them  that  confuted  Job.  They  had  not 
"  found  wisdom  " — they  had  not  "  van- 
quished Job" — at  the  last  they  had  been 
'*  ama?ed,  and  had  not  had  a  word  more  to 
say  "  (vers.  13—16).  Eliliu,  tlierefore,  will 
supply  their  deflciency ;  he  has  kept  silence 
with  ditSSculty,  and  is  ftiU  of  thoughts,  to 
v»'hich  he  would  fain  give  utterance  (vera, 
17^^20).  In  all  that  he  says  he  will  show 
no  favouritism — ^he  will  "accept  no  man's 
person,"  "  give  no  flattering  titles,"  but  ex- 
press sincerely  what  he  believes  (vers.  21, 
22). 

Ver.  6— And  Elihu  the  son  of  Barachel 
the  finzite  answered  and  said,  I  am  young, 
and  ye  are  very  old.  We  can  only  guess 
at  the  exact  ages  of  Job  and  bis  friends. 
Pjom  the  fact  that  God  at  the  last  "gave 
Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had  before  "  (ch. 
xlii.  10),  and  the  further  fact  that  he  lived, 
after  ho  had  recovered  his  prosp:  rity,  a 
huiidrtd  and  forty  years  (ch.  xlii.  16),  it 
has  been  conjectured  that  he  was  seventy 
years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his  conference 
with  his  Idends,  and  that  he  died  at  the 
age  of  two  hundred  and  ten.  But  this 
clearly  is  quite  uncertain.  He  inny  not 
have  been  much  more  than  fifty  when  his 
calamities  fell  upon  him.  If  this  were  so, 
the  age  of  his  friends  need  not  have  ex- 
ceeded fi-om  sixty  to  seventy.  Perhaps 
Eliliu  was  himself  not  moie  than  thirty. 
Wherefore  I  was  afraid,  and  durst  not  show 
you  mine  opinion ;  rather,  1  held  back  and 
was  afraid  to  utter  what  I  knew  in  your  •pre- 
tence. Elihu  wouhl  have  been  thought 
unduly  pushing  and  presumptuous  if  be 
had  ventured  to  come  forward  until  his 
seniors  ha\l  fndi  d  their  colloquy. 

Ver.  7.— 1  said;  te.  "I  kept  saying  to 
myself,  wlien  llie  desire  to  interrupt  came 
upon  me."  Days  should  speak.  Age  should 
give  wisddin,  and  the  speech  of  the  old 
should  be  roost  worthy  of  being  attended 
to.  Elihu  had  been  brought  up  in  this 
convictio'i.  snil  therefore  regained  himself. 
And  multitude  of  years  should  teach  wis- 
dom     "Old   experience   should    altain   to 


something  of  prophetic  strain,''  "  One 
ought  to  give  attention,"  says  Aristotle,  "  to 
the  mere  unproved  assertions  of  wise  and 
aged  men,  as  much  as  to  the  actual  demon- 
strations of  others  "  ('  Eth.  Nic,,'  vi.  11,  ad 
fin.  Comp.  also  ch.  i.  12 ;  xv.  10 ;  Prov. 
xvi.  31). 

Ver.  8. — But  there  is  a  spirit  in  man. 
But,  after  all,  it  is  not  mere  age  and  ex- 
perience that  make  men  wise  and  able  to 
teach  others.  "  There  is  a  spirit  in  man  " 
(see  Gen.  ii.  7) ;  and  it  is  according  as  this 
spirit  is  or  is  not  enlightened  from  on  high 
that  men  speak  words  of  wisdom  or  the  con- 
trary. The  inspiration  of  the  Almijhty — 
this  it  is,  which — giveth  them  understand- 
ing, And  such  inspiration  it  is  in  the 
power  of  God  to  bestow,  as  he  pleases,  on 
the  old  or  on  the  young,  on  the  great  of 
the  earth,  or  on  those  of  small  reputation. 
Hence  Elihu's  conclusion — 

Ver.  9. — Great  men  are  not  always  wise : 
neither  do  the  aged  (always)  understand 
judgment.  Elihu  lays  down  the  universal 
law,  before  applying  it  to  the  particular 
instance.  True  wisdom  is  from  God,  not 
from  observation  and  experience.  There- 
fore many  aged  men  are  not  wise ;  many 
experienced  men,  great  in  position,  versed 
in  affairs,  do  not  possess  understanding.  It 
is  a  trite  remark,  "  With  bow  little  wisdom 
the  world  is  governed  1 " 

Ver.  10. — Therefore  I  said,  Hearken. to 
me,  Elihu  evidently  claims,  not  exactly 
what  is  ordinarily  understood  by  inspira- 
tion, Imt  that  his  spirit  is  divinely  en- 
lighte'iud,  and  that  therefore  he  is  more 
competent  to  take  part  in  the  controversy 
that  has  been  raised  than  many  of  the  aj^cd. 
I  also  will  show  mine  opinion,  "I  also,"  or 
"  even  I" — i.e.  I,  young  as  I  am, "  will  show 
mv  opinion,"  or  "  utter  what  I  know  on  the 
subject. "  Elihu  does  not  speak  of  his  con- 
victions as  mere  "opinions,"  but  claims  to 
be  in  possession  of  actual  "  knowledge." 

Ver.  11.— Behold,  I  waited  for  your  words; 
i.e.  "  I  was  full  of  expectation ;  I  waited 
impatiently  to  hear  what  you  would  say." 
Then,  while  you  spoke,  I  gave  ear  to  your 
reasons — or,  yowr  reasonings ;  I  did  my  best 
to  apprehend  your  meaning— whilst  ye 
searched  out  what  to  say.  Professor  Lea 
translates,  "  whilst  ye  examined  Job's  con- 
clusions ; "  but  the  Authorized  Version  i| 
probably  correct.  Elihu  means  that  he 
listened  carefully  while  the  friends  hunted 
out  all  the  arguments  they  could  think  of 
in  order  to  ci  mfute  Job. 

Ver.  12. — Yea,  I  attended  unto  you — or, 
lent  you  my  attention-^&ndi,  behold,  there 
was  none  of  you  that  convinced  Job ;  rather 
Ihai  convioted  (or,  confuted)  Job.  Or  that 
answered  his  words.  In  Elihu's  opinion, 
the  argumentative  valus  of   all  **ve  long 


622 


THK  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXII.  1 — 2i. 


speeches  of  the  three  friends  was  nil ;  they 
had  entirely  failed  to  answer  Job's  argu- 
ments. 

Vei.  13.— lest  ye  Bhotdd  say,  We  have 
found  out  wisdom;  or,  beware  lest  ye  say. 
We  have  found  wisdom  (see  tlie  Revised 
Version).  "  Do  not  suppose,  i.e.,  that  you 
have  triumphed  in  the  controversy,  that 
your  mode  of  meeting  Job's  complaints  is 
the  wise  and  right  one.  The  exact  reverse 
is  the  case.  You  have  not  vanquished  Job. 
On  the  contrary,  he  is  unvanquished,  and 
remains  master  of  the  field.  If  he  is  ever 
to  be  vanquished,  it  will  not  be  by  you. 
Ood  thrusteth  (rather,  may  thrugt)  him 
down,  not  man.  A  true  prophecy  I  (see 
eh.  xl.  1—14). 

Ver.  14. — Now  he  hath  not  directed  his 
words  against  me.  Elibu  thinks  that  he 
can  interfere  in  the  controversy  with  the 
better  prospect  of  a  good  result,  since  he  is 
untouched  by  any  of  Job's  words,  and  can 
therefore  speak  without  passion  or  resent- 
ment. Neither  will  I  answer  him  with  your 
speeches.  He  is  also  going  to  bring  forward 
fresh  arguments,  which,  as  they  avoid  the 
line  taken  by  the  three  friends,  may  soothe, 
instead  of  exasperating,  the  patriarch. 

Ver.  15.  —  They  were  amazed,  they 
answered  no  more.  A  change  from  the 
second  to  the  third  person,  possibly  aa 
seeming  less  disrespectful.  Or  perhaps 
Elihu  turns  from  the  three  friends  at  this 
point,  as  Professor  Lee  supposes,  and  ad- 
dresses himself  to  Job.  Job's  "  comforters," 
he  says,  "  were  amazed  "  by  his  last  speech, 
and  could  find  nothing  to  say  in  reply  to  it. 
Consequently,  they  left  off  speaking. 

Ver.  16.— When  I  had  waited  (for  they 
spake  not,  hnt  stood  still,  and  answered  no 
more) ;  rather,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version, 
and  shall  I  wait,  because  they  speak  tiot, 
because  tliey  stand  still,  a/nd  answer  no  mort  1 
Am  I  to  wait  until  they  shall  have  recovered 
themselves,  and  found  something  to  answer? 
Surely  this  is  not  necessary.  Neither 
courtesy  nor  etiquette  prescribes  it.  Espe- 
cially when  I  have  waited  so  long,  and  have 
so  much  to  say,  and  am  so  exceedingly 
anxious  to  say  it  (see  vers.  18 — 20).  Elihu 
shows  all  the  impatience  and  ardour  of  a 
young  speaker  (see  ver.  6),  and  feels  the 
confjdencu  that  young  men  so  often  feel  in 
the  wisdom  and  persuasiveness  of  their  words 
(comp.  ch.  xxxiii.  1 — 6). 

Vor.  17. — I  said,  I  will  answer  also  my 
part,  I  also  will  show  mine  opinion,  The 
initial  "  I  said "  is  superfluous.  Elihu, 
having  asked  himself  the  question,  "Shall 
I  wait?"  in  ver.  16,  here  gives  the  answer. 
He  will  not  wait  any  longer,  he  will  take 
the  word,  he  will  set  forth  his  conviutiou. 

Ver.  18. — For  I  am  fnU  of  matter;  literally, 
I  am  full  of  words;  i.e.  I  biive  very  much 


to  say.  The  spirit  within  me  constraineth 
me;  literally,  the  spirit  of  my  belly;  i.e. 
"  my  inward  feelings  and  emotions."  Com- 
pare Zophar's  statements  in  ch.  xx.  2,  3  ; 
and  Job's  own  declarations  in  ch.  xiii.,  that 
he  must  speak  (vers.  13,  19).  There  is  a 
state  of  intense  excitement,  when  reticence 
becomes  impossible. 

Ver.  19. — Behold,  my  belly  is  as  wine  which 
hath  no  vent.  The  process  of  fermentation 
properly  takes  place  in  the  vat,  from  which 
the  gas  evolved  in  the  operation  can  freely 
escape.  When  wine  was  put  into  skins  before 
fermentation  was  complete,  and  gas  continued 
to  be  evolved,  the  effect  was  that  the  skins 
became  distended,  as  the  gas  had  no  vent, 
and  then  not  nnfrequently  the  skins  would 
bnrst,  especially  if  they  were  old  ones  (see 
Matt.  ix.  17).  It  is  ready  to  burst  like  new 
bottles,  Even  if  the  skins  were  new,  they 
would  undergo  distension,  and  would  appear 
as  if  "  ready  to  burst,"  though  the  actual 
catastrophe  might  be  avoided.  Elihu's  pent- 
up  feelings  seem  to  him,  if  they  do  not 
obtain  a  vent,  to  threaten  some  such  a  result. 

Ver.  20. — I  will  speak,  that  I  may  be  re- 
freshed; ia.th.er,  that  I  may  obtain  relief  ;  or, 
according  to  some,  "that  I  may  be  able  to 
breathe  "  (Cook,  Bosenmiiller).  Elihu  feels 
almost  suffocated  by  conflicting  feelings  of 
rage  (vers.! — 3), disappointment  (vers.  11, 
12),  and  anxiety  to  vindicate  God's  hononi 
(ver.  2).  I  will  open  my  lips  and  answer. 
In  the  remainder  of  Elihu's  discourse  the 
attempt  is  made  to  "  answer  "  Job  (see  eh. 
xxxiii. — xxxvii.),  with  what  success  will  be 
considered  elsewhere. 

Ver.  21. — Let  me  not,  I  pray  yon,  accept 
any  man's  person.  Elihu  hopes  that,  in  what 
he  is  about  to  say,  he  will  not  permit  him- 
self to  be  swayed  by  any  personal  bias ;  that 
he  will  neither  unduly  favour  the  upper 
classes  nor  the  vulgar  (see  Professor  Lee,  on 
the  difference  between  tf'N  and  mx,  '  Book 
of  Job,'  p.  444),  but  will  treat  all  fairly  and 
equitably.  Neither  let  me  (he  says)  give 
flattering  titles  unto  man.  Professor  Leo 
observes  on  this :  "  The  Oriental  practice  of 
giving  long  and  fulsome  titles  is  too  well 
known  to  need  anything  beyond  the  mere 
mention  of  the  fact."  Elihu  certainly,  in 
tihe  whole  of  his  address,  flatters  no  one. 
_  Ver.  22.— For  I  know  not  to  give  flattering 
titles;  t.e.  it  is  not  my  habit  to  give  flatter- 
ing titles,  nor  have  I  any  knowledge  of  the 
art.  I  should  expect  that,  if  such  were  my 
habit, my  Kaker  would  soon  take  me  away; 
would  soon,  i.e.,  remove  me  from  the  earth, 
as  one  whose  influence  was  not  for  good,  but 
for  evil.  Flattery  is  condemned  by  Job,  in 
ch.  xvii.  5;  by  David,  in  the  Psalms  (iii.  9; 
xii.  2,  3;  Ixxviii.  36);  and  by  Solomon,  in 
the  Book  of  Proverbs  (ii.  16 ;  vii.  21 ;  xx. 
W)  ;  xxviii.  23,  etc.). 


cfi.  xjKii.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOS  OF  JOB.  623 


H0MILETIC8, 

Vers.  1 — 5. —  The  intervention  of  Elihu.  I,  The  dibcomfitubb  of  thb  friends, 
"  So  these  three  men  "— Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar— "  ceased  to  answer  Job ;  "  i.e.  did 
not  respond  to  the  lamentations  and  protestations  which  he  uttered  in  his  parable.  1. 
The  reason  they  perhaps  assigned  for  their  silence.  "  Because  he,"  i.e.  Job,  "  was  right- 
eons  in  his  own  eyes."  If  this  was  scarcely  accurate  in  the  strict  theological  sense  of  the 
expression,  since  Job  had  more  than  once  acknowledged  himself  a  sinner  (oh.  vii.  20, 
21 ;  Ix.  2,  3),  and  even  subscribed  to  the  sentiment  of  Eliphaz  and  his  associates  that 
no  mortal  man  can  be  just  before  God  (oh.  ix.  20 ;  xiv.  3,  4),  it  is  yet  difficult  to 
exonerate  the  patriarch  entirely  from  the  charge  here  preferred  against  him ;  for,  though 
righteous  to  the  extent  of  being  free  from  flagrant  transgression,  which  his  friends 
alleged  he  was  cot,  and  sincerely  devoted  to  the  ways  of  holiness,  as  God  himself  had  tes- 
tified (ch.  i.  1),  he  nevertheless  insisted  on  his  blamelessness  of  life  and  uprightness  of 
character  with  such  pertinacity  as  to  overstep  the  bounds  of  true  humility,  advancing 
these  as  a  ground  or  reason  why  God  should  have  dealt  with  him  differently  from  what 
he  had  done,  and  thus,  as  it  were,  constructing  out  of  them  a  claim  of  merit,  or  self- 
righteousness  before  Grod.  2.  The  reason  they  forgot  to  assign  for  their  silence, 
"  Because  they  had  found  no  answer,"  i.e.  to  Job.  For  this  explanation  of  their  conduct 
we  are  indebted  to  the  observation  of  Elihu,  a  new  interlocutor  who  appears  upon  the 
scene.  Unable  to  convince  Job  of  immorality  and  hypocrisy,  they  were  likewise,  in 
Blihu's  judgment,  incompetent  to  reply  to  his  arguments  and  protestations.  Doubtless 
the  matter  did  not  so  present  itself  to  the  contemplation  of  the  friends.  According  to 
their  theology,  Job,  being  a  great  sufferer,  must  have  been  a  great  sinner ;  and  any 
declarations  on  his  part  to  the  contrary  only  proved  that  he  had  not  been  sufficiently 
humbled  before  God,  and  was  indulging  in  self-deception.  This,  however,  as  Job 
explained,  entirely  failed  in  its  applicability  to  him,  whose  past  life  of  stainless  purity, 
fervent  piety,  and  unwearied  philanthropy  gave  conspicuous  demonstration  of  the 
falsehood  of  their  allegations,  and  whose  present  consciousness  reproached  him  with  no 
dereliction  of  duty,  but  rather  loudly  proclaimed  the  steadfast  character,  untarnished 
beauty,  and  unmixed  sincerity  of  his  integrity  to  Heaven.  But,  inasmuch  as  the 
above-cited  nostrum  was  the  only  specific  which  remained  in  the  pharmacopoeia  of  the 
friends,  they  judiciously  abandoned  the  case  as  beyond  their  skill.  They  had  spent 
every  weapon  in  their  quiver  without  overthrowing  their  antagonist ;  and,  accordingly, 
with  commendable  prudence,  observing  a  discreet  reticence  as  to  the  secret  motive  of 
their  behaviour,  they  retired  fi-om  the  contest. 

II.  The  interposition  of  Elihu.  "  Then  was  kindled  the  wrath  of  Elihu  the  son 
of  Barachel  the  Buzite,  of  the  kindred  of  Ram."  1.  The  personality  of  Elihu.  Details 
such  as  these— concerning  the  name  (Elihu,  equivalent  to  "  He  is  my  God  "),  parentage 
(sdn  of  Barachel,  or  "God  blesseth"),  country  (the_Buzite,  probably  a  descendant  of 
Nahor  through  his  second  son  (Gen.  xxii.  21),  and  therefore  of  Aramsean  extraction, 
(hough  by  birth  an  Arabian,  Buz  being  mentioned  with  Dedan  and  Tema  as  a  city  of 
Idumea  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah,  xxv.  23),  kindred  (of  the  family  of  Ram,  otherwise 
nnknown,  unless  connected  with  Aram,  the  son  of  Shem,  Gen.  x,  23,  the  brother  of 
Ruz,  Gen.  xxii.  21,  or  the  grandfather  of  Nahshon,  cf.  Numb.  1.  7  with  1  Chron.  ii. 
9.  10)— dispose  of  the  patristic  conceit  that  the  new  interlocutor  was  Jesus  Christ. 
Equally,  however,  do  they  preclude  the  hypothesis  (Cox)  that  he  was  simply  one  of  the 
young  men  of  Job's  city  (ch.  xxix.  8).  They  rather  hint  that  he  "  belonged  to  a 
ifamily  which  had  retained  the  knowledge  of  the  God  of  heaven  "  (Cook) ;  and,  indeed, 
when  it  is  considered  that  Elihu  distinctly  claims  to  speak  under  Divine  impulse  (ch, 
xxxii.  8 ;  xxxiii.  4),  proposes  himself  as  a  response  to  Job's  oft-repeated  demand  for  a 
daysman  (oh.  xxxiii  6),  and  unfolds  views  of  Divine  truth  concerning  the  remedial 
character  of  affliction  and  the  doctrine  of  atonement  (ch.  xxxiii.  14 — 30)  that  seem 
like  anticipations  of  gospel  discoveries,  it  is  hard  to  resist  the  inference  that  in  Elihu 
we  have  a  young  Arabian  prophet  who  had  been  providentially  brought  upon  the 
scene,  as  the  friends  were,  and  was  moved  at  thr  appiopriate  juncture  to  deliver  certain 
nrelirainary  judgments  on  tl  e  cause  thrn  i  ending.  2.  The  time  of  his  appearing. 
We  are  inclined  to  think  that,  as  >he  result  ol  ibe  strife  of  tongues  between  the  patriarch 


624  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xncn.  1—22. 


and  his  friends,  to  which  also  we  can  suppose  that  Elihu  had  listened,  the  citadel  of  Job's 
integrity,  if  not  in  danger  of  being  captured,  was  at  any  rate  rudely  shaken,  and 
that  victory,  in  the  grand  fundaments  debate  or  controversy  of  the  poem,  was 
inclining  to  the  side  of  the  devil.  But  as  God  never  leaves  his  people  in  their  hovir  of 
need,  so  neither  was  Job  suffered  to  be  taken  captive  by  the  craft  of  Satan.  And 
accnrdingly  Elihu  is  at  this  point  introduced  upon  the  stage.  3.  The  purpose  of  hit 
introduction.  (1)  Doctrinal  comp'eteness.  Considered  as  a  theological  discussion, 
nothing  could  have  been  less  satisfactory  than  the  position  of  matters  at  the  close 
of  Job's  monologue.  On  the  one  hand,  the  friends  had  exhausted  themselves  in  an 
attempt  to  demonstrate  their  partionlar  theory  without  convincing  Job.  On  the  other 
hand.  Job  had  uttered  his  last  word  without  converting  them  to  his  way  of  thinking. 
On  the  one  side,  they  remained  exactly  as  they  were,  both  as  to  the  truth  of  their 
dogma  and  as  to  its  beai  ing  on  the  case  of  Job.  On  the  other  side.  Job  himself  was 
hopelessly  entangled  in  a  futile  endeavour  to  reconcile  the  seemingly  insoluble  contra- 
diction which  existed  between  his  outward  lot  and  his  inward  condition.  So  far  as  the 
right  relation  of  suffering  to  sin  was  concerned,  neither  of  the  disputants  had  discovered 
it.  Occasionally,  indeed.  Job  seemed  to  get  a  glimpse  of  it  (ch.  xxiii.  10),  as  also  did 
Bliphaz  (ch.  v.  17);  but  for  the  most  part  the  remedial,  corrective,  beneficent,  pjeda- 
gogic  uses  of  adversity  were  not  understood.  This  view  of  affliction,  therefore,  required 
to  be  prominently  exhibiled,  if  the  poem  were  at  all  to  be  redeemed  from  a  chart;e  of 
incompleteness,  of  starting  a  problem  it  could  not  answer,  of  propounding  an  enigma 
it  could  not  solve ;  and  this  was  done  by  setting  forth  Elihu  to  clear  away  the  doctrinal 
fogs  which  had  gathered  around  the  otherwise  acute  mind  of  Job,  no  less  than  round 
the  less  penetrative  intellects  of  his  friends.  (2)  Dramatic  unity.  Recurring  to  the 
problem  lying  at  the  basis  of  the  poem,  the  controversy  represented  as  existing  between 
God  and  Satan,  and  solemnly  put  to  trial  in  the  person  of  Job,  was  not  whether  man, 
standing  alone  and  unaided  on  the  platform  of  nature,  could  maintain  his  integrity  to 
Heaven,  but  whether  man  could  do  so  on  the  platform  of  grace  (vide  ch.  i.  9,  homi- 
letics).  It  was  needful,  therefore,  ihat,  just  at  the  moment  when  Job  seemed  to  be  on 
the  eve  of  giving  way,  he  should  receive  such  assistance  as  grace  could  impart;  and 
this,  again,  was  done  by  Elihu,  who,  speaking  from  a  Divine  impulse,  "  sets  before  Job 
clearer,  fuller,  and  more  accurate  views  of  the  Divine  character  and  modes  of  pro- 
cedure in  dealing  with  the  children  of  men,  and  thereby  seeks  to  reinforce  him  in  hia 
struggle  with  his  friends,  and  to  prevent  him  from  succumbing  beneath  the  temp- 
tations of  the  foe"  (vide  British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Beview,  October,  1872, 
ait.  "  The  Problem  of  Job,"  by  the  Rev.  T.  Whitelaw,  M.A.).  Thus  the  interlocution  of 
Elihu  is  not  so  much  "  what  Job  had  repeatedly  called  for,  a  confutation  of  his 
opinions,  not  effected  by  an  overwhelming  display  of  Divine  power,  but  by  rational 
and  human  argument "  (Canon  Cook,  in  'Speaker's  Commentary'),  or  "the  human 
verdict  on  the  controversy  between  Job  and  the  friends,  which  we  want  to  hear  almost 
as  much  as  the  Divine  verdict "  (Cox),  as  the  special  illumination  which  Divine  grace 
had  to  shed  upon  the  problem  agitated  between  him  and  them,  which  illumination 
was  conveyed  to  him  through  the  instrumentality  of  Elihu,  as  it  is  now  more  amply 
and  luminously  unfolded  to  us  in  the  gospel.  4.  The  spirit  of  his  intervention.  (1) 
His  wrath  was  kindled.  That  Elihu  should  have  given  way  to  an  uncalled-for  ebul- 
lition of  anger,  if  such  be  the  view  adopted  of  his  passionate  excitement,  was  no  more 
a  proof  that  he  did  not  speak  under  inspiration  than  was  the  fact  that  he  made  use  of 
Arnmaisms,  and  committed  certain  ineleganoies  of  style.  "  It  is  good  to  be  zealously 
affected  in  a  good  thing,"  and  Elihu's  indignation  was  amply  vindicated  by  the  conduct 
first  of  Job  (\  er.  2),  and  secondly  of  the  friends  (ver.  3).  Yet  (2)  his  modesty  was 
conspicuous.  The  style  of  severe  animadversion  adopted  by  many  cornmentators,  both 
ancient  and  modern,  in  stigmatizing  Elihu  as  "an  emblem  of  confident  arrogance" 
(Grepiory  the  Great),  as  an  example  of  the  ambitious  orator  (Strigel),  as  "  arrogant  and 
bold"  (Herder),  as  "a  conceited  prater "  (Umbreit),  and  his  addresses  as  "the  weak 
and  rambling  8[ieeches  of  a  boy,"  is  quite  unwarranted.  Not  only  had  he  waited 
rcispeotfully  until  his  elders  had  concluded  their  disputations  (ver.  4),  but  with  much 
humility  he  attributed  any  value  his  contributions  might  possess,  not  to  the  intrinsic 
excellence  of  his  dwn  genius,  but  to  the  fact  of  liis  inspiration  (ver.  8),  which  rendered 
him  little  more  than  the  mouthpiece  of  Heaven. 


OH.  xxzn.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  625 

Learn:  1.  It  is  one  mark  of  true  wisdom  to  know  when  to  be  silent.  2.  It  is 
specially  becoming  in  young  men  to  be  deferential  towards  their  elders.  3.  It  is  quite 
possible  for  good  men  to  be  righteous  in  their  own  eyes.  4.  It  is  commonly  the  ciise 
that  of  two  controversialists  both  are  wrong.  5.  It  is  not  unseemly  for  even  young 
men  to  be  jealous  of  the  Divine  honour.  6.  It  is  no  sin  for  young  men  who  know  the 
truth  to  instruct  old  men  who  kaow  it  not.  7.  It  is  right  in  those  who  speak  for 
Grod  to  be  raised  above  the  fear  of  man.  8.  It  is  certain  that  God  never  suffers  saints 
to  be  tempted  without  reinforcing  them  by  Divine  grace  and  teaching.  9.  It  is 
observable  that  heavenly  succour  mostly  comes  to  men  when  human  resources 
are  exhausted. 

Vers.  6 — 22. — The  (ipology  of  Elihu.  I.  Thb  reasons  of  his  previotjs  betioencb. 
Elihu  had  been  an  earnest  Ustener  to  the  controversy  Job  waged  with  his  three  friends, 
"  waiting  for  Job  with  words "  (ver.  4),  t.e.  eager  to  pour  out  in  speech  the  argu- 
ments that  trembled  on  his  lips ;  and  now  he  declares  that  two  things  had  restrained 
him  from  joining  earlier  in  the  discussion.  1.  A  modest  respect  for  their  superior  age. 
He  was  but  a  young  man  (literally,  "  few  of  years  "),  while  they  were  very  old.  Their 
venerable  aspect  had  inspired  him  with  such  awe  that  he  feared  to  utter  his  opinion  in 
their  presence.  Young  men  in  modern  times  are  not  always  so  deferential  towards 
thi'ir  elders.  But  seniorespriores  is  a  maxim  which  should  be  of  universal  application. 
While  it  is  at  all  times  unbecoming  and  impertinent  for  a  youth  to  interrupt  or  precede 
an  elder  in  conversation,  it  is  a  special  mark  of  rudeness  in  religious  discussion  for  an 
inexperienced  boy  to  "show  his  opinion"  btfure  men  of  mature  years  have  delivered 
theirs.  Jesus,  at  the  age  of  twelve,  among  the  doctors  in  the  temple,  was  not  delivering 
his  convictioijs,  but  "  hearing  and  asking  them  questions."  2.  A  hfty  esteem,  for  their 
superior  knowledge.  He  considered  that  old  age,  with  its  rich  experience,  should  have 
had  wise  and  weighty  thoughts  immeasurably  more  worthy  of  being  listened  to  than 
any  crude  sentiments  and  immature  judgments  that  he  could  utter.  A  young  man 
who  thus  accurately  gauges  the  relative  importance  of  the  wisdom  of  age  and  the 
"  opinions  "  of  youth  is  a  rare  phenomenon.  It  is  characteristic  of  youth,  though  born 
like  a  wild  ass's  colt,  to  fancy  itself  as  wise  as  Solomon.  For  the  most  part,  the  educa- 
tion of  ».  lifetime  is  required  to  enable  any  one  to  gather  successfully  the  ripe  fruits  of 
wisdom;  and  even  then,  the  wisdom  one  gathers  is  chiefly  this,  that  what  one  Imows 
is  as  nothing  in  comparison  to  that  of  which  one  is  ignorant.  Occasional  examples  may 
be  found  of  amazing  talent,  immense  learning,  extraordinary  genius,  in  youth ;  but  ripe 
wisdom,  i.e.  carefully  verified,  well-digested,  skilfully  arranged  knowledge,  is  pre- 
eminently the  property  of  age. 

II.  The  motives  foe  his  pkesbnt  iNTBRrERENCB.  In  justification  of  his  behaviour, 
he  offers  the  following  considerations.  1.  Thai  true  wisdom  in  its  ultimate  analysis 
is  an  inspiration  of  Heaven.  "  Truly  it  is  the  spirit  in  man  [literally,  '  weak,  feeble, 
rnoital  man '],  and  the  breath  of  Shaddai  that  giveth  them  [t.e.  man  collectively] 
understanding  "  (ver.  8).  That  is  to  say,  human  life  in  all  its  departments — physical, 
iiitellectual,  spiritual — is  not  an  evolution  or  development  from  dead  matter,  but  is  the 
creation  of  God's  Spirit  (Gen.  ii.  7).  It  is  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  that  snstaihs 
the  thinking  principle  in  man  no  less  than  the  principle  of  purely  aniniiil  cxistenci;. 
Hence  wisdom,  spiritual  insight,  intellectual  penetration,  religious  understanding,  has 
its  origin  rather  from  within  than  from  without.  It  is  dependent  not  so  much  (if  at 
all)  upon  accidental  circumstances,  such  as  age,  capacity,  opportunity,  as  upon  the 
quicl(ening  influence  of  the  vitalizing  and  enlightening^  Spirit.  Nay,  it  demonstrates 
the  possibility  of  a  supernatural  communication  of  wisdom  to  whomsoever  Shaddai 
wills,  and  upon  whatsoever  theme  he  may  please.  It  proves  that  no  man  can  justly, 
or  without  presumption,  claim  a  monopoly  of  wisdom.  The  doctrine  of  Elihu,  that  all 
intelligence  in  man,  and  much  more  all  spiritual  understanding,  proceeds  from  a  Divine 
iifflatus  which  breatheth  when,  where,  and  how  it  wills,  was  the  doctrine  of  Pharaoh 
(Gen  xli.  38),  of  Moses  (Bxod.  xxxi.  3),  tff  Nehemiah  (ix.  20),  of  Isaiah  (xi.  2),  of 
Christ  (John  xvi.  13),  of  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  ii.  10),  and  of  St.  John  (1  John  ii.  20).  2.  Thai 
true  wisdom  is  not  necessarily  the  property  of  age.  "  Great  men  are  not  always  wise ; 
neither  do  the  aged  understand  judjiment"  (ver.  9).  This  was  an  advance  upon  the 
previous  thought.    Not  only  was  wisdom  not  the  property  of  age  alone ;  the  discourses 


626  THE  BOOK  OP  J03.  t*^-  Jfxxii.  1—22. 


to  which  he  had  listened  had  painfully  convinced  him  it  was  not  necessarily  a  charac- 
teristic of  age  at  all.  This  witness  is  trae.  If  juvenile  witlings  ahound  among  all  ranks 
and  classes  of  society,  there  is  unfortunately  no  lack  of  aged  dullards.  Partly  through 
lack  of  capacity,  partly  from  defective  education,  partly  from  long-continued  negligence, 
many  come  to  old  age  without  acquiring  wisdom  (ch.  iv.  21),  and  sometimes  without 
possessing  common  sense.  It  is  not,  therefore,  wrong  for  young  men  of  piety  and 
culture  to  offer  to  instruct  these  persons  in  Divine  truth  or  secular  information;  only 
even  to  such  as  these  it  becomes  young  men  to  manifest  the  courtesy  and  deference  that 
are  always  due  to  age.  3.  That  in  particular  the  old  men  iefore  him  had  not  displayed 
a  high  degree  of  wisdom.  He  had  hearkened  to  their  "  understandings,"  i.e.  their  expla- 
nations of  the  subject-matter  in  dispute,  and  had  carefully  examined  the  replies  with 
which  they  had  endeavoured  to  convince  and  silence  Job ;  but  in  no  single  instance 
had  they  fairly  combated  his  position.  It  was  not  reasonable  to  say,  "  Lo !  we  have 
found  out  wisdom,"  and  here  it  is :  "  Gud  thrusteth  him  down,  not  man,"  so  that  from 
this  his  punishment  we  infer  his  guilt  (ver.  13)  ;  because  that  was  exactly  the  point  at 
issue  throughout  the  entire  course  of  the  discussion.  Nor,  again,  was  it  reasonable  to 
a^se^t  that  their  dogma  was  the  absolute  wisdom,  though  Job  was  of  so  obstinate  a 
temper  that  only  God  could  convince  him,  since  obviously  man  could  not.  That,  again, 
was  to  beg  the  question  entirely ;  and,  in  default  of  argument,  to  abuse  the  plaintiff's 
attorney.  Job's  words  must  be  fairly  and  honestly  controverted.  But  these  old 
preachers  did  not  understand  the  business.  A  well-known  interpretation  of  ver.  13 
makes  Elihu  say  that  only  God  could  overthrow  Job,  while  he  really  means  that  only 
such  uncommon  genius  as  he  (Elihu)  possessed  could  vanquish  a  disputant  so  obstinate 
as  Job  (Umbreit) ;  but  this  is  putting  the  worst  construction  possible  on  language  which 
may  legitimately  signify  that  in  Elihu's  judgment  Job's  position  could  not  be  turned 
by  merely  human  wisdom,  but  demanded  the  light  of  inspiration  such  as  he  was  about 
to  shed  upon  the  theme.  4.  ITiat  the  contribution  he  proposed  to  offer  was  entirely 
fresh  and  original.  The  position  he  intended  to  occupy  was  not  one  against  which 
Job  had  already  directed  his  attacks  ;  nor  had  the  arguments  he  designed  to  use  in  con- 
futation of  the  patriarch  occurred  to  any  of  the  friends.  The  new  thoughts  Elihu 
proposed  to  introduce  into  the  discussion  related  chiefly  to  the  disciplinary  character  of 
affliction  ;  and  it  is  doubtful  if  such  a  view  of  life's  tribulations  could  have  occurred 
to  any  one  apart  from  Divine  revelation.  The  interpretation  which  understands  Elihu 
to  say  that,  inasmuch  as  he  had  not  been  personally  interested  in  the  debate  which  Job 
and  the  friends  had  conducted,  he  was  able  both  to  deliver  an  impartial  verdict  on  the 
point  at  issue,  and  to  preserve  a  more  equal  temper  than  they,  the  friends,  had  been 
able  to  do,  though  perhaps  admissible,  is  not  so  forcible  or  apt.  5.  That  the  strength 
of  his  convictions  would  no  longer  admit  of  his  keeping  silence.  So  powerfully  had  the 
truth  seized  upon  him,  and  so  long  had  he  endeavoured  to  restrain  it,  that  now  his 
soul  (literally,"  his  belly,"  as  the  seat  of  spiritual  emotions)  seemed  like  a  wine-skin  on 
the  eve  of  bursting  through  the  fermentation  of  the  liquor  it  contained  (vers.  17 — 19). 
So  every  Heaven-born  idea,  to  whomsoever  it  is  first  communicated,  irresistibly  strives 
after  utterance.  For  a  season  the  living  thought  may  be  kept  in  abeyance,  carefully 
secluded  from  the  world  at  large,  but  ultimately  there  comes  a  moment  when  it  asserts 
its  Heaven-granted  supremacy  over  the  mind  of  the  man  that  has  received  it,  and, 
refusing  to  be  longer  concealed,  eventually  drives  that  mind  to  speak  forth  the  God- 
imparted  messnge.  So  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  in  Jeremiah's  heart  as  a  burning  fire 
shut  up  in  his  bones  (Jer.  xx.  9).  So  SS.  Peter  and  John  told  the  Sanhedrin  they 
could  not  but  speak  the  things  which  they  had  seen  and  heard  (Acts  iv.  20).  So  St. 
Paul  felt  that  necessity  was  laid  upon  him  to  preach  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  ix.  16).  So 
Mahomet  proclaimed  to  the  rude  Arab  tribes  of  a  later  day  the  sublime  discovery  of  the 
imity  of  God ;  and  Luther  could  not  keep  back  the  truth  which  God's  Spirit  had  flashed 
into  his  soul  on  Pilate's  Staircase,  that  "  the  just  shall  live  by  faith."  So  when  God 
gives  to  any  man — prophet,  poet,  preacher,  writer,  inventor,  discoverer,  or  man  of  genius 
generally,  a  new  idea,  it  renders  him  uncoTnfortable  until  it  has  been  liberated,  brought 
to  the  birth,  as  it  were,  and  sent  forth  to  wander  through  the  world  on  its  Heaven- 
designed  mission.  If  the  possessor  of  such  an  idea  would  have  ease  and  comfort  in  hi* 
soul,  he  must  give  it  voice.  As  Elihu  says,  ha  must  speak  in  order  to  be  refreshed. 
III.  Thk  ohabaotes  of  his  roETHCOMiKo  tTTBRANOB.    The  two  closing  veraei  ar* 


OH.  xxxn.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  527 

by  some  understood  to  contaia  an  additional  reason  fur  Blihu's  interposition,  viz.  that 
continued  silence  would  evince  such  a  mean  and  cowardly  deference  to  merely  human 
authority,  that  he  could  not  hope  to  escape  punishment  for  it  at  the  hands  of  God 
('  Speaker's  Commentary  ;'  Oox) ;  but  it  seems  preferable  to  view  them  as  setting  forth 
first  the  principles  he  intended  to  observe  in  his  proposed  interlocution,  and,  secondly, 
the  reasons  or  arguments  on  which  those  principles  were  based  (Delitzsch,  Carey,  Fry, 
etc.).  1.  The  principles  he  intended  to  observe.  These  wore:  (1)  The  strictest  impar- 
tiality as  between  man  and  man :  "  Let  me  not,  I  pray  thee,  accept  any  man's  person  " 
(ver.  21).  The  acceptance  of  persons,  or  the  favouring  of  the  great  at  the  expense  of 
the  small,  of  the  rich  at  the  expense  of  the  poor,  of  the  powerful  at  the  expense  of  the 
weak,  results  either  from  moral  cowardice,  intellectual  vanity,  or  personal  dishonesty. 
Condemned  in  the  Word  of  Grod  (Prov.  xviii.  5),  it  is  specially  unbecoming  in  the 
followers  of  Christ  (Jas.  il.  1).  Charged  by  Job  against  the  friends  (ch.  xiii.  8),  it 
was  a  sin  which  Elihu  felt  it  incumbent  upon  him  to  avoid.  (2)  The  directest  honesty 
as  regards  the  individual  himself.  "  Neither  let  me  give  flattering  titles  to  any 
man."  Unlike  his  Oriental  countrymen,  Elihu  would  be  guilty  of  no  adulation  or  com- 
pliment to  any  man;  but  with  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity  would  deliver  the  senti- 
ments with  which  he  had  been  charged.  So  Elijah  preached  to  Ahab  (1  Kings  xviii. 
18),  and  the  Baptist  to  Herod  (Matt.  xU.  4).  So  did  St.  Paul  preach  the  gospel  at  Corinth 
(2  Cor.  i.  12),  Thessalonica  (1  Thess.  ii.  4),  Athens  (Acts  xvii.  22),  and  elsewhere. 
So  preached  Luther  to  the  princes  of  Grermany,  Latimer  to  Henry  VIII.  of  England, 
andJohn  Knox  to  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  2.  2%e  reasons  he  alleged  for  his  intended 
behaviour.  These  were  extremely  creditable  to  himself.  (1)  He  had  not  learnt  the 
art  of  flattery.  He  possessed  a  soul  too  large,  honest,  and  independent  to  reside  in  a 
courtier's  bosom.  Adulation  was  abhorrent  to  his  nature.  Such  souls  are  scarce.  Yet 
there  is  no  better  mark  of  true  spiritual  nobility  than  an  incapacity  to  either  give  or 
receive  the  honeyed  words  and  fawning  courtesies  of  flattery.  (2)  He  would  certainly 
bs  punished  if  he  did  commit  the  wickedness  alluded  to — punished,  according  to  the 
iuteifretation  of  the  last  clause  (Carey,  Fry),  with  the  richly  merited  contempt  of  God: 
"  How  little  would  my  Maker  esteem  me ! " — according  to  another  rendering  (Delitzsch, 
Cook,  Cox),  with  some  signal  manifestation  of  his  displeasure,  as  e.g.  by  sudden  death. 
Learn  :  1.  There  is  a  time  to  speak  and  a  time  to  keep  silence,  even  in  regard  to  the 
most  sacred  matters.  2.  It  is  a  hi^^h  proof  of  wisdom  to  be  able  to  recognize  whence 
all  wisdom  comes.  3.  Il;  is  proper  to  sift  the  opinions  and  doctrines  of  even  the  oldest 
and  wisest  of  men ;  to  prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.  4.  It  would 
largely  contribute  to  the  world's  happiness  if  those  who  undertook  to  teach  others 
never  spoke  until  they  were  impelled  by  the  ibrce  of  inward  conviction.  5.  The  men 
who  move  the  woild  are  those  whose  souls  are  illumined  and  inflamed  by  the  light  and 
fire  of  great  ideas.  6.  One  of  the  greatest  pleasures  a  human  soul  can  enjoy  on  earth 
is  that  of  propounding  and  diffusing  new  and  lofty  thoughts.  7.  Sincerity  of  mind  and 
heart  is  an  indispensable  qualification  for  the  teacher  whom  God  employs.  8.  Want 
of  fidelity  to  the  trath  and  to  those  who  hear  is  one  of  the  greatest  crimes  a  preacher 
can  commit.  9.  God  despises  and  will  punish  those  who  yield  to  fear  or  favour.  10. 
God  can  easily  remove  those  who  are  unfaithful  to  the  trust  they  have  received. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1 ch.  xxxvii.  24. — Elihu  and  Ms  discourse.      In  the  person  of  the  young 

Elihu  a  new  speaker  comes  forward,  who  mediates  between  Job  and  his  friends.  Calmer 
and  juster  in  thought  than  either,  he  takes  up  the  word  when  "  wit  and  reason  "  on  both 
sides  are  at  an  end;  he  shows  the  weakness  of  the  friends,  but  at  the  same  time 
reproaches  Job  with  his  past  wild  speeches,  and  refutes  certain  of  his  errors.  Thus  ha 
prepaies  the  way  for  the  appearance  of  Jehovah  himself.  In  ch.  xxxii.  and  xxxiii.,  after 
a  long  introduction,  he  advances  an  argument  for  the  truth  that  man  may  not  esteem 
himself  pure  and  just  in  the  presence  of  God. — J. 

Ver.  1 oh.  xxxiii.  7. — Appearance  of  Elihu :  the  motives  of  his  address.^  L  Hlf 

rsAKAOTEB  nTDloATEO.     (Vers.  1 — 6.)     In  a  few  touches  the  temper  and  sjarit  of  this 


628  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxil  1— 22. 

new  speaker  are  set  before  us.  1.  Ilis  warm  piety,  which  could  not  tolerate  the  confi- 
dence and  the  self-justifying  spirit  of  Job.  ffis  sense  of  the  greatness  of  God  and  his 
holiness  is  so  profound  that  he  cannot  endure  what  seems  to  be  the  bold  and  haughty 
attitude  of  the  creature.  His  feeling  seems  to  be,  "  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a 
liar ! "  2.  His  spirit  of  justice,  which  was  indignant  at  the  unfairness  of  the  friends, 
who  held  Job  for  guilty,  and  condemned  him  without  being  able  to  give  an  answer  to 
his  plea.  Tliese  are  two  grand  elements  in  a  noble  character.  Without  zeal  for  God 
and  his  righteousness,  our  sympathy  for  the  suffering  may  degenerate  into  a  sickly  and 
immoral  sentimentalism.  But  without  feeling  for  the  wrongs  of  the  oppressed,  without 
the  passion  fur  justice,  our  zeal  for  God  will  become  an  unholy  and  pernicious  fire. 
This  last  has  been  the  cause  of  many  of  those  terrible  persecutions  which  have  defaced 
the  history  of  the  world.  Let  us  beware  in  our  spirit  and  temper  of  these  extremes— 
and  avoid  either  dishonouring  God  through  a  weak  pity  for  mere  suffering,  or  being 
cruel  to  men  through  a  zeal  for  God.  Zeal  is  a  goud  servant,  but  a  bad  master ;  the 
spring  of  heioic  deeds  or  of  dreadful  crimes.  3.  His  modesty  and  respect,  shown  by  his 
keeping  silence  in  the  presence  of  his  elders,  so  long  as  they  might  desire  to  speak. 
As  the  shade  to  a  figure  in  a  picture,  so  does  modesty  impart  a  strength  and  beauty 
to  the  character ;  it  adds  to  virtue  the  charm  that  chastity  adds  to  beauty.  But  there 
is  a  limit  to  every  grace ;  and  modesty  becomes  a  weakness  if  it  leads  a  man  to  with- 
hold truth  from  the  world,  or  to  keep  his  mouth  shut  when  the  "  word  in  season " 
ought  to  be  spoken. 

IL  The  explanation  of  Elihu's  intbrferenob.  (Vers.  6 — ^10.)  His  modest  sense 
of  his  own  youth  and  his  respect  for  their  age  held  him  back  in  the  presence  of  his 
seniors.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  conscience  and  the  inspiration  of  God's  truth  within 
him  impelled  him  to  speak.  This  little  fragment  is  very  instructive,  and  yields  several 
important  lessons.  There  is  a  lesson  of  prudence  and  tact.  The  speaker  should  ever 
seek  to  gain  the  good  will  of  his  audience,  by  laying  aside  every  appearance  of  assump- 
tion or  conceit,  by  testimonies  of  graceful  respect  for  his  audience.  Especially  should 
this  rule  be  kept  in  mind  by  those  who  have  the  most  important  truths  to  deliver. 
Before  sowing  the  seed  let  the  ill  weeds  be  rooted  out,  and  the  soil  be  well  broken  up. 
We  must  try  to  soften  the  minds  of  our  hearers  as  a  preparative  for  impressing  them. 
Augustine  says,  "  He  who  strives  to  persuade  others  to  goodness  should  neglect  none 
of  these  three  things  :  to  please,  to  teach,  to  sway  their  minds ;  thus  he  will  be  hear-i 
gladly,  intelligently,  obediently."  But  higher  than  these  is  the  lesson  of  conscientious- 
ness— attention  to  the  voice  within.  The  Spirit  of  God  finds  its  truest  echo  in  the 
conscience.  All  distinctions  of  persons  and  of  age  fade  away  in  presence  of  this  supreme 
truth.  For  wisdom  depends  not  on  age,  but  on  the  Divine  illuminatioa.  Well  for  us 
if  we  can  forget  in  whose  presence  we  are  speaking,  whether  younger  or  elder,  richer  or 
poorer,  wiser  or  more  unlearned,  because  absorbed  like  Elihu  in  the  sense  of  God's  truth 
and  the  desire  for  his  glory.  "Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth"  (1  Tim.  iv,  12).  If 
young  men  have  a  sound  knowledge  of  Divine  things,  the  elder  need  not  be  ashamed 
to  listen  and  L  am  from  them. 

III.  The  justification  of  Elihu's  intbbfebenob.  (Vers.  11—22.)  In  this  passage 
his  character  and  spirit  are  further  unfolded  in  points  that  are  worthy  of  admiration  and 
imitation.  1.  Sis  love  of  reason.  He  waited  expectantly  to  hear  some  batisfactory 
reply  from  the  Iriends  to  Job's  clear  arguments  and  statements  in  self-vindication.  He 
expected  either  that  they  would  confute  him,  or  that  they  would  candidly  admit  they 
were  worsted  in  the  strife.  "  We  found  wisdom  (in  Job) ;  God  can  strike  him,  not  man." 
His  wisdom  is  so  superior  to  ours  that  God  only  can  drive  him  from  the  field  (ver.  13). 
This  is  a  lesson  on  the  morals  of  controversy.  Meet  your  antagonist  with  reason  tor 
reason ;  and,  when  you  can  do  so  no  longer,  be  willing  to  own  yourself  beaten.  Eeason- 
abkness  and  candour,  the  desire  to  persuade  others  or  to  be  persuaded  one's  self  of  the 
truth, — this  is  the  chivalry  of  controversy ; -these  are  the  jewels  that  shine  amidst  tlie 
cloud  of  words ;  the  precious  balsam-drops  that  these  woeful  wars  distil.  A  suUeu 
conspiracy  of  silence  is  the  retreat  and  fortress  of  the  dishonourable  and  the  coward. 
2.  His  depth  of  heart.  Elihu  is  not  convinced  by  Job ;  his  mind  teems  with  matter 
of  deep  and  living  truth.  His  is  no  shallow  logic  of  the  schools,  which  falls  powerless 
upon  the  true  heart  armed  with  the  justice  of  its  cause.  His  is  no  foul's  bolt,  soon 
shot,  and  leaving  liim  in  helplessness.     His  bosom  is  like  a  skin  of  new  wine;  he  is 


OH.  xxxn.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  629 

bursting  to  tell  forth  all  that  experience  and  reflection  have  taught  him  concerning 
the  truths  of  life.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaks."  Let  us 
harvest  the  instruction  of  time,  lay  up  a  good  store  of  heart-memories,  that  wi'.  may 
ever  have  a  good  and  useful  word  to  speak  in  season.  Let  us  take  care  of  those 
strong  impulses  that  they  are  true  and  pure  before  we  speak ;  but  never  hesitate  to 
speak  when  we  are  conscious  that  God  is  inspiring  us.  To  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  we 
must  walk  in  the  Spirit.  3.  His  fearless  sincerity.  He  has  no  respect  of  persons  when 
truth  is  concerned,  reverential  as  he  otherwise  is  in  the  presence  of  his  elders.  He  will 
not  flatter ;  he  does  not  imderstand  the  base  art.  The  fear  of  6od  is  before  his  eyes. 
"  Flatterers  are  the  worst  kind  of  traitors,"  says  Sir  Walter  Raleigh.  He  who  is  true  to 
God  and  to  himself  will  never  distil  this  poison  from  his  tongue.  In  Eliliu,  then,  we 
have  the  picture  of  what  a  man  should  be,  of  what  we  all  should  desire  in  a  friend — 
Jairness,  honour,  candour ;  sympathy  and  affection  based  upon  the  only  sure  foundation, 
love  of  truth,  piety  toward  God. 

IV.  Elihd's  special  appeal  to  Job  fob  a  patient  HKAsiNa.  (Oh.  xxxiii.  1 — ^7.) 
Here  we  see  the  following  traits :  1.  Intense  earnestness.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  For  these  opening 
words,  which  might  seem  to  our  Western  ears  like  a  "  beating  about  the  bush,"  are  in 
fact  Oriental  phrases  by  which  the  speaker  calls  the  most  solemn  attention  to,  and  lays 
the  greatest  weight  upon,  what  he  is  about  to  speak.  Such  opening  formulas  may  be 
found  in  Matt.  v.  2;  Acts  x.  34;  2  Cor.  vi.  11.  Let  it  be  clear  in  one  way  or  another 
to  those  who  listen  that  we  mean  what  we  say,  that  we  are  not  talking  to  fill  up  time, 
or  using  words  to  conceal  the  void  of  thought.  2.  Perfect  sincerity.  (Ver.  3.)  His 
sayings  are  the  straightforward  utterances  of  his  heart,  very  different  from  the  stale 
and  secondhand  commonplaces  of  the  three  friends.  True  eloquence,  like  the  substance 
of  every  virtue  and  every  art,  is  in  the  heart.  The  buUet  finds  its  way  to  the  mark, 
according  to  the  old  legend,  that  has  been  first  dipped  in  the  marksman's  blood.  Words 
that  come  from  the  heart  will  reach  to  the  heart.  3.  The  sense  of  dependence  upon 
God  (ver.  4),  for  all  light  and  wisdom,  which,  while  it  makes  a  man  humble,  makes 
him  truly  confident  and  strong.  God's  Spirit  has  made  him.  He  appeals  to  no  special 
inspiration,  however,  but  simply  to  that  genuine  human  wisdom,  that  common  sense 
which  he  recognizes  to  be  a  Divine  endowment.  It  is  a  mark  of  true  piety  to  own  the 
presence  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  all  the  ordinary  as  well  as  the  extraordinary  gifts  of 
intelligence.  It  is  this  that  chastens,  sweetens,  and  sanctifies  the  use  of  every  bright 
talent  of  the  mind  and  heart.  4:.  Fellow-feeling.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  He  does  not  pretend  to 
stand  nearer  to  God  than  the  fellow-man  he  has  arisen  to  comfort  and  instruct.  He 
is  made  of  the  same  clay,  moulded  by  the  hand  of  the  Divine  Potter.  Therefore  Job 
has  not  to  fear  an  unequal  struggle  with  Elihu  as  he  has  with  God.  Would  that  all 
teachers  would  remember  this!  The  artificial  distinctions  of  life,  as  prince  or  peasant, 
lettered  or  unlettered,  mean  but  little ;  those  of  talent,  character,  and  attainment 
have  a  certain  value ;  but  the  common  constitution  God  has  given  us  is  the  great  ground 
of  appral,  the  great  source  of  authority.  Those  are  the  best  teachers  who  most  deeply 
read  and  interpret  this  common  nature ;  and  every  truth  must  at  last  be  certified,  not 
by  the  ipse  dixit  of  a  dogmatiziug  teacher,  but  by  the  utterance  of  the  universal  heart 
and  conscience. — J. 

Vers.  1—22. — The  voice  of  Juvenile  self-confidence.  We  now  approach  the  solution 
of  the  mystery,  the  untying  of  the  knot,  the  end  of  the  controversy.  Job's  three 
friends  have  failed  to  convince  Job  that  he  is  suffering  the  well-mented  consequences 
of  evil-doing;  and  he  has  failed  to  convince  them  of  his  integrity.  Now  a  younger 
friend  speaks  with  kindled  wrath  because  the  three  friends  "had  found  no  answer." 
He  speaks  with  the  undue  confidence  of  youth ;  but  he  weaves  many  words  of  truth 
and  wisdom  into  his  speech,  from  which  we  may  gather  some  for  our  guidance.  With 
some  hesitation,  and  a  complimentary  reference  to  the  claims  of  age.Elihu  nevertheless 
reveals  the  impatient  self-confidence  of  youth.  Even  though  truth  may  be  on  its  side, 
youthful  self-confidence  is  an  error.  The  error  manifests  itself  here  as  so  often  elsewhere-- 

I  In  AN  UNDUE  ASSUMPTION  OF  EQUALITY  WITH  AGE.  The  "  Spirit "  that  is  "  in 
man  "  and  "  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty,"  is  assumed  to  give  them  "  understanding  " 
equally.  At  least  Elihu  puts  himself  on  their  level,  though  he  afterwards  affirms  their 
inferiority.  _ 

JOB.  ** 


530  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxxii.  1— 22. 

n.  In  a  bebpisal  of  the  teachings  of  aob.  So  the  3'oung  lips  are  ready  to 
affirm,  "Great  men  are  not  always  wise :  neither  do  the  aged  understand  judgment." 

III.  In  an  unwarranted  self-confidence.  How  ready  is  youth  to  give  its 
judgment  I     "  I  also  will  show  mine  opinion." 

IV.  In  an  eagerness  to  give  expression  to  opinions.  "  I  am  full  of  matter,  the 
spirit  within  me  constraineth  me,"  etc. 

V.  In  a  presumption  of  freedom  from  prejudice.  "  I  Imow  not  to  give  flattering 
titles."  Thus  speaks  youth  in  a  confidence  which  is  so  often  the  effpct  of  ignorance 
and  inexperience.  The  true  attitude  for  youth  is  (1)  lowliness  and  humility ;  (2) 
teachableness ;  (3)  patience ;  (4)  reverent  regard  for  age  and  for  the  counsels  of 
experience. — R.  Q. 

Ver.  1. — Silence  after  the  storm.  The  three  friends  first  comforted  Job  with  seven 
days  of  silence  (ch.  ii.  13).  They  relapse  into  silence  after  their  painful  controversy 
with  the  suffering  man.  We  feel  a  sense  of  relief,  and  breathe  freely  now  that  their 
dogmatic  delusions  are  done  with,  and  we  have  silence  after  the  storm. 

I.  It  is  wise  to  know  when  to  be  silent.  We  cannot  attribute  much  of  this 
wisdom  to  the  three  friends.  They  would  have  been  more  commendable  if  they  had 
practised  it  throughnut.  Still,  they  were  not  wholly  senseless  and  heartless.  They 
were  able  to  perceive  at  length  that  no  more  words  of  theirs  would  help  their  case. 
Part  of  the  art  of  speaking  is  to  perceive  the  time  for  ceasing  to  speak.  It  is  difficult 
for  many  people  to  come  to  an  end  of  their  words.  Let  us  note  some  of  the  times  for 
silencing  our  speech.  1.  WJien  we  have  no  more  to  fay.  A  man  should  only  speak 
because  he  has  something  to  say,  never  because  he  has  to  say  something.  2.  When, 
our  words  are  not  heard.  If  we  speak  to  heedless  ears  we  waste  our  breath.  It  is 
vain  to  pour  out  words  that  our  auditors  cannot  or  will  not  drink  in.  3.  When  our 
words  are  not  accepted.  If  we  cannot  persuade  men  by  what  we  say,  we  shall  not  do 
so  by  mere  reiteration.  We  may  find  that  no  words  will  move  our  hearers ;  then 
further  words  are  wasted  on  them.  If  we  are  altogether  out  of  sympathy  with  our 
audience  we  cannot  benefit  them  by  adding  words  to  words.  4.  When  the  time/or 
action  has  arrived.  It  will  not  be  wise  for  the  general  to  be  haranguing  his  men  when 
the  enemy  are  already  in  the  field.  Words  have  their  place ;  but  this  is  not  to  usurp 
the  place  of  deeds.  5.  When  another  should  be  heard.  Elihu  has  been  waiting  patiently 
while  the  old  men  have  been  talking.  Now  his  time  has  come.  Talkative  people  are 
tempted  to  be  selfish.  St.  Paul  ordered  that  when  many  wished  to  speak  in  the 
Church  at  Corinth  each  should  have  his  turn,  one  givina;  place  to  anotlier  (1  Cor. 
xiv.  30). 

II.  Silence  is  most  valuable  when  it  follows  a  storm.  This  second  silence 
has  not  the  beauty  of  the  first  silence  of  sympathy.  But  it  has  a  deeper  significance 
in  some  respects.  1.  It  is  a  relief  from  distressful  controversy.  It  is  painful  to  be 
perpetually  arguing  with  our  friends.  When  the  controversy  rises  to  angry  words  the 
Ijest  thing  is  to  break  it  off'  and  relapse  into  silence.  2.  It  affords  time  for  reflection. 
If  anything  worth  remembering  has  been  said,  it  is  well  that  jieople  should  have  time 
to  think  over  it.  Probably  our  relij;ious  services  would  be  more  fruitful  il'  jieople 
would  only  have  patience  to  allow  of  pauses  for  quiet  meditation.  3.  It  is  a  means  of 
establishing  peace.  When  words  only  irritate,  peace  will  be  best  secured  by  silence. 
If  the  three  friends  wished  to  be  reconciled  to  Job,  their  wisest  course  was  to  wait  for 
the  heat  of  discussion  to  cool  down.  4.  It  is  itself  a  blessiny.  Other  voices  speak  in 
the  silence.  Then  the  unseen  world  draws  near  to  us.  After  the  storm  is  hushed  the 
heavens  open.  We  all  need  more  silence,  especially  after  times  of  strain  and  difBcultv 
— W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Elihu  the  yotmg  man.  We  now  reach  another  act  in  the  drama.  The 
vexatious  controversy  between  Job  and  his  three  friends  is  over.  Suddenly  and  quite 
unexpectedly  a  new  character  appears  on  the  stage.  We  need  not  trouble  ourselves 
with  the  question  as  to  whether  the  Elihu  episode  was  an  original  part  of  the  poem 
or  whether  it  was  inserted  later  by  the  author  or  even  by  another  hand.  We  may 
be  thankful  that  we  have  it,  and  we  may  make  use  of  its  lessons  with  confidence  ■ 
for  we  do  not  know  who  was  the  author  of  any  part  of  the  Book  of  Job,  and  yet  w« 


OH.  XXXII.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  53] 


find  the  grand  work  alive  with  Divine  inspiratinn  and  rich  in  spiritual  lessons.  Let 
us  consider  the  character  of  Elihu.  Most  contradictory  opinions  bave  been  expiessed 
about  him. 

I.  A  YOUNO  MAN.  The  elders  have  spoken ;  now  is  the  time  for  youth.  Wisdom 
does  not  wholly  reside  with  age.  In  the  present  day  an  American  freedom  is  doing 
away  with  old-fashioned  restraints  upon  youth,  and  young  peoplu  are  enjoying  a 
prominence  which  was  once  regarded  as  not  becoming.  Whether  thn  change  is  wholly 
profitable  may  be  gravely  questioned.  But  most  assuredly  it  is  not  without  some 
advantages.  There  is  an  elan,  a  freshness,  and  a  vivacity  which  only  the  young  can 
contribute  to  life;  all  the  world  should  be  thankful  for  the  breezy  vigour  that  accom- 
panies youthful  iiotivity,  for  all  the  world  is  the  better  for  it. 

II.  A  CONFIDENT  MAN.  Elihu  waited  in  modesty  while  the  old  men  were  speaking; 
yet  there  is  a  touch  of  satire  in  his  tone  of  humility.  For,  in  fact,  he  has  a  supreme 
contempt  for  the  droning  commonplaces  of  the  elder  advisers.  Even  Job  comes  under 
his  laah.  He  hits  out  all  round.  It  is  exceedingly  difficult  for  young  people  to  believe 
that  they  are  not  infallible.  The  confidence  that  is  natural  to  youth  tends  to  develop 
into  oensoriousness. 

III.  A  KEEN-SIGHTED  MAN.  Elihu  had  somc  ground  for  his  confidence.  He  could 
see  that  the  three  friends  had  blundered  most  outrageously.  Job,  too,  was  in  error. 
Elihu  comes  forward  with  a  new  truth.  The.  friends  should  not  accuse  Job ;  Job 
should  not  accuse  God.  The  sufferings  of  Job  were  not  penal  at  all ;  they  were 
medicinal.  Thus  this  young  man  lifts  the  question  on  to  a  new  stage.  He  it  is  who 
introduces  the  great  thought  of  the  disciplinary  character  of  suffering. 

IV.  An  inspired  man.  Elihu  claimed  a  direct  inspiration — ^not  one  that  is  peculiar 
to  seers  like  Eliphaz,  and  that  comes  in  startling  vision,  but  one  that  is  vouchsafed 
to  man  as  man.  He  claims  to  have  a  share  in  this  inspiration  himself.  Thus  he  too 
would  speak  for  God ;  and  to  a  certain  extent  he  is  right.  Hence  the  truth  and  value 
of  his  words.  We  can  only  reach  truth  when  we  touch  God.  We  must  be  free  from 
worldly  maxims  and  selfish  prejudices,  and  open  to  the  voice  of  Heaven,  if  we  would 
possess  Divine  truth. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. —  Youth,  and  age.  Elihu  speaks  with  becoming  modesty  in  these  words, 
although  most  of  his  discourse  shows  that  he  is  perfectly  self-confident,  and  full  of 
contempt  for  the  old  censors  of  Job.  He  cannot  but  admit  at  least  the  conventional 
distinctions  between  the  claims  and  dues  of  youth  and  age.  Let  us  look  at  these 
distinctions. 

I.  Dbfeubncb  is  due  to  age.  We  all  fettl  that  this  is  appropriate,  even  though  age 
does  not  always  appear  in  a  light  that  fully  justifies  its  claims.  On  what  grounds  does 
this  deference  rest  f  1.  The  experience  of  age.  Certainly  age  has  had  opportunities  of 
gaining  wisdom  that  are  not  aflorded  to  youth.  Whether  a  good  use  has  been  made  of 
those  opportunities  is  another  matter.  Still,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  pass  through  the 
world  without  learning  something,  if  only  from  one's  own  blunders.  2.  The  maturity 
of  age.  There  is  a  certain  rawness  about  youth.  Apart  from  its  acquisitions  from 
without,  the  growth  of  the  inner  life  of  a  man  should  ripen,  and  time  should  mellow  his 
temperament.  3.  The  dignity  of  age.  Age  is  not  always  dignified ;  still,  the  fatherly 
relation  implies  a  certain  rank  that  is  only  found  with  added  years.  We  must  respect 
the  orderly  arrangement  that  gives  places  of  honour  to  years.  4.  The  achievements  of 
age.  The  old  hero  may  have  become  a  feeble  invalid.  Yet  he  still  wears  the  scars  of 
the  battles  of  bygone  days,  and  we  must  respect  him  for  what  he  has  done.  5.  The 
infirmities  of  age.  These  claim  considerate  and  sympathetic  treatment,  not  slighting 
and  scornful  disregard. 

n.  MoDBSTT  IS  BECOMING  in  YOUTH.  This  is- especially  fit  On  two  grounds.  1.  The 
claims  of  age.  If  these  are  to  be  respected,  youth  must  stand  back  for  a  time.  How- 
ever it  might  desire  to  assert  itself,  youth  here  finds  itself  confronted  by  an  obstacle 
that  must"  not  be  rudely  thrust  aside.  It  may  chafe  against  the  restraints,  and  think 
them  most  unreasonable.  Perhaps  it  would  be  well  for  the  young  to  consider  that  they 
will  be  aged  some  day,  and  wiU  need  the  consideration  shown  to  age.  Meanwhile  their 
advantages  are  greater  than  those  of  the  aged  in  many  respects,  so  that  the  attempt 
t9  8'4rruuiid  ti  naturally  melancholy  lot  of  increasing  inflipaities  with  hoijour*  is  really 


532  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxii.  1—22. 


a  pathutic  confession  of  tte  loss  of  many  of  the  solid  boons  of  life.  The  young  need 
nut  envy  the  honouis  of  age,  seein,'  that  they  have  the  powers  and  opportunities  and 
delights  of  the  sunny  spring-time  of  life.  2.  The  imperfection  of  youth.  New  and 
untried  powers  promise  great  things,  but  they  need  regulating  and  guiding.  It  is 
possible  to  do  immense  harm  by  rushing  forward  ignorantly  and  without  circumspection. 
It  is  wiser  to  begin  quietly,  and  feel  our  way  by  degrees. 

III.  Neither  the  deference  D0b  to  age  nob  the  modesty  becoming  in  touth 
SHOULD  BB  allowed  TO  INTERFERE  WITH  DUTY.  Old  men  should  be  careful  not  to 
suppress  the  generous  enthusiasm  of  youth.  They  should  rather  mourn  that  they  have 
lost  it,  if  it  is  no  longer  with  them.  No  venerable  position  can  justify  the  obstruction 
of  good  works.  The  young  have  to  learn  to  combine  a  suitable  modesty  with  fidelity 
to  truth  and  right.  There  will  be  no  progress  if  the  constitutional  timidity  of  age  is 
permitted  to  stand  in  the  way  of  every  proposed  improvement.  Deference  does  not 
mean  absolute  submissi'jn.  After  all,  the  consequences  of  actions  are  much  more 
important  to  the  young,  who  will  live  to  reap  them,  than  to  the  old,  who  will  soon  leave 
the  world.  The  future  is  for  the  young ;  the  young  must  be  allowed  to  shape  it. — 
W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  8. — The  common  inspiration  of  man.  Eliha  here  utters  a  great  and  daring 
thought  He  turns  from  the  dogmas  of  the  ancients  to  the  present  Divine  inspira- 
tion ;  from  the  teaching  of  authority  to  the  voice  of  truth  in  the  heart  of  man. 

i.  There  is  a  Divine  inspiration  of  man.  Elihu  affirms  its  existence.  The  old 
men  had  grown  stiff  in  thought,  worldly,  and  dim-sighted.  If  ever  they  had  quivered 
beneath  the  touch  of  inspiration  this  was  in  bygone  days,  and  they  had  forgotten  the 
experience.  But  the  young,  enthusiastic  Elihu  is  alive  to  spiritual  influence.  Here 
we  are  at  the  root  of  religion,  which  does  not  spring  from  man's  worship  of  God,  but 
from  God's  touching  man. 

II.  This  inspiration  is  for  all  men.  Elihu  is  not  thinking  of  the  special  and  rare 
vision  of  the  seer  which  Eliphaz  iad  described  as  so  awe-inspiring  (ch.  iv.  12 — 16).  He 
is  thinking  of  something  more  simple,  more  natural,  and  more  common.  God  does  not 
only  teach  us  indirectly  by  means  of  prophets  and  intermediate  messen;;ers.  He  has 
not  left  himself  without  witness  in  the  heart  of  man.  Conscience  is  the  voice  of  God 
in  the  soul.  Eeason  in  man  is  a  spark  from  the  Logos,  the  great  Word  and  Reason  of 
God.  Whenever  men  read  truth  they  are  in  contact  with  the  ever-present  Spirit  of 
truth.  We  do  not  live  in  a  God-deserted  world,  nor  in  one  that  is  only  visited  at  rare 
intervals  by  Divine  influences.  God  is  nearer  to  us  than  we  suspect.  Job  has  been 
crying  out  for  God ;  Elihu  shows  that  God  is  not  far  off. 

III.  The  common  inspiration  of  man  is  seen  in  various  forms.  It  does  not  make 
every  man  a  prophet,  much  less  does  it  always  confer  the  gift  of  infallibility.  In  Bezaleel 
it  was  a  faculty  for  artistic  workmanship  (Exod.  xxxv.  30 — 35).  Samson  found  it  a 
source  of  physical  strength  (Judg.  xiii.  25).  God  gives  his  Spirit  in  science,  leading  men 
to  truth;  in  art,  teaching  what  is  beautiful,  and  helping  men  to  discriminate  between 
meretricious,  hurtful  art  and  true,  fruitful  art ;  in  daily  life,  affording  guidance  in  per- 
plexity and  strength  in  difficulty ;  in  religion,  not  only  under  the  Jewish  and  Christian 
dispensations,  where  indeed  it  is  most  gloriously  developed,  but  in  every  truly  reli>;ious 
life.  God  has  not  abandoned  India,  nor  did  he  abandon  Greece  or  Egypt.  Even  amidst 
tlie  monstrous  delusions  and  the  gross  corruptions  of  heathenism  the  still  small  voice  of 
God  may  be  detected.    Whatever  is  good  and  true  in  the  world  is  an  inspiration  of  God. 

IV.  Christianity  deepens  and  quickens  the  inspiration  of  man.  Joel  predicted 
the  time  when  God's  Spirit  should  be  poured  out  on  all  flesh  (Joel  ii.  28),  and  St.  Peter 
claimed  that  that  time  had  come  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  16 — 18).  St.  Paul 
tells  us  that  all  Christians  together  fconslitute  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor. 
vi.  19).  If  the  Spirit  of  God  is  felt  in  the  world,  much  more  must  the  gracious 
Divine  presence  be  enjoyed  in  the  Church.  Every  Christian  is,  indeed,  an  inspired  man. 
He  is  not  infallible.  But  he  has  a  Guide  to  truth,  a  Comforter  in  distress,  a  Strength 
for  service,  and  a  Grace  for  holiness. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  20. — The  refreshment  of  speech.  Elihu  will  speak  that  he  may  be  refreshed. 
Let  us  consider  some  of  the  ways  in  which  this  refreshment  may  be  experienced. 


OH.  xrsn.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  62S 


I.  The  sense  of  belief.  1.  In  utterance  of  what  is  strongly  felt.  It  is  difficult  to 
restrain  powerful  emotions.  Passion  inspires  .speech.  We  long  to  tell  out  wljat  burns 
in  our  hearts.  Difficulty  of  utterance  ofteu  arises  from  deadness  of  soul — often,  but  not 
always,  for  many  of  the  best  men  have  no  facility  of  speech.  Still,  the  surest  road  to 
eloquence  is  through  emotion.  2.  In  confession  of  what  is  deeply  distressing.  It  is 
hard  to  hide  a  dark  secret.  Criminals  have  been  linown  to  confess  their  evil  deeds 
simply  because  they  could  not  endure  to  keep  silence  abi)ut  them.  Great  sorrows  find 
relief  in  utterance.  While  the  sufferer  suppresses  himself  iu  stony  grief  his  reason  is 
in  danger;  let  him  weep  and  speak,  and  the  worst  anguish  of  his  soul  will  find  soma 
relief.  Prayer  in  great  distress  is  not  only  appealing  to  God  for  help;  it  is  also 
relieving  the  overburdened  soul  by  utterance.  It  is  much  to  be  able  to  unbosom  one's 
self  to  God,  to  open  out  sad  secrets  to  Heaven. 

IL  The  bxbecisb  op  poweb.  No  doubt  the  lower  motive  of  desiring  to  feel  his 
power  was  influencing  Elihu,  though  he  would  have  been  too  vain  to  have  admitted  it. 
Sume  people  delight  to  hear  the  sound  of  their, own  voices.  The  importance  and 
publicity  of  speaking  before  others  is  found  to  be  attractive.  When  the  speaker 
discovers  that  he  can  move  an  audience  by  his  eloquence,  a  new  fascination  lays  hold 
of  him,  and  if  he  can  influence  by  means  of  speech,  he  will  find  a  pleasure  in  wielding 
so  powerful  an  instrument.  But  there  is  great  danger  in  all  this,  lest  the  speaker  should 
idolize  his  own  eloquence,  and  try  to  influence  others  merely  for  the  sake  of  making 
them  feel  the  weight  of  his  utterance.  It  must  be  remembered  that  there  is  great 
responsibility  in  speech.  A  hasty  utterance  may  be  followed  by  a  long  repentance, 
when  the  speaker  will  give  worlds  to  recover  his  mischievous  words. 

III.  The  achievement  of  good.  A  good  man  will  desire  to  speak  for  the  profit  of 
others.  He  who  knows  God's  truth  will  long  to  declare  it  to  others.  So  great  a 
treasure  is  not  to  be  hidden.  For  Christ's  sake  and  for  the  world's  sake  it  must  be  made 
known  far  and  wide.  The  Christian  should  feel  that  a  serious  obligation  is  upon 
him  to  lead  others  to  share  in  those  privileges  of  the  gospel  which  all  need,  and  which 
are  designed  for  all.  St.  Paul  felt  an  awful  necessity  laid  on  him,  and  exclaimed, 
"  Woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel!."  (1  Cor.  ix.  16).  The  lepers  of  Samaria 
felt  that  they  would  be  guilty  of  a  great  sin  if  they  feasted  in  the  camp  of  the  Syrians, 
and  did  not  let  the  starving  city  know  that  there  was  abundance  of  good  outside  the 
gates  (2  Kings  vii.  9),  But  not  only  is  it  a  duty  to  preach  Christ ;  it  is  a  great  joy. 
The  body  may  be  wearied  bv  the  effort,  but  the  soul  will  be  refreshed.  There  is  a 
cheering  and  invigorating  influence  in  making  truth  known  ;  this  is  greatest  when  the 
work  ij  to  bring  the  knowledge  of  God's  love  in  Christ  to  sorrowing  men  and  women. 
— W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  21,  22. — Flattery.  Elihu  promises  to  be  frank  and  outspoken,  not  "  accepting 
any  man's  person  "  in  perversion  of  truth,  and  giving  "  flattering  titles  "  to  no  man. 
This  resolve  would  be  very  significant  in  the'East,  where  personal  rank  counts  for  much 
even  in  courts  of  justice,  and  where  a  "  flattering  title"  is  given  as  a  matter  of  course, 
especially  when  some  favour  is  sought,  even  though  it  belies  the  true  opinion  held  by 
the  flatterer;  e.g.  Acts  xxiv.  2. 

I.  Temptations  to  flattery.  1.  To  win  favour.  This  is  the  lowest  motive  with 
which  to  flatter ;  it  is  without  any  valid  excuse ;  its  character  is  wholly  selfish.  2.  To 
avoid  harm.  This  is  also  a  selfish  motive  ;  but  it  may  be  urged  by  fear  and  encouraged 
by  weakness.  The  flatlcry  of  a  tyrant  is  not  creditable  to  anybody  concerned ;  but  it 
is  one  of  the  certain  effects  of  tyranny  on  weak  natures.  3.  To  give  pleasure.  With- 
out any  deep  design  of  gain,  agreeable  people  wish  to  please  those  with  whom  they  are 
associated.  A  certain  foolish  kindness  may  help  the  flattery.  4.  To  express  hvmility. 
Very  humble  people  are  tempted  to  ascribe  good  qualities  to  others  in  contrast  with 
their  own  unworthiness. 

II.  The  sin  of  flattbbt.  Elihu  justly  repudiates  the  idea  of  flattering  any  one, 
though  he  does  so  with  a  needless  ostentation  of  independence.  Pkttery  is  bad  in 
many  ways,  and  involves  many  evil  things.  1.  Falsehood.  This  is  the  very  first 
element  of  flattery.  You  praise  a  man  to  his  face  beyond  your  true  thoughts  of  him. 
2.  Cowardice.  If  the  flattery  is  indulged  in  in  order  to  propitiate  a  powerful  tyrant,  the 
flatterer  humiliates  himself,  and  appears  in  the  miserable  character  of  a  cringing  coward. 


5M 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xxxui.  1 — 33k 


3.  Oodlessnets.  Flattery  of  man  tends  to  a,  disregard  of  the  law  and  will  of  God.  U 
the  dignity  and  rank  of  a  person  is  made  too  much  of,  he  is  really  becoming  to  us  almost 
a  i;cid  ;  we  are  in  danger  of  giving  to  him  the  deference  which  should  only  bo  offered  t« 
our  Maker. 

III.  The  evil  oonsequbnobs  of  flatteet.  1.  2%e  overthrow  of  Justice.  If  a  man 
"  accepts  persons  "  he  will  neglect  justice.  Instead  of  considering  what  is  right  and 
fair,  the  flatterer  considers  what  is  pleasant.  Thusrightandequity  are  set  aside.  2.  Tli* 
destruction,  of  confidence.  Flattery  is  sure  to  be  discovered,  and  the  habit  of  flattering 
will  be  soon  recognized.  Then  words  of  admiration  cease  to  have  any  meaning.  II 
becomes  impossible  to  give  true  honour  to  a  person,  because  this  cannot  be  distiuguished 
from  the  false  honours  which  the  sycophant  heaps  on  his  patron.  It  is  no  longer  possible 
to  know  whether  approval,  support,  and  loyalty  are  maintained  or  not.  Traitors  hide 
under  the  cloak  of  flattery.  3.  The  anger  of  Ood.  Blihu  talks  somewhat  brusquely  about 
his  Maker  taking  him  away.  It  is  a  trait  of  his  self-confidence  to  be  quite  at  home  ii. 
speaking  of  Grod.  Yet  there  is  a  truth  in  his  words.  God  cannot  endure  (Usehood  and 
injustice.  His  favour  is  not  won  by  flattery ;  the  flattery  of  men  is  sui*  to  be  detected 
by  God,  and  therefore  the  flatterer  must  lie  under  the  disfavour  of  Hei,s'>n,  even  while 
he  enjoys  the  favour  of  his  earthly  patron. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBE  XXXIII. 


Vers.  1 — 33. — In  this  chapter  Elihu,  turn- 
ing away  from  the  "  comforters,"  proceeds 
to  address  Job  himself,  offering  to  reason 
out  the  matter  in  dispute  with  him,  in  God's 
stead.  After  a  brief  exordium  (vers.  1 — 7), 
he  takes  exception  (1 )  to  Job's  self-assertion 
(vers.  8,  9) ;  and  (2)  to  liis  charges  against 
God  (vers.  10 — 13),  which  (he  says)  are 
unjust.  He  next  brings  forward  liis  theory 
of  God-inflicted  sufferiiip:s  being,  in  the 
main,  chastisements  proceeding  from  a 
loving  purpose,  intended  to  purify,  to 
strengthen,  to  purge  out  faults,  to  "  save 
from  the  pit,"  to  improve,  and  to  enlighten 
(vers.  14 — 24).  He  points  out  in  what 
spirit  chastisement  should  be  received  (vers. 
25 — 30) ;  and  concludes  with  a  recommenda- 
tion to  Job  to  remain  silent,  and  hear  him 
out,  while  at  the  tame  time  he  expresses  a 
willingness  to  listen  to  what  Job  has  to  say, 
if  he  has  objections  to  offer  (vers.  31 — 33). 

Ver.  1. — ^Wherefore,  Job,  I  pray  thee, 
hear  my  speeches ;  rather,  ho-wbeit.  Job,  I 
pray  thee,  hear  my  speech  (see  the  Revised 
Version);  i.e.  "However  you  regard  me 
]ierhOiially,  hear  what  I  have  to  say."  And 
hearken  to  all  my  words.  Give  me  your/uK 
attention ;  do  not  suifer  aught  that  I  say  to 
escape  you.  Elihu  has  a  deep  conviction  of 
the  importance  of  what  he  is  about  to  utter 
(comp.  ch.  xxxii.  8,  10,  17). 

Ver.  2. — Behold,  now  I  have  opened  my 
mouth.  (On  the  solemnity  of  the  phrase, 
"  opened  my  mouth,"  see  the  com.Taeut  upon 


oh.  iii.  1.)  Uy  tongue  iuttiih  spoken  in  m} 
month ;  literally,  in  my  palate  (comp.  ch,  vi. 
80).  Each  word  has  beisa,  us  it  were,  tasted ; 
that  is,  seriously  considered  and  examined 
beforehand.  My  remnrks  will  not  be  crude, 
extem[iore  remarks;  so  may  they  be  the 
better  worth  attending  to. 

Ver.  3. — My  words  shall  be  of  the  upright- 
ness of  my  heart.  Moreover,  whatever  I  say 
will  be  said  with  entire  sincerity.  My  heart 
is  upright,  and  I  shall  speak  "  from  the  up- 
rightness of  my  heart,"  without  pretence, 
deception,  or  concealment  of  any  kind.  And 
my  lips  shall  utter  knowledge  olearly.  I 
shall  say  only  what  I  know,  and  shall  en- 
deavour to  say  it  simply  and  clearly,  so  that 
no  one  can  mistake  my  meaning. 

Ver.  4.— The  Spirit  of  Ood  hath  made  me. 
This  is  assigned  as  the  main  reason  why 
Job  should  give  his  best  attention  to  Elihu's 
words.  Elihu  claims  to  be  quickened  and 
informed  by  the  Divine  Spirit  which  was 
once  breathed  into  man  (Gen.  ii.  7),  whereby 
man  became  a  living  soul  (comp.  ch  xxxii. 
8).  And  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  hath 
given  me  life ;  or,  quicltened  me — originated 
and  preserved  my  life.  Elihu  does  not,  how- 
ever, claim  that  his  words  are  actually 
inspired,  or  that  he  has  a  message  to  Job 
from  the  Almighty. 

Ver.  5. — If  tiou  canst  answer  me ;  rather, 
^  tlwu  canet,  answer  thou  me  (see  the  Bevised 
Version).  Set  thy  words  in  order  before  me, 
stand  up  (comp.  oh.  xxiii.  4). 

Ver.  6. — Behold,  I  am  aocording  to  thy 
wish  in  God's  stead;  i.e.  I  am  the  antagonist 
for  whom  thou  hast  asked  (ch.  ix.  33 ;  xiii. 
19),  ready  to  enter  into  controversy  with 
thee,  instead  of  God.  I  am  thine  equal,  a 
creature  like  thyself.  I  also  am  formed  out 
of  the  clay  (comp.  Gen.  ii.  7>    Therefore-^ 


CH.  XXXIII.  1 — 33.] 


THB  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


535 


Ter.  7. — Uy  terror  shall  not  make  thee 
afraid.  Thou  canst  feel  no  alarm  at  .me;  I 
cannot  terrify  thee,  as  God  would  (eh.  vi.  4 ; 
vii.  14;  ix.  34,  etc.).  Neither  shall  my  hand 
(literally,  my  pacle-saddle)  be  heavy  upon 
thee.  Thou  wilt  not  feel  my  presence  a 
Wrden,  or  be  crushed  under  the  weight  of 
<uy  words. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — His  exordium  over,  Elihu 
proceeds  to  point  out  what  he  blames  in 
Job's  discourses,  and  at  present  notices  two 
departures  from  truth  and  right  only.  Job, 
he  says,  asserts  his  absolute  innocence  (ver. 
9) ;  he  also  maintains  that  Ood  deals  with 
him  harshly,  as  au  enemy  (vers,  10,  11). 
Neither  assertion  Js  justifiable. 

Ver.  8. — Surely  tfiba  hast  spoken  In  mine 
hearing,  and'  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  thy 
words,  sayingr.  EUhu  does  not  quote  exactly 
what  Job  had  aiid.  He  probably  intended 
to  be  perfectly  fair  and  just,  but  in  reality 
he  grtatly  overstates  the  truth.  Job  had 
oever  said  the  words  he  ascribes  to  him  in 
ver.  9;  at  best  they  are  an  inference,  or 
deduction,  from  what  he  had  said.  And  he 
had  said  a  great  deal  on  the  other  side, 
which  Elihu  overlooks  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  9). 

Ver.  9. — I  am  clean  without  transgression, 
I  am  innocent.  Job  had  not  said  that  he 
was  "  clean,"  or  "  without  transgression,"  or 
"innocent"  With  respect  to  "cleanness," 
he  had  observed,  "Who  can  bring  a  clean 
thing  out  of  an  imcleani  not  one,"  implying 
that  all  men  were  unclean  (see  ch.  xiv.  4). 
Concerning  "transgressions,"  he  had  de- 
clared, "  I  have  sinned.  .  .  .  Why  dost  thou 
not  pardon  my  transgression,  and  take  away 
mine  iniquity  ?  "  (ch.  vii.  20, 21) ;  and  again, 
"  Thou  makest  me  to  possess  the  iniquities 
of  my  youth  "  (ch.  xlli.  26).  Further,  he 
had  asked  to  be  told  the  number  of  his 
iaiquitiesand  sins  (oh.  xiii.  23),  and  declared 
that  God  kept  his  transgressions  and 
iniquities  sewn  up  and  sealed  in  a  bag  (ch. 
xiv.  17).  With  regard  to  "  innocence,"  the 
only  observation  that  he  had  made  was,  "  1 
know  that  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  innocent " 
(ch.  ix.  28).  What  he  had  really  asserted 
was  his  uprightness,  his  integrity,  his 
"righteousness"  (ch.  xli.  4;  xvi.  17;  xxiii. 
7 ;  xxvii.  5,  6 ;  xxxi.  5—40).  And  these 
are  exactlv  what  God  bore  witness  to  (ch.  i. 
8;  ii.  3).  'it  is  plain,  then,  that  Elihu  over- 
stated his  case,  and,  whatever  his  intentions 
were,  was  practically  almost  as  unfair  to 
Job  as  the  "comforters."  Neither  is  there 
iniquity  in  me.  Nor  had  JoH  said  this.  He 
had  frequently  acknowledged  the  contrary 
(see  oh.  vii.  21 ;  xiii.  26 ;  xiv.  17). 

Ver    10.— Behold,   he   findeth   ocoasions 


against  me.  This  charge  may  perhaps  be 
justified  by  reference  to  Job's  complaints 
in  ch.  vii.  17 — 19  and  x.  3—6;  but  the 
exact  words  are  not  Job's.  He  counteth  me 
for  his  enemy.  Certainly,  Job  had  said 
this  more  than  once  (seech  xvi.  9 ;  xix.  II). 
But  he  cannot  really  have  believed  it,  or  his 
trust  in  God  must  have  failed.  The  fact 
that  to  the  last  he  clung  to  God,  appealed 
to  him,  hoped  to  receive  judgment  from  him 
(oh.  xxxi.  2, 6,  28, 35—37),  is  proof  sufficient 
that  he  knew  God  was  not  really  alienated 
from  him,  but  would  in  the  end  acknowledge 
him  and  vindicate  his  character. 

Ver.  11. — He  putteth  my  feet  in  the 
stocks.  A  reference  to  Job's  words  in  ch. 
xiii.  27.  He  marketh  all  my  paths  (comp. 
oh.  xxxi.  4,  and  see  also  ch.  vii.  17 — 19). 

Ver.  12. — Behold,  in  this  thou  art  not  just. 
It  would  certainly  not  have  been  a  just 
charge  to  make  against  God,  that  he  counted 
Job  as  an  enemy ;  and,  so  far  as  Job's  state- 
ments go,  it  must  be  admitted  that  he  had 
laid  himself  open  to  Elihu's  rebuke.  But 
it  is  no  logical  "  answer  "  to  Job's  charge  to 
say,  in  reply  to  it,  I  will  answer  thee,  that 
Ood  is  greater  than  man.  Might  does  not 
constitute  right,  and  it  is  a  poor  way  of 
justifying  God  to  urge  that  he  is  all-power- 
ful, and  may  do  what  he  likes.  So  Cambyses 
was  justified  in  his  worst  acts  by  the  royal 
judges  (Herod.,  iii.  31);  and  so  in  an  abso- 
lute monarchy  it  is  always  possible  to  justify 
the  extremest  acts  of  tyranny.  Certainly 
God  cannot  act  unjustly ;  but  this  is  not 
because  his  doing  a  thing  makes  it  right, 
but  because  his  justice  is  a  law  to  his  will, 
and  he  never  wills  to  do  anything  that  he 
has  not  previously  seen  to  be  just  (see  Cud- 
worth's  'Immutable  Morality,'  which  de- 
serves the  careful  study,  not  alone  of 
moralists,  but  also  of  theologians). 

Ver.  13. — Why  dost  thou  strive  against 
him?  Why  dost  thou  insist  on  taking  the 
attitude  of  one  who  contends  with  God,  who 
would  fain  enter  into  a  controversy  with  him, 
and  force  him  to  plead  in  his  own  defence  ? 
It  is  not  alone  his  omnipotence  that  makes 
such  conduct  folly,  but  his  remoteness,  his 
inaccessibility.  He  cannot  be  forced  to 
make  answer ;  it  is  not  his  wont  to  do  so ; 
he  giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his  matters. 
It  is  presumptuous  to  suppose  that  God  will 
condescend  to  reveal  himself  from  heaven 
and  make  answer  to  thy  overbold  challenges. 

Ver.  14. — For  God  speaketh  once,  yea 
twice.  God  has  his  own  ways  of  speaking 
to  man,  which  are  not  those  that  Job  has 
been  expecting.  He  speaks  silently  and 
secietly,  not  in  thunders  and  lightnings,  as 
at  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  16 — 20),  not  by  extra- 
ordinary theophanies,  but  nevertheless  quite 
as  effectually.  Yet  man  perceiveth  it  not. 
Man  often  does  not  recognize  God'i  actiou 


636 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  xxmi.  1 — 33. 


In  this  Bilent  tetushiiig  of  his.  Man  wantB 
Bomething  more  startling,  more  sensational. 
In  our  Lord's  time,  the  Jews  demanded  "  a 
sign  " — "  a  sign  from  heaven ; "  but  no  sign 
of  the  Mud  was  given  tliem.  Job  now  did 
not  understand  that  God,  whom  he  called 
upon  to  answer  him  (ch.  x.  2 ;  xiii.  22 ; 
xxiii.  5,  etc.),  was  alroiidy  speaking  to  him 
ill  various  ways — by  bis  judgments,  by 
thoughts  suggested  inwardly  to  his  heart, 
by  the  dreams  and  visions  whereof  he  com- 
plained (ch.  vii.  14). 

Yer.  15. — In  a  dream,  in  a  vision  of  the 
flight.  So  God  spoke  to  Abimelecb  (Gen. 
XX.  3 — 7),  to  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxi.  11),  to  Laban 
(Gen.  xxxi.  24),  to  Joseph  (Gen.  xxxviii.  5, 
9),  to  tlie  Fhaiaoh  whom  Joseph  served 
(Gen.  xli.  1 — 7),  to  Solomon  (1  Kings  iii. 
S),  to  Daniel  (Dan.  ii.  19),  to  Nebuchad- 
nezzar (Dan.  ii.  28 ;  iv.  5 — 18),  and  to  many 
others.  Sometimes  men  recognized  such 
visions  as  Divine  communications;  but 
sometimes,  probably  quite  as  often,  they  re- 
garded them  as  mere  dreams,  fancies,  phan- 
tasies, unwortliy  of  any  attention.  Blihu 
seems  to  hold  that  Divine  visions  came  only 
when  deep  sleep  faUeth  upon  men;  and 
similarly  Eliphaz,  in  ch.  iv.  13.  This 
method  of  revelation  seems  to  belong  espe- 
cially to  the  more  primitive  times,  and  the 
earlier  stages  of  God's  dealings  with  men. 
In  the  New  Testament  dreams  scarcely  form 
any  part  of  the  economy  of  grace.  In  Blnm- 
beringa  upon  the  bed.  A  pleonastic  addition, 
which  must  not  be  regarded  as  diminishing 
from  the  force  of  the  precedent  clause. 

Ver.  16. — Then  he  openeth  the  ears  of 
men,  and  sealeth  their  instraction.  At  euch 
times,  Elihu  holds,  God  gives  men  spiritual 
wisclom,  instructs  them,  makes  them  under- 
stand his  dealings  with  them  and  his  piu:- 
poses  with  respect  to  them.  If  Job  is  per- 
plexed concern iog  the  Almighty's  ways  with 
himself,  and  desires  explanations,  let  him 
have  his  ear  open  to  the  Divine  teaching  on 
such  occasions,  and  seriously  lay  it  to  heart. 
He  will  thus,  it  may  be,  find  his  perplexity 
diminished. 

Ver.  17.— That  he  (i.e.  God)  may  with- 
draw man  from  his  purpose ;  literally,  from 
hie  work,  assumed  to  be  a  wrongful  work. 
Eliliu  regards  the  Divine  teaching  through 
visions  as  intended  to  elevate  and  purify  men. 
Sometimes  God  so  works  upon  them  as  to 
n  ake  them  abandon  an  evil  course  on  which 
they  had  entered.  Sometimes  his  object  is 
to  ba\e  them  from  indulgence  in  an  evil 
temper  into  which,  without  liis  help,  they 
might  have  fallen.  In  this  latter  ccse  he 
may  occasionally  hide  pride  from  man. 
Elihu,  perhaps,  thinks  that  Job  is  unduly 
proud  of  his  integrity. 

Ver.  18. — He  keepeth  back  his  soul  from  the 
pit,  and  his  life  from  perishing  by  the  sword. 


By  these  inti  rpositions  God  may  even  save 
a  man  from  utter  ruin,  when,  but  for  them, 
he  would  have  rushed  upon  it.  He  may 
cause  a  person  to  give  up  designB  or  enter- 
prises which  would  have  brought  him  into 
danger,  and  perhaps  led  to  his  being  slain 
with  the  sword. 

Yer.  19. — He  is  chastened  also  with  pain 
upon  bis  bed,  God  also  speaks  to  men, 
secretly  and  silently,  in  another  way,  viz. 
through  chastisements.  He  afflictb  the 
strong  man  with  a  grievous  sickness,  causes 
liim  to  take  to  his  bed,  racks  him  with  pain 
there^and  wrings  the  mnltitnde  of  his  bones 
with  strong  pain.  Bnt  here  again  his  pur- 
pose is  kind  and  loving. 

Yer.  20. — So  that  his  life  abhorreth  bread, 
and  his  soul  dainty  meat.  Eating  and 
drinking  are  detestable  to  the  man  who  is 
stretched  on  a  bed  of  sickness  (eomp.  Ps. 
cvii.  18,  "  Their  soul  abhorreth  all  manner 
of  meat ;  and  they  draw  near  unto  the  gates 
of  death  ").  The  chains  that  hind  to  earth 
fall  o£r,  and  the  soul  is  left  open  to  loftier 
influences. 

Yer.  21. — His  flesh  is  consumed  away, 
that  it  cannot  he  seen ;  literally,  from  tlie 
Si'ght;  but  the  Authorized  Version  gives 
probably  the  correct  meaning.  And  his 
bcues  that  were  not  seen  stick  out.  These 
are  general  features  of  a  wasting  illness 
(comp.  Ps.  xxii.  17,  "  I  may  tell  all  my 
bones ").  Such  illness  gives  the  suflerer 
time  to  review  thoroughly  bis  life  and  cou 
duct,  and  see  to  it  "  if  there  be  any  way  of 
wickeduess  in  him,"  or  any  particular  form 
of  sin  to  which  he  is  tempted. 

Ver.  22. — Tea,  his  sonl  draweth  near  unto 
the  grave,  and  his  life  to  the  destroyers. 
"  The  destroyers  "  are  probably  the  angels 
to  whom  the  task  is  assigned  of  ultimately 
inflicting  death,  if  minor  chastisements 
prove  insufScieut  (comp.  2  Sam.  xxiv.  lU, 
17  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  49,  etc.). 

Ver.  23.— If  there  he  a  messenger  with 
him ;  rather,  an  angel  (see  the  Revised  Ver- 
sion). It  is  generally  supposed  that  "the 
angel  of  the  covenant "  is  meant,  and  thut 
the  whole  passage  is  Messianic ;  but  much 
obscurity  hangs  over  it.  The  Jews  cer- 
tainly understand  it  Messianically,  since 
they  read  it  on  the  great  Day  of  Atiue- 
ment,  and  use  in  their  hturgies  the  prayer, 
"Raise  up  for  us  the  righteous  Interpreter; 
say,  I  have  found  a  ransom."  Elihu's 
knowledge  of  an  Interpreter,  or  Mediator, 
one  among  a  thousand,  who  should  deliver 
the  afflicted  man  from  going  down  to  the 
pit,  and  find  a  ransom  for  him  (ver.  24),  is 
certainly  .very  surprising;  and  we  can 
scarcely  imagine  that  he  understood  the 
full  force  of  his  words;  but  it  cannot  be 
right  to  d«nude  them  of  their  natural  signi- 
ficatio*.    Elihu  certainly  did  not  mean  to 


OH.  xzxm.  1 — 33.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  JOB. 


637 


Bpeak  of  himself  bb  an  "  angel-inteipreter, 
one  among  a  thousand ; "  and  it  is  not  pro- 
bable that  he  intends  a  reference  to  any 
merely  human  helper.  To  show  nnto  man 
his  nprightnesB ;  either  "  to  sliow  to  a  man 
wliat  it  is  right  for  him  to  do,"  or  "  to  indicate 
to  a  man  in  what  true  righteousness  consists." 

Yer.  24. — Then  he  is  graoiouB  onto  him, 
and  saith.  Some  interpret,  "  Then  he  (i.e, 
God)  is  gracious  unto  him,  and  he  (i.e.  the 
angel)  saith."  Others  make  God  the  subject 
of  both  clauses.  But  the  angel  is  the  natural 
subject.  Deliver  him  from  going  down  to 
the  pit,  The  mediating  angel  thus  ad- 
dresses God,  and  adds,  I  have  found  a  ransom, 
leaving  the  nature  of  the  ransom  unex- 
plained. Some  notion  of  ransom,  or  atone- 
ment, underlay  the  whole  idea  of  sacrifice, 
which  appears  to  have  been  universally 
practised  from  the  remotest  times  by  the 
Oriental  nations. 

Yer.  25. — His  flesh  shall  he  fresher  than 
a  child's.  The  chastisement  having  done 
its  work,  and  the  suflerer  being  delivered 
frc  m  death  by  the  mediating  angel,  a  res- 
toration to  health  follows.  The  recovery 
of  "  flesh  fresher  than  a  child's  "  stands  as 
the  natural  antithesis  to  Job's  leprosy.  He 
shall  return  to  the  days  of  his  youth. 
Youthful  strength,  youthful  vigour,  youth- 
ful feelings,  shall  come  back  to  him.  He 
shall  be  once  more  as  he  was  in  the  days 
of  his  prime. 

Yer.  26. — He  shall  pray  unto  Ood,  and 
he  (i.e.  God)  will  he  favourable  unto  him. 
Being  restored  to  God's  favour,  he  will  once 
Liore  be  able  to  addrtss  him  in  "effectual 
fervent  prayer,"  and  obtain  whatever  he  de- 
si  r<3  of  him.  And  he  shall  see  his  face  with 
joy.  God's  face  shall  no  longer  be  a  terror 
to  him,  but  he  shall  look  upon  it  with  joy 
and  gladness.  For  he  (t.«.  God)  will  render 
unto  man  bis  righteousness.  That  is,  will 
both  account  and  make  him  righteous — 
both  justify  and  sanctify  him. 

Yer.  27. — He  looketh  upon  men ;  rather, 
he  (i.e.  the  restored  penitent)  singeth  before 
men.  He  is  jubilant,  and  confesses  his 
former  offences  with  a  light  heart,  feeling 
tbut  now  he  is  pardoned  and  restored  to 
God's  favour.  And  if  any  say,  I  have  sinned, 
and  perverted  that  which  was  right  This 
is  altogether  a  mistranslation.  The  con- 
sti'uction  of  the  Hebrew  is  simple  enough, 
and  runs  thus:  And  he  (the  peuitent)  eaith, 
J  have  tinned  and  peroerk  d  thai  uhich  was 
right.  And  it  profited  me  not ;  i.e.  "  I  sained 
nuthing  by  my  transgressions — they  brought 
me  no  advantage."  Couii)iire  St.  Paul's  in- 
quiry (Kom.  vi.  21),  "What  fruit  had  ye 
then  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now 
ashamed?"  Some,  however,  translate, 
"And  it  was  not  requited  to  me,"  which 
kltio  gives  a  good  meaning. 


Ver.  28. — ^He  will  deliver  his  soul  from 
going  into  the  pit,  and  his  life  shall  see  the 
Ught;  rather,  as  in  the  margin,  he  hath 
delivered  my  sold  from  going  into  the  pit 
(comp.  ver.  24),  and  my  life  shall  tee  the 
light.   The  restored  penitent  is  still  speaking. 

Yer.  29. — Lo,  all  these  things  worketh 
Ood  oftentimes  (literally,  twice  and  thrice) 
with  man.  Elihu,  from  this  point  to  the 
end  of  the  chapter,  speaks  in  his  own  per- 
son. God,  he  says,  tlius  works  with  man, 
through  visions  or  through  chastisements 
oftentimes — not,  in  the  latter  case,  taking 
vengeance  on  them  for  their  sins,  but  gra- 
ciously leading  them  on  to  a  better  mind 
and  a  higher  spiritual  condition.  This  is 
part  of  God's  ordinary  moral  government, 
and  Job  lias  no  need  to  suppose  himself  ex- 
ceptionally dealt  with.  Elihu  has  reason 
on  his  side  in  all  this,  and  his  words  may 
have  given  Job  some  comfort.  But  they 
did  not  exactly  fit  Job's  case.  Elihu,  un- 
less Bupernaturally  enlightened,  could  not 
possibly  penetrate  into  the  special  circum- 
stances of  Job's  trial.  He  could  only  try  to 
bring  liis  case  under  general  laws,  of  which 
it  was  not  an  illustration ;  and  so,  though 
well-meant  and  probably  of  some  service, 
his  argument  was  no  complete  answer  to 
Job's  difficulties. 

Yer.  30. — To  bring  back  his  sonl  from  the 
pit.  For  discipline  and  correction,  not  for 
vengeance — in  love  and  not  in  anger  (comp, 
Heb.  xii.  5 — 11,  where  the  doctrine  is  set 
forth  fully).  To  he  enlightened  with  the 
light  of  the  living;  or,  that  he  may  be  en- 
lightened. This  is  God's  purpose,  or.  linarily, 
in  afSicting  men ;  or,  at  any  rate,  a  part  of 
his  purpose.  He  aims  at  enlightening  their 
understandings,  and  so  enabling  them  to 
comprehend  his  ways,  and  clearly  see  the 
path  which  it  is  their  true  vrisdom  to  walk  in. 

Yer.  31.— Mark  well,  0  Job,  hearken  unto 
me;  ».e.  "Mark  well  what  I  say.  Note  it, 
and  lay  it  up  in  thy  heart."  Hold  thy  peace, 
and  I  will  speak.  It  may  be  conjectuied 
that  Job  at  this  point  showed  some  inclina- 
tion to  break  silence  and  answer  Elihu. 
But  Elihu  thought  that  he  had  a  great  deal 
more  to  say,  which  was  of  importuncc,  and 
wished  nut  to  be  interrupted.  He  thereforo 
checked  Job's  utterance.  Then,  fearing 
lest  he  had  gone  too  far,  he  made  the  con- 
cession of  the  next  verse. 

Yer.  32.— If  thou  hast  anything  to  say, 
answer  me.  Nevertheless,  i.e.,  if  there  is 
really  anything  that  thou  wouldst  fain  urge 
on  thine  own  behalf  at  this  point,  speak — I 
am  joady  to  hear — for  I  desire  to  justify 
thee ;  i.e,  "  I  am  anxious,  if  possible,  or  so 
far  as  possible,  to  defend  and  justify  thy 
conduct."  Then,  probably,  Elihu  made  a 
pansr,  to  allow  of  Job's  speaking;  but,  as 
the  patriarch  kept  silence,  he  continued. 


638 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xxxiH.  1 — 33. 


Yer.  S3. — If  not,  bearken  unto  me :  hold 
thy  peace,  and  I  shall  teach  thee  wisdom. 
Elihu  is  certainly  quite  sufficiently  im- 
pressed with  the  sense  of  his  intellectual  ca- 
pacity. Job's  silence  may  have  been  meant 
as  a  sort  of  tacit  rebuke  to  him.  Consider- 
ing his  youth  (ch.  xxxii.  6),  there  is  some- 
thing of  aiTogance  in  the  whole  tone  of  his 


address,  and  especially  in  his  notion  that  he 
could  "  teach  Job  wisdom."  It  is  signifl- 
cant  that  neither  now,  when  expressly  in- 
vited to  reply,  nor  at  any  subsequent  point 
of  tile  discourse,  nor  even  at  its  close,  does 
Job  conilesoond  to  make  any  answer  at  aU 
to  Ellhu's  speech. 


H0MILETIC8, 

Vers.  1 — 13. — Mihu's  first  address  to  Job  :  1.  An  exposure  of  JoVs  sin.  I.  Blihtj 
BESPEAKS  Job's  attbktion.  This  he  does  on  four  distinct  arounds.  1.  That  what  he 
was  about  to  say  had  been  deliberattly,  thoroughly,  and  impartially  weighed.  (Ver.  2.) 
He  was  not  about  to  open  his  mouth  at  random  or  under  anj  'seling  of  excitement, 
but  after  having  tasted  every  word,  as  it  were,  in  his  palate — a  metaphor  suggestive 
of  the  wise  discrimination  with  which  botli  his  thoughts  had  been  prepared  and  his 
language  selected.  "A  fool's  mouth  poureth  forth  foolishness:  but  the  tongue  of  the 
wise  useth  knowledge  aright "  (Prov.  xv.  2).  The  conduct  of  Blihu  is  worthy  of  imitation 
by  all,  but  especially  by  preachers  of  the  gospel,  who  should  never  speak  on  sacred 
things  without  long,  wise,  painful,  prayerful  premeditation  and  preparation.  2.  That 
what  he  was  about  to  say  would  be  uttered  with  the  utmost  sincerity.  (Ver.  3.)  The 
harangues  of  the  friends  had  been  conspicuously  lacking  in  words  of  uprightness 
(ch.  vi.  25).  Blihu's  ovations  should  be  the  uprightness  of  his  heart.  (1)  They  should 
be  puie  and  unmixed  truth,  not  fancies  or  speculations,  ancient  maxims  or  wise  apo- 
thegms, such  as  Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar  had  dealt  in,  but  ascertained  facta,  estab- 
lished doctrines,  verified  ex|ier)ences.  (2)  They  should  be  clearly  and  simply  stated, 
without  any  adventitious  mixture  of  rhetoric  or  eloquence,  without  any  meretricious 
graces  of  language  or  ornaments  of  diction  that  would  only  serve  to  hide  the  truth 
which  they  pretended  to  convey.  (3)  They  should  be  honestly  and  honourably  meant, 
not  advanced  simply  for  the  sake  of  argument,  or  in  onier  to  exhibit  the  speaker's  skill, 
and  siill  less  with  any  sinister  purpose  as  regards  the  hearer,  but  as  believed  to  have  a 
direct  and  important  bearing  on  the  subject  in  hand.  The  determination  of  Elihu  again 
deserves  the  earnest  study  of  Christian  ministers,  who,  in  the  prosecution,  of  their 
sacred  callings,  should  remember  to  set  lorth  the  pure  and  unadulterated  truth  of  God, 
like  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  ii.  2),  like  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  iv.  11),  and  to  do  so  with  "  great  plain- 
ness of  speech  "  (2  Oor.  iii.  12),  never  seeking  to  exalt  self  (1  Cor.  ii.  1 — 5 ;  ix.  16)  or 
to  please  men  (Gal.  v.  11 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  4),  but  always  to  glorify  God  (1  Cor.  x.  31)  and 
edify  the  hearer  (1  Cor.  xiv.  3 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  10).  3.  TImt  what  he  was  about  to  say 
was,  in  a  certain  sense,  an  inspiration  of  the  Almighty.  (Ver.  4.)  To  redeem  the 
language  from  a  charge  of  superfluity,  if  not  of  presumption,  it  must  he  held  that  Blihu 
here  claims  to  be  the  subject  of  a  Divine  afflatus,  which  so  excited  within  his  breast 
the  convictions  he  then  possessed  that  they  were  completely  irrepressible.  Once  more 
Elihu  stands  forth  as  a  pattern  to  the  messengers  of  Christ,  who,  though  not  perhaps 
inspired  exactly  as  Blihu  was,  are  yet  dependent  on  that  same  Spirit's  teaching  for  i 
perfect  "understanding  of  what  through  the  prophets  and  apostles  has  been  revealed 
(1  Cor.  ii.  9, 10 ;  John  xvi.  13 — 15),  and  who  should  aim,  in  addressing  iheir  fellow- 
creatures  on  Divine  things,  to  have  their  hearts  illumined,  excited,  and  warmed  by  the 
light,  fire,  and  heat  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  preacher  most  nearly  approaches  tht 
Ideal  of  a  genuine  gospel  minister  who  can  in  a  measure  adopt  Blihu's  words,  and 
describe  himself  as  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  enlightened  and  set  on  fire  by  tht 
breath  of  the  Almighty. 

II.  Blihu  challenges  Job's  refutation.  Job  had  frequently  asserted  that  he 
could  triumphantly  repel  any  charges  that  might  be  brought  against  him  (ch.  xiii.  22; 
xxiii.  4 — 7;  xxxi.  35 — 37).  .  Accordingly  Elihu  requests  him  to  prepare  such  a  vindi- 
cation of  himself  as  he  had  spoken  of.  On  the  supposition  that  Job  was  right,  such  a 
task  should  not  be  difficult.  1.  Elihu  was  the  sort  of  antagonist  whom  Job  had  desired 
to  meet.  (Ver.  6.)  Job  had  urged  that  his  invisible  op])onent  was  not  a  man  like 
himself  (ch.  ix.  32),  and  had  craved  the  intervention  of  a  daysman  who  might  lay  hia 


OH.  xxxm.  1— 33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  639 

hand  upon  both  (ch.  ix.  33).  In  reply,  Elihu  says,  "  Behold,  I  am  according  to  thy 
mouth  to  ['of,'  'for,'  or  'by ']  God,"  meaning  either  (1)  I  am  according  to  thy  wish 
unto,  i.e.  for  or  instead  of  God  (Authorized  Version) ;  or  (2)  I  am  like  thee  (_sg.  created) 
by  God  (Gesenius),  or  what  appears  preferable,  I  am  as  thou  art  unto  God,  i.e.  I  stand 
to  him  in  the  same  relation  as  thou  dost — I,  like  thyself,  am  his  creature  (Carey) ;  or  I, 
like  thee,  bel-^r  g  to  God  (Delitzsch),  i.e.  I  am  a  human  being  like  thyself,  fashioned  by 
the  hand  of  God,  nipped  off  from  the  clay  as  when  a  potter  nips  off  a  piece  of  clay  from 
the  larger  lump  to  construct  of  it  a  vessel  or  a  humau  figure.  Blihu's  language  in  a 
striking  manner  recalls  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  creation  of  man  (Gen.  ii.  7).  2.  There 
was  nothing  about  Elihu  to  intimidate  Job  or  prevent  him  from  replying  if  he  could. 
"  Benold,  my  terror  shall  not  make  thee  afraid,  neither  shall  my  hand  be  heavy  upon 
thee ; "  literally,  "  and  my  burden,  pressure,  or  load  upon  thee  shall  not  be  heavy." 
Job  would  have  nothing  to  overpower  or  discourage  him  in  making  the  fullest  state- 
ment of  his  case;  he  would  feel  himself  to  be  dealing  with  an  equal,  with  one  who 
would  scorn,  even  if  he  could,  to  take  undue  advantaga  of  his  opponent.  In  Elihu  we 
seem  to  see  a  type,  or  at  least  a  resemblance,  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  who,  endowed 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  without  measure,  has  become  the  Mediator  and  the  Judge  of  men. 

III.  Elihu  declares  Job's  offence.  1.  That  Job  Justijied  himself.  He  had  said, 
"  I  am  clean  without  transgression,  I  am  innocent ;  neither  is  there  iniquity  in  me  " 
(ver.  9).  That  Elihu  does  not  greatly  misrepresent  the  patriarch  may  be  proved  by 
comparison  of  the  statements  here  made  with  Job's  utterances  previously  recorded  (ch.  ix. 
21 ;  X.  7 ;  xii.  4 ;  xvi.  7).  But  Elihu,  it  is  said,  does  not  sufficiently  allow  for  certain 
other  declarations  in  which  Job  admits  a  consciousness  of  natural  sinfulness  (ch.  ix.  2 ; 
xiv.  4).  The  object  of  Elihu,  however,  was  not  to  indicate  the  portions  of  Job's 
addresses  and  appeals  that  were  doctrinally  and  practically  correct,  but  to  point  out 
where  Job  had  overstepped  the  bounds  of  rectitude  and  truth ;  and  this  he  does  by 
citing  what  he  regards  as  the  substance  of  Job's  own  utterances,  as  language  that  even 
a  justified  sinner  conscious  of  his  own  integrity  and  moral  purity  should  be  chary  in 
adopting,  and  should  never  be  over-vehement  in  maintaining.  2.  That  Job  condemned 
God.  Under  this  head  Elihu  refers  to  the  ipsissima  verba  of  the  patriarch.  Infinitely 
jealous  of  his  own  reputation.  Job  had  been  fearfully  reckless  with  regard  to  God's. 
Resenting  with  a  fierce  indignation  the  faintest  whisper  that  might  be  breathed  against 
himself,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  impeach  the  Almighty  of  harshness,  saying,  "Behold, 
he  findeth  occasions  against  me,  he  countoth  me  lor  his  enemy.  He  puttetli  my  feet 
in  the  stocks,  he  uiarketh  all  my  path*,"  language  taken  directly  from  the  lips  of  Job 
(ch.  X.  13—17 ;  xiii.  24—27  ;  xix.  11 ;  xxx.  21). 

IV.  Elihu  exhibits  Job's  error.  Probably  the  mere  reproduction  of  Job's  words 
was  enough  to  convince  him  of  their  impropriety.  In  addition,  he  is  reminded  of 
the  superhuman  greatness  of  God,  iu  which,  as  in  a  mirror,  he  may  behold  the  fallacy 
of  all  that  he  has  maintained.  1.  The  mistahe  of  concluding  that  he  himself  was 
righteous.  "  Behold,  in  this  thou  art  not  just,"  i.e.  thou  art  not  right  in  supposing 
thyself  to  be  clean  and  free  from  transgression,  because,  even  though  thy  heart  con- 
demn thee  not,  God  is  greater  than  thy  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things  (1  John  iii.  20). 
"  Even  when  we  have  confidence  before  God  respecting  our  own  integrity,  our  confi- 
dence may  be  misplaced,  and  our  own  hearts  may  have  deceived  us  "  (Fry).  Cf  the 
language  of  St.  Paul  (1  (Jor.  iv.  4).  2.  The  foolishness  of  thinking  Ood  regarded  him  at 
an  enemy.  The  exalted  character  and  infinite  power,  nut  to  say  immeasurable  grace,  of 
Gild  should  have  delivered  him  from  any  such  misconception.  Had  Job  adequately 
reflected  on  the  Divine  greatness,  he  would  never  have  suffered  himself  to  think,  far 
less  to  speak,  of  God  as  an  unkind  A'lveisary  and  ever-vigilant  Assailant.  3.  The 
absurdity  of  expecting  God  to  respond  to  his  interrogations.  God  is  too  exalted,  too 
lofty  and  gl^jrious  a  being,  to  be  questioned  by  man.  Hence  Elihu  offers  himself  to 
answer  Job  in  God's  stead.  Hence  also  preposterous  is  the  delusion  of  thinking  to 
contend  with  him  in  any  court  of  justice,  since  "he  giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his 

matters."  .     /-n.  . 

Learn  :  1.  That  if  Elihu  was  deserving  of  Job's  attention,  much  more  is  Christ 
deserving  of  ours.  2.  That  Christ's  humanity  afi'ords  to  sinful  men  the  greatest 
encouragement  to  approach  his  throne  without  fear.  3.  That  they  who  come  to  plead 
with  Christ  must  be  prepared  to  acknowledge  their  offences.    •*-.  That  Christ  is  well 


640  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxiii.  1—33. 

informed  concerning  all  the  transgression*  of  those  for  whom  he  intercedes.  6.  That 
one  of  the  greatest  mistakes  a  human  soul  can  commit  is  to  say  that  God  regards  him 
as  an  enemy.  6.  That  the  deepest  foUy  a  finite  creature  can  perpetrate  is  to  strive 
against  Grod.  7.  That  the  highest  tribunal  before  which  any  of  God's  actions  can  be 
Irought  is  his  own  just,  holy,  and  loving  Godhead. 

Vers.  14 — 33. — Elihu's  first  address  to  Job :  2.  The  philosophy/  of  Divine  instruc- 
tion. I.  The  methods  of  Divine  instbitotion.  1.  Through  the  medium  of  dreams. 
The  dreams,  or  visions,  referred  to  were  supernatural  revelations  in  early  times 
imparted  to  men,  when  the  spirit,  probably  wrapt  in  meditation  on  Divine  things, 
was  cast  into  a  deep  sleep,  such  as  fell  on  Adam  at  the  creation  of  Eve  (Gen.  ii. 
21).  That  noctum^  dreams  usually  find  their  psychological  basis  in  the  mental 
idiosyncrasies  of  the  individual,  and  in  large  degree  borrow  their  shapes  and  colours 
from  the  phenomena  of  waking  existence,  is  no  proof  that  God  may  not  sometimes 
have  employed  them,  and  may  not  still  employ  them,  as  channels  for  imparting 
instruction  to  men.  That  they  were  so  employed  in  early  times,  not  only  for 
instructing  heathens  like  Abimeleeh  (Gen.  xx.  6),  Laban  (Gen.  xxxi.  24),  Pharaoh 
(Gen.  xli.  1),  and  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.  6),  but  also  saints  like  Abraham  (Gen.  xv. 
12),  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxi.  10),  Jrtseph  (Gen.  xxxyii.  5),  Bliphaz  (ch.  iv.  13),  and  Joseph  the 
husband  of  Mary  (Matt.  i.  20),  is  explicitly  declared  in  Scripture.  That  men  cannot 
readily  distinguish  between  such  dreams  and  visions  as  are  the  creations  of  their  own 
excited  imaginations,  and  such  as  are  sent  from  above,  does  not  demonstrate  the 
impossibility  of  God  still  in  the  same  supernatural  fashion  "  opening  the  ears  of  men, 
and  sealing  instruction  upon  their  souls."  2.  Through  the  instrumentality  of  afflic- 
tion. The  sufferer  described  by  Elihu  passes  through  an  experience  similar  to  Job's. 
The  disease  which  assails  him  has  many  of  the  characteristics  of  elephantiasis.  (1) 
Painful.  "  He  is  chastened  also  with  pain  upon  his  bed  "  (ver.  19),  which  pain,  if  we 
may  take  advantage  of  the  various  readings  and  translations  of  the  following  clause,  :a 
represented  as  sudden,  "  while  the  multitude  of  his  limbs  is  still  vigorous  "  (Ewald) ; 
universal,  "  and  the  multitude  of  his  limbs  with  strong  pain  "  (Authorized  Version) ; 
vehement, "  so  that  he  writheth  in  great  agony  "  (Cox) ;  and  incessant,  "  and  with  the 
unceasing  conflict  of  his  limbs  "  (Delitzsch) ;  or,  "  and  the  contest  never  resteth  in  his 
bones  "  (Umbreit) ;  or,  "  and  the  racking  of  his  bones  is  incessant "  (Pry).  (2)  Nauseat- 
ing. "  So  that  his  life  abhorreth  bread,  and  his  soul  dainty  meat ; "  literally,  "  meat  of 
desire  "  (ver.  20).  The  case  of  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvii.  4)  was  exceptionaL  Loss  of  appetite 
and  nausea  are  usual  concomitants  of  a  weak  and  sickly  condition  of  body.  (3)  Wasting. 
"  His  flesh  is  consumed  away,  that  it  cannot  be  seen  " — literally, "  out  of  sight,"  which 
may  also  signify  "  from  comeliness,  so  that  it  becomes  unsightly  "  (Delitzsch) — "  and  his 
bones  that  were  not  seen  stick  out  "  (ver.  21) ;  or,  according  to  another  reading,  "  bis 
bones  waste  away  and  disappear"  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '),  i.e.  they  lose  their  beautiful 
form,  till  eventually  he  becomes  little  better  than  a  fleshless,  bloodless,  marrowless, 
emaciated  skeleton.  (4)  Destroying.  "Tea,  his  soul  draweth  near  to  the  grave,  and 
his  life  to  the  destroyers  "  (ver.  22) ;  either  to  those  angels  whom  God  commissii  ms  to 
slay  man  when  he  continues  impenitent,  or  to  those  destructive  agencies  which  God 
employs  to  terminate  the  vital  functions.  3.  Through  the  friendly  offices  of  an  interpreter. 
The  word  "  interpreter  "  has  obviously  in  this  place  the  sense  of  "  internuncius,"  i.e. 
ambassador,  or  representative,  who  communicates  the  will  of  a  superior,  and  indicates 
the  special  ofiSce  entrusted  to  the  "  messenger  "  alluded  to  by  Elihu  as  that  of  authori- 
tatively making  known,  as  a  Heaven-commissioned  teacher  or  prophet,  the  will  of  God. 
Diversity  of  view  prevails  as  to  whether  the  messenger  to  whom  this  task  is  deputed 
should  be  regarded  as  human,  angelic,  or  Divine  (vide  Exposition),  as  a  teacher, 
prophet,  or  minister  like  Elihu,  a  superhuman  angelic  being,  or  the  angel  oF  the 
Presence,  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant.  Against  the  first,  there  can  be  no  insuper- 
able objection;  only  it  is  obvious  that  in  this  case  Elihu  cannot  refer  to  himself 
without  extraordinary  self-conceit,  since  he  characterizes  the  messenger  whom  the 
sick  man  requires  as  mediator  as  "  one  of  a  thousand,"  i.e.  not  one  of  many,  but  one 
without  an  equal,  one  possessed  of  pre-eminent  gifts  of  insight  and  teaching.  Nor  is 
it  impossible  that  Elihu,  remembering  the  language  of  Eliphaz  (ch.  iv.  18),  may  have 
been  thinking  of  an  angelic  heljier ;  only  the  qualifying  clause, "  one  of  a  thousand  " 


oiLxxxm.  1— 33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB, 


641 


determines  that  one  to  be  the  Anjjel  of  Jehovah,  who  alone  among  the  myriad  hosts 
of  angels  stands  without  a  peer.  That  a  young  Arabian  prophet  of  Aramcean  extrac- 
tion should  be  familiar  with  the  angel-interpreter  is  no  more  remarkable  than  that  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord  should  be  known  to  the  patriarchs. 

II.  The  pdrposbs  of  Divine  instetjotiokt.    1.  To  deter  man  from  sin.    In  particular 
the  withdrawing  of  man  from  his  purpose  (ver.  17),  literally,  from  his  work,  generally 
in  an  evil  sense,  is  exhibited  as  the  specific  object  aimed  at  by  God's  supernatural 
warnings  to  the  soul,  as  e.g.  in  the  cases  of  Abimelech  (Gen.  xx.  6)  and  Laban  (Gen. 
xxxi.  24) ;  but  none  the  less  is  afBiction  designed  to  exercise  on  wicked  men  a  deterrent 
influence,  restraining  them  from  sin,  as  in  the  cases  of  Pharaoh  (Exod.  vii.  16)  and 
Manasseh  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  12);  while  the  third  method  of  instruction  referred  to,  that 
of  spiritual  enlightenment  (whether  human  or  Divine  as  to  its  agency,)  distinctly  con- 
templates as  its  aim,  among  other  things,  the  subjugation  of  evil  impulses  in  the  soul, 
ami  the  obliteration  of  evil  deeds  from  the  life,  of  man  (John  xv.  3 ;  xvii.  17  ;  1  Thess. 
ii.  13;  2  Tim.  iii.  16).     2.  To  withdraw  man  from,  pride.    Pride  is  the  homage  which 
a  human  soul  pays  to  itself,  the  arrogant  assumption  by  self  of  that  worship  whicli  is 
due  to  God.     The  great  sin   to  which  man  in  innocence  was  tempted  by  the  devil 
(Gen.  iii.  5),  it  has  ever  since  been  a  characteristic  of  the  fallen  heart  (Ps.  x.  2),  which, 
seemingly  oblivious  of  its  weakness,  is  always  looking  out  for  symptoms  of  its  power| 
styling  itself  a  geler,  "a  strong  one,"  a  valiant  hero,  when  in  reality  it  is  an  enosA, 
"  a  frail  and  feeble  creature"  (cf.  the  Laodicean  Christians).     Besides  being  extieniely 
foolish  in  itself,  and  infinitely  dangerous  to  the  subject  of  it,  such  a  disposition  and 
mind  is  intensely  hateful  to  God  (Ps.  ci.  5;  Prov.  viii.  13;  Isa.  xiii.  11 ;  Jer.  1.  31 ; 
1  Cor.  i.  29 ;  Jas.  iv.  6),  who,  by  the  threefold  ministry  above  specified,  aims  at  its 
complete  extirpation  from  the  human  heart — first  checking  its  outward  manifestations 
by  providential  warnings,  supernatural  or  otherwise,  as  in  the  cases  of  Hagar  (Gen. 
xvi.  9),  Miriam  and  Aaron  (Numb.  xii.  2—10),  David  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  10),  and  Hezokiah 
(2  Kings  XX.  13 ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31);  then  striking  at  its  inward  roots  by  the  sharp 
axe  of  afBiction,  as  he  did  with  Pharaoh  (Exod.  vii.,  et  seq.),  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv. 
30—34),  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xviii.  19—35);  and  finally,  by  the  personal  example 
and  teaching  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  29X  casting  it  out,  and  hiding  it,  from  the  souls  of 
those  in  whom  such  afliction  is  sanctified.    3.  To  deliver  man  from  ignorance.    More 
specifically  is  this  declared  to  be  the  object  contemplated  by  the  "  Maleach  Malitz." 
Siniul  man  is  pre-eminently  in  darkness  concerning  "his  uprightness;"  i.e.  either 
G  jd's  rectitude  and  justice  in  dealing  with  individuals  (Carey),  or,  what  seems  prefer- 
alile,  man's  right  course  to  be  followed  (cf.  1  Sam.  vi.  12 ;  Prov.  xiv.  2) — the  path  which 
he  ought  to  pursue  when  lying  under  God's  chastening  hand ;  "  in  one  word,  the  way 
of  salvation,  which  he  must  take  in  order  to  get  free  of  sin  and  death,  the  way,  viz., 
of  repentance  and  of  faith"  (Delitzsch,  Good,  Pry,  Cox,  and  others).     In  large  measure 
this  absence  of  moral  and  spiritual  enlightenment  as  to  the  way  of  salvation  accounts 
for  man's  hardness  and  impeuitence  of  heart.    Consequently,  the  Divine  administration 
has  provided  for  bringing  the  needful  illumination  to  man's  benighted  soul  by  means 
of  a  special  Angel-Interpreter  (first  Christ,  then  the  Holy  Ghost,  and,  under  them,  the 
angels  or  ministers  of  the  Churches);  and  the  time  selected  for  sending  in  a  flood  of 
heavenly  light  upon  man's  darkened  understanding  is  the  season  of  affliction,  when,  hia 
pride  having  been  laid  low,  his  heart  has  become  soft  and  amenable  to  instruction.    4. 
To  save  man  from  death.     It  is  unreasonable  to  insist  that  Blihu  knew  nothing  of  a 
spiritual  deliverance  of  the  soul  from  condemnation  and  everlasting  death,  and  that  his 
language  (vers.  18,  24,  30)  about  the  pit  must  be  confined  exclusively  to  the  grave. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  equally  preposterous  to  deny  that  Blihu  does  here 
allude  to  the  temporal  and  physical  recovery  of  a  sick  man  as  the  result  of  accepting 
with  penitence  and  faith  the  teaching  of  the  Angel-Interpreter ;  as  e.g.  in  the  case  of 
Hezekiah,  to  whom  Isaiah  acted  in  the  capacity  of  a  "  Maleach  Malitz,"  and  who,  in  answer 
to  his  prayers  and  tears,  was  restored  to  health  (Isa.  xxxviii.  5),  and  as  in  early  Christian 
times  the  invalid  who  called  for  the  elders  of  the  Church  and  listened  to  their  instruc- 
tions was  directed  to  hope  that  in  response  to  the  prayer  of  faith  God  would  raise  him 
up  (Jas.  V.  14,  15).     The  probability  is  that  both  forms  of  deliverance  were  in  the 
contemplation  of  Elihu :  (1)  of  the  sinful  man's  soul  from  the  pit  of  condemnation  of 
which  David  sings  (Ps.  xl.  2),  and  (2)  of  the  sick  man's  body  from  the  pit  of  corrup- 


542  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxiii.  1—33. 


tion  into  which  Hezekiah  looked  (Isa.  xxxviii.  18) — the  latter  being  the  consequence 
as  well  as  the  sign  of  the  former. 

III.  The  RESULTS  OF  DiviKKiNSTBncTioii.  1.  Emancipation.  When  the  purpose  aimed 
at  by  the  Divine  warnings,  afflictions,  and  teachings  is  accomplished,  the  penitent  is 
liberated  like  a  captive  from  his  bondage,  like  a  prisoner  from  his  confinement,  this 
being  in  all  probability  the  import  of  the  word  translated  "  deliver,"  which  occurs  nowhere 
elf-e ;  and  this  emancipation  of  the  chastened  soul  is  minutely  depicted  by  the  speaker. 
(1)  Its  primal  source  is  the  grace  of  God  (ver.  24).  To  the  true  penitent  God  is  pitifully 
inclined,  regarding  him  with  tender  mercy  and  forgiving  love ;  and  in  this  Divine  emo- 
tion towards  man  all  redemption  has  its  ri^e  (Ps.  iii.  8;  Ixviii.  19,  20 ;  Ixxxvi.  15;  Isa. 
xlv.  21 ;  Bph.  iL  5, 8;  Titus  ii.  11).  Not  that  Gkid  either  can  or  will  pardon  any  on  the 
ground  sinjply  of  their  penitence,  without  the  intervention  of  an  atonement ;  but  that, 
wherever  genuine  contrition  exists,  there  God  is  merciful  ami  gracious  (Ps.  IL  17 ;  Isa. 
Ivii.  15),  while  he  neither  is  nor  can  be  forgiving  and  benignant  towards  the  impenitent 
and  rebellious  (Isa.  i.  20).  (2)  Its  essential  nature  is  deliverance;  both  physical  and 
spiritual,  both  temporal  and  eternal  (vide  supra),  the  latter  being  symbolized  by  the 
former,  the  recovery  of  the  soul  to  God's  favour  and  fellowship  by  the  restoration  of  the 
body  to  health  and  vigour.  The  sick  man,  who  has  been  reduced  by  disease  to  a  thin, 
feeble,  emaciated,  transparent  skeleton,  begins  to  put  on  flesh  till  his  well-covered  bones 
become  fat  and  plump,  as  if  he  had  returned  to  the  days  of  his  youth  like  Naaman 
the  Syrian  (2  Kings  v.  14) ;  and  in  this  is  vouchsafed  to  him  a  visible  token  of  God's 
returning  favour.  (3)  Its  meritorious  ground  is  the  ransom  or  redemption-price  paid  for 
getting  free  from  captivity  or  death  (Exod.  xxi.  30 ;  xxx.  12 ;  Isa.  xlii.  3),  that  ransom 
being  not  the  repentance  (Hofmann,  Carey)  or  the  sufferings  (Umbreit)  of  the 
chastened  one,  but  the  mediatorship  of  the  Angel  (Delitzsch,  Cook,  Fry) — a  thought  in 
which  "  we  readily  recognize  a  presage  of  the  mystery  unveiled  in  the  New  Testament, 
that  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself."  To  pronounce  such  a 
doctrine  in  the  mouth  of  Elihu  "  an  anachronism,"  is  to  forget  the  protevangel  of  Eden 
(Gen.  iii.  16),  and  to  gratuitously  assume  that  outside  the  line  of  the  chosen  family  in 
patriarchal  times  faith  in  this  sublime  gospel  had  become  entirely  extinct.  To  affirm 
that  such  an  anachronism  (so-called)  is  "  rebuked  by'the  plain  and  obvious  sense  of  the 
passage  itself,  and  of  the  meaning  and  intention  of  the  chapter  in  general"  (Cox),  is  to 
dem^  instrate  that  one  has  failed  to  distinctly  grasp  the  scope  and  purpose  both  of  this 
particular  section  and  of  Elihu's  interlocution  as  a  whole.  If  Elihu  spoke  by  inspira- 
tion, why  should  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  him  (1  Pet.  i.  11)  have  testi- 
fied beforehand  of  the  work  of  him  who,  when  he  came  to  earth,  was  to  give  his  life  & 
ransom  for  many  (Matt.  xi.  28),  and  all  the  more  that  the  finding  of  such  a  ransom 
was  a  work  transcending  human  ability,  and  requiring  as  is  here  declared  the 
intervention  of  God  himself?'  2.  Acceptation,  As  a  next  result  of  Divine  teaching, 
of  accejjted  warnings,  sanctified  afflictions,  improved  instructions,  the  subdued  penitent, 
now  admitted  into  the  Divine  favour,  receives  a  recompense  for  his  righteousness,  i.e. 
a  gracious  reward  for  his  having  turned  to  God  in  contrition  (cf.  Isa.  Ixiv.  5),  and  for 
his  upright  conversation  generally,  or  is  henceforth  regarded  and  treated  as  a  righteous 
or  justitied  person ;  the  treatment  accorded  to  him  and  the  reward  bestowed  upon  him 
being  the  same,  and  comprised  in  three  inestimable  privileges.  (1)  Free  access  to 
God's  throne.  "  He  shall  pray  unto  God  "  (ver.  26).  Prayer  is  the  language  of  the  new- 
born spirit  (Acts  ix.  11);  a  necessary  characteristic  of  God's  children  (Rom.  viii.  15); 
the  imperative  duty  of  all  men  (Ps.  Ixii.  8 ;  Isa.  Ixv.  6 ;  Luke  xviii.  1) ;  and  a  special 
privilege  of  believers  (Eph.  ii.  18;  Heb.  iv.  16;  x.  22).  The  pardoned  sinner  enjoys 
the  fullest  liberty  to  address  God  in  prayer  when,  where,  and  how  he  will  (Phil.  iv.  6 ; 
1  Thess.  V.  17),  provided  always,  of  course,  he  does  so  in  faith  (Heb.  xi.  6),  in  the 
Name  of  Jesus  Christ  (John  xiv.  13, 14),  and  for  things  agreeable  to  God's  will  (1  John 
V.  14).  (2)  Certain  enjoyment  of  Gcd's  I'avour.  "He,"  i.e.  God,  "  will  be  favourable 
unto  him  "  and  to  his  petitions.  Gcd  ne'cer  says  to  any  of  the  seed  of  Jacob,  "Seek 
ye  me  in  vain  "  (Isa.  xlv.  19),  but,  on  the  contrary,  expressly  engages  to  fulfil  the 
desires  of  them  that  fear  him  (Ps.  Ixxxi ,  10 ;  xci.  15 ;  Isa.  Ixv.  24 ;  Jer.  xxix.  12 ; 
Zech.  xiii.  9 ;  Matt.  vii.  7  ;  John  xvi.  23 ;  1  John  v.  14).  '« The  sacrifice  of  the 
wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  :  btJit  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight  "* 
(Prov.  XV.  8).     "  The  Lord  is  far  from  the  wicked  :  but  be  heareth  the  prayer  of  tb» 


OH.  xxxin.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  643 

righteous"  (Prov.  XV.  29).  Greater  encouragcmeat  to  "continue  instant  in  prayer" 
can  scarcely  be  imagined.  (3)  Filial  joy  in  God's  presence.  "  He,"  i.e.  the  pardoned 
sinner,  "  shall  see  his,"  i.e.  God's,  "  face  with  joy."  Now  by  faith  coming  before  him 
as  a  happy  child  exulting  in  a  father's  love  (Eph.li.  18) ;  and  hereafter  in  heaven  when 
as  one  of  the  glorified  he  shall  stand  before  the  throne  (Ps.  xviil  16 ;  Bev.  xxii.  4).  3. 
Jubilation.  Like  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxvrii.  20)  and  like  David  (Ps.  xl.  3 ;  civ.  33),  the 
recovered  sick  man  and  accepted  penitent  breaks  forth  into  singing.  "  He  chanteth 
unto  men  and  saith"  (ver.  27),  the  burden  of  his  anthem  being:  (1)  A  humble  acknow- 
ledgment of  sin.  "I  had  sinned,  and  perverted  that  which  was  right,  and  it  was  not 
requited  unto  me."  Confession  of  sin,  though  indispensable  to  forgiveness  (Lev.  xxvi. 
40 — 42 ;  Josh.  vii.  19 ;  Prov.  xxviii.  13 ;  Ps.  xxxii.  5 ;  Hos,  v.  15 ;  Luke  xviii.  13  ;  1 
John  i.  9),  is  never  so  frank,  full,  or  fervent  before  conversion  as  after  it.  The  justified 
sinner  sees  more  clearly  than  the  newly  awakened  penitent  the  exceeding  heinousness 
nf  sin,  realizes  more  acutely  the  greatness  of  his  own  personal  guilt,  and  appreciates 
more  highly  the  Divine  clemency  in  passing  by  the  transgression  he  might  justly 
have  visited  with  condign  punishment.  (2)  A  hearty  acknowledgment  of  grace.  Not 
only  does  he  magnify  the  Divine  clemency  in  not  requiting  to  him  his  evil  deeds, 
but  he  extols  the  Divine  loving-kindness  in  delivering  his  guilty  soul  from  condemna- 
tion and  death.  "  He  hath  delivered  my  soul  from  going  down  into  the  pit,  and  my 
life  rejoioeth  in  the  light."     Cf.  David's  anthem  (Ps.  ciii.  1 — 5). 

Learn :  1.  The  extreme  anxiety  with  which  God  seeks  man's  instruction.  2.  The 
natural  insensibility  of  man  to  Divine  teaching.  3.  The  efficiency  with  which  God 
can  seal  instruction  on  the  human  heart.  4.  The  indebtedness  of  wicked  men  to  God's 
restraining  grace.  6.  The  folly  as  well  as  sin  of  indulging  in  pride.  6.  The  inevitable- 
ness  of  man's  destruction  unless  God  interposes  to  save.  7.  The  beneficent  design  of 
afBiction.  8.  The  facility  with  which  God  can  destroy  the  pleasantness  of  life,  and 
conduct  even  the  strong  man  to  the  grave.  9.  The  infinite  mercy  of  God  in  providing 
man  with  an  Angel-Interpreter  and  a  ransom.  10.  The  impossibility  of  any  man 
escapin-;  the  pit  unless  God  says, "  Deliver."  11.  The  blessedness  of  the  man  whose 
sins  are  pardoned,  and  whose  transgression  is  covered.  12.  The  obligation  lying  on 
all  saints  to  declare  what  great  things  God  bath  done  for  their  souls. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yers.  8 — 33. — Elihu's  first  discourse :  the  guilt  of  man  in  the  sight  of  God.  L 
Job's  confidence  in  his  innocence  censured.  (Vers.  8—11.)  Elihu  gathers  up 
in  brief  some  of  those  sayings  of  Job  which  had  shocked  his  ear  and  scandalized  his 
spiritual  conscience.  Job  had  asserted  his  own  purity,  and  had  accused  God  of 
enmity  against  his  person  (compare  Job's  words,  oh.  ix.  21 ;  x.  7  ;  xvi.  17 ;  xxiii.  10 ; 
xxvii.  5,  6 ;  X.  13,  seg. ;  xix.  11 ;  xxx.  21).  ,       „    x     „ 

II.  The  true  kelations  of  man  to  God  set  fobth.  (Vers.  12 — 30.)  By  many 
intimations  of  inward  and  outward  experience  God  seeks  to  warn  man  and  to  bring 
him  to  himself.  He  i;;  no  Being  of  passions  such  as  Job  represents  him ;  "  higher  than 
a  mortal,"  it  is  no  part  of  his  nature  to  crush  in  anger  and  revenge  a  defenceless 
creature.  Nor  is  he  dumb,  voiceless,  cold  to  his  creatures'  cries  and  appeals,  as  Job 
thinks.    He  speaks  again  and  again ;  but  the  fault  is  in  the  deafness  and  dulness  of  the 

listener  (vers.  12 14).     Some  modes  of  Divine  instruction  are  then  described.     1.  The 

voice  of  conscience  in  dreams.  (Vers.  15—18.)  The  ear  is  opened;  the  sensuous  nature  is 
stilled,  the  imagination  is  kindled  into  life ;  memory  unlocks  her  stores;  the  past  suggests 
the  future ;  and  thus  hints  and  warnings  are  "  stamped  upon  the  instruction  "  of  the  soul. 
These  are  not  merely  facts  of  a  past  age  of  the  world.  If  the  Divine  instruction  by 
dreams  was  ever  real,  it  is  real  still.  The  study  of  the  physiology  and  psychology  of 
our  dream-life  may  yield  a  fund  of  interest  of  a  directly  religious  kind  to  all  who  believe 
our  nature  to  be  in  immediate  intercourse  with  the  unseen  and  the  Divine.  We  are  still 
warned  and  comforted  of  God  in  dreams.  The  purpose  of  these  communications  is  to 
restrain  man  from  evil ;  to  hide  pride  from  him,  that  is,  so  that  he  ceases  to  indulge  it ; 
to  keep  hack  his  soul  from  the  grave ;  to  warn  him  against  death  and  all  that  is  deadly— 
against  the  sudden  oncoming  of  the  fatal  blow.  Whatever  view  be  taken  of  the  subject 
of  speciti  visions  and  comrounicatiuns  from  the  other  world,  it  is  open  to  us  all  to  observe 


644  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxm.  1—33. 

how  in  our  physical  constitution  we  are  never  without  warnings,  forebodings,  timely 
hints,  of  coming  pain  and  disease ;  how  in  our  moral  constitution  in  like  manner  coming 
events  of  retribution  cast  their  shadows  before,  and  rouse  us  from  the  stupor  of  guilt 
and  shame.  A  kindly  voice  is  ever  calling  us  in  these  ways  to  flee  from  the  wrath 
that  is  to  come.  2.  Severe  sickness  as  the  visitation  of  ffod,  (Vers.  19 — 22.)  Suffer- 
ing is  felt  to  be  chastisement.  When  all  the  frame  is  unstrung,  when  the  sweet  sense  of 
life  turns  to  loathing,  and  the  body  wastes  away,  and  death  draws  near,  then  man  feels 
h  is  dependence  on  a  higher  power ;  then  often  for  the  first  time  learns  to  pray,  to  believe 
in  Grod,  and  to  feel  his  nearness  and  his  goodness.  No  doubt  there  was  much  of  super- 
stition in  ancient  times  with  regard  to  supposing  suffering  to  be  a  direct  visitation  of  the 
anger  of  God.  But  while  we  get  rid  of  the  superstition,  let  us  preserve  the  truth  of 
which  it  is  a  distortion — that  in  this  mixed  constitution  of  ours  the  proper  effect  of 
pain  is  to  lead  the  mind  to  the  Author  of  all  that  we  both  enjoy  and  suffer.  "  In  some 
constitutions  affliction  seems  peculiarly  necessary  as  a  hint  of  God.  Some  trees  will 
not  thrive  unless  their  roots  be  laid  bare;  or  unless,  besides  pruning,  their  bodies  be 
gashed  and  sliced.  Others  that  are  too  luxuriant  need  their  blossoms  to  be  pulled  off, 
or  they  will  yield  nothing.  Rank  corn,  if  it  be  not  timely  eaten  down,  may  yield 
something  to  the  barn,  but  little  to  the  granary.  Every  man  can  say  he  thanks  God 
for  ease ;  but  for  me,  I  bless  God  for  my  troubles  "  (Bishop  Hall).  3.  2%e  ministry  of 
angels.  (Vers.  23 — 28.)  Literally  in  the  last  verse  the  "  destroyers  "  are  the  "  angel^s 
of  death,"  sent  upon  their  fatal  errand  by  the  Almighty.  In  contrast  we  have  now 
the  mention  of  the  good,  delivering  angel  who  brings  release  from  the  doom.  The 
ministering  angel  draws  near  to  the  penitent  sufferer  in  compassion,  and  says,  "  Relieve 
him  from  going  down  into  the  pit;  I  have  found  a  ransom."  In  the  forms  of  the 
poetical  imagination,  an  unexpected  recovery  from  deadly  sickness  is  thus  described. 
Then  returning  health  covers  his  flesh  again  with  the  bloom  of  youth ;  the  sorrow 
vanishes  from  his  mind;  it  is  once  more  summer  in  the  soul.  He  prays  to  the 
Almighty,  and  is  graciously  heard  and  accepted ;  he  basks  in  the  sunshine  of  God's 
countenance ;  and  the  lost  peace  is  restored  to  the  purified  conscience.  And  the  heart 
breaks  out  into  singing,  for  a  new  song  is  put  into  the  restored  one's  mouth — a  song  of 
praise  to  God.  And  this  is  its  burden :  "  I  had  sinned  and  perverted  right ;  but  it  was 
not  requited  to  me ;  he  redeemed  my  soul,  that  I  might  not  go  into  the  grave,  and  my 
life  sees  his  pleasure  in  the  light"  (comp.  Ps.  xxii.  23,  seq. ;  li.  17).  Such  is  the  p  Ttion 
of  the  man  who  hears  the  rod,  and  who  has  appointed  it ;  who  bows  beneath  affliction 
onl^  to  rise  to  a  purer  height  of  spiritual  joy.  His  sins  are  pardoned,  his  good  endeavours 
accepted,  his  crosses  sanctified,  his  prayers  heard ;  everything  that  he  has  is  a  bless, 
iiig  to  him,  everything  that  he  suffers  an  advantage. 

Conclusion.  (Vers.  31 — 33.)  These  are  the  dealings  of  God  with  man ;  this  the 
purport  of  all  his  afflictions.  Experience  seals  the  truth.  Let  Job  or  any  other 
gainsay  or  refute  it  if  he  will  or  can  I  But  rather  this  strong  deep  personal  conviction 
of  Elihu  will  vibrate  and  awake  a  response  in  the  sufferer's  heart.  There  is  a  contai;ion 
in  true  faith.  Oh  for  the  victory  that  overcomes  the  world!  Once  realize  God  to  be 
our  God,  our  Refuge  and  Strength,  our  present  Help  in  trouble,  and  earth  or  hell 
in  vain  labour  to  make  us  other  than  blessed. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 33. — 77te  Divine  correction.  In  the  self-assurance  of  his  competency  to 
give  wisdom  to  Job,  and  to  correct  his  errors  and  to  solve  the  mystery  of  his  affliction, 
Elihu  continues  his  speech  and  invites  reply.  "  If  thou  canst  answer  me,  set  thy  words 
in  order  before  me,  stand  up."  He  makes  his  accusation  against  Job  that  he  has  not 
only  affirmed  his  own  innocence,  but  that  he  has  also  made  charges  against  God.  He 
then  proceeds  to  vindicate  the  purposes  of  God  in  human  affliction.  »  God  speaketh 
once,  yea  twice  ; "  the  error  is  on  man's  part,  who  "  perceiveth  it  not."  He  gives  a 
view  of  the  Divine  corrections. 

I.  As  TO  THEiE  METHOD.  The  God  that  "is  greater  than  man,"  who  worketh 
secretly  and  "  giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his  matters,"  giveth  instruction :  1.  In  a 
dream,  in  the  visions  of  the  night ;  opening  the  ears  of  men,  and  sealing  their  instruc- 
tion. 2.  By  the  severities  of  affliction;  when  man  is  "chastened  with  pain  upon  his 
bed."  This  is  applicable  to  Job;  and  the  former  may  have  been  mentioned  gently  to 
introduce  this. 


OH.  xxxai.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  545 

n.  Ab  to  theie  purpose.  This  is  alvays  gracious.  It  is  to  save  from  impending 
danger,  and  to  lead  in  safe  and  good  ways.  1.  To  restrain  man  from  evil  paths.  "  To 
withdraw  him  from  his  puriiose."  2.  To  hide  pride  from  man.  To  bring  down  the 
high  loolvs  of  the  self-complacent  and  tlie  wicked.  3.  To  save  from  untimely  death, 
and  from  the  weapons  of  destructive  violence.  To  keep  "  his  life  from  perishing  by 
the  sword."  Sin  tends  to  diath  both  by  natural  causes  and  by  violence.  Then  Elihu 
views  these  corrections — 

III.  In  theik  happy  besult.  (1)  Should  the  mediating  Counsellor  be  near,  and 
the  way  of  life,  the  right  way— the  way  of  righteousness — be  pointed  out ;  and  (2)  the 
smitten  one  return  with  repentance,  saying,  "  I  have  sinned,  and  perverted  that  which 
was  right ; "  and  (3)  lifting  up  his  voice  "  pray  unto  God ; "  then  (4)  shall  the  Divine 
deliverance  come:  (o)  in  an  expression  of  the  Divine  forbearance;  (6)  in  admission 
to  the  Divine  favour — "  he  shall  see  his  face  with  joy ;  "  (c)  in  a  gracious  restoration, 
delivering  "his  soul  from  going  Into  the  pit,"  and  bringing  him  to  rejoice  in  the  light. 
This  is  the  Divine  response  to  repentance  which  Elihu  urges  upon  Job.  Happy  is 
every  smitten  one  who,  returning  to  God,  finds  a  ransom  price  paid  for  his  soul,  and 
rejoices  in  a  deliverance  which  restores  to  him  the  days  of  his  youth,  when  "  his 
very  flesh  becometh  fresher  than  a  child's." — E.  G. 

Ver.  4. — The  inspiration  of  creation.  Elihu  assures  Job  that  he  is  a  man,  made 
by  God,  and  by  his  very  creation  having  the  Spirit  of  God  in  him.  There  is  some 
pretentiousness  in  the  manner  of  Elihu.  Yet  what  he  says  is  important,  because  it  is 
not  true  of  him  alone,  but  of  every  man. 

L  Ma.n  IS  MADE  BY  THE  SpiBiT  OF  GoD.  1.  Eis  Origin  it  outside  himself.  What- 
ever man  can  do  for  himself,  he  certainly  cannot  make  himself.  When  we  come  back 
to  the  question  of  origins,  the  most  self-reliant  person  must  confess  that  he  could  not 
have  caused  his  own  being.  2.  His  origin  is  from  Ood.  Man  derives  his  life  originally 
from  the  First  Cause  of  the  whole  series  of  living  creatures.  Whether  man  was  created 
immediately  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  or,  as  evolutionists  teach,  mediately,  through 
other  creatures,  he  in  common  wich  all  things  living  derives  his  being  from  the  great 
Parent  of  nature.  Evolution  does  not  destroy  creation ;  it  only  describes  the  process, 
and  throws  back  the  time  of  the  beginning  of  creation.  3.  His  origin  is  in  the  Spirit 
of  Ood.  The  Spirit  of  God  at  first  brooded  over  the  face  of  the  waters  (Gen.  i.  2).  When 
man  appeared  God  breathed  into  him  the  spirit  of  life  (Gen.  ii.  7).  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life.  In  his  spiritual  nature  man  is  especially  related  to  the 
Spirit  of  God.  He  is  a  spark  from  the  eternal  Sun.  4.  His  very  existence  is  maintained 
hy  the  Spirit  of  Ood.  Man  lives  only  because  God  lives  in  him.  By  nature  his  life 
is  an  inspiration  from  heaven.  At  any  moment,  if  God  were  to  withdraw,  man 
would  perish.  "  In  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  Thus  not  only 
the  original  creation,  but  also  the  present  life,  should  be  regarded  as  inspired  by 
God. 

II.  The  inspiration  of  creation  ib  a  source  of  knowledob.  1.  The  Maker  may 
he  known  hy  his  work.  All  creation  reveals  God ;  but  man,  the  higliest  creature,  most 
fully  expresses  the  Divine.  To  us  there  can  be  no  higher  revelation  of  God  than  that 
which  is  made  through  a  perfect  man.  Therefore  the  incarnation  of  Christ  is  our  most 
complete  vision  of  the  Father.  But  all  men  are' in  a  measure  revealers  of  the  hand 
that  made  them.  2.  The  spiritual  nature  of  man  is  a  type  of  Gud.^  All  nature 
reveals  God  ;  suns  and  stars,  trees  and  flowers,  birds,  beasts,  and  tishes,  give  lessons  of 
the  Divine ;  but  they  do  so  through  their  material  structures.  Man  reveals  God  in 
the  constitution  of  his  spiritual  nature.  He  is  not  merely  the  building  that  sets  forth 
the  ideas  of  the  Architect ;  he  is  the  child,  himself  made  in  the  image  of  the  Father. 
His  spiritual  nature  is  essentially  like  God,  who  is  Spirit.  Thus  he  is  made  in  the 
image  of  Gjd.  3.  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood  is  a  permanent. revelation  of 
Ood.  God  not  only  makes  himself  known  by  what  he  has  done,  he  is  daily  revealing 
himself  by  his  present  life  in  our  midst.  Nature  is  not  like  a  fossil  that  shows  in  its 
dead  lineaments  the  traces  of  ari  old-world  life;  she  is  a  mirror  of  the  Divine  activity. 
Our  own  souls  are  witnessing  to  God  by  their  vitality.  The  dwelling  of  God  within 
us  is  a  continuous  proof  that  he  lives,  that  he  works,  that  he  loves.  We  know  what 
God  is  now  by  what  God  is  now  doing  in  our  hearts  and  lives. — W.  P.  A 

JOB.  2   H 


546  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxun.  1—31 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  human  mediator.  Elihu  declares  that  Us  attitude  towards  God  is 
just  the  same  as  Job's.  He  stands  like  Job  in  respect  of  God.  He  is  a  mortal  man  formed 
out  of  the  clay.  Then,  though  Job  dreads  the  awful,  invisible  God,  he  may  listen  to  a 
fellow-creature  without  fear.  If  he  cannot  find  God  in  the  darkness,  he  may  becheered 
and  strengthened  by  feeling  the  presence  of  a  brother-man.  He  may  take  his  lessons 
from  Elihu  quite  simply  and  naturally  as  from  one  like  himself.  In  these  ideas  Elihu 
shadows  forth  what  may  be  perfectly  realized  in  Christ.  It  was  a  mark  of  Elihu'g 
confident  vanity  for  him  to  speak  as  he  did.  But  his  words,  somewhat  superfiuous  as 
regards  himself,  set  him  fortli  in  a  striking  light  as  a  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  We  need  human  sympathy  in  eeligion.  Although  man  is  made  in  the  image 
of  God,  and  although  his  very  life  is  a  constant  inspiration,  and  depends  on  the  presence 
and  power  of  God,  still  God  is  invisible,  God  is  great,  God  is  an  infinite  Spirit.  The 
soul  of  man  hungers  for  brotherly  sympathy.  We  all  want  to  feel  the  fellowship  of 
one  who  is  like  ourselves.  1.  ITtat  we  may  wnderstand  a/right.  We  cannot  understand 
a  being  of  a  different  species  from  ourselves.  We  cannot  even  comprehend  the  meaning 
of  our  own  dog  when  he  looks  up  at  us  with  pathetic  eyes,  for  we  are  of  another 
species.  2.  That  our  affections  may  he  awalcened.  We  most  naturally  love  one  who 
is  kindred  to  ourselves.  The  difficulty  of  loving  God  is  to  perceive  that  there  is  that 
in  him  which  is  akin  to  our  own  natures.  When  he  appears  strange  to  us  we  shrink 
from  him ;  we  cannot  reach  out  to  him  in  confidence  and  joyous  emotion. 

II.  Christ  brings  trs  human  sympathy  in  eeligion.  We  must  not  think  of  him 
as  standing  half-way  between  us  and  God.  Such  a  Christ  would  be  a  monstrous  being 
— neither  one  with  us  nor  one  with  God.  United  with  the  Father  on  the  Divine  side, 
our  Lord  is  a  perfect  Man  on  the  human  side.  1.  Ee  is  intelligible  to  us.  We  can  see 
him,  hear  him,  understand  him.  And  he  has  told  us  that  when  we  see  him  we  see  the 
Father  (John  xiv.  9).  2.  He  wins  our  heart's  affections.  His  kinship  makes  this 
possible ;  his  brotherly  love  makes  it  actual ;  his  great  work  and  death  for  us  perfect 
his  hold  upon  us.     Thus  our  hearts  are  drawn  out  to  God  by  the  sympathy  of  Christ. 

III.  Men  should  show  human  sympathy  in  eeligion.  What  Elihu  aimed  at, 
what  Christ  realized,  that  is  the  ideal  for  us.  Without  the  ostentation  of  the  young 
Buzite,  we  are  called  upon  to  remember  our  human  nature  when  we  try  to  help  onl 
fellow-men  in  religious  as  well  as  in  others  matters.  There  is  a  sort  of  sanctimonious 
spirituality  which  ignores  humanity.  This  is  disgusting  to  men,  and  it  is  the  cause  of 
much  popular  aveislon  to  religion.  We  cannot  help  our  fellow-men  till  we  recollect 
we  are  human  like  them — frail,  fallible,  mortal ;  nay,  sinful,  fallen,  ourselves  needing 
a  Saviour.  Brotherly  sympathy  is  the  first  essential  for  helpful  religious  influence. 
— W.  F.  A. 

fers.  14 — 17. — Divine  voices.  L  The  advent  of  the  Divinb  voices.  Elihu 
reminds  us  of  Eliphaz,  yet  with  a  difference.  Both  men  believe  in  superhuman 
influences,  in  God-sent  messages.  But  Eliphaz  tells  of  a  stately  vision,  an  awful  and 
overwhelming  apparition  ;  Elihu,  on  the  other  hand,  is  satisfied  with  dream-voices. 
God  approaches  man  in  various  ways.  The  most  awe-inspiring  is  not  necessarily  the 
most  instructive.  Dreams  have  been  continually  recognized  among  the  channels  of 
Divine  communication,  e.gr.  the  stories  of  Joseph  and  Daniel  and  the  prediction  of 
Joel  (ii.  28).  It  is  very  easy  to  misinterpret  a  dream,  and  to  attribute  to  a  Divine 
impulse  what  only  springs  from  the  vagaries  of  one's  own  fancy.  We  need  some 
assurance  that  the  voices  are  from  God.  Now,  the  test  is  in  their  character.  AH  holy 
thoughts  proceed  from  God,  and  none  that  are  unholy.  When  we  are  visited  by  a  holy 
thought,  whether  in  sleep  or  in  waking  hours,  we  may  rejoice  with  gratitude  to  know 
that  Gud  has  spoken  to  ua. 

II.  The  repetition  of  the  Divine  voices.  - "  God  speaketh  once,  yea  twice." 
Pharaoh's  dreams  were  r(ipeated  (Gen.  xli.  32).  Joseph's  different  dreams  reiterated 
the  same  message  (Gen.  xxxvii.  9).  Prophet  followed  prophet  with  warning  and 
promise  for  Israel.  The  new  Christian  voice  followed  the  old  Jewish  voice.  God  is 
speaking  now,  sending  one  message  after  another  in  his  providence.  We  have  all 
heard  from  God  more  than  once.  His  was  the  voice  that  instilled  the  first  eager  desires 
for  goodness  in  childhood,  and  his  the  voice  that  pleaded  amid  the  passionate  enthu- 
siiisms  oi  youth.     It  has  sounded  in  our  ears  repeatedly  among  the  varied  scenes  of  life 


OH.  xzzra.  1— 33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOR  647 


warning  against  sin,  and  calling  to  Christian  service.  It  ia  repeated  whenerertha  Bibl* 
is  read,  whenever  Divine  truth  is  preached,  whenever  conscience  is  aroused. 

III.  The  beobption  of  the  Divine  voices.  Too  often  they  are  unheeded.  "  Man 
perceiveth  it  not."  A  mood  of  spiritual  dulness  may  let  the  voices  pass  unheard.  But 
this  ia  not  a  natural  condition.    The  little  child  is  not  thus  deaf. 

"  Heaven  lies  about  ns  in  our  infancy." 

Later  years  deaden  our  perceptions,  not  indeed  by  the  simple  wear  and  tear  of  life,  but 
by  the  evil  things  that  are  engendered.  Distracting  worldliness  and  sin,  the  deadliest 
foes  to  the  heavenly  voices,  make  us  careless  of  the  messages  from  God. 

IV.  The  pubpose  or  the  Divine  toioes.  They  are  to  guide  and  save.  "  To  with- 
draw man  from  his  purpose,"  when  that  purpose  is  evil  or  dangerous.  "  To  hide  pride 
from  man,"  i.e.  to  save  man  from  his  pride.  Thus  the  voices  are  warning  and  deterrent. 
They  remind  us  of  the  "  demon  "  of  Socrates,  which,  he  said,  told  him  when  he  was  not 
to  do  something,  but  did  not  prompt  him  to  do  anything.  We  know  that  God  inspires 
for  action,  that  heavenly  voices  summon  to  toil  and  battle.  Yet  perhaps  we  may 
perceive  that  the  inner  voice  is  more  often  a  restraining  than  a  stimulating  voice.  For 
the  stimulus  we  look  to  the  living  Christ.  Yet  the  restraint  ia  lent  in  mercy.  God 
warns,  that  he  may  save. — ^W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — Chastisement.  Elihu  now  approaches  his  own  special  and  new  con- 
tribution to  the  great  controversy.  God  addresses  man  in  various  ways.  First  he 
speaks  with  the  still,  small  inner  voice  of  conscience.  But  when  the  repetition  of  this 
voice  is  unheeded  he  proceeds  by  another  method,  and  calls  attention  through  the 
rousing  voice  of  chastisement. 

I.  SuFFEBiNO  IS  CHASTISEMENT.  As  he  elaborates  his  thought  we  see  what  Elihu  is 
making  clear.  Suffering  is  not  the  vindictive  punishment  of  sin ;  nor  is  it  the  work 
of  a  malignant  or  even  of  an  indifferent  being.  It  is  sent  by  God  for  the  wholesome 
discipline  of  his  children.  No  doubt  this  discipline  is  often  rendered  necessary  by  sin, 
and  when  it  is  so  chastisement  is  virtually  punishment ;  but  even  then  it  is  punish- 
ment with  a  merciful  end.  It  is  the  rod  that  corrects,  not  the  gallows  that  ends  a 
career  without  hope.  It  looks  forward  to  better  things ;  it  is  directly  designed  to  help 
and  bless  and  save.  But  often  it  is  not  connected  with  sin.  It  is  the  wholesome 
discipline  that  seasons  the  soldier  with  hardship. 

II.  Chastisement  is  a  Divine  messenger.  The  poor  sufferer,  "  chastened  also  with 
pain  upon  his  bed,"  is  not  deserted  by  God.  He  is  tempted  to  look  upon  his  trouble 
as  a  proof  that  God  has  left  him,  if  it  is  not  a  sign  that  God  has  become  his  Enemy. 
But  both  ideas  are  wrong.  God  is  neither  inimical  nor  negligent.  The  very  suffering 
is  a  sign  of  God's  present  care.  It  is  a  process  by  means  of  which  he  is  bettering  his 
child.  Therefore  it  is  a  message  of  mercy.  Yet  it  is  not  alwa)  s  possible  to  d^ijcern 
the  mercy  in  the  message.  Still,  the  message  is  not  fruitless.  Perhaps  there  was  a 
danger  of  too  much  self-confidence ;  pride  was  creeping  in ;  success  was  lifting  up  ihe 
soul  to  dangerous  heights.  Then  the  chastisement  came  to  cast  down  and  humble. 
At  first  this  seemed  harsh  and  hurtful.  But  on  reflection  it  is  seen  to  be  the  very 
thing  needful  for  saving  the  better  life  and  refining  it. 

III.  The  suffeking  of  chastisement  should  dbive  us  to  God.  Perhaps  we  would 
not  heed  him  in  the  cheerful  hours.  Now  we  need  him.  The  voices  that  were  drowned 
in  the  noisy  scenes  of  pleasure  may  steal  into  our  ears  in  the  lonely  watches  of  piun. 
Thus  we  learn  to  trust  in  the  darkness. 

"  Lord,  in  thy  sky  of  blue 

No  stain  of  cloud  appears ; 

Gone  all  my  faithless  fears. 
Only  thy  love  seems  true. 
Help  me  to  thank  thee,  then,  I  pray ; 
Walk  in  the  light  and  cheeifally  obey. 

•*  Lord,  when  I  look  on  high, 
Clouds  only  meet  my  sight ; 
Fears  deepen  with  the  night} 
But  yet  it  is  thy  sky. 


648  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxin.  1—88. 

Help  me  to  trast  thee,  then,  I  pray ; 
Wait  in  the  daik  and  tearfully  obey." 

W.P.A. 

Vers.  23 — ^26. — The  messenger  and  the  ransom.  Elihu  shows  that  God  has  three 
ways  of  speaking  to  man — by  inward  voices  (vers.  14 — 18),  by  the  experience  of  chas- 
tisement (vers.  19 — 22),  and  now  lastly  by  a  living  messenger  (vers.  23 — 26). 

I.  God  speaks  bt  a  messenger.  It  is  a  question  whether  we  should  understand 
the  word  rendered  "messenger"  in  the  usual  sense  attached  to  it,  i.e.  as  standing  for 
"  angel."  God  has  spoken  through  angel-messengers  from  the  days  of  Abraham.  But 
any  one  charged  with  a  Divine  message  becomes  God's  angel  to  those  to  whom  he 
delivers  it.  Every  prophet  is  God's  messenger,  one  who  speaks  for  God.  The  apostle 
is  one  sent  forth  by  Christ.  Angels,  prophets,  apostles — ^they  are  all,  so  far,  the  same. 
They  are  God's  piissionaries.  Christ  is  once  called  an  Apostle  (Heb.  iii.  1),  because 
he  too  was  sent  forth  by  his  Father  (1  John  iv.  14).  Our  Lord's  mission  on  earth 
was  to  bring  the  new  message  of  salvation  from  heaven,  and  to  make  it  a  real  and 
living  thing  among  men.  Every  true  follower  of  Christ  is  called  to  be  a  messenger 
from  God  to  his  fellow-men.  People  will  listen  to  the  human  voice  when  they  are 
deaf  to  the  pleadings  of  conscience  and  blind  to  the  teachings  of  experience.  The  true 
preacher  is  God's  messenger.  "We  are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  as  though  God  did 
beseech  you  by  us :  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God"  (2  Cor.  v.  20). 

II.  God's  mbssbngbe  bbings  a  bansom.  It  is  contrary  to  the  whole  course  of 
historical  revelation,  which  develops  truth  by  slow  degrees,  to  suppose  that  the  ransom 
intended  by  Elihu  was  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross.  Such  an  ana^ 
chronism  implies  an  entire  lack  of  perspective  in  the  view  of  the  interpreter.  Never- 
theless, the  essential  ideas  of  a  ransom  are  here  brought  forward.  1.  Ddiverwace,  It 
is  the  duty  of  God's  messenger  to  preach  "  deliverance  to  the  captives."  He  is  more 
than  a  revealer  of  truth ;  he  is  a  herald  of  salvation.  2.  A  costly  m,ethod.  Elihu 
may  have  no  conception  of  the  price  of  redemption.  Yet  he  perceives  more  or  less 
dimly  that  some  ransom  must  be  paid.  We  have  a  much  clearer  view  of  the  subject, 
because  we  can  read  it  in  the  light  of  history.  We  now  know  that  our  deliverance  is 
effected  through  the  death  of  Christ.  "  The  Son  of  man  came  to  give  his  life  a  ransom 
for  many  "  (Matt.  xx.  28). 

III.  The  Divine  eaksom  secures  a  olad  welcome  fbom  God.  The  message  may 
seem  to  come  in  stern  tones  of  anger,  following  a  John  the  Baptist  preparation  of  chas- 
tisement. Yet  it  is  a  gospel.  Ver.  26  paints  a  glowing  picture  of  the  redeemed  man. 
1.  Acceptable  prayer.  Until  he  was  ransomed  his  prayer  seemed  to  be  in  vain.  Now 
God  hears  it  with  favour.  2.  The  beatific  vision.  "  He  shall  see  his  face  with  joy." 
Eeconciled  to  God,  he  rejoices  in  communion  with  God.  3.  Restoration  of  righteous- 
nestt  "  He  restoreth  unto  man  his  uprightness."  This  is  the  grand  human  result  of 
redemption.  Deliverance  from  doom  is  not  enough,  is  not  the  chief  end.  The  restora- 
tion of  the  broken  and  defiled  image  of  God  to  its  original,  or  more  than  its  original, 
beauty  is  the  great  outcome  of  the  redeeming  work  of  Christ. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  27 — SO. — 3%e  restored  peniterit.  I.  The  condition  op  bestobation.  The 
redeemed  man  is  represented  as  chanting  a  grateful  psalm  in  recognition  of  his  merciful 
deliverance.  In  this  psalm  he  both  acknowledges  his  guilt  and  recognizes  that  he  has 
not  been  treated  as  he  deserves.  Guilt  is  a  fact  to  be  first  of  all  owned.  There  is  no 
forgiveness  without  confession.  Even  when  a  man  is  forgiven,  though  God  may  put 
aside  his  guilt,  the  man  cannot  do  so.  The  thought  of  what  he  has  been  deliyered 
from  heightens  his  gratitude  while  it  deepens  his  humility. 

II.  The  state  op  eecovebt.  It  is  deliverence  from  death — "  the  pit."  Death  is 
the  natural  penalty  of  sin.  But  when  God  forgives  and  restores  he  does  more  than 
remit  the  penalty.  Salvation  is  far  more  than  this  negative  blessing.  The  sin  has 
already  poisoned  the  life  of  the  sinner.  Already  he  is  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins." 
Iherefore  he  needs  the  gift  of  life.  Now,  this  positive  boon  comes  with  the  great 
restoration  of  souls  in  redemption.  God,  who  first  gave  natural  life,  now  gives  spiritual 
life.  Thus  the  blessing  is  internal  and  personal.  It  is  not  a  change  of  the"  soul's 
estate,  but  a  regeneration  of  the  soul  itsolt 


OH.  xxxiv.  1—87.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


649 


III.  The  souboi!  of  redemption.  God  himself  brings  about  the  new,  happy  condi- 
tion of  the  restored  penitent.  He  could  not  restore  himself;  no  creature  in  the  universe 
could  give  him  what  he  needs.  For  the  evil  was  death,  and  the  requirement  was  a 
gift  of  life.  Only  he  who  first  created  life,  and  who  ever  lives  in  all  his  creatures,  can 
renew  life.  Regeneration  implies  a  Divine  energy.  Those  forms  of  religion  which  are 
satisfied  with  man  as  he  is  may  dispense  with  any  very  marked  activity  on  God's  side 
in  religion ;  but  when  the  ruin  of  man  is  acknowledged,  the  chief  element  in  religion 
must  be,  not  man's  devotion,  but  God's  salvation.  Now,  this  is  what  we  see  in  the 
Bible.  There  man  appears  in  his  sinfulness  and  helplessness,  utterly  unfit  for  heaven, 
or  even  for  earthly  life  in  its  beauty  and  fruitfulness,  and  there  God  is  seen  as  the 
Blighty  Deliverer  coming  to  the  rescue  of  his  helpless  child. 

IV.  The  method  of  renewal.  Elihu  has  spoken  of  the  Divine  voices,  the  experi- 
ence of  chastisement,  and  the  personal  messenger.  By  these  means  God  reaches  man. 
What  else  is  done  is  not  so  fully  seen  here  as  in  the  later  revelation  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, in  which  we  discover  the  cross  of  Christ  as  the  root  of  man's  new  life.  But 
throughout  God's  dealings  with  man  in  all  ages  it  has  been  apparent  that  there  are 
various  processes  of  spiritual  experience  through  which  God  leads  returning  penitents. 
Therefore,  if  the  present  process  is  dark  and  mysterious  and  even  painful,  we  have  great 
encouragements  tor  submitting  to  it  with  more  than  patient  faith,  with  joyous  hope, 
looking  to  the  end  which  is,  "  to  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit,  to  be  enlightened 
with  the  light  of  the  Uving."— W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEK  XXXIV. 


Vers.  1 — 37.— In  this  chapter  Elihu  turns 
from  Job  to  those  whom  he  addresses  as 
"wise  men"  (ver.  2),  or  "men  of  under- 
standing" (ver..  10).  Whether  these  are 
Job's  three  special  friends,  or  others  among 
the  company  which  had  perhaps  gathered  to 
hear  the  debate,  is  uncertain.  He  makes 
the  subject  of  his  address  to  them  Job's 
conduct— scarcely  a  polite  thing  to  do  in 
Job's  presence.  Job,  lie  says,  has  scorned 
God  and  charged  him  with  injustico  (vers. 
5—9).  He  will  vindicate  him.  This  he  pro-, 
ceeds  to  do  in  vers.  10 — 30.  He  then  points 
out  what  Job's  course  ought  to  be  (vers. 
31 — 33),  and  winrls  up  by  an  appeal  to  the 
"men  of  understanding"  to  endorse  his 
condemnation  of  Job  as  a  sinner  and  a  rebel 
(vers.  34—37). 

Vers.  1,  2. — Furthermore  Elihu  answered 
and  said,  Hear  my  words,  0  ye  wise  men. 
Having,  as  he  may  have  thought,  reduced 
Job  to  silence  by  the  force  of  his  reasonings, 
Elihu,  wishing  to  carry  with  him  the  general 
consent  of  his  audience,  makes  an  appeal  to 
them,  or,  at  any  rate,  to  the  wise  among 
them,  to  judge  Job's  conduct  and  pronounce 
upon  it.  It  is  probable,  as  Schultens  re- 
marks, that  A  considerable  number  of  influ- 
ential persons  had  by  this  time  collected 
together  to  hear  the  discussion  which  was 


going  on.  To  these  Elihu  specially  addresses 
himself:  Give  ear  unto  me,  ye  that  have 
knowledge. 

Ver.  3. — ^For  the  ear  trieth  words,  as  the 
mouth  tasteth  meat.  A  proverbial  expres- 
sion, already  used  by  Job  in  the  dialogue 
(ch.  xii.  11).  "It  is  as  much  the  business 
of  the  ear  to  discriminate  between  wise  and 
foolish  words,  as  of  the  palate  to  distinguish 
between  wholesome  and  unwholesome  food." 

Ver.  4. — let  us  choose  to  us  judgment ; 
i.e.  "Let  us  seek  to  come  to  a  right  conclu- 
sion (mishplmf)  on  each  subject  that  comes 
before  us  for  consideration."  Let  us  know 
among  ourselves  that  which  is  good.  "  Let 
us  know,  discern,  and  recognize  that  which 
is  right  and  good."  Excellent  sentiments, 
but  somewhat  pompously  put  forth  by  a 
young  man  addressing  elder  ones. 

Ver.  5, — For  Job  hath  said,  I  am  righteous. 
Job  had  maintained  his  "  righteousness  "  in  a 
certain  sense,  i.e.  his  integrity,  hia  honesty,his 
conviction  that  God  would  ultimately  acquit 
him ;  but  he  had  not  maintained  his  sinless- 
ness  (see  the  comment  on  oh.  xxxiii.  9).  He 
had  not  even  said,  in  so  many  words,  "  I  am 
righteous."  The  nearest  that  he  had  come 
to  saying  it  was  when  (in  ch.  xiii.  18)  ha 
had  exclaimed,  "  I  know  that  I  shall  be  held 
righteous,"  or  "justified."  And  God  hath 
taken  away  my  judgment.  Job  had  said 
this  (ch.  xxvii.  2),  but  in  the  sense  that 
God  had  withheld  from  him  the  judgment 
on  bis  cause  which  he  desired,  not  that  he 
had  perverted  judgment,  and  wrongfully 
condemned  him  (see  the  'Speaker's  Com 
mentary,'  vol.  iv.  p.  97). 


550 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB, 


[cH,  XXXIV.  1 — 37. 


Ver.  6.— Should  I  lie  against  my  right? 
This  was  an  essential  portion  of  Job's  argu- 
ment (Bee  oh.  xxvii.  4).  Against  the  theory 
of  his  secret  heinous  wickedness  put  forward 
by  his  "comforters,"  he  maintained  con- 
sistently his  freedom  from  conscious  de- 
liberate opposition  to  the  will  of  God,  and 
refused  to  make  the  confessions  which  they 
suggested  or  required,  on  the  ground  that 
they  would  Lave  been  untrue— in  making 
them  he  would  have  "  lied  against  his 
right"  In  this  certainly  Job  "sinned  not." 
But  it  was  essential  to  the  theory  of  Elibn,  no 
less  than  to  that  of  Eliphaz  and  bis  friends, 
that  Job  was  suffering  on  account  of  past 
iniquity,  whether  he  were  being  punished 
for  it  in  anger  or  chastised  for  it  in  love 
(see  oh.  xxxiii.  17,  27).  My  -wound  (literally, 
my  arrow;  comp.  ch.  Ti.  4)  is  incurable 
without  transgression ;  i.e.  without  my 
having  committed  any  transgression  to 
acf  ount  for  it. 

Ver.  7. — What  man  is  like  Job,  who 
drinketh  up  eooming  like  water  t  This 
comment  is  not  only  unnecessary,  but  unfair. 
It  was  not  for  Elihu,  who  professed  a  desire 
to  "justify  "  (or  completely  exonerate)  Job, 
to  aggravate  his  guilt  by  means  of  rhetorical 
comment ;  and  the  comment  itself  was  un- 
fair, for  Job  had  not  indulged  in  scorn  to 
any  extent,  much  less  "drunk  it  up  like 
water"  (comp.  ch.  xv.  16).  He  had  in  no 
respect  scorned  God;  and  if  he  had  occa- 
sionally pourud  some  scorn  upon  bis  "  com- 
forters" (ch.  vi.  21;  xii.  2;  xiii.  4—13; 
xvi.  2 ;  xxi.  2 — 5 ;  xxvi.  2 — 4),  must  it  not 
be  admitted  that  they  had  deserved  it?  It 
was  the  duty  of  Elihu  to  act  as  moderator 
between  Job  and  the  "  comforters,"  whereas 
he  here  seeks  to  exasperate  them,  and  lash 
them  up  to  fury  against  their  aflSioted  friend. 
Perhaps  Job's  impassive  attitude  has  em- 
bittered him. 

Ver.  8. — ^Which  goeth  in  company  with 
the  workers  of  iniquity.  It  is  impossible  to 
supply  any  other  antecedent  to  "  which " 
than  Job  himself.  Elihu  therefore  accuses 
Job  of  having  turned  aside  from  righteous- 
ness, and  betaken  himself  to  the  "  counsel 
of  the  iingodly,  the  way  of  sinners,  and  the 
seat  of  the  scornful"  (Ps.  i.  1).  This  is 
grubsly  to  exaggerate  Job's  faults  of  temper, 
and  puts  Elihu  very  nearly  on  a  level  with 
Eliphaz,  Bildad,  and  Zophar  in  respect  of 
misconception  and  rudeness.  And  walketh 
with  wicked  men.  If  no  more  is  meant 
than  that  Job  has  adopted  principles  and 
arguments  commonly  used  by  wicked  men 
(Canon  Cook),  the  language  employed  is 
unfortunate. 

Ver.  9.— For  he  hath  said,  It  proflteth  a 
man  nothing  that  he  should  delight  himself 
with  God.  Ag:ain  it  mnst  be  remarked  that 
.lob  had  not  said  this.   Ihe  nearest  approach 


tolt  is  to  be  fonnd  in  ch.  Ix.  22,  where  this 
passage  occurs :  "  It  is  all  one ;  therefore  I 
say.  He  destroyeth  the  perfect  and  the 
wicked  "  (Revised  Version).  Elsewhere  Job 
speaks,  not  generally,  but  of  his  own  indi- 
vidual case,  remarking  that  his  righteous- 
ness has  not  saved  him  from  calamity  (ch. 
ix.  17, 18;  X.  15;  xvii.  9—17,  etc.).  And 
the  fact  is  one  that  causes  him  the  deepest 
perplexity. 

Ver.  10. — ^Therefore  hearken  unto  me,  ye 
men  of  understanding  (comp.  ver.  2).  Elihu 
repeats  himself,  wishing  to  call  special  at- 
tention to  his  justification  of  ^od  (vers. 
10—30).  Far  be  it  from  God,  that  he  should 
do  wickedness.  Elihu  probably  means  that 
to  do  wickedness  is  contrary  to  the  very 
nature  and  idea  of  God ;  but  he  does  not 
express  himself  very  clearly.  And  from  the 
Almighty,  that  he  should  commit  iniquity. 
An  evil  God,  a  God  who  cm  do  wrong,  is  a 
contradiction  in  terms — an  impossible,  in- 
conceivable idea.  Devil  -  woishippers,  if 
there  are  or  ever  have  been  such  persons, 
do  not  conceive  of  the  object  of  their  wor- 
ship as  really  God,  but  as  a  powerful  malig- 
nant spirit.  Once  rise  to  the  height  of  the 
conception  of  a  Power  absolutely  supreme, 
omniscient,  omnipresent,  the  Author  of  all 
things,  and  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  him 
as  less  than  perfectly  good. 

Ver.  11. — For  the  work  of  a  man  shall  ha 
render  unto  him,  God  "rewardeth  every 
man  according  to  his  work "  (Ps.  Ixii.  13), 
renders  to  each  one  good  or  evil,  according 
as  his  own  deeds  have  been  the  one  or  the 
other.  But  this  must  be  understood  of  the 
man's  wlwle  conduct,  and  God's  entire  treat- 
ment of  him.  Such  an  absolute  rectitude  of 
God's  moral  government,  considered  as  a 
whole,  is  implied  and  involved  in  his  abso- 
lute and  perfect  justice.  And  cause  every 
man  to  fiiid  according  to  his  ways.  We 
"  find  according  to  our  ways  "  when,  having 
"ploughed  iniquity,  and  sown  wickedness, 
we  reap  the  same  "  (ch.  iv.  8),  or  when,  on  the 
other  hand,  having  "  sown  in  righteousness, 
we  reap  in  mercy"  (Hos.  x.  12).  Exact 
retribution  is  the  law  of  God's  rule;  but  the 
exactness  cannot  be  seen,  or  tested,  or  de- 
monstrated in  this  life.  It  will  appear, 
however,  and  be  recognized  by  all,  at  the 
consummation  of  all  things. 

Ver.  12.— Yea,  surely  God  will  not  do 
wickedly,  neither  will  the  Almighty  pervert 
judgment.  Elihu  is  fond  of  rhetorical  am- 
plification, like  most  young  speakers.  Vers. 
11,  12  contain  nothing  that  is  really  addi- 
tional to  the  statement  in  ver.  10. 

Ver.  13. — Who  hath  given  him  a  charge 
over  the  earth  ?  The  argument  seems  to  be 
that  if  God  had  "  received  a  charge,"  and 
were  in  possession  of  a  mere  delegated 
authority,    like    the   subordinate    gods   o£ 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—37.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


551 


heathen  nations,  he  might  have  an  interest 
apart  from  that  of  those  whom  he  governs, 
and  so  be  tempted  to  be  unjust ;  but  as  he 
is  the  Author  of  all  and  the  sole  Buler  of 
all,  his  interest  must  be  hound  up  with  the 
true  interests  of  his  creatures,  and  cannot 
clash  with  them.  He  can  tlius  never  be 
unjust,  since  he  can  have  no  temptation  to 
be  unjust.  Or  who  hath  disposed  the  whole 
world?  rather.  Who  hath  laid  upon  him  the 
whole  world  i  (see  the  margin  of  the  Revised 
Version).  Eiihu  repeats  the  idea  of  the 
previous  clause  in  other  words. 

Yer.  14. — If  he  set  his  heart  npon  man,  if 
he  gather  unto  himself  his  spirit  and  his 
breath.  Two  renderings  are  proposed,  both 
supported  by  about  equal  authority :  (1)  •'  If 
he  (i.e.  Ood)  set  his  heart  upon  himself,  if  he 
should  gather  to  himself  hii  own  spirit  and 
breath,"  then  all  flesh  would  perish,,  etc. 
(2)  "  If  he  [i.e.  God]  set  his  heart  upon  [or, 
•against']  man,  if  he  were  to  gather  to 
himself  mom's  spirit  and  maris  breath,"  then, 
etc.  The  difference  is  not  great.  God 
could,  either  by  withdrawing  from  man  the 
breath  and  spirit  which  he  has  given  him, 
or  simply  by  withholding  from  man  the 
quickening  and  sustaining  influences  which 
he  is  perpetually  putting  forth,  reduce  all 
humankind  to  nothingness.  Being  so  com- 
pletely master  of  man,  he  would  surely  not 
condescend  to  treat  him  with  injustice.  In- 
justice implies  something  of  opposition, 
struggle,  rivalry. 

Yer.  15, — All  flesh  shall  perish  together 
(comp.  Pb.  civ.  29).  Without  God's  sustain- 
ing hand,  all  creatures  would  fall  back  into 
nothingness.  And  man  shall  turn  again 
unto  dust.  Either  Elihu  refers  here  to 
Gen.  iii.  19,  or  else  he  lias  a  traditional 
knowledge  of  man's  origin,  handed  down 
from  a  remote  antiquity,  which  is  in  entire 
conformity  with  the  Hebrew  belief. 

Yei.  16. — ^If  now  thou  hast  understand- 
ing, hear  this.  The  appeal  is  not  to  Job, 
but  to  any  wise  and  intelligent  man  among 
the  many  hearers  who  were  present  (see  the 
comment  on  vers.  1,  2).  Hearken  to  the 
voice  of  my  words  (comp.  vers.  2, 10). 

Yer.  17.— Shall  even  he  that  hateth  right 
govern  J  Is  it  conceivable  that  there  can 
be  at  the  head  of  the  universe,  its  Euler  and 
Guide,  One  who  hates  justice  ?  The  appeal 
is  to  the  instinctive  feeling  that  in  the  one 
God  perfect  goodness  and  omnipotence  are 
nnited.  Its  spirit  is  exactly  that  of  Abra- 
ham's question,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth  do  right?"  (see  Gen.  xviii.  5). 
And  wilt  thou  condemn  him  that  is  most 
just  ?  ratlier,  him  that  is  both  just  and  strong 
(see  the  Eevised  Yersion). 

Yer.  18.— Is  it  fit  to  say  to  a  king.  Thou 
art  wicked  1  and  to  princes.  Ye  are  ungodly? 
Would  any  subject  of  au  earthly  kj*f  deem 


it  flttino;  to  accuse  his  sovereign  of  wicked 
and  unjust  conduct?  Would  he  even  tax 
those  who  stood  next  to  the  king — the 
princes  and  great  officers  of  the  court— with 
nngodliness?  If  a  sense  of  what  is  becom- 
ing and  seemly  would  restrain  a  man  from 
the  use  of  language  of  this  sort  towards  his 
earthly  ruler,  can  it  be  right  that  he  should 
allow  himself  in  such  liberty  of  speech 
towards  his  heavenly  King,  his  absolute 
Lord  and  Master  ?  Job  Lad  not  really  used 
such  language  of  God,  though  the  complaints 
which  he  had  made  with  respect  to  God's 
treatment  of  him  might  not  unreasonably  be 
held  to  imply  some  such  accusation. 

Yer.  19. — How  much  less  to  him  that 
oocepteth  not  the  persons  of  princes  1  How 
much  less  becomingly  is  such  language  used 
of  One  so  far  above  princes  that  he  regards 
them  as  on  a  level  with  all  other  men,  and 
pays  them  no  special  respect  I  Worldly 
rank  is,  of  course,  nothing  with  God.  All 
mankind  arc  his  subjects  and  servants,  whom 
he  differentiates  one  from  another  solely 
by  their  moral  and  spiritual  qualities.  Nor 
regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor.  If 
earthly  rank  is  of  no  account  with  God,  much 
less  is  abundance  of  possessions.  The 
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus  places 
his  complete  indifference  in  a  strong  light. 
For  they  all  are  the  work  of  his  hands.  All 
classes  of  men,  rich  and  poor,  powerful  and 
weak,  are  equally  God's  creatures,  brought 
into  the  world  by  him,  given  by  him  their 
several  stations,  and  regarded  by  him  with 
favour  or  disfavour,  according  as  they 
conduct  themselves  in  their  various  occupa- 
tions and  employments. 

Yer.  20. — In  a  moment  shall  they  die.  AU 
lie  under  the  same  law  of  death — 

"  Pallida  Mors  tequo  pulsat  pede  pauperum 
tabernas 
Begumque  turres." 

(Horace, '  Od.,'  i.  4, 11. 13, 14.) 

"  In  B  moment,"  whenever  God  wills,  they 
pass  from  life  and  disappear,  the  rich 
equally  with  the  needy,  the  powerful  prijice 
as  much  as  the  outcast  and  the  beggar.  And 
the  people  shall  be  troubled  at  midnight, 
and  pass  away  (comp.  Exod.  xii.  29 ;  2  Kings 
xix.  35).  Such  sudden  catastrophes  are 
infrequent;  but  it  is  within  the  power  of 
God  to  produce  them  at  any  time.  When 
they  occur,  they  strikingly  exemplify  the 
equality  of  his  dealings  with  all  classes  of 
men,  since  none  escape  (Exod.  xi.  5;  xii. 
29).  And  the  mighty  shall  he  taken  away 
without  hand ;  i.e.  without  human  agency 
(comp.  Dan.  ii.  34). 

Yer.  21. — For  his  eyes  are  upon  the  ways 
of  man,  and  he  seeth  all  his  goings.  Elihu 
proceeds  to  a  iresh  argument.  The  omni- 
science of  God  is  a  security  against  his  acting 


669 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXIV.  1 — 37. 


unjustly.  He  knows  exactly  each  man's 
powers,  capacities,  temperament,  temptations, 
circumstances.  He  can  exactly  measure 
each  man's  due,  and  will  assuredly  mete  it 
out  to  each  without  partiality  or  prejudice. 

Ver.  22. — There  is  no  darkness,  nor 
shadow  of  death,  where  the  workers  of 
iniquity  may  hide  themselves.  "  All  things 
are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him 
with  whom  we  have  to  do"  (Heb.  It.  13). 
However  careful  wicked  men  may  be  to 
conceal  their  misdeeds  by  "  waiting  for  the 
twilight"  (ch.  xxiv.  15),  or  lioing  them  "in 
the  dark"  (ch.  xxiv.  16),  they  will  find  it 
quite  impossible  to  escape  the  all-seeing  eye 
of  the  Almighty,  which  is  as  clear-sighted 
in  tlie  deepest  darkness  as  in  the  brightest 
light  ("Yea,  the  darkness  is  no  darkness 
with  thee,  but  the  night  is  as  clear  as  the 
day ;  the  darkness  ani  I  light  to  thee  are 
both  alike,"  Ps.  cxxxix.  11,  Prayer-book 
Version). 

Ver.  23. — For  he  will  not  lay  upon  man 
moie  than  right;  rather, /or  he  needeth  not 
further  to  consider  a  man  (see  the  Revised 
Version).  He  has  no  need  to  ctmsider  any 
mau's  case  twice;  he  sees  it  at  the  first  glance, 
and  judges  it  infallibly.  That  he  should 
enter  into  judgment  with  God.  Were  it  not 
so,  a  man  might  perhaps  claim  to  have  a 
second  trial,  and,  pleading  in  his  own 
defence,  might  "  enter  into  judgment  with 
God,"  or  faooording  to  others)  "  go  before 
God  in  judgment;"  but  God's  absolute 
omniscience  precludes  this. 

Ver.  21. — He  shall  break  in  pieces  mighty 
men  without  number ;  ruther,  in  ways  that 
are  unsearchable,  or  in  ways  past  finding  out 
(see  the  Revised  Version).  And  set  others 
in  their  stead  (comp.  1  Sam.  ii.  7 ;  Ps.  Ixxv. 
7  ;  Dan.  ii.  21). 

Ver.  25. — ^Therefore  (i.e.  to  that  end,  or 
with  that  ohjeet  in  view')  he  knoweth  (rather, 
taheth  knowledge  of)  their  works.  As  God 
governs  the  world,  and  governs  it,  to  a  large 
extent,  by  exalting  some  men  and  depress- 
ing others,  he  is  bound  to  take  strict  account 
of  their  conduct,  that  he  may  exalt  the 
worthy  and  depress  the  unworthy.  And  he 
overturneth  them  in  the  night  (comp.  ver. 
20).  So  that  they  are  destroyed;  literally, 
crushed.  God's  judgments  fall  on  men 
suddenly,  either  "  in  the  night,"  or  as  "  in 
the  night,"  i.e.  suddenly,  unexpectedly,  when 
they  are  quite  unprepared  ;  and  fall  on  them 
with  "  crushing  "  force,  with  a  might  that 
is  wholly  irresistible. 

Ver.  26. — He  striketh  them  as  wicked 
men ;  i.e.  as  open  and  acknowledged  male- 
factors. In  the  open  sight  of  others ;  lite- 
rally, »■«  the  place  of  beholders ;  i.e.  publicly, 
openly,  where  their  fate  is  an  example  to 
others. 

Ver.  27. — Because  they  turned  back  from 


him.  (On  the  sin  of  "turning  back,"  see 
2  Kings  xvii.  15,  16  ;  Prov.  xxvi.  11 ;  2  Pet. 
ii.  22.)  And  would  not  consider  any  of  his 
wayB(oomp.  Ps.  xxviii.  5;  Isa.  v.  12).-  The 
folly  and  wickedness  of  such  conduct  is 
reproved  by  Solomon  in  the  strongest  terms, 
"  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused  ;  I 
have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man 
regarded ;  but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all 
my  counsel,  and  would  none  of  my  reproof: 
I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity ;  I  will 
mock  when  jour  fear  cometh;  when  your 
fear  cometh  as  desolation,  and  your  destruc- 
tion Cometh  as  a  whirlwind ;  when  distress 
and  anguish  cometh  upon  you.  Then  shall 
they  oaU  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer ; 
they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall  not 
find  me :  for  that  tliOy  hnted  knowledge,  and 
did  not  choose  the  fear  of  the  Lord :  they 
would  none  of  my  counsel !  they  despised 
all  my  reproof.  Therefore  shall  they  eat 
the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  and  be  filled  with 
their  own  devices.  For  the  turning  away  of- 
the  simple  shall  slay  them,  and  the  prosperity 
of  fools  shall  destroy  them  "  (Prov.  i.  24 — 
32). 

Ver.  28. — So  that  they  cause  the  cry  of 
the  poor  to  come  unto  him.  Elihu  views 
the  wicked  man  as  almost  certainly  an 
oppressor,  whose  misdeeds  "  cause  the  cry  of 
the  poor  to  come  before  God,"  and  provoke 
God,  the  Avenger  of  the  poor  and  needy,  to 
visit  him  with  chastisement.  And  he  heareth 
the  cry  of  the  afflicted  (comp.  Exod.  ii.  23, 
24;  xxii.  23,  24;  Ps.  xii.  5,  etc.).  God's 
ears  are  ever  open  to  the  cry  of  the  oppressed, 
and  his  hand  is  ever  heavy  upon  those  who 
"  aflJict "  the  weak  and  defenceless  (Isa.  i.  24 ; 
iii.  12—15 ;  Amos  v.  II,  12 ;  Micah  iii  I— 
4;  Hab.  i.  13). 

Ver.  29. — When  he  giveth  quietness,  who 
then  can  make  trouble?  literally.  Who  then 
can  condemn?  The  sentiment  is  the  same 
as  that  of  St  Paul  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans,  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us?  .  .  .  Who  shall  lay  anything  io 
the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  Siat 
justifieth.  Who  is  he  that  oondemneth?" 
(Rom.  viii.  31—34).  And  when  he  hideth 
his  faoe,  who  then  can  behold  him  1  When 
God  hideth  away  his  faoe,  then  all  flesh  is 
troubled  (Ps.  civ.  29);  man  shrinks  into 
himself,  and  despairs  of  happiness ;  nature 
itself  seems  to  fail  and  fade.  None  can  be- 
hold him  when  he  hides  himself ;  none  can 
do  more  than  deprecate  his  anger,  and  pray, 
"Lord,  lift  thou  up  the  light  of  thy 
countenance  upon  ug"  (Ps.  iv.  6).  Whether 
it  be  done  against  a  nation,  or  against  a 
man  only.  The  results  are  similar,  whethei 
God  withdraws  the  light  of  his  countenano* 
from  a  nation  or  from  an  individual.  In 
either  case,  (here  is  no  help  ftova  withont; 
ruin  and  destruction  follow. 


OH.  XXXIT.  1 — 87.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


66S 


Ver.  SO.— That  the  hypocrite  reign  not, 
lest  the  people  be  ensnared;  rather,  that  an 
ungodly  man  reign  not,  that  a  people  he  not  a 
mare.  (So  Schulteiis,  Professor  Lee,  and 
others.)  The  passage  1b  obscure  from  its 
brevity ;  but  this  seems  to  b-3  tlie  best  sense. 
God  withdraws  his  favour  from  an  ungodly 
king  or  from  a  wicked  nation,  that  the  king 
may  cease  to  injure  men  by  his  rule,  and 
the  nation  cease  to  be  a  snare  to  its  neigh- 
bours. 

Yer.  31. — Sorely  it  is  meet  to  he  stud  unto 
God,  I  have  borne  chastisement.  (So  Bosen- 
miiller  and  others.)  If  the  passage  be  thus 
rendered,  Elihu  must  he  considered  as,  like 
Eliphaz  (ch.  v.  8),  Bildad  (ch.  viii.  5),  and 
Zopliar  (oh.  si.  13 — 16),  counselling  Job  to 
submit  himself  to  God,  acknowledging  his 
sin,  accepting  his  punishment,  and  promising 
amendment  for  the  future  (ver.  22).  But 
perhaps  it  is  better  to  regard  the  passage  as 
interrogative,  and  Elihu  as  asking — What 
man,  among  those  whom  God  has  cast  down 
and  punished,  has  ever  sought  to  deprecate 
his  wrath  by  contrition,  confession,  and 
promise  of  amendment,  implying  that,  liad 
they  done  so,  GJod  would  have  relented  and 
forgiven  them  ?  (see  the  Eevised  Version). 
In  this  case  no  direct  counsel  is  offered  to 
Job ;  but  still  an  indirect  hint  is  given  him. 
I  will  not  offend  any  more.  This  is*prefer- 
able  to  the  marginal  rendering  of  the 
Eevised  Version,  "  though  I  have  not 
offended." 

Ver.  32. — ^That  which  I  see  not,  teach  thou 
me ;  i.e.  "  If  in  anything  I  fail  to  see  thy 
will,  teaeli  thou  it  me.  Make  thy  way  plain 
before  my  face."  If  I  have  done  iniquity, 
I  will  do  no  more.  The  hypothetical  form 
seems  to  be  preferred,  as  more  acceptable  to 
Job,  who  maintained  his  righteousness,  than 
a  positive  confession  of  sin. 

Ver.  33.— Should  it  be  according  to  thy 
mind  I  he  will  recompense  it.  The  two 
clauses  should  be  taken  together,  and  the 
translation  should  run,  "Should  God  re- 
compense "  (t.e.  make  his  awards)  "  accord- 
ing to  tAy  pleasure,"  or  "as  tAo«  wiliest?" 
Elihu  turns  to  Job  and  directly  addresses 
him,  "  Can  he  expect  that  God  will  make 
his  decrees — condemn  and  absolve  men — just 
as  Job  thinks  righ  t  ?  "  Whether  thou  refuse ; 
rather,  tince  thou  refueeat  them.  Job  had 
refused  to  acknowledge  the  justice  of  God's 
awards   and   decisions.    Or  whether  thou 


choose ;  and  not  I ;  rather,  but  thou  must 
choose,  and  not  I.  It  is  Job  who  most  deter- 
mine how  he  will  act,  Elihu,  a  friend,  can 
only  point  out  and  recommend  a  course,  as 
he  had  done  in  vers.  31,  32.  It  is  for  Job 
himself  to  determine  what  course  he  will 
take.  Therefore  speak  what  thon  knowest ; 
t.e.  "  Say'what  thou  hast  determined  on." 

Ver.  34. — Let  men  of  understanding  tell 
me,  and  let  a  wise  man  hearken  unto  me. 
'As  Job  does  not  answer  him,  Elihu  turns 
t»  his  "  men  of  understanding  "  (supra,  vers. 
2, 10).  He  feels  sure  that  he  will  at  least 
have  carried  them  with  him,  and  that  they 
will  join  in  the  condemnation  of  Job's  words 
as  wanting  in  true  wisdom.  "Men  of 
understanding,"  he  says,  "  will  say  unto  me, 
yea,  every  wise  man  that  heareth  me  will 
say.  Job  speaketh  without  knowledge,"  eto. 
(see  the  Revised  Version). 

Ver.  35. — Job  hath  spoken  without  know- 
ledge, and  his  words  were  without  wisdom ; 
literally,  not  in  wisdom.  The  words  intended 
are,  of  course,  those  in  which  Job  has  seemed 
to  tax  God  with  injustice  (see  the  comment 
on  ver.  9). 

Ver.  36. — My  desire  is  that  Job  may  bt 
tried  unto  the  end;  literally.  Would  that 
Job  were  tested  to  the  uttermost  I — "  tested," 
I.e.,  as  gold  is  tested  by  the  touchstone, 
and  "  to  the  uttermost,"  so  that  there  should 
be  no  doubt  as  to  the  result.  Elihu  had  his 
wish.  Job  was  tried  as  severtly  as  possible, 
and  the  issue  was  pronounced  by  God  him- 
self, "  Ye  have  not  spoken  of  me  the  thing 
that  is  right,  at  my  servant  Job  hath  "  (oh. 
xlii.  8,  Revised  Version).  Because  of  his 
answers  for  wicked  men;  rather,  after  th« 
manner  of  wicked  men  (comp.  above,  vers.  5, 
6,  9).  This  was  the  view  which  Elihn  took 
of  Job's  rash  words. 

Ver.  37. — ^Tor  he  addeth  rebellion  unto 
his  sin.  Elihu  holds  tliat  it  is  Job's  "  sin  " 
which  has  brought  on  him  his  chastisement, 
and  regards  hisexpostulationsand complaints 
as  flagrant  "  rebellion  "  against  the  Most 
High.  He  clappeth  his  hands  among  us ; 
i.e.  he  applauds  himself,  approves  of  his  own 
conduct,  and,  instead  of  repenting,  makes  a 
boast  of  it.  And  mnltiplieth  his  words 
against  God.  Job  bad  continued  to  the  last 
(ch.  zxxi.)  to  justify  himself  -and  protest 
his  integrity ;  which,  in  the  view  of  Elihu, 
was  to  tax  God  with  injustice. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vera.  1 — 37. — .E7j^m  to  the  bystanaen:  the  case  of  Job  tried.  L  The  ooubi 
OOKSTITUTED.  1.  The  panel.  Job,  a  good  man,  a  great  sulTerer,  sorely  calumniated, 
di-eply  perplexed,  involved  in  doubt  and  darkness,  and  guilty  of  much  presumption. 
2.  2%«  fudges.  Either  the  three  friends  ironically  addressed  as  "wise  men,"  ot 
the  bystanders,  among  whom  were  doubtless  many  possessfd  of  oound  wisdom  and 


554  THE  BOOK   OP  JOB.  [oh.    xxiv.  1—37 

discretion — "  wise  "  and  "  knowing  ones  "  (ver.  2),  "  men  of  understanding," 
literally,  "men  of  heart,"  i.e.  persona  of  intelligence  and  ripe  experience,  capable  of 
forming  a  judgment  upon  so  high  a  matter  as  that  about  to  be  submitted  to  them. 
3.  I7ie  prosecutor,  Elihu.  Details  of  his  personality  have  been  given  in  ch.  xxxii.  2.  A 
young  Arabian  prophet  claiming  to  speak  under  a  Divine  impulse,  and  introduced  for  the 
purpose  of  delivering  a  preliminary  verdict  upnn  Job's  case,  with  a  view  to  preparing 
Job  for  the  subsequent  theophany  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xxxviii.  1).  4.  The  address.  Elihu 
invites  the  court  of  jurymen  to  attend  to  the  details  of  the  case,  as  he  should  present  it 
for  their  consideration,  to  use  discrimination  in  sifting  what  the  ear  heard,  so  as  to 
separate  the  essential  from  the  accidental,  the  important  from  the  unimportant,  the 
pertinent  from  the  irrelevant,  the  ear  being  endowed  with  a  faculty  of  trying  words  as 
the  palate  is  with  a  capacity  for  tasting  meats  (ver.  3),  and,  in  the  exercise  of  a  sound 
judgment,  to  resolve  upon  arriving  at  the  truth  (ver.  4).  What  are  here  coftimended 
to  the  listeners  and  spectators  beside  the  "  ash-heap  "  as  indispensable  qualifications  for 
judging  the  case  of  Job  aright,  viz.  attention,  discrimination,  and  probation,  are 
needful  for  all  inquirers  after  truth,  and  are  specially  enjoined  upon  helieving  students 
of  the  Word  of  God,  who  are  commanded  not  only,  like  the  Beroeans,  "  to  receive  the 
Word  with  all  readiness  of  mind,"  and  "  to  search  the  Scriptures  daily  "  (Acts  xvii.  11), 
but,  like  the  Thessalonians,  to  "  prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good " 
(1  Thess.  V.  21). 

II.  The  indictment  peefbebed.  1.  That  Job  had  declared  himself  to  It  righteow. 
Elihu  doubtless  alludes  to  those  passages  in  which  Job  had  asserted  his  innocence  as 
against  the  baseless  aspersions  of  his  friends  (ch.  ix.  17,  21;  x.  7;  xiii.  18;  xvi.  17). 
Though  true  in  the  sense  that  Job  was  guiltless  of  flagrant  wickedness,  yet  in  the 
judgment  of  Elihu  such  vehement  protestations  of  stainless  integrity  as  had  fallen  from 
his  lips  were  hardly  becoming  in  a  sinful  creature  (vide  ch.  xxxii.  2,  homiletics). 
2.  That  Job  charged  Ood  with  injustice.  Again  Elihu  faithfully  reports  what  he  regards 
as  the  substance  of  Job's  contention,  that  he  would  be  guilty  of  falsehood  and  hypocrisy 
were  he  to  admit  the  correctness  of  his  friends'  allegations  (ch.  xxvii.  4) ;  that  the 
seemingly  incurable  malady  which  had  overtaken  him  (God's  arrow,  as  in  ch.  vi.  4; 
xvi.  9 ;  xix.  11)  had  come  upon  him  although  he  was  "  without  transgression  "  (ch.  x. 
17),  and  that  cdnsequently  God  had  taken  away  his  right  (ch.  xxvii.  2),  which  he 
supposes  to  mean,  had  denied  him  justice  and  treated  him  as  a  criminal,  while  in  reality 
he  was  innocent.  3.  That  Job  had  indulged  in  blasphemy.  In  charging  Job  with 
"  drinking  up  scorning  like  water,"  t.e.  uttering  blasphemous  censures  against  God, 
Elihu,  it  has  heen  said  (Canon  Cook),  "goes  now  for  the  first  time  far  beyond  the 
truth,"  since  "  Job's  words "  of  fierce  and  bitter  remonstrance  "  were  wrung  from 
him  by  agony,  and  by  the  taunts  of  his  unfriendly  counsellors,*'  while  "his  scorn 
was  altogether  directed  against  them,  not,  as  Elihu  seems  to  assume,  agaiust  God." 
But  it  may  be  questioned  whether  this  is  not  an  illustration  of  forgetting  to  act 
upon  Elihu's  canon,  "  Let  us  choose  to  us  judgment :  let  us  know  among  our- 
selves what  is  right."  Excusable  as  was  the  scornful  contempt  Job  hurled 
against  the  friends,  it  is  impossible  to  recall  the  wild,  passionate,  often  reckless  and 
unreasonable  appeals  and  expostulations  he  addressed  to  God  without  agreeing  with 
Elihu  that  at  such  moments  he  did  overstep  the  limits  of  a  just  and  holy  modera- 
tion, and  came  perilously  near,  if  he  did  not  actually  touch,  the  bounds  of  an  impious 
an<i  blasphemous  irreverence.  _ "  We  cannot  but  feel  that  he  often  pushed  his  infer- 
ences against  the  Divine  justice  and  providence  much  too  far,  as  indeed  he  himself 
confessed  he  had  when  at  last  he  saw  Jehovah  face  to  face "  (Cox).  4.  That  Job 
had  adopted  the  sentiments  and  maxims  of  the  ungodly.  Without  explicitly  asserting 
that  Job  had  himself  been  a  ribald  and  profane  jester  at  holy  things,  Elihu  affirms  that 
by  maintaining  that  "  it  profiteth  a  man  nothing  that  he  should  delight  himself  with 
God "  (ver.  9),  Job  had  practically  gone  over  to  the  side  of  the  irreligious.  Though 
nowhere  is  the  above  declaration  stated  in  so  many  words,  it  is  by  no  means  an  unnatural 
inference  from  Job's  words  (ch.  ix.  22  ;  xxi.  7 ;  xxiv.  1 ;  xxx.  26).  A  reasoner  is  not 
unfairly  held  responsible  for  what  may  he  deduced  by  just  and  necessary  consequence 
from  his  premisses,  even  though  he  himself  should  fail  to  perceive,  or,  perceivin", 
should  not  mean,  what  these  premisses  involve.  Now,  Job  had  repeatedly  insisted  on 
the  apparently  anomaloun  distribution  of  good  and  evil  among  mankind ;  and  while  as 


en.  xxxiT.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  655 


an  answer  to  the  friends,  that  was  perfectly  legitimate,  it  was  possible  to  so  exhibit 
that  perplexing  circumstance  as  to  make  it  carry  the  conclusion  that  the  supremo 
Governor  of  the  universe  was  indifferent  to  the  characters  of  his  subject  intelligences, 
and  that  a  good  man  derived  no  advantage  from  his  piety,  while  a  wicked  man  suffered 
no  disadvantage  in  consequence  of  his  irreligioa.  This,  in  the  judgment  of  Elihu,  Job 
had  done,  and  against  this  Elihu  proceeded  to  protest. 

in.  The  counteb-proposition  stated.  The  position  taken  by  Elihu  was  the 
negative  of  Job's,  viz.  that  the  perpetration  of  wrong  against  any  of  his  creatures  was 
on  the  part  of  God  simply  impossible,  that  with  him  such  a  thing  as  perversion  of 
judgment  was  inconceivable,  and  that,  when  rightly  comprehended,  the  principle  of  the 
Divine  administration  was  one  of  absolute  equity.  The  three  friends  maintained,  not 
only  that  such  was  the  principle  of  the  Divine  administration,  but  that  its  operation 
was  always  visible.  Job  contended  that  the  operation  of  such  a  principle  was  not 
always  visible  in  God's  dealings  with  mankind,  and  hence  Job  sometimes  doubted 
whether  that  was  the  principle  on  which  the  universe  was  governed,  though  in  his 
inmost  soul  he  felt  that  it  ought  to  be.  Elihu  afBrms  that,  whether  visible  or  not 
to  human  intelligence  and  in  particular  cases,  such  and  no  other  was  the  law  or  rule  of 
the  Divine  procedure. 

IV.  The  NEEDPtTL  DEMONSTRATION  OFFERED.  1.  The  ohsolute  Supremacy  of  God, 
(Vers.  13 — 15.)  The  argument  has  three  points.  (1)  God  governs  the  world  with  no 
delegated  authority.  No  one  hath  given  him  a  charge  over  the  whole  earth,  or 
committed  to  him,  as  to  a  satrap  or  underling,  the  vioeroyalty  of  the  globe  (ver.  13). 
On  the  contrary,  he  rules  with  a  ri^ht  that  is  essential  and  underived,  indisputable  and 
irresponsible.  (2)  God  governs  the  world  with  no  insufficient  power.  Were  God 
selfishly  to  fix  his  attention  on  himself  alone  (Grotius,  Eichhorn,  Delitzsch,  Umbreit, 
Carey,  Cook,  Cox),  rather  than  on  man,  regarding  him  as  an  enemy  (Vulgate,  Targums, 
De  Wette,  Bosenmliller),  and  in  consequence  to  gather  unto  himself  his  Spirit  and  his 
breath,  by  which  all  living  creatures  are  sustained  (ch.  xii.  9, 10),  the  result  would  be 
the  complete  extinction  of  all  animated  being  on  the  face  of  earth  (ver.  15),  The 
meaning  is  that  God  has  all  creatures  so  entirely  in  his  hand  that  they  are  nothing, 
and  can  do  nothing  except  in  so  far  as  they  are  upheld  by  him.  Hence  (3)  God 
governs  the  world  for  no  selfish  end.  If  he  did,  he  could  easily  dispose  of  a  rebel 
universe  by  reducing  it  to  dust  or  consigning  it  to  annihilation.  That  he  does  not  is 
proof  that  he  regards  not  himself  alone,  or,  in  other  words,  that  he  is  impelled  by 
considerations  of  unselfish  love  for  man.  And  this  being  so,  it  is  manifestly  impossible 
that  God  can  inflict  injustice  on  a  creature  whom  he  loves.  2.  TTie  immaculate  purity 
of  God.  (Ver.  17.)  Elihu's  argument  amounts  to  this:  that  the  necessary  basis  of  aU 
government  is  right — integrity  in  the  Person  and  equity  in  the  Law  of  the  Ruler ;  that 
without  this  every  administration,  human  or  Divine,  would  fall  into  anarchy  and  con- 
fusion ;  and  that,  consequently,  unless  these  conditions  were  supplied  by  the  supreme 
Governor  of  mankind,  the  administration  he  conducted  would  sooner  or  later  be  over- 
whelmed in  ruin.  If  it  be  true  that  the  stability  of  any  government  depends  ultimately 
upon  the  righteous  character  of  its  rulers  and  the  equitable  nature  of  its  laws,  much 
more  must  the  moral  administration  of  the  universe  be  founded  on  the  immaculate 
holiness  of  God  and  the  unchangeable  justice  of  his  laws.  3.  The  strict  impartiality 
of  God.  According  to  Elihu  it  is  little  short  of  lese-majesty,  or  high  treason,  for  a 
subject  to  accuse  either  kings  or  princes  of  corruption  (Exod.  xxii.  28),  thereby  denying 
them  the  first  and  most  indispensable  qualification  of  a  ruler. 

"  The  king-beooinlng  graces 
Are  justice,  verity,  temperance,  stableness.'' 

(Shakespeare.) 

And  "he  that  ruleth  over  men  must  be  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
3).  What,  then,  must  it  be  to  impeach  him  who  "  accepteth  not  the  persons  of  princes, 
nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor.?  "  (ver.  19).  Respect  of  persons,  a  common 
enough  failing  even  with  good  people  (Dent.  i.  17 ;  xvi.  19 ;  Jas.  ii.  1,  9),  is  impossible 
with  God  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14;  Acts  x.  34;  1  Pet.i.  17),  whose  impartiality  towards  men 
is  based  on  the  consideration  that  they  are  all  alike  "  the  work  of  his  hands"  (ver.  19), 
therefore  all  alike  possessed  of  the  same  essential  dignity,  amenable  to  the  wme  high 


666  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xsxiv.  1—37, 

authority,  and  entitled  to  be  cared  for  by  the  same  paterual  government.  And  as  it  ii 
based  on  the  fundamental  equality  of  men  in  the  sight _of  Heaven,  so  is  it  proved  by  the 
palpable  fact  that  all  alike  are  subjected  to  the  same  impnrtial  doom  (ver.  20) ;  great 
and  mighty  potentates  dying  in  a  moment,  like  Belshazzar  (Dan.  v.  30)  or  like  Pharaoh 
(Bxod.  xiv.  28),  or,  being  taken  away  without  hand  (of,  Dan.  ii.  34 ;  viii.  25),  t.«.  by 
some  supernatural  visitation,  like  the  rebellious  princes  of  the  congregation  (Numb.  xvi. 
29)  or  like  Hi  rod  (Acts  xii.  23),  and  their  peoples  being  troubled  at  midnight,  like  the 
Egyptians  (Exod.  xii.  29),  or  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  overthrown,  like  the  ante- 
diluvians (Gen.  vii.  22)  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities  of  the  plain  (Gen.  xix.  24,  25). 
4.  The  all-encompassing  omniscience  of  Ood.  (Ver.  21.)  The  eyes  of  the  Supreme  are 
constantly  on  tlie  ways  of  man.  'I'iiere  is  no  darkness  nor  shadow  of  death  whpre 
workers  of  iniquity  can  hide  themselves  from  his  penetrating  glance.  With  such  accu- 
racy can  he  read  the  human  heart,  that  he  does  not  require  to  regard  a  man  twice  in 
order  to  understand  his  character  and  conversation.  He  has  no  need  to  pause  before 
bringing  the  individual  into  judgraeqt.  Job's  demand  that  God  should  hold  a  court  of 
assizes  and  put  his  case  to  trial  was  wholly  superfluous.  So  thoroughly  does  God 
comprehend  man  by  the  glance  of  his  omniscient  eye  that  he  can  proceed  to  break  the 
mighty  without  investigation,  making  short  work  of  their  trial,  and  setting  others  in 
their  siead  (ver.  24).  Clearly,  reasons  Elihu,  a  God  who  thus  exactly  and  fully  com- 
prehends every  case  that  is  bnjught  before  him  is  not  likely  to  be  guilty  of  committing 
wickedness  by  perverting  judgment  5.  The  unchallengeable  righteousness  of  God. 
(Vers.  24 — 30.)  Elihu  means  that  the  absolute  integrity  of  God  may  be  established 
by  a  consideration  of  the  character  of  his  judgments,  which  are:  (1)  Sudden.  "He 
overtumeth  the  wicked  in  the  night "  (ver.  25) ;  i.e.  instantaneously  and  unexpectedly, 
which,  of  course,  he  would  not  and  could  not  do  unless  he  were  completely  satisfied 
with  the  righteous  character  of  his  judgments.  But  "  he  knoweth  their  works  "  without 
investigation,  in  virtue  of  his  omniscience ;  and  hence  he  does  not  hesitate,  as  if  fearing 
miscarriage  of  justice,  to  proceed  to  swift  execution.  (2)  Public.  "  He  striketh  them 
as  wicked  men  " — i.e.  as  convicted  malefactors,  about  whose  criminality  there  can  be  no 
question — "  in  the  open  sight  of  others,"  literally,  "  in  the  place  of  spectators."  "  He 
that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be 
reproved."  But  God,  whose  works  are  all  of  them  verity  and  judgment,  and  done  in  truth 
and  uprightness  (Ps.  cxi.  7,  8),  has  no  need  to  shun  observation  or  be  afraid  of  criticism. 
Hence  he  never  does  resort  to  star-chambers  or  secret  inquisitions,  but  courts  the 
greatest  possible  publicity  for  all  he  does.  (3)  Retributive.  When  God  steps  out  of 
his  place  to  inflict  sufferings  on  men,  it  is  never  for  the  gratification  of  any  private 
feeling  of  revenge,  never  in  the  reckless  exercise  of  merely  arbitrary  power,  but  always 
for  the  vindication  of  insulted  justice,  always  for  the  punishment  of  some  outrageous 
display  of  wickedness.  When  mighty  tyrants  are  struck  down  in  the  open  sight  of 
others,  it  will  generally  be  found,  says  Elihu,  that  it  has  been  "  because  they  turned 
back  from  him,  and  would  not  consider  any  of  his  ways,"  but  proceeded  to  such  a  height 
of  daring  impiety,  oppressing  and  trampling  on  the  poor,  that  they  "  caused  the  cry  of 
the  poor  to  come  unto  him,"  and  in  a  manner  obliged  him  to  hear  the  cry  of  the 
afflicted  (ver.  28).  Examined  into,  every  such  case  will  be  found  in  its  most  essential 
features  to  be  in  complete  accord  with  the  eternal  fitness  of  things.  (4)  Unimpeach- 
able. They  are  so  evidently  right,  so  self-justifying,  in  fact,  that  no  one  can  venture 
to  assail  them  en  the  ground  of  inequity.  "  When  he  giveth  quietness  " — i.e.  maketh 
peace  by  striking  down  the  oppressor  of  the  poor  (Delitzsch,  Gesenius,  Carey),  rather 
than  "when  he  striketli  to  the  earth"  (Umbreit) — "who  then  will  condemn  him?" 
or  "  who  then  will  make  a  noise?"  as  if  he  had  perpetrated  an  injustice.  And  vice 
versa,  "  when  he  hideth  his  face,"  in  the  sense  of  being  angry  with  and  punishing  an 
individual  or  a  nation  (Ps.  xxx.  8 ;  civ.  29),  "  who  then  can  behold  him,  {.e.  make  him 
visible,  and  cause  him  to  restore  his  favour,  as  if  by  withdrawing  his  regard  he  had  been 
guilty  of  doing  wrong  ?  The  universal  conscience  feels,  says  Elihu,  that  the  Almighty 
in  so  acting  is  acting  rightly.  (6)  Beneficent.  And  not  only  so,  but  God's  judgments 
evince  the  most  benevolent  and  philanthropic  design,  being  dictated  by  a  lofty  regard 
for  the  general  welfare  of  mankind,  to  the  end  that  "the  hypocrite  [literally,  'the 
ungodly,'  such  as  lead  others  to  impiety]  reign  not,  that  they  be  not  snares  to  the  people  " 
(ver.  30),  as  wicked  rulers  commonly  are;  e.g,  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xii   28),  Omri 


«H.  XXMT.  1— «7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  657 

(1  Kings  xvi  25,  26),  Ahab  (1  Kings  xvi.  31),  Jehoahaz  (2  Kings  xiii.  2),  and  other 
monarchs  botli  of  Israel  and  of  Judah.  It  is  a  special  mercy  to  a  people  when  God 
cuts  short  the  lives  of  wicked  kings. 

V.  The  counsel  given.  To  adopt  the  model  confession  next  recited  (vers.  31,  32), 
in  which  are  three  things  worthy  of  consideration.  1.  A  humble  submission  to  Ood's 
chastisements.  "  Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  God,  I  have  home ! "  («c.  chastisement). 
Resignation  in  affliction  is  the  duty  of  all  (Prov.  iii.  11) ;  it  is  specially  incumbent  on 
God's  people  (Luke  xxi.  19),  indispensable  as  a  condition  of  returning  favour  (Lev. 
xxvi.  40—42),  and  one  of  the  surest  signs  of  a  truly  penitent  heart  (Jer.  xxxi.  18). 
Nothing  enables  one  to  manifest  genuine  resignation  like  the  clear  recognition  of  God's 
hand  in  affliction  (Micah  vi.  9 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  18 ;  Jas.  iv.  7),  and  of  the  true  design  of 
affliction  to  chastise  rather  than  punish  (Heb.  xii.  6 ;  Ps.  cxix.  75).  Besignatiuu  in 
afSiction  and  submission  to  Divine  chastisement  were  exemplified  by  Aaron  (Lev.  x.  3), 
the  children  of  Israel  (Judg.  1. 15),  Bli  (1  Sam.  iii.  18),  David  (2  Sam.  xv.  26),  Job  (ch.  i. 
21 ;  ii.  10),  Micah  (vii.  9),  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxi.  14).  2.  A  hearti/ promise  of  amendment. 
"  I  will  not  offend  any  more  "  (ver.  31) ;  "  If  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more  " 
(ver.  32).  Such  a  promise  distinctly  involved  the  confession  that  one  had  offended ; 
and  without  confession  there  can  be  no  forgiveness  (Prov.  xxviii.  13  ;  1  John  i.  9),  as, 
on  the  other  hand,  without  amendment  there  is  no  evidence  that  confession  is  sincere 
(ch,  xxii.  23 ;  Isa.  i.  16  ;  Ezek.  xiv.  6 ;  Hos.  xiv.  8).  8.  An  earnest  desire  after  Divine 
instruction.  "  That  which  I  see  not  teach  thou  me "  (ver.  32).  Converted  souls  are 
always  more  or  less  deeply  sensible  of  their  ignorance,  especially  in  regard  to  spiritual 
things,  as  e.g.  the  wickedness  of  their  own  hearts  (Jer.  xvii.  9),  the  subtlety  of  sin  (Ps. 
xix.  12),  the  specific  purposes  of  providential  dispensations  (John  xiii.  7),  the  right 
path  of  holy  living  (Jer.  x.  23) ;  and  with  reference  to  all  these  and  many  other  points 
they  are  ever  ready  to  receive  heavenly  enlightenment,  saying,  "  Teach  me  to  know 
thy  way  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  11),  and  "  to  do  thy  will "  (Ps.  cxliii.  10). 

VI.  The  AEPLiOATiON  VADE.  1.  An  appeal  to  Job.  (1)  A  question.  "  Shall  he  "— 
»'.«.  God — "recompense  it "  (so.  man's  wickedness,  and  actions  generally)  "according  to 
thy  mind?"  t.e.  shall  Gtod  adopt  a  mode  of  government  or  principle  of  administration 
to  please  thee  ?  (2)  A  reason.  "  For  thou  hast  found  fault "  (Delitzsch) ;  "  For  thou 
hast  despised"  (sc.  his  judgments)  (Cook).  That  is.  Job  had  expressed  dissatisfaction 
with  God's  dispensations.  Whence  the  obvious  inference  arose  that  Job  deemed 
these  dispensations  should  have  been  framed  according  to  his  ideas.  (3)  A  duty.  "  So 
that  thou  hast  to  choose,  and  not  I,"  meaning  that  in  the  circumstances  Job  had  better 
make  up  his  mind  about  that  better  plan  of  government  for  the  world  than  God's,  and 
publish  it  as  soon  as  possible :  "  And  what  thou  knowest  speak  out."  2.  An  address  to 
the  bystanders.  Finding  Job  silent,  Blihu  turns  to  the  listeners  aud  spectators,  whom 
he  dexterously  salutes  as  "men  of  understanding"  and  "  wise  ones,"  asking  them  to 
say  whether  it  is  not  the  case  that  they  agree  with  him  in  the  verdict,  "  Job  speaketh 
without  knowledge,  and  his  words  are  without  wisdom "  (vers.  34,  35).  A  severe 
verdict,  whether  the  audience  appealed  to  endorsed  it  or  not !  Yet  Jehovah  afterwards 
affirmed  its  truth  (ch.  xxxviii.  2).  And  surely  it  is  an  index  of  folly  for  puny  man,  as 
Job  did,  to  sit  in  judgment  on  God.  3.  A  declaration  by  Mihu.  (1)  Blihu's  desire. 
That  Job's  trial  might  be  further  continued,  which  may  signify  either  that  Job's  senti- 
ments might  be  more  thoroughly  examined,  or  that  Job's  afflictions  might  be  further 
prolonged — the  first,  a  wish  becoming  a  genuine  seeker  after  and  an  earnest  preacher  of 
the  truth ;  and  the  second,  though  seemingly  harsh,  yet  not  necessarily  unkind  or 
inconsistent  with  the  obligations  and  claims  of  friendship.  (2)  Elihu's  reason.  Gene- 
rally, that  Job's  affliction  had  not  yet  produced  that  beneficial  effect  upon  him  for 
which  it  was  intended.  Particularly,  that  (o)  his  sentiments  were  irreligious—"  his 
answers"  were  "after  the  manner  of  evil  men;"  (b)  his  wickedness  was  great — "  he 
addeth  rebellion,"  or  the  most  aggravated  form  of  transgression,  "  that  of  blasphemous 
speeches  "  (Delitzsch),  "  unto  sin,"  i.e.  his  unconscious  and  unintentional  errors ;  (c) 
his  scorn  was  conspicuous — "  among  us  he  clappeth  "  (sc.  his  hands),  expressive  of 
triumphant  contempt,  showing  that  "  though  victorious  in  the  argument,"  he  was  "  not 
yet  humbled  in  spirit  "  (Bobinson)  ;  and  (d)  his  irreverence  was  extreme— he  "  mul- 
tiplieth  his  words  against  God,"  "carrying  himself  as  victor,  not  only  over  men,  but 
also  over  God  "  (Bobinson). 


658  THE   BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.  xxxiv.  1—37. 

Learn :  L  That  good  men,  in  pronouncing  judgment  upon  their  fellows,  should  pro- 
ceed with  the  utmost  care  and  caution.  2.  That  God's  people  should  be  studious  in 
giving  utterance  to  words  calculated  to  leave  wrong  impressions  on  the  minds  of  hearers. 
3.  That  saints  may  sometimes  be  mistaken  for  sinners  because  of  the  indiscreetnesi 
of  their  talk.  4.  That  the  justice  of  God  is  a  fundamental  maxim  in  all  souud 
theology.  6.  That  equally  the  unselfishness  (or  graciousness)  of  God  must  in  every 
adequate  conception  of  his  character  stand  contlative  with  his  justice.  6.  That  the 
God  of  the  Bible  is  the  only  Deity  possessed  of  qualifications  adequate  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  world,  not  to  say  the  universe.  7.  That  God's  judgments,  as  exhibited 
in  his  providential  government  of  the  earth,  are  admirably  fitted  to  teach  man 
righteousness.  8.  That  God  is  profoundly  interested  in  the  welfare  of  nations  and 
communities  as  well  as  of  private  persons.  9.  That  the  Divine  administration  is  ever 
carried  on  in  the  interests  of  holiness.  10.  That  the  true  attitude  of  man  in  presence 
of  the  Divine  government  is  meek  and  cheerful  submission. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa 

Vers.  1 — 37. — Elihu's  second  discourse :  man  has  no  right  to  doubt  of  God's  justice. 
I.  CENBUaB  or  Job's  doubts.  (Vers.  1 — 9.)  In  silence  Job  has  listened  to  the  reproof 
of  his  fiiend,  and  has  apparently  taken  to  heart  the  lesson  that  in  justifiable  self- 
defence  we  may  carry  our  protests  beyond  the  true  boundary,  and  exaggerate  our 
innocence  while  rejecting  false  imputations.  Elihu  therefore  rises  again,  and  proceeds 
with  his  second  reproof.  Job  has  represented  God  as  a  cruel,  unjust  persecutor  of  his 
innocence.  He  doubts  then  of  the  justice  of  the  world-ruling  dominion  of  (rod.  To 
the  refutation  of  this  position  the  present  discourse  is  directed.  Elihu  appeals  to  the 
common  sense  of  men,  to  the  unbiassed  wisdom  of  experience.  The  ear  has  a  power 
of  trying  words,  the  mind  has  a  faculty  of  judgment  and  taste,  analogous  to  that  of  the 
body,  whereby  we  discriminate  the  false  from  the  true,  and  the  good  from  the  evil. 
This,  indeed,  must  be  the  last  appeal  in  every  controversy  whether  on  Divine  or  human 
things.  A  written  word,  a  positive  revelation,  is  always  open  to  diverse  interpretations ; 
and  this  makes  it  the  more  necessary  to  ascertain  the  broad  dictates  of  conscience  and 
of  the  common  judgment,  with  which  every  true  revelation  agrees.  The  question  now 
is — Does  this  common  religious  sense  condemn  the  utterances  and  the  attitude  of  Job 
or  not?  He  has  asserted,  "I  am  innocent,  and  yet  God  has  denied  me  justice,  has 
taken  away  my  right.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  right  is  on  my  side,  I  shall  be  a  liar  if 
I  maintain  it.  The  wound  caused  by  the  shaft  of  God's  wiath  is  incurable."  This, 
according  to  the  speaker,  was  the  effect  of  Job's  language.  He  indignantly  repels  it. 
Borrowing  an  expression  from  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  16),  he  denounces  Job  as  one  who 
drinks  scofSng  like  water;  and  by  these  blasphemies  associates  himself  with  the 
wicked.  Job  denies,  according  to  the  speaker,  that  there  is  any  profit  or  use  in  piety — 
in  living  in  friendship  with  God.  He  had  never  said  this  in  so  many  words ;  but  the 
sense  of  much  that  he  had  said  resembled  this  (oh.  ix.  22, 23  ;  xxi.  7,  8 ;  xxiv.  1,  sqq.). 
Such  expressions  seemed  to  deny  the  very  foundation  of  religion.  Job  was  turning 
against  the  light  within.  And  though  he  had  several  times  censured  and  half  recalled 
his  own  words,  the  offence  had  nevertheless  been  repeated. 

II.  Pboofb  of  the  Divine  justice.  (Vers.  10 — 30.)  1.  From  the  creative  goodness 
of  Qod.  (Vers.  10 — 15.)  The  point  is  to  show  that  God  is  incapable  of  doing  wrong,  of 
perverting  justice  and  right  in  his  dealings  with  men;  to  show  that  he  rewards  men 
according  to  their  works,  gives  them  the  proper  fruit  of  their  sowing,  causes  the  life- 
path  they  choose  to  conduct  to  the  happy  or  unhappy  issue,  according  to  the  rightness 
of  their  choice  or  otherwise.  He  sets  before  them  blessing  and  cursing;  and  the 
responsibiUty  of  the  resvdt  is  theirs  alone.  But  how  may  we  have  the  conviction  that 
all  this  is  so  ?  The  answer  is  by  showing  that  the  works  of  God  exclude  the  thought 
of  selfishness ;  and  selfishness  alone  can  explain  the  perversion  of  right.  We  cannot 
conceive  of  self-seeking  in  God.  None  entrusted  to  him  the  charge  of  the  earth  ;  none 
but  he  has  founded  the  circle  of  the  earth.  As  first  and  absolute  Cause,  all  things  are 
his ;  there  is  no  division  of  power,  profit,  or  glory.  Ambition,  greed,  jealousy— 
every  passion  that  tempts  men  to  wrong  their  fellows— is  shut  out  of  the  very  idea 
of  God.     He  is  ever  pouring  forth  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  life  and  blessedness  upon 


OH.  xixiv.  1— 37.]  THE  BOOK   OP  JOB.  559 

his  creatures — the  very  opposite  action  to  that  of  selfishness,  which  draws  as  much 
as  possible  into  itself  of  good,  and  parts  with  as  little  as  possible.  Only  suppose  for 
a  moment  that  God  were  to  become  a  self-absorbed  Being,  "  directing  his  heart  only 
to  himself,  taking  in  his  spirit  and  breath,"  instead  of  giving  it  forth,  universal  death 
must  at  once  ensue ;  men  must  perish,  returning  to  the  dust.  The  very  impossibility 
of  such  a  supposition  shows  the  impossibility  of  ascribing  self-seeking  and  self-love  to 
God.  He  is  the  Eternal  Father;  and  as  the  pure  parent's  love  has  the  least  alloy  of 
self  in  it  of  any  earthly  love,  we  are  to  take  this  as  the  type  of  the  nature  of  God. 
These  are  sublime  and  inspiring  thoughts.  God  cannot  injure  man,  or  do  wroug, 
because  he  would  thus  injure  himself  and  sully  his  own  glory.  No  one  can  consciously 
betray  or  wrong  himself.  All  that  we  call  wrong^doing  implies  that  man  has  his 
equals  as  free  beings  by  his  side,  and  disposes  of  the  property  of  others.  This  is 
impossible  with  God,  because  all  things  belong  to  him,  being  the  product  of  his  loving 
activity,  his  self-giving  fulness  of  life.  2.  From  the  idea  of  Ood  as  the  supreme  Btder, 
(Vers.  16 — 30.)  As  the  Governor  of  the  world,  he  cannot  be  unjust,  because,  govern- 
ment can  only  be  maintained  by  constant  and  equal  righteousness,  and  must  be 
destroyed  by  the  lack  of  it.  God  is  at  once  the  Just  and  the  Mighty,  because  he  could 
not  exercise  the  one  quality  without  the  other.  Experience,  the  great  teacher,  shows 
this  by  the  constant  course  of  events. 

III.  Conclusion.  The  folly  and  coNTRADicroaT  natube  of  Job's  accusations 
AGAINST  God.  (Vers.  31 — 37.)  A  reluctant  confession  is  introduced,  as  if  uttered  by 
Job:  "I  am  chastised,  without  doing  evil;  what  I  see  not,  that  do  thou  show  me! 
If  I  do  wrong,  I  will  do  so  no  more  1 "  (vers.  31,  32.)  He  seems  to  say  that  he  will 
repent  provided  only  wrong  be  pointed  out  (comp.  ch.  vii.  20 ;  xix.  4).  But,  asks  Elihu, 
shall  God  pass  unpunished  thy  discontented  complaint  against  his  mode  of  retribution, 
and  adopt  a  mode  that  is  agretable  to  thy  mind?  Are  the  laws  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment to  be  dictated  by  individual  wishes  or  notions  of  what  is  right  ?  Is  man  to  choose, 
and  not  God,  the  way  in  which  he  is  to  be  rewarded  or  punished  ?  And  say,  then,  what 
is  the  true  retribution  ?  Speak  I  But  this  direct  appeal  must  convince  the  murmurer  of 
his  inability  to  suggest  a  better  method  of  administering  the  world.  God's  ways  may  not 
be  clear  to  us  in  many  particulars ;  but  we  should  recollect,  as  Bishop  Butler  teaches, 
that  we  see  only  "parts  of  a  scheme  imperfectly  understood."  Were  all  known,  doubt 
and  distress  would  cease.  In  conclusion,  the  speaker  sums  up  his  meaning  in  the  words 
of  the  men  of  understanding  to  whose  judgment  he  appeals,  condemning  the  want  of 
true  insight  in  the  words  of  Job,  and  expressing  the  hope  that  he  may  be  furthe'r  tried, 
because  of  his  replies  "  in  the  manner  of  the  reprobate,"  because  he  adds  insult  to  sin, 
adopts  the  tone  of  the  scoffer,  and  multiplies  words  against  God.  Whether  this  view 
of  Job's  state  of  mind  be  right  or  wrong,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  tempta- 
tion." Blessed  he  who  can  exclaim,  amidst  sufferings  which  he  cannot  but  feel  to  be 
dissociated  from  g\iilt,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  try  me ;  prove  me,  and  know  my 
thoughts ;  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  ever- 
lasting."— J. 

Ver.  10. The  righteousness  of  the  Divine  dealings.    Elihu's  words  continue.     Sis 

accusation  against  Job  is  that  he  saith,  "  I  am  righteous."  He  "  addeth  rebellion  \mto 
his  sin  "  (ver.  37).  And  in  his  own  self-justification  he  casts  a  shadow  upon  the  Bivine 
procedure.  "  He  multiplieth  his  words  against  God  "  (ver,  37).  Such  is  Elihu's  con- 
tention. He  says  Job  declares, "  God  hath  taken  away  my  judgment."  To  defend  the 
Divine  work  and  so  bring  Job  to  acknowledge  his  sin  is  the  purpose  of  Elihu.  He 
here  declares  the  righteousness  of  the  Divine  de£dings.  "  Far  be  it  from  God  to  do 
wickedness."     The  righteousness  of  God's  ways  is  seen— 

I  In  his  absolute  impabtiality  towards  man.  "  He  accepteth  not  the  person 
of  princes,  nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor."  Truly  there  is  no  respect  of 
persons  with  God.    "  The  work  of  a  man  shall  he  render  to  him     (ver.  11),  be  it 

^°II  °In  the  pekpeot  bightbousnbss  of  the  Divine  Name  is  to  be  found  the 
utmost  pledee  of  justness.  "  Surely  God  will  not  do  wickedly,  neither  wiU  the 
Almighty  pervert  judgment"  (ver.  12).  "For  he  will  not  lay  upon  man  more  than 
right "  (ver.  23).    This  is  further  illustrated — 


56C  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 87. 


III.  In   the  8BLF-IMP0SED   GOVBRNMBNT   OF   THE    WORLD.        "  Who   hath   glTeD   him 

a  charge  over  the  earth  ?  "  If  he  please  he  can  "  gather  unto  himself  his  spirit  and  his 
breath."  Then  would  "  all  flesh  perish  together,  and  man  would  turn  again  to  dust." 
He  has  no  temptation  to  depart  from  right  in  his  dealings  with  men,  since  all  are 
entirely  in  his  hand.  But  a  fiirther  and  striking  evidence  of  the  righteousness  of  the 
Divine  ways  is  seen — 

IV.  In  the  judgment  upon  the  ungodly.  The  evil  ones  "  he  striketh  as  wicked 
men  in  the  open  sight  of  others  '  (ver.  26).  Blihu  finds  a  further  confirmation  of 
this — 

V.  In  the  bfpeotual  purposes  op  the  Divine  benignity.  "When  he  giveth 
quietness,  who' then  can  make  trouble?"  etc.  (ver.  29).  All  this  is  done  "that  the 
hypocrite  reign  not."  From  all  this  he  would  lead  Job  to  confession.  "  If  I  have  done 
iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more."  So  must  the  purpose  of  the  righteous  ways  of  God  be 
to  lead :  1.  To  consciousness  of  evil.  2.  To  confession  of  known  wrong.  3.  To  amend- 
ment of  life.  4.  To  patience  under  Divine  afflictions.  This  Elihu  teaches,  though  he 
knows  not  yet  the  purpose  of  Job's  suffering. — R.  Or. 

Ver.  3. — I%e  test  of  truth.  I.  It  is  left  fob  man  to  test  truth.  There  is  no 
unmistakable  oracle.  In  the  multitude  of  voices  we  have  to  discover  which  is  the  cry 
of  truth,  which  that  of  error.  We  know  the  voice  of  God,  not  because  we  are  assured 
beforehand  that  it  is  he  and  he  only  who  will  speak  to  us,  but  because  we  detect  the 
heavenly  utterance  in  contrast  with  the  many  syren-songa  tliat  would  fain  allure  us  to 
destruction,  detect  it  by  its  own  tones,  and  not  merely  because  of  any  authority  that 
assures  it  to  us.  The  Church  may  claim  to  guide  us  in  this  important  quest ;  but  the 
Church  consists  of  human  members,  who  have  to  use  those  faculties  which  God  has 
given  them,  although  no  doubt  the  Church  is  aided  with  the  presence  of-  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  her  midst.  So  when  individual  men  seek  for  truth,  God's  Spirit  is  for  them 
a  Light  and  Guide.  Still,  the  search  must  be  made ;  words  must  be  tried  and  sifted. 
1.  Jliis  is  a  warning  against  credulity.  Many  voices  claim  our  attention.  Let  us  be 
careful  that  we  are  not  deceived.  2.  This  is  a  stimulus  to  thought.  We  are  not  to 
be  like  the  dull  earth  that  gives  growth  to  whatever  seeds  fall  into  it — ugly  weeds 
as  much  as  beautiful  flowers,  poisonous  plants  as  well  as  fruitful  crops.  We  have  an 
independent  capacity  to  sift  and  winnow,  choose  and  reject.  Therefore  let  us  use  our 
mindSi  3.  This  is  for  the  cultivation  of  vu/r  souls.  The  very  effort  of  testing  truth 
contributes  to  mental  and  spiritual  growth.  When  we  hold  it  after  testing  it,  the  truth 
is  more  real  to  us  than  if  we  had  received  it  without  an  effort.  4.  This  should  drive 
us  to  prayer.  How  shall  we  distinguish  between  the  many  specious  voices?  Our 
unaided  faculties  are  likely  to  err.  Therefore  let  us  seek  light  from  above,  not  to 
Bupeisede  our  own  powers,  but  to  strengthen  and  illuminate  them. 

II.  The  test  of  truth  is  like  the  taste  of  food.  1.  It  is  natural.  God 
has  given  us  a  natural  sense  of  taste  by  which  to  discriminate  between  what  is  whole- 
some and  what  is  noxious  in  our  food,  and  he  has  implanted  in  us  a  similar  faculty  of 
mental  and  spiritual  discernment.  2.  It  should  be  trained.  In  some  respects  the 
natural  appetite  is  not  a  safe  guide.  The  child  may  delight  in  sweet  but  unwholesome 
delicacies.  Some  poisons  are  not  distasteful.  Therefore  the  mere  perception  of  agree- 
ableness  is  not  sufficient.  Some  very  pleasant  because  flattering  ideas  are  very  false 
and  hurtful.  What  is  "  just  to  our  taste  "  may  be  neither  true  nor  good  for  us.  To 
select  favourite  ideas  is  not  to  obtain  certain  truths.  We  have  to  train  the  truth- 
testing  faculty  to  recognize  sterling  worth  in  what  is  not  attractive,  and  to  reject 
meretricious  charms.  3.  It  may  he  corrupted.  The  appetite  may  be  vitiated.  An 
unhealthy  liking  for  unwholesome  food  may  be  engendered  by  practice ;  good,  whole- 
some food  may  seem  disgusting  to  one  who  is  in  a  bad  state  of  health.  Corrupt  thoughts 
and  feelings  lead  to  a  degeneration  of  the  truth-testing  faculty.  Even  the  natural  sense 
for  truth  is  blunted.  The  needle  ceases  to  point  to  the  north.  The  chemical  reatrent 
is  impure,  and  so  it  fails  to  act  as  a  test.  The  false  and  impure  soul  chooses  lies  "and 
rejects  truth.  4,  It  needs  correction.  After  all,  the  test  of  truth  is  not  like  a  bodily 
sense.  It  is  not  immediate.  It  involves  reflection.  But,  in  order  that  the  reflection 
may  be  true  and  sound,  the  whole  spiritual  nature  needs  to  be  pure  and  simple  and 
healthy.     It  is  dangerous  to  rely  too  much  on  our  private  faculty  of  testing  truth. 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  561 

Out  only  safety  is  in  keeping  close  to  Christ,  who  is  the  Truth,  and  to  Christ's  Church, 
which  he  bade  us  "  hear  "  (Matt,  xviii.  17). — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  10. — IR«  certain  justice  of  God.  Job  appeared  to  have  arraigned  the  Divine 
justice.  Elihu  emphatically  asserts  its  absolute  perfection.  Whatever  else  we  may 
fail  to  Me,  one  landmark  must  not  be  lost  sight  of.  God  is  perfectly  free  from  all  evil. 
We  may  not  understand  his  ways  of  action,  but  moat  assuredly  he  is  acting  justly. 

I.  The  GBOtruDS  or  faith  in  the  certain  justice  of  God.  Why  can  we  thus 
dogmatically  assert  that  God  is  perfectly  just  ?    Notice  three  grounds  of  assurance. 

1.  The  essential  character  of  Ood.  We  understand  the  very  idea  of  God  to  involve 
justice.  He  would  not  be  God  if  he  ceased  to  be  just.  Now,  his  absolute  justice  is  like 
his  infinite  power.  There  is  no  reason  for  limiting  it.  If  either  attribute  exists  at  all, 
it  is  most  natural  to  suppose  that  it  exists  in  perfection.  There  is  nothing  to  limit 
God.  God  is  too  great  to  be  tempted  to  be  unjust.  2.  The  revealed  character  of  Qod. 
All  through  the  Bible  the  justice  of  Grod  is  asserted  and  reasserted.  Those  men  who 
knew  God  best  affirmed  most  clearly  that  he  was  just.  3.  The  tried  character  of  Ood. 
We  know  God  in  life.  We  may  not  be  always  able  to  assure  ourselves  of  the  justice 
of  what  God  does  while  he  is  doing  it.  Then  it  may  look  dark  and  dreadful.  But 
how  often  have  we  found,  ou  looking  back  on  the  moat  gloomy  tracts  of  life,  that  the 
clouds  have  passed,  and  the  justice  of  God  has  been  made  clear  as  the  noonday  I 

II.  The  trial  of  faith  in  the  cebtain  justice  of  God.  To  each  individual 
man  the  fact  of  God's  justice  must  be  a  matter  to  be  taken  on  faith.  That  is  to  say, 
though  there  is  good  evidence  for  it,  we  cannot  see  how  it  obtains  in  our  own  personal 
circumstances.  This  is  to  be  expected,  however,  and  may  be  accounted  for  by  various 
causes.  1.  Pa/rtiai  views.  We  cannot  see  the  whole  pattern  at  which  God  is  working, 
and  therefore  the  crossing  threads  often  seem  to  us  confusing  and  wrongly  placed. 

2.  Perverted  ideas.  We  judge  of  God  by  our  own  standard.  But  that  standard  may 
have  been  warped.  Then  what  is  straight  in  God  looks  crooked  to  us,  simply  because 
our  rule  is  crooked.  3.  Trial  of  faith.  There  is  a  reason  in  God's  providential 
government  why  he  should  permit  us  to  be  in  the  dark  as  to  the  meaning  and  purpose 
of  some  of  his  actions.  He  wishes  to  lead  us  to  trust  him.  If  we  could  see  all,  faith 
would  hav«  no  scope,  no  exercise,  and  therefore  no  development.  It  would  perish  for 
want  of  use. 

III.  The  exeeoise  of  faith  in  the  cektain  justice  of  God.  1.  In  our  own 
lives.  Here  we  are  called  upon  to  walk  by  faith.  When  the  way  is  hard  and  painful,  let 
us  call  to  mind  the  truth  that  God  is  doing  well  with  us,  though  we  cannot  see  how. 
2.  In  history.  Nations  are  led  by  the  King  of  kings.  Through  strange  revolutions  he 
is  brin<'ing  about  his  righteous  will.  If  we  could  believe  this,  we  should  view  the  dark 
and  threatening  aspect  of  the  world  without  dismay.  3.  In  natwre.  Here,  too,  God 
is  acting  for  the  good  of  the  whole,  and  in  justice  to  each.  The  fierce  strife  of  nature 
looks  cruel.  But  peace  1  God  is  just.  4.  In  redemption.  Here  God  shows  himself 
both  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour,  upholding  righteousness  while  he  has  pity  on  sinners. — 
W.  P.  A. 

Yer.  29. UtepeaceofOod.    I.  Peace  is  a'  blessing  of  the  highest  value.   There 

is  a  quietness  of  death ;  the  defeated  are  stilled ;  lethargy  and  inertness  are  quiet.  And 
there  is  no  blessedness  in  these  things.  True  peace  is  alive, -watchful,  full  of  power 
and  faculty,  yet  calm.  The  peace  which  our  souls  crave  is  inward  restfulness.  This 
may  be  found  with  much  external  activity,  with  much  life  and  thought  within  also, 
but  without  confusion  or  tumult.  The  activity  is  harmonious.  It  is  possible  for  peace 
to  coexist  with  many  sorrows.  Peace  is  deeper  than  pain.  When  it  dwells  within 
it  gives  a  strength  as  well  as  a  sense  of  satisfaction,  so  that  suffering  which  otherwise 
would  seem  intolerable  becomes  quite  bearable,  though  it  can  never  cease  to  be 
distressful.  The  deepest  desire  is  not  for  joy ;  it  is  for  satisfaction  of  some  hunger  of 
the  BOuL  There  is  an  unrest  that  torments.  Even  appetite  craves  peace— not  so 
much  the  enjoyment  that  accompanies  its  satisfaction,  as  that  satisfaction  itself, ».«.  the 

II   Man  FAILS  TO  find  peace.     Two  opposite   methods  have  been  tried.    1. 
The    satisfaction,  of  desire.      This  is  the  way  of  the  voluptuary;    but  it  brings 
J0«.  2  0 


662  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxxv.  1—37. 


wearineBS  and  disgust,  not  peace.  Many  desires  cannot  bo  satisfied,  and  the  vain  effort 
to  give  them  their  enils  is  a  cause  of  inward  tumult.  Even  when  one  desire  is  satisfied, 
another  springs  up  clamorous  in  its  place.  The  capaicity  for  desire  is  immeasurable, 
but  the  facilities  for  satisfaction  are  very  limited.  Hence  an  inevitable  disappointment. 
2.  The  suppression  of  desire.  This  is  the  ascetic  method.  It  is  less  disappointing  in 
some  respects,  but  it  is  only  possible  for  strong  natures.  Indeed,  in  its  completeness 
it  is  not  possible  for  any.  Desires  will  arise  unsought.  But  if  all  desires  could  be 
crushed,  the  result  would  be  torpor,  death.  For  we  live  by  hope.  Therefore  the 
peace  of  mere  suppression  is  but  the  peace  of  death,  and  no  true  peace. 

III.  God  gives  pbaob.  The  quietness  of  a  strong  and  happy  life  is  from  him  and 
flu  111  him  alone.  Yet  it  is  not  given  as  a  direct  boon  irrespective  of  our  condition. 
God  gives  peace  through  confidence.  Christ  said,  "Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled ; 
believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me."  Therefore  we  must  trust  in  order  to  be  at  rest. 
Nevertheless,  the  peace  is  a  Divine  gift ;  it  is  more  than  the  natural  consequence  of 
trusting.  Something  must  be  done  to  quell  turbulent  passions  and  to  harmonize 
conflicting  desires,  and  this  is  done  by  the  influence  of  God's  Spirit  in  the  heart  of 
man. 

IV.  The  peace  of  God  is  bboubb.  "Who  then  can  make  trouble?"  This  is  a 
siilid  peace.  1.  testing  on  a  good  foundation.  Earthly  peace  is  like  an  unstable 
equilibi-ium.  It  looks  fair  and  inviting,  yet  it  is  overturned  by  the  first  touch  of 
opposition.  But  the  peace  of  God  is  stable ;  we  can  learn  to  put  it  to  the  test.  It  is 
not  a  mere  mood  of  the  soul ;  it  is  of  a  strong  and  vital  character.  2.  Protected  from 
serious  assaults.  When  quietness  of  soul  is  given  by  God,  it  is  also  guarded  by  him. 
He  shelters  his  haven  of  refuge.  By  providential  watchfulness  he  keeps  off  what  will 
destroy  peace ;  by  inward  grace  he  fortifies  the  soul  against  disturbing  influences.  All 
this  is  experienced  so  long  as  the  soul  is  trusting  God,  and  therefore  living  in  com- 
munion with  him.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on 
thee."— W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  31,  32. — Lessons  of  affliction.  AtHiction  is  a  school,  and  its  scholars  are  put  to 
learn  valuable  lessons.    Let  us  consider  some  of  them. 

I.  Peatbe.  The  whole  passage  is  concerned  with  prayer,  with  what  it  is  meet  to 
say  unto  God.  Affliction  does  not  teach  all  men  to  pray ;  some  only  learn  despair  and 
hardness  of  heart.  But  the  design  of  affliction  is  to  lead  us  to  God.  It  makes  us  feel 
our  helplessness;  it  reveals  to  us  the  action  of  an  unseen  hand;  and  so  reminds  us  of 
the  presence  of  God ;  it  shows  us  that  earthly  things  will  not  satisfy ;  it  gives  us  an 
opportunity  to  use  and  enjoy  the  Divine  blessing  of  that  peace  which  the  world  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away. 

II.  Patience.  "I  have  borne  chastisement."  Here  is  a  reflection  gathered  from 
the  contemplation  of  experience.  It  is  a  thought  that  comes  from  a  soul  enriched  by 
what  it  has  passed  through.  We  have  to  let  "patience  have  her  perfect  work."  A 
visitor  to  the  Boyal  Hospital  for  Incurables  is  struck  with  the  spirit  of  peace  that 
pervades  it.  What  is  outwardly  a  palace  of  pain  is  found  to  be  in  fact  a  home  of  peace. 
The  sufferers  have  been  drilled  by  suffering  into  patience ;  into  more  than  patience, 
indeed,  for  a  cheerfulness  is  seen  among  the  hopeless  sufferers.  Long  endurance  has 
brought  forth  wonderful  fruits  which  we  scarcely  see  among  the  happy  and  heedless. 

III.  Humility.  The  prayer  reveals  in  every  clause  a  spirit  of  humility.  Pride  is 
broken  down  completely.  Prosperity  was  self-contained  and  self-satisfied.  Its  favours 
were  too  much  accepted  as  rights  and  even  as  rewards.  But  affliction  has  dispelled  the 
illusion.  It  may  be  that  the  trouble  is  not  the  punishment  of  sin ;  but  still  it  proves 
the  weakness  and  littleness  of  man,  and  it  makes  him  see  that  he  has  no  claim  on  the 
good  things  that  he  had  been  enjoying. 

IV.  CoNTEiTioN.  All  men  who  suffer  greatly  are  not  great  sinners ;  often  the  best 
men  suffer  most.  This  is  made  clear  to  us  by  the  Book  of  Job,  and  Elihu  is  not  so 
blind  to  it  as  the  three  friends.  Still,  every  man  sins,  and  therefore  every  man  needs 
to  learn  contrition.  Now,  the  school  of  affliction  is  designed  to  lead  us  into  this 
wholesome  condition.  Without  comparing  one  person  with  another,  without  venturing 
to  charge  our  neighbours  with  sin  because  they  suffer,  without  supposing  that  there  is 
any  proportion  between  the  guilt  of  sin  and  the  amount  of  suffering,  we  may  yet,  each 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB  668 


for  himself,  search  our  own  hearts  and  make  confession  of  our  own  sins  in  the  still  hour 
of  sorrow. 

V.  Ambndmbnt,  The  sufferer  is  to  seek  for  guidance  for  the  future.  Where  he  is 
wrong  and  does  not  see  it,  he  prays  that  God  may  reveal  his  error  to  him.  Then  he 
will  ahandon  the  mistakes  and  sins  of  the  past.  He  resolves  not  to  do  iniquity  any 
more.  It  is  not  every  sufferer  who  so  acts.  Purgatory  does  not  always  purge.  But 
the  good  man  will  try  to  turn  his  affliction  to  advantage,  not  only  by  heart-searchings 
into  the  past,  but  also  by  earnest  resolves  to  live  better  for  the  future. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  33. — The  limits  of  private  Judgment.  Elihu  has  been  appealing  to  private 
judgment,  saying,  "  The  ear  trieth  words,  as  the  mouth  tasteth  meat "  (ver.  3).  Now 
he  seems  to  turn  round  on  this  principle  and  repudiate  it.  Yet  he  is  not  iucongistent, 
for  there  must  be  limits  to  private  judgment.  We  cannot  sit  in  judgment  on 
Providence.  Let  us,  then,  consider  in  what  respect  the  decision  as  to  truth  is  to  be 
removed  from  the  court  of  our  own  reason  and  judgment.  What  are  the  limits  to 
private  judgment?  We  may  consider  these  from  two  points  of  view — from  that  of 
our  own  imperfection,  and  from  that  of  God's  greatness. 

I.  The  limits  that  bbsult  fbou  oub  own  imperfection.  1.  Ignoranee, 
The  best  judge  cannot  decide  aright  till  all  the  facts  are  laid  before  him.  We  know 
but  a  few  of  the  circumstances  that  determine  the  action  of  Providence ;  and  we  do  not 
know  the  laws  and  principles  that  have  to  be  applied.  2.  Prejudice.  We  are  not 
iinj>artial  judges;  our  justice  is  not  blindfold;  our  scales  are  not  even.  Pride,  self- 
interest,  and  passion  blind  our  eyes  and  warp  our  judgment.  3.  Sin.  This  is  worse 
than  prejudice;  it  is  a  directly  deceiving  influence.  It  leads  us  to  ignore  moral 
distinctions,  and  even  to  call  evil  good.  We  are  unjust  judges  concerning  truth  when 
we  are  the  enemies  of  the  highest  truth  and  justice.  4.  Natural  weakness.  Apart 
from  all  these  defective  conditions,  there  are  natural  conditions  that  limit  our  powers 
of  judgment.  With  all  possible  enlightenment  and  moral  rectiScation  we  should  still 
remain  human,  i.e.  we  should  still  be  creatures  of  very  small  capacity  in  regard  to  the 
great  problems  of  the  universe.  These  problems  are  too  high  for  us;  we  cannot  attain 
unto  them.     They  baffle  thought. 

II.  The  limits  that  eesult  feom  the  greatness  of  God.  Our  imperfection 
limits  us  in  judging  all  questions ;  but  more  especially  does  it  limit  us  in  estimating 
the  action  of  God.  The  special  idea  of  Elihu  is  that  we  cannot  judge  of  God's 
providential  dealings  with  us.  The  three  friends  were  wrong  in  their  defence  of  it — as 
Job  said,  "speaking  wickedly  for  God;"  and  Job  was  wrong  in  thinking  hardly  of  it. 
For  neither  party  was  in  a  position  to  decide  about  it.  We  cannot  choose  our  own  course 
in  the  world  wisely,  much  less  can  we  decide  how  God  shall  act.  The  greatness  of 
God  and  of  his  works  far  exceeds  the  range  of  our  view.  1.  Supreme  wisdom.  Ideas 
qaite  above  our  comprehension  rule  in  the  purposes  of  God.  2.  Large  designs.  God  is 
not  confined  to  the  consideration  of  a  single  individual  or  a  little  circle ;  he  administers 
a  universe.  Therefore  his  schemes  and  purposes  must  far  exceed  our  view  in  the 
extent  of  their  range  as  well  as  in  the  character  of  their  aim.  3.  Perfect  goodness. 
God  must  decide  aright,  for  in  him  is  no  evil.  His  holiness  and  love  should  make  us 
f^el  that  we  dare  not  sit  in  judgment  on  his  actions.  If  they  are  dark  to  us,  they  are 
so  from  excess  of  light. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  36. — 2%e  completion  of  trial.  Elihu  wishes  Job  to  be  "  tried  unto  the  end." 
His  desire  strikes  us  as  cruel.  Yet,  perhaps  unknown  to  himself,  great  good  may  come 
out  of  the  fulfilment  of  :t. 

I.  There  is  an  end  of  tbial.  As  we  look  down  the  long  vista  of  troubles  we  can 
see  no  terminus ;  it  seems  to  run  on  for  ever  into  the  darkness.  But  whatever  may  be 
the  appearance,  the  reality  is  not  everlasting.  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but 
joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  Never  was  night  more  long.  Its  slow  hours  drag  on 
wearily  •  yet  they  must  pass,  and  day  must  come  in  God's  good  time.  The  long  life  of 
trouble  will  end  at  last  in  the  peace  of  the  grave.  But  many  earthly  troubles  pass  like 
stormy  noons,  and  there  is  "  light  at  eventide." 

II.  A    GOOD    USB    OF    TBIAL    MAT    HASTEN    THE    END    OP    IT.      So    long    aS    we    fret 

against  it  God  may  find  it  necessary  to  keep  it  with  us.    If  we  are  slow  in  learning  our 


664 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXV.  1—16 


lesson  we  must  be  kept  long  at  schooL    But  when  the  lesson  is  learnt  the  school  may 
be  broken  up. 

III.  The  completion  of  tbial  is  been  is  its  fbdits.  The  fire  has  not  done  its 
woi'k  if  the  dross  has  not  been  separated  from  the  metal.  Only  when  the  crucible 
ehows  the  required  chemical  change  is  the  test  complete.  Tiierefore  we  should  be 
watching  for  results.  Great  troubles  are  wasted  oa  men  who  will  not  submit  to  them, 
so  that  they  may  bear  their  designed  fruits  in  patience,  humility,  contrition,  amend- 
ment, etc, 

IV.  We  cannot  judge  of  tbial  till  wb  have  seen  the  end  of  it.  We 
have  to  read  to  the  end  of  the  story  of  Job  before  we  can  discover  for  what  he  is  beiug 
led  through  the  deep  waters.  The  rounded  life  shows  the  place  and  purpose  of  its 
several  episodes,  but  those  episodes  by  themselves  look  fragmentary  and  meaningless. 
Therefore  we  have  to  "  wait  for  the  end."  When  this  arrives  many  a  riddle  will  be 
solved,  many  a  hard  experience  will  be  explained,  mauy  a  black  cloud  will  ba  glorified 
into  golden  splendour. 

V.  God  mat  dispense  with  the  natubal  completion  of  tbial.  Trouble  is 
not  like  a  tunnel,  from  which  there  is  no  exit  except  at  its  ends.  It  is  a  burden  which 
may  be  lifted  whenever  God  sees  fit.  The  object  of  trial  may  be  obtained  by  other 
means,  and  it  is  possible  that  gentler  methods  may  bring  about  the  same  results. 
Thus  God  leads  to  repentance  by  his  goodness  as  well  as  by  purgatorial  afBictiong. 
Therefore  we  should  not  live  as  though  some  iron  fate  held  us  to  a  certain  amount  of 
trial.  God  is  a  living  Spirit  and  a  loving  Father ;  and  he  will  not  permit  his  children  to 
suffer,  when  peaceable  methods  of  discipline  will  do  the  desired  work  for  tliem.  Our 
part  is  to  take  patiently  wliat  God  sends,  and  to  use  it  profitably,  trusting  God  to  cut 
short  the  trouble  or  lengthen  it  as  he  sees  best. — W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER   XXXV. 


Vers.  1 — 16. — In  this  short  chapter,  onoe 
more  Elihn  addresses  himself  to  Job,  first 
(vers.  1 — 8)  answering  his  complaint  that 
a  life  of  righteousness  has  brought  him  no 
correspondent  blessings;  and  then  (vers. 
9—14)  explaining  to  him  that  his  prayers 
and  appeals  to  God  have  probably  not  been 
answered  because  they  were  not  preferred 
in  a  right  spirit,  i.e.  with  faith  and  humility. 
Finally  (vers.  15, 16),  he  condemns  Job  for 
haughtiness  and  arrogance,  and  reiterates 
the  charge  that  he  "  multiplies  words  with- 
out knowledge  "  (comp.  ch.  xxxiv.  35^37). 

Vers.  1,  2. — £lihu  spake  moreover,  and 
said,  Thinkest  thou  this  to  be  right,  that 
thou  saidst,  Uy  righteousness  is  more  than 
God's  1  Once  more  it  is  to  be  observed  that 
Job  had  said  no  such  thing.  At  the  worst, 
he  had  made  statements  from  which  it 
might  be  argued  that  he  regarded  himself 
as  having  a  more  delicate  sense  of  justice 
than  God  (e.g.  ch.  ix.  22—24 ;  x.  3 ;  xii.  6, 
etc.).  But  Elihu  insists  on  pushing  Job's 
intemperate  phrases  to  their  extremest 
logical  issues,  and  taxing  Job  with  having 
mid  all  that  his  words  might  seem  to  a 
strict  logician  to  involve  (compare  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  xxxiv.  5, 9). 


Ver.  3.— -For  thon  saidst,  What  advan- 
tage will  it  be  unto  thee  ?  •".«.  What  advan- 
tage will  thy  righteousness  be  unto  thee  ? 
Job  had  certainly  argued  that  his  righteous- 
ness brought  him  no  temporal  advantage; 
but  he  had  always  a  conviction  that  he 
would  ultimately  be  the  better  for  it. 
Elihu,  however,  does  not  acknowledge  this ; 
and,  assuming  that  Job  expects  to  receive 
no  advantage  at  all  from  his  integrity, 
argues  that  God  is  not  bound  to  afford  him 
any.  And,  What  profit  shall  I  have,  if  I  be 
cleansed  from  my  sini  rather,  And  what 
profit  ehall  I  have,  more  than  if  1  had 
tinned  ?  (see  the  Revised  Version,  and  com- 

Sare   the    cojiimonts  of   Bosenmiiller    and 
anon  Cook). 

Ver.  4.— I  will  answer  thee,  and  thy  com- 
panions with  thee;  i.e.  "thy  oomfortejs, 
Eliphaz,  Biklad,  and  Zophar."  Elihu  has 
pledged  himself  to  confute  their  reasonings, 

no  less  than  those  of  Job  (eh.  xxxii.  5 20), 

and  now  proposes  to  carry  out  this  intention. 
But  it  is  not  very  clear  that  he  aooomplishi-s 
his  purpose.  In  point  of  fact,  he  does  little 
more  than  repeat  and  expand  the  argu- 
ment of  Eliphaz  (ch.  xxii.  2,  3). 

Ver.  5. — Look  unto  the  heavens,  and  see ; 
and  behold  the  clouds  which  are  higher  than 
thou;  i.e.  "look  to  the  material  sky  and 
heavens,  so  far  above  thee  and  so  Onap- 
proaoliable,  and  judge  from  them  how  far 
the  God  who  made  them  is  above  thy  puny 


OH.  XXXT.  1 — 16.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


66fi 


feeble  self — how  incapable  he  iB  of  being 
touched  by  any  of  thy  doings." 

Ver.  6. — If  thou  sinnest,  what  doest  thon 
against  him  I  Man's  sins  against  God  can- 
not injure  him,  diminish  from  his  power,  or 
lower  his  dignity.  They  can  only  injure 
the  sinner  himself.  God  does  not  punish 
them  because  they  harm  him,  but  because 
they  are  discords  in  the  harmony  of  his 
moral  universe.  Or  even  if  thy  transgres- 
sions he  mnltiplied ;  i.e.  if  thou  persistest  in 
a  long  course  of  sin,  and  addcst "  rebellion  " 
to  transgression,  and  self-complacency  to 
rebellion,  and  "multipliest  thy  words  against 
God  "  (ch.  sxxiv.  37)— even  then,  what  doest 
thou  unto  him  %  i.e.  what  hurt  dost  thon 
inflict  upon  him?    None. 

Ver.  7. — If  thou  be  righteous,  what  givest 
thou  himf  By  parity  of  reasoning,  as  our 
sins  do  not  injure  God,  so  our  righteousness 
cannot  benefit  him.  As  David  says,  "  My 
goodness  extendeth  not  to  thee  "  (Ps.  xvi. 
2).  Or  what  reoeiveth  he  of  thine  hand  1 
All  things  being  already  God's,  we  can  but 
give  him  of  his  own.  We  cannot  really 
add  to  his  possessions,  or  to  his  glory,  or 
to  his  felicity.  We  cannot,  as  some  have 
supposed  thoy  could  ('Beligions  of  the 
Ancient  World,'  pp.  143,  144),  lay  him 
under  an  obligation. 

Ver.  8. — Thy  wickedness  may  hurt  a  man 
as  thou  art;  and  thy  righteousness  may 
profit  the  son  (rather,  a  son)  of  man.  Job 
must  not  think,  Elihu  means,  that,  because 
his  good  actions  benefit  and  his  bad  actions 
injure  his  fellow  men,  tlierefore  they  must 
also  in  the  one  case  injure  and  in  the  other 
bonefit  God.  The  oases  are  not  parallel. 
God  is  too  remote,  too  powerful,  too  great, 
to  be  touched  by  his  actions.  Job  has  done 
wrong,  therefore,  to  expect  that  God  would 
necessarily  reward  his  righteousness  by  a 
prospe~vous,  happy  life,  and  worse  to  com- 
plain because  his  expectations  have  been 
disappointed.  It  is  ot  liismere  spontaneous 
goodness  and  bonnty  that  God  rewards 
the  godly. 

Vers.  9 — 14. — Job  had  made  it  a  frequent 
subject  of  complaint  that  God  did  not  liear, 
or  at  any  rate  did  not  answer,  bis  prayers 
and  cries  for  relief.  Elihu  answers  that 
Job's  case  is  not  exceptional.  Those  who 
ory  out  against  oppression  and  suffering 
frequently  receive  no  answer,  but  it  is 
because  they  "  ask  amiss."  Job  should  have 
patience  and  tru§t. 

Ver.  9. — By  reason  of  the  multitude  of 
oppressions  they  make  the  oppressed  to  cry ; 
rather,  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  oppres- 
sions, men  cry  out.  It  is  not  Job  only  who 
mea  to  God.      Oppiessors  are  numerous; 


the  oppressed  are  numerous;  everywhere 
there  are  complaints  and  outcries.  They 
cry  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  of  the  mighty. 
The  oppressors  are,  for  the  most  part,  the 
mighty  of  the  earth — kings,  princes,  nobles 
(see  Isa.  i.  23;  iii.  14,  15;  Hos.  v.  10; 
Amos  iv.  1,  etc.). 

Ver,  10. — But  none  saith,  Where  is  God 
my  Maker  ?  The  oppressed,  in  many  cases, 
do  not  appeal  to  God  at  all.  Tliey  mutter 
and  complain  and  groan  because  of  their 
afflictions;  but  they  have  not  enough  faith 
in  God  to  ory  to  him.  Or,  if  they  do  so  cry, 
it  is  not  in  a  right  spirit ;  it  is  despond- 
ingly,  despairingly,  not  confidently  or  cheer- 
fully. God  is  one  who  giveth  songs  in  the 
night.  The  truly  pious  man  sings  hymns 
of  praise  in  his  affliction,  as  Paul  and  Silas 
did  in  the  jail  at  Philippi,  looking  to  God 
with  faith  and  a  lively  hope  for  deliver- 
ance. 

Ver.  11. — Who  teacheth  ua  more  than  the 
beasts  of  the  earth,  and  maketh  us  wiser 
than  the  fowls  of  heaven.  Elihu  probably 
alludes  to  Job's  defence  of  his  complaints 
as  natural,  like  the  instinctive  cries  of  beasts 
and  birds  (oh.  vi.  5).  God,  he  says,  has 
given  to  man  a  higher  nature  than  he  has 
bestowed  on  the  brutes;  and  this  nature 
should  teach  him  to  carry  his  griefs  to  God 
in  a  proper  spirit  -  a  spirit  of  faith,  piety, 
humility,  and  resignation.  If  men  cried  to 
him  in  this  spirit,  they  would  obtain  an 
answer.  If  they  do  not  obtain  an  answer,  it 
must  be  that  the  proper  spirit  is  lacking 
(comp.  Jas.  iv.  3). 

Ver.  12.— There  they  cry.  "There," 
smitten  by  calamity,  they  do  a^  last  cry  to 
God.  But  none  giveth  answer.  They  "  ask, 
and  receive  not."  Why?  Because  of  the 
pride  of  evil  men.  Because,  i.e.,  they  ask 
proudly,  not  humbly;  they  claim  relief  as 
a  right,  not  as  a  favour ;  they  approach  God 
in  a  spirit  that  offends  him  and  prevents 
him  from  granting  their  requests. 

Ver.  13.— Surely  God  will  not  hear  vanity. 
God  will  not  hear  prayers  that  are  rendered 
"  vain "  by  sin  or  defect  in  those  who  offer 
them,  as  by  a  want  of  faitli,  piety,  humility, 
or  resignation.  Neither  will  the  Almighty 
regard  any  such  petitions. 

Ver.  14. — Although  thou  Gayest  than  shalt 
not  see  him ;  rather,  Mow  much  less  when 
thou  sayrnt  thou  canst  not  see  Mm  I  (coBopare 
the  Bevieed  Version);  i.e.  how  much  less 
will  God  atteml  to  thy  prayprs  when  thpu 
sayeat  that  thon  canst  not  see  or  find  him 
(ch.  ix.  H  ;  xxiii.  3, 8—10),  that  he  is  alto- 
gether hid  from  thee,  and  treats  thee  as  an 
enemy  (ch.  xxxiii.  10)  1  Still,  judgment  (or, 
the  cause,  i.e.  "  thy  cause  ")  is  before  him, 
or  "awaits  his  decision."  Thereforo  trust 
thou  in  him.  Wait  on,  in  patience  and 
trust.    The  last  word  is  not  yet  spoken. 


666 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[OH.  xsxv.  1—18. 


Vers.  15, 16.— Leaving  hia  advice  to  sink 
into  Job's  mind,  Blihu  turns  from  him  to 
the  bystanders,  and  remarks,  with  some 
severity,  that  it  is  because  Job  has  not  been 
punished  enough,  because  God  has  not 
visited  him  for  his  petulance  and  arrogance, 
that  he  indulges  in  "  hi^h  swelling  words 
of  vanity,"  and  continues  to  utter  words 
which  are  foolish  and  "  without  knowledge." 

Yer.  15. — But  now,  because  it  is  not  so,  he 
hath  visited  in  his  anger.  This  is  an  im- 
possible rendering.  The  Hebrew  is  per- 
fectly plain,  and  is  to  be  translated  literally 
as  follows :  But  noia,  because  he  hath  not 
mtited  hie  (i.e.  Job's)  auger.    (So  Sohultens, 


Canon  Cteok,  and,  with  a  slight  difference, 
our  Revisers.)  God  had  not  visited  Job 
with  any  fresh  aflSictions  on  account  of  his 
vehement  expostulations  and  overbold  and 
reckless  words.  Yet  he  knoweth  it  not  in 
great  extremity.  The  Authorized  Version 
again  wholly  misses  the  meaning.  Trans- 
late, with  the  Revised  Version,  Neither  doth 
he  greatly  regard  (Job's)  arroganoe. 

Ver.  16. —Therefore  doth  Job  open  his 
mouth  in  vain ;  or,  in  vanity  (comp.  ver.  13). 
He  mnltipUeth  words  without  knowledge; 
i.e.  he  is  bold  to  speak  words  that  are  vain 
and  insensate,  because  God  has  not,  as  he 
might  have  done,  punished  him  for  bii 
previoiu  utteranoea. 


H0MILBTI08. 

Vers.  1 — ^16. — Wihu  to  Job:  the  trial  of  Job  continued.  I.  Job's  offbnob  restated. 
Returning  to  the  charge,  Elihu  accuses  Job  of  having  given  utterance  to  two  dangerous 
assertions.  1.  That  his  (Job's)  righteousness  was  greater  than  God's.  "  Thinkest  thou 
this  to  be  right?" — dost  thou  hold  this  for  a  sound  judgment? — "that  thou  saidst.  My 
righteousness  is  more  than  God's  ?  "  (ver.  2).  That  Job  never  used  this  expression  may 
be  true ;  "but  that  Elihu  does  not  unfairly  represent  the  patriarch's  meaning  may  be 
inferred  from  the  circumstahce  that  even  at  an  earlier  stage  in  the  controversy  Elipliaz 
distinctly  understood  this  to  be  the  import  of  his  language  (eh.  iv.  17).  Besides,  it  is  a 
legitimate  deduction  from  those  passages  in  which  Job,  maintaining  his  own  integrity, 
complains  that  God  does  not  accord  to  him  even-handed  justice,  but  treats  him,  though 
innocent,  as  a  criminal ;  so  that  practically  it  is  involved  in  the  milder  rendering,  "  I  am 
righteous  before  God  "  (LXX.,  Umbreit,  and  others),  Job  meaning  thereby  to  affirm  that 
he  failed  to  discern  in  God  a  corresponding  righteousness  to  that  which  he  beheld  in 
himself,  or,  in  other  words,  that  bis  righteousness  was  more  (visible  and  real)  than  Goii's. 
"Whether  designed  or  not,  the  inevitable  result  of  regarding  with  too  much  admiration 
one's  own  righteousness  (natural  or  gracious,  legal  or  evangelical)  is  to  obscure  one's 
perceptions  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  as,  on  the  other  band,  the  more  exalted  views 
a  saint  entertains  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  the  less  will  he  feel  disposed  to  magnify 
his  own.  2.  Uiat  his  (JoVs)  piety  was  of  no  advantage  to  himself.  "  For  thou  saidst, 
"What  advantage  will  it  be  unto  thee  ?  and,  "What  profit  shall  I  have,  if  I  be  cleansed 
from  my  sin  ?  "  literally,  "  (from  it)  more  than  from  my  sin  "  (ver.  3).  This,  which  Job 
himself  had  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  ungodly  (ch.  xxi.  15),  adding,  "  The  counsel  of 
the  wicked  be  far  from  me,"  had  already  been  assigned  to  Job  by  Blihu  (ch.  xxxiv.  9 ; 
vide  homiletics),  and  might  well  seem  to  be  implied  in  such  utterances  as  ch.  ix.  22 — 31, 
in  which  God  is  represented  as  involving  "  the  perfect  and  the  wicked  "  in  one  indis- 
criminate destruction,  and  in  a  time  of  sudden  and  overwhelming  calamity  "  laughing 
at  the  trial  of  the  innocent "  (ch.  xxi.  7 — 13 ;  xxiv.  18 — 24),  and  in  which  the  prosperous 
lives  and  happy  deaths  of  the  ungodly  are  set  over  against  the  evil  fortunes  commonly 
allotted  to  the  good.  Such  questions  as  these  of  Job  about  the  profit  of  religion,  thougli 
common  in  the  mouths  of  saints  (e.g.  Aeaph,  Ps.  Ixxiii.  13 ;  St.  Peter,  Matt.  xix.  27), 
proceed  from  mistaken  views  as  to  the  essential  character  of  piety,  which  is  nothing 
if  not  disinterested.  Yet,  in  the  truest  and  most  comprehensive  sense,  "  godliness  is 
profitable  unto  all  things  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  8 ;  of.  Matt.  xix.  28). 

II.  Job's  folly  exposed.  Beversing  the  order  of  Elihu's  words,  we  discover :  1.  A 
sound  premiss.  That  a  man  may  be  hurt  by  the  irreligion,  and  benefited  by  the  godliness, 
of  his  neighbour.  Nothing  more  demonstrable,  or  indeed  less  demanding  demonstration, 
than  thiit  moral  character  is  contagious,  and  evil  character  even  more  so  than  good. 
Every  wicked  man  does  an  injury,  directly  as  well  as  indirectly,  unconsciously  even 
when  not  consciously,  to  the  world  in  which  he  lives,  the  neighbourhood  in  which  hw 


ca.  xiXT.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  667 

dwellB,  the  society  in  which  he  moves,  the  individuals  with  whom  he  comes  in  contact. 
The  ungodly  man  may  be  compared  to  a  walking  pestilence.  On  the  other  hand, "  the 
fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  tree  of  life  "  (Prov.  xi.  30).  However  humble  the  position  he 
occupies  or  the  talents  he  possesses,  the  good  man,  whose  breast  is  the  seat  of  fervent 
piety,  is  a  distinct  gain  to  the  world  and  the  age  (Matt.  v.  13,  14).  2.  A/allacious 
deduction.  Correct  enough  in  thinking  that  a  man  might  make  his  fellow  a  debtor  by 
his  goodness,  or  incur  towards  his  fellow  obligations  in  consequence  of  damage  done  by 
his  wickedness,  Job  was  utterly  at  fault  in  inferring  that  the  same  relations  could  exist 
between  man  and  God.  "  If  thou  sinnest,  what  doest  thou  against  him  ?  or  if  thy 
transgressions  be  multiplied,  what  doest  thou  unto  him?  If  thou  be  righteous,  what 
givest  thou  him  ?  or  what  receiveth  he  of  thine  hand  ?  "  (vers.  6,  7).  That  is,  human 
piety  cannot  add  to  the  blessedness  of  God  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  God  the  debtor 
of  Ids  creature,  and  lay  him  under  obligation  to  make  the  good  man  happy;  neither 
can  man's  impiety  so  diminish  the  Divine  felicity  as  to  require  God  to  protect  himself 
against  the  machinations  of  the  wicked  by  always  entailing  on  them  misery  as  the 
reeompense  of  their  wickedness  (vide  homiletics  on  ch.  xxii.  2 — 4).  If  God  makes  & 
good  man  happy,  he  does  so  of  grace  and  favour;  if  he  allows  him  to  pass  his  life  in 
misery,  he  does  not  thereby  commit  an  act  of  injustice.  3.  A  complete  refutation. 
Elihu  disposes  of  Job's  bad  logic  by  reminding  him  first  of  the  lofty  elevation  of  the 
heavens  (ver.  5),  and  a  fortiori  of  the  infinite  exaltation  of  him  who  dwells  above 
the  heavens  beyond  the  highest  and  purest  creature  on  the  earth.  Since  God  thus 
transcends  even  the  best  of  men,  it  is  clearly  impossible  to  suppose  that  he  can  ba 
tried  by  purely  human  standards. 

III.  Job's  mistakes  indicated.  1.  Dwelling  too  exclinsively  upon  the  greatness  of 
hit  misery.  "By  reason  of  the  multitude  of  oppressions  they  make  the  oppressed 
to  cry ; "  or  they,  i.e.  the  oppressed,  raise  a  cry :  "  they  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  arm," 
i.e.  violence,  "  of  the  mighty  "  (ver.  9).  So  Job  had  complained  (ch.  xxiv.  12),  anim- 
adverting severely  on  the  seeming  indifference  of  God  to  what  he  could  not  but  be 
cognizant  of,  viz.  man's  inhumanity  to  man ;  and  to  this  Elihu  now  alludes  with  the 
view  cf  suggesting  to  the  mind  of  Job  the  direction  in  which  to  look  for  an  explanatinn 
of  this  remarkable  phenomenon — God's  silence  in  the  presence  of  human  sorrow,  'i'ha 
cry  which  rises  from  the  oppressed  is  in  no  sense  a  believing  appeal  to  the  Creator  ibr 
assistance.  It  is  simply  a  groan  of  anguish.  Instead  of  turning  with  hope  and  expec- 
tation to  their  Maker,  they  fix  their  thoughts  upon  their  misery  and  raise  a  shout.  It 
is  impossible  not  to  think  that,  in  holding  up  such  a  mirror  before  the  mind  of  Job, 
Elihu  designed  the  patriarch  to  catch  a  reflection  of  himself.  Had  not  he  too  been 
crying  out  under  the  severity  of  the  stroke  which  had  fallen  on  him,  rather  than 
anticipating  the  hour  of  deliverance  when  God  would  fill  his  mouth  with  rejoicing  ? 
The  mistake  of  magnifying  one's  troubles,  and  dwelling  too  exclusively  upon  them,  is 
one  which  even  Christians,  no  less  than  Job,  are  not  careful  to  avoid.  Besides  springing 
from  unbelief,  it  has  a  tendency  to  hinder  their  beneficent  design,  and  commonly 
obscures  the  soul's  discernment  of  the  source  as  well  as  of  the  first  approaches  of  relief. 
2.  Neglecting  to  repair  to  Oodfw  succour.  "None  saith,  Where  is  God  my  Maker, 
who  giveth  songs  in  the  night?"  Instead  of  giving  way  to  wailing,  the  victim  of 
oppression  (and  such  Job  deemed  himself  to  be)  ought  to  turn  in  believing  confidence 
and  with  hopeful  expectation,  not  to  his  fellows,  like  Asa  the  King  of  Israel  (2  Chron. 
xvL  12),  or  to  false  gods,  like  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Ahab  (2  Kings  i.  2),  or  to  any  form 
of  creature-help  whatsoever  (Ps.  cxlvi.  2),  but  like  David  to  the  living  God  (Ps.  cxxi. 
2),  remembering  (1)  who  God  is  in  himself— Eloah,  the  all-powerful  and  all-sufBcient 
One;  (2)  the  relation  in  which  he  stands  to  the  sufferer,  that  of  Maker;  and  (3)  the 
gracious  character  in  which  he  delights  to  present  liimself  to  his  creatures,  viz.  as  a 
God  "who  giveth  songs  in  the  night,"  i.e.  who,  by  granting  deliverance  to  afdioted 
sufferers  in  the  night  of  tribulation,  gives  them  occasion  to  celebrate  his  praise  in 
anthems  of  gratitude  and  joy.  Such  nights  of  sorrow  and  tribulation  occur  in  all  men's 
lives  (ch.  V.  7),  but  especially  in  the  lives  of  saints  (Acts  xiv.  22).  Yet  no  night  is 
too  dark  for  God  to  turn  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning  (Amos  v.  8).  God, 
who  caused  Israel  to  sing  upon  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea  (Exod.  xv.  1),  and  David 
after  escaping  from  the  hands  of  Saul  (2  Sam.  xxii.  1),  and  Paul  and  Silas  in  prison 
at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  25),  can  cause  the  most  despairing  sufferer  to  shout  "Hallelujah  1 " 


568  THK  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oH.  Xxxt.  1-^16 

Still  nothing  is  more  frequent  than  for  saints  to  forget  God,  and  turn  to  almost  every 
other  quarter  before  they  seek  unto  him  (Isa.  IL  13),  though  one  principal  end  of 
affliction  is  to  impel  men  to  seek  unto  him  who  alone  can  put  a  new  song  into  their 
mouths,  3.  Forgetting  the  superior  dignity  of  his  nature.  Simply  to  howl  over  one's 
miseries,  Elihu  intends  to  say,  is  to  reduce  one's  self  to  the  level  of  the  brute  creation, 
which  express  their  natural  sense  of  pain  by  means  of  such  bellowings  (oh.  vi,  5). 
But  man  belongs  to  an  order  of  creation  loftier  than  the  wild  ass  or  the  oi :  and, 
being  possesBed  of  nobler  faculties  and  larger  intelligence  than  these,  should  not  he 
content  with  such  modes  of  giving  utterance  to  emotion  as  are  shared  in  by  them, 
but  should  address  himself  to  God  in  the  filial  confidence  of  prayer.  And  to  this  the 
example  of  the  beasts,  viewed  in  another  light,  may  be  said  to  urge  hira.  Another 
rendering  supplies  the  thought  that  God  "  teacheth  us  by  the  beasts  of  the  earth  "-^by 
the  young  lions,  e,g.,  who  roar  after  their  prey,  and  seek  their  meat  from  Gtod  (Ps.  civ. 
21) ;  "  and  maketh  us  wise  by  the  fowls  of  heaven" — for  instance,  by  the  ravens  who 
cry  to  God  for  food  (Ps.  cxlvii.  9).  4.  Offering  prayers  that  spring  from  vanity  and 
pride.  "  There  they  cry,  but  none  giveth  answer,  because  of  the  pride  of  evil  men. 
Surely  God  will  not  hear  vanity,  neither  will  the  Almighty  regard  it"  (vers.  12,  13). 
Again  under  the  general  case  Blihu  deals  with  the  case  of  Job.  Job  had  repeatedly 
complained  that  his  prayer  had  not  been  answered  (ch.  xix.  7;  xxx.  20).  Elihu 
indirectly  meets  his  objection  by  explaining  why  the  prayers  of  suflferers  in  general 
remain  unheard.  They  are  not  prayers  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  expression,  being 
dictated  by  wounded  pride  rather  than  by  conscious  need,  and  consisting  of  emptiuess 
and  wind,  mere  "  sound  and  fury  signifying  nothing,"  rather  than  the  aspirations  and 
desires  of  a  believing  heart.  It  is  impossible  to  resist  the  impression  that  Job's  outcries 
and  entreaties  were  sometimes  inspired  by  lacerated  pride  and  insulted  vanity  rather 
tlian  by  lowly  humility  and  fervent  piety.  Hence  they  were  suflfered  to  ring  through 
the  vault  of  heaven  unheeded.  So  are  all  similar  prayers  by  whomsoever  presented 
(Ps.  Ixvi.  18  i  Isa.  i.  15 ;  Prov.  xxviii.  9 ;  John  ix.  31 ;  Jas.  iv,  3).  A  prayer,  to  be 
acceptable,  must  be  sincere,  lowly,  reverent,  and  devout,  5.  Supposing  God  did  not 
midersiand  his  ease.  This  an  extremely  natural  inference  from  the  oft-reiterated 
demand  that  God  would  permit  Job  to  lay  his  cause  before  him.  But  Elihu  assures 
him  that  this  was  quite  unnecessary ;  that,  although  he  did  not,  and  apparently  could 
sot,  see  God,  i.e.  come  to  God's  presence  (ch.  xxiii.  3 — 9),  the  whole  case  he  wished 
to  submit  to  God  was  already  before  him,  and  all  he  (Job)  needed  to  do  was  simply 
10  wait  for  God's  gracious  intervention  (ver.  14) — words  suggestive  of  (1)  a  great 
temptation  to  which  sufi'ering  saints  are  not  seldom  exposed,  viz.  a  temptation  to 
despond  of  Divine  succour  and  Divine  favour,  like  Job  himself  (ch.  xxiii,  3),  tike  David 
(Ps.  xlii.  6),  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  7 — 9),  Heman  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  6),  Jonah  (ii.  4).  and 
others ;  (2)  a  great  consolation  which  all  desponding  and  despairing  ones  may  cling 
to,  viz.  that  God  perfectly  understands  their  case  in  all  its  minutest  details,  as 
he  knew  the  cases  of  Job  (ch.  xxiii.  10),  Eagar  (Gen.  xvi.  13),  and  Israel  (Exod. 
iii,  7) ;  and  (3)  a  great  duty  which  is  eqtially  incumbent  on  all,  to  wait  patiently  on 
God  till  he  is  pleased  to  come  with  deliverance  and  favour  (Ps.  Ixii.  5 ;  Lam.  iii.  26; 
Micah  vii.  7;  Hab.  ii.  3).  6.  Misi'mproving  the  Divine  clemency.  Understanding 
KUhu  to  say,  "And  now,  because  he,"  i.e.  God,  "does  not  visit "  (t.e.  hostilely,  in  the 
sense  of  punishing)  "his,"  i.e.  Job's,  "anger,  and  does  not  know  "(in  the  sense  of 
regarding  or  taking  notice  of)  "  his  wickednesis  or  pride  greatly ;  therefore  doth  Job  open 
his  mouth  in  vain,  he  raultiplieth  words  without  knowledge"  (vers.  15,  16),  the 
meaning  is  that  Job's  sufferings  have  not  been  severe  enough,  and  that  the  Divine 
clemency  in  dealing  sparingly  with  Job  has  only  been  recompensed  by  the  continuation 
and  manifestation  in  Job  of  a  rebellions  and  refractory  spirit. 

Learn ;  1.  That  God's  servants  ought  to  cry  aloud  and  spare  not  in  exposing  the 
wickedness  of  men,  whether  saints  or  sinners.  2.  That  it  is  of  great  advantage  when 
a  faithful  reprover  can  particularly  specify  the  sin  which  he  condemns,  3.  That  men's 
words  commonly  afford  a  good  index  to  the  state  of  their  hearts.  4.  "That  by  the 
quality  of  their  speech  shall  men  eventually  be  either  acquitted  or  condemned.  5. 
That  preachers  of  the  gospel  should  ever,  like  Elihu,  be  able  to  defend  as  well  a» 
recommend  the  faith  which  they  proclaim.  6.  That  God  is  not  too  high  to  bless  man, 
though  he  is  certainly  too  exalted  to  be  injured  by  man,    7.  That  while  man  can 


Oft.  Tcxxv.  1-1$.]  TH1?.  BOOK  OP  JOB.  669 

eirich  God  with  nothing,  God  both  can  and  does  enrich  man  with  all  things.  8.  That 
"  man's  inhumanity  to  man  makes  countless  thousands  mourn."  9.  That  God  is  per- 
petually cognizant  of  all  the  wickedness  and  misery,  crime  and  wretchedness,  that 
exists  on  earth.  10.  That  the  only  power  competent  to  banish  sin  and  sorrow  from 
the  heart  or  from  the  world  is  the  power  of  God.  11.  That  men  have  usually  them- 
selves to  blame  when  their  prayers  are  not  heard.  12.  That  God  is  infinitely  worthy 
of  the  unwavering  confidence  of  men. 

Ver.  10.^— Man's  forgetfulness  of  God,  and  OodTs  remembrance  of  man.  I.  Man's 
FOEGBTPULNESS  OF  Gop.  "  Noue  saith.  Where  is  God  my  Maker  ? "  1.  The  cause  of 
it.  (1)  Generally,  the  sinfulness  of  the  human  heart.  That  njan  should  so  habitually 
neglect  God  is  inexplicable  except  upon  the  hypothesis  of  a  fall.  But  sin,  having 
intervened  to  separate  man  from  God,  has  caused  man  to  turn  his  back  upon  God, 
and  to  contrive  to  live  without  any  sort  of  acquaintance  with  him.  (2)  Particularly, 
man's  neglect  of  God  may  be  traced  to  three  things :  (o)  a  sense  of  guilt,  which 
instinctively  urges  man  to  shun  God's  presence  (Gen.  iii.  8) ;  (&)  the  dominion  of 
the  world,  which  over  every  sinful  heart  exercises  an  almost  resistless  fascination 
(1  John  ii.  15);  and  (c)  an  absorption  in  self,  which,  by  magnifying  all  its  own  little 
interests  and  concerns,  its  sorrows  no  less  than  its  joys,  prevents  the  human  soul  from 
seeking  after  God.  2.  The  criminality  of  it.  (1)  The  character  of  God  as  Eloah,  the 
all-sufficient  and  all-powerful  One,  demonstrates  the  wickedness  of  man  in  living  so 
habitually  in  neglect  of  his  service.  (2)  The  relation  of  God  to  man  as  his  Maker 
attests  the  sinfulness  of  such  behaviour  on  the  part  of  man.  (3)  Tiie  favour  of 
God  to  man  in  first  bestowing  upon  him  a  superior  nature  to  that  possessed  by  the 
animal  creation,  and  secondly  in  making  these  lower  creatures  his  instructors,  gives 
additional  evidence  of  man's  heinous  guilt  in  thus  neglecting  to  inquire  after  God. 
(4)  The  power  of  God  to  assist  man  by  giving  "songs  in  the  night"  is  a  further 
proof  of  man's  amazing  criminality  in  not  remembering  God. 

II.  God's  EEMBMBKANCE  OF  MAN.  He  "  gjveth  songs  in  the  night."  1.  In  the  night 
of  natwral  day.  By  spreading  out  the  star-illumined  canopy  above  man's  head,  he 
stirs,  at  least  in  thoughtful  minds,  such  exalted  ideas  and  holy  emotions  as  frequently 
break  out  in  anthems  of  praise:  witness  David  (Ps.  viii.  3,  4),  Job  (ix.  4—10),  Isaiah 
(xl.  26),  and  the  unknown  Hebrew  singer  (Ps.  cxlvii.  4),  2.  In  the  night  of  devout 
meditation.  "  Let  the  saints  slug  aloud  upon  their  beds  "  (Ps.  cxlix.  5) ;_  and  often- 
times when  wrapt  in  heavenly  contemplation,  remembering  God  upon  their  beds,  and 
meditating  on  him  in  the  night-watches,  the  mouths  of  saints  praise  him  with  joyful 
lips  (Ps.  IxJii.  5,  6).  3.  In  the  night  of  spiritual  conviction.  In  such  a  night  David 
sang  some  of  his  sweetest  songs  (Ps.  li.).  And  as  God  put  a  new  song  into  David's 
lavuth  when  he  was  lifted  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  miry  clay  (Ps.  xl.  3),  so  does  he 
pat  a  happy  anthem  of  praise  for  forgiving  mercy  into  the  lips  of  every  believing 
penitent :  witness  the  jailor  of  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  34).  4.  In  the  night  of  temporal 
nfflicfion.  Israel,  escaping  from  the  land  of  Egypt  in  a  night  which  at  one  period 
seemed  dark  enough  (Exod.  xiv.  10),  sang  a  song  of  deliverance  before  the  morning 
dawn  had  fully  risen  (Exod.  xv.  1).  A  dark  dismal  night  of  adversity  it  was  for 
David  when  he  was  driven  forth  from  his  palace,  from  his  capital,  from  his  people, 
from  the  temple  (2  Sam.  xv.  30) ;  and  yet  then  it  was  that  David  sang,  "But  thou,  O 
Lord,  art  a  Shield  for  me,  and  the  Lifter-up  of  mine  head  "  (Ps.  iii.  3).  Paul  and  Silas 
had  their  songs  in  the  prison  of  Philippi  (Acts  xvi,  25) ;  and  there  is  not  a  samt,  how- 
ever feeble,  that  may  not  chant  in  the  darkest  night  of  trouble  a  psalm  of  holy  confi- 
dence in  God.  5.  In  the  niyht  of  approaching  dissolution.  Job  himself  at  times  was 
not  without  his  song,  though  he  felt  that  he  was  standing  on  the  verge  of  the  tomb 

(ch  xix  25 27).    So  did  God  give  an  anthem  to  Hezekiah,  when  he  raised  that 

weeping  and  praying  monarch  from  what  seemed  a  couch  of  death  (Isa.  xxxviii.  20). 
David  too  had  a  song  ready  for  that  dark  sad  night  which  he  knew  to  be  mevitable 
fPs  xxiii  4)  It  was  a  nolile  hymn  which  St,  Paul  sent  forth  from  the  Roman  prison  to 
his'voung  son  Timothy  (2  Tim.  iv.  6).  And  so  does  God  give  to  aU  saints,  who  seek 
after  him  in  bvimility,  penitence,  and  faith,  a  song  to  cheer  them  m  the  dying  hour 
a  Cor,  XV,  55) ;  and  when  the  dark  night  of  death  breaks  away,  puts  into  their 
jnouthi  th«  never-ending  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb. 


670  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  sxxv.  1- -1 6, 


Leam :  1.  The  advantage  of  seeking  after  God.  2.  The  kindness  of  God  ia  thinking 
upon  man. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Vera.  1 — 16. — EUhu's  third  speech:  the  profit  of  godliness.  I.  Follt  or  rax 
OPINION  THAT  THEEE  IS  NO  PKOFIT  IN  GODLINESS.  (Vers.  1 — 8.)  A  good  man,  says 
Elihii,  would  not  speak  as  Job  has  done,  questioning  whether  godliness  is  more  pro- 
fitable than  sin.  But  what  is  the  refutation  of  this  dangerous  notion?  The  speaker 
poinlB  to  the  blessed  self-siifSciency  of  God,  the  exalted  One  in  the  heavens.  In  this 
light  man  must  appear  alone  as  one  who  draws  advantage  from  his  righteousness 
(comp.  ch.  vii.  20;  xxii.  2,  sqq.).  Our  evil  deeds  cannot  injure  God,  neither  cau  our 
good  deeds  add  to  his  blessedness.  To  expect  a  return  or  recompense  from  God  for 
obedience,  as  if  we  had  given  him  a  pleasure  or  conferred  on  him  an  advantage,  is, 
according  to  Elihu,  a  sign  that  we  have  altogether  forgotten  the  distance  between  our- 
selves and  him,  and  the  true  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  him.  A  modern  philo- 
soplier,  indeed,  says,  using  a  bold  expression,  "  Put  God  in  your  debt  I "  But  this 
means  only — Conform  to  God's  laws,  and  expect  that  God  will  be  true  to  those  rela- 
tions axpressed  by  his  laws.  The  misery  of  Job  is  that  he  cannot,  for  the  present, 
see  that  God  is  true  to  those  relations.  He  has  sown  righteousness,  but  not,  as  it 
seems,  reaped  mercy.  He  is  half  in  the  right,  and  so  is  his  present  insiruotoi.  It 
remains  for  these  two  halves  of  truth  to  be  united  into  a  whole.  Meanwhile  Elihu 
points  to  a  great  canon  of  conduct,  a  great  motive  of  right.  Piety  is  always  beneficial, 
ungodliness  always  hurtful  to  our  fellow-men,  in  a  sense  in  which  this,  of  course,  cannot 
be  said  of  God.  And  this  should  sustain  us  in  suffering :  the  thought  of  the  example 
we  may  be  permitted  to  set,  the  light  that  may  shine  out  of  our  darkness,  the  image 
of  those  who  may  be  deterred  from  evil  or  allured  to  good  by  what  they  see  in  us. 

II.  Reasons  fob  unanswbbbd  pbaters.  (Vers.  9 — 16.)  1.  Want  of  true  reverence 
for  God.  (Vers.  9 — 14.)  The  cry  of  the  oppressed  goes  up  to  heaven,  and  it  is  long 
before  an  answer  comes.  Help  is  delayed  or  denied.  Why  ?  In  most  cases  it  is  pro- 
bably the  fault  of  the  sufferer  himself.  There  is  something  defective  in  the  substance 
or  in  the  spirit  of  his  prayers.  He  does  not  cry, "  Where  is  the  Almighty,  my  Creator  ?" 
(ver.  10).  This  is  the  complaint  which  Jehovah  makes  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah 
(ii.  6,  8).  There  is  no  injustice  in  him ;  but  there  is  inconsistency  in  men.  They  do 
not  trust  him.  They  ungratefully  forget  his  past  providences.  They  disobey  his  laws, 
they  meddle  with  forbidden  things.  There  are  conditions,  moral  conditions,  under 
which  alone  it  is  possible  for  men  to  be  heard,  delivered,  blessed.  "  Have  I  been  a 
wilderness  to  Israel  1 "  Behind  these  figures  lies  the  truth  tliat  Divine  blessing  is  con- 
ditioned by  our  own  moral  state  and  endeavour.  Those  grand  relations  of  mercy  in 
which  God  stands  to  men — their  Deliverer,  the  Giver  of  songs  in  the  night  of  natural 
distress  and  emergency,  the  Instructor  of  their  spirits  in  that  life  above  that  of  the 
brutes  who  "  lead  a  blind  life  within  the  brain  " — can  only  be  realized  by  the  faithful 
and  the  true.  To  know  God  as  our  Saviour,  we  must  humbly  and  constantly  trust  him  ; 
to  know  him  as  our  Teacher  and  Guide,  we  must  diligently  follow  him.  Pride,  vain 
or  evil  desires  in  the  heart,  these,  then,  are  the  only  permcment  causes  of  unanswered 
prayers.  And  how  much  less  are  advantage  and  deliverance  possible  for  Job,  if  he 
reproaches  God  with  iniquity  in  being  unwilling  to  regard  his  cause ;  if  he  waits  as  if 
that  cause  were  not  already  laid  before  God  (ver.  14)1  For  he  knows  all;  and  we 
must  commit  our  way  to  him,  in  the  assurance  that  he  will  in  due  time  bring  it  to 
pass.  2.  Presumptuous  language  against  Ood.  (Vers.  15,  16.)  Though  such  folly 
has  hitherto  passed  unpiinished,  it  does  not  follow  that  God  has  not  observed  it. 
According  to  Job's  way  of  thinking,  Elihu  says,  in  effect,  this  would  follow.  But  he 
wiU  soon  see  the  contrary.  The  passage  is  instructive  as  giving  us  searching  admo- 
nition on  the  subject  of  unanswered  prayer,  unrelieved  distress.  It  is  a  time  for  heart- 
searching.  The  fault  cannot  be  with  God ;  if  fault  there  be,  it  lies  at  our  door.  The 
Word  comes  with  power  in  such  momtnts,  "Cleanse  your  hands,  ye  sinners!  Draw 
nigh  to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  to  you."  Read  Isa.  i.  But  to  the  true  and  con- 
trite heart,  mercy  and  deliverance  may  be  delayed,  never  denied.  And  the  lesson,  then, 
is — Be  patient,  wait,  and  hope. — J. 


OH.  xxxt^.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  671 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  cry  that  is  not  unto  God.  Elihu  continues  to  press  Job  severely. 
His  teachings  run  in  the  lines  of  truth,  and  they  approach  moie  nearly  to  the  design 
of  Job's  suffering  than  those  of  Job's  friends,  but  they  fail  actually  to  reach  it.  He 
makes  many  sagacious  reflections  on  human  conduct.  This  is  one.  There  is  a  cry 
raised  by  the  suff'ering  ones  under  the  heavy  burden  of  their  multiplied  oppressions, 
and  "  by  reason  of  the  arm  of  the  mighty."  How  often  is  it  that  these  address  not 
their  cry  to  God  1  It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  wondered  at  that  relief  does  not  come. 
Job  seema  to  imply  that  God  does  not  vindicate  the  sufferers.  Here  is  a  reason.  They 
cry  not  to  (jtod.  "  None  saith,  Where  is  God  my  Maker,  who  giveth  songs  in  the 
night?" 

I.  The  kbrob  of  such  a  cey.  God  only  is  able  truly  to  respond  to  the  cry  of 
suffering.  It  is  expending  the  breath  in  vain  to  Invoke  help  from  other  sources.  Man 
is  often  utterly  powerless ;  and,  even  when  able,  is  not  always  willing  to  help.  If  the 
cry  is  to  a  false  god,  it  is  a  still  greater  error,  and  can  only  end  in  disappointment. 

II.  But  the  cby  which  is  an  erboe  is  also  a  folly.  Such  a  cry  ends  in  vexation ; 
the  unheard  cry  aggravates  the  sorrow  and  makes  the  burden  greater.  Why  should 
man  in  his  feebleness  appeal  to  his  feeble  fellow  ?  and  why  forsake  the  Maker  of  all, 
who  alone  can  give  songs  of  joy  in  the  night  of  mourning  ? 

lU.  This  cky  is  also  a  wrong.  It  is  a  moral  wrong  for  man  to  turn  his  face  away 
from  Grod  in  the  time  of  his  trouble.  It  reflects  upon  the  Divine  goodness  and  upon 
the  ability  and  willingness  of  God  to  help.  It  casts  an  unjust  reproach  upon  a  loving 
Creator,  "  who  teacheth  us  "  lessons  by  "  the  beasts  of  the  earth,"  and  "  maketh  us 
wise  "  by  the  very  "  fowls  of  heaven." 

IV.  Bdt  this  is  altogether  a  vain  cbt.  "  None  giveth  answer."  Evil  men  in 
their  pride  will  not  humble  themselves  to  call  upon  Jehovah ;  they  will  not  acknuw- 
ledge  their  dependence  upon  him,  will  not  submit  to  him.  Their  cry  is  as  one  made 
to  the  wind.  Even  if  addressed  to  God,  it  is  void  of  all  truth  and  meaning.  It  is 
the  cry  of  vanity.     "  God  will  not  hear,  neither  will  the  Almighty  regard  it." 

From  all  which  comes  the  great  lesson,  Though  God  is  hidden,  and  men  see  him 
not,  "  yet  judgment  is  before  him  " :  therefore  may  men  trust  in  him,  and,  believing 
"  that  he  is,  and  that  ho  is  a  Rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him,"  make  thtit 
supplication  unto  God,  their  cry  to  the  Almighty. — R.  G. 

Ver.  2. — An  unjust  inference.  Elihu  represents  Job  as  saying  that  his  righteous- 
ness is  greater  than  God's,  and  he  asks  whether  the  patriarch  thinks  it  right  to  use 
such  language. 

I.  It  is  unjust  to  ascribe  to  oue  fellow-men  opinions  which  they  have  not 
expressed.  Job  had  not  used  such  blasphemous  language  as  Elihu  attributed  to  him, 
and  he  would  have  repudiated  the  ideas  that  it  conveyed.  His  young  monitor  was 
rudely  asserting  what  he  thought  Job  meant,  what  he  took  to  be  the  underlying 
opinion  of  Job.  But  this  was  unjust.  Half  the  controversies  of  the  Church  would 
have  been  avoided  if  people  had  not  put  into  the  mouths  of  others  words  that  they 
never  uttered.  The  only  fair  way  is  to  listen  to  a  man's  own  statement  of  his  case. 
The  common  injustice  is  to  charge  an  opponent  with  holding  all  the  opinions  which  we 
think  can  be  deduced  from  his  confessed  beliefs.  Thus  we  make  him  responsible  for 
our  inferences.     "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged." 

II.  We  should  bee  the  natural  consequences  of  our  utterances.  Although 
it  was  unjust  to  draw  conclusions  as  Elihu  was  doing,  it  might  be  helpful  for  Job  to 
see  what  conclusions  were  drawn  from  his  hasty  words.  He  would  revolt  from  such 
ideas  with  horror.  Then  the  question  may  well  arise— Did  he  not  provoke  them? 
Though  Elihu  did  wrong  to  make  his  assertion,  Job  may  also  have  done  wrong  in 
speaking  words  that  Elihu  could  use  in  such  a  way.  We  may  learn  from  the  lalse 
charges  that  are  brought  against  us.  Possibly  these  have  been  provoked  by  us.  They 
are  caricatures  of  our  conduct.  Therefore  they  show  up  the  salient  features  of  that 
conduct  in  a  strong  light.  The  very  exaggeration  calls  attention  to  the  pomts  that 
have  been  unduly  magnified.  Wo  need  to  consider  the  tendencies  of  what  we  say,  and 
test  the  tendencies  of  our  opinions  by  the  inferences  that  are  drawn  from  them. 

III.  Man  is  tempted  to  think  himself  more  just  than  God.  Ho  would  not  own 
to  Buch  an  idea  opunly,  nor  even  in  bis  own  private  thought.    Nevertheless,  in  th« 


672  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxv.  1—16. 

heat  of  excitement,  he  acts  as  though  this  were  his  belief.  Otherwise,  why  does  he 
murmur?  Why  does  he  rehel?  Why  is  he  cast  dowa  into  despair?  We  magnify 
our  own  opinions  and  we  justify  our  own  actions  when  these  are  counter  to  the  truth 
and  will  of  God.     Virtually  this  is  making  ourselves  more  just  than  God. 

IV.  The  justice  of  God  is  the  type  of  all  justice.  Evidently  Elihu  assumes 
that  what  is  justice  to  man  is  in  itself  justice  to  God.  This  is  assumed  throughout 
the  Bible,  which  makes  no  attempt  to  escape  from  the  diflSculties  of  providenoe  by 
means  of  the  "  regnlative  ideas"  advocated  by  Dean  Mansel.  Here  we  do  not  see  that 
justice  means  one  thing  in  God  and  another  thing  in  man.  But  the  perfection  of 
justice  may  be  applied  to  circumstances  that  are  beyond  our  understanding.  Then  it 
may  look  unjust.  Yet,  if  we  knew  all,  we  should  see  that  it  is  the,  type  and  pattern 
of  the  very  justice  we  are  called  to  strive  after. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Is  goodness  profitaWef  I.  A  natubai,  question.  Job  is  driven  to  put 
this  question ;  or,  rather,  Elihu  concludes  that  Job's  language  shows  that  the  patriarch 
is  debating  it  within  himself.  Satan  had  sneered  at  the  notion  of  disinterested  good- 
ness, and  had  asked,  "  Doth  Job  fear  God  for  naught  ?  "  (ch,  i.  9).  Now  Job  is  begin- 
ning to  see  that  the  profits  of  goodness,  as  they  are  commonly  believed  in,  do  not  accrue, 
for  good  men  suffer  as  much  as  other  .men,  if  not  more.  The  utilitarian  question  crops 
up  in  practice,  whatever  ethical  theory  we  may  have  adopted.  People  will  ask — ^What 
is  the  advantage  of  religion?  Why  should  they  deny  their  passions  ?  What  will  they 
be  the  better  for  reftaining  from  evil  ?  The  inquiry  is  natural  for  two  reasons.  1.  We 
naturally  desire  to  see  results.  Men  wish  to  know  that  some  good  end  is  to  be  reached. 
They  are  not  satisfied  with  a  good  road;  they  must  know  where  it  leads  to.  2.  We 
vaturalli/  desire  our  own  advantage.  The  instincts  implanted  in  us  encourage  such 
a  desire.  In  itself  it  is  not  bad,  but  natural.  Evil  comes  from  the  abuse  or  the 
supremacy  of  it. 

II.  A  BUPEEFLuous  QUESTION.  Although  the  question  is  natural,  we  ought  to  bo 
able  to  rise  above  it.  After  all,  our  chief  concern  is  not  with  results,  but  with  duty. 
Our  part  is  to  do  the  right,  whether  it  leads  to  failure  or  to  success.  Obedience  is  our 
sphere ;  results  are  with  God.  We  sow  and  water  ;  he  it  is  who  gives  the  increase.  It 
is  difficult  to  learn  this  lesson,  for  we  all  gravitate  to  selfish  and  material  ends  unless 
we  are  lifted  out  of  ourselves.  Still,  the  lesson  must  be  learnt.  If  a  man  is  only 
virtuous  on  account  of  the  rewards  of  virtue,  he  is  not  really  virtuous  at  all.  He  who 
does  not  steal  simply  because  he  is  persuaded  that  "  honesty  ia  the  best  policy,"  is  a 
thief  at  heart.  Conscience  is  independent  of  advantage,  and  true  goodness  is  only  that 
which  rests  on  conscience. 

III.  An  answerable  question.  Elihu  is  ready  with  his  reply.  Perhaps  it  is  not 
quite  so  simple  a  matter  as  he  assumes,  for  he  is  one  of  those  fearless  talkers  who 
handle  the  most  difficult  problems  with  jaunty  confidence.  Still,  he  helps  us  towards 
a  reply.  Goodness  is  not  ignored  by  God.  This  Elihu  show,  in  three  ways.  1.  Qod 
is  too  great  to  unjustly  deprive  men  of  the  rewards  of  their  deeds.  These  may  not  come 
at  once  ;  but  God  can  have  no  conceivable  motive  for  withholding  them  (vers.  6 — 8). 
2.  The  absence  of  immediate  blessings  is  no  proof  of  Divine  negligence.  While  com- 
plaining that  their  rewards  are  not  given  them,  men  may  not  be  treating  God  aright, 
and  so  not  deserving  his  blessing  (vers.  9 — 13).  3.  Qod's  watchfulness  ensures  his 
righteous  treatment  <^  his  creatwret.  (Vers.  14 — 16.)  Thus  according  to  Elihu  goodness 
is  ultimately  for  the  advantage  of  its  possessor.  But  may  we  not  go  further,  and  say 
that  even  if  it  brings  no  ultimate  reward  it  is  infinitely  better  than  sin,  for  goodness 
is  in  itself  a  blessing  ?  Few  of  us  can  be  great,  or  rich,  or  very  successfuL  But  it  is 
better  to  be  good  than  to  be  great,  or  rich,  or  successful ;  for  to  be  good  is  to  be  like 
Christ,  like  God.— W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — ffoJs  independence  of  man.  I.  God  ib  not  dependent  on  man's 
CONDUCT.  We  must  agree  in  the  main  with  what  Elihu  here  states.  God  is  self- 
sulBcient,  and  he  owns  all  things.  "  The  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  are  his."  If  he 
vvLfe  hungry  he  would  not  need  to  tell  us.  Onr  most  active  service  is  not  necessary  to 
God,  our  most  vimlent  malignity  cannot  really  touch  liim.  He  dwells  in  the  fulnesi 
Iknd  serenity  of  his  own  perfection! 


cm.  XXXV.  1-16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  673 

IL  God  cannot  be  bbibed  bt  man's  gifts.  The  huge  mistake  of  heathen  worship 
is  that  it  consists  fur  the  most  part  in  attempts  to  buy  off  the  auger  and  secure  the 
favour  of  the  goda  by  means  of  gifts  and  sacrifices.  We  meet  with  the  same  heathenish 
idea  in  all  religious  exercises  that  aim  at  being  really  profitable  to  Qod,  not  for  his  own 
sake,  but  to  purchase  his  favour, 

III.  God  is  undeb  no  inducement  to  be  unjust  to  man.  Between  man  and 
man  injustice  is  common,  because  one  man  is  much  afi'ected  by  the  conduct  of  another. 
But  if  man  can  neither  profit  nor  injure  God,  God  can  have  no  motive  for  dealing  in 
any  unequal  way  with  man. 

IV.  God  voluntarily  cosoebnb  himself  with  oub  conduct  because  hb  loves 
UB.  Elihu's  description  of  God  is  one-sided.  True  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  things, 
it  is  false  as  it  concerns  the  action  and  sympathy  of  God.  Elihu's  God  is  too  much 
hke  an  Epicurean  divinity.  The  love  which  is  most  characteristic  of  the  Divine  cha- 
racter, as  it  is  revealed  in  the  Bible,  is  here  quite  ignored.  God  may  not  be  dependent 
on  us.  Yet  his  love  leads  him  to  be  deeply  concerned  in  what  we  do,  and  to  entrust 
his  designs  to  us  as  his  servants.  At  the  same  time,  seeing  that  luve  is  his  leading 
motive,  there  can  be  no  need  for  us  to  try  to  bribe  God,  even  if  it  were  possible  for  us 
to  do  so;  and  we  may  be  sure  that,  so  far  from  dealing  with  harsh  injustice,  God  will 
only  desire  our  good, 

V.  God  accepts  man's  treatment  of  his  brothbb-man  as  though  this  affected 
himself.  Christ  has  taught  us  that  what  is  done  to  one  of  the  least  of  his  brethren 
is  done  to  our  Lord  himself  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  God's  love  for  his  children  make?  him 
regard  any  injury  done  to  them  as  though  it  were  an  injury  to  his  own  person.  The 
Father  feels  in  the  sufferings  of  his  cliildien.  Thus  we  may  benefit  or  injure  God  by 
benefiting  or  injuring  our  fellow-men.  At  the  same  time,  this  only  results  from  the 
position  which  God  voluntarily  assumes  towards  us. 

VI.  Man  is  dependent  on  God,  and  his  conduct  should  be  a-  ebsponsb  to 
God's.  Religion  does  not  begin  with  our  worship  of  God.  Its  commencement  is  earlier, 
in  Grod's  goodness  to  man.  All  true  worship  springs  from  gratitude.  Thus,  while  we 
cannot  be  useful  or  hurtful  to  God,  excepting  in  so  far  as  his  love  and  sympathy 
permit  us,  we  are  urged  to  coiisider  how  completely  our  lives  are  in  his  hands,  and 
how  essential  it  is  for  us  to  live  so  that  we  may  enjoy  his  continued  favour. — W.  F.  A, 

Yet.  10. — "  Songs  in  the  night."  I.  Songs  in  the  night  abb  peodliably  helpful. 
The  thought  is  of  a  lonely  and  desolate  night — a  night  of  weary  watching  oi-  painful 
suffering,  when  sleep  cannot,  or  should  not,  be  enjoyed.  Travellers  who  dare  not 
sleep  vn  a  perilous  region  infested  by  wild  beasts,  sing  songs  as  they  sit  round  their  camp 
fire.  Poor  sufferers  on  beds  of  sickness  welcome  strains  of  well-known  hymns  in  the 
long,  wakeful  night.  The  dreadful  night  of  sorrow  needs  the  cheering  of  some  song  of 
Zion.  In  the  sunny  day  songs  come  readily  enough ;  but  tlien-  we  could  dispense  with 
them  It  is  when  darkness  lies  about  our  path  that  we  need  some  uplifting  and 
cheer'ng  influence. 

II.  Songs  in  the  night  mat  be  enjoyed.  Elihu  speaks  in  the  present  tense. 
OhrisAian  history  tells  of  many  a  soul  cheered  by  heavenly  songs  in  darkest  hours. 
PauJ  and  Silas  sang  in  prison  with  their  feet  in  the  stocks  (Acts  xvi.  25). 

"  Stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make, 
Nor  iron  bars  a  cage." 

Sufferers  have  been  cheerful  with  interior  joy,  even  when  their  outer  life  has  been  hard 
and  cruel.  The  joy  of  God  is  never  so  real  as  when  it  breaks  out  in  the  midst  of 
the  deepest  eartihly  trouble.  This  is  an  actual  experience  tliat  lies  within  the  reach  of 
benighted  souls,  if  only  they  will  seek  its  cheering  helpfulness. 

III,  Songs  in  the  night  do  not  arise  spontaneously.  There  is  something  para- 
doxical in  the  phrase,  "songs  in  the  niglit,"  for  of  course  the  context  shows  that  it 
does  not  point  to  the  noise  of  those  who  turn  night  into  day  with  unseemly  revelry. 
Eiihu's  nio-l^it-sungs  are  of  holy  thoughts  and  heavenly  music,  or  at  least  of  pure  and 
rafreshin'f  "gladness,  as  his  indication  of  the  Source  of  them  proves.  Now,  sorrow  is 
j»Ot  the  parent  of  gladness.  If  we  are  to  enjoy  deep  harmonies  of  thought,  or  to  soar 
">Ato  hi'h  heavens  of  emotion  among  the  depressini.'  uiflueuces  of  trouble,  we  must  nut 


674  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  t<^  xxxv.  1— le. 

look  for  the  trouble  to  produce  the  songs.     We  must  turn  elsewhere,  and  if  we  have 
no  higher  than  earthly  supplies,  we  shall  have  no  songs  such  as  Elihu  spoke  of. 

IV.  Songs  m  the  nioht  abb  given  bt  God.  In  the  still  hours  of  darkness  he 
draws  near  to  the  soul.  When  the  desolation  and  misery  are  greatest,  God  is  most 
compassionate.  He  is  not  dependent  on  external  circumstances.  Night  and  day  are 
alike  to  hiin.  Thus  it  is  possible  for  him  to  inspire  his  sweetest  songs  when  we  are 
drinking  the  most  bitter  cup.  We  must  not  delude  ourselves  into  the  notion  that  we 
shall  not  feel  suffering  if  God  is  with  us,  although  martyrs  have  been  known  to  lose 
consciousness  of  the  devouring  flames  in  the  ecstasy  of  their  spiritual  joy.  The  song 
does  not  dispel  the  darkness  of  night.  But  it  drives  out  the  terror  and  the  despair,  and 
brings  peace  and  a  deep  joy  that  is  nearer  the  true  heart  of  man  than  the  waves  of 
sorrow  which  sweep  over  the  surface  of  his  life.  The  lark  that  soars  to  heaven's  high 
gate  rises  from  a  lowly  nest  on  the  ground.  The  sweetest  songs  of  Zion  that  ascend 
to  the  gates  of  glory  begin  on  the  tearfiil  earth. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  H. —  3%e  superiority  of  men  to  animals.  Man  is  naturally  superior  to  animals — 
I.  In  intelligence.  We  cannot  but  admire  the  intelligence  of  the  horse,  the  dog, 
the  elephant;  the  ant.  There  seems  to  be  more  than  instinct  in  these  creatures ;  we 
notice  in  them  the  germs  of  a  reasoning  power,  because  they  can  adapt  means  to  ends, 
accommodate  themselves  to  fresh  circumstances,  and  overcome  unexpected  difficulties. 
Yet  man's  intelligence  far  exceeds  that  of  the  animal  world.  Two  striking  character- 
istics which  are  peculiar  to  it  may  be  noted.  1.  The  supremacy  of  man.  Man  is  one 
of  the  weakest  and  most  defenceless  creatures.  He  has  not  the  hide  of  the  rhinoceros, 
nor  the  horns  of  the  bull,  nor  the  fangs  of  the  lion,  nor  the  strength  of  any  of  these 
creatures.  Yet  he  masters  them  and  rules  the  world,  simply  by  means  of  superioi 
intelligence.  2.  The  progress  of  man.  Only  man  among  the  animals  advances  in  civi- 
lization. Ants -build  now  as  their  ancestors  built  ages  ago.  Man  only  moves  onward. 
The  savage  may  seem  to  be  as  low  as  the  baboon ;  but  he  is  susceptible  of  an  education 
that  his  humble  cousin  can  never  enjoy. 

IT.  In  conscience.  There  seems  to  be  a  trace  of  conscience  in  the  shame  of  the  dog 
when  he  has  done  what  he  knows  has  been  forbidden  him.  But  though  the  animal 
may  know  shame,  he  does  not  know  sin.  Purity  is  an  idea  quite  foreign  to  his  nature. 
He  may  be  generous,  and  he  may  sacrifice  his  life  in  devotion  to  his  master.  Yet  he 
cannot  feel  the  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness.  The  deep  sense  of  sin  and  the 
great  desire  for  holiness  are  peculiar  to  man. 

III.  In  religion.  A  dim  religious  feeling  may  be  dawning  in  the  dog  when  he 
raises  adoring  looks  to  his  master,  often  to  a  very  imworthy  master — like  poor  Caliban 
worshipping  drunken  Stephano.  But  the  animal  cannot  know  God,  Man  alone  of  all 
God's  creatures  knows  his  Maker.  AH  nature  praises  God  unconsciously,  only  man 
blesses  him  consciously.  To  man  it  is  given  to  feel  the  love  of  God,  and  to  love  God 
in  return.  Man  is  permitted  to  hold  communion  with  God;  he  is  God's  child.  Nature 
is  the  work  of  God;  man  his  son.  Nature  is  dependent  on  her  Creator;  man  is  sus- 
tained by  his  Father. 

IV.  In  Divine  favoub.  This  is  implied  by  all  that  precedes.  All  the  superiority 
of  man  is  from  God.  Intelligence,  conscience,  and  religion  are  Divine  endowments. 
We  could  not  raise  ourselves  above  the  animal  worM,  for  no  creature  could  transcend 
its  own  nature.  If  our  nature  is  superior  to  that  of  animals,  this  fact  is  wholly  owing 
to  the  grace  of  God.  But  we  may  go  further,  and  see  that  grace  not  only  in  our 
original  creation  and  natural  endowments,  but  also  in  our  history.  By  his  providence 
God  has  been  adding  to  his  favour.  Not  for  the  animals,  but  for  man,  and  man  alone 
Christ  came.  The  Incarnation  was  a  fact  of  the  human  world,  and  In  it  man  is 
supremely  honoured  by  being  united  to  God.  Man  is  redeemed  by  the  death  of  the 
Son  of  God. 

V.  In  obligation.  Much  is  expected  from  him  to  whom  much  has  been  given. 
What  is  innocent  in  the  animal  may  be  sinful  in  man.  It  is  a  degradation  for  man  to 
sink  down  to  animalism.  Brutal  violence  and  bestial  vice  are  utterly  unworthy  of  a 
being  exalted  far  above  the  animals  by  nature  and  the  grace  of  God.  When  man 
sinks  down  to  the  level  of  the  animals  he  really  falls  much  lower.  It  is  an  insult  to 
innocent  brutes  to  associate  them  with  the  habits  of  corrupt  men. — W.  P.  A. 


CH.  XXXVI.  1 — 33.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB, 


575 


Ver.  14. — From  despair  to  trust.  Job  had  often  expressed  a  deep  desire  to 
meet  with  God.  He  had  longed  for  an  opportunity  of  making  his  case  clear,  and 
having  it  tried  by  his  great  Judge.  He  had  felt  like  a,  prisoner  languishing  in  gaol 
without  a  trial,  greatly  wishing  for  an  haheas  corpm;  and  he  had  despaired  of  ever 
being  brought  face  to  face  with  his  Accuser,  who,  as  he  thought,  was  also  his  Judge. 
Now  Elihu  tells  him  that  God  is  already  attending  to  his  case,  and  therefore  that  he 
should  have  faith. 

I.  The  suffeebr's  despair.  Job  despairs  of  seeing  God.  He  has  indeed  expressed 
a  confident  assurance  that  he  will  behold  his  Bedeemer  with  his  own  eyes  ;  he  himself, 
and  not  another  (ch.  xix.  25 — 27).  We  need  not  be  startled  at  the  contradiction.  In 
such  darkness  as  that  of  Job's,  faith  ebbs  and  flows.  For  a  moment  the  clouds  break 
and  a  gleam  of  sunshine  falls  on  the  sufferer's  path,  and  at  the  sight  of  it  he  leaps  up 
triumphant ;  but  soon  the  blackness  closes  in  again,  and  then  the  despair  is  as  deep  as 
ever.  1.  God  is  not  seen  hy  the  hodily  eye.  We  may  sweep  the  heavens  with  the  most 
powerful  telescope,  but  we  shall  never  discover  their  King  seated  on  his  throne  among 
the  stars.  2.  Ood  does  not  give  an  imm'diate  solution  of  our  difficulties.  We  a^k 
him  to  decide  our  case,  to  justify  the  right,  and  to  destroy  the  false.  Yet  he  does  not 
seem  to  be  interfering ;  for  the  confusion  and  the  injustice  remain.  Then  the  weary 
waiting  leads  us  to  think  that  he  will  never  appear.  "  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart 
sick,"  and  in  its  sickness  it  loses  its  hope. 

n.  The  bncocbagement  to  faith.  1.  Ood  is  not  neglecting  «».  Elihu  assures 
Job  that  his  case  is  already  before  his  Judge.  It  is  neither  forgotten  nor  postponed. 
It  is  now  being  tried.  Elihu  was  quite  justified  in  making  this  statement,  as  we 
know  from  the  prologue  (ch.  i.  8 — 12).  Job  was  being  tried  before  God  throughout ; 
and  so  also  were  his  friends,  as  the  conclusion  of  the  book  shows  (ch.  xlii.  7 — 9).  Per- 
haps one  lesson  to  be  taught  by  this  great  poem  is  that  God  is  watching  man,  and 
dealing  justly  with  him,  even  when  no  indication  of  Divine  interest  or  activity  is 
vouchsafed  to  him.  The  verdict  is  not  yet  given  nor  the  judgment  pronounced ;  but 
the  case  is  proceeding,  and  the  Judge  is  carefully  attending  to  it.  That  is  what  this 
book  teaches  concerning  the  great  problem  of  life.  2.  We  should  learn  to  trust  God.  _ 
We  cannot  see  our  Judge  as  yet.  We  must  wait  for  the  verdict.  All  is  dark  to  the ' 
eye  of  sense.  But  if  we  know  that  God  is  watching  over  us  and  considering  our  con- 
dition, we  ought  to  be  assured  that  we  cannot  suffer  from  neglect.  The  special  region 
for  faith  is  this  present  scene  of  darkness,  and  we  are  to  expect  the  darkness  to  continue 
as  long  as  the  faith  is  to  be  exercised.  But  this  will  not  be  for  ever.  Job  was  right 
when,  in  a  moment  of  strange  elation,  he  leaped  to  the  assurance  that  his  Redeemer 
lived,  and  that  he  would  see  him  at  the  latter  day. — W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVL 


Vers.  1 — 33. — The  two  chapters,  ch.  xxxvi. 
and  xxxvii.,  form  a  single  discourse,  and 
ought  nrt  to  have  been  separated ;  or,  at  any 
rate,  not  so  unskilfully  as  they  are,  in  the 
middle  of  a  description  of  a  thunderstorm. 
They  constitute  a  final  appeal  to  Job,  who 
is  exhorted  to  submission,  resignation,  and 
patieiice,  in  consideration  of  God's  inscruta- 
bility, and  of  his  perfect  justice,  wisdom, 
and  strength.  Ch.  xxxvi.  begins  with  u 
short  preface  (vers.  1—4),  in  which  Elihu 
seeks  to  prove  his  right  to  offer  counsel  to 
Job,  after  which  God's  justice  is  demon- 
strated (vers.  5—16),  and  Job  warned  that 
his  petulanoB  may  lead  to  his  complete  de- 


struction (vers.  17 — 25).  Finally,  in  Illus- 
tration of  God's  might  and  unsearohablo- 
ness,  the  description  of  a  thunderstorm  is 
commenced  (vers.  26 — 33),  which  is  carried 
on  into  the  next  chapter. 

Vers.  1, 2. — Elihu  also  proceeded,  and  said, 
Suffer  me  a  little,  and  I  will  show  thee  that  I 
have  yet  to  speak  on  God's  behalf;  literally, 
that  there  are  yet  words  for  God.  The  con- 
troversy, i.e.,  is  not  exhausted ;  there  is  yet 
much  that  may  be  urged  on  God's  behalf, 
in  respect  of  the  charges  thou  hast  made 
against  him. 

Ver.  3. — I  will  fetch  my  knowledge  ftom 
afar  (compare  the  declaration  of  Bildad,  oh, 
viii.  8).  In  neither  case  does  the  perform- 
ance justify  the  pretentious  character  of  the 
preface.    Elihu's  arguments   are,  for   the 


576 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXVI,  1 — 33, 


most  part,  trite  and  commonplace.  And 
will  asoriba  righteousness  to  my  Maker.  I 
will  show,  i.e.,  tliat  God  is  righteous  and 
just  (comp.  ch.  xxxiv.  10,  12). 

Ver.  4.— For  truly  my  words  shall  not  be 
false:  he  that  is  perfect  in  knowledge  is 
with  thee.  The  words  sound  arrogunt ;  but 
perhaps  Blihu  does  not  mean  any  more  than 
to  pledge  himself  to  speak  truthfully,  and 
to  say  only  what  he  has  perfect  knowledge 
of.  It  is  clear  that  he  speaks  of  himself,  not 
of  God  (Stanley  Leathes),  in  the  second 
clause  of  the  verse,  aa  in  the  first. 

Ver.  5. — Behold,  God  is  mighty.  The 
preface  over,  tiie  argument  to  prove  God's 
justice  begins.  First,  he  "  is  mighty."  How 
unlikely  that  any  one  who  is  mighty — nay, 
almighty — should  lie  unjust  I  Next,  he  de- 
spiseth  not  any.,  Job  has  wrongly  charged 
him  with  "despising  the  work  of  his  own 
hands."  In  truth,  he  despises  nothing  that 
he  has  made.  "Are  not  two  sparrows  sold 
for  a  farthing?  and  one  of  them  shall  not 
fall  to  the  ground  without  your  Father.  But 
the  very  liairs  of  your  head  are  all  num- 
bered" (Matt.  X.  29,  30).  Much  less,  then, 
is  any  man  despised.  Moreover,  God  is 
mighty  in  strength  and  wisdom;  or  rather, 
{»  strength  of  imderetanding,  and  therefore 
above  the  weakness  of  being  unjust. 

Ver.  6. — He  preserveth  not  the  life  of  the 
wioked.  There  is  no  special  providence  over 
ttie  life  of  the  wicked,  as  Job  had  supposed, 
orpretendedtosuppose(ch.x!d.7;  comp. ch. 
xii.  6).  On  tlie  contrary,  God  "  overturneth  " 
wicked  men  "  in  the  night,  so  that  they  are 
destroyed;  he  striketh  tiieiii  as  wicked  men 
in  the  open  sight  of  others  "  (ch.  xxxiv.  2.5, 
26).  But  giveth  right  to  the  poor.  The 
poor  and  afflicted,  the  meek  and  humble, 
God  vindicates.  They  are  his  special  charge. 
So  far  is  he  from  favouring  the  ungodly. 

Ver.  7. — He  withdraweth  not  his  eyes  from 
the  righteous.  Under  no  circumstances  does 
God  cease  to  keep  an  eye  upon  the  righteous, 
as  Job  had  seemed  to  imply  when  he  ex- 
claimed, "Oh  tliat  I  were  as  in  months  of 
old,  in  the  days  when  God  preserved  me  I " 
or  "Watched  nje  I "  (ch.  xxix.  2).  "  The  eyes 
of  the  Lord  are  "  always  "  upon  the  righteous, 
as  his  ears  are  open  unto  tlieir  cry"  (Pa. 
xxxiv.  15).  With  kings  are  they  on  the 
throne.  In  some  cases,  God  shows  his  oaie 
of  the  righteous  by  "setting  them  with 
princes,  even  with  the  princes  of  his  people" 
(Ps.  cxiii.  8),  raising  them,  that  is,  tu  high 
station,  and  making  them  companions  of  tlie 
groat  of  the  earth.  Yea,  he  doth  establish 
them  for  ever,  and  they  are  exalted.  They 
are  permanently  established  in  their  high 
positions,  like  Joseph  and  Mordecai  and 
Daniel ;  and  they  are  exalted  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  prosperity. 

Ver.  8.— And  iif  they  be  bound  in  fetters, 


and  be  holden  in  cords  of  affliction.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  doubtless  cases  where 
the  righteous  suffer  adversity — are  even 
"  bound  in  fetters,"  and  "  holden  in  cords  of 
affliction  "  (Gen.  xxi^ix.  20 ;  Jer.  xl.  1 ;  Diin. 
iii.  21 ;  Matt.  xiv.  3 ;  Acts  xii.  6 ;  xvi.  24 ; 
xxiv.  27,  etc.).  But  even  here  God's  vigi- 
lance is  not  relaxed.  On  the  contrary,  he 
watches  with  the  utmost  care  over  their 
afflictions,  appoitioning  them  accordini;;  to 
the  needs  of  eacli,  and  making  every  possible 
effort,  by  means  of  them,  to  work  their  le- 
I'ormation  (see  tlie  two  following  verses). 

Ver.  9. — Then  he  showeth  them  their 
work,  God,  liy  liis  eliastisements,  makes 
mon  see  what  has  been  faulty  in  their  life's 
work,  in  what  respects  they  have  been  negli- 
<rent,  where  they  have  lapsed  into  actual 
sin.  Signal  afflictions  are  a  call  to  men  to 
"consider  their  ways,"  and  search  out  the 
nature  of  their  offences.  Some  afflictions,  as 
eiokness  and  imprisonment,  by  depriving  men 
of  active  employment,  almost  force  them  to 
engage  in  such  a  retrospect.  And  their 
transgressions  that  they  have  exceeded; 
rather,  and  their  transgressions,  wherein  they 
have  behaved  themselves  proudly  (coja^axe  the 
Revised  Version).  In  all  sin,  as  it  is  a  con- 
tempt of  God's  Law,  there  is  an  element  of 
pride.  The  temfjtatiou  to  pride  especially 
besets  those  whose  conduct  is,  in  outward 
appearance,  correct  and  yirtuous. 

Ver.  10  — He  openeth  also  their  ear  to  dis- 
cipline. It  is  the  especial  merit  of  Elihu's 
theoiy  of  suffering  that  he  views  it  as  far 
less  penal  than  disciplinary  and  restorative. 
Job's  sufferings  especially  he  views  in  this 
light.  Instead  of  looking  upon  Job,  like  his 
other  friends,  as  a  heinous  sinner,  upon  whom 
God  is  taking  vengeance,  he  regards  him  as 
a  person  who  is  beinii;  chastised,  in  love,  for 
some  fault  or  faults  that  he  has  committed, 
to  his  ultimate  advantage  and  improvement. 
This,  though  not  exactly  the  truth,  is  far 
nearer  the  truth  than  the  view  taken  by  the 
other  three  "friends."  And  oonimandeth 
that  they  return  from  imq,uity.  God's  chas- 
tisements are  to  be  viewed  as  commands  to 
men  to  "  go  and  sin  no  more." 

Ver.  11. — If  they  obey  and  serve  him, 
they  shall  spend  their  days  in  prosperity, 
and  their  years  in  pleaenres  (comp.  ch.  xii. 
13—19;  Jer.  vii.  23;  xxvi.  13).  Under  the 
old  covenant,  prosperity  was  promised  to  the 
righteous,  and  even  to  the  repentant,  fre- 
quently, and  in  the  most  definite  terms. 
Under  the  new,  when  any  such  promise  is 
made,  it  is  carefully  guarded  (Mark  x.  30); 
while  in  many  passages  tlie  promise  is  of 
an  opposite  character — the  righteous  are 
told  to  expect  tribulations  and  persecutions 
(John  xvi.  33 ;  Acts  xiv.  22 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  12 ; 
Heb.  xii.  1—11 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  12, 18,  etc.). 

Ver.  12.— -But  if  thav  obev  not.  thev  shall 


OH,  XXXVI.  1 — S3.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


677 


perish  Ly  the  Bwoid.  Not,  necessarily,  by  a 
material  sword,  but  by  the  sword  of  God's 
vengeance,  which  slaysina  thonsand  diiferent 
manners,  piercing  through  all  obstacles,  and 
reaching  to  the  heart  and  spirit.  And  they 
shall  die  without  knowledge.  Either  with- 
out knowing  that  they  are  about  to  die,  or 
in  their  wilful  ignorance  of  God's  intentions 
in  chastising  them. 

Ver.  13. — But  the  hypooiites  in  heart  heap 
up  wrath.  In  his  vindication  of  God's  justice, 
Elihu  here  passes  from  the  case  of  the  right- 
eons  (ver.  7)  to  that  of  the  "  hypocrites,"  or 
rather  the  ungodly.  They,  he  says,  "  heap 
up  wrath,"  t.e.  "  treasure  up  to  themselves 
wratli  against  the  day  of  wrath  "  (Rom.  ii.  5), 
continually  intensify  God's  anger  against 
them,  and,  as  it  were,  lay  in  a  store  of  it, 
which  will  one  day  be  outpoured  upon  them. 
They  cry  not  when  he  bindeth  them.  They 
do  not  cry  to  him,  they  do  not  deprecate  his 
anger,  when  they  first  find  themselves  bound 
with  the  "  cords  of  afSiction  "  (ver.  8),  but 
allow  his  wrath  to  increase  and  accumulate. 

Ver.  14. — They  die  in  youth;  literally, 
tteir  toal  dieth  in  youth.  The  result  is  that, 
while  they  are  still  young,  the  vital  strength 
of  their  soul  is  sapped;  they  "come  to  a 
premature  end,  like  youths  who  have  de- 
stroyed the  spring  of  life  by  licentiousness  " 
(Cook).  And  their  life  is  among  the  un- 
clesin.  (On  the  particular  "  unoleanness  "  in- 
tended, see  Dent,  xxiii.  17.) 

Ver.  15. — He  delivereth  the  poor  in  his 
affliction;  rather,  he  delivereth  the  afflicted 
by  his  affliction  (see  the  Revised  Version). 
Elihu  recurs  to  what  he  had  said  in  ver.  10 
with  respect  to  the  discipline  of  afliiction. 
The  bulk  of  the  afflictions  sent  by  God  are, 
according  to  him,  intended  to  act  medicinally. 
If  the  afflicted  man  leceives  them  aright,  s 
they  are  the  very  means  of  his  deliverance 
(comp.  Ps.  oxix.  67, 71 ;  Heb.  xii.  11).  And 
openeth  their  ears  in  oppression;  rather, 
by  sufering.  Their  sufforinga  lead  them  to 
God,'  cause  them  to  pay  more  attention  to  his 
Word,  lead  them  to  open  their  ears  to  his 
inward  voice. 

Ver.  16. — Even  so  would  he  have  removed 
thee  out  of  the  strait  into  a  broad  place, 
where  there  is  no  straitness ;  and  that  which 
should  be  set  on  thy  table  should  be  full  of 
fatness.  Another  quite  different  interpre- 
tation has  boen  proposed  by  Ewald,  and 
adopted  by  Dillmann  and  Canon  Cook,  who 
suppose  Elihu  to  speak,  not  of  what  would 
have  happened  to  Job  under  ccrtiun  circum- 
stances, but  of  what  had  actually  happened 
to  him,  and  render,  "  Thee  moreover  hath 
thy  unbounded  prosperity  seduced  from 
listening  to  the  voice  of  affliction,  and  the 
ease  of  thy  table  which  was  full  of  fatness." 
But  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Vereion, 
which  is  substantially  that  of  Schultens  and 
JOB. 


Bosenrnfiller, is  still  upheld  by  many  scholars, 
and  has  been  retained  by  our  Bevisers.  If 
we  adopt  it,  we  must  understand  Elihu  as 
assuring  Job  that  he  too  would  have  been 
delivered  and  restored  to  his  prosperity,  if 
he  had  accepted  his  afflictions  in  a  proper 
spirit,  and  learnt  the  lesson  they  were  in- 
tended to  teach  him  (see  vers.  9,  10). 

Ver.  17.— But  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  judg- 
ment of  the  wicked ;  i.e.  but,  as  thou  hast 
not  BO  acted,  the  result  has  been  different. 
Thy  hardness  and  impenitence  have  brought 
upon  thee  the  judgments  reserved  by  God 
for  the  wicked — judgment  and  justice  take 
hold  on  thee — thou  art  suffering  the  just 
penalty  of  thy  obstinacy. 

Ver.  IS.^Beoause  there  is  wrath,  beware 
lest  he  take  thee  away  with  his  stroke.  The 
original  is  exceedingly  obscure,  and  three  or 
four  quite  distinct  renderings  have  been  pro- 
posed ;  but  one  of  the  latest  critics  (Pro- 
fessor Stanley  Loathes)  prefers  to  all  the 
other  translations  that  of  the  Authorized 
Version.  Job  is  threatened  by  Wihu  with 
a  coming  judgment  which  shall  remove  him 
from  the  earth  altogether.  Then  a  great 
ransom  cannot  deliver  thee.  Once  let  de- 
struction fall,  and  there  is  no  longer  any 
place  for  ransom.  Nothing  can  then  deliver 
thee  from  thy  just  punishment. 

Ver.  19.— Will  he  esteem  thy  riches  1 
rather.  Will  thy  riches  suffice  ?  (Revised  Ver- 
sion) ;  or  Will  they  stand  the  shock  of  battle  f 
(Schultens).  Will  they  be  a  sufficient 
strength  to  thee  in  the  time  of  trouble  ?  No, 
not  gold.  This  rendering  is  now  generally 
given  up,  and  the  words,  lo  betsar  (nM  n"?), 
are  taken  in  connection  with  the  preceding 
sentence,  thus :  Will  thy  riches  suffice,  that 
thou  be  not  in  distress  f  or,  in  other  words, 
Will  they  keep  thee  out  of  trouble  1  If  not, 
will  all  the  forces  of  thy  strength  suffice  to 
do  so?  Assuredly, nothing  will  avail  against 
the  "stroke"  of  God  (ver.  18). 

Ver.  20. — ^Desire  not  the  night,  when 
people  (rather,  peoples)  are  cut  off  in  their 
place.  This  is  an  allusion  to  Job's  repeatedly 
expressed  desire  to  be  cut  off  at  once,  and 
laid  in  the  grave  (ch.  vi.  9 ;  vli.  15 ;  xiv.  13, 
etc.).  Elihu  holds  that  such  a  desire  is 
wrongful.  It  certainly  implies  a  want  of 
complete  resignation  to  the  Divine  will. 

Ver.  21. — Take  heed,  regard  not  iniquity ; 
i.e.  be  on  thy  guard.  Whilst  thou  art  care- 
ful to  preserve  thy  integrity  and  faith  in 
God,  do  not  fall  into  sin  in  pther  respects— 
as  by  impatient  desires,  or  proud  thoughts,  or 
rash  accusations  of  God.  For  this  hast  thou 
chosen  rather  than  affliction.  Bather  than 
acquiesce  in  thy  afflictions  and  bear  them 
patiently,  thou  hast  elected  to  murmur,  to 
complain,  to  question  the  justice  of  God,  and 
speak  overboldly  concerning  him.  There 
is  some  ground  for  Elihu'B  comlemnation ; 

2f 


678 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[cH.  XXXVI.  1 — 33. 


but  it  is  excessive ;  it  fails  to  make  allow- 
ance for  the  extremity  of  Job's  sufferings, 
aud  the  disturbing  influence  of  extreme 
Buftering  on  the  miud  and  judgment.  It  is, 
at  any  rate,  more  severe  than  God's  judg- 
ment upon  his  servant  (ch.  xxxviii.  2 ; 
xlii.  7). 

Ver.  22. — Behold,  God  exalteth  by  Ms 
power ;  rather,  hehold,  God  dodh  loftily  in 
his  power  (see  the  Revised  Version).  Who 
teaoheth  like  him?  This  has  been  called 
"  the  key-note  of  Elihu's  whole  discourse  " 
(Cook).  The  entire  providential  govern- 
ment of  the  woi'ld  by  God  he  views  as 
didactic,  as  a  series  of  moral  lessons  ad- 
dressed to  men  by  their  Maker  (see  ch.  xxxiil. 
14,  16;  XXXV.  11;  xxxvi.  9,  etc.).  If  the 
lessons  intended  are  taken  to  heart,  tlien 
all  goes  well  with  men ;  if  they  are  rejected, 
then  very  sad  and  terrible  results  follow 
(oh.  xxxvi.  12). 

Ver.  23. — Who  hath  enjoined  him  his  way? 
(comp.  oh.  xxxiv.  13).  While  God  is  thus 
the  universal  and  all-perfect  Teacher,  there 
are  some  who  would  fain  instruct  him,  dic- 
tate the  course  which  he  ought  to  pursue, 
improve  and  amend  his  universe.  Some- 
thing of  this  spirit  has  appeared  in  Job's 
remonstrances,  which  seem  to  insinuate 
that  the  Divine  government  of  the  world 
might  be  carried  on  better  than  it  is  (see 
ch.  ix.  22— 2i;  x.3;  xiiL20— 26;  xvi.  11— 
17,  etc.).  Elihu's  intention  is  to  reprove 
Job  for  his  presumption.  Or  who  can  say, 
Thou  hast  wrought  iniquity  ?  Job  has  not 
said  this;  but  he  has  gone  near  to  saying  it 
(ch.  ix.  24;  x.  3;  xxi.  7—26;  xxiv.  2—12, 
etc.) ;  compare  the  comment  on  ch.  xxxiv. 
5—12. 

Ver.  24. — Remember  that  thon  magnify 
his  work.  Instead  of  murmuring,  Job  should 
"  magnify  God's  work."  He  should  recog- 
nize the  mercy  of  God,  even  in  his  own 
afflictions,  and  praise  him  for  it.  Which 
men  behold.  Men  are  looking  on,  anxiously 
considering  Job's  sufferings ;  he  is  a  spec- 
tacle to  them,  as  the  apostles  were  to  men 
and  angels  (1  Cor.  iv.  9),  and  the  more 
reason  therefore  that  he  should,  by  patient 
endurance,  by  submission  and  confession, 
cause  his  sufferings  to  redound  to  the  glory 
and  honour  of  God. 

Ver.  25. — Every  man  may  see  it ;  rather, 
eeea  it,  or  has  seen  it.  Man  may  behold  it 
afar  off;  rather,  beholds  it,  or  has  lieheld  it, 
from  afar.  Job's  afflictions  have  drawn  all 
eyes  upon  them — not  only  those  of  his 
neighbours,  but  of  many  who  look  on  "  from 
afar." 

Vers.  26— 33.— Elihu  passes  now  to  a  de- 
scription, which  must  be  allowed  to  be 
eloquent,  of  the  power  and  providence  of 
God,  and  especially  of  his  power  in  the 


natural  world.  It  is  suggested  that  t]i8 
storm,  which  ultimately  broke  at  the  theo- 
phania  (ch.  xxxviii.  1),  was  already  begin- 
ning to  gather,  and  turned  the  thoughts  of 
Elihu  in  this  direction.  He  begins  with  the 
consideration  of  how  rain  is  generated,  passes 
rapidly  to  the  gathering  of  the  clouds  from 
all  quarters,  and  thence  to  the  loud  crash- 
ing of  the  thunder,  and  the  dazzling  flashes 
of  the  lightning,  which  illumine  even  the 
lowest  depths  of  the  sea  (ver.  30).  The 
effects  of  the  storm  are  then  spoken  of,  in 
words  the  exact  meaning  of  which  is  very 
obscure  (vers.  31 — 83). 

Ver.  26.— Behold,  God  is  great,  and  wt 
know  him  not.  This  is  the  final  lesson 
which  Elihu  seeks  to  impress  on  his  hearers. 
God  is  so  great  that  fully  to  comprehend 
him  transcends  the  power  of  the  human 
understanding.  However  much  we  know 
of  him,  there  is  more  that  we  do  not  know. 
His  nature  is  unsearchable ;  his  depths 
(1  Cor.  ii.  10)  are  inscrutable;  try  as  we 
may,  we  can  never  "find  him  out"  (ch. 
xxxvii.  23).  Neither  can  the  number  of  his 
years  be  searched  out.  Even  his  duration, 
being  eternal,  is  beyond  us.  We  cannot 
realize  the  thought  of  pre-  and  post-eternity. 

Ver.  27. — For  he  maketh  small  the  drops 
of  water  ;  rather,  he  draweth  up  the  drops  of 
water;  i.e.  by  the  heat  of  his  sun  he  causes 
exhalations  to  arise  from  the  sea  and  th^, 
moist  earth,  and  draws  them  up  into  the 
higher  regions  of  the  atmosphere,  where  they 
are  comlensed  into  clouds,  that  hang  sus- 
pended in  the  air.  They  pour  down  rain 
according  to  the  vapour  thereof;  )iterall>, 
they  flow  down  as  rain  for  his  mi^t.  The 
waler  collected  in  the  clouds  flows  down  in 
the  shape  of  rain  for  the  purpuae  of  watering 
the  earth  (see  Gen.  ii.  6,  where  the  same 
word  (IK)  occurs). 

Ver.  28.— Which  the  clouds  do  drop  and 
distil  upon  man  abundantly.  All  is  done /or 
man,  for  his  benefit  and  advantage. 

Ver.  29. — Also  can  any  understand  the 
spreadings  of  the  clouds  1  The  rapid  genera- 
tion of  clouds,  their  gathering  together,  seem- 
ingly, from  all  quarters,  and  the  way  they 
almost  suddenly  overspread  the  heavens 
(1  Kings  xviii.  45),  are  among  the  most 
remarkable  phenomena  of  nature,  and  are 
very  difficult  to  "  understand"  and  account 
for.  Or  the  noise  of  his  tabernacle.  The 
awful  crash  of  the  thunder,  which  echoes 
along  the  sky — God's  "tabernacle,"  or 
pavilion  (Ps.  xviii.  11)— is,  if  not  as  inex- 
plicable, even  more  fearful  and  astounding. 
Man  shrinks  and  quails  before  the  terrible 
sound,  and  feels  himself  in  the  presence  of 
a  mighty  aud  inscrutable  power. 


OH.  XXXVI.  1 — 33.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


57S 


Vei.  30. — Behold,  he  spreadeth  his  light 
npoa  it.  God  flashes  the  weird  brilliance  of 
his  lightning  over  the  heaven — not  over 
himself,  as  some  translate  (Bosenmiiller, 
Cook).  He  lights  up  the  whole  sky  at  once 
with  the  electric  splendour,  and  even  covereth 
with  it  the  bottom  (literally,  the  roots)  of  the 
sea.  This  is,  of  course,  hyperbole;  but  it 
seems  to  be  Dlihu's  meaning. 

Ver.  31. — For  by  them  judgeth  he  the 
people.  By  his  clouds  God  works  two 
opposite  effects.  On  the  one  hand,  he 
executes  judgment  upon  the  peoples,  de- 
stroying their  crops,  causing  widespread 
ruin  by  inundations,  smiting  and  slaying 
numbers  with  his  thunderbolts;  on  the 
other,  he  givethmeat  in  abundance,  restoring 
to  the  parched  earth  its  fertility  by  means 
of  copious  and  refreshing  showers,  stimu- 
lating vegetation,  and  so  furthering  the 
harvest. 

Ver.  32. — With  olouds  he  oovereth  the 
light;    rather,  7^e  oovereth  both  hie  hatuU 


with  light,  i.e.  with  the  lightning.  So  Vul 
was  represented  in  Assyrian  and  Zens  in 
Greek  mythology,  as  filling  their  hands  with 
thunderbolts,  and  hurling  them  upon  their 
foes  in  their  wrath.  And  oommandeth  it 
not  to  shine,  etc.  This  rendering  is  wholly 
indefensible.  Translate,  And  layeth  com- 
mand upon  it  that  it  strike  the  mark  (com- 
pare the  Revised  Version). 

Ver.  33.'.^Ihe  noise  thereof  showeth  oon- 
cerning  it;  or,  concerning  him.  The  loud 
crash  proclaims  the  fierceness  of  God's 
anger.  The  cattle  also  concerning  the 
vapour ;  rather,  it  showeth  the  cattle  also  con- 
cerning Mm  that  goeth  up;  i.e.  the  very 
cattle  also  feel  that  God  is  in  the  storm, 
rides  upon  it,  and  "goeth  up"  (corap.  Ps. 
xlvii.  5).  The  rendering  of  the  Revised 
Version,  "(It  showeth)  the  cattle  also  con- 
cerning tlie  dtorm  that  cometh  up,"  is  very 
weak,  and  unworthy  of  guch  an  orator  aa 
Efihu. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 ^21. — Elihu  to  Job :  3.  A  sermon  on  the  Divine  administration.     I.  Thb 

PBBACHUB  INTRODUCES  HIMSBLI'.  *l.  As  having  something  fwther  to  say.  A  man 
who  has  nothing  to  communicate  should  not  emerge'  from  the  safe  regions  of  obscurity 
which  Providence  designs  he  should  adorn.  But  alas !  of  preachers,  orators,  lecturers, 
talkers,  who  babble  on  without  contributing  anything  to  elucidate  their  themes  or 
enlighten  their  hearers,  however  much  to  gratify  themselves,  the  number  is  legion. 
The°first  requirement  in  one  who  aspires  to  be  a  teacher  of  men,  whether  from  the 
pulpit  or  from  the  platform,  is  that  he  have  something  to  impart.  When  in  Zeohariah's 
vision  the  angel  was  dkected  to  "run,"  and  "speak  to  the  young  man"  with  the 
measuring-line,  he  was  at  the  same  time  entrusted  with  a  messsage  (Zech.  ii.  4).  Ihe 
preacher  who  habitually  delivers  sermons  of  the  vacuous  and  windy  order  affords 
perfectly  sufficient  evidence  of  having  mistaken  his  calling.  Neither  God  nor  Christ 
ever  commissioned  an  ambassador  without  giving  him  a  message.  2.  As  proposing  to 
speak  in  God's  behalf.  Of  the  controversy  which  Job  carried  on  with  Bliphaz,  Bildad, 
and  Zophar,  Elihu  disposed  by  a  simple  expression  of  indignation  (oh.  xxxii.  3, 12). 
The  full  strength  of  his  ability  was  directed  to  maintain  the  cause  of  God  against  Job, 
and  to  ascribe°righteousness  to  One  whom  Job  had  charged  with  want  of  equity.  So 
the  mission  of  the  Christian  pulpit  is  not  to  plunge  into  the  labyrinthine  intricacies  of 
theological  discussion,  in  the  hope  of  definitely  pronouncing  upon  long-standmg,  world- 
famous  controversies  like  those  which  engaged  the  attention  of  Milton's  erudite  devils 
('Paradise  Lost,'  bk.  ii.  559),  but  to  speak  with  men  on  God's  behalf— on  the  one  hand, 
to  ascribe  right  to  God,  i.e.  to  vindicate  the  Divine  character,  the  Divine  administration, 
the  Divine  redemption  as  being  in  perfect  accord  with  right  and  truth ;  and  on  the 
other  hand,  to  bring  sinful  men  to  a  right  state  of  mind  and  heart  towards  God. 
It  is  a  profanation  of  the  sacred  office  of  the  ministry  when  it  is  employed  to  diffuse 
philosophy,  to  propagate  science,  to  advance  politics,  to  promote  what  is  ca,lled  culture 
as  distinguished  from  religion— in  short,  to  do  anything  that  does  not  directly  con- 
tribute to  either  the  vindication  of  God  or  the  salvation  of  man.  3.  As  offering  a  wide 
and  comprehensive  view  of  his  subject.  The  chief  fault  of  controversialists,  and  one 
requiring  to  be  guarded  against  even  by  the  wisest  and  fairest,  is  that  ot  one-sided 
presentation,  commonly  resulting  in  exaggerated  statement,  rash  generalization, 
unwarranted  deduction.  Such  a  fault  usually  proceeds  from  incapacity  to  perceive 
that  truth  is  many-sided,  or  inability  to  grasp  more  sides  than  one ;  from  unwillingness 
to  admit  that  aspects  of  truth  may  be  presented  to  one  which  are  denied  to  another, 


680  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvi.  1-33. 


or  from  overweening  self-conceit  whicli  supposes  notliing  can  be  accurate  which  self 
does  not  see.  Job  and  the  three  friends  are  good  illustrations  of  men  who  look  at 
the  same  object  (e.g.  the  Divine  administration)  from  different  standpoints,  and  pronounce 
each  other  wrong.  Elihu  Undertook  to  present  views  derived  from  an  extensive 
induction  of  [larticulurs,  from  a  many-sided  contemplation  of  truth,  from  long  and  deep 
reflection.  So  should  preachers  aim  at  setting  forth  only  such  expositions  of  Divine 
truth  as  have  been  gathered  by  patient  industry  and  diligent  research,  of  the  widest 
and  minutest  sort,  in  the  volume  of  the  Scriptures,  in  the  books  of  nature  and  history, 
in  the  records  of  experience ;  and  even  these  only  after  they  have  been  subjected  to 
careful  inspection  and  personally  abaofbed  by  deep  meditation.  4.  As  speaking  with 
the  utmost  sincerity.  Elihu  promised  that  his  words  should  not  be  false  as  to  matter, 
disingenuous  as  to  aim,  or  beguiling  as  to  form  (ver,  4) ;  and  neither  should  the 
utterances  of  a  preacher  in  any  one  of  these  respects  deviate  from  the  straight  path  of 
rectitude.  What  he  offers  to  the  acceptance  of  his  audience  should  be  the  unmixed 
truth  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  2, 7 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  2),  presented  not  "  with  enticing 
words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power ''  (1  Cor.  ii.  4, 
13),  and  exhibited  with  no  ulterior  motive  of  personal  agsjrandizement,  but  with  honest 
endt-avour  to  advance  God's  glory  in  man's  salvation  (2  Cor.  iv.  2).  Soundness  of 
doctrine,  simplicity  of  speech,  singleness  of  aim,  are  qualifications  indispensable  for  an 
efficient  ministry.  5.  As  possessed  of  b»  adequate  acquaintance  with  his  theme.  In 
claiming  to  be  "  perfect  in  knowledge  "  (ver.  4),  Elihu  may  be  only  asserting  his  honesty 
of  purpose  (Umbreit,  Caiey,  Cook),  but  the  application  of  the  same  phrase  to  God  (ch. 
xxxvii.  16)  makes  it  probable  that  he  here  alludes  to  the  "  faultlessness  and  clearness 
of  peroeptioa  "  (Delitzsoh)  with  which  he  apprehends  "  the  theodicy  which  he  opposes 
to  Job,"  and  the  intensity  of  that  inward  conviction  which  he  holds  as  to  its  truth 
(Cook).  So  again  should  God's  prophets  and  Chjist's  preachers,  by  prayerful  study 
of  the  Divine  Word,  by  prolonged  cogitation  on  the  themes  they  design  to  diseuss,  and 
in  particular  by  humble  dependence  on  that  Spirit  who  instructed  Elihu,  labour  to 
arrive  at. the  veritable  truth  of  God,  and  to  have  as  complete  an  understanding  thereof 
as  possible,  that  so,  in  all  their  utterances,  they  may  be  able  to  say,  like  Christ,  "  We 
speak  that  we  do  know"  (John  iii.  11);  like  David,  "I  believed:  therefore  have  I 
spoken"  (Ps.  cxvi.  10);  and  like  St.  Paul,  "We  also  believe,  and  therefore  speak" 
(2  Cor.  iv.  13). 

II.  The  pkbaohbr  announobb  his  theme.  1.  The  character  of  the  Divine  Being. 
Introduced  by  a  "  Behold !  "  to  mark  its  worthiness  of  Job's  attention  and  admiration. 
(1)  Mighty.  Meaning  exalted  in  station,  lofty  in  rank  or  quality  of  being,  and  resist- 
less in  power — a  point  frequently  descanted  on  by  Job  himself  (e.g.  ch.  ix.  4 ;  xii.  13), 
as  well  as  by  the  friends.  (2)  Condescending.  Despising  not  any,  acting  not  scorn- 
fully, as  Job  insinuated  God  did  in  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  his  entreaties,  and  regarding 
his  misery  without  concern  (ch.  x.  3;  xix.  7  ;  xxiii.  13).  But  the  Supreme  Governor 
of  the  universe,  according  to  Elihu,  is  too  exalted  a  Being  to  act  unjustly,  or  even 
unkindly,  towards  any,  even  the  meanest,  of  his  creatures.  On  the  contrary,  his  very 
greatness  is  the  best  guarantee  for  his  absolute  impartiality  and  condescending  kind- 
ness. That  God  despises  nothing  he  has  made,  neither  man  nor  beast,  but  watches 
with  loving  care  over  the  least  as  well  as  the  greatest  of  his  works,  was  asserted  by 
Christ  (Matt.  x.  29),  and  experienced  by  David  (Ps.  xl.  17),  and  may  be  confirmed  by 
a  reference  to  nature  itself,  in  which  the  smallest  objects  (e.g.  flowers  and  insects) 
have  lavished  on  them  the  largest  amount  of  skill  in  their  construction,  decoration,  and 
preservation.  This  combination  of  strength  and  beauty,  of  power  and  gentleness,  of 
dignity  and  condescension,  which  Elihu  proclaims  to  be  characteristic  of  God,  was 
eminently  exemplified  in  Christ,  and  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  moral  greatness 
in  man.  (3)  Wise.  "  Mighty  in  strength  of  heai  t "  (ver.  5  ),  the  Divine  Being  can 
penetrate  through  all  disguises,  discovering  right  and  wrong  everywhere,  at  all  times, 
and  altogether.  Besides  being  of  infinite  power  and  of  great  kindness,  he  is  also  of 
omniscient  understanding.  2.  27je  character  of  the  Divine  administration.  (1) 
Punitive,  or  destructive  towards  the  ungodly  :  "  He  preserveth  not  the  life  of  ^e 
wicked"— the  doctrine  of  the  friends  (ch.  v.  2;  viii.  12, 13;  xi.  20),  but  here  advanced 
with  greater  fairness  of  statement  (vide  infra) ;  and  (2)  gracious,  or  preservative  towards 
the  pions :  "  He  giveth  right  to  the  poor,"  or  afflicted,  ».«.  he  allotteth  to  them  what 


OB.  xxxvi.  1--33.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  681 

is  just,  what  is  in  moral  and  Bpiritunl  harmony  with  their  conrlition,  viz.  deliverance 
and  salvation — also  a  tenet  of  the  friends  (ch.  v.  17 — 27  ;  viii.  5 — 7 ;  xi.  13 — 19),  though 
here  ^ain  set  forth  with  more  precision  and  moderation  than  by  them. 

III,  Thb  pbeachbk  develops  his  aroument.  1,  The  Divine  treatment  of  the 
righteous.  (1)  Watching  over  them  while  doing  right.  "  He  withdraweth  not  his 
eyes  from  the  righteous  " — a  frequently  stated  doctrine  of  Scripture  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9  ; 
Ps.  i.  6 ;  xxxiv.  15 ;  ProT.  x.  3 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  7 ;  xxvii.  3) ;  illustrated  by  the  cases  of 
Noah  (Gen.  vii.  1),  the  Israelites  (Bxod.  iii,  7),  David  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1),  and  even  Job 
himself  (ch.  xxiii.  10) ;  and  here  declared  to  be  of  universal  application,  whether  the 
objects  of  his  observation  are  kings  on  the  throne,  like  David,  Solomon,  Hezeldah,  and 
Josiah,  or  prisoners  in  af9iction,  like  Joseph  in  Egypt,  Daniel  in  Babylon,  or  St.  Paul 
in  Philippi.  (2)  Bewarding  them  for  their  piety,  "  With  kings  are  they  \i.e.  the 
righteous]  on  the  throne;  yea,  he  doth  establish  them  for  ever,  and  they  are  exalted." 
Sooner  or  later,  the  righteous  are  advanced  to  a  state  of  regal  prosperity ;  sometimes 
literally,  as  with  Joseph,  David,  Daniel ;  but  always  spiritually,  like  the  chosen  people, 
who  were  made  '•  a  kingdom  of  priests  "  (Bxod.  xix.  6),  and  lil?e  Christians,  who  are 
constituted  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God"  (Rev.  i.  6 ;  v.  10 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9)  and  appointed 
to  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  (3)  Instructing  them  when  afflicted.  Assuming  that  the 
cords  and  fetters  which  hold  them  have  been  imposed  as  an  act  of  mercy  by  God  (ch, 
V.  17;  Ps.  xciv.  12;  Prov,  iii,  11 ;  Eev,  iii,  12),  Elibu  directs  attention  to  a  richer 
benefaction  than  the  affliction,  viz.  the  special  education  they  receive  from  God  during 
its  continuance — an  education  in  its  character  (a)  gracious,  being  imparted  by  God, 
chiefly  through  his  Word  and  Spirit ;  (6)  convincing,  unfolding  to  them  the  sin  of 
which  they  have  been  guilty;  (c)  humbling,  pointing  out  the  foolish  pride  and  vain- 
glory from  which  it  has  proceeded ;  (d)  admonitory,  warning  them  of  the  danger  in 
which  they  continue  while  impenitent ;  (e)  authoritative,  enabling  their  awakened 
consciences  to  feel  the  urgent  duty  of  departing  from  evil ;  and  (/)  efficacious,  leading 
in  the  case  of  every  genuine  child  of  God  to  a  hearty  return  to  God's  ways,  (4) 
Eestoring  them  when  penitent.  Defining  that  submission  they  accord  to  Gfod  as  a 
hearing  and  serving  (the  essential  ingredients  of  all  true  contrition),  Blihu  depicts 
them  as  finishing  their  days  in  the  midst  of  "  good,"  i.e.  of  every  sort  of  pure  enjoy- 
ment, and  their  years  in  the  midst  of  pleasures,  or  things  of  loveliness  and  true  delight. 
2,  The  Divine  treatment  of  the  unrighteous.  One  principal  aim  of  affliction  is  to  sift 
the  unrighteous  from  the  righteous.  As  the  latter  are  distinguished  by  their  penitential 
return  to  God,  so  the  former  are  recognized  by  opposite  characteristics,  neither  hearing 
God's  voice  (ver.  12 ;  cf,  John  xviii,  37)  nor  submitting  to  God's  hand,  but  cherishing 
wrath  and  indignation  against  God's  justice  in  afflicting  them  (ver.  13),  nor  praying 
for  God's  help  (ver.  13)  when  he  has  bound  them,  but  either  enduring  in  sullen  silence 
or  howling  in  impatient  anguish.  Accordingly,  God  leaves  them  to  their  richly  merited 
and  naturally  evolved  doom,  of  dying  (1)  suddenly :  "  They  shall  pass  away  by  the 
sword,"  the  allusion  being  not  so  much  to  the  violent  manner  of  their  departure,  as  to 
its  being  the  result  of  a  judicial  visitation ;  (2)  hopelessly :  "  They  shall  die  without 
knowledge" — "  without  having  attained  to  wisrlom"  (ch.  iv.  21),  having  missed  the 
true  end  of  their  existence,  having  failed  to  reach  that  knowledge  of  God  in  which 
alone  lies  salvation  (John  xvii.  2),  like  the  Gentiles  of  whom  Paul  writes,  "  Having 
no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world  "  (Bph.  ii.  12) ;  (3)  prematurely :  "  They 
[literally, '  their  souls '],  die  in  youth  "  (ver.  14),  being  cut  down  while  as  yet  they  are 
only  standing  on  the  threshold  of  life,  their  sun  going  down  while  it  is  yet  noon  (Amos 
viii.  9),  like  Ahaziah  (2  Kings  viii.  26),  Alexander  the  Great, and  others;  (4)  filthily: 
"  Their  life  is  among  the  unclean,"  i.e.  having  spent  their  days  in  sensuality  and 
prematurely  enervating  incontinence,  like  the  sodomites  (margin),  like  the  consecrated 
men  who  practised  nameless  lewdness  in  heathen  temples  (1  Kings  xiv.  24 ;  xv.  12  ; 
xxii,  47),  like  those  whom  St.  Paul  describes  as  "  dishonouring  their  own  bodies  between 
themselves"  (Bom.  i,  24—27),  they  were  permitted  to  die  as  they  had  lived,  and  to 
find  a  grave  in  the  moral  filthiness  in  which  they  had  wallowed,  thus  "  receiving  in 
themselves  that  recompense  of  their  error  which  was  meet." 

IV.  The  pbeaohbe  applies  his  discourse.  Generally,  to  the  whole  body  of  the 
righteous  (ver.  15),  but  more  particularly  to  Job,  by  setting  forth :  1.  The  Messing  h« 
had  missed.    If  instead  of  murmuring  and  repining  under  God's  chastisements,  he  had 


582  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [ch.  xxsvl  1—33, 


yielded  penitential  submission,  God  would  ere  now  have  interposed  for  his  deliverance, 
and  rescued  him  from  the  niouth  of  distress,  inciting  him  forward  till  he  had  reached 
a  broad  place  where,  literally,  wiiose  "  beneath  "  (ground)  would  have  been  no  straitness, 
and  where  the  letting  down  of  his  table,  i.e.  the  food  set  thereon,  should  have  been  full 
of  fatness  (ver.  16).  So  God  engages  to  do  for  all  who  humbly  trust  his  grace 
and  power  (1)  to  deliver  them  in  time  of  trouble  (2  Kings  xx.  6 ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  19 ;  xli. 
1;  xci.  14;  xcvii.  10),  as  he  snatched  David  from  the  jaws  of  the  lion  and  the  bear 
(1  Sam.  xvii.  37;  Ps.  xviii.  16, 17);  (2)  to  establish  them  in  ease  and  comfort,  setting 
them  down  in  large  places,  as  he  did  David  (Ps.  xviii.  19)  and  a  later  Hebrew  bard 
(Ps.  cxviii.  5),  as  he  did  with  Israel  when  he  brought  her  out  of  Egypt  first  into  the  wilder- 
ness and  then  into  Canaan  (Exod.  iii.  8 ;  Judg.  xviii.  10),  and  as  he  does  with  believers 
when  he  frees  them  from  condemnation  and  introduces  them  into  the  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God ;  and  (3)  to  provide  for  them  a  table  in  the  wilderness,  as  again  he  did 
for  Israel  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  19)  and  for  David  (Ps.  xxiii.  5),  as  he  has  done  for  all  the  world 
in  the  gospel  (Isa.  xxv.  6 ;  Matt.  xxii.  1),  and  for  Christ's  people  in  the  Holy  Supper 
(I  Cor.  X.  21 ;  xi.  20).  2.  The  sin  he  had  committed.  Job  had  "  fulfilled  the  judgment 
of  the  wicked"  (ver.  17);  i.e.  like  the  wicked,  he  had  pronounced  a  judicial  sentence 
upon  God  and  his  dealings.  Instead  of  humbly  acquiescing  in  the  Divine  dispensations, 
he  had,  according  to  another  rendering  of  the  previous  verse,  suffered  himself  to  be 
seduced  from  listening  to  the  voice  of  aiHiotion  by  his  boundless  prosperity  and  by  the 
ease  of  his  table,  which  was  full  of  fatness  (Bwald,  Dillmann,  Canon  Cook),  so  that  he 
had  filled  up  the  measure  of  his  iniquity  like  a  common  evil-doer.  It  reveals  a  terrible 
declension  on  the  part  of  a  good  man  when  he  can  behave  no  better  under  God's 
chastisements,  and  think  no  better  of  God  because  of  them  than  an  ordinary  sinner. 
Yet  good  men,  if  left  to  themselves,  may  come  to  this.  Therefore  let  us  not  be  high- 
minded,  but  fear.  3.  The  danger  he  had  incurred.  In  consequence  of  Job's  insensate 
obstinacy  and  impenitent  censcriousness  tc  wards  God,  "justice  and  judgment  had  taken 
lioll  on  him;"  he  was  now  really  undergoing  such  punishments  as  were  due  to  wicked 
men  from  the  even  hand  of  justice.  If  good  men  by  their  ill  behaviour  place  them- 
selves amongst  the  wicked,  it  need  not  surprise  them  if  God  should  beat  them,  i.e. 
judge  and  punish  them,  as  the  wicked.  Such  judging  as  Job  had  been  guilty  of 
bordered  close  upon,  and  was  commonly  followed  hard  by,  the  judgment  of  God.  The 
only  judging  that  a  good  man  can  with  safety  perform  is  upon  himself  (1  Cor.  xi.  31, 
32).  4.  The  admonitions  he  required.  (1)  Against  declining  into  infidel  scoffing. 
" Because  there  is  anger  \_sc.  in  thy  heart],  let  it  not  entice  thee  to  scorning"  (ver.  18). 
Of  this  be  had  indeed  been  accused  by  Zophar  (ch.  xi.  3),  and  not  entirely  acquitted 
by  Blihu  (ch.  xxxiv.  37),  who  now,  however,  solemnly  advertises  him  that  that  would 
be  the  certain  issue  of  it  if  he  yielded  to  his  passioivate  feelings  against  God.  The 
scoruer's  chair  is  the  common  terminus  of  such  as  begin  by  walking  in  the  way  of  the 
ungodly.  (2)  Against  undervaluing  the  Divine  wrath.  "Because  there  is  wrath" 
(sc.  with  God),  beware  "  lest  ha  take  thee  away  with  a  stroke."  "  Because  sentence 
against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is 
fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil"  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  But  the  wicked  man  has  no  guarantee 
that  the  Divine  indignation  against  sin  may  not  flame  forth  suddenly  against  him,  as 
it  did  against  Cain,  the  antediluvians,  the  cities  of  the  plain,  Pharaoh,  Korah,  Dathan, 
and  Abiram,  Haman,  Herod,  and  others.  (3)  Against  trusting  to  any  self-provided 
ransom  or  atonement.  "  Then  a  great  ransom  cannot  deliver  thee  "  (ver.  18).  Neither 
wealth  (ver.  19)  nor  suffering  (ver.  18)  can  avert  the  Divine  wrath.  Only  one  Ransom 
has  sufficient  merit  to  turn  aside  the  sword  of  judgment.  (4)  Against  thinking  that 
either  wealth  or  any  personal  efforts  can  secure  salvation.  "  Shall  thy  riches  place  thee 
beyond  distress,  and  all  the  efforts  of  thy  strength  ?  "  (ver.  19).  No ;  nothing  will  except 
repentance  and  faith.  (5)  Against  longing  for  a  speedy  death.  "  Desire  not  the  night, 
when  people  are  out  off  in  their  place  "  (ver.  20).  Of  this  verse,  of  which  a  commentator 
(Schultens)  gives  fifteen  different  explanations,  the  sense  clearly  is  that  Job  had  better 
be  careful  of  foolishly  indulging  in  any  such  wish  as  that  God  should  out  him  off  (ch. 
vi.  9 ;  vii.  15),  since  God  might  take  him  at  his  word  and  remove  him  from  his  place 
below,  i.e.  from  the  earth  (Delitzsch),  or  to  a  place  below  (Carey).  Death  removed 
whole  peoples,  and  would  have  no  difficulty  in  removing  him.  And  Job  might  find  his 
expectation  disappointed.    Instead  of  going  up  to  an  ameliorated  condition,  he  might 


OH,  xsjxvi.  1— 33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  5«3 

rather  at  death  descend  into  a  worse  (Umhreit).  No  man  that  knows  what  (^cafh  is 
will  desire  it  sooner  than  God  is  pleased  to  send  it.  (6)  Against  preferring  wiclsedness 
to  misery.  "  Talie  heed,  regard  not  iniquity ;  for  this  hast  thou  chosen  rather  than 
affliction "  (ver.  21).  That  is,  rather  than  endure  with  meekness  Grod's  chastening 
hand.  Job  had  sinfully  desired  to  die,  independently  altogether  of  whether  or  not  it 
was  God's  will.  A  common  temptation  to  saints  no  less  than  to  ordinary  men,  to 
choose  sin  rather  than  suffering.  To  elect  to  die  rather  than  sin  is  the  triumph  of  grace. 
Learn :  1.  The  true  dignity  of  a  gospel  minister  as  one  who  speaks  for  God  and 
Christ.  2.  The  special  business  of  a  gospel  minister,  viz.  to  vindicate  the  ways  of  God 
with  man.  3.  The  binding  duty  of  a  gospel  minister,  to  give  himself  to  reading  and 
meditation.  4.  The  lofty  aim  of  the  gospel  minister,  always  to  speak  from  personal 
conviction.  5.  The  supreme  glory  of  the  Godhead,  as  combining  infinite  justice  and 
infinite  mercy,  infinite  greatness  and  infinite  condescension.  6.  The  extreme  anxiety 
God  manifests  to  bring  men  to  repentance  and  salvation.  7.  The  undoubted  cer- 
tainty that  the  impenitent  and  uniigiiteous  will  ultimately  perish.  8.  The  absolute 
impossibility  of  salvation  for  those  who  despise  the  divinely  provided  ransom.  9.  The 
great  danger  of  indulging  in  wrath  again'st  either  God  or  his  dispensations.  10.  The 
deep  delusion  of  those  who  imagine  death  to  be  a  blessing  to  any  but  God's  people. 

Vers.  22 — 33. — Elihu  to  Job :  4.  A  sermon  on  (he  greatness  of  Qod.  1.  Absoltttb 
IN  HI8  BOVERBIGNTT.  1.  BuUng  by  his  own  power.  "Behold,  God  exalteth"  {sc. 
himself),  i.e.  showeth  himself  to  be  exalted,  "acteth  loftily"  (Delitzsoh)  "in  his 
strength  "  (ver.  22).  The  universal  empire  of  God  is  based  on  his  omnipotence.  With 
him  might  and  right  are  co-ordinate  and  coextensive.  "  He  ruleth  by  his  power  fur 
ever ;  his' eyes  behold  the  nations :  let  not  the  rebellious  exalt  themselves  "  (Ps.  Ixvi.  7). 
2.  Holding  dominion  from  no  superior.  "  Who  hath  enjoined  him  his  way  ?  "  (ver.  23). 
Princes  and  potentates  of  earth  derive  their  authority  from  him  (Prov.  viii.  16) ;  the 
ever-blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  derives  his  from 
none.  "Dominion  and  fear  are  with  him"  (ch.  xxv.  2).  Yea,  saith  Jehovah,  "I  am 
the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else"  (Isa.  xlv.  18).  3.  Admitting  of  no  inspection. 
"Who  can  say.  Thou  hast  wrought  iniquity?"  (ver.  23).  As  the  Almighty  brooks  no 
superior  or  rival  on  his  throne,  so  admits  he  of  no  opposition  to  his  work.  "  Whatso- 
ever his  soul  desireth,  that  he  doeth  "  (ch.  xxiii.  13).  As  none  can  interpose  to  say, 
"What  doest  thou?"  (Dan.  iv.  35),  so  none  'can  claim  a  right  to  subject  his  work  to 
critical  inspection.  To  pass  judgment  on  it  is  for  a  creature  to  be  guilty  of  the  highest 
arrogance.     Substantially  this  was  the  sin  of  Job. 

II.  Incomparable  in  his  TJSACHma.  "Who  teacheth  like  him?"  (ver.  22).  In 
the  judgment  of  Ehhu,  one  of  the  principal  ends  contemplated  by  God's  providential 
government  of  the  world  was  the  education  of  men  (ch.  xxxiii.  14;  xxxv.  11 ;  xxxvi.  9). 
Hence  by  Elihu  God  is  styled  an  Instructor  or  Teacher — Moreh,  translated  by  the 
LXX.  "  Lord."  So  God  represented  himself  to  Moses  (Exod.  iv.  15),  to  Israel  (Exod. 
XX.  1),  to  David  (Ps.  xxxii.  8).  So  is  God  to  his  people  generally  (Isa.  liv.  13  ;  Jer. 
xxxL  33,  34;  Micah  iv.  2;  John  vi.  45).  As  a  Teacher  of  men,  God  surpasses  all 
other  instructors,  possessing  qualifications  never  found,  unitedly  or  severally,  to  perfectly 
exist  except  in  himself.  1.  Ability.  Many  undertake  .to  instruct  others  who  are 
wholly  destitute  of  the  capacity  to  understand  either  their  subjects,  their  pupils,  or 
themselves.  But  no  such  deficiency  can  be  with  God,  who,  besides  knowing  hinisulf, 
comprehends  all  things  and  accurately  gauges  all  men.  This  qualification  was  posaes.sed 
in  an  eminent  degree  by  Christ.  2.  Authority.  The  Divine  authority  to  teach  and 
the  authoritative  character  of  the  Divine  teaching  are  based  upon  God's  Lordship  over 
man,  and  God's  perfect  knowledge  of  tliat  which  he  teaches.  So  Christ,  for  exactly 
the  same  reasons,  spake  with  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes  (Matt.  vii.  29).  3. 
Variety.  Like  every  intelligent  instructor,  Qod  employs  different  methods  m  teaching 
—his  works  (ch.  xxxv.  11),  his  Word  (Ps.  xciv.  10),  his  providential  dispensations  (ch. 
xxxiii  16)  his  Spirit  (Seh.  ix.  20;  Prov.  i.  23).  So  did  Christ  instruct  his  followers, 
by  his  works  (Matt.  vi.  26—31),  by  his  Word  (Luke  xxiv.  27),  by  his  providences 
(Luke  xiii.  1—5),  by  his  Spirit  (Luke  xii.  12 ;  John  xiv.  26).  4.  Suitability.  God's 
teaching  is  always  adapted  to  the  occasion  (Ps.  xxxii.  8 ;  Isa.  xlviii.  17) ;  and  to  the 
capacities  of  his  scholars  (Isa.  xxviii.  9, 10);  and  so  likewise  was  Christ's  (John  xvi. 


584  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB,  ^oh.  xxxn.  1-33. 

12 ;  Mark  x.  23).  The  Holy  Spirit  also  proceeds  in  the  same  gradual  fashion  in  the 
work  of  illuminating  darkened  minds.  5.  Simplicity.  Aiming  at  the  good  of  those 
who  hear,  God  always  teaches  in  the  plainest  and  direotest  manner  possible,  speaking 
so  clearly,  distinctly,  and  intelligibly,  that  he  reqiurcs,  as  with  Adam  (Gen.  iii.  9)  and 
with  Noah  (Gen.  vi.  13),  with  Abimelech  (Gen.  xx.  3)  and  with  Laban  (Gen.  xxxi. 
24),  to  speak  only  once ;  with  snch  earnestness  and  eagerness  that  he  often  speaks 
twice,  as  he  did  with  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  11),  and  as  Christ  did  with  Saul  (Acts  ix.  4); 
yea,  with  a  patience  and  gentleness  so  admirable  that  he  even  condescends  to  speak 
thrice,  as  he  did  with  Samuel  (1  Sam.  iii.  10).  6.  Desirability.  The  teaching  God 
gives  is  on  subjects  which  it  most  behoves  man  to  know,  in  particular  on  that  which 
maketh  wise  unto  salvation — the  Being,  character,  and  purpose  of  God ;  the  original 
dignity,  present  condition,  and  future  destiny  of  man ;  the  nature,  guilt,  and  penalty 
o;  sin ;  the  Person,  offices,  and  work  of  Christ ;  the  source,  means,  and  end  of  salvation ; 
the  law  of  life  and  the  rule  of  duty ;  the  way  to  die  and  the  path  to  glory  everlasting. 
7.  Effleiency.  Desirable  and  complete  as  such  a  programme  of  instruction  is,  no  one 
can  learn  it  by  his  own  unaided  powers  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  But  God  can  guide  his  people 
into  the  understanding  of  it  in  all  its  fulness'(Ps.  xxv.  9). 

III.  Immaculate  in  his  holiness.  "  Who  can  say,  Thou  hast  wrought  iniquity  ?  " 
(ver.  23).  1.  Holiness  insepardble/rom  the  idea  of  God.  A  Being  who  can  be  charged 
with  iniquity  cannot  possibly  be  Divine.  Hence  God  can,  in  no  sense  or  degree,  be  the 
Author  of  sin.  2.  Men  prone  to  connect  sin  toiih  God.  The  heathen  do  so  when  they 
worship  deities  like  themselves — "  gods  fierce,  rapacious,  cruel,  and  unjust."  Philo- 
sophers do  so  when  they  hold  God  responsible  for  everything  that  exists.  Even  trood 
people  do  so  when  they  charge  God  with  inequality  or  injustice  in  his  ways.  3.  Ood's 
noUness  lari/ely  insisted  on  in  Scripture.  The  inveterate  tendency  of  the  fallen  heart 
to  forget  the  Divine  purity  demands  that  this  be  frequently  held  up  for  contemplation 
(Exod.xv.  11;  Deut.  xxxii.  4 ;  ISam.  ii.  2;  ch.iv.  17;  xxxiv.  10;  F8.xcii.l5;  cxi.9; 
Isa.  Ivii.  15 ;  Bev.  iv.  8). 

IV.  Unseaeohablb  ih  hib  Being.  "Behold,  God  is  great,  and  we  know  him  not" 
(ver.  26).  1.  We  know  him  not  directly.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  said 
Christ  (John  i.  18);  with  which  agrees  God's  word  to  Moses  (Bxod.  xxxiii.  20),  and 
John's  word  to  Christians  (1  John  iv.  12).  God  reveals  himself  to  man  in  creation 
(Ps.  xix.  1 ;  Bom.  i.  20),  in  providence  (ch.  ix.  11,  sgq.),  in  Christ  (John  xiv.  9 ;  2 
Cor.  iv.  6 ;  Col.  i.  15),  through  the  Spirit  (Matt.  xi.  27).  2.  We  know  him  not  com- 
pletely. It  is  certain  that  the  infinite  God  will  never  be  entirely  comprehended  by  a 
finite  creature.  But  of  even  such  a  measure  and  degree  of  knowledge  as  is  possible  to 
m;in,  it  is  likewise  true  that  we  have  not  reached  the  full  measure.  "  Now  we  know  in 
part"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12);  Hereafter  all  that  can  be  known  of  God  by  finite  creatures  will 
be  realized.  3  We  know  him  not  clearly.  Even  what  we  do  apprehend  of  the  Divine 
Being  is  involved  in  much  obscurity.  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly  "  (1  Cor. 
xiii.  12).  Hereafter  his  servants  shall  behold  his  face  with  open  vision  (Rev.  xxii.  4). 
Yet  for  all  that,  notwithstanding  these  limitations :  4.  We  know  him  not  imaginarily, 
but  really.  That  is,  our  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Being,  though  neither  direct,  nor 
adequate,  nor  perfectly  clear,  is  real,  acpurate,  and  reliable  so  far  as  it  goes. 

V.  Eternal  in  his  existence.  "  Neither  can  the  number  of  his  years  be  searched 
out "  (ver.  26).  The  language  which  ascribes  years  to  God  is,  of  course,  anthropo- 
morpiiic  (Ps.  cii.  24).  Both  Blihu  and  the  Hebrew  bard  intend  to  represent  God  as 
"  without  beginning  of  days  or  end  of  years,"  as  existing  "  from  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting," as  exalted  high  above  all  the  permutations  and  vicissitudes  of  creat^  life,  and 
therefore  as  removed  completely  beyond  the  sphere  of  man's  judgment  or  criticism. 

VI.  Wonderful  in  his  working.  To  this  thought  Elihu  recurs  in  detail  in  the 
ensuing  chapter  (vide  homiletios).  In  the  mean  time  he  alludes  to  certain  natural 
pi  enomena  as  indicative  of  God's  excellent  power  in  working.  1.  Bain.  "For  he 
maketh  small  [literally, '  he  draweth  up,'  sc.  by  evaporation]  the  small  drops  of  water," 
after  which  "  they  pour  down  rain  [or,  '  as  rain'],  according  to  the  vapour  thereof,"  or 
"for  this  mist"  (Cook),  or  "in  connection  with  its  mist"  (Delitzsch).  It  is  not  the 
imderstanding  of  how  rain  is  formed  that  constitutes  either  the  wonder  or  the  difficulty 
of  the  phenomenon ;  it  is  the  making  of  rain,  the  institution  and  maintenance  of  those 
material  laws  and  forces  which  produce  rain.     It  is  here  that  Divine  power  is  required 


Ofi.  xxxvL  1— 33J  THE  BOOK  Of  JOa  585 

and  seen.  2.  Clouds,  "  Which  the  clouds  do  drop  and  distil  upon  man  abundantly  "  (ver. 
28).  Not  the  least  interesting  among  those  objects  which  attract  the  student  of  nature 
are  the  clouds  of  heaven,  which  receive  the  evaporated  moisture  of  earth,  and  retain  it 
floating  in  the  atmosphere  until  it  is  again  required  by  the  parched  soil.  Objects  of 
beauty  in  themselves,  they  strikingly  attest  the  almighty  power,  mittchless  wisdom,  and 
essential  goodness  of  God.  3.  Thunder.  "  Also  can  any  understand  the  spreadings  of 
the  clouds,  or  the  noise  of  his  tabernacle  ?  "  (ver.  29).  The  appearance  of  the  sky  in  a 
thunderstorm  is  what  the  poet  aims  at  depicting,  when  the  dark  clouds  spread  across 
the  firmament,  and  the  first  thunder-crash  falls  upon  the  ear  (vide  homiletics  on 
next  chapter).  4.  Lightning.  "  Behold,  he  spreadeth  his  light  upon  it,"  or  over  him- 
self (Hab.  iii.  4),  "  and  covereth  the  bottom  [literally, '  the  roots "]  of  the  sea  "  (ver. 
30) ;  t.e.  he  lights  up  the  whole  heaven,  and  even  illuminates  the  hidden  depths  of  the 
ocean  by  the  glare  of  his  lightning. 

VII.  Behbficbnt  in  hib  administration.  "  The  two  ideas  of  power  and  goodness 
are  associated  closely  in  Elihu's  mind ;  wheretis  the  three  friends  dwell  more  upon  the 
combination  of  power  and  justice,  and  Job  upon  that  of  power  and  wisdom.  Goodness, 
righteousness,  wisdom,  are  one  in  God;  various  aspects  under  which  the  essential 
principle  of  love  is  manifested  "  (Canon  Cook).  The  beneficence  of  the  Divine  adminis- 
tration in  nature  is  represented  in  a  twofold  form.  1  Negatively,  as  judgment  upon 
the  nations.  "For  by  them  judgeth  he  the  people  "  (ver.  31).  Seemingly  severe  in 
themselves,  God's  judgments  upon  the  wicked  men  and  nations  are  to  righteous  men 
and  nations  acts  of  grace  and  kindness.  It  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  that  sin  should 
be  chastised.  Love  no  less  than  justice  demands  that  the  wicked  should  be  overthrown. 
2.  Positively,  as  kindness  to  his  people.  "  He  giveth  meat  in  abundance."  In  this 
aspect  Elihu  thinks  of  the  rain,  the  clouds,  the  thunder,  the  lightning.  The  beneficent 
uses  of  these  and  other  ordinary  phenomena  of  nature  are  patent  to  the  si  ghtest  reflec- 
tion. The  rain  is  the  great  fertilizer  of  the  soil ;  the  cloud,  besides  serving  as  a  screen 
to  moderate  the  warmth  of  the  sun,  operates  to  prevent  the  too  speedy  radiation  of  the 
earth's  heat,  while  it  also  acts  as  the  great  rain-collector  and  distributor  for  the  parched 
ground  ;  the  thunderstorm  is  the  most  effective  of  all  atmospheric  purifiers  and  rectifiers. 

VIII.  Glorious  in  hib  manifestations.  Taking  advantage,  as  usual,  of  the  extreme 
obscurity  of  the  last  two  verses  (vide  Exposition),  and  availing  ourselves  of  the  more 
probable  of  the  offered  interpretations,  we  find  Elihu  suggesting  concerning  the  Divine 
manifestations  that  they  are :  1  Announced  by  the  elements.  Elihu  alludes,  it  is 
thought,  to  an  approaching  theophany,  of  which  the  thunderstorm  was  the  herald. 
"With  clouds  he  covereth  the  light," etc.;  literally,  "  Upon  both  hands  he  spreadeth  as 
a  covering  the  light"  (i.e.  the  lightning),  "and  commandeth  it  as  one  who  hitteth  the 
mark  "  (Delitzsch)  against  his  enemy  (Gesenius,  Umbreit),in  striking  (Carey)  whom  it 
shall  reach  (Canon  Cook).  So  was  God's  approach  to  Adam  after  he  had  fallen  announced 
by  a  rush  of  wind  through  the  garden  (Gen.  iii.  8) ;  to  Israel  by  thunders  and  lightnings 
and  the  noise  of  a  trumpet  (Exod.  xx.  18)  ;  to  Elijah  by  a  wind,  an  earthquake,  and  a 
fire  (1  Kings  x^x.  11).  So  was  God's  advent  to  the  world  at  the  Incarnation  proclaimed 
by  signs  and  wonders  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  The  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  at 
Pentecost  was  accompanied  by  a  rushing  mighty  wind.  The  return  of  God  to  judge  the 
world  will  be  attended  with  alarming  prodigies.  2.  Recognized  by  the  irrational  creation. 
To  the  herds  the  rumble  of  the  thunder  is  pictured  by  Elihu  as  announcing  the  arrival 
of  God.  So  when  Christ  the  Son  of  God  came  to  earth,  not  only  did  the  winds  and 
the  seas  obey  him  (Mark  iv.  41),  but  the  wild  beasts  gathered  round  him  and  forgot 
their  ferocity  (Mark  i.  13).  Among  the  signs  that  shall-foretell  his  second  coming  wil 
be  the  lying  down  of  the  wolf  with  the  lamb,  and  of  the  leopard  with  the  kid  (Isa. 

xi.  6 9).    '3.  Presented  to  man.    Neither  the  inanimate  creation  nor  the  irrational 

animals  can  consciously  apprehend  the  glory  of  God.  Hence  the  Divine  manifestations, 
though  heralded  and  unconsciously  recognized  by  them,  are  not  specifically  meant  for 
them,  but  for  man,  the  head  and  crown  of  the  material  globe.  To  man  alone  of  all 
God's  creatures  on  the  earth  belongs  the  power  of  apprehending  the  Divine  glory. 
Hence  God's  self-revelations  are  always  for  the  sake  of  man.  The  one  now  approaching 
was  for  Job's  sake.  The  Incarnation  was  for  the  sake  of  humanity.  The  second 
advent  will  be  for  the  sake  of  the  Church.  4.  Directed  against  unrighteousness.  "  The 
sound  thereof  (i.e.  the  thunder-crash)  announces  concerning  their  fierceness  of   wrath 


686  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  zxxvl  1—33. 


against  unrighteousness"  (Cook).  Even  so  the  first  Divine  manifestation  in  the  Incarna- 
tion and  cross  was  a  revelation  of  the  wrath  of  God  against  all  unrighteousness  of  men 
(Eom.  i.  18) ;  though  of  this  character  much  more  will  the  next  Divine  apocalypse 
partake.  5.  Designed  for  the  salvation  of  the  righteous.  According  to  another  render- 
ing (Umbreit),  Blihu  is  understood  to  say  that,  while  God  fills  both  his  hands  with 
light,  in  the  one  hand  he  holds  the  lightning-shaft  wherewith  to  strike  the  wicked,  but 
in  the  other  the  cheering  light  of  the  sun  to  reveal  to  his  friend,  and  even  unto  cattle 
and  to  plants.  It  may  remind  us  again  of  the  double  purpose  of  aU  God's  manifesta- 
tions. The  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  meant  destruction  to  Egypt,  but  emancipation  to 
Israel.  Even  the  gospel  is  a  savour  of  life  unto  gome,  but  of  death  unto  others.  _  When 
Christ  next  comes,  it  will  be  not  alone  to  punish  his  foes,  but  also  to  save  his  friends. 

Learn  :  1.  To  magnify  the  work  of  God.  2.  To  celebrate  the  praise  of  God.  3.  To 
reverence  the  Name  of  God.  4.  To  delight  in  the  revelation  of  God.  5.  To  acquiesce 
in  the  purpose  of  God.  6.  To  listen  to  the  teaching  of  God.  7.  To  accept  the 
salvation  of  Ck)d. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAETODS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1 — ch.  xxxvii.  24. — Elihu's  fourth  speech :  God  the  Loving,  the  Just,  and  the  Holy. 
In  the  preceding  discourses  of  Elihu,  he  has  dwelt  chiefly  upon  the  moral  relations  of 
man  to  God,  and  the  view  presented  of  God  has  been  chiefly  that  obtained  through  the 
medium  of  human  feelings  and  analogies.  His  present  discourse  rises  to  a  sublime  view 
of  him  as  the  infinitely  mighty  One,  the  wise  and  just  Father  of  mankind.  If  we 
supijose  that  during  this  address  the  storm  is  brewing  out  of  which  Jehovah  presently 
spiaks,  then  all  Elihu's  references  to  the  lightning,  the  thunder,  the  storm  and  rain 
receive,  as  he  proceeds,  their  splendid  illustration  from  the  sublime  scene  around,  and 
heighten  the  force  of  his  appeals, 

I.  Inteoduotioit.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  The  speaker  begins  by  announcing  that  he  has 
•omething  further  of  weight  to  say  in  justification  of  the  ways  of  God  to  man.  He  has 
"  words  for  God  "  to  utter.  Though  God's  works  are  his  justification,  and  he  needs  no 
defence  at  the  hands  of  man,  yet  it  may  be  said  that  the  free  exercise  of  reason,  in  setting 
forth  the  glory  of  his  goodness  and  justice,  is  an  acceptable  service  to  him.  If  he 
delights  in  the  unconscious  testimony  of  babes  and  sucklings  (Ps.  viii.),  still  more  must 
he  delight  in  the  conscious  spontaneous  offerings  of  man's  matured  thought  at  his  shrine. 
The  great  works  of  Christian  theologians  and  apologists,  such  as  Calvin's '  Institutes '  or 
Butler's  'Analogy,'  are  the  tributes  of  reason  to  the  honour  of  God.  But  they  are 
valueless  unless  they  have  that  quality  which  Elihu  so  emphatically  claims,  sincerity, 
truth.  He  who  ventures  to  speak  for  Gid  must  speak,  not  with  the  purpose  of  temporary 
expediency,  but  out  of  the  consciousness  of  eternity. 

II.  The  justice  of  God  eevbaled  in  the  history  of  man.  (Vers.  5 — 21.)  The 
course  of  life,  argues  the  speaker,  shows  that  a  chastening,  a  purifying,  but  at  the  same 
time  a  loving,  Power  is  at  work  in  the  world.  This  is  supported :  1.  By  a  general 
view  of  human  life.  (Vers.  6 — 15.)  Gk)d  is  revealed  in  the  diflferent  courses  of  men's 
lives  as  Power,  but  not  as  arbitrary  Power.  His  greatness  is  not  associated  with  con- 
tempt for  the  lowliness  of  man.  It  is  not  reckless  of  right  and  wrong.  It  upholds  the 
moral  order — the  godless  sink  unsupported  into  the  ruin  their  own  conduct  has  prepared 
for  them;  while  those  who  suffer  from  the  injustice  of  others  are  succoured  and  defended. 
God's  watchful  eye  is  upon  all  just  men,  from  the  king  whose  throne  he  establishes, 
whose  dignity  he  guards,  to  the  captive  in  his  chains,  to  the  beggar  in  his  misery. 
This,  ns  we  have  so  often  seen,  is  the  firm  foundation-truth  which  runs  beneath  the 
whole  of  this  book,  and  through  the  whole  of  the  Bible.  And  the  seemini;  exceptions 
to  these  principles  of  the  Divine  administration  are  now  explained  as  merely  seeming; 
for  they  come  under  the  principle  of  chastisement,  which  is  but  another  illustration  of 
love.  According  to  this  view — never  more  feelingly  set  forth  than  here — suffering  may 
be,  not  the  brand  of  guilt,  but  the  silent  token  of  love  in  the  form  of  discipline.  With- 
out positive  guilt  there  may  be  moral  stagnation,  in  which  the  germs  of  future  evil  are 
discovered  by  the  eye  of  the  Divine  Educator.  Evil  is  forming  in  tendency  or  thought 
when  it  has  not  blossomed  into  deeds.    Then  comes  the  visit  of  God  in  suffering  to 


CM.  xxxvL  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  Of  JOB.  587 

warn,  to  hint  of  danger,  to  "open  the  ear  "  to  instructions  that  were  thought  unneces- 
sary in  the  days  of  perfect  peace  and  self-complacency.  And  if  the  mind  yields  tc 
this  gracious  leading,  and  bends  itself  to  docility  to  this  new  revelation  of  the  holy 
will,  all  shall  yet  be  well.  The  season  of  depression  and  disaster  will  be  passed 
through,  and  the  sheep  who  have  heard  the  Shepherd's  voice  will  find  themselves  led 
once  more  into  the  green  pastures  of  content  (vers.  6 — 11).  But  the  God  who  is  revealed 
to  UB  in  this  tender  and  gracious  aspect  in  the  course  of  experience,  under  the  condition 
of  obedience,  becomes  clothed  in  sternness  and  severity  to  those  who  resist.  Those  wlio 
venture  to  war  with  law,  to  rebel  against  omnipotence  and  justice,  can  but  meet  an 
unhappy  doom.  In  wondrous  ways,  unknown  to  man,  God  is  able  to  bring  men  to 
their  destined  goal  (vers.  12 — 14).  The  great  lesson,  then,  is  to  betake  one's  self  to 
self-examination  (the  opening  of  the  ear)  and  to  prayer  when  the  visitants  of  God's 
chastening  love  are  knocking  at  the  door  of  our  heart.  The  lesson  is  expressed  by 
pointing  to  the  sad  examples  of  unsubmissive,  prayerless  lives!  These,  like  spois 
where  the  dew  falls  not,  cannot  thrive.  Hearts,  like  bare  rocks,  that  will  not  melt  in 
the  sun,  callous,  impenitent,  heedless,  perish  for  want  of  knowledge,  of  faith,  of  God ; 
but  those  whose  whole  nature  has  been  broken  up  and  laid  open  by  suffering  are 
prepared  to  receive  the  seed  of  eternal  wisdom  which  the  Divine  Husbandman  seeks  iu 
such  times  to  implant  (ver.  15).  2.  By  reference  to  Job's  vicissitudes.  (Vers.  16 — 21.) 
In  these  verses,  which  are  so  obscure  in  meaning  in  our  version,  a  deduction  is  made 
from  the  foregoing  principles  in  reference  to  the  case  of  Job.  In  ver.  16  the  verb  should 
be  taken  in  the  present,  "  God  is  leading,"  or  "  is  for  leading  "  him  out  of  his  present 
straitened  and  distressed  condition;  but  what  if  the  conditions  of  submission,  penitence, 
and  docility  are  wanting  in  Job  ?  Assuming  that  there  is  this  want,  solemn  warnings 
are  given — that  he  cannot,  if  in  a  state  of  sin,  escape  the  judgment  of  God;  that  if  ho 
allows  the  fire  of  suffering  to  madden  him  into  impiety  instead  of  purifying  his  spirit, 
he  will  find  himself  in  an  evil  plight,  for  no  cries  nor  efforts  can  avail  to  extricate  him 
from  the  fangs  of  doom.  Let  not  Job,  then,  says  the  speaker  (ver.  20),  perhaps 
pointing  to  the  dark  warning  of  the  sky,  long  after  the  night  (of  judgment) ;  for  whole 
peoples  pass  away  in  that  terrible  darkness  when  the  wrath  of  God  is  outpoured! 
And  to  conclude  the  warnings,  let  Job  beware  of  the  turning  of  the  heart  to  vanity — 
the  natural  thoughtlessness  of  mankind  in  presence  of  the  judgments  of  God.  The 
application  is  unfair  as  regards  Job ;  still,  we  are  reminded  indirectly  that  it  is  not 
sufficient  to  hold  a  true  theory  of  God's  moral  government  in  general,  without  apply- 
ing it  to  the  facts  of  our  own  lives.  Men  may  harshly  applygreat  principles  to  our 
character  and  condition  in  the  world ;  this  cannot  absolve  us  from  the  duty  of  applying 
them  truly  and  honestly  for  ourselves. 

III.  The  kighteousitess  of  God  revealed  in  nature.  (Ver.  22 — ch.  xxxvii.  24.) 
1.  The  wisdom  and  power  of  Ood  as  seen  in  nature's  wonders.  (Ver.  22 — ch.  xxxvii. 
13.)  Introduction.  (Vers.  22—25.)  The  sublime  power  of  God  fills  every  observer  of 
Nature  with  awe.  Who  is  a  Euler  as  he?  Who  can  improve  upon  Nature?  She  is 
the  great  mechanist,  artist,  designer,  executor.  Man  may  produce  new  varieties  of 
plants  and,  to  some  extent,  of  animals  by  the  exercise  of  intelligence,  but  "  o'er  that  art 
which  men  call  nature  is  another  art  which  nature  makes."  Art  is  the  highest  effort 
of  human  nature ;  and  what  nature  can  he  honour  who  honours  not  the  human?  If, 
then,  you  have  a  quarrel  with  God,  what  is  this  but  to  ditipute  the  beauty  and  the 
good  of  things,  which  all  men  delight  to  celebrate,  on  which  no  eyes  are  weary  of 
looking  with  wonder  ?  2.  Look,  then,  at  the  grandeur  of  the  phenomena  of  nature — 
the  rain,  the  clouds,  the  storms.  (Ver.  26— ch.  xxxvii.  5.)  Bead  the  words  of  the 
description,  compare  them  with  your  own  feelings,  lu  the  very  vagueness  and 
vastness  of  nature  there  is  a  power  to  impress  the  imagination.  This  array  of  beauty 
and  of  grandeur  is  not  only  far  beyond,  but  totally  unlike,  anything  that  man  can 
conceive  or  accomplish.  No  words  can  better  set  forth  these  profound  and  unutterable 
impressions  than  the  words  of  great  poets,  "  thrown  out "  as  it  were  at  a  distant, 
illimitable  object  which  cannot  be  defined.  "  God  thunders  with  his  voice  wondrously, 
doth  great  things  that  we  understand  not:"  this  is  the  sum  of  all.  The  indefinite 
grandeur  of  images  and  sounds,  which  is  so  impiessive  in  the  highest  poetry,  represents 
the  inarticulate  but  overwhelming  voice  of  nature  which  tells  of  the  Being  and  the 
gooducM  of  God.    Again,  these  effects  point  to  causes ;  and  the  regularity  of  effects 


S88  THE  BOOK  OS*  JOB.  [«=•  mxvi.  1— S«. 


to  the  regularity  of  causes ;  and  the  whole  series  of  effects  and  causes  resolves  itself 
into  the  conception  of  law,  high,  unerring,  unbroken.  Even  with  a  very  imperfect 
knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  cosmos,  there  is  some  dim  perception  of  these  truths: 
how  much  more  should  consummate  science  impress  them  upon  the  spirit  I  Every  phe- 
nomenon that  strikes  with  awe  the  senses,  or  that  gently  excites  the  wonder  and  curiosity 
of  the  mind,  hints  at  an  Intelligence  which  is  ever  at  work.  The  snow,  the  rain-torrents, 
wliich  give  pause  to  the  labours  of  man,  and  compel  his  gaze  to  the  sky;  the  crouching 
of  the  wild  beast  in  his  lair  before  the  fury  of  the  storm ;  the  rushing  forth  of  the  blasts 
as  from  some  hidden  repository  (as  the  Greeks  fabled,  the  cave  of  jEoIus)  ;  thecongela- 
tion  of  the  wafers  ;  the  clouds  discharging  their  weight  of  moisture  or  Sashing  forth 
their  lightnings; — all  speak  of  superhuman  power,  all-controlling  and  still  guiding  the 
march  of  nature  by  a  principle  of  right ;  now  scourging  men's  folly,  and  now  rewarding 
and  blessing  their  obedience.  In  the  fearful  and  beautiful  scenes  of  the  storm  and  of 
winter  we  indeed  no  longer  see  signs  of  the  personal  displeasure  of  God.  We  explain 
them  by  the  "  laws  of  nature."  But  none  the  less  do  these  phenomena  tell  of  the 
power,  the  wisdom,  and  the  goodness  of  God,  and  hint  to  us  the  duty  and  the  need  of 
prayer  to  hira  who  gave  to  Nature  her  laws.  3.  Inferences  ;  exhortations.  (Oh.  xxxvii. 
14 — 24.)  If  this  be  the  view  Nature  gives  us  of  her  God  and  of  our  Creator,  instead 
of  murmuring  at  him  or  disputing  his  dealings,  let  Job  and  all  sufferers  draw  the  true 
conclusions  amidst  the  dark  enigmas  of  their  lives.  Let  the  preceding  impressions  b* 
laid  well  to  heart,  and  in  quiet  contemplation  let  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  operations 
be  reviewed.  Can  man  explain  the  secrets  of  nature?  If  not,  why  should  he  expect  to 
explain  fully  that  which  is  a  part  of  the  same  system,  under  the  same  rule,  controlled 
by  the  same  God,  namely,  his  own  life  and  its  mingled  web  of  weal  and  woe  (ver. 
14,  «2<?0  ?  "  We  have  but  faith ;  we  cannot  know,"  "  If  man  is  not  called  by  God  to 
his  side  in  other  matters  of  his  daily  doing,  to  be  as  a  judge  and  counsellor,  and  this 
can  be  expected  by  none,  and  none  presumes  to  murmur  against  that  order,  it  is  right 
that  man  should  not  demand  that  the  method  of  God's  government  should  be  shown 
him  in  this  world,  but  that  he  should  acquiesce  in  it,  whether  he  understands  it  or 
no  ;  that  he  should  believe  his  Word,  and  await  his  good  in  patience  "  (Cocceius). 

Conclusion.  And  now  the  speaker — pointing  to  the  rising  storm  which  has  been 
gathering  during  his  discourse,  brings  his  words,  in  solemn  iteration  and  summing-up, 
to  a  close  (vers.  21 — 24).  The  aspect  of  yonder  heaven  is  a  symbol  of  Job's  position 
in  relation  to  God.  The  light  that  flashes  in  its  wonted  splendour  behind  the  clouds  is 
not  seen  just  now,  but  a  wind  rises  and  sweeps  those  clouds  away;  and  so  the  God  who 
is  concealed  for  a  time,  and  of  whom  we  are  in  danger  of  entertaining  wrong  thoughts, 
may  suddenly,  to  our  surprise  and  shame,  discover  himself.  Let  us,  then,  humble  our- 
selves in  presence  of  the  destiny  that  just  now  is  full  of  darkness.  From  the  gloom  as 
of  midnight  there  bursts  forth  the  gleam  as  of  gold — brilliant  token  of  the  sublime 
power  of  Jehovah.  And  God  remains  inaccessible  to  sense,  to  knowledge,  dwelling  in 
the  unapproachable  light.  But,  amidst  all  the  terror  and  the  mystery,  the  voice  of 
conscience,  the  moral  sense  in  man,  tells  him  that,  though  God  be  incomprehensible, 
this  much  concerning  him  may  be  known — he  is  no  Perverter  of  right  and  justice  ;  he 
is  the  infallibly  good  and  wise,  just  and  holy  One.  This  faith  is  the  foundation  of 
reverence,  of  piety;  and  as  for  the  "self-wise,"  the  men  wise  in  their  own  conceits, 
God  holds  them  in  no  regard.  (On  the  dazzling  light,  the  symbol  of  the  majesty  of 
God,  compare  the  hymn  of  Binney,  "  Eternal  Light  I  Eternal  Light  I ")— J. 

Vers.  6 — 17. —  The  perfectness  of  the  Divine  ways.  Elihu  continues  to  speak  on  God's 
behalf.  He  deferjds  the  Divine  ways  from  what  he  esteems  to  be  Job's  reflections 
upon  them.  He  will  fain  "ascribe  righteousness"  to  his  "  Maker."  The  perfectness 
and  justness  of  the  ways  of  him  who  is  "mighty  in  strength  and  wisdom"  is  traced 
by  Elihu  in  many  instances.  Though  greatly  exalted,  God  does  not  look  disdainfully 
upon  man ;  nor  doth  he  despise  the  work  of  his  own  hands.  His  perfect  work  ia 
seen — 

I.  In  his  judgments  upon  the  ungodly.  "He  preserveth  not  the  life  of  the 
wicked." 

II.  In  tiis  JUSTICE  TO  THE  OPPRESSED.  "  He  givetb  right  to  the  poor;"  "  He  delivereth 
the  poor  in  his  affliction  "  (ver.  15). 


OK.  XXXVI.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  589 

m.  In  bis  beoabd  fob  the  obedient  and  fubb.  "  He  withdroweth  not  his  eyes 
from  the  righteous."    This  is  especially  seen — 

IV.  In  ms  disciplike  and  coreection  of  the  biohteous.  This  topic  Elihu 
expands.  While  the  Almighty  suffers  the  wicked  to  perish,  he  maintains  the  lot  of  the 
oppressed  and  righteous  poor,  keeping  them  ever  in  view,  and  ever  working  all  things 
together  for  their  good.  1.  In  leading  them  to  an  established  honour.  "  With  kings  are 
they  on  the  throne."  He  "  doth  establish  them  for  ever,  and  they  are  exalted."  2.  He 
sanctifles  their  sorrows  as  means  of  spiritual  discipline  and  correction.  "  If  they  be 
bound  in  fetters,  and  be  holden  in  cords  of  affliction,  he  showeth  them  their  work,  and 
their  transgressions  that  they  have  exceeded."  3.  He  imparts  instruction,  warning 
them  away  from  the  dangers  of  iniquity.  4.  He  crowns  their  obedience  with  ample 
reward.  "  If  they  obey  and  serve  him,"  he  makes  them  to  spend  their  days  in 
prosperity.  How  does  this  anticipate  the  final  condition  of  Job)  and  in  the  process 
of  this  Divine  poem,  how  is  the  unravelling  of  the  mystery,  the  knotof  human  suffering, 
gradually  promoted  I  Again,  with  another  motive  to  urge  Job  to  repentance,  Elihu 
points  out :  6.  That  even  the  righteous,  if  they  are  disobedient  to  the  Divine  instructions 
and  correction,  "  shall  perish  by  the  sword,  and  they  shall  die  without  knowledge." 
He  makes  a  direct  application  of  the  whole  teaching  to  Job:  "Even  so  would  he  have 
removed  thee  out  of  the  strait  into  a  broad  place ; "  but  lays  at  Job's  door  the  accusa- 
tion of  fulfilling  the  judgment  of  the  evil-doer  aud  suffering,  as  he  does,  for  the  severities 
of  "  judgment  and  justice."  The  principle  of  Blihu's  teaching  is  just,  if  his  application 
of  it  is  faulty.  All  may  learn  (1)  to  acknowledge,  (2)  to  bow  to,  (3)  to  harmonize 
their  life  with,  the  perfect  work  of  God. — E.  G. 

Ver.  2.—8peahing  on  God's  hehalf.  Elihu  is  not  a  little  bold  in  roundly  asserting 
that  he  is  speaking  on  God's  behalf.  He  may  be  right,  but  his  assertion  needs  testing. 
Not  all  who  claim  to  speak  for  God  can  be  accredited  as  his  ambassadors.  We  must 
examine  the  credentials  of  those  who  say  that  they  speak  on  behalf  of  God. 

I.  The  false  claim  to  sfeae  on  God's  behalf.  This  claim  is  put  forth  repeatedly. 
1.  By  offiaialism.  Because  certain  people  hold  a  high  ofSce,  they  assume  that  they 
have  a  right  to  represent  God.  But  they  may  be  true  in  their  work  and  in  discharging 
the  proper  functions  of  their  ofiBce,  and  yet  quite  false  in  pretending  to  speak  for  God. 
God  does  not  confine  his  heavenly  communications  to  official  channels.  2.  By  authori- 
tative orthodoxy.  No  one  can  read  the  sad  records  of  ecclesiastical  history  without 
seeing  what  ungodly  passions  have  been  engaged  in  the  battles  of  theology.  Dare  we 
say  that  the  issue  of  these  miserable  conflicts  has  always  been  a  triumph  for  truth? 
3.  By  personal  dogmatism.  Young  men,  such  as  Elihu,  declare  that  they  are  speaking 
for  God.  They  are  very  positive.  But  are  they  infallible  ?  Would  it  not  be  well  to 
see  that  God  is  not  absolutely  dependent  on  our  advocacy  ?  Vast  mischief  has  accrued 
through  bungling  and  even  unrighteous  attempts  to  vindicate  God's  truth  and  God's 
action.  Can  he  not  take  care  of  his  own  cause  ?  Shall  we,  like  Uzzah,  interfere  at 
every  crisis  to  save  the  ark  of  God  from  destruction  ?  Much  unbelief  is  simply  due  to 
unwise  advocacy  and  defence  of  religion.  Sometimes  it  is  best  to  say  nothing,  but  to 
trust  God's  cause  to  himself.     "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God." 

II.  The  neoessaet  ddty  of  speaking  on  God's  behalf.  There  are  times  when 
God'requires  his  people  to  speak  for  him,  and  we  dare  not  be  silent  under  all  circum- 
stances. Wrong  must  be  denounced,  error  corrected,  truth  maintained,  the  gospel 
made  known.  How,  then,  can  this  advocacy  be  saved  from  the  mischievous  effects 
which  follow  from  a  wrong  way  of  speaking  for  God  ?  \.  By  a  Divine  commission. 
They  who  speak  for  God  must  be  called  by  God.  Whatever  be  their  human  mission, 
they  certainly  need  a  Divine  vocation.  Let  a  man  be  well  assured  in  his  heart  that 
God  has  called  him  before  he  opens  his  lips.  The  assurance  may  not  come  by  any 
mystic  voices,  but  by  clear  indications  of  providence,  the  prompting  of  conscience, 
the  faculty  to  speak,  the  open  door.  2.  By  a  hold  of  truth.  The  teacher  must  be 
taught.  The  advocate  must  have  his  brief;  the  envoy  his  despatch.  The  Christian 
missionary  must  be  clear  in  his  own  grasp  of  Christian  truth.  We  have  the  best  guide 
to  truth  in  the  Bible.  If  any  one  would  speak  for  God,  let  him  follow  the  teachings  of 
this  book.  3.  By  i-ympathy  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  cannot  even  speak  the  truth 
we  know' wisely  and  well,  unless  we  are  guided  by  tliC  present  iufluence  of  the  Holy 


590  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 33. 


Spirit.  It  is  not  enough  to  study  our  Bibles.  We  must  be  much  in  prayer,  we  must 
live  near  to  God,  so  that  we  may  speak  in  the  strength  and  spirit  of  God. — ^W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  3. — Knowledge  fetched  fr(ym  afar,  L  Knowledgb  must  be  fetched  from 
AFAB.  True  to  his  character,  the  brilliant  but  pretentious  young  Elihu  makes  an 
ostentations  claim  to  having  gone  far  for  the  knowledge  that  he  is  now  about  to 
declare.  It  might  be  said  that  many  precious  truths  lie  at  our  feet  ready  for  us 
if  only  we  would  have  the  humility  to  stoop  for  them.  Diamonds  sparkle  in  the 
dust ;  we  need  not  be  for  ever  straining  after  the  stars.  Still,  there  is  a  knowledge 
that  can  only  be  got  by  far  searching.  1.  Over  a  wide  realm.  Elihu  is  about  to 
launch  forth  ioto  the  great  sea  of  nature.  The  infinite  variety  of  facts  and  the  grand 
harmony  of  laws  there  displayed  are  not  perceived  at  a  glance.  Truth  covers  a  large 
area.  Many  of  our  notions  are  erroneous  just  because  our  inductions  are  too  nar- 
row. We  judge  of  the  world  by  the  parish.  We  estimate  man  by  our  private  circle  of 
acquaintances.  We  value  life  by  our  own  experience.  We  must  learn  to  break  down 
the  barriers,  to  master  our  shortness  of  sight,  to  take  broad  views,  and  look  down  long 
vistas  of  truth.  2.  By  persevering  thought.  A  mere  glance  at  truth  is  not  enough. 
We  must  search  for  wisdom  as  for  hidden  treasure. 

II.  KnOWLEDSB     fetched    from    AFAB   VINDIOATEB    THE     BIQHTBOU8NBS8     OF   GOD. 

This  is  the  conclusion  to  which  Elihu  has  come.  The  three  friends  had  declared  for 
the  same  result,  but  they  had  started  from  much  narrower  premisses,  and  their  cramped 
ideas  could  not  satisfy  Job.  Elihu  professes  to  take  a  wider  view  of  the  world,  and  so 
to  establish  his  conclusion  on  a  broader  basis.  We  have  only  to  know  enough  of  God 
to  be  assured  that  all  he  does  is  good.  The  hard  thoughts  of  God  which  we  are 
tempted  to  entertain  spring  from  partial  and  one-sided  views  of  his  works. 

III.  ChBIST  has  BROUGHT  U8  KNOWLEDGE  FROM  AFAB  WHICH  REVEALS  THE  GOOD- 
NESS OF  God.  We  are  not  left  entirely  to  our  own  dim  groping  after  truth  in  the  great 
wilderness  of  existence.  What  we  could  never  have  discovered  for  ourselves  has  been 
brought  to  us  by  Jesus  Christ.  He  has  come  from  afar,  from  the  distant  heavens ;  and 
he  has  brought  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  eternity  to  earth.  Now,  if  we  would  have 
the  highest  wisdom,  our  first  course  is,  like  Mary,  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  When  we 
do  this  we  shall  learn  that  all  that  God  does  is  good.  Then  we  shall  see  that  he  is  our 
Father,  and  that  love  is  the  principle  that  pervades  all  his  government  of  the  world. 
Some  of  us  may  yet  be  far  from  a  perception  of  these  glorious  truths — ^because  we  are 
far  from  Christ.  We  have  to  know  and  trust  him  in  order  to  reach  the  truest  and 
best  thoughts  of  God.— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. — The  might  and  mercy  of  Ood.  The  remarkable  thought  here  brought  before 
us  is  the  juxtaposition  of  God's  might  and  mercy.  He  is  both  powerfiil  and  pitiful, 
majestic  and  condescending,  infinite  and  sympathetic. 

I.  God's  might  dobs  not  desteot  his  merot.  It  is  only  a  very  low  and  earthly 
view  that  could  lead  us  to  suppose  that  it  might  do  so.  When  small  men  are  lifted 
up  they  begin  to  display  their  littleness  by  despising  those  who  are  beneath  them. 
But  no  such  conduct  can  be  ascribed  to  the  great  God.  We  must  not  suppose  that  any 
one  of  his  creatures  is  so  humble  that  he  will  not  stoop  to  care  for  it.  His  is  not  the 
rude  strength  of  the  giant. 

n.  God's  merot  is  confirmed  by  his  might.  The  truth  is  the  opposite  to  what 
we  might  fear  if  we  judged  by  the  small  experience  of  earthly  greatness.  God  has  no 
temptation  to  despise  any  of  his  creatures.  He  does  not  wish  to  make  a  display  of  his 
greatness.  1.  He  does  not  despise  the  small.  Feeble  strength  and  slight  capacity 
lead  to  contempt  among  men ;  but  what  is  the  greatest  strength,  what  the  highest 
capacity  in  the  sight  of  God,  in  whose  eyes  all  men  are  but  as  dust  and  ashes  ?  If  he 
d  spiseri  any,  he  would  despise  all.  2.  He  does  not  despise  the  wicked.  He  knows 
their  sin,  folly,  and  helplessness.  He  seems  to  treat  them  with  contempt,  as  psalmists 
and  prophets  describe  his  actions.  But  all  that  he  really  docs  is  to  frustrate  their 
foolish  designs  and  show  that  he  cannot  be  touched  by  their  vrin  rebellion.  If  God 
despised  the  wicked,  he  would  despise  all  his  children,  because  in  the  light  of  hii 
holiness  the  best  meu  are  covered  with  the  shame  of  guilt. 

IIL  God's  might  and  mekct  wobk  toosthbb,   The  might  gives  effect  to  the  mercy. 


OH.  XXXVI.  1-33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  691 

If  God  ia  mighty,  and  if  also  he  does  not  despise  any,  we  may  be  sure  that  he  will  us« 
his  great  power  for  the  benefit  of  helpless  creatures  who  are  not  beneath  his  notice. 
Sympathy  is  not  enough  for  salvation,  without  strength.    God  has  both. 

IV.  The  might  and  meroy  of  God  should  lead  us  to  trust  in  him.  We  have 
not  to  deal  with  an  aristocratic  Divinity  who  looks  with  contempt  on  the  "  dim 
multitude."  Though  high  above  us,  God  does  not  despise  us ;  then  we  may  venture 
to  confide  in  him.  No  trouble  is  so  foolish  that  he  will  not  take  account  of  it,  if  it 
really  vexes  one  of  his  chiWren.  Those  who  are  despised  by  their  fellow-men  may 
take  comfort  from  the  thought  that  they  are  not  so  regarded  by  their  God.  It  is  well 
to  find  a  refuge  frum  the  contempt  of  the  world  in  the  sympathy  of  God. 

V.  We  should  not  despise  ant  of  oub  bbetheen.  If  God  has  not  despised  them, 
dare  we  do  so  ?  Whatever  feelings  inay  be  provoked  by  the  baseness  and  meanness  or 
men,  contempt  is  never  justifiable.  God  respects  the  dignity  of  the  child  whom  he  has 
•uade  in  his  own  image ;  and  we  should  learn  to  treat  with  respect  the  lowest  of  our 
fellow-men.  Contempt  not  only  hurts  the  feelings  of  the  most  humble,  it  degrailes  the 
most  vicious.  We  shall  not  save  the  sinner  by  despising  him ;  the  only  method  is 
Christ's  method — loving  him  and  treating  him  as  a  brother. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  7. — The  kingship  of  righteousness.  Blihu  assures  Job  that  the  righteous  are  to 
be  with  kings  on  the  throne.  In  the  New  Testament  we  learn  that  Christians  are 
"kings  and  priests  unto  God."  Let  us,  then,  inquire  as  to  what  the  kingship  of 
righteousness  consists  in. 

I.  Its  source.  How  does  this  kingly  state  come  to  be  conferred  on  men  ?  1.  By 
Divine  favour.  God  favours  righteousness.  This  is  not  apparent  on  earth,  or,  at  all 
events,  under  circumstances  of  trouble  and  disappointment.  Yet  in  the  long  run  God 
sustains  and  exalts  those  who  follow  his  will.  No  man  can  lift  himself  up  to  the  high 
places  of  God.  God,  and  God  alone,  raises  up  and  casts  down.  God  "  withdraweth  not 
his  eyes  from  the  righteous."  2.  On  condition  of  righteousness.  This  is  not  an  arbi- 
trary condition.  (1)  It  is  just.  The  right  should  prevail.  Good  men  are  best  fitted 
to  be  in  the  exalted  positions.  (2)  It  is  natural.  If  "  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth  " 
b;  a  silent  law  that  gives  them  possession  of  it,  the  righteous  shall  rule  it  by  force  of 
a  similar  law  in  the  very  constitution  of  things.  Eight  tends  to  prevail,  for  there  is 
"  a  stream  of  tendencies  that  makes  for  righteousness."  3.  Through  faith.  We  must 
add  this  Christian  thought  to  the  teaching  of  Elihu,  if  we  would  have  a  complete  view 
of  the  truth.  Our  own  self-made  righteousness  will  never  exalt  us  to  a  kingly  throne. 
Tliere  is  no  royalty  about  it.  The  kingly  grace  attaches  to  that  righteousness  of  faith 
which  ia  the  gift  of  God. 

II.  Its  ohaeactbb.  In  what  sense  is  it  said  that  righteous  men  are  to  be  with 
kings  on  the  throne?  How  can  Christians  be  regarded  as  kings?  1.  In  true  glory. 
Good  men  may  not  enjoy  worldly  glory;  they  may  be  poor,  despised,  obscure.  Yet  in 
the  sight  of  God  and  the  angels  they  may  be  sitting  as  kings  with  crowns  on  their 
heads.  Boyal  dignity  is  not  a  matter  of  display.  There  is  a  glory  which  no  eye  of  sense 
can  see.  2.  In  spiritual  power.  Kings  in  the  East,  and  in  the  olden  time,  were  rulers 
who  made  their  power  felt ;  and  in  the  Bible  kingship  involves  ruling  authority  as  well 
as  reigning  dignity.  Now,  there  is  influence  in  goodness.  The  man  of  character  carries 
weight  with  his  advice.     In  course  of  time  he  gains  respect,  and  so  acquires  mfluence. 

•  3.  In  future  possession.  These  ideas  of  the  kingship  of  the  good  point  to  a  yet  unseen 
futiu-e  for  their  perfect  realization.  Righteousness  is  not  yet  by  any  means  universally 
dominant.  The  future  has  in  store  for  us  a  glorious  kingdom  of  God,  when  all  evil  shall 
be  suppressed,  and  when  goodness  shall  take  its  rightful  place.  In  that  perfect  Messianic 
age,  with  Christ  reigning  as  King  of  kings,  all  his  people  will  have  the  honour  and 
power  of  royalty.  In  the  mean  time  let  us  recollect  that  the  kmgdom  must  begm 
within  Until  we  can  rule  our  own  souls  we  are  not  fit  to  sit  as  kings.  Kmgly  natures 
are  those  that  have  mastered  themselves,  and  so  are  capable  of  ruling  others.  Eighteous- 
ness  implies  self-mastery.  When  the  self-mastery  is  complete  it  will  be  time  to  ask 
about  the  larger  kingship.— W.  P.  A. 

Vet  10  —The  ear  that  is  open  to  discipline.  I.  Suffering  is  foe  disoipltn*.  This 
is  Elihu's  great  thought,  and  he  returns  to  it  again  and  again.    It  is  femiUar  to  us. 


5M  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 33. 

but  it  seems  to  have  been  a  new  idea  in  the  days  of  Job,  and  a  frosh  revelation  for  bim 
and  his  friends.  It  is  not  the  less  important  to  us  because  we  are  well  acquainted 
with  it.  Still,  we  have  to  enter  into  the  meaning  of  it,  and  employ  it  as  the  key  for 
unlocking  the  mysteries  of  our  experience.  Discipline  is  very  different  from  punish- 
ment. 1.  It  is  for  the  good  of  the  sufferer.  Punishment  may  be  so ;  kind  parents 
punish  their  children  to  benefit  them.  But  this  is  not  the  sole  object  of  punishment, 
which  is  also  instituted  to  deter  bad  men  from  crime  by  the  fear  of  its  infliction,  and 
to  warn  others  by  the  wholesome  lesson  of  its  example.  Discipline,  on  the  otherhand, 
is  wholly  schooling,  entirely  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  subjected  to  it.  2.  It  is 
not  necessarily  consequent  upon  sin.  Punishment  is  only  for  guilt ;  but  discipline  is 
for  education.  It  may  be  the  more  needed  on  account  of  sin ;  but  it  is  not  confined 
to  its  effect  on  sin.  Christ  the  Sinless  was  made  perfect  by  the  things  which  he  suffered 
(Heb.  V.  8,  9). 

II.  Discipline  must  be  biohtlt  received  if  it  is  to  peofit.  It  is  quite  possible 
for  it  to  be  entirely  thrown  away  upon  the  sufferer.  Gold  is  purified  by  the  fire 
because  gold  is  but  a  dead  metal.  But  souls  are  living,  and  the  effects  of  the  fires  of 
affliction  upon  them  are  dependent  on  voluntary  action.  They  may  harden,  they 
may  consume,  they  may  purify,  they  may  strengthen.  If  they  are  to  benefit  as  disci- 
pline they  must  be  received  in  the  right  spirit.  Now,  this  spirit  is  indicated  by  the 
open  ear.  The  discipline  brings  a  message  from  Grod.  It  does  not  only  affect  our  feel- 
ings. It  aims  at  reaching  our  thoughts.  Probably  it  will  do  us  no  good  at  all  if  it 
does  not  ledd  us  to  think.  An  intelligent  appreciation  of  God's  dealings  with  us  is 
valuable  for  discipline  to  work  its  right  end.  Then  we  need  to  think  about  our  own 
way  in  life.  Affliction  arrests  our  attention  and  helps  us  to  search  our  heart  and  see 
whether  we  have  not  been  doing  wrong;  it  encourages  us  to  survey  our  whole  life 
with  a  view  to  improving  it  for  the  future. 

III.  God  helps  his  people  to  ebcbive  discipline  aright.  We  need  to  pray  for 
grace  to  make  the  best  use  of  affliction.  When  our  hearts  are  right  with  God  he  will 
aid  us  to  do  this.  1.  Me  will  incline  the  heart  to  learn.  When  we  are  stubborn  and 
self-willed,  discipline  is  of  little  use.  It  may  tend  to  break  down  the  obstruction ;  but 
as  long  as  that  is  standing  it  does  little  good.  The  disciple  must  be  docile.  Now, 
the  inward  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  helps  us  to  become  docile  under  discipline.  2. 
He  will  assist  the  vmderstamding  to  comprehend.  We  want  to  know  what  God  is  teach- 
ing us  by  his  discipline.  Our  own  wild,  prejudiced  ideas  may  lead  us  quite  astray. 
Therefore  it  is  well  to  fall  upon  our  knees  and  pray  that  God  will  show  us  what  he 
means  by  the  special  discipline  he  is  putting  us  through — what  he  is  teaching  us,  and 
whither  he  would  lead  us. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  15. — Affliction  as  a  deliverer.  Elihu  says  that  God  delivers  the  afflicted  by  his 
affliction.  We  have  been  accustomed  to  look  on  affliction  as  an  evil,  from  which  some 
deliverer  may  set  us  free.  Elihu  startles  us  with  a  very  different  view  of  it.  In  his 
opinion  the  affliction  is  itself  a  deliverer. 

I.  Affliction  is  not  the  greatest  evil.  In  our  selfish  cowardice  we  look  for  some 
escape  from  pain,  as  though  that  were  our  supreme  foe.  But  sin  is  worse  than  sufferin<' 
—-more  hurtful,  more  objectionable  in  itself.  Any  escape  from  trouble  that  leaves 
wickedness  untouched  is  no  salvation ;  but  any  process,  however  painful,  that  trees  us 
from  the  power  of  sin  is  salvation. 

IL  Affliction  may  be  no  evil  at  all.  In  itself,  of  course,  it  is  undesirable.  But 
its  "peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness"  may  bq  so  wholesome  and  profitable  that,  on 
the  whole,  the  affliction  must  be  accounted  a  good  thing.  We  should  judge  of  any 
experience  by  its  results,  not  by  its  passing  phases.  We  have  to  learn  that  the  pain 
that  blesses  is  really  itself  a  blessing.  The  black  cloud  that  brings  a  refreshing  shower 
is  not  a  threatening  storm.  The  spur  that  drives  us  from  the  desert  where  we  would 
perish  to  the  streams  of  living  water  is  not  a  cruel  instrument  of  torture.  The  heavy 
blow  that  awakens  us  when  we  are  sleeping  in  the  snow  the  sleep  that  would  end  in 
death  is  nothing  less  than  an  angel  of  mercy. 

III.  Affliction  may  be  a  real  deliverer.  We  have  now  to  ask  how  this  paradox 
can  be  true.  1.  By  humbling  pride.  When  all  is  well  we  are  tempted  to  be  self- 
■ufficieut  and  self-satiafied.    But  in  suffering  we  are  cast  low,  and  then  our  lowlinesa 


CH.  xxxvi.  1— 83.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  693 

may  be  our  salvation.  2.  By  inducing  thought.  We  let  the  happy  hours  glide  by  in 
careless  ease,  dreaming  life  away.  Trouble  arouses  us  with  a  trumpet-blast.  It  cries, 
"  Awake  1'  Think  1 "  3.  By  revealing  sin.  In  our  humility  and  our  reflectiveness  we 
are  led  to  a  consciousness  of  sin.  4.  By  driving  us  to  Ood.  We  need  most  of  all  to 
be  delivered  from  ourselves  and  to  be  brought  back  to  God.  The  utter  helplessness  of 
great  trouble  urges  us  in  this  direction. 

IV.  Affliction  delivers  from  itself.  It  is  its  own  deliverer  when  it  is  rightly 
received.  1.  The  right  reception  of  it  overcomes  its  hilterness.  There  is  no  such 
victory  over  pain  as  the  capacity  to  endure  it  with  equanimity.  We  are  more  delivered 
from  an  evil  when  the  thing  we  have  regarded  as  evil  ceases  to  hurt  us  than  when  we 
only  escape  from  its  clutches.  2.  The  patient  endurance  of  it  brings  it  to  an  end. 
When  God  sees  that  his  scholar  has  learnt  the  desired  lesson,  he  can  close  the  book. 
No  more  of  the  scorching  lines  need  be  spelt  out  with  tearful  eyes.  The  student  hag 
graduated.  Henceforth  he  is  free  from  the  old  drudgery.  Therefore  the  true  way  to 
escape  from  dreaded  suffering  which  God  sends  as  discipline  is  not  to  murmur  agaiast 
it,  but  to  make  the  best  use  of  it,  in  order  that,  being  purified  by  fire,  we  may  become 
vessels  fit  for  the  King's  use. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  16. — "  A  broad  place."  Elihu  tells  Job  that  it  is  the  work  of  afBiction  to  "  lure  " 
him  out  of  a  strait  into  a  broad  place. 

I.  Life  is  in  danger  of  beoomino  naekow.  Various  influences  combine  to  narrow 
it.  1.  Selfishness.  The  disposition  to  think  much  of  ourselves  dwarfs  the  world  to  us. 
But  when  we  are  thus  living  chiefly  for  our  own  ends,  we  are  shut  into  a  small  circle  of 
personal,  private  interests,  and,  the  great  world  being  ignored,  we  ourselves  shrink  into 
littleness.  2.  Worldliness.  When  we  are  absorbed  in  things  of  this  world,  the  other 
and  larger  world  is  lost  to  view.  The  consequence  is  that  we  become  short-sighted, 
and  thought  and  interest  are  shut  in  to  the  domain  of  the  visible  and  temporal.  3. 
Conventionality.  We  lose  the  courage  of  personal  conviction,  and  fall  back  on  the 
ideas  and  practices  of  our  neighbours.  4.  Routine.  Since  all  goes  smoothly,  the  mill 
grinds  on  in  a  dreamy  atmosphere  of  changeless  indifference.  Then  our  lives  miss  the 
'stimulus  of  a  rousing  call  to  arduous  service. 

II.  God  delivees  from  narrowness  by  means  of  affliction.  L  A  Divine  work. 
Seeing  how  hurtful  the  narrowness  is,  and  desiring  us  to  escape  from  it,  he  puts  forth 
his  hand  to  draw  us  out  of  the  imprisonment  it  involves.  It  is  diflScult  for  one  who  has 
Mien  into  a  mountain  gorge,  and  who  lies  among  the  stones  bruised  and  battered,  to 
lift  himself  up  and  climb  the  steep  and  treacherous  crags.  He  who  has  fallen  into  a 
strait  in  life  needs  the  strong  arm  of  God  to  draw  him  out.  2.  Accomplished  through 
affliction.  God  comes  to  the  rescue  of  his  straitened  sei-vant.  But  the  method 
of  deliverance  is  strange  and  unexpected.  AfSiction  is  itself  a  strait ;  it  seems  to 
press  on  the  soul,  to  hamper  and  limit  its  activity.  Yet  this  is  the  very  instrument 
employed  in  delivering  the  victim  of  narrowness.  Narrowness  of  circumstances 
may  deliver  from  narrowness  of  soul.  The  very  pressure  of  this  new  strait  rouses 
us  and  bids  us  exert  ourselves.  Then,  as  it  cures  our  errors,  it  leads  us  out  of  its  own 
constraints. 

III.  God's  deliverance  sets  us  in  a  broad  place.  First  there  is  a  fresh  strait,  a 
hard  pressure  of  trouble  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  with  no  door  of  escape.  But 
when  the  affliction  has  accomplished  its  work  there  is  deliverance.  1.  lAberty  of  action. 
"  The  truth  shall  make  you  free  "  (John  viii.  32).  God  desires  his  people  to  serve 
willingly  and  lovingly,  not  with  fetters  on  their  ankles.  The  freedom  is  of  a  soul  "  at 
leisure  from  itself."  There  is  a  large  place  with  great  scope  for  work,  which  can  only 
be  enjoyed  in  unselfishness  and  unworldliness.  2.  Breadth  of  view.  It  is  wonderful 
how  the  vision  is  broadened  by  the  experience  of  sorrow.  Although  at  first  it  may  be 
cramped  and  confined  to  the  immediate  present  by  the  absorbing  influence  of  pain, 
when  deliverance  comes,  this  is  followed  by  a  wonderful  mental  expansion.  No  one 
knows  the  depth  and  breadth  of  life  who  has  not  been  through  the  waters  of  affliction. 
3.  Largeness  of  Joy.  The  broad  place  is  open  to  the  fresh  air  and  the  bright  sunshine. 
Delivered  from  dank  and  dreary  narrow  regions,  we  can  rejoice  in  our  God-given  liberty. 
This  bliss  is  partly  enjoyed  on  earth  ;  it  will  be  perfect  in  heaven,  the  large  plac«  of  life 
and  liberty.— W.  F.  A. 

JOB  *• 


694  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [on.  xxxvi.  1—33. 

Ver.  lS.~The  uselessness  of  a  great  ransom.  Job  had  sinned,  says  Elihu,  though 
not  in  the  black  and  hypocritical  way  that  his  three  friends  attributed  to  him.  His 
sill  had  been  in  judging  God,  and  charging  the  Holy  One  with  injustice ;  and  "this  sin 
brought  its  own  punishment ;  indeed,  it  was  its  own  punishment,  because  to  think 
that  God,  our  Maker  and  our  Judge,  is  unjust  is  to  be  in  torment.  Now  Job  is  told 
that  if  he  holds  to  this  sin  the  greatness  of  a  ransom  will  be  of  no  avail ;  he  cannot  be 
saved. 

I.  Man  looks  fob  deliverance  thbottgh  a  ransom.  This  is  not  only  a  Christian 
iilea.  it  is  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  it  is  to  be  traced  througli  lieathen  systems 
of  religion,  though  aniong  tliese  systems  it  appears  in  a  degraded  and  corrupted  state. 
1.  Man  has  a  sense  of  bondage.  This  he  feels.  When  conscience  is  aroused,  he  has 
the  most  intense  consciousness  of  its  galling  fetters.  "  Who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  (Rom.  vii.  24).  2.  Man  cannot  escape  from  his  bondage.  The 
old  brigand,  Satan,  that  great  robber  of  souls,  has  too  tight  a  hand  on  his  victims  to 
let  them  go  free  whemver  they  choose  to  escape  from  his  clutches.  Habit  is  a  stronger 
bandage  than  the  cords  with  which  Samson  was  bound.  The  d<4iverance  must  come 
from  without.  3.  'ITiis  deliverance  must  be  at  a  great  cost.  We  do  not  kbow  what 
the  cost  must  be,  nor  how  it  should  be  settled.  It  cannot  be  true,  as  some  of  the 
Fathers  held,  that  a  price  must  be  paid  to  Satan  that  he  may  consent  to  liberate 
man.  He  never  consents.  He  can  have  no  compensation.  The  liberation  is  by  the 
overthrow  of  Satan  and  the  conquest  of  his  domain.  The  Bastille  must  be  stormed 
and  hurled  down  if  its  prisoners  are  to  escape.  But  this  can  only  be  done  at  great 
cost. 

II.  Chbibt  IB  THE  Ransom  fob  the  deliverance  of  man.  This  is  his  own  statement 
(Matt.  XX.  28).  His  advent  with  humiliation  in  a  state  of  servitude  was  a  Divine  pay- 
ment— a  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  God.  His  death  was  his  own  surrender  of  his  life  for 
the  libeiation  of  man  from  sin.  We  need  not  understand  why  the  ransom  had  to  be 
paid  in  order  to  see  that  it  has  been  paid.  A  clear  idea  of  the  reason  and  necessity 
of  tlie  payment  might  help  our  faith.  Still,  the  fact  is  the  great  thing  to  know.  Christ 
has  given  himself  for  us,  and  through  him  we  have  liberty. 

III.  The  greatest  ransom  mat  be  unavailing.  1.  If  it  is  not  rig  ally  paid. 
Men  make  great  sacrifices  in  asceticism ;  yet  there  is  no  reason  to  thiuk  that  tliey  are 
of  any  adequate  value,  because  they  are  not  required  by  God,  and  they  serve  no  good 
end.  2.  Jf  there  is  no  repentant.  The  work  of  Christ  is  for  the  benefit  of  all  who 
will  avail  themselves  of  it.  But  a  first  condition  of  profiting  by  it  is  repentance. 
While  a  man  holds  to  his  sin  he  cannot  enjoy  the  benefits  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  For 
him  Christ  has  died  in  vain.  3.  If  it  is  not  accompanied  by  faith.  This  is  the  con- 
necting link  that  joins  the  soul  to  Christ.  All  that  he  has  dune  for  us  remains  outside 
us,  not  touching  our  lile  and  need,  till  we  learn  to  confide  in  him. 

Conclusion.  It  is  worse  for  the  ransom  to  be  paid  in  vain  than  for  it  not  to  be 
paid  at  all.  They  who  reject  Christ  are  doubly  without  hope,  for  they  are  without 
excuse. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver,  22. — Exaltation  and  instruction.  Both  of  these  are  from  God,  and  both  of 
them  exceed  any  human  effort.  It  is  his  power  that  exalts ;  he  is  the  incomparable 
Teacher.    Let  us  look  at  both  of  these  truths  and  then  at  their  mutual  relations. 

I.  Divine  exaltation.  1.  The  experience.  God's  people  are  not  kept  in  perpetual 
depression.  Sometimes  they  are  cast  down  to  the  dust.  But  this  is  not  their  continual 
state.  Salvation  is  not  attained  by  means  of  ceaseless  humiliation.  There  is  exalta- 
tion (1)  ill  gladness,  rejoicing  over  the  love  of  God  ;  (2)  in  strength,  rising  to  achieve 
great  service  in  the  kingdom ;  (3)  in  victory,  triumphing  over  failure  and  evil.  2. 
Its  source.  God  exalts.  Man  cannot  truly  exadt  himself,  and  when  he  tries  to  do  bo, 
pride  and  vanity  give  him  an  ugly  fall.  Success  in  this  world  even  is  dependent  on 
God's  providence ;  much  more  are  true  elevation  of  character  and  exaltation  of  energy 
dependent  on  his  favour.  3.  Us  accomplishment.  God  exalts  by  his  power.  It  is 
much  to  know  that  God  is  almighty  as  well  as  most  merciful  and  gracious.  To  be 
f  ivoured  by  one  who  had  small  resources  would  be  pleasant,  but  it  could  not  be  very 
helpful.     But  God's  power  goes  with  his  love  to  effect  his  good  designs. 

II,  iNooMrABABLE  INSTKUOTION.     "  Who  tcacheth  like  him  ?  "    1.  How  Ood  teaches. 


ra.  XXXVI.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  595 

11)  By  experience.  He  puts  us  to  a  school  of  life ;  he  makes  us  feel  the  reality  of  hia 
essons.  The  sorrows  ant]  joys,  the  humiliations  and  the  exaltations  are  all  parts  of 
the  Divine  instruction.  (2)  In  revelation.  This  Divine  instruction  carries  us  out  of 
ourselves  and  opens  to  us  visions  of  heavenly  truth.  God  teaches  partly  through  prophets 
and  apostles  in  the  Scriptures,  but  mainly  through  Christ  in  his  great  life,  death,  and 
resurrection.  2.  Why  his  teaching  is  mcomparahle.  (1)  Because  he  knows  the  lesson. 
The  Teacher  is  a  master  of  his  subject.  God  knows  all  truth.  Who,  then,  can  teach  it  as 
he  will  teach  it  ?  (2)  Because  he  understands  the  pupils.  This  condition  is  necessary 
if  the  lesson  is  not  to  miss  the  mark.  Great  scholars  are  not  always  great  teachers, 
because  they  cannot  always  enter  into  the  difBculties  of  beginners  and  expound  tu  the 
simple  and  ignorant  what  they  are  themselves  most  familiar  with.  (3)  Because  he  spares 
no  pains.  He  is  in  earnest  in  desiring  to  teach  his  children.  He  is  not  like  the  listless 
teacher  who  drones  over  his  perfunctory  task.  God  means  to  get  his  lessons  into  the 
dullest  of  his  pupils,  and,  being  in  earnest  and  full  of  sympathy,  he  is  unequalled. 

III.  The  connection  between  the  exaltation  and  the  instbuction.  Each  helps 
the  other.  1.  The  exaltation  a  method  of  instruction.  As  we  rise  higher  we  leave 
the  mists  of  the  valley,  and  at  the  same  time  our  horizon  expands.  Gladness  and 
strength  and  victory  open  our  eyes  to  the  love  of  God  and  the  glory  of  the  kingdom. 
Adversity  has  its  lessons,  but  so  also  has  prosperity.  2.  The  instruction  an  element 
of  the  exaltation.  We  cannot  become  great  in  mind  until  we  rise  above  the  petty, 
narrow,  ignorant  conceptions  that  belong  to  our  more  backward  state.  Spiritual  great- 
ness implies  enlarged  knowledge  as  well  as  an  increase  in  other  graces.  When  Christ 
sets  his  people  in  places  of  joy  and  honour,  they  have  to  show  appreciation  of  their 
privileges  by  opening  their  souls  to  receive  the  fuller  truth  that  he  reveals. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  24:.— Ood  praised  for  hia  works.  I.  Conbidbb  how  worthy  of  pbaisb  abb 
THE  WORKS  OP  QoD.  We  do  not  prize  them  so  much  for  their  vast  bulk  and  infinite 
number  as  for  their  character  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  executed.  A  small 
statue  is  more  admirable  than  a  huge  boulder,  and  a  minute  and  finely  cut  gem  more 
precious  than  a  great  sea  crag.  Wherein,  then,  shall  we  find  the  specially  praiseworthy 
characteristics  of  the  works  of  God?  1.  In  thoroughness.  The  infinitely  little  is  aa 
well  wrought  as  the  infinitely  great.'  Thought  and  care  are  lavished  on  tiny  insects. 
Exquisite  workmanship  is  seen  in  humble. weeds.  The  unseen  parts  of  God's  works 
are  as  perfect  as  those  which  are  most  prominent.  The  hosts  of  flowers  that  bloom 
on  uninhabited  prairies  are  as  beautiful  as  those  that  smile  at  us  from  an  English 
hedgerow.  2.  In  harmony.  The  various  parts  of  God's  works  fit  together  and  aid  one 
another  with  mutual  services.  Not  only  is  there  a  general  peaceable  arrangement  of 
nature,  but  there  is  also  a  reciprocity  that  makes  each  part  necessary  to  the  whole. 
Plants  live  on  the  soil,  animals  on  the  plants,  and  these  again  on  the  perishing  bodies 
of  animals.  3.  In  leauty.  The  direct  utility  of  nature  might  have  been  served  in  an 
ugly  fashion.  Clouds  might  all  have  been  black,  and  leaves  and  flowers  and  earth  of 
one  dull  hue.  But  God  has  breathed  a  spirit  of  beauty  over  his  works.  4.  In  joy.  God 
has  made  existence  itself  to  be  a  gladness.  Insects,  birds,  and  beasts  rejoice  in  the 
sunlight  of  a  summer  day.  Man  flnds  life  a  source  of  joy.  5.  In  progress.  All  nature 
IS  moving  on  in  a  grand  progress  to  higher  forms  of  life  and  more  perfect  types  of 
organization.     It  is  full  of  hope,  and  it  looks  forward  to  God's  greater  future  works. 

II.  Bemembbb  how  well  it  is  that  we  should  pbaisb  God  fob  his  wobks.  1.  In 
gratitude.  We  are  ourselves  part  of  his  works,  and  we  have  to  thank  him  that  we 
are  "fearfully  and  wonderfully  made."  Then  other  works  of  God  minister  to  our 
welfare,  and  as  we  profit  by  their  utility  or  enjoy  their  beauty,  it  is  becoming  that  we 
should  praise  him  who  is  the  Maker  and  Giver  of  them  all.  2.  In  admiration.  It  is 
a  miserable  thing  to  sink  into  that  cynical  pessimism  that  can  only  criticize  adversely 
and  can  never  see  and  enjoy  merit.  It  passes  for  cleverness,  but  it  is  real'.y  a  form  of 
dulness,  for  it  is  the  result  of  a  want  of  capacity  to  perceive  the  good  points  of  that 
which  only  arrests  attention  on  account  of  its  real  or  supposed  defects.  This  haljit 
of  mind  prevents  us  from  rising  to  any  true  greatness  ouraelves,  because  men  are  drawn 
upwards  by  admiration.  When,  however,  we  have  learnt  to  admire  the  works  of  God, 
it  is  only  fitting  that  we  should  go  on  and  adore  their  great  Artificer.  The  praise  of 
the  picture  is  the  praise  of  the  artist.    Yet  there  are  lovers  of  nature  who  seem  lo 


696  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvu.  1—24 

forget  her  Author.  3.  In  aspiration.  The  wings  of  praise  carry  the  soul  aloft.  When 
we  sing  of  the  great  and  marvellous  works  of  God  with  the  heart  and  the  understanding, 
we  shall  enter  into  the  thoughts  of  God  lovingly  and  with  sympathy.  We  grow  like 
what  we  adore.  Following  the  angels  in  songs  of  praise,  we  shall  grow  like  the  angels 
in  heavenly  chaiacter,  if  we  live  in  a  spirit  of  worship,  praising  God  not  only  by  the 
hymns  of  the  sanctuary,  but  by  the  grand  psalm  of  a  whole  life  of  worship. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  26. — "  God  is  great."  This  is  the  Mussulman  creed,  and  a  truth  of  great  force 
in  Mohammedanism.  Christianity  also  contains  it,  and  simijla  as  may  be  the  con- 
ception when  set  forth  in  bare  words,  there  are  depths  and  wide  reaches  of  inferences 
flowing  from  it  that  can  never  be  exhausted. 

I.  God  IB  IRRESISTIBLE.  TUs  is  the  Mohammedan  inference,  and  of  course  a 
necessary  and  true  one,  although  it  does  not  describe  all  that  we  know  of  God.  We 
know  that  it  is  simply  foolish  to  run  against  the  laws  of  nature.  Wo  cannot  deflect 
one  of  them  by  a  hair's  breadth.  But  the  laws  of  nature  are  the  ways  of  God.  There- 
fore there  can  be  but  one  end  to  our  opposition  to  God ;  it  must  fail.  The  booner  we 
own  this  obvious  truth  and  act  upon  it  the  better  for  ourselves.  If  we  cease  to  run 
madly  against  the  will  of  God,  we  may  repent  and  turn  to  the  better  way ;  if  we  still 
hurl  ourselves  headlong  against  it,  we  can  but  dash  ourselves  to  pieces. 

II.  God  is  unfathomable.  If  we  could  measure  God,  he  would  cease  to  be  God, 
for  he  would  be  no  longer  infinite.  Therefore,  instead  of  being  surprised  that  we  meet 
witb  mysteries  in  him,  we  should  expect  it,  and  take  it  as  a  sign  that  we  are  dealing 
with  One  who  is  vastly  greater  than  we  are.  The  child  cannot  understand  all  the 
actions  of  his  earthly  father.  How,  then,  can  any  man  think  to  understand  God  ?  This 
does  not  mean  that  we  can  know  nothing  of  God.  For  God  may  be  known  as  far  as 
he  has  revealed  himself  to  us,  and  as  far  as  we  are  able  to  rise  to  a  comprehension  of 
some  things  in  his  nature.  We  may  know  GK)d  truly ;  but  we  cannot  know  him 
adequately.  Before  the  awful  mystery  of  his  greatness  we  tremble,  humbled  and 
abashed.  1.  Therefore  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  Judge  of  Qod's  actions.  We  see 
but  a  minute  fraction  of  them.  Their  roots  lie  in  dark  depths  beyond  tlie  reach  of 
our  inquiry ;  their  purposes  stretch  far  beyond  the  utmost  rim  of  our  horizon.  2. 
Therefore  we  should  learn  to  trust  God.  We  must  walk  by  faith,  for  we  cannot 
see  all. 

III.  God  is  almightt  to  save.  The  Christian  God  is  more  than  the  Mussulman 
Allah.  He  is  not  like  an  inexorable  Oriental  despot.  He  is  full  of  sympathy  for  his 
children,  listening  to  their  cry  and  coming  to  save  them  in  their  need.  If  he  is  great, 
that  is  the  more  reassuring  for  us  when  we  put  our  trust  in  him.  It  is  vain  for  us  to 
resist  him ;  but  it  is  safe  for  us  to  trust  him.  Even  the  mysteriousness  of  God  invites 
our  confidence  when  once  we  are  assured  of  his  love.  His  almighty  power  is  ahle  to 
save  unto  the  uttermost,  and  his  great  and  wonderful  thought  invites. us  to  repose  in 
bis  wisdom.    Henry  Vaughan,  in  '  Silex  Sointillana,'  says — 

"  There  is  a  God,  some  say — 
A  deep,  bnt  dazzling  darkness  ; 

As  men  here 
Say  it  is  late  and  dusky,  because  they 

See  not  all  clear. 
Oh  foi'  that  night!  where  I  in  him 
Mi^kt  live  invisible  and  dim  I " 


W.  P.  A. 


EXPOSITION 
CHAPTER  XXXVII. 


Vers.  1—24:. — It  has  been  already  re- 
marked that  there  is  no  natural  division 
between  oh.  xxxvi.  and  oh.  xxxvii. — the  de- 
^pription  of  the  thunderstorm  and  its  effects 


runs  on.  From  its  effect  on  cattle,  Elihu 
passes  to  its  effect  on  man  (vers.  1 — 5) ;  and 
thence  goes  on  to  speak  of  other  natural 
manifestations  of  God's  power  and  marvel- 
lousness — snow,  violent  rain,  whirlwind, 
frost,  and  the  like  (vers.  6 — 13).    He  then 


CH.  XXXVII.  1—24.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


697 


makes  a  final  appeal  to  Job  to  acknowledge 
his  own  weakness  and  God's  perfection  and 
unsearchableness,  and  to  bow  down  in  won- 
der and  adoration  before  him  (tots.  14 — 24). 

Ver.  1. — At  this  also ;  i.e.  at  the  thunder- 
storm or  at  the  particular  crash  mentioned 
in  ch.  xxxvi.  33.  My  heart  trembleth.  A 
violent  peal  of  thunder  produces  in  almost 
all  men  a  certain  amount  of  nervous  trepida- 
tion. Eliliu  seems  to  have  been  abnormally 
sensitive.  His  heart  trembled  so  that  it 
seemed  to  be  moved  out  of  his  place. 

ViT.  2. — Hear  attentively  the  noise  of  his 
voice,  and  the  sound  that  goeth  out  of  his 
mouth ;  or,  Hearken  ye,  hearken  ye  to  the 
noise  of  his  voice  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxvii.  18 ;  civ. 
7 ;  and  below,  vers.  4,  5).  We  need  not 
suppose  Elihu  to  speak  otherwise  than 
poetically.    He  does  not,  like  the  Indian  of 

"...  untutored  mind, 
Bee  God  in  clouds  or  hear  him  in  the  wind." 

He  does  not  mean  that  the  thunder  is  actually 
God's  voice,  but  that  it  tells  of  him,  reminds 
of  him,  brings  naturally  to  men's  minds  the 
tiiought  of  his  marvellous  gre»tness  and 
power,  and  should  therefore  be  listened  to 
with  awe  and  trembling,  not  passed  over 
lightly,  like  any  other  sound. 

Ver.  3. — He  directeth  it  under  the  whole 
heaven.  The  reverberations  of  the  thunder- 
clap roll  along  the  entire  cloud-canopy,  from 
one  end  of  the  heavens  to  the  other,  begjin- 
ning  often  faint  in  the  distance,  then  growmg 
loud  over  our  heads,  finally  sinking  into  low 
muttered  rumblings  on  the  far  horizon.  And 
his  lightning  nnto  the  ends  of  the  earth. 
Similarly,  the  lightning,  though  originating 
in  a  flash  at  some  definite  spot,  sets  the 
whole  sky  aglow,  shining  from  side  to  side 
of  the  heavens,  and,  as  it  were,  to  the  very 
"  ends  of  the  earth."  Both  have  a  character 
of  universality  which  is  marvellous,  and 
which  makes  them  fitting  emblems  of  him 
of  whom  they  are  the  messengers  and  minis- 
ters (see  Mutt.  xxiv.  27). 

Ver.  4. — After  it  a  voice  roareth.  Afttr 
the  lightning-flash  has  been  seen,  the 
thunderclap  oomts.  In  their  origin  they 
are  simultaneous;  but,  as  light  travels 
faster  tliau  sound,  unless  we  are  close 
to  the  flash,  there  is  an  interval,  the 
thunder  following  on  the  lightning.  He 
thnndereth  with  the  voice  of  his  excellency 
(see  the  comment  on  ver.  2).  And  he  will 
not  stay  them  when  his  voice  is  heard.  The 
words  are  plain,  but  the  meaning  is  obscure. 
What  will  not  God  stay  ?  His  lightnings  ? 
His  thuniierings ?  His  rain?  His  hail? 
There  is  no  obvious  antecedent.  And  in 
what  sense  will  he  not  "stay"  tliem? 
gome  explain,  "He  will  not  Bl»oken  their 


Bpeed ; "  others,  "  He  will  not  cause  them  to 
cease." 

Vor.  5.— God  thundereth  marvelloasly 
with  his  voice.  In  finishing  oflf  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  thunderstorm,  Elihu  dwells  upon 
its  marvellousness.  Each  step  in  the  entire 
process  is  strange  and  wonderful,  beyond 
man's  comprehension ;  and  the  lesson  to  be 
drawn  from  the  consideration  of  the  whole 
series  of  phenomena  is  that  great  things 
doeth  he  (i.e.  God),  which  we  cannot  compre- 
hend. Even  alter  all  that  has  been  done  of 
late  years  to  advance  the  science  of  meteor- 
ology, it  cannot  be  said  that  the  rationale  of 
storms  is  fully  grasped  by  the  scientific 
intellect. 

Ver.  6. — For  he  saith  to  the  snow.  Be  thou 
on  the  earth.  The  phenomenon  of  snow  is 
always  full  of  marvel  to  an  Oriental.  It 
comes  before  him  so  seldom ;  it  is  in  itself 
so  strange;  it  involves  things  so  inexplic- 
able as  the  sudden  solidification  of  a  liquid, 
crystallization,  a  marked  expansion  of  bulk, 
and  the  sudden  assumption  by  what  was 
colourless  of  a  definite  and  dazzling  colour. 
In  Arabia  and  the  countries  bordering  on 
Palestine  snow  very  seldom  falls ;  but  in 
Palestine  itself  the  mountain  ranges  of 
Lebanon  and  Hermoii  are  never  without  it ; 
and  in  the  region  occupied  by  Job  and  his 
friends  tliere  is  reason  to  believe  that  ice 
and  snow  were  not  altogether  infrequent 
(see  ch.  vi.  16,  and  the  comment  ad  loc). 
Likewise  to  the  small  rain ;  or,  to  the  light 
ihower  of  rain — "  the  spring  rain,"  as  the 
Chaldee  paraphrast  explains  it.  And  to  the 
great  rain  of  his  strength ;  or,  "  the  heavy 
win  ter  rain,"  according  to  the  same  authority. 
"  The  former  and  the  latter  rain  " — the  rain 
of  winter,  and  the  rain  of  spring — are  often 
mentioned  by  the  sacred  writers  (see  Deut. 
xi.  14;  Jer.  v.  24;  Hos.  vi.  3;  Joel  ii.  23; 
Zech.  X.  1 ;  Jas.  v.  7).  God  gave  both,  or- 
dinarily, in  due  course. 

Ver.  7. — He  sealeth  up  the  hand  of  every 
man.  In  the  winter  season,  wlien  the  snow 
falls,  and  the  heavy  rains  ponr  down  (ver.  6), 
God  "  sealeth  up  the  hand  of  every  man ;  " 
i.e.  puts  an  end  to  ordinary  out-of-doors 
labour,  and  establishes  a  time  of  pause  or 
rest  (comp.  Homi  r, '  II.,'  xvii.  549).  He  does 
this  with  the  object  that  all  men  may  know 
his  work ;  i.e.  that,  during  the  time  of  their 
enforced  idleness,  men  may  have  leisure  for 
reflection,  and  may  employ  it  in  meditating 
upon  him  and  his  marvellous  "  work." 

Ver.  8 Then  (t'.e.  in  winter)  the  beasts 

go  into  dens.  The  very  beasts  shut  them- 
selves up,  and  remain  hidden  in  their  places, 
i.e.  in  their  lairs,  on  account  of  the  inole- 
menoy  of  the  season. 

Ver.  9. — Out  of  the  south  eometh  the 
whirlwind ;  rather,  out  of  the  secret  cliamier 
— the   storehouse    where    God   keeps  hit 


698 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xxxvii.  1 — 2i. 


tempests.  Nothing  is  said  of  "  the  south  " 
here,  though  elsewhere,  no  doubt,  whirl- 
winds are  said  to  come  especially  from 
that  quarter  (see  Isa.  xxi.  1  and  Zeoh.  ix. 
14).  And  cold  out  of  the  north;  rather,  aiid 
cold  fram  the  scatterers.  "  The  soatterers  " 
seem  to  be  the  violent  winds  which  clear 
the  heavens  of  clouds,  and  bring  in  a  clear 
frosty  atmosphere.  Or  the  word  used  may 
designate  a  constellation  (comp.  oh.  xxxviii. 
32). 

Ver.  10.— By  the  breath  of  God  frost  is 
given  (oomp.  Ps.  cxlvii.  16—18).  "The 
breath  of  God,"  which  is  a  metaphor  for  the 
will  of  God,  causes  alike  both  frost  and 
thaw.  And  the  breadth  of  the  waters  is 
straitened ;  or,  congeaZed.  A  broad  expanse 
of  water  is  suddenly  turned  by  frost  into  a 
stiff  and  solid  mass. 

Ver.  11.— Also  by  wateringha  wearieth  the 
thick  cloud;  rather,  also  with  moitture  he 
ladeth  tlie  thick  cloud.  Blihu  returns  from 
his  description  of  the  winter  season  to  the 
more  ordinary  condition  of  things.  Eain  is 
the  chief  necessity  of  Eastern  countries; 
and  God  is  ever  providing  it,  causing 
moisture  to  be  drawn  up  from  earth  and 
sea,  and  safely  lodged  in  the  clouds,  whence 
it  descends,  as  neerled,  and  as  commanded 
by  God,  upon  the  fields  and  plains  that 
man  cultivates.  He  scattereth  his  bright 
cloud.  Most  commentators  see  a  reference 
to  lightning  here;  and  it  is  possible,  no 
doubt,  that  such  a  reference  is  intended. 
"His  bright  cloud  "—literally,  "the  cloud 
of  his  light"— may  mean  "the  cloud  in 
which  his  lightning  is  stored."  But  per- 
haps no  more  is  meant  than  that  God 
spreads  abroad  over  the  earth  the  clouds 
on  which  his  sunlight  rests.  The  genial 
sliowers  of  spring  fall  generally  from  clouds 
that  are,  in  part  at  any  rate,  steeped  in  the 
•un's  rays. 

Ver.  12. — ^And  it  is  tnmed  round  about  by 
his  counsels.  "  It "  (i.e.  the  cloud)  is  "  turned 
round"  (or  directed  in  its  course)  "by  his 
counsels,"  or  under  the  guidance  of  his  wis- 
dom, and  so  conveys  his  rain  whither  he 
pleases.  That  they  may  do  whatsoever  he 
coramandeth  them  upon  the  face  of  the  world 
in  the  earth.  There  is  no  expressed  ante- 
cedent to  "  they."  Perhaps  the  showers  are 
intended,  or  the  atmospheric  influences 
generally. 

Vur.  13. — He  causeth  it  to  come,  whether 
for  correction,  or  for  his  land,  or  for  mercy, 
God  hns  different  purposes  in  directing 
the  rain  hitlier  or  thither.  Sometimes  his 
object  is  to  punish  by  violent  or  excessive 
rainfall ;  sometimes  it  is  to  fertilize  his  own 
special  land ;  sometimes  it  is  out  of  kind- 
ness to  men  generally. 

Vers.  14 — 24. — Elihu  ends  with  a  per- 


sonal appeal  to  Job,  based  on  the  statements 
which  he  has  made.  Can  Job  imagine  thai 
he  understands  the  workings  of  God  in 
nature?  If  not,  how  can  he  venture  to 
challenge  God  to  a  controversy  ?  Would  it 
not  be  better  to  recognize  that  his  ways  are 
inscrutable? 

Ver.  14. — Hearken  unto  this,  0  Job :  stand 
still,  and  consider  the  wondrous  works  of 
God.  Consider  the  marvels  of  God's  works 
in  nature,  as  I  have  set  them  forth  to  thee 
(ch.  xxxvi.  27—33;  xxxvii.  2—13);  the 
mysteries  of  evaporation,  of  cloud  formation 
and  accumulation,  of  thunder,  of  lightning, 
of  snow  and  frost,  of  genial  showers  and 
fierce  downpours,  of  summer  and  winter,  of 
the  former  rain  and  the  latter,  of  the  gentle 
breeze  and  the,  whirlwind ;  and  then  say  if 
thou  oomprehendest  the  various  processes, 
and  canst  explain  them,  and  make  others  to 
understand  them  (ver.  19).  If  not,  shouldest 
thou  not  own,  as  we  do,  that  "  we  cannot 
find  him  out "  (ver.  28),  cannot  reach  to  the 
depths  of  his  nature,  and  therefore  are  unfit 
to  pronounce  judgment  on  his  doings  ? 

Ver.  15. — ^Dost  thou  know  when  God  dis- 
posed them ;  rather,  disposes  them — gives 
them  their  orders,  arranges  for  their  course 
and  sequence?  Or  dost  thou  know  when 
he  caused  (or  rather,  causes)  the  light  of  his 
cloud  (either  the  lightning,  or  perhaps  the 
rainbow,  as  Schultens  suggests)  to  shine  1 
Thou  canst  not  pretend  to  any  such  know- 
ledge. 

Ver.  16. — ^Dost  then  know  the  balancings 
of  the  clouds  1  t'.e.  "  how  they  are  poised  and 
suspended  in  the  sky "  (Stanley  Leathes). 
The  wondrous  works  of  him  which  is  perfect 
in  knowledge  (comp.  ch.  xxxvi.  5). 

Ver.  17. — How  thy  garments  are  warm, 
when  he  qnieteth  the  earth  by  the  south 
wind?  Dost  thou  even  know  how  it  is  that, 
while  the  breeze  from  the  north  chills  tlu  e 
(vers.  9,  10),  the  breath  from  the  south 
makes  thee  feel  thy  garments  too  warm  ? 
If  thou  canst  not  explain  a  physical  matter, 
wherein  thine  own  comfort  is  concerned,  how 
much  less  cnnst  thou  comprehend  the  work- 
ings of  God  in  hia  moral  universe  I 

Ver.  18. — Hast  thou  with  him  spread  out 
the  sky  t  Didst  thou  assist  in  the  spreading 
out  of  the  sky,  that  great  and  magnificent 
work  of  the  Creator,  transcending  almost  all 
others  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  ix.  8)  ?  Or 
did  not  God  efieot  this  work  alone,  without 
even  a  counsellor  (Isa.  xl.  18,  14),  so  that 
thon  hadst  no  part  in  it?  Which  is  strong, 
and  as  a  molten  looking-glass.  The  sky  is 
"strong"  or  "firm;"  t.e.  enduring  or  per- 
manent, though  not  really  hard  like  a 
mirror.  Elihu,  however,  seems  to  have  re- 
garded it,  like  many  of  the  ancients,  as  • 


m.  xxxva.  1—24.] 


TflE  BOOK  OF  30% 


m 


solid  mass,  resembling  a  concave  mirror  of 
metal.  Tho  tr.inslation,  "  looking-glass,"  is 
wrong,  both  here  and  in  Bxod.  xxxviii.  8, 
since  glass  was  not  used  for  mirrors  until 
the  period  of  the  early  Roman  empire.  The 
earlier  mirrois  were  of  polished  metal  (see 
Smith's  'Diet,  of  Antiquities,'  toI.  iii.  pp. 
1052, 1212). 

Var.  19. — Teach  as  what  we  shall  say 
onto  him.  Elihu  indulges  in  irony.  If 
thou  art  so  wise  as  thou  pretendest  to  be, 
then  be  pleased  to  "  teach  us."  We  acknow- 
ledge our  ignorance — we  cannot  order  our 
speech  by  reason  of  darkness.  Bnlighten 
us,  if  thou  canst. 

Ver.  20.— Shall  it  be  told  him  that  I 
speak  I  rather,  that  I  would  tpeak  (comp. 
ch.  xxxi.  35).  Job  had  expressed  the  wish 
that  God  would  "  hear  him,  and  answer 
him."  Elihu,  intending  to  rebuke  this  pre- 
sumption, yet  shrinking  from  doing  so 
directly,  puts  himself  in  Job's  place,  and 
asks,  "Would  it  be  fitting  that  I  should 
demand  to  speak  with  God?"  If  not,  it 
cannot  be  fitting  that  Job  should  do  so.  If 
a  man  speak,  surely  he  shall  be  swallowed 
ap.  This  is  probably  the  true  meaning, 
though  another  has  been  suggesterl  by  some 
commentators,  who  prefer  to  render,  "Or 
should  a  man  wish  that  he  were  destroyed 7" 
(So  Ewald,  Dillmann,  Canon  Cook,  and  our 
Revisers.)  If  we  adopt  this  rendering,  we 
must  understand  Elihu  as  appending  to  his 
first  rebuke  a  second,  levelled  against  Job's 
desire  to  have  his  life  ended. 

Ver.  21. — And  now  men  see  not  the  bright 
light  which  is  in  the  clouds;  rather,  and 
now  men  cannot  behold  the  light  which  it 
bright  in  the  skieg.  Now,  i.e.,  here  in  this 
world,  men  cannot  look  straight  at  the  sun, 
since  he  dazzles  them.  How  much  less, 
then,  would  they  be  able  to  face  God  on  his 
throne  in  heaven  I  Yet  this  is  what  Job 
bad  proposed  to  do  (ch.  iz.  32 — 33;   xiii. 


18—22;  xxii.  3—7,  etc.).  But  th5  wind 
passeth,  and  cleanseth  them;  rather,  when 
the  wind  passeth  and  cleareth  tlmm;  i.e. 
when,  the  wind  having  swept  away  the 
clouds  and  cleared  the  sky,  the  sun  shines 
forth  in  all  its  splendour. 

Ver.  22. — Fair  weather  oometh  out  of  the 
north ;  literally,  out  of  the  north  eometh  gold. 
The  bearing  of  this  is  very  obscure,  whether 
we  suppose  actual  gold  to  be  meant,  or  the 
golden  splendours  of  the  sun,  or  any  other 
bright  radiance.  No  commentator  has  hit 
on  a  satisfactory  explanation.  With  God  is 
terrible  majesty.  This  is  suflBoiently  plain, 
and  it  is  the  point  whereto  all  Elihu's  later 
argument  has  been  directed  (see  ch.  xxxvi. 
22 — 33;  xxxvii.  1 — 18).  God's  majesty  is' 
so  great  that  men  can  only  tremble  befor* 
him. 

Ver.  23. — Touching  the  Almighty,  c^e 
cannot  find  him  oat.  This  is  the  "  couslu- 
sion  of  the  whole  matter."  God  is  inscrut- 
able, and  man  must  hide  his  face  before  hini, 
and  not  presume  to  judge  him.  He  is  also 
excellent  in  power,  and  in  judgment,  and  in 
plenty  of  justloe.  His  moral  perfection  is 
on  a  par  with  his  might  and  majesty.  He 
will  not  afiiiot ;  rather,  he  wiU  not  answer ; 
i.e.  he  will  not  account  to  men  for  his  doings, 
or  condescend  to  justify  himself  in  their 
eyes.     His  acts  cannot  but  be  righteous. 

Ver.  24. — Men  do  therefore  fear  him ;  or, 
let  men  therefore  fear  him.  Let  them  see  in 
his  unsearchableness,  his  almiglity  power, 
his  absolute  moral  perfection,  and  his  supe- 
riority to  &11  human  questioning,  ample 
grounds  for  the  profoundest  reverence  ard 
fear.  And  let  them  remember  that  he  re- 
specteth  not  any  that  are  wise  of  heart. 
However  "  wise  of  heart "  men  may  be, 
God  does  not  "  respect "  them,  at  any  rate 
to  the  extent  of  submitting  his  conduct  to 
their  judgment,  and  answering  their  ques- 
tionings (see  ver.  20), 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1—24. — Elihu  to  Job:  5.  The  wonderful  works  of  Ood.  I.  Wondbrittl  in 
RESPECT  OF  THEIB  VARIETY.  Beginning  with  the  thunderstorm  (ver.  2),  with  its 
quickly  .spieading  clouds  (ch.  xxxvi.  29),  its  sharp,  gleaming  bolts  (ver.  3), its  crashing 
and  reverberating  peals  (ver.  4),  Elihu  passes  on  to  descant  upon  other  natural  pheno- 
mena— such  as  the  falling  of  the  snow  and  the  rain  upon  the  earth  (ver.  6) ;  the  sweep- 
ing of  the  whirlwind,  or  hot  simoom,  from  the  remote  regions  of  the  southern  desert, 
alternately  with  the  rushing  of  the  cold  blasts  from  "the  soatterers," or  north  winds 
(ver.  9) ;  the  congelation  of  the  water-drops  by  the  breath  of  winter,  and  the  straitening 
of  the  rivers  by  thick  blocks  of  ice  (ver.  10) ;  the  replenishing  of  the  emptied  rain- 
cloud  with  fresh  loads  of  water,  and  the  distribution  far  and  wide  of  the  cloud  of  his 
light,  i.e.  of  the  cloud  that  is  pregnant  with  lightning  (ver.  11).  And  yet  such  pheno- 
mena are  only  an  infinitesimally  small  portion  of  that  endless  variety  which  Nature  in 
her  movements  and  manifestations  affords.  This  variety,  too,  besides  being  an  eminent 
enhancement  of  nature's  beauty,  contributes  in  a  high  degree  to  nature|s  usefulness. 
Hid  is  a  testimony  by  no  means  unimportant  in  favour  of  nature  having  been  th« 


600  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxrn.  1—24. 


production  of  an  all-wise  Artificer,  since  the  suggestion  ia  little  short  of  inconceivable 
that  a  world  so  wondrotisly  fair,  so  exquisitely  diversified,  so  harmoniously  adjusted 
in  all  its  parts,  could  have  been  the  work  of  blind,  unintelligent  force,  directed  in  its 
operations  by  purposeless  chance,  or  could  have  emanated  from  any  other  source  than 
that  of  an  infinite  mind. 

II.  WoNDEBFiiii  IN  EESPBOT  OP  THBiB  OBioiir.  The  presumption  above  created  is 
explicitly  confirmed  by  Elihu,  who  commends  to  Job's  attention  the  entire  circle  of 
nature's  interesting  phenomena  as  "the  wondrous  works  of  God"  (ver.  14),  "the 
wondrous  works  of  him  who  is  perfect  in  knowledge  "  (ver.  16),  and  "  his  work  "  (Ver, 
7),  i.e.  as  the  productions  of  his  almighty  finger.  Does  the  thunder  cannonade  along 
the  sky  ?  It  is  God  who  roareth  with  the  voice  of  his  excellency  (ver.  4).  Do  the 
heavens  shake  their  snowflakes,  distil  their  gentle  showers,  or  pour  their  copious 
floods  upon  the  earth  ?  It  is  God  who  saith  to  the  snow  and  rain,  "  Be  thou  on  the 
earth  "  (ver.  6).  Does  the  frost  arrest  the  flowing  river,  congeal  the  water-drop,  lie 
like  crisp  white  beads  upon  the  ground,  or  trace  its  fairy  pictures  on  the  window- 
pane?  It  is  God's  breatli  that  sends  the  frost  into  the  air  (ver.  10).  Do  the  rain- 
olouds  fill  and  empty  themselves  upon  the  earth  ?  It  is  God  who  loadeth  them  with 
liquid  burdens  (ver.  11).  Does  the  lightning-shaft,  leaping  from  the  dark  bosom  of  the 
storm-cloud,  career  through  the  murky  sky  ?  It  is  God  who  directeth  it  under  the  whole 
heaven  (ver.  3).  Nor  is  this  simply  superstition,  like  that  which  caused  the  untutored 
savage  and  the  cultured  Greek  alike  to  transform  every  mountain  and  stream  into  tlie 
abode  of  a  divinity.  And  just  as  little  is  it  merely  poetry  which,  personifying  dead 
things,  deals  with  them  as  beings  endued  with  life  and  intolli;^enoe.  It  is  piety  which, 
with  a  keener  and  truer  discernment  than  is  sometimes  evinced  by  modern  scientists, 
overleaping  every  intermediate  cause,  takes  its  station  with  adoring  wonder  beside  the 
throne  of  him  who  is  the  absolute  and  uncreated  Author  of  this  universal  frame.  The 
characteristic  here  ascribed  to  Elihu,  the  youthful  prophet  of  Arabia,  was  one  which  in 
an  eminent  dei;ree  pertained  to  the  Hebrew  mind.  The  psalms  of  David,  in  particular, 
are  distinguished  by  the  boldness  with  which  they  recognize  the  hand  of  God  in  the 
ever-varying  phenomena  of  this  terrestrial  sphere  (cf.  Ps.  viii. ;  xix. ;  xxix.;  Ixv. ;  Ixviii.). 
Nor  was  this  peculiarity  awanting  to  the  later  poets  of  the  period  of  the  exile  (cf.  Ps. 
civ.).  Even  New  Testament  writers  (e.g.  St.  Paul,  Acts  xiv.  17;  xvii.  28)  are  not  strangers 
to  this  devout  practice.  Above  all,  it  was  habitual  with  Christ  (Matt.  vi.  30 ;  John  v. 
17).  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  modern  scientists  should  so  frequently  overlook  the 
fact  that  in  investigating  nature's  laws  they  are  merely  informing  tiiemselves  as  to  the 
specific  methods  in  which  the  supreme  Creator  has  been  pleased  to  work. 

III,  WoNDERFUii  nf  KBSPECT  OF  THBIB  EXECUTION.  If  the  phenomena  of  nature  are 
in  themselves  such  as  to  demand  an  infinite  mind  for  their  conception,  much  more  does 
their  production  call  for  a  supreme  Artificer  of  unlimited  resources  as  to  wisdom  and 
power.  Elihu  declares  them  to  be  "doings  "  positively  incomprehensible  by  the  finite 
mind  (ver.  5)  ;  and,  notwithstanding  all  the  results  of  scientific  observation,  it  is  still 
true  that  the  chief  secrets  of  nature  continue  to  baffle  man's  intelligence.  Take  the 
thunderstorm,  for  instance,  to  which  Elihu  alludes.  Almost  any  scientific  treatise 
touching  on  the  subject  will  explain  how  the  dark  masses  of  cloud  that  pile  themselves 
above  the  horizon  and  gradually  spread  along  the  sky  are  filled  with  water  and  charged 
with  electricity,  how  the  lighining  is  produced  by  the  meeting  of  positive  with  negative 
electricity,  and  how  the  thunderclap  results  from  the  explosion  of  the  overcharged 
clouds.  But,  after  all,  this  does  not  impart  a  great  deal  of  information  to  the  mind. 
It  leaves  unresolved  the  deepest  mysteries  connected  with  the  problem,  such  as  the 
way  in  which  the  storm-cloud  is  formed,  and  the  structure  of  the  particles  of  which  it 
is  composed,  the  mode  in  which  the  earth  and  the  air  have  been  charged  with  different 
kinds  or  decrees  of  electricity,  what  electricity  itself  is,  and  what  are  the  laws  of  Us 
production  and  distribution.  And  even  though  all  these  matters  were  explored  by  the 
patient  intellect  of  science,  there  would  still  remain  the  question  how  the  phenomena 
themselves  can  be  made,  clearly  showing  that  the  utmost  that  is  attainable  by  man  is 
to  understand  the  works  of  God  (at  least  in  part)  when  they  are  made,  not  to  arrive 
at  the  wisdom  by  which  they  might  be  reproduced.  The  meteorologist  can  observe 
how  God  maltes  his  thunder,  but  he  cannot  himself  thunder  with  a  voice  like  God's. 
He  can  descant  upon  *he  cause  o?  snow,  can  expatiate  upon  the  beauty  of  the  snowflakek 


OH.  xxxvn.  1— 24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  «01 

and  can  tell  that  their  crystals  assume  five  leading  forms ;  but  with  all  his  learning  and 
amid  all  his  researches  he  has  never  laid  his  finger  on  the  art  of  making  snow,  or  of 
saying  to  a  single  flake, "  Be  thou  on  the  earth." 

IV.  Wonderful  in  respect  of  thbib  control.  If  nature  is  not  a  vast  machine 
from  which  God  has  departed,  still  less  is  it  an  engine  which  he  has  suffered  to  escape 
from  his  hand.  Conceived  by  infinite  wisdom  and  fashioned  by  almighty  power,  i  t 
has  by  the  same  combination  of  qualities  been  kept  in  complete  subordination.  Elihu 
instances  the  lightning-cloud  as  a  work  of  God  that  is  "  turned  round  about  by  his 
counsels,  and  that  doeth  whatsoever  he  commandeth  upon  the  fape  of  the  wide  earth  " 
(ver.  12).  But  it  is  the  same  with  the  snow  and  the  rain,  the  frost  and  the  wind. 
These  are  as  submissive  to  his  command  as  the  thunder  when  it  roars,  or  the  lightning 
when  it  gleams.  So,  according  to  the  concurrent  testimony  of  Scripture,  are  all  his 
works  in  all  places  of  his  dominion  (ch.  xxiii.  13 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  9 ;  cxix.  90,  91 ;  Isa. 
tl.  26 ;  Dan.  iv.  35  ;  Eph.  i.  11). 

V.  WONDBRFDL  IN  RESPECT  OF  THEIR  IMPKKS8IVENE8S.      More   CSpeoi'llly   18   thls   the 

case  with  the  grander  and  sublimer  phenomena.  The  thimderstorm,  wiih  its  ominous 
gloom,  its  lurid  fires,  its  terrific  detonations,  carries  a  sense  of  awe  to  every  sentient 
creature.  At  its  first  approach  the  cattle  manifest  their  ftar  by  herdinii  together  in  the 
most  sheltered  spots  that  they  can  find.  The  birds,  as  they  fly  with  eager  haste  to  screen 
themselves  among  the  boughs,  give  evidence  that  they  are  smitten  with  an  unknown 
dread.  Even  the  wild  beasts  that  roam  through  the  forest  or  scour  the  plain,  the 
shaggy  lion  and  the  ferocious  tiger,  slink  away  to  hide  themselves  within  their  dens. 
Nay,  man,  whether  civilized  or  barbarian,  religious  or  unbelieving,  cannot  witness  the 
dread  commotion  of  the  elements,  cannot  look  upon  "  the  sulphurous  and  thought-exe- 
cuting fires,  vaunt  couriers  of  oak-cleaving  thunderbolts  "  as  they  flash  across  the  murky 
vanlt  of  heaven,  or  listen  to  the  "all-shaking  thunder"  as  it  crashes,  rolls,  and  roais 
across  the  pavement  of  the  skies,  without  instinctively  holding  his  breath  and  feeling 
soleujnized,  as  if  he  stood  in  presence  of  the  supernatural.  Even  the  heart  of  Elihu 
trembled  and  tottered  from  its  place  before  the  awe-inspiring  manifestation  of  Divine 
power  which  was  then  taking  place  (ver.  1),  very  much  as  Moses  did  in  the  presence 
of  Mo'::it  Sinai,  when  it  shook  beneath  the  feet  of  the  God  of  Israel  (Ps.  Ixviii.  8),  and 
he  gava  expression  to  his  horror,  saying,  "I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake"  (Heb.  xii.  21). 
But  scarcely  less  impressive  to  a  thoughtful  and  devout  mind  is  Nature  in  her  quieter 
moods. 

"  The  meanest  floweret  of  the  vale, 

The  simplest  note  that  swells  the  gale, 

The  common  sun,  the  air,  the  skies, 

To  him  are  opening  Paradise." 

Elihu  speaks  of  God  sealing  up  the  hand  of  every  man  by  the  terrors  of  his  thunder 
or  the  rigours  of  his  winter  (ver.  7) ;  that  is,  arresting  man's  customary  occupations, 
and  compelling  man,  by  a  period  of  enforced  leisure,  to  meditate  upon  his  work,  so  as 
to  know  and  recognize  it  to  be  his.  One  reason  why  men  fail  to  trace  God's  presence 
in  his  own  creation  is  the  want  of  a  religious  contemplation  of  his  works.  The  snpreme 
Creator  has  so  constructed  every  portion  of  nature  that,  if  rightly  interpreted,  it  will 

speak  of  him.  .  ,    •    ■..,  . 

IV.  Wonderful  in  respect  of_  their  design.  It  is  a  fundamental  article  in  biblical 
theology  that  the  supreme  Artificer  never  acts  without  a  purpose  (Acts  xv.  18  ;  Eph. 
i.  11).°  The  universe  was  not  summoned  into  existence  without  a  specific  end  in  view 
(Bev.  Iv.  11).  The  earth  was  not  created  in  vain,  but  formed  to  be  inhabited  (Isa.  xlv. 
18).  So  every  single  work  of  God  Vias  its  paiticular  aim.  Elihu  again  recurs  for  an 
example  to  the  thunder-cloud.  When  God  causes  a  thunderstorm  to  burst  upon  a  land, 
it  is  not  an  accident,  or  a  haphazard  operation,  but  an  event  with  a  well-defined  object  in 
contemplation.  It  is  either  as  a  punishment  for  sin,  or  as  an  act  of  mercy  towards  man, 
or  as  a  means  of  fertilizing  the  land  and  thus  conferring  benefit  on  an  entire  popula- 
tion. That  is  to  say,  it  is  employed  as  an  instrument  in  the  execution  of  Gdd's  pre- 
arranged design,  whether  that  be  specific  in  its  destination  or  general,  i.e.  for  the 
benefit  of  an  individual  or  the  good  of  a  country,  and  whether  it  be  punitive  or  merciful. 
And  every  other  phenomenon  of  nature  is  in  like  manner  connected  with  the  silver 
line  of  God's  eternal  purpose.    Science  may  not  be  able  to  see  how  the  two  are  linked 


602  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  Cofi.  xxrvn.  1— 24 

together.  But,  if  faith  can,  it  is  enough.  It  is  not  unscientific  to  affirm  that  God 
sends  the  thunderstorm  and  the  whirlwind,  the  earthquake  and  the  pestilence,  since 
the  hand  of  God  confessedly  is  outside  the  cognizance  of  science ;  it  is  not  required  hy 
religion  to  deny  that  all  these  phenomena  are  due  to  immediately  preceding  causes. 
Science  traces  back  the  links  of  the  chain  to  the  verge  of  its  material  domain.  When 
science  falters  and  becomes  blind,  faith,  catching  up  the  quest,  penetrates  the  regions 
beyond,  and  discovers  the  last  link  of  the  chain  to  be  the  hand  of  God. 

VII.  WoNDBEFUL  IN  RESPECT  OP  THEIK  TEACHINGS.  These  may  be  summed  up 
in  one  word, "  ignorance."  Whatever  else  they  attest,  they  emphatically  proclaim  man 
to  be  destitute  of  true  knowledge.  1.  Concerning  the  phenomena  of  nature.  Elihu 
asks  Job  with  a  touch  of  irony  if  he  could  explain  what  to  men  in  general  was  incom- 
prehensible— how  God  had  imposed  laws  upon  the  cloud  and  the  lightning,  and  by  what 
means  he  caused  "  the  light  of  his  cloud  "  to  shine — if  he  knew  so  much  about  meteor- 
ology as  to  be  able  to  comprehend  "  the  balancings  of  clouds" — nay,  if  he  could  tell 
how  the  action  of  the  south  wind,  or  hot  simoom,  made  him  warm  (vers.  15 — 17). 
Doubtless  on  every  one  of  these  points  science  has  laid  open  to  us  much  that  was 
concealed  from  the  mind  of  Job  and  even  of  Elihu ;  but  still  it  is  relatively  true  that 
in  comparison  with  what  remains  to  be  explored  man  is  as  yet  profoundly  ignorant  ^i 
the  great  secrets  of  nature.  2.  Concerning  the  position  of  himself.  Man,  Elihu 
reminds  Job,  was  not  di.stiuguished  from  nature's  phenomena  as  God  was,  being  not 
the  creator  as  God,  but  only  himself  a  creature  like  nature.  "Hast  thou  with  him 
spread  out  the  sky,  strong  and  as  a  molten  mirror  ?  "  (ver.  18).  Consequently,  it  was 
sheer  presumption  to  imagine  that  man  was  competent  to  enter  into  judgment  or 
controversy  with  God.  If  Job  knew  how  to  address  God,  EUhu  would  be  glad  to  be 
instructed ;  as  for  himself,  he  would  as  s<wn  think  of  saying  that  he  wanted  to  be 
swallowed  up  as  that  he  wished  to  speak  with  God  (vers.  19,  20).  It  is  ever  precisely 
in  proportion  as  we  understand  the  feebleness,  insignificance,  and  sinfulness  of  our 
position  before  God  that  we  are  withheld  from  the  offences  of  presumption  and 
irreverence.  3.  Concerning  the  administration  of  providence.  Exactly  as  the  clear 
firmament  overhead  with  its  shining  sun  is  obscured  from  view  by  the  storm-clouds 
that  intervene,  so  the  principles  on  which  God  governs  the  world,  allotting  suffering  to 
one  and  happiness  to  another,  cannot  be  distinctly  perceived  by  man.  By-and-by 
they  will  be  made  to  shine  forth  with  resplendent  lustre,  as  soon  the  darkened  heavens 
will  be  swept  of  clouds,  and  the  bright  light,  beaming  down  from  the  ethereal  heights, 
will  in  all  its  radiant  glory  be  disclosed.  Meantime  man  stands  beneath  the  clouds, 
where  all  is  dark,  though  above,  ».«.  to  the  mind  of  God,  everything  is  clear  (1  John 
i.  5).  4.  Concerning  the  character  of  Ood.  Elihu  means  to  say  either  that  fair 
weather,  effulgent  as  gold  (or  disclosing  the  golden  sun),  cometh  out  of  the  northern 
quarters  of  the  sky,  or  that  men  out  of  the  northern  regions  of  the  earth  extract  gold ; 
but  that  neither  can  the  Divine  Being,  with  whom  is  terrible  majesty,  be  steadily 
looked  upon  by  man,  as  man  can  contemplate  the  orb  of  day,  nor  can  the  nature  of 
God  be  fathomed  as  men  dig  out  gold  from  the  mine.  "  Touching  the  Almighty,  we 
cannot  find  him  out."  Not  that  this  implies  an  utter  ignorance  of  the  attributes 
pertaining  to  the  Supreme.  On  the  contrary,  man  may  gather  from  his  wondrous 
works  in  creation  and  providence  that  God  is  "  excellent  in  power,  and  in  judgment, 
and  in  plenty  of  justice ; "  nay,  that  he  is  compassionate  and  merciful  also,  being 
indisposed  to  afflict  either  willingly  or  severely,  and  never  except  as  a  means  to  an 
end.  5.  Concerning  the  rule  of  duty.  "  Men  do  therefore  fear  him."  Such  homage 
rests  on  the  three  pillars  of  God's  power,  God's  justice,  and  God's  mercy.  Yet  man, 
like  Job,  is  prone  to  forget  the  reverence  due  to  God.  Hence  it  is  ever  needful  to 
enforce  attention  to  duty  by  reminders  of  God's  supremacy  and  majesty.  "  He  respecteth 
not  any  that  are  wise  of  heart."  Self-righteousness  aud  pride  are  wholly  inconsistent 
with  a  right  fulfilment  of  human  duty  towards  the  Supreme.  "  Though  the  Lord  be 
high,  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly;  but  the  proud  he  knoweth  afar  off"  (Ps. 
cxxxviii.  6). 

Learn  :  1.  That  nature  is  the  handiwork  of  God.  2.  That  nature  contains  revela- 
tions of  beauty,  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  justice,  -to  the  soul  of  man.  3.  That  it  is 
man's  duty  to  study  that  which  God  has  revealed,  i.  That  the  best  preparation  for 
a  study  of  nature,  as  of  any  other  revelation,  is  a  deep  conviction  of  {crsoDiU  ignorance. 


CH.  xxxvn.  1—24,]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  603 


'6.  That  the  more  we  learn  of  the  works  of  God,  the  less  shall  we  think  of  ourselves. 
6.  That  rightly  pioseciitcd,  the  study  of  nature  leads  to  God.  7.  That  the  glory  of 
God  is  ever  greater  than  the  giandeur  of  his  works,  or  of  Nature  in  lier  sublimest 
moods.  8.  That  the  sum  of  human  duty,  as  expounded  by  nature,  is  to  fear  God  and 
keep  his  commandments.  9.  That  the  discoveries  of  nature  have  been  eclipsed  by 
the  revelations  of  the  gospel.  10.  That  if  it  behoves  man  to  study  God  in  nature, 
much  more  does  it  behove  him  to  study  God  in  Christ. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  14. —  On  considering  the  works  of  Ood.  Blihu  in  his  continued  address  would 
teach  Job  to  hearken  to  tbe  Lord  rather  than  reply  to  him,  to  learn  rather  than  teach, 
and  more  especially  to  consider  his  wonderful  works.  The  greatness  of  the  Divine 
works  causeth  Job's  teacher's  heart  to  tremble;  so  he  would  it  were  with  Job.  To 
the  greatness  of  the  Divine  voice,  to  the  wonder  of  the  Divine  works,  he  directs  liim. 
The  works  of  God  may  be  considered — 

I.  As  A  EBVBLATtoN  OP  THE  DiviNB  GBBATNESS.  TMs  is  One  of  the  purposes  in 
Elihu's  mind.  He  would  lead  Job  to  "  fear."  It  is  only  by  a  contemplation  of  the 
works  of  God  that  we  can  rise  as  by  successive  steps  to  any  adequate  conception  of  the 
greatness  of  the  Divine  power  or  the  grandeur  of  the  Divine  Name.  They  are  beyond 
our  comprehension,  and  so  give  us  a  notion  of  the  infinite ;  they  are  multiplied,  and 
great  and  wonderful.  In  them  is  hidden  the  parable  of  the  Divine  greatness.  Tliey 
may  be  considered — 

II.  As  A  REVELATION  OP  THE  DlviNB  GOODNESS.  With  great  beauty  the  Divine 
goodness  is  traced  in  this  book.  A  goodness  extended  not  only  to  man,  but  also  to  the 
beasts  of  the  field,  to  the  fish  of  the  sea,  to  the  bird  of  the  air.  It  is  from  this 
contemplation  that  man  may  return  to  himself,  and  learn  that  the  goodness  everywhere 
displayed  around  him  may  be  truly  at  work  within  and  for  him,  though  its  processes 
are  not  made  known.     So  the  Divine  works  may  be  considered — 

III.  As  A  EEVELATION  OP  THE  HIDDEN  PUBPOSB  OP  GoD.  In  all  the  Wonderful 
works  around,  much  as  men  know,  there  is  much  that  is  hidden.  To  this  Elihu  calls 
Job's  aitention.  "  Dost  thou  know  when  God  disposed  them ?  "  "Dost  thou  kn  >w 
the  balancing  of  the  clouds  ?  "  Dost  thou  know  "  the  wondrous  works  of  him  that 
is  perfect  in  knowledge  "  ? 

IV.  Hence  is  revealed  (1)  the  ignorance  of  man  ;  (2)  his  littleness;  (3)  his  consequent 
inability  to  contend  with  God.  This  is  the  process  of  Elihu's  argument.  "  With  God 
is  terrible  majesty."  His  work  is  deep.  He  is  "the  Almighty,"  whom  we  cannot 
find  out.  His  purposes  we  cannot  fathom.  Therefore — so  the  argument  teiminates — 
therefore  how  andwaii  and  trust.  God  "is  excellent  in  power,  and  in  judgment  and  in 
justice."  These  he  perverts  not.  Therefore  may  men  reverence  him  with  lowly  fear 
and  with  silent  mouth,  and  the  wise  will  wait  on  him  for  the  unfolding  of  his  own 
wise  ways. — R.  G. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  voice  of  the  thunder.  I.  A  voice  op  tbbkob.  The  deep  roar,  the 
wide  volume  of  sound,  the  mystery  ana  the  majesty  of  the  thunder,  combine  to  make 
it  strike  us  with  awe.  Thunder  accompanied  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Mount  Siuai 
(Exod.  xix.  16).  Men  are  naturally  alarmed  at  any  voice  from  heaven.  God  sometimes 
speaks  to  us  in  thimderous  notes,  i.e.  through  great  calamities.  Then  we  tremble  as 
before  an  irresistible  majesty. 

II.  A  voice  op  natcjee.  The  thunder  is  part  of  the  economy  of  nature — as  much 
a  part  of  it  as  the  whisper  of  the  wind  or  the  hum  of  the  insect.  It  struck  the  ancient 
worlii  with  the  greater  alarm  because  it  was  wholly  inexplicable.  Now  that  we  know 
its  connection  with  the  electric  currents  of  the  atmosphere,  we  do  not  think  of  it  as  so 
fearful.  The  artillery  of  the  heavens  is  all  obfdient  to  fixed  laws  of  nature.  Yet  it  is 
not  the  less  fired  by  the  hand  of  God,  who  is  the  Spirit  of  nature  as  well  as  its  Maker. 
The  reduction  of  the  thunder  to  a  place  among  natural  phenomena  suggests  a  lesson  in 
faith.  We  ma3  be  reassured  when  we  see  that  what  looks  lawless  is  part  of  the  Divine 
order.  We  often  alarm  ourselves  with  needless  fears ;  but  all  must  be  well  when  God 
rules  over  all. 


e64:  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvii.  1— 24. 


III.  A  P0WBELBS8  VOICE.  The  silent  lightaing  is  deadly.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  are  no  thunderbolts;  it  was  ignorance  that  attributed  the  effects  of  the  electric 
flash  to  the  thunder  that  followed  it.  But  this  was  in  accordance  with  a  common 
way  of  thinking.  We  pay  most  attention  to  that  which  makes  most  noise.  Yet  when 
the  noise  is  heard  the  power  is  past.  Men  are  always  undervaluing  the  lightning 
and  overvaluing  the  thunder.  Sin  is  ignored,  its  consequences  are  made  much  of. 
Goodness  is  forgotten,  fame  is  worshipped.  Fidelity  is  not  seen,  success  makes  the 
welkin  ring  with  applause. 

IV.  A  voiCB  OP  MEBOT,  The  thunder  cannot  do  anything  directly,  with  all  its 
noise  and  fury.  The  deeds  are  done  by  the  swift,  subtle  electricity;  and  the  boasting 
thunder  is  nothing  but  noise.  Still,  there  is  a  messa.a;e  in  the  thunder.  The  noise  of 
the  thunder  tells  us  that  the  lightning  has  come  and  gone  I  The  fearful  flash  has 
passed,  and  still  we  live  untouched,  unhurt.  Moreover  the  storm,  of  which  the  thunder 
is  one  element,  is  a  most  refreshing  influence,  clearing  the  atmosphere,  cooling  the 
temperature,  bringing  rain  to  thirsty  fields  and  gardens.  Thus  the  voice  that  seems 
only  to  roar  in  rage  is  to  be  associated  with  grateful  thoughts.  The  same  may  be  said 
of  other  thunderous  voices.  Calamities  burst  over  our  heads  like  thunderstorms.  At 
first  they  stun  us ;  but  by  degrees  we  begin  to  see  that  they  have  brought  showers  of 
blessing,  and  that  they  have  not  crashed  us  as  we  expected.  Here  we  stand,  in  spite 
oi  the  storm,  still  living  and  still  enjoying  the  loving-kindness  of  God. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  11 — 18. — The  rainstorm.  I.  Its  souboe.  It  is  produced  by  God,  and  it  is 
directed  by  God.  He  brings  it  about,  and  he  guides  it.  1.  It  comes  from  God.  Now, 
this  is  most  certainly  an  integral  part  of  nature.  We  have  seen  that  the  thunder 
belongs  to  nature.  That  was  not  always  apparent  to  men ;  there  seemed  to  be  something 
so  weird  and  awful  about  it  that  men  attributed  it  to  supernatural  agencies.  But  the 
rain  is  manifestly  in  the  order  of  natural  phenomena.  Yet  this  is  as  Divine  as  the 
thunder.  God  is  in  all  nature,  and  as  much  in  its  quiet,  normal  occurrences  as  in 
what  is  startling  and  exceptional.  2.  It  is  piloted  hy  Ood.  The  clouds  seem  to  pass 
over  the  heavens  in  wild  confusion.  We  can  see  no  reins  to  hold  them  in,  nor  any  whip 
to  drive  them  on.  The  science  of  meteorology  is  alx>ut  the  most  backward  of  all  the 
sciences,  because  it  is  so  difiScult  to  reduce  the  phenomena  of  the  weather  to  their  place 
in  an  orderly  scheme,  on  account  of  their  ceaseless  variations  and  apparently  boundless 
irregularities.  But  we  are  already  seeing  that  there  are  laws  behind  the  weather,  and 
some  of  them  are  already  known.  Hence  our  weather  prognostications  in  the  newspapers. 
Now,  the  Scripture  view  of  the  weather,  as  much  as  that  of  the  most  orderly  and 
changless  phenomena,  attributes  all  its  movements  to  the  will  of  God.  God  is  in  what 
looks  to  us  most  conflicting  and  purposeless.  If  he  is  steering  it,  we  can  trust  to  him 
to  bring  it  to  a  happy  end. 

II.  Its  purpose.  1.  This  is  determined  hy  Ood.  The  march  of  the  clouds  is 
commanded  by  their  great  Captain.  In  nature  as  well  as  in  human  life  God  works 
with  a  purpose,  and  the  end  is  with  him.  2.  It  is  obscure.  We  cannot  tell  whether 
the  rain  is  for  one  particular  purpose  which  we  have  in  mind,  or  for  another  that  has 
never  occurred  to  us.  In  all  life  God  works  out  many  pur[)oses  quite  beyond  the  reach 
of  our  thoughts.  3.  It  may  he  "for  a  scourge."  God  sends  what  we  regard  as 
untimely  rain— rain  in  harvest;  or  too  much  rain  —floods  that  devastate  fields,  drown 
crops,  and  invade  houses.  For  God  sometimes  looks  very  stern  in  his  actions,  whatever 
liis  thoughts  may  be.  In  other  ways  God  chastises  his  people  by  natural  calamities. 
Let  us  not  be  amazed  when  these  things  happen  to  us.  They  are  predicted,  and 
therefore  they  should  be  expected.  4.  ft  may  he  in  mercy.  "  For  the  good  of  his 
land."  The  dry  soil  needs  rain.  Thirsty  crops  are  refreshed  by  the  downpour  that  is 
distressing  to  the  traveller.  What  looks  like  a  calamity  may  be  a  blessing.  Instead 
of  complaining  of  the  inconvenience  of  what  happens  to  us,  let  us  look  round  us  and 
see  if  it  is  bringing  good  in  some  other  direction.  5.  In  any  case  it  is  for  a  hlessing. 
The  scourge  is  a  blessing  in  disguise.  Though  various  results  may  issue  from  God's 
various  actions,  in  so  far  as  they  are  designed  by  God  they  all  make  for  righteousness 
and  the  welfare  of  his  children.  Thunder  and  rain  bless  even  by  their  calamities. 
Borrow  and  loss,  pain  and  tears,  scourges  and  thorns,  are  instruments  of  discipline  thai 
bless  when  thejr  hurt. — W.  P.  A. 


OH.  xxxvii.  1— 24,]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  606 

Ver.  14. — "  The  wondrous  works  of  Ood."  I.  The  natubb  of  these  woeks.  1, 
Material  things.  We  cannot  live  for  ever  in  a  realm  of  ideas.  It  is  well  to  come  down 
to  the  solid  earth  and  look  at  physical  facts.  There  are  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the 
stones  and  trees  and  living  creatures  of  nature.  Mountain  and  stream,  forest  and 
flower,  speak  to  the  soul  of  man.  2.  Created  things.  "  Works."  These  things  were 
made.  They  are  not  eternal ;  they  are  manufactured  articles.  They  are  not  chance 
products  of  chaos  ;  they  have  been  designedly  made.  3.  Divine  things.  The  glory 
of  them  is  their  Maker.  God  has  condescended  to  put  his  hand  to  this  earth  of  ours, 
and  the  result  has  been  all  the  life  and  beauty  with  which  it  abounds.  The  character 
of  the  Maker  is  impressed  on  his  work.  God  owns  what  he  has  made.  Therefore 
his  works  belong  to  him.  They  are  but  lent  to  us.  We  are  stewards  who  will  have 
to  give  an  account  of  all  that  we  use  and  of  how  we  use  it.  4.  Wonderful  things. 
God's  works  are  "  wondrous."  They  are  stamped  with  the  impress  of  thought.  The 
most  advanced  science  is  but  man's  blundering  attempt  to  spell  out  God's  hieroglyphics 
written  in  the  great  book  of  nature.  The  very  difficulties  of  nature  spring  from  its 
vast  complexity.  The  Architect  of  the  universe  is  an  infinite  Artist,  Mathematician, 
Physiologist. 

n.  How  THESE  WONDROUS  W0KK8  SHOOTiD  BE  KEOABDED.  1.  With  attention.  "  Hearkeu 
unto  this."  The  sin  of  the  world  distracts  our  thoughts,  so  that  we  fail  to  perceive 
what  God  is  saying  to  us  through  the  many  voices  of  nature.  We  miss  the  voices  of 
God  in  nature  and  life  through  heedless  indi£ference.  2.  With  patience.  "Stand 
still."  We  hurry  to  and  fro,  and  so  fail  to  gather  the  treasures  that  come  to  him  who 
waits.  The  life  of  rushing  haste  is  superSoial.  The  best  things  do  not  come  at  a  call, 
nor  can  they  be  snatched  up  in  a  moment.  We  must  "  wait  on  thu  Lord  "  if  we  would 
have  his  blessing,  and  "be  still"  if  we  would  know  that  he  is  God  (Ps.  xlvi.  10). 
Thus  hearkening  and  standing  still,  we  are  to  wait  for  God  to  speak  to  us  through 
his  works.  We  talk  too  much  about  the  works  of  God;  it  would  be  better  if  we 
would  be  silent  and  let  them  speak  to  us.  3.  With  thought.  "And  consider."  Note 
the  "and."  Attention  and  patience  should  precede  and  prepare  the  way  for  the 
consideration.  But  then  this  must  follow  and  be  joined  on  to  the  earlier  [lassive 
conditions.  We  must  not  be  still  in  mental  indolence.  When  God  speaks  to  us 
tlirough  his  wondrous  works,  our  part  is  to  receive  his  message  intelligently  and  think 
over  it.  The  study  of  nature  in  science  is  commended  to  us.  But  we  need  to  rise 
above  this,  to  meditate  over  the  Divine  voices  in  nature  and  in  all  the  works  of  God. 
— W.  F.  A. 

Yer.  19. The  prayer  for  prayer.    Seeing  Jesus  in  prayer,  and  noticing  bow  different 

his  prayer  was  from  theirs,  the  disciples  besought  him  to  teach  them  to  pray  (Luke 
xi.  1).  Their  request  implied  a  high  estimation  of  true  prayer,  and  at  the  same  time 
a  deep  sense  of  their  own  inability  to  pray  aright.  The  same  feelings  are  expressed 
to  us  by  Elihu. 

I.  What  is  bequirbd  in  tbue  pbaybb.  The  greatness  of  God  suggests  to  Elihu 
the  importance  of  speaking  to  God  in  the  right  way.  The  vastness  and  splendour  of 
the  heavens,  as  well  as  the  majesty  of  the  thunder  and  the  government  of  the  cloud, 
impress  us  with  the  majesty  of  God;  and  yet  his  greatest  glory  is  not  seen  in  these 
phenomena,  but  it  is  revealed  in  his  moral  rule  and  his  fatherly  goodness.  _  It  would 
be  a  foolish  thing  for  us  to  shrink  from  approaching  God  on  account  of  his  majesty 
in  the  physical  universe.  He  is  not  like  a  stately  monarch  who  surrounds  himself 
with  the  ceremony  of  a  court.  Formal  manners  are  an  abomination  in  prayer.  God 
does  not  look  for  the  courtier's  obsequiousness ;  he  seeks  the  child's  confidence.  At 
the  same  time,  his  kingly  state  is  crowned  by  holiness.  We  have  to  approach  him  in 
awe  of  his  purity.  He  dwells  in  light  eternal.  This  fact,  much  more  than  his  power 
and  wide  sway  over  the  physical  universe,  calls  for  a  deeply  reverent  spirit  in  prayer. 
Then  the  spiritual  nature  of  God  requires  spiritual  worship,  and  we  must  be  true  in 
heart  if  we  would  pray  acceptably.  j  .v,     i-    •  ,        , 

II  The  difficulty  of  attaining  to  tbue  praybb.  Klihu  and  tbe  disciples  of 
Christ  both  felt  this  difficulty.  Job's  friend  gives  the  cause  of  it—"  for  we  cannot 
order  our  speech  by  reason  of  darkness."  1.  Ignorance.  We  do  not  know  what  God 
wills  •  nor  do  we  know  our  own  hearts.     Not  only  is  the  4)iritual  realm  strange  to  us ; 


606  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvii.  1— 24, 

we  even  need  to  know  what  are  our  needs.  2.  Sin.  This  is  the  darkness  that  really 
hinders  and  ruins  prayer.  The  father  is  not  vexed  at  his  child's  helpless  prattle  when 
the  child  is  loving  and  obedient.  He  does  not  look  for  pompous  phrases ;  he  prefers  the 
natural,  simple  outpouring  of  the  child's  heart.  But  he  is  grieved  at  duplicity,  insin- 
cerity, unreality.  When  our  hearts  are  far  from  God  we  cannot  pray  acceptably  to 
him.  The  great  difficulty  is  want  of  sympathy  with  God ;  want  of  sympathy  is  the 
one  hindrance  to  all  human  intercourse,  and  it  is  the  une  thing  that  prevents  us  from 
praying  acceptably. 

III.  The  WAT  TO  beach  tbub  fbayeb.  This  is  by  prayer.  We  must  pray  to  be 
taught  to  pray.  The  confession  of  our  inability  to  pray  is  the  first  step  towards  doing 
60  acceptably.  Pride  and  self-sufficiency  keep  us  back  from  the  right  spirit  of  prayer. 
We  have  to  learn  to  bow  our  wills  as  well  as  to  bend  our  knees.  But  the  prayer  to 
be  taught  this  lesson  may  be  answered  in  unexpected  ways.  We  may  learn  what  we 
should  say  to  God  in  a  school  of  adversity.  Humbled  and  subdued  by  sorrow,  we  may 
be  brought  down  to  the  right  spirit  of  prayer  in  the  experience  from  which  we  shrink 
with  dismay.  Or  perhaps  the  lesson  may  come  through  more  directly  spiritual 
influences.  We  need  to  contemplate  the  character  of  God  in  order  to  pray  to  him 
aright.  The  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  shows  us  how  we  should  approach  God.  When 
we  see  Jesus  we  learn  how  to  pray. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  21. — Unbearable  Ught.  When  clouds  are  cleared  from  the  face  of  the  sun  we 
cannot  bear  to  look  up  at  the  splendour  of  unveiled  light.  This  is  the  case  even  in 
our  thick  and  humid  atmosphere ;  but  it  is  much  more  so  in  the  East,  where  the 
sun  shines  in  its  terrible  strength.  The  unbearable  light  is  a  type  of  the  majesty 
of  God. 

I.  God  veils  his  globt  in  olouds.  The  day  often  begins  with  clouds  about  the  sun. 
Then  we  can  look  at  the  splendour  of  the  dawn,  because  the  ever-shifting  panorama  of 
crimson  and  gold  that  heralds  in  the  day  is  visible  to  us  in  colours  that  our  eyes  can 
endure  to  look  at.  God  begins  the  education  of  his  children  in  ti  light  that  is  tempered 
to  suit  their  feeble  vision.  But  a  common  mistake  is  to  forget  that  God  is  condescending 
to  our  weakness,  and  to  limit  our  conception  of  God  to  the  measured  revelation.  Thus 
we  form  partial  and  human  ideas  of  God.  If  his  cloud  is  thick  and  dark  we  do  not 
see  his  glorious  light,  and  then  we  accuse  him  of  the  darkness,  and  narrow  and  unjust 
thoughts  of  God  spring  up  in  our  hearts.  Difficulties  in  nature  and  providence  trouble 
us.  Vexatious  thoughts  about  the  apparent  imperfection  of  God's  works  fill  our  minds 
with  doubt.  And  all  the  while  the  simple  truth  is  that  God  is  merciful  and  considerate, 
veiling  himself  in  clouds  for  the  very  purpose  of  sparing  us. 

II.  God's  unveiled  gloet  would  be  an  unbeabablb  light.  This  we  commonly 
say  and  instinctively  feeL  Let  us  now  ask  how  it  should  be  so.  1.  Ignorance  is 
dazzled  by  absolute  knowledge.  The  beginner  is  not  helped,  he  is  only  perplexed,  when 
he  is  favoured  with  the  most  advanced  thoughts  of  the  ripe  scholar.  If  all  God's 
truth  were  suddenly  flashed  out  to  us  it  would  be  incomprehensible  and  overwhelming. 
2.  Sin  shrinks  from  perfect  holiness.  The  centre  of  God's  eternal  light  is  his  purity. 
In  our  sin  we  cannot  bear  to  look  upon  this.  3.  Finite  life  cannot  endure  the  fulness 
of  infinite  life.  Our  sympathies  endeavour  to  respond  to  the  appeals  that  draw  them 
out.  But  when  those  appeals  are  infinite,  our  own  life  is  swallowed  up  in  the  response. 
If  we  entered  fully  into  the  life  of  God,  our  life  would  be  extinguished  as  the  light  of 
the  stars  is  quenched  in  that  of  the  sun. 

III.  God  eduoateb  us  by  geadually  unveiling  his  glory.  The  clouds  are  rolled 
back  by  degrees.  Twilight  is  a  merciful  gift  of  providence,  tempering  the  first  approach 
of  the  light,  and  saving  us  from  the  shook  of  the  sudden  exchange  of  night  fur  day. 
God's  education  of  his  people  is  gradual.  1.  Revelation  is  progressive.  Adam  could 
not  endure  the  light  which  Christ  brought.  Early  ages  were  trained  by  degrees  to  fit 
them  for  the  growing  light  of  God's  truth.  We  have  not  reached  all  knowledge. 
Christ  lias  many  things  to  tell  us,  but  we  cannot  bear  them  now  (John  xvi.  12).  "  God 
has  yet  more  light  and  truth  to  break  forth  from  his  Word."  2.  Individual  lives  are 
-prepared  for  growing  light.  We  cannot  endure  on  earth  the  glory  that  shall  be 
icvealed  in  heaven.  Our  early  Christian  experience  is  not  capable  of  receiving  all 
that  God  wishes  to  reveal  to  us;  therefuie  he  rolls  back  the  clouds  by  slow  detrees 


OH.  xxxvm.  1— 41.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  607 

preparing  for  the  great  apocalypse.    "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly ;  but  then 
face  to  face  "  (1  Cor.  xiu.  12).— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  23. — The  mystery  of  Ood.  We  cau,!.  find  out  God,  In  his  great  strength 
and  perfect  equity  he  will  render  an  aocouui  m  no  man.  Here  is  a  mystery,  but  one 
that  is  saved  from  terror  by  a  sufficient  revelation  to  reassure  us  of  the  true  righteous- 
ness of  God. 

I.  The  mystery  is  in  the  action  op  God.  His  nature  is  mysterious.  But  W9 
are  not  distressed  by  the  difficulty  of  comprehending  it,  for  we  know  it  must  be 
beyond  our  grasp,  and  we  may  be  content  to  live  in  peace  without  solving  the  most 
abstruse  problems  of  theology.  It  is  very  different  with  the  action  of  God.  This 
affects  us  closely.  We  see  it  in  our  common  life  in  the  world.  Yet  heie  too  is 
mystery.  1.  Nature  is  a  mystery.  Not  only  cannot  we  understand  its  origin,  but 
we  cannot  see  whither  it  is  tending.  The  great  machine  rolls  on  to  a  future  beyond 
our  imagination.  What  is  God  doing  with  it  ?  How  is  he  using  all  the  pain  and 
failure  of  it  ?  2.  Providence  is  a  mystery.  We  cannot  see  why  God  acts  as  he  does, 
giving  prosperity  to  one  and  adversity  to  another  without  reasons  that  we  can  discover. 
Why  does  he  permit  the  simple,  honest  man  to  fail,  and  the  clever  rogue  to  succeed  ? 
3.  Ueligion  is  a  mystery.  There  are  mysterious  doctrines  in  it;  these  we  can  endure. 
But  there  ai'e  also  mysterious  experiences.  We  cannot  understand  the  dark  days  of 
strange  thoughts  and  sad  feelings,  the  weariness  and  failure,  through  which  we  have 
to  pass. 

II.  The  ohabacteb  of  God  is  bevealed  to  ub.  Let  us  be  fair  and  see  what  is 
known  before  we  sit  down  and  despair  over  the  mystery  of  God.  It  is  better  to  fix 
our  eyes  on  the  light  we  have  than  to  brood  in  helpless  melancholy  over  the  darkness 
that  surrounds  it  on  every  side.  Now  we  know  what  it  most  concerns  ua  to  know 
about  God.  We  need  not  understand  the  exact  process  if  we  can  see  the  end.  But 
if  the  character  of  God  is  revealed,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  end  of  God's  actions  will 
agree  with  it.  God  has  made  himself  known  to  us  as  perfect  righteousness.  That  is 
enough.  Then  all  he  does  must  be  righteous — "  in  plenty  of  justice."  We  can  trust 
God  for  what  he  is,  even  when  we  do  not  understand  what  he  does. 

III.  The  mystery  of  God  is  in  habmony  with  the  bbvelation  of  God.  Thers 
is  «  close  connection  between  the  two.  They  do  not  contradict  one  another.  On  the 
contrary,  the  revelation  leads  up  to  the  mystery.  That  revelation  shows  equity.  Now, 
equity  implies  a  fair  treatment  of  all  things.  It  is  not  a  simple  notion  like  love  or 
anger.  If  God  is  just,  he  must  take  into  account  others  besides  the  one  person  he  is 
dealing  with,  and  more  than  the  pleasure  or  pain  of  the  present  moment.  Large 
issues  are  at  stake,  wide  interests  are  involved.  These  must  go  beyond  our  small 
world  of  observation.  Therefore,  because  we  believe  in  the  equity  of  God,  we  must 
expect  him  to  act  in  mystery.  It  is  not  for  us  to  call  him  to  account.  The  idea  of 
doing  so  suggests  an  unworthy  doubt.  We  should  trust  his  righteousness  without 
asking  him  to  solve  the  mystery  of  his  action. — ^W.  F.  A. 


Sbotion  VI.  Ch.  xxxvin. — xli.   Close  of  the  Contbovebsy  by  the  Intebfebenge 

OF  the  Almighty. 


CHAPTER  XXXVni. 

The  discourse,  by  which  the  Almighty 
answers  Job  and  rebukes  his  "friends," 
occupies  four  chapters  (ch.  xxxviii. — xli.). 
It  is  broken  into  two  parts  by  the  interposi- 
tion of  a  short  confession  on  Job's  part 
(ch.  xl.  3 — 5).  Ch.  xxxviii.  and  xxxix.  are 
closely  connected,  and  form  a  single  appeal 


EXPOSITION. 

— a  sort  of  argvmevtwm  ad  vereeundimn — to 
Job's  profound  ignorance  of  God's  natural 
government,  which  incapacitates  him  from 
passing  judgment  upon  what  is  far  more 
incomprehensible  and  mysterious,  God's 
moral  government.  The  points  adduced,  in 
which  Job  is  challenged  to  claim  that  he 
has  knowledge,  or  confess  that  he  is 
ignorant,  are:    (1)    The    creation    of  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOR 


[oh.  xxxvm.  1 — 41. 


material  world  (oh.  xxxvili.  4—7).    (2)  The 

control  and  government  of  the  sea  (vers.  8 — 
11).  (3)  The  bringing  forth  of  the  dawn 
(vers.  12—15).  (4)  The  formation  of  She61, 
of  light  and  darkness,  of  snow,  hail,  floods, 
rain,  lightning,  thunder,  ioe,  dew,  hoarfrost 
(vers.  17 — 30).  (5)  The  government  of  the 
stars  and  of  the  clouds  (vers.  31 — 38). 
(6)  Tlie  creation,  endowment  with  instincts, 
and  general  direction  of  the  animal  world — 
wild  goats,  hinds,  wild  asses,  wild  cattle, 
ostriclies,  horsrs,  hawks,  eagles  (ch.  xxxix. 
1 — 30.)  The  tone  of  the  appeal  is  sustained 
at  a  liigh  pitch,  and  the  entire  passage  is 
one  of  extraordinary  force  and  eloquence. 

Ver.  1. — Then  the  Lord  answered  Job  out 
of  the  whirlwind.  It  Is  remarked,  with 
reason,  that  the  special  mention  of  Job  as 
the  persiiu  answered  "implies  that  another 
spiaker  had  intervened"  (Wordsworth); 
while  the  attachment  of  the  article  to  the 
word  "whirlwind"  implies  some  previous 
mention  of  that  phenomenon,  which  is  only 
to  be  found  in  the  discourse  of  Elihu  (ch. 
xxxvii.  9).  Both  points  have  an  important 
bearing  on  the  genuineness  of  the  disputed 
section,  ch.  xxxii.  —  xxxvii.  And  said. 
The  question  whether  there  was  an  objec- 
tive utterance  of  human  woids  out  of  the 
whirlwind,  or  only  a  subjective  impression 
of  the  thoughts  recorded  on  the  minds  of 
those  present,  is  unimportant.  In  any  case, 
there  was  a  revelation  direct  from  God,  which 
furnished  an  authoritative  solution  of  the 
questions  debated  to  all  who  had  been 
engaged  in  the  debate. 

Ver.  2. — Who  is  this  that  daikeneth 
oonnsel  by  words  without  knowledge?  It 
is  very  noticeable  that  God  entirely  ignores 
the  reasonings  of  Elihu,  and  addresses  him- 
self, in  the  first  instance,  wholly  to  Job, 
with  whom  he  begins  by  remonstrating. 
Job  has  not  been  without  fault.  He  has 
spoken  many  "words  without  knowledge" 
or  with  insufGcienl  knowledge,  and  has 
thus  trenched  on  irreverence,  and  given  the 
enemies  of  God  occasion  to  blaspheme. 
Moreover,  he  has  "  darkened  counsel."  In- 
stead of  making  the  ways  of  God  clear  to 
ills  friends  and  companions,  he  has  oast 
doubts  upon  God's  moral  government  (oh. 
xxi.  7 — 26),  upon  his  mercy  and  loving- 
kindness  (ch.  xvi.  7 — 14),  almost  upon  his 
justice  (oh.  xix.  7;  xxxi.  1 — 35).  He  is 
thus  open  to  censure,  and  receives  censure, 
and  owns  himself  "  vile  "  (oh.  xl.  4),  before 
peace  and  reconciliation  can  be  established. 

Ver.  3.— Gird  up  now  thy  loins  like  a 
man.  Job  had  desired  to  contend  with  God, 
to  plead  with  him,  and  argue  out  his  case 


(oh.ix.  32—35;  xiii.  8, 18—22;  xxui.  4—7; 
xxxi.  35).  God  now  offers  to  grant  his 
request,  and  bids  him  stand  forth  "  as  a 
man,"  and  "gird  himself"  for  the  contest, 
which  he  has  challenged.  Tor  I  will  demand 
of  thee,  and  answer  thou  me.  He  will  begin 
with  interrogatories  which  Job  must  answer; 
then  Job  will  be  entitled  to  put  questions 
to  him.  Job,  however,  on  the  oppnrtunity 
being  given  him,  shrinks  back,  and  says, 
"Behold,  I  am  vile;  what  shall  I  answer 
thee  ?  I  will  lay  my  hand  upon  my  mouth. 
Once  have  I  spoken ;  but  I  will  not  answer : 
yea,  twice;  but  I  will  proceed  no  further" 
(oh.  xl.  4,  5).  The  confident  boldness  which 
he  felt  when  God  seemed  far  off  disappears 
in  his  presence,  and  is  replaced  by  di£Sdenoe 
and  distrust. 

Ver.  4. — Where  wast  thon  when  I  laid 
the  foundations  of  the  earth  ?  Wast  thou 
present?  Didst  thou  witness  it?  If  not, 
what  canst  thou  know  concerning  it  7  And 
if  thou  knowest  nothing  of  creation,  what 
canst  thou  know  of  deeper  things?  The 
metaphor,  by  which  the  creation  of  tlje 
earth  is  compared  to  the  foundation  of  an 
edifice,  is  a  common  one  (Ps.  cii.  25 ;  civ.  5; 
Prov.  viii.  29;  Isa.  xlviii.  13;  li.  13,  16; 
Zech.  xii.  1 ;  Heb.  i.  10,  etc.),  and  is  to  be 
viewed  as  a  concession  to  human  weakness, 
creation  itself,  as  it  actually  took  place, 
being  inconceivable.  Declare,  if  tho«  hast 
understanding.  That  is,  if  thou  hast  ac:y 
knowledge  on  the  subject  (comp.  ver.  18). 

Ver.  5. — Who  determined  the  measures 
thereof  J  Everything  in  creation  is  orderly, 
measured,  predetermined,  governed  by  law 
and  will.  The  actual  weight  of  the  planets 
is  fixed  by  Divine  wisdom,  with  a  view  to 
the  stability  and  endnringuess  of  the  solur 
system  (oomp.  laa.  xl.  12).  If  thon  knowest; 
literally, /or  thou  knowest — an  anticipiitiou 
of  the  lofty  irony  which  comes  out  so 
remarkably  in  ver.  21.  Or  who  hath 
stretched  the  line  upon  itt  Human  builders 
determine  the  dimensions  of  their  construc- 
tions by  means  of  a  measuring-line  (Ezek. 
xl.  3 — 49,  etc.).  The  writer  carries  out  his 
metaphor  of  a  building  by  supposing  a 
measuring-rod  to  liave  been  used  at  the 
creation  of  the  earth  also.  Some  find  a 
trace  of  the  idea  in  Gen.  i.  9,  where  they 
translate  Djsri  il|3'_,  "Let  the  waters  be 
marked  out  with  a  2in«." 

Ver.  6.  —Whereupon  are  the  foundations 
thereof  fastened  t  These  details  follow 
naturally  upon  the  adoption  of  the  particular 
metaphor  of  a  house  or  building.  They  are 
not  to  be  piessed.  The  object  is  to  impress 
on  Job  his  utter  ignorance  of  God's  ways  in 
creation.  Or  who  laid  the  oorner-stone 
thereof?  Who  gave  the  last  finishing  touch 
to  the  work  (see  Ps.  exviii.  22 ;  Zech.  iv.  7)! 


OH.  xzxvm.  I— 11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


60!) 


Canst  thou  tell  ?  If  not,  why  enter  into 
oontroTeisy  with  the  Oreator? 

Ver.  7. — When  the  morning  stars  sang 
together.  The  stars  generally,  or  the  actual 
stars  Tuible  on  the  morn  of  creation,  are 
probably  meant.  They,  as  It  were,  sang  a 
song  of  loud  acclaim  on  witnessing  the  new 
marvel.  Their  priority  to  the  earth  is 
implied,  since  they  witness  its  birth.  Their 
song  is,  of  course,  that  silent  song  of  sym- 
pathy, whereof  Shakespeare  speaks  when 
he  says,  "  Each  in  its  motion  like  an  angel 
sings"  ('Merchant  of  Venice,' act  v.  so.  1). 
And  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy. 
"  The  sons  of  God "  here  must  necessarily 
be  the  angels  (see  ch.  i.  6 ;  ii.  1),  since  there 
were  no  men  as  yet  in  existence.  They 
too  joined  in  the  chorus  of  sympathy  and 
admiration,  perhaps  lifting  up  their  voices 
(Eev.  V.  11,  12),  perhaps  their  hearts  only, 
praising  the  Creator,  who  had  done  such 
marvellous  things. 

Yer.  8. — Or  who  shut  up  the  sea  with 
doors  t  From  the  earth  a  transition  is  made 
to  the  sea,  as  the  second  great  wonder  in 
creation  (comp.  Gen.  1.  9, 10 ;  Exod.  xx.  11 ; 
Ps.  ciT.  24,  25).  God's  might  is  especially 
shown  in  his  power  to  control  and  confine 
the  sea,  which  rages  so  terribly  and  seems 
so  utterly  uncontrollable.  God  has  blocked 
it  in  "  with  doors  " — 1.«.  with  "  bounds  that 
it  cannot  pass,  neither  turn  again  to  cover 
the  earth"  (Ps.  civ.  9).  Sometimes  the 
barrier  is  one  of  lofty  and  solid  rock,  which 
seems  well  suited  to  confine  and  restrain; 
but  sometimes  it  is  no  more  than  a  thin 
streak  of  silver  sand  or  a  bank  of  loose, 
shifting  pebbles.  Yet,  in  both  cases  alike, 
the  restraint  suffices.  "  The  sand  is  placed 
for  the  bound  of  the  sea  by  a  perpetual 
decree,  that  it  cannot  pass  it "  ( Jer.  v.  22) ; 
the  beach  of  shifting  pebbles  remains  as 
firm  as  the  rock  itself,  and  never  recedes  or 
advances  more  than  a  few  feet.  When  it 
brake  forth,  as  if  it  had  issued  out  of  the 
womb ;  i.e.  at  its  birth,  when  it  was  first 
formed,  by  the  gathering  together  of  the 
waters  into  one  place  (see  Gen.  i.  9). 

Ver.  9.— When  I  made  the  oloud  the 
garment  thereof.  The  account  of  creation 
here  given  is  certainly  not  drawn  wholly 
from  Genesis.  It  is  to  be  viewed  as  a 
second,  independent,  account  of  the  occur- 
rences, in  fuller  detail,  but  vaguer,  by  reason 
of  the  poetical  phraseology.  And  thick  dark- 
ness a  Bwaddling-band  for  it.  The  infant 
sea,  just  come  from  the  womb  (ver.  8),  is 
represented  as  clothed  with  a  cloud,  and 
swaddled  in  thick  darkness,  to  mark  its 
complete  subjection  to  its  Creator  from  the 
first. 

Ver.  10.— And  brake  up  for  it  my  decreed 
place ;  rather,  as  in  the  margin,  and  estab- 
lished my  decree  upon  it}  or,  as  ia  the  fie- 


vised  Version,  and  preteribed  for  it  my 
deoree.  The  decree  itself  is  given  in  ver.  11. 
And  set  bars  and  doors  (see  above,  ver.  8, 
where  the  imagery  of  "doors"  has  been 
already  introduced).  As  Professor  Lee  ob- 
serves, "  The  term  o^^/J^  contains  a  metaphoi 
taken  from  the  large  folding-doors  of  a  city, 
which  are  usually  set  up  for  the  purpose  of 
stopping  the  progress  of  an  invading  enemy, 
and  are  hence  supplied  with  bolts  and  bars  " 
('  Book  of  Job,'  p.  490).  Eepresentations  of 
such  folding-doors  are  common  in  the  As- 
syrian sculptures ;  and  in  one  instance  the 
doors  themselves,  or,  to  speak  more  exactly, 
their  outer  bronze  casing,  has  been  recovered 
(see  a  paper  in  the  '  Transactions  of  the  So- 
ciety of  Biblical  Arehseology,'  on  the  Bronze 
Gates  discovered  by  Mr.  Bassam  at  Balawat, 
vol.  vii.  pp.  85 — 118).  These  gates  were 
twenty-two  feet  high  and  six  feet  broad  each. 

Ver.  11. — And  said,  Hitherto  shalt  thou 
oome,  but  no  further.  The  law  is  not  quite 
absolute.  Wherever  the  sea  washes  a  coast- 
line, there  is  a  continual  erosive  action, 
whereby  the  land  is,  little  by  little,  eaten 
away,  and  the  line  of  the  coast  thrust  back. 
But  the  action  is  so  slow  that  millennia  pass 
without  any  considerable  effect  being  pro- 
duced, and  encroachments  in  some  places 
are  generally  counterbalanced  by  retrench- 
ment in  others,  so  that  the  general  contour 
of  land  and  water,  with  the  proportion  of  the 
one  to  the  other,  remain  probably  very  much 
the  same  at  the  present  day  as  when  the  earth 
first  became  the  habitation  of  man.  And 
here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed.  The 
waves  of  the  sea  "  rage  horribly,"  and  every 
now  and  then  topple  down  a  rock  or  under- 
mine a  cliff,  and  seem  proud  of  their  achieve- 
ments ;  but  how  little  do  they  effect,  even 
in  thousands  of  years  I  The  little  islet  of 
Psyttaleia  still  blocks  the  eastern  end  of 
the  straits  of  Salamis.  The  Pharos  island 
lies  off  the  westernmost  mouth  of  the  Nile. 
Even  the  low,  flat  Aradus,  on  the  Syrian 
coast,  has  not  been  swept  away.  Every- 
where the  waves  are  practically  "  stayed," 
and  all  the  menaces  of  the  sea  against  the 
land  come  to  nought. 

Ver.  12. — Hast  thou  commanded  the  morn- 
ing since  thy  days  1  rather,  by  reason  of  thy 
length  of  days — a  similar  irony  to  that  ob- 
servable in  vers.  5,  21,  etc.  The  third 
marvel  of  creation  brought  before  us  is  the 
dawn,  or  daybreak — that  standing  miracle 
of  combined  utility  and  beauty.  Has  Job 
authority  to  issue  his  orders  to  the  dawn, 
and  tell  it  when  to  make  its  appearance? 
Has  he  caused  the  dayspring  to  know  his 
place  ?  Job  cannot  possibly  pretend  to  any 
such  power. 

Ver.  13.— That  it  might  take  hold  of  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  that  the  wicked  might  ba 

2a 


«10 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xxxvm.  1 — 41. 


Bhaken  out  of  iti  The  idea  leems  to  be 
that  the  dawn,  snddenly  appearing,  seizes 
hold  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  "at  one 
rush"  (Canon  Cook),  and  lights  up  the 
whole  terrestrial  region.  The  wicked,  lovers 
of  darkness,  are  taken  by  surprise,  and  re- 
ceive a  shook  from  which  they  recover  with 
difficulty  (oomp.  ch.  ixiv.  16,  17).  That 
they  are  "shaken  from  the  earth"  must  be 
regarded  as  Oriental  hyperbole. 

Yer.  14. — It  is  turned  as  clay  to  the  seal ; 
rather,  it  changei  as  the  clay  of  a  seal.  The 
seals  of  the  Babylonians,  Assyrians,  and 
others  were  commonly  impressed  upon  clay, 
and  not  upon  wax  (Layard,  '  NineTeh  and 
Babylon,'  pp.  153—156).  As  the  seal 
changed  the  clay  from  a  dull,  shapeless  lump 
to  a  figured  surface,  so  the  coming  of  the 
dawn  clianges  the  earth  from  an  indistinct 
mass  to  one  diversified  with  form  and  colour. 
As  M.  Eenan  explains,  "  L'aurore  fait  sur  la 
terre  I'effet  d'un  sceau  sur  la  terre  sigillee, 
en  donnant  de  la  forme,  et  dn  relief^  k  la 
surface  de  Tunivers,  qui  pendant  la  nuit  est 
comme  un  chaos  indistinct."  And  they 
stand  as  a  garment ;  rather,  and  things  stand 
out  as  a  garment,  or  as  on  a  garment — a 
richly  embroidered  dress  is  Intended,  on 
which  the  pattern  stands  out  in  relief. 

Ver.  15. — And  from  the  wicked  their  light 
is  withholden.  Then,  when  the  dawn  bursts 
forth,  "from  the  wicked,  their  light" — 
which  is  darkness  (oh.  xxiv.  13 — 17) — "  is 
withholden,"  and  the  consequence  is  that 
the  high  arm — the  arm  that  is  proud  and 
lifted  up — shall  be  broken.  Detection  and 
punishment  fall  upon  the  wicked  doers  who 
are  surprised  by  the  dayliglit. 

Ver.  16. — East  thou  entered  into  the 
springs  of  the  seal  The  emphasis  is  on 
the  word  "  springs,"  which  means  sources, 
origin,  or  deepest  depths  (see  the  Septua- 
gint,  which  has  ■trnyii,  and  the  Vulgate, 
which  has  profunda).  Canst  thou  go  to  the 
bottom  of  anything,  explore  its  secrets,  ex- 
plain its  cause  and  origin?  Or  hast  thou 
walked  in  the  search  (rather,  the  deep  places) 
of  the  depth  ?  Art  thou  not  as  ignorant  as 
other  men  of  all  these  remote  and  secret 
things  ?  Physical  science  is  now  attempting 
the  material  exploration  of  the  ocean-depths, 
but  "  deep-sea  dredgings "  bring  us  no 
nearer  to  the  origin,  cause,  or  mode  of 
creation  of  the  great  watery  mass. 

Ver.  17. — Have  the  gates  of  death  beea 
opened  unto  thee  f  By  "  the  gates  of  death," 
SheSl,  the  abode  of  the  dead,  seems  to  be 
intended  (comp.  ch.  x.  21,  22 ;  xvii.  16). 
Has  Job  explored  thfe  region,  and  penetrated 
its  secrets  ?  Or  is  it  as  unknown  to  him  as 
to  the  rest  of  mankind  ?  The  second  hemi- 
stich— Or  hast  thou  seen  the  doors  of  the 
shadow  of  death  t — is  a  mere  echo  of  the  first, 
adding  no  new  idea. 


Yer.  18. — Hast  thou  peroeived  the  breadth 
of  the  earth!  literally,  the  breculthi;  i.e.  the 
dimensions  generally.  The  exact  dimen- 
sions are  probably  not  even  yet  known.  Job 
can  scarcely  have  had  any  conception  of 
them.  To  him  the  earth  was  probably  a 
vast  plain,  extended,  he  knew  not  how  far, 
in  all  directions.  Declare  if  thou  knowest 
it  all  (comp.  vers.  4,  5,  and  21). 

Ver.  19.— Where  is  the  way  where  light 
dwelleth  1  or.  Which  is  the  way  to  the  dwell- 
ing-place of  light  ?  Where,  i.e.,  does  light 
dwell  ?  What  is  its  original  and  true  home  1 
Light  is  a  thing  quite  distinct  from  the 
sun  and  moon  and  planets  (Gen.  i.  3,  IG). 
Where  and  what  is  it?  Dost  thou  know 
the  way  to  its  dwelling-place  ?  If  not,  why, 
once  more,  dost  thou  pretend  to  search  out 
the  deep  things  of  God  ?  And  as  for  dark- 
ness, where  is  theplaoe  thereof  1  Darkness, 
too,  light's  antithesis,  must  not  that  have 
a  home — a  "place"  of  abode,  as  Job  him- 
self had  postulated,  when  he  spoke  of  "a 
lan<i  of  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death, 
a  land  of  darkness  as  darkness  itself  .  .  . 
where  the  light  is  as  darkness"  (ch.  x 
21,  22)?  If  BO,  can  Job  point  out  the 
locality  ? 

Ver.  20. — That  thou  shouldest  take  it  to 
the  boimd  thereof.  Can  Job  "  take  "  light 
and  darkness,  and  lead  them  to  their  proper 
places,  and  make  them  observe  their  proper 
"bounds,"  as  God  can  (Gen.  i.  4)?  And 
that  thou  shouldest  know  the  paths  to  the 
house  thereof  (comp.  ver.  19). 

Yer.  21. — Knowest  thou  it,  because  thou 
wast  then  bom  ?  The  irony  that  has  under- 
lain the  whole  address  comes  here  to  the 
surface,  and  shows  itself  palpably.  Job,  of 
course,  is  as  old  as  the  Almighty,  or,  at  any 
rate,  coeval  with  creation;  otherwise  he 
could  not  presume  to  take  the  tone  which 
he  has  taken,  and  arraign  the  moral  govern- 
ment of  the  Creator.  Or  because  the  number 
of  thy  days  is  great  1  Compare  the  sarcasm 
of  Eliphaz  (ch.  xv.  7). 

Yer.  22. — Hast  thou  entered  into  the 
treasures  of  the  snow  !  The  "  treasures  of 
the  snow"  are  the  storehouses,  wherein  the 
snow  is,  poetically,  supposed  to  be  laid  up. 
Vast  accumulations  of  snow  actually  exist 
in  various  portions  of  the  earth's  surface, 
but  the  fresh  snow  that  falls  is  not  taken 
from  these  treasuries,  but  newly  generated 
by  the  crystallization  of  floating  vapours  in 
the  atmosphere.  Or  hast  thou  seen  the 
treasures  of  the  hail  1  This  expression  is  to 
be  explained  similarly,  as  'poetical.  Hail  is 
nowhere  kept  in  store.  It  is  generated  by 
the  passage  of  rain-drops  through  a  layer  of 
freezing  air. 

Ver.  23.— Which  I  have  reserved  against 
the  time  of  trouble.  Hail  is  reckoned 
throughout  Scripture  as  one  of  the  miuistera 


CH.  zxznn.  1 — 41.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


611 


of  the  Divine  vengeance  (see  Exod.  ix.  18 
29;  X.  5—15;  Josh.  x.  11;  Pa.  xviii.  12, 
13;  Ixxviii.  47,  48;  cv.  32;  Isa.  xxx.  30 
xxxii.  19;  Ezek.  xiii.  11,  13;  xxxvi.  22 
Hag.  ii.  17;  Eev.  viii.  7;  xi.  19;  xvi.  21> 
Its  destructive  effect  upon  crops,  even  in 
temperate  latitudes,  is  indicated  by  the  in- 
surances against  damage  from  hail,  which, 
even  in  our  own  country,  so  many  farmers 
think  it  worth  their  while  to  pay.  In 
tropical  and  semi-tropical  regions  the  injury 
caused  by  hailstorms  is  far  greater.  Against 
the  day  of  battle  and  war.  Compare  espe- 
cially Josh.  X.  11,  which,  however,  we  need 
not  suppose  to  have  been  in  the  mind  of 
the  writer.  In  ancient  times,  when  Ihe 
bow  held  the  place  in  war  which  is  now 
occupied  by  the  rifle  or  the  musket,  a  heavy 
hailstorm,  striking  full  in  the  face  of  the 
combatants  on  one  side,  while  it  only  fell  on 
the  backs  of  their  adversaries,  must  often 
have  decided  a  battle. 

Ver.  24. — By  what  way  is  the  light 
parted  1  or,  distributed,  so  as  to  be  enjoyed 
by  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  (Stanley 
Leathes).  Which  soattereth,  etc.;  rather, 
or  hy  what  way  is  the  east  wind  scattered 
over  the  earth  i  (see  the  Kevised  Versiou) 
Job  is  asked  to  explain  God's  modus  ope- 
randi in  nature,  which,  of  course,  he  cannot 
do.    Hence  his  answer  in  ch.  xl.  5. 

Ver.  25. — Who  hath  divided  a  water-course 
for  the  overflowing  of  waters  ?  rather,  as  in 
the  Eevised  Version,  Who  hath  cleft  a  channel 
for  the  water-flood  i  i.e.  Who  has  furrowed 
and  seamed  the  ground  (in  Western  Asia) 
with  deep  gullies,  or  "water-courses,"  for 
the  rapid  carrying  off  of  the  violent  rains 
to  which  those  regions  are  subject?  Tije 
wadies  of  Syria  and  Arabia  seem  to  be 
alluded  to.  They  too  are  God's  work,  not 
Job's.  Or  a  way  for  the  lightning  of 
thunder  ?  The  "  way "  for  the  passage  of 
the  electric  current  is  not  marked  out  before- 
hand, like  the  way  for  the  escape  of  the 
superfluous  waters ;  but  it  is  equally  deter- 
mined on  and  arranged  previously  by  God, 
who  has  laid  down  the  laws  which  it  is 
bound  to  follow. 

Ver.  26. — To  cause  it  to  rain  on  the  earth, 
where  no  man  is ;  on  the  wilderness,  wherein 
there  is  no  man.  God  not  only  causes  his 
rain  to  fall  equally  on  the  just  and  on  the 
unjust  (Matt.  v.  45),  but  equally,  or  almost 
equally,  on  inhabited  lands  and  uninhabited. 
His  providence  does  not  limit  itself  to  sup- 
plying the  wants  of  man,  but  has  tender 
regard  to  the  beasts,  and  birds,  and  reptiles, 
and  insects  which  possess  the  lands  whereon 
man  has  not  yet  set  his  foot. 

Ver.  27. — To  satisfy  the  desolate  and  waste 
ground.  Parched  ground  seems  to  cry  aloud 
for  water,  and  so  to  make  a  piteous  appeal 
to  Heaven.     Feihapg  lain  it  not  wholly 


wasted,  even  on  the  bare  sands  of  the 
Sahara,  or  the  rugged  rocks  of  Tierra  del 
Fuego.  It  may  have  uses  which  are  beyond 
our  cognizance.  And  to  oauso  the  hud  of 
the  tender  herb  to  spring  forth.  Where  the 
rain  produces  herbage,  it  is  certainly  of  use, 
for  wherever  there  is  herbage  there  are 
always  insects,  whose  enjoyment  of  life  has 
every  appearance  of  being  intense. 

Ver.  28.— Hath  the  rain  a  father?  or 
who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  dew  I  How 
do  rain  and  dew  come  into  existence  ?  Can 
Job  make  them,  or  any  other  man?  Can 
man  even  conceive  of  the  process  by  which 
they  were  made?  If  not,  must  not  their 
Maker,  who  is  God,  bo  wholly  inscrutable? 

Ver.  29. — Out  of  whose  womh  came  the 
ice  1  Modern  scientists  admit  that  the  pro- 
cess by  which  a  liquid  is  metamorphosed 
into  a  solid  transcends  their  utmost  power 
of  thought.  They  know  nothing  more  than 
the  fact  that  at  the  temperature  of  82* 
Falir.  water,  and  at  other  temperatures 
other  liquids,  are  solidified  (see  an  article 
by  Professor  Tyndall  on  the  generation  of 
a  snowflake  in  the  Contemporary  Review  of 
1880).  It  is  thus  nut  only  creation  itself, 
but  the  transformations  of  created  things, 
that  transcend  the  scientific  intellect  and 
are  inexplicable.  And  the  hoary  frost  of 
heaven,  who  hath  gendered  it  1  This  is  the 
same  question  as  that  of  the  previous  clause, 
expressed  in  different  words. 

Ver.  30. — The  waters  are  hid  as  with  a 
stone ;  rather,  the  waters  are  hardened,  lilce 
unto  stone.  When  the  frost  comes,  the 
waters  are  congealed  and  rendered  as  hard 
as  stone,  (So  Dillmann  and  Canon  Cook.) 
And  the  face  of  the  deep  is  frozen.  By  "  the 
deep"  (DiriP)  is  certainly  not  meant  here 
either  the  open  ocean,  which,  in  the  lati- 
tudes known  to  the  dwellers  in  South- 
western Asia,  never  freezes,  or  the  Mediter- 
ranean. Some  of  the  lakes  which  abound 
in  the  regions  inhabited  by  Job  and  his 
friends  are  probably  meant.  These  may 
occasionally  have  been  thinly  coated  with 
ice  in  the  times  when  the  Book  of  Job  was 
written  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  vi.  16). 

Ver.  31. — Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  in- 
fluences of  Pleiades  ?  (On  the  almost  certain 
identification  of  the  Hebrew  Kimah  with 
the  Pleiades,  see  the  comment  on  ch.  ix. 
9.)  Whether  the  "  sweet  influences  "  of  the 
constellation  are  here  spoken  of  is  very 
doubtful.  Schultens  and  Professor  Lea 
support  the  rendering ;  but  most  critics  pre- 
fer to  translate  the  word  employed  (D'jnj)D) 
by  "chains"  or  "fastenings"  (Eashi,  Kimohi, 
EosenmuUer,  Dillmann,  Canon  Cook).  If 
we  adopt  this  view,  we  must  suppose  the 
invisible  links  which  unite  the  stars  into 
a  constellation  to  be  intended.  Job  is  asked 
whether  he  can  draw  the  links  nearer  to- 


612 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xxxviu.  1-^1. 


gether,  and  bind  the  stars  closer  to  one 
another.  Or  loosa  the  bands  of  Orion  1  The 
identity  of  Kesil  with  Orion  is  generally 
allowed.  Job  is  asked  if  he  can  loosen  the 
tie  which  unites  the  several  members  of 
this  constellation  together.  Of  course,  he 
can  pretend  to  no  such  powers. 

Ver.  32. — Canst  thou  bring  forth  Mazza- 
roth  in  his  season!  The  context  implies 
that  "Mazzaroth"  is  a  constellation  on  a 
par  with  the  Pleiades,  Orion,  and  the  Bear 
(Kimafc,  KMl,  and  'AisK).  This  makes  it 
impossible  to  accept  the  meaning,  so  gene- 
rally assigned,  of  "  the  twelve  signs  of  the 
Zodiac."  Again,  the  plural  form  is  fatal  to 
the  conjecture  that  "  Mazzaroth  "  designates 
a  single  star  or  planet,  as  Jupiter,  Venus, 
or  SiriuB  (Cook).  The  word  is  derived  pro- 
bably from  the  root  zahar,  "to  shine,"  "to 
be  bright,"  and  should  designate  some  es- 
pecially brilliant  cluster  of  stars.  Whether 
it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  variant  of  Mazza- 
loth  (2  Kings  xxiii.  5)  is  uncertain.  Or 
canst  thou  guide  Arctnrns  with  his  sonsi 
(On  the  identity  of  'Ash  or  'Aish  with  the 
Great  Bear,  see  the  comment  on  ch.  ix.  9.) 
The  •'  sous "  of  'Aish  are  conjectured  to  be 
the  three  large  stars  in  the  tail  of  Ursa 
Major  (Stanley  Leatlies);  but  the  grounds 
on  which  the  conjecture  rests  are  very 
slight. 

Ver.  33 Knowest  thou  the  ordinances  of 

heaven  1  i.e.  the  physical  laws  by  wliich 
the  course  of  nature  is  governed  (comp. 
Ps.  cxix.  90,  91 ;  cxlviiL  6).  The  general 
prevalence  of  law  in  the  material  world  is 
quite  as  strongly  asserted  by  the  sacred 
writers  as  by  modern  science.  The  differ- 
ence is  that  modem  science  regards  the 
laws  as  physical  necessities,  self-subsisting, 
while  Scripture  looks  upon  them  as  the 
ordinances  of  the  Divine  will.  This  latter 
view  involves,  of  course,  the  further  result 
that  the  Divine  will  can  at  any  time  sus- 
pend or  reverse  any  of  its  enactments.  Canst 
thou  set  the  dominion  thereof  in  the  earth ) 
If  Job  does  not  even  know  the  laws  whereby 
the  world  is  governed,  much  less  can  he 
establish  such  laws  himself,  and  make  them 
work. 

Ver.  34. — Canst  then  lift  up  thy  voice  to 
the  clouds,  that  abundance  of  water  may 
cover  theel  Will  the  clouds  take  their 
orders  from  thee,  listen  to  thee,  obey  thy 
voice?  None  but  the  "medicine-men"  of 
savage  tribes  profess  to  have  any  such  power. 
Elijah,  indeed,  "prayed,  and  the  heaven 
gave  rain  "  (Jas.  v.  18) ;  but  this  was  a  very 
different  thing  from  "commanding  the  clouds 
of  heaven."  His  prayer  was  addressed  to 
God,  and  God  gave  the  rain  for  which  he 
made  his  petition. 

Ver.  35. — Canst  thou  send  lightnings,  that 
IL^  may  go,  and  say  nnto  thee,  Here  w« 


are?  If  Job  cannot  command  the  clouds, 
much  less  can  he  send  (or  reithet,  send  forth) 
lightnings — those  marvellous  and  terrible 
evidences  of  almighty  power.  Even  now, 
with  all  our  command  of  electricity,  our 
savants  would,  from  the  best  electrical  ma- 
chine, find  it  difScult  to  produce  the  effects 
which  often  result  from  a  single  flash  of 
lightning. 

Ver.  36. — Who  hath  put  wisdom  in  the 
inward  parts  f  Some  refer  this  to  human 
wisdom,  and  understand  the  Almighty  as 
asking — ^Who  has  put  man's  wisdom  into  his 
inward  parts?  liteiallj,  into  hU  hidneye,  or, 
as  our  idiom  would  express  it,  "into  his 
heart."  But  there  is  great  (UfBoulty  in 
supposing  a  sudden  transition  from  clouds 
and  lightning  in  vers.  34,  35  to  the  human 
understanding  in  ver.  36,  with  a  return  to 
clouds  and  rain  in  ver.  37.  Hence  many 
of  the  best  critics  understand  ver.  36  of  the 
purpose  and  intelligence  that  may  be  re- 
garded as  existing  in  the  clouds  and  rain 
and  lightning  themselves,  which  are  God's 
ministers,  and  run  to  and  fro  at  his  com- 
mand, and  execute  his  pleasure.  (So  Schul- 
tens,  Bosenmuller,  Professor  Lee,  and  Pro- 
fessor Stanley  Loathes.)  To  obtain  this 
result,  we  must  translate  the  word  ninita 
by  "tempest "or  "thunder-bolts,"  and  the 
word  'laty,  in  the  next  clause,  by  "  storm  " 
or  something  similar  (see  the  Revised  Ver- 
sion, where  "  dark  clouds  "  is  suggested  as 
an  alternative  for  "  inward  parts,"  and 
"meteor"  as  an  alternative  for  "heart"). 
The  whole  passage  will  then  run  thus :  Who 
hath  put  vjisdom  in  the  thxmderboUa  1  or  who 
hath  given  understanding  to  the  tempest  ? 

Ver.  37. — ^Who  can  number  the  clouds  in 
wisdom  1  i.e.  Who  is  wise  enough  to  number 
the  clouds,  and  say  how  many  they  are? 
Or  who  can  stay  the  bottles  of  heaven  t 
rather.  Who  can  pour  out  1  (see  the  Bevised 
Version).  The  "  bottles,"  or  "  water-skins," 
of  heaven  are  the  dense  clouds  heavy  with 
rain,  which  alternately  hold  the  moisture 
like  a  reservoir,  and  pour  it  out  upon  the 
earth.  God  alone  can  determine  when  the 
rain  shall  fall. 

Ver.  38.— When  the  dust  groweth  into 
hardness.  'Aphar  (is];)  here,  as  often, 
means  "earth,"  or  "soil,"  rather  than  "dust." 
When  by  the  heat  of  the  sun's  rays  the 
ground  grows  into  hardness,  and  the  clods 
cleave  fast  together,  baked  into  a  compact 
mass,  then  is  the  time  when  rain  is  most 
needed,  and  when  the  Almighty  in  his 
mercy  commonly  sends  it.  The  considera- 
tion of  inanimate  nature  here  ends,  with 
the  result  that  its  mysteries  altogether 
transcend  the  human  intellect,  and  render 
speculation  on  the  still  deeper  mysteries  of 
the  moral  world  wholly  vain  and  futile.  ~ 

V«.  S3.— Wilt  thoa  hunt  the  prey  for  tba 


en.  xtxna.  1— 4t] 


ttta  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


613 


lion  1  A  new  departnra.  Oh.  zzzix.  Bhonld 
commence  from  this  point.  What  does  Job 
know  of  the  habits  and  Instinots  of  animals  7 
Can  he  arrange  so  that  the  lion  (rather, 
lioness)  shall  obtain  its  proper  prey,  and 
thus  fill  the  appetite— or,  satisfy  the  appetite 
(Revised  Version) — of  the  young  lions,  which 
depend  on  their  dam?  Certainly  not.  "The 
lions,  roaring  after  their  prey,  do  seek  their 
meat /rom  God  "  (Ps.  civ.  21). 

Ver.  40. — When  they  oonoh  in  their  dens, 
and  abide  in  the  covert  to  lie  in  wait  (comp. 
Ps.  X.  9, 10 ;  xvii.  12). 

Ver.  41. — Who  provideth  for  the  raven 
Us  food  !  (oomp.  Luke  xii.  24,  "  Consider 


the  ravens :  for  they 'neither  sow  nor  reap ; 
which  neither  have  storehouse  nor  bam; 
and  Ood  feedeth  them").  God's  mercy  is 
"over  all  Ms  works,"  not  only  over  those 
whereof  man  sees  the  utility ;  but  also  over 
beasts  of  prey,  and  birds  thought  to  be  of 
ill  omen.  Especially  he  cares  for  the  young 
of  each  kind,  which  most  need  protection. 
When  his  young  ones  cry  unto  God.  So  Ps. 
cxlvii.  9, "  He  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food, 
and  to  the  young  ravens  which  cry."  The 
young  ravens  are  driven  to  cry  out,  when 
they,  i.e.  the  parent  birds,  wander  for  lack 
of  meat,  and  have  a  di£9culty  in  finding  it. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Jehovah  to  Job  :  the  first  answer — the  theophany.  I.  The  Lord's 
APPEABANCE  TO  JoB.  1.  The  time  of  this  appearance.  At  the  close  of  Elihu's  address. 
Not  too  soon,  when  neither  had  Elihu  finished  his  expositions  nor  had  Job's  heart 
been  suitably  prepared  for  such  an  interview  as  he  was  on  the  eve  of  obtaining,  but 
precisely  at  the  moment  when  the  purpose  of  his  coming  was  most  likely  to  be  effected. 
God  never  mistimes  any  of  his  visits  to  his  people,  whether  he  comes  for  judgment  or 
for  mercy.  In  this  case  the  preaching  of  Elihu  had  begun  to  tell  upon  the  turbulent 
spirit  of  the  patriarch.  The  thunderstorm  had  helped  to  solemnize  his  mind,  and  lay 
him  prostrate  before  the  majesty  of  that  Worker  who  had  hitherto  remained  invisible. 
Then,  amid  the  crashing  of  the  thunder  and  the  lurid  gleams  of  the  lightning, 
while  the  fierce  whirlwind  swept  up  from  the  southern  desert — then  was  the  moment 
God  selected  for  making  his  presence  known  to  his  a£Bicted  servant.  2.  The  mode 
of  this  appearance.  Whether  there  was  a  visible  form  presented  to  the  patriarch's  eye 
it  is  impossible  to  say.  Probably  there  was  only  a  voice,  like  that  which  spoke  to 
Adam  in  the  garden  (Gen.  iii.  9, 10),  to  Abraham  on  Moriah  (Gen.  iiii.  11),  to  Israel  at 
Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  19 ;  xx.  1 ;  Deut,  iv.  12),  and  to  Elijah  at  Horeb  (1  Kings  xix.  12) ; 
like  that  which  spoke  to  Christ  at  the  Jordan  (Matt.  iii.  17),  on  the  Mount  of  Trans- 
figuration (Matt.  xvii.  5),  and  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  (John  xii.  30);  like  that 
which  arrested  Saul  (Acts  ix.  4),  and  afterwards  St.  John  (Eev.  i.  10).  That  this  voice 
should  have  issued  from  the  midst  of  a  whirlwind  (by  the  way,  an  indirect  confirma- 
tion of  the  authenticity  of  the  Elihu  section)  was  doubtless  designed  (1)  to  arrest 
JoVs  attention,  (2)  to  convey  some  impression  of  the  majesty  of  God,  and  (3)  to 
indicate  the  weighty  character  of  the  truth  about  to  be  communicated.  3.  The 
reality  of  this  appearance.  It  has  been  suggested  that  there  was  no  objective  appear- 
ance presented  to  any  of  Job's  senses  except  what  was  afforded  by  the  phenomena  of 
the  thunderstorm;  that  the  voice  was  purely  subjective — the  inner  voice  of  Job'sown 
spirit,  as  it  were,  rising  up  within  him  to  proclaim  the  overpowering  sense  of  the  Divine 
majesty  under  which  it  lay.  "As  the  storm  passes  away  with  a  vehement  wind, 
clearing  the  heavens  and  presenting  a  lively  symbol  of  the  terrible  majesty  of  God, 
Job  feels  the  near  presence  of  his  Maker ;  the  word  rings  through  his  heart,  it  brings 
back  all  that  he  had  ever  learned  of  his  works ;  creation  arises  before  him  to  witness 
for  its  Maker,  the  Spirit  of  God  moulds  his  thoughts  and  completes  his  knowledge," 
and  leads  him  to  pour  forth  the  sentiments  here  recorded  in  that  "  methodical  and 
artistic  form  which  pertains  to  the  highest  order  of  Hebrew  poetry "  (Canon  Cook). 
To  such  an  interpretation  of  the  dramatist's  language  there  is  no  very  serious  objection ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  permissible  to  hold  that  the  entire  phenomenon  was  objec- 
tive. 4.  The  object  of  this  appearance.  (1)  To  meet  Job's  .desires.  Eepeatedly  and 
earnestly  had  the  patriarch  expressed  a  wish,  at  first  dubiously,  but  afterwards  with 
something  like  defiance,  that  God  would  admit  him  to  an  interview,  that  he  might 
have  an  opportunity  of  stating  his  case  and  pleading  his  cause  (oh.  ii.  34,  35 ;  xiii.  3, 
22  ■  zxiii.  3 ;   xxxi.  37).     Well,  in  amasing  condescension  to  this  almost  impious 


614  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvin.  1— 41 


demand,  Jehovah,  "who  giveth  not  an  account  of  his  matters  "  (oh.  xxxui.  13),  cornea 
down  from  the  serene  altitudes  of  his  eternal  palace,  riding  on  a  whirlwind,  thundering 
with  his  voice,  sending  forth  his  lightnings,  causing  the  solid  globe  to  tremble  beneath 
the  tread  of  his  glowing  feet  (Ps.  xviii.  9—14).  (2)  To  complete  Job's  instruction. 
Elihu  had  been  sent  to  begin  the  work  of  educating  God's  ill-informed  servant.  That 
work  had  been  performed  with  some  considerable  measure  of  success.  Accordingly,  to 
deepen  the  impressions  made  upon  the  mind  of  Job,  Jehovah  _  takes  up  the  line  of 
argument  pursued  by  his  ambassador,  thus  in  a  manner  confirming  all  that  had  been 
by  him  advanced,  and  opening  up  before  the  mind  of  Job  the  full  import  of  that  teach- 
ing in  a  way  that  was  impossible  to  Elihu.  (3)  To  humble  Job's  pride.  Although 
the  Lord  had  expressly  come  to  afford  Job  an  opportunity  to  vindicate  himself,  if  he 
could,  he  begins  by  aiming  at  the  reduction  of  Job's  self-righteous  vanity.  With  a 
creature  filled  as  Job  was  at  the  moment  with  such  intolerable  haughtiness  and  pre- 
sumption, it  was  impossible  that  God  could  treat.  The  first  thing  to  be  attempted  was 
to  bring  Job  down  from  the  lofty  pedestal  of  self-complacent  dignity  on  which  he  had 
established  himself;  and  this  was  aimed  at  partly  by  the  sublime  character  of  ihe 
Divine  manifestation,  and  partly  (perhaps  chiefly)  by  the  elevated  tenor  of  the  Divine 
teaching.  (4)  To  effect  Job's  restoration.  That  in  the  terrible  ordeal  through  which 
Job  had  passed  his  integrity  had  not  been  to  some  extent  shaken,  no  candid  reader 
will  afBrm.  Satan  at  the  outset  alleged  that  it  would  wholly  fail.  Jehovah  maintained 
that  it  would  stand.  When  the  last  trial  (the  preaching  of  the  friends)  had  ended.  Job 
was  far  from  being  in  a  state  of  stable  equilibrium  as  to  his  integrity.  Accordingly, 
Elihu,  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  original  conditions  of  the  problem,  was  sent  to  his 
assistance ;  and  now,  when  all  things  had  been  prepared  for  his  coming,  God  himself 
•rrives  upon  the  scene.  "  Who  can  teach  like  him  ?  "  said  Elihu ;  and  so  discerning 
the  approach  of  the  great  King,  the  faithful  ambassador  withdraws,  leaving  Job  to  get 
his  last  lesson  from  him  who  alone  teacheth  to  profit  (Isa.  xlviii.  17).  If  after  this 
Job  still  continues  unhumbled,  then  Satan  will  have  proved  victorious ;  but  if  God 
shall  be  able  to  restore  his  servant  to  a  pro[  er  frame  of  mind,  then  the  final  verdict 
will  go  with  him,  and  not  only  the  devil,  but  the  intelligent  universe,  be  forced  to  own 
that 

"  A  good  man,  in  the  darkness  and  dismay 

Of  powers  that  fail,  and  purposes  o'erthrown, 

May  stOl  be  conscious  of  the  proper  way ; " 

(Goethe's  '  Faust,'  Prologue.) 

that  a  man  through  the  grace  of  God  may  become  possessor  of  a  piety  against  which 
even  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail. 

II.  The  Lord's  ebpeoof  of  Job.  1.  Sin  charged.  Jehovah  begins  the  interview 
by  distinctly  specifying  Job's  offence.  He  had  "  darkened  counsel "  (ver.  2)  ;  that  is, 
he  had  obscured  and  misrepresented  the  prearranged  plan  and  underlying  principles 
of  the  Divine  administration.  The  language  reminds  us :  (1)  That  there  is  a  well- 
defined  plan  in  accordance  with  which  everything  on  earth  comes  to  pass.  As 
the  primordial  atoms  of  matter  did  not  fortuitously  fashion  themselves  into  that 
brilliant  host  of  suns  and  systems  which  we  name  the  universe,  or  even  into  this 
wondrous  globe  which  in  comparison  with  the  whole  is  but  as  a  drop  in  the  ocean,  so 
neither  do  the  events  of  time  which  compose  human  history  occur  by  chance,  but  each 
one  falls  into  the  place  prepared  for  it  in  the  universal  scheme.  (2)  That  this  plan,  or 
creation-programme,  has  been  arranged  in  accordance  with  the  highest  wisdom.  It  is 
not  a  random  plan  that  God  has  selected  for  his  universe,  or  even  for  the  earth,  as  an 
architect  might  build  a  house  agreeable  to  the  first  idea  or  sketch  that  came  into  his 
mind;  it  is  the  best  possible  plan  that  omniscient  wisdom  could  devise.  (3)  That 
this  creation-programme  or  world-plan  in  all  its  details  has  been  constructed  in  accord- 
ance with  the  fundamental  principles  of  truth  and  equity.  Otherwise  it  could  not 
have  been  the  production  of  the  highest  wisdom.  Hence  it  is  deducible  that  the 
existence  neither  of  sin  nor  of  suffering  is  incompatible  with  eternal  right.  (4)  That 
the  harmonious  accordance  of  this  Divine  plan  with  law  and  justice  shines  forth  in 
God's  administration  with  sufficient  clearness  to  convince  every  one  who  studies  that 
administration  with  fairness  and  impartiality.  (5)  That  if  in  any  case  the  luminous 
radiance  of  God's  counsel  ia  obscured,  it  must  be  owing  to  the  shadow  cast  thereon  by  the 


CH.  xxxvm.  1—41.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  615 


intellectual  and  moral  darkness  of  those  by  whom  it  is  helield.  2.  Ignorance  affirmel. 
Exactly  this  was  the  case  with  Job,  for  the  challenge  is  not  addressed  to  the  friends, 
and  still  less  to  Elihu.  Job  had  asserted  more  than  once  that  the  Divine  government 
of  the  world  was  not  in  accordance  (at  any  rate,  not  in  visible  accordance)  with  the 
eternal  principles  of  equity,  adducing  instances,  as  he  supposed,  which  no  amount  of 
ingenuity  could  harmonize  with  absolutely  impartial  justice.  "  But  God  pronounces 
that  these  words  were  'without  knowledge.'  The  instances  that  Job  had  appealed 
to  aB  being  obvious  to  the  sight  of  all  men  of  God's  giving  prosperity  to  the  wicked, 
and  causing  the  innocent  to  suffer  wrongfully,  and  without  redress,  are  pronounced 
to  be  untrue  "  (Pry).  3.  Astonishment  expressed.  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  The  words 
carry  in  them  (1)  "  a  rebuke  or  reprehension,"  "  as  if  God,  pointing  at  Job,  had  said. 
Is  it  you?  I  could  not  have  believed  that  my  servant  Job  would  have  so  much 
forgotten  himself ; "  and  (2)  "  a  slight  or  diminution,"  as  though  Job,  otherwise  a 
man  of  an  excellent  spirit,  •'  had  been  too  bold  with  God,  and  therefore  no  wonder  if 
God  spake  contemningly  to  him  "  (Caryl). 

III.  The  Lokd'b  demand  from  Job.  1.  To  display  the  courage  he  had  previously 
vaunted.  "  Gird  up  thy  loins  now  like  a  man,"  i.e.  like  a  valiant  hero  (a  geber),  as  you 
frequently  affected  to  be.  Job  had  formerly  professed  to  be  ready  for  an  interview 
with  God  (ch.  xiii.  18, 22) ;  had  complained  that  God  acted  towards  him  like  an  invisible 
assailant  (ch.  xix.  7),  whom  he  knew  not  how  to  meet  or  where  to  find  (ch.  xxiii.  3, 8, 9) ; 
nay,  had  declared  that  nothing  would  rejoice  him  more  than  to  hear  that  his  unseen 
adversary  had  opened  a  tribunal  for  the  hearing  of  his  case  and  prepared  an  indictment 
for  the  exposition  of  his  guilt — that  such  an  indictment  he  would  wind  around  his 
brow  like  a  regal  crown,  and  march  into  God's  presence  with  the  stately  steps  of  a 
prince  (ch.  xxxi.  35 — 37).  Brave  words,  0  Job !  But  most  men,  like  Falstaff,  are 
valiant  in  the  absence  of  the  foe.  Jehovah  had  now  come  to  ask  Job  to  evince  the 
sincerity  of  his  boast.  So  will  God  one  day  come,  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with 
great  power  and  glory,  to  afford  all  the  presumptuous  ungodly  an  opportunity  of 
showing  whether  they  can  meet  without  fear  him  whom  they  now  despise  without 
shame.  2.  Torecite  the  answers  he  had  formerly  professed  to  have  prepared.  Job  had 
declared  his  perfect  indifference  as  to  whether  the  Almighty  when  he  came  should 
assume  the  position  of  assailant  or  defendant.  If  he  preferred  that  Job  should  open 
Hm  sase,  Job  was  ready;  if  he  elected  to  assume  the  initiative,  Job  had  his  defences 
at  hand.  "  Well,"  exclaims  Jehovah,  "  as  you  gave  me  the  choice,  I  decide  upon  the 
latter.  I  am  ready  to  begin  the  hearing  of  your  cause.  Therefore  stand  forth.  I  will 
demand  of  thee,  and  answer  thou  me ! "  "I  will  come  shortly,"  wrote  Paul  to  the 
Corinthians  (1  Cor.  iv.  19),  "  if  the  Lord  will,  and  will  know,  not  the  speech  of  them 
which  are  puffed  up,  but  the  power."  In  the  like  spirit  had  Jehovah  come  to  Job,  to 
see  whether  the  reality  corresponded  in  any  degree  with  the  loud-sounding  profession 
he  had  made. 

Learn :  1.  That  God  keeps  the  times  and  seasons  of  all  things  connected  with  his. 
kingdom  in  his  own  hand.  2.  That  nature  with  all  its  phenomena  is  under  service  to 
God.  3.  That  God's  voice  in  nature,  much  more  in  the  Word,  and  most  of  all  in  the 
conscience,  is  full  of  majesty,  4.  That  for  God  to  answer  any  of  his  creatures,  much 
more  sinful  dust  and  ashes,  is  an  act  of  amazing  condescension.  5.  That.  God  will 
not  hide  the  faults  of  any  of  his  people  when  he  enters  into  judgment  with  them.  6. 
That  ignorance  lies  at  the  root  of  much,  if  not  all,  of  man's  misunderstanding  of,  and 
murmuring  against,  God's  ways. 

Yerg,  4 15. — Jehovah  to  Job  :  the  first  answei — the  examination ;  1.   Concerning 

the  creation.  I.  The  cbeation  of  the  earth  the  handiwork  of  God.  1.  An 
exclusively  Divine  work.  Jehovah  claims  not  simply  to  have  been  the  Pramer  of  the 
mio-hty  fabric  of  the  globe,  but  to  have  shared  the  honour  of  that  stupendous  achieve- 
ment with  no  co-worker.  Hence  certainly  not  with  Job.  "  Where  wast  thou  when 
I  established  the  earth?"  Not  taking  part  or  even  looking  on,  since  thou  wast  not 
than  in  existence.  That  this  terrestrial  world,  and  indeed  the  vast  universe  of  which 
it  forms  a  part  almost  inflnitesimally  small,  has  not  existed  from  eternity,  and  did  not 
spring  into  being  fortuitously  and  without  adequate  cause,  but  was  summoned  from 
the  womb  of  nothingness  by  the  fiat  of  Omnipotence,  besides  according  with  th« 


616  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ofi.  xxxnn.  1 — 41. 

plainest  declarations  of  Scripture  (Gen.  1. 1),  harmonizes  more  exactly  than  any  other 
theory  with  the  dictates  of  reason.  2.  A  perfectly  finished  work.  As  in  the  Mosaic 
cosmogony  Elohim  is  represented  as  beginning,  carrying  forward  through  successive 
stages,  and  completing  the  preparation  of  the  newly  made  earth  as  man'a  abode,  so 
here  Jehovah  advances  a  like  claim  in  behalf  of  himself.  Under  the  image  of  a 
building  he  describes  the  earth,  in  its  construction,  as  having  been  planned  by  him : 
"  Who,"  i.e.  but  me,  "  hath  determined  its  measure  ?  "  founded  by  him :  "  Where  wast 
thou  when  I  established  the  earth  ?  "  erected  by  him :  "  Whereupon  are  the  foundations," 
i.e.  the  bases  of  its  pillars,  "  fastened  ?  "  finished  by  him :  "  Who  hath  laid  the  corner- 
stone thereof  ?  "  &.  A  firmly  secured  work.  Not,  however,  in  the  sense  of  standing 
still  and  without  motion  (Caryl),  but  in  that  of  being  permanently  established.  The 
constitution  and  course  of  nature,  though  not  unalterable  at  the  vnll  of  him  by  whom 
it  hath  been  decreed,  is  yet  bo  definitely  settled  that  man  can  reckon  on  its  uniformity. 
It  can  be  overthrown  by  neither  accident  nor  design.  The  properties  and  laws  of 
matter  are  so  certain  in  their  operation,  that  some  reasoners  have  falsely  concluded 
them  to  be  immutable. 

II.  The  ceeation  of  the  eabth  was  the  sonq  of  the  angels.  1,  The 
singers:  the  angels.  The  race  of  spiritual  intelligences  who  inhabit  the  heavenly 
world  (Ps.  Ixviii.  17 ;  Matt,  xviii.  10 ;  John  i.  51),  who  are  here  described  by :  (1) 
Their  place  in  creation ;  being  styled  (according  to  one  exposition  of  the  passage) 
"morning  stars,"  as  having  been  first  created,  the  first  beings  summoned  into 
the  broad  expanse  of  dependent  existence  (Gen.  iii.  24 ;  Ps.  viii.  5),  as  the  morn- 
ing stars  appear  to  swim  out  first  into  the  vault  of  heaven ;  as  being  possessed  of 
incomparable  excellence  of  nature  (Ps.  ciii.  20),  as  the  morning  stars  outshine  all 
other  stars  in  brilliance ;  or  as  being  the  harbingers  or  heralds  of  succeeding  and 
perhaps  higher  creatures  than  themselves  (John  i.  51),  as  the  morning  star  serves  to 
usher  in  through  the  portals  of  the  dawn  the  golden  chariot  of  the  sun.  (2)  Their 
relation  to  God ;  being  designated  his  "  sons,"  not  as  Christ  is,  who  is  the  Father's  Only 
Begotten  (Ps.  ii.  7 ;  John  i.  18 ;  Acts  xiii.  33) — an  honour  never  conferred  upon  the 
angels  (Heb.  i.  5) ;  or  as  saints  are,  by  regeneration  and  adoption  (John  i.  12) — an 
experience  which  the  unfallen  angels  do  not  need,  and  the  fallen  ones  do  not  get ;  out 
probably  as  Adam  was  (Luke  iii.  38),  and  as  men  in  general  are  (Acts  xviL  28)  to 
indicate  their  dependence  upon,  and  constitutional  likeness  to,  God  their  Creator.  2. 
Their  song :  an  anthem  of  creation.  Which  also  is  characterized  in  a  twofold  way :  (1) 
By  its  outward  expression,  as  vocal, "  they  sang,"  giving  utterance  to  their  emotions  in 
the  tongue  of  immortals ;  as  choral,  "  they  sang  together,"  preserving  harmony  in  their 
singing,  maintaining  a  delightful  concord  of  sweet  sounds;  as  universal,  "all  the 
sons  of  God  shouted,"  there  was  not  a  voice  in  the  innumerable  throng  that  was 
silent  (cf. '  Merchant  of  Venice,'  act  v.  sc.  1) ;  as  cordial,  "  they  shouted,"  expressive 
of  the  hearty  vehemence  and  exuberant  gladness  with  which  they  poured  forth  their 
heavenly  melodies.  (2)  By  its  inward  inspiration,  as  proceeding  from  the  full  tide  of 
joy  which  rose  and  swelled  within  their  breasts,  which  joy  was  occasioned  by  admiration 
of  the  great  Creator's  power,  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Artificer's  wisdom,  appreciation 
of  the  Infinite  Father's  goodness,  anticipation  of  the  supreme  God's  purpose,  in  calling 
forth  from  the  wide  womb  of  non-existence,  by  a  single  fiat  of  omnipotence,  a  world  so 
wondrously  fair,  for  an  end  of  which  it  may  have  been  given  to  their  angelic  minds 
to  form  some  by  no  means  dim  conception,  viz.  to  be  the  future  home  of  man. 

III.  The  oeeation  of  the  bakth  a  study  fob  man.  As  such  it  was  propounded 
to  Job,  who  was  asked  to  receive  lessons  from  it  as  to  three  points.  1.  27ie  breifity  of 
man's  life  as  compared  with  the  existence  of  Ood.  "  Where  wast  thou  when  I  founded 
the  earth  ?  Thou  wast  not  then  born  1  Thy  days  on  earth  are  as  a  shadow.  A  few 
years  ago  thou  hadst  no  existence.  But  I,  thy  Creator,  whom  thou  dost  foolishly 
arraign,  had  a  being  before  the  world  was  I  "  Nothing  is  more  fitted  to  impress  man 
with  a  sense  of  the  utter  vanity  and  insignificance  of  this  terrestrial  existence  of  which 
be  partakes  than  a  conteinplation  of  the  eternity  of  God.  2.  The  ignorance  of  man's 
mind  as  compared  with  the  omniscience  of  Ood.  Jehovah  asks  the  patriarch  if  he 
could  tell  how  the  pillars  of  the  globe  were  fastened  in  their  sockets,  or  how  either 
the  foundation  or  corner  stones  of  the  stupendous  fabric  were  laid  in  their  places,  and 
fixed  w  as  to  continue  permanent  and  immovable.  "  Declare,  if  thou  hast  understanding." 


ca,i3txvm.l— 41.]  THE  BOOK  OJ"  JOS.  611 


But  all  these  were  comprehended  hy  eternal  wisdom.  How  immeasurably  foolish,  then, 
must  it  be  for  man  to  presume  that  he  either  can,  or  ought  to  be  able  to,  understand 
the  moral  administration  of  a  world  of  whose  original  construction  he  is  entirely 
ignorant  I  Nothing  is  better  calculated  to  humble  the  pride  of-  human  wisdom  than 
to  reflect  both  how  small  is  the  circle  of  knowledge  surveyed  by  the  wisest  in  comparison 
with  the  vast  sphere  of  ignorance  by  which  he  is  still  encompassed,  and  in  particular 
how  infinitesimal  is  the  largest  quantity  of  science  collected  by  man  when  weighed 
against  the  immeasurable  omniscience  of  God.  3.  The  impotence  of  man's  arm  as 
compared  with  the  omnipotence  of  Ood.  Vast  in  contrivance  and  execution  as  are 
many  of  the  works  of  man,  the  building  of  the  pyramids,  the  exploration  of  mines,  the 
construction  of  locomotives,  the  tunnelling  of  mountains,  and  other  mighty  achieve- 
ments of  human  genius,  it  is  certain  that  man  himself  must  regard  these  as  puny  and 
insignificant  beside  the  gigantic  works  of  nature,  the  piling  up  of  Himalayas,  the 
formation  of  oceans,  the  establishment  of  those  mysterious  influences  which  men  in 
their  ignorance  denominate  physical  forces,  the  peopling  of  earth,  air,  and  sea  with 
their  myriad  forms  of  life.  And  yet  these  are  all  the  handiwork  of  God,  effected  by 
his  power  with  infinite  ease  and  with  such  consummate  skill  that  man  cannot  hope  to 
improve  them,  cannot  even  imitate  them,  yea,  can  hardly  succeed  in  making  a  perfect 
copy  of  them.  Nay,  modem  astronomy,  by  enlarging  our  conceptions  of  the  stellar 
world,  reminds  us  that  stupendous  a  woik  as  is  the  formation  of  this  material  globe,  it 
is  in  reality  one  of  the  smallest  of  the  productions  that  have  come  from  his  creative 
hand,  being  in  fact  but  as  a  drop  in  a  bucket,  or  as  the  small  dust  of  a  balance,  in 
comparison -with  the  boundless  universe  to  which  it  belongs. 

Learn :  1.  That  the  first  of  all  beings  is  God.  2.  That  the  primal  cause  of  all  things 
is  the  power  of  God.  3.  That  only  the  mind  which  planned  the  world  can  perfectly 
understand  its  government.  4.  That  all  God's  works,  in  the  moral  world  no  less  than 
in  the  material,  are  characterized  by  wisdom.  5.  That  God's  works  should  never  fail  to 
excite  the  admiration  and  rejoicing  of  God's  children.  6.  That,  though  man  cannot  be 
saved,  he  may  yet  be  instructed,  by  the  angels.  7.  That  if  the  old  or  material  creation 
required  the  power  of  God,  much  more  does  the  new  or  spiritual  creation. 

Ver.  7. — The  songs  of  the  angels.    I.  At  the  creation  of  the  wobld. 

n.  At  the  incarnation  op  the  Saviotjb. 

Ill   At  the  conversion  of  sinners. 

IV.  At  the  introduction  of  the  new  hbavbnb  and  the  new  earth. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Jehovah  to  Job  :  the  first  answer — the  examination :  2.  OoncerniTig 
the  sea.  I.  The  peodoction  of  the  bea.  1.  The  place  wJience  it  issued.  The  sea,  by 
a  bold  metaphor,  is  represented  as  a  child  proceeding  from  its  mother's  womb.  The 
allusion  apparently  is  to  the  third  day's  creative  work,  when  the  terrestrial  waters  were 
collected  into  seas  by  "  the  upheaval  of  the  land  through  the  action  of  subterranean  fires, 
or  the  subsidence  of  the  earth's  crust  in  consequence  of  the  cooling  and  shrinking  of  the 
interior  mass"  ('  Pulpit  Commentary  :  Genesis,'  i.  9).  The  hitherto  quiet  surface  of  the 
deep  being  thrown  into  violent  commotion,  on  the  one  hand  the  upward  rush  of  waters 
occasioned  by  the  sinking  of  the  solid  particles  would  seem  like  an  irruption  from  the 
interior  of  the  earth,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  backward  sweep  produced  by  the  sudden 
upheaval  of  mountain-peaks  would  appear  as  if  effected  by  the  superior  restraint  of  some 
mighty  hand.  Hence,  the  whole  is  depicted  as  the  birth  of  a  young  giant,  who  is  no 
sooner  ushered  into  life  than  he  requires  to  be  restrained  and  confined.  2.  The  violence 
of  its  irruption.  The  word  employed  by  Jehovah  to  describe  its  evolution  from  the  still 
chaotic  mass  of  the  globe  is  the  same  which  Scripture  writers  use  to  represent  the 
bursting  forth  of  a  river  from  its  source  (ch.  xl.  23),  the  emerging  of  a  child  from  its 
mother's  womb  (Ps.  xxii.  10),  the  rushing  of  a  soldier  into  battle  (Ezek.  xxxii.  2),  the 
springing  of  a  warrior  from  ambush  (Judg.  xx.  33).  The  language  conveys  a  vivid 
picture  of  the  vehement  and  sudden  manner  in  which  the  land  and  water  of  our  globe 
were  separated,  which,  according  to  both  revelation  (Ps.  civ.  7)  and  science,  was  most 
probably  effected  by  volcanic  agjncy.  3.  The  appearance  it  presented.  Still  adhering 
to  the  metaphor  of  a  new-born  infant,  which  the  nurse  wraps  in  swaddling-bands  and 
baby-clothes,  Jehovah  tells  the  patriarch  that  he  too  had  providftl  suitable  apparel  for 


618  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvm.  1— 4L 

the  new-bom  sea,  giving  it  clouds  for  a  garment  and  darkness  for  a  band,  meaning  that 
at  its  first  separation  from  the  solid  earth  it  was  overhung  by  heavy  vapours  and  thick 
mists  which  served  to  enshroud  it  like  a  pall. 

II.  The  disposition  of  the  sea.  1.  The  preparation  of  its  place.  The  received 
translation,  which  is  clearly  inspired  by  Gen.  i.  9  and  Ps.  civ.  8,  understands  God  to 
say  that  the  newly  formed  sea  was  not  left  to  roll  its  waters  at  will  across  the  surface  of 
the  globe,  but  was  withdrawn  into  the  ocean  beds  in  which  at  the  present  time  it  rests, 
and  that  these  beds,  besides  being  constructed  by  Divine  agency,  acting,  no  doubt, 
through  natural  means,  had  also  been  definitely  prearranged  by  Divine  wisdom,  which, 
had  "  broken  up  for  it  my  decreed  ^tece,"  and  were  permanently  fixed  by  Divine  power, 
which  had  "strictly  measured  its  boundary"  (Umbreit),  or  broken  over  it  a  Divine 
decree  (Delitzsoh),  i.e.  imposing  upon  it  a  statute  of  limitation.  2.  The  restraining  of 
its  waters.  This  again  is  represented  as  the  imprisoning  within  strongly  built  walls 
and  firmly  barred  doors  of  the  aforesaid  young  and  vigorous  giant,  who  cannot  be  per- 
mitted unchecked  liberty,  but  must  be  kept  within  bounds,  being  afiforded  so  Uiuch 
freedom  and  no  more — freedom,  that  is  to  say,  within  the  precincts  of  his  prison,  but 
not  beyond.  In  the  case  of  the  sea,  the  imprisoning  walls  and  doors  are  the  rocks 
and  sands  and  beaches  which  line  the  coasts  of  the  great  ocean  waters.  And  yet 
it  is  not  these  that  repel  the  sea  from  overflowing  its  banks,  but  the  voice  of  God  who 
says,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further :  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be 
stayed ; "  as  it  is  not  the  prison  walls  that  really  confine  the  young  giant,  but  the 
sovereign  will  of  him,  the  Parent  or  Nurse,  by  whom  they  have  been  constructed  and 
the  infant  monster  has  been  immured. 

Learn :  1.  That  God  is  the  Maker  of  the  sea  as  well  as  of  the  dry  land.  2.  That  God 
can  control  the  sea  even  in  its  fiercest  moods.  3.  That  the  sea,  no  less  than  other 
creatures,  cannot  overstep  the  bounds  assigned  it  by  its  Maker.  4.  That  God's  hand 
upon  the  sea,  and  God's  voice  to  the  sea,  are  all  that  keep  its  waters  from  overflowing 
the  earth. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — Jehovah  to  Job :  the  first  answer — the  examination ;  3.  Concerning 
the  light.  I.  The  light  of  the  mokotng  the  sebvant  of  God.  1.  The  light  of  the 
morning  is  a  servant  to  some  one.  It  is  under  the  commandment  of  a  Superior.  Every 
movement  that  it  makes  proclaims  it  to  be  under  law.  Modern  science  is  even  able 
with  much  precision  to  formulate  the  laws  to  which  it  renders  obedience.  And  these 
operate  with  such  unfailing  regularity  and  such  irresistible  potency,  that  even  this 
subtlest,  nimblest,  and  most  powerful  of  creatures  is  unable  to  elude  their  grasp  or  repel 
their  sway.  Morning  after  morning  does  the  dawn  appear  like  a  sentinel  retumins;  to 
his  place.  Day  after  day  does  the  golden  sun  push  his  disc  above  the  horizon,  never 
mistaking  the  time  when  or  the  exuot  spot  where  he  should  first  begin  to  tip  the 
mountain-tops  with  roseate  hues.  From  whatever  source  the  laws  emanate  it  is  clear 
that  the  sun  yields  them  submission.  2.  I%e  light  of  the  morning  is  not  the  servant  of 
man.  "  Hast  thou  commanded  the  morning  since  thy  days  ?  hast  thou  caused  the  day- 
spring  to  know  its  place  ?  "  inquires  Jehovah  of  Job,  as  if  he  meanf  ironically  to  suggest 
that,  although  Job  could  have  had  no  hand  in  either  the  first  formation  of  the  globe  or 
the  production  of  the  sea,  inasmuch  as  he  was  not  then  in  existence,  perhaps  since  he 
had  arrived  on  earth  he  had  been  the  lord  paramount,  to  whom  the  powerful  king  of 
day  did  obeisance,  and  from  whom  the  roseate  dawn  received  its  daily  charge.  At  the 
same  time,  the  interrogation  is  so  phrased  as  to  point  to  the  appropriate  reply  that  not 
only  was  Job  not  the  director-general  of  the  solar  movements,  but  throughout  the  entire 
course  of  his  career  he  had  not  been  able  to  impose  his  authority  on  the  morning  light 
for  so  much  as  a  single  day.  And,  of  course,  what  was  true  of  Job  is  likewise  true  of 
all.  The  student  of  the  heavens  may  contemplate  the  beauty  and  investigate  the  laws 
of  the  solar  beam ;  but  he  cannot  hinder  it  on  its  mission  or  turn  it  aside  from  its  path. 
He  can  neither  instruct  nor  direct  it  as  to  when,  where, or  how  it  is  to  shine.  It  may 
serve  him  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  command  which  has  made  all  creatures  wait  on 
man ;  but  man  cannot  make  of  it  his  servant  in  the  sense  of  subjecting  it  to  his 
ordinances.  Hence  the  inference  that  follows  is  inevitable.  3.  The  light  of  the  morning 
is  exclusively  the  servant  of  God.  The  voice  it  obeys  is  that  which  addressed  Job  from 
the  whirlwind.  The  rule  it  follows  is  that  prescribed  for  it  by  him  who  at  the  first  said. 


ra,  jcxxvm.  1— 41.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  619 

"  Let  light  be,"  and  light  was.    The  law  it  recognizes  and  fulfils  is  that  of  him  who  set 
the  sun  in  the  heavens  to  give  light  upon  the  earth. 

II.  The  light  of  the  morning  the  enemy  op  evil-dobrs.  1.  The  expressive  meta- 
phor. The  light,  personified  as  a  powerful  servant  or  minister  of  Q-od,  is  represented 
as  coming  forth  every  morning  from  the  chambers  of  the  dawn,  as  seizing  the  broad  and 
beautifully  variegated  carpet  of  the  earth  by  the  edges,  as  forcibly  lifting  it  up,  and  as 
effectively  shaking  from  it  the  evil-doers  who,  under  cover  of  darkness,  had  laid  them- 
selves down  to  rest,  or  had  gone  forth  on  errands  of  wickedness,  upon  its  surface.  2.  The 
authorized  interpretation.  So  completely  does  the  dawn  of  day  surprise  the  night-birds, 
or  workers  of  inquity,  who  prey  upon  society  that  their  outstretched  arms  are  broken, 
i.e.  are  arrested  in  the  very  act  of  perpetrating  their  nefarious  deeds.  When  the  dark- 
ness vanishes,  the  light  in  which  they  work  is  removed  from  them ;  and,  shunning  the 
dawn  of  day  as  if  it  were  the  shadow  of  death  (ch.  xxiv.  17),  they  slink  away  into  their 
dens,  disappearing  as  effectually  from  the  world  of  light  as  if  they  had  been  shaken 
violently  from  the  surface  of  the  earth. 

III.  The  LIGH.T  or  the  morning  the  bbaittifier  of  the  earth.  1.  The  imprinting 
seoH.  Analyzing  the  Divine  metaphor,  one  may  say  that  the  spreading  of  the  dawn  is 
compared  to  the  rolling  of  a  cylindrical  seal  across  the  surface  of  a  prepared  sheet  of  clay. 
The  tigure  indicates  the  gradual  and  progressive  openitjg  of  the  dawn,  the  silent  and 
onward  march  of  the  light,  the  continually  widening  diffusion  of  day,  the  uprising  of 
objects  on  the  earth's  surface  into  clearness  and  distinctness  of  outline.  2.  The  printed 
clay.  As  the  seal  when  it  passes  over  the  smooth  clay  leaves  behind  it  an  impression 
which  seems  to  start  up  from  the  clay,  so  the  sweeping  of  the  dawn  across  the  plains  of 
earth  causes  object  after  object,  mountain,  rock,  tree,  grass,  flower,  everything  that  earth 
supports  on  its  bosom,  to  start  up  in  succession  into  prominence  of  vision.  3.  ITie  radiant 
garment.  The  result  is  expressed  by  a  change  of  figure.  The  illuminated  earth  is  com- 
pared to  a  richly  embroidered  garment,  whose  variegated  hues  and  deftly  woven  figures, 
concealed  by  the  preceding  darkness,  are  now  brought  to  light  by  the  eifulgent  day. 

Learn :  1.  That  the  constitution  and  course  of  nature  in  all  its  parts  and  details  rest 
upon  the  command  of  God.  2,  That  apart  from  this  Divine  commandment  the  sons  of 
men  could  not  enjoy  so  much  as  a  single  day.  3.  That  the  power  of  man  can  interfere 
with  little  things  no  more  than  with  great  things  in  nature.  4.  That  man  has  many 
servants  who  obey  not  his  command.  5.  That  light  plays  an  important  part  in  the 
moral  administration  of  earth.  6.  That  the  main  source  of  beauty  in  material  things  is 
the  light  of  day.     7.  That  evil-doers  generally  and  instinctively  hate  the  light. 

Vers.  16 — 30. — Jehovah  to  Job :  the  first  answer — the  examination :  4.  Concerning 
the  mysteries  of  creation.  I.  The  mysteries  of  creation  are  manifold  in  theib 
VARIETY.  Jehovah  directs  Job's  attention  to  some  examples  of  these  hidden  things,  or 
secrets,  of  nature.  1.  The  depths  of  the  ocean.  The  sea,  perhaps  more  than  any  other 
object  in  nature,  the  universal  emblem  of  the  mysterious,  in  respect  of  its  immensity, 
inconstancy,  potency,  harmony,  is  specially  invested  with  a  veil  of  wonder  when  the 
mind  reflects  upon  its  unfathomable  profundity.  Ever  soundino;  and  singing  on  its 
surface,  now  chanting  weiid  melodies  as  its  tiny  wavelets  break  upon  the  shore,  now 
bellowing  and  roaring  with  discordant  fury  when  the  raging  winds  catching  the  ruffian 
billows  by  the  top  bid  them  clash  in  mortal  conflict,  underneath  all  is  still,  silent,  solemn, 
voiceless,  and,  except  where  there  are  currents,  motionless  as  the  grave.  Above  inviting 
man's  approach  and  investigation,  below  it  has  deep  and  dark  recesses,  untraversed  by 
human  foot,  unscanned  by  mortal  eye.  Continually  sending  forth  its  treasures  to  the 
upper  air  in  magic  trains  of  mist,  doing  homage  to  the  golden  sun,  it  has  "  springs  "  or 
"fountains  "  underneath  (Gen.  vii.  11),  whence  its  waste  is  supplied.  2.  The  realms  of 
the  unseen  world.  The  grim  and  gloomy  subterranean  regions  so  eloquently  described  by 
Job  (ch.  X.  22 ;  xxvi.  5)  as  the  abodes  of  disembodied  spirits,  are  here  similarly  repre- 
sented as  the  habitations  of  the  dead,  who  are  shut  within  the  sunless  receptacles  bjr 
means  of  doors  and  bars.  Without  expressly  asserting  that  the  two  places, "  the  interior 
parts  of  the  earth  "  and  "  the  realm  of  shades,"  were  identical,  the  language  of  Jehovah 
imports  that  both  alike  were  among  the  secret  things  as  yet  unveiled  to  man.  And  this 
witness  is  true.  To  saint  and  sinner  equally  the  manner  of  existence,  when  the  now 
embodied  spirit  shall  have  shuffled  off  this  mortal  coil,  is  an  unfathomable  mystery.    A 


620  THE!  book:  OF  JOB.  [oa.  Xxxmi.  l-4i. 

terra  incognita  ii  the  country  beyond  the  tomb.  Nor  has  man  yet  been  able  to  explore 
the  Innermost  recesses  of  the  earth.  His  investigations  and  resparches  have  been  con- 
fined to  the  earth's  crust,  possessing  a  thickness  of  only  a  few  thousand  feet.  Whether 
the  central  substance  of  the  globe  is  a  solid  mass  or  a  glowing  fire  is  yet  with  physicists 
a  qussstio  vexata.  3.  The  extent  of  the  earth.  That  the  earth  was  in  patriarchal  times 
popularly  believed  to  be  a  plain  is  no  proof  that  even  then  its  sphericity  was  not  guessed 
at,  though  perhaps  not  definitely  ascertained  by  geographers  and  astronomers  (vide 
ch.  xxvi.  7,  homiletics).  Still,  with  all  the  appliances  of  modem  science  for  observing 
the  transit  of  Venus,  upon  which  calculations  for  the  earth's  dimensions  depend,  the  most 
that  can  be  thus  obtained  is  only  an  approximation  towards  the  truth — an  approxima- 
tion no  doubt  sufBciently  accurate  for  working  purposes,  but  still  an  approximation  as 
distinguished  from  the  absolute  truth.  4.  The  origin  of  light  whd  darhne$s.  Among 
the  discoveries  of  modern  science  few  surpass  in  interest  those  relating  to  the  composition 
and  the  laws  of  light.  The  piism  by  untwisting  a  solar  beam,  and  the  spectrum  by 
analyzing  its  very  substance,  have  widened  man's  knowledge  in  this  department  of 
physics  to  an  astonishing  extent.  Yet  what  light  itself  is,  what  are  its  physical  causes, 
and  how  it  produces  its  particular  effects,  are  still  among  the  unascertained  facts  of 
nature.  5.  2%e  sources  of  snow  and  hail.  Here  again  it  is  not  the  physical  power  or 
force  which  causes  snow  or  hail  which  constitutes  the  mystery ;  but  the  fact  that  they 
seem  to  descend  upon  earth  in  inexhaustible  supplies  at  the  moments  when  they  are 
most  required,  viz.  when  God  has  some  time  of  trouble  in  store  for  man  or  some  terrible 
judgment  to  inflict  on  earth.  Scripture  speaks  of  hail  as  having  been  employed  by  God 
for  the  destruction  of  his  enemies  (Exod.  ix.  18;  Josh.  x.  11;  Isa.  xxx.  10).  6.  The 
distribution  of  light  and  wind.  Jehovah  alludes  to  the  laws  in  accordance  with  which 
the  beams  of  light  and  the  air-currents  spread  themselves  across  the  surface  of  the  globe, 
and  exercise  their  respective  influences  upon  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants.  7.  The  inner 
principles  of  rain,  dew,  ice,  and  frost.  The  causes  that  immediately  produce  these 
phenomena  were  probably  to  a  large  extent  unknown  in  the  days  of  Job,  though  they 
are  now  understood  by  persons  of  a  moderate  degree  of  culture.  But  it  is  the  power 
behind  the  immediately  operating  material  causes  after  which  Jehovah  inquires. 

II.  The  mysteries  of  creation  are  undiscovebablb  by  man.  1.  The  oldest  man 
was  not  present  at  tJwir  formation.  "  Knowest  thou  it  {i.e.  where  the  light  dwellethi 
because  thou  wast  then  born?  or  because  the  number  of  thy  months  is  great?' 
Jehovah  means  that  neither  Job  nor  any  other  human  intelligence  was  cognizant  by 
personal  observation  of  the  institution  of  this  or  any  other  of  the  above-named 
mysteries.  The  establishment  of  nature's  laws  took  place  before  the  birth  or  creation 
of  man.  Each  individual  as  he  opens  his  eyes  upon  the  theatre  of  existence  witnesses 
their  operation.  "When  they  first  began  to  operate  no  man  was  there.  2.  The  vnsest 
man  does  not  know  them  through  intuition.  "  Hast  thou  perceived  the  breadth  of  the 
earth?"  Has  the  knowledge  of  this  or  of  any  of  these  mysteries  flashed  in  upon 
thee,  or  risen  up  within  thee  by  a  kind  of  scientific  intuition  ?  The  human  understand- 
ing we  believe  to  be  sent  into  the  world  with  a  definite  amount  of  mental  furniture  in 
the  shape  of  mental  and  moral  intuitions,  which  gradually  assert  their  presence  in  and 
power  over  the  soul ;  but  among  these  innate  ideas  are  not  to  be  discovered  solutions  of 
the  physical  problems  of  the  universe.  3.  The  most  diligent  man  cannot  reach  them  ly 
personal  investigation.  "  Hast  thou  come  in  thy  walkings  upon  the  fountains  of  the 
sea?"  Have  thy  researches  conducted  thee  to  the  secrets  of  creation  ?  At  the  best 
man's  knowledge  of  the  material  universe  is  comparatively  superficial.  It  is  doubtful 
if  his  powers  of  investigation  can  conduct  him  to  the  first  principles  of  natural  pheno- 
mena; and,  even  if  they  were  sufficient  in  themselves,  the  limited  extent  of  time 
during  which  man  can  apply  them  to  the  task  renders  ultimate  success  well-nigh 
impossible.       ' 

HI.  The  mysteries  of  creation  are  all  understood  by  God.  1.  Thty  are  all  o^ 
his  making.  The  sea  with  all  its  springs  and  caves  is  of  his  production.  The  dark 
underworld  of  spirits  has  been  constructed  by  him.  His  was  the  voice  that  summoned 
the  light  into  being.  Snow,  hail,  wind,  rain,  frost,  and  dew,  are  each  and  all  his 
creatures.  2.  They  are  all  of  his  hiding.  If  man  knows  so  much  and  no  more  about 
natural  phenomena,  that  is  traceable  solely  to  the  Divine  will.  Qoi  could  have 
endowed  man  with  %  deeper  insight  into  the  final  causes  of  things  had  he  chosen.    Ifj 


OH.  xxxvra.  1— 4L]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  621 

therefore,  God  has  power  to  hide,  he  must  likewise  know  what  he  hides.  3.  They  are 
all  of  his  directing.  It  is  God  who  bids  the  fountains  of  the  ocean  spring,  who  says  to 
the  light,  "  Be  distributed  across  the  face  of  the  earth,"  who  charges  the  snow  to  fall 
upon  the  ground,  who  causes  it  to  rain  upon  the  wilderness  where  no  man  is.  Hence 
the  entire  secret  of  their  working  must  be  known  to  him. 

Learn :  1.  In  the  presence  of  nature's  mysteries,  a  lesson  concerning  our  own 
ignorance,  2.  In  presence  of  our  ignorance,  a  lesson  of  humility.  3.  In  presence  of 
the  God  of  nature,  lessons  of  reverence,  trust,  and  submission. 

Vers.  31 — 41. — Jehovah  to  Job:  the  first  answer — the  examination:  6.  Ooncerning 
four  worlds,  I.  The  world  of  stars.  Jehovah  invites  Job  to  reflect  upon  his  own 
impotence,  and  therefore  also  inferetitially  upon  his  (i.e.  Jehovah's)  omnipotence,  as 
regards  the  phenomena  of  the  heavens,  over  which  the  power  of  God  is  exhibited  in 
a  fourfold  degree.  1.  In  creating  the  orbs  of  heaven.  The  constellations  (Orion, 
Arcturus,  the  Pleiades,  Mazzaroth)  and  the  planets  that  adorn  the  nocturnal  sky,  the 
nebulsB  that  fill  the  depths  of  space,  the  wandering  comets  that  flash  along  their  eccen- 
tric paths,  are  all  the  work  of  his  almighty  fingers ;  cf.  ch.  ix.  9,  homiletics ;  and  consult 
Exposition  for  the  import  of  the  names  Orion  ("  Giant "  or  "  Fool "),  the  Pleiades  ("  A 
Heap "  or  "  Group  "),  Arcturus  (the  Great  Bear).  Mazzaroth  is  commonly  understood 
to  signify  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac  (Gesenius,  Umbieit,  Delitzsch,  Carey), 
though  its  introduction  between  Orion  and  Arcturus,  conjoined  with  its  obvious  con- 
nection with  the  root  zahar,  "  to  shine,"  seems  to  point  to  a  constellation  or  star  of 
peculiar  brightness  (Canon  Cook),  as  e.g.  Jupiter  or  Venus  (LXX.,  Lucifer).  2.  In 
instituting  the  ordinances  of  heaven.  The  laws  in  accordance  with  which  the  celestial 
luminaries  have  been  formed  and  established  in  their  respective  places  in  the  sky,  and 
in  obedience  to  which  they  move  through  the  depths  of  space  and  shine  upon  the  face 
of  earth,  have  been  patiently  investigated,  and  are  now  in  some  degree  understood  by 
man ;  but  in  the  sense  of  comprehending  how  they  have  been  ordained,  the  wisest 
astronomer,  no  less  than  the  dullest  peasant,  is  completely  ignorant.  Kepler  ascer- 
tained that  planets  move  in  elliptical  orbits,  but  why,  was  beyond  his  power  to  telL 
Newton  discovered  the  law  of  gravitation;  but  what  gravitation  itself  was,  the  philo- 
sopher could  no  more  explain  than  a  schoolboy.  3,  In  regulating  the  movements  of 
heaven.  Whether  the  image  is  that  of  a  chariot  to  which  its  snorting  steeds  are 
fastened  by  means  of  bands  (Carey),  or  of  a«  bouquet  of  jewels  bound  or  twisted 
together  (Delitzsch),  the  binding  of  the  sweet  influences  of  the  Pleiades  refers  to  God's 
power  in  bringing  that  constellation  above  the  horizon  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year, 
and  in  calling  it  forth  every  night  during  the  season  upon  the  dark  vault  of  heaven. 
So  the  loosening  of  the  bands  of  Orion  may  point  to  the  disappearance  of  that  con- 
stellation from  the  firmament,  the  bringing  forth  of  Mazzaroth  and  the  guiding  of 
Arcturus  to  the  directing  of  their  movements  in  the  sky.  4.  In  determining  the 
influences  of  heaven.  That  the  stellar  world  exercised  an  influence  upon  the  earth,  the 
course  of  its  events  and  the  fortunes  of  its  inhabitants,  was  a  dream  of  astrological 
superstition,  and  cannot  be  admitted  as  the  subject  to  which  Jehovah  here  alludes. 
The  explanation  must  be  sought,  and  with  sufficient  fulness  will  be  found,  by  recur- 
ring to  the  words  of  Moses  in  conrlection  with  the  work  of  the  fourth  creative  day 
(Gen.  i.  14—19). 

II.  The  world  of  meteobb.  Descending  from  the  upper  circle  of  the  stars,  Jehovah 
pauses  at  the  next  beneath  it,  the  circle  of  the  aerial  firmament,  directing  Job  to  two 
phenomena  that  lie  beyond  the  range  of  his  ability,  but  quite  within  the  sphere  of 
God's,  thereby  demonstrating  on  the  one  hand  the  feebleness  of  man,  and  on  the  other 
hand  the  omnipotence  of  God.  1.  The  bringing  of  rain.  "  Canst  thou  lift  up  thy 
voice  to  the  clouds,  that  abundance  of  waters  may  cover  thee  ?  "  God  speaks  to  the 
clouds  when  his  voice  thunders  through  the  sky,  and  immediately  the  clouds  reply  by 
deluging  the  earth  with  a  flood.  But  man  may  shout  himself  hoarse  in  the  vain 
endeavour  to  make  the  clouds  obedient  to  his  will.  Yet  the  power  of  faith  wielded  by 
a  weak  man  has  accomplished  what  is  here  denied  to  man  in  himself  (1  Kings  xviii. 
42 ;  Jas.  v.  17).  2.  The  sending  of  lightning.  "  Canst  thou  send  forth  lightnings, 
that  they  may  go,  and  say  unto  thee.  Here  we  are  ?  "  No  1  It  is  a  special  mercy  that 
&o  Job  can  thus  exercise  unlimited  control  over  the  powers  of  nature. 


622  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxviii.  1—41 

"  Ck>uld  great  men  thunder 
As  Jove  himself  does,  Jove  would  ne'er  be  quiet, 
For  every  pelting,  petty  officer 
Would  ufle  Ma  heaven  for  thunder  I  " 

('  Measure  for  Measure,'  act  ii.  so.  2.) 

But  the  thunderbolts  of  the  sky,  the  electric  currents  of  the  air,  the  innumerable  forces 
of  the  globe,  are  all  obedient  to  the  word  of  command  which  God  gives  (cf.  Matt.  viii.  9) 

III.  The  world  of  intelligence.  Descending  yet  a  third  step,  Jehovah  reachei 
the  realm  of  men.  Interrogating  Job,  he :  1.  Males  a  franh  recognition.  Man  is 
possessed  of  wisdom  in  the  inward  parts,  and  retains  understanding  in  his  heart ;  i.e. 
he  has  a  certain  power  of  inquiring  into  the  names  and  causes  of  terrestrial  phenomena. 
God  delights  to  acknowledge  the  essential  dignity  of  man,  even  though  sin  has  largely 
defaced  his  beauty  and  impaired  his  powers.  Man's  intelligence  is  a  noble  gift  which 
man  should  not  despise,  but  cultivate  with  assiduity.  2.  Ashs  an  important  questiori. 
Whence  did  man  receive  his  wisdom?  Was  it  from  himself?  Did  it  spring  up  wiihin 
his  heart  as  a  spontaneous  growth  or  development  ?  Or  was  the  doctrine  of  Elihu 
(ch.  zxxii.  8)  correct  that  it  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Almighty  which  gives  man  under- 
standing ?  Many  modern  scientists  would  affirm  the  former,  which  shows  that  they 
still  require  to  ponder  Jehovah's  question  to  the  patriarch. 

IV.  The  woeld  of  animals.  Leaving  man,  the  last  stage  is  arrived  at  in  the 
domain  of  the  lower  creatures,  in  which  Job  is  invited  to  behold  an  evidence  of  the 
power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God.  1.  0/  Ood's  power.  Had  the  problem  been 
proposed  to  Job  to  provide  food  for  the  lioness  and  her  whelps,  Jehovah  asks  him  if  he 
could  have  done  it :  "Wilt  thou  hunt  the  prey  for  the  lioness?  or  fill  the  appetite  of 
the  young  lions  ?  "  (ver.  39).  No ;  Job  could  not  have  so  much  as  approached  these 
ferocious  creatures  without  trembling ;  but  God  did  it  every  day,  silently,  regularly, 
effectively,  by  the  operation  of  a  divinely  implanted  instinct  .which  impelled  every 
particular  creature  to  seek  and  find  its  own  particular  fuod.  That  God  was  able  thus 
to  move  even  the  most  untamable  of  beasts  was  sufficient  demonstration  of  the  com- 
pleteness of  that  control  which  he  wielded  over  the  entire  animal  creation.  2.  0/ 
God's  wisdom.  There  are  few  more  striking  illustrations  of  the  wisdom  of  God  than 
those  afforded  by  the  instincts  of  the  lower  creatures,  and  in  particular  by  that  which 
guides  them  to  the  special  food  which  each  requires,  to  the  place  where  it  is  to  be  found, 
and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  to  be  appropriated.  What  this  mysterious  force  is  which 
controls  every  sentient  creature  neither  science  nor  philosophy  can  explain.  Resem- 
bling intelligence,  it  yet  differs  from  intelligence  by  obvious  characteristics.  3.  0/ 
Ood's  goodness.  Manifested  in  catering  for  any  of  his  creatures,  it  is  conspicuously 
seen  in  providing  food  for  the  unclean  raven  and  her  hateful  brood.  It  is  even  revealed 
by  those  predatory  instincts  which  lead  the  stronger  animals  to  prey  upon  the  weaker, 
thus  serving  among  other  purposes  to  limit  the  increase  of  the  inferior  orders  of 
existence,  and  even  shadowing  forth  to  man  truths  of  a  lofty  spiritual  significance,  had 
he  only  the  opened  eye  to  understand  them. 

Learn :  1.  That  there  is  no  part  of  God's  universe  over  which  his  sway  is  not 
sovereign  and  complete.  2.  That  man  may  admire  God's  great  power  and  wisdom, 
but  he  can  neither  equal  the  one  nor  improve  the  other.  3.  That  man  is  even  depend- 
ent upon  God  for  the  capacity  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  Divine  wisdom  qnd 
power.  4.  That  nothing  exists  in  God's  world  that  does  not  serve  some  divinely 
ordained  purpose.  5.  That  God's  goodness  extends  to  the  meanest  and  most  repulsive 
of  creatures.  6.  That  that  God  wlio  is  kind  to  lionesses  and  ravens  will  not  likely  be 
forgetful  of  his  own  children.  7.  That  men  should  imitate  their  Maker  in  being  kind 
to  the  lower  animals. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1— ch.  xlii.  6.—  The  discowses  of  Jehovah.  At  length,  in  answer  to  the  repeated 
appeals  of  Job,  the  Almighty  appears,  not  to  crush  and  overwhelm,  as  fear  had  often 
suggested,  but  to  reason  with  his  servant;  to  appeal  to  his  spiritual  intelligence,  rathei 
than  to  smite  him  into  lower  prostration  by  some  thunderbolt  of  rebuke.    "  Come  now 


OH.  xixvm.  1— 41.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  (J23 

and  let  us  reason  together,"  is  the  gracious  invitation  of  him  who  is  Eternal  Reason, 
amidst  the  wild  clamours  of  our  passion  and  despondency.  At  the  same  time,  this 
revelation  of  the  majesty  of  God  humiliates  and  purifies  the  recipient  of  it,  teaching 
him  his  own  littleness  and  limitation  in  presence  of  this  fulness  of  might  and  of 
wisdom.  God,  as  the  Almighty  and  only  Wise,  with  whom  no  mortal  may  contend 
in  judgment,  may  appoint  the  sufferings  of  the  righteous  for  their  probation  and  purifi- 
cation. And  thus  the  great  problem  of  the  book,  the  enigma  of  life,  receives  from  the 
highest  Source  its  long-delayed  solution. — J. 

Ver.  1 — oh.  xxxix.  30. — First  discourse  of  Jehovah :  Ood  the  Almighty  and  the  All- 
wise :  man  may  not  contend  with  him.  I.  Introduction.  Appbaeancb  op  God; 
SUMMONS  to  Job.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  Out  of  the  storm,  in  aU  its  grandeur  and  beauty,  which 
had  been  gathericig  while  Blihu  was  speaking,  the  voice  of  the  Creator  is  heard,  calling 
upon  Job,  as  one  who  has  been  obscuring  the  Divine  counsel  by  ignorant  words,  to  gird 
up  his  loins  and  prepare  for  the  contest  he  has  so  often  invoked. 

II.  God's  questions  to  man's  reason  and  conscibncb.  (Ver.  4— ch.  xxxix.  30.) 
These  questions  all  appeal  to  man's  wonder  and  curiosity,  which  impel  him  to  seek  the 
causes  of  things,  and  are  therefore  indirect  reminders  of  his  ignorance  which  can  find 
no  last  answer  to  the  questions  he  cannot  but  ask.  1.  Questions  on  the  mode  of  creation. 
(Vers.  4 — 15.)  (1)  How  was  the  earth  founded?  Who  prescribed  its  limits  ?  How- 
shall  the  solid  pillars,  on  which  in  tl)e  fancy  of  the  ancient  world  it  was  conceived  as 
resting,  be  themselves  conceived  as  supported  ?  Where  is  the  comer-stone  of  this 
world-building,  and  who  laid  it  ?  How  can  that  great  epoch  of  creation  be  realized  in 
imagination  when  all  the  celestial  beings  held  jubilee  over  the  new-born  world?  We 
conceive  of  the  existence  of  the  earth  in  spade  under  diflferent  notions  than  these ;  but 
is  the  wonder  of  a  world  rolling  in  space,  and  bound  by  the  principle  of  gravitation  to 
other  bodies,  a  less  wondrous  conception,  or  one  more  easy  to  explain  ?  (2)  So  with 
the  great  sea.  Who  gave  it  its  limits,  who  shut  in  as  with  gates  the  vast  flood  of  waters  ? 
Breaking  forth,  as  it  seemed,  from  the  womb  of  earth  with  impetuous  force,  yet 
governed  and  kept  within  bounds,  so  that  its  proud  waves  cannot  transcend  the  limits 
fixed  by  Omnipotence,  clothed  with  the  raiment  of  clouds,  the  great  ocean  awakes  in 
all  minds  the  sense  of  sublimity,  the  emotion  of  awe. 

"  Thou  glorious  mirror,  where  the  Almighty's  form 
Glasses  itself  in  tempests  ;  in  all  time, — 
Calm  or  convulsed,  in  breeze,  or  gale,  or  storm, 
Icing  the  pole,  or  in  the  torrid  clime 
Dark-heaving — boundless,  endless,  and  sublime, 
The  image  of  eternity,  the  throne 
Of  the  Invisible ;  even  from  out  thy  slime 
The  monsters  of  the  deep  are  made ;  each  zone 
Obeys  thee :  thou  goest  forth,  dread,  fathomless,  alone." 

(3)  Or  look  again  at  the  dawn  in  its  splendid  beauty,  wliich  men  worshipped  as  Eos, 
Ushas,  Aurora ;  consider  the  regularity  of  its  appearance,  gladdening  the  hearts  of  all 
creatures.  Who  bade  the  dawn  arise  and  gild  the  summits  of  the  mountain,  causing 
the  earth  to  flash  with  all  her  brilliant  variety  of  colours?  Who  bade  the  sun  clothe 
the  torrent  with  rainbows?  Nay,  who  made  yonder  sun  a  symbol  of  righteousness, 
instinctively  perceived  by  the  human  conscience,  so  that  ill-doers  flee  before  its  revealing 
beams,  for  their  stronghold  of  darkness  is  broken  open  and  their  power  is  overthrown? 
2.  Question  continued :  earth's  depths  and  heights,  and  the  forces  that  thence  proceed. 
(Vers.  16—27.)  (1)  The  depths  under  the  earth.  (Vers.  16—18.)  God  calls  man  to 
reflect  upon  the  immeasurable,  the  inaccessible;  to  cause  his  thought  to  plunge  into 
the  abysses  of  the  sea,  to  pass  in  imagination  those  gloomy  portals  where  the  sun  goes 
down,  and  which  lead  to  Hades,  the  realm  of  shadows  and  of  darkness ;  or  with  exten- 
sive view  to  survey  the  broad  earth -in  all  its  vastness  from  east  to  west.  "  Cabin'd, 
cribb'd,  confin'd  "  to  one  spot  by  the  conditions  of  the  bodily  life,  our  mind  has  spiritual 
capacities  and  organs  by  which  we  may  have  notions  of  the  Infinite,  and  these  fill  us 
with  the  sense  of  the  unsearchableness  of  God.  (2)  Again,  from  the  depths'let  fancy 
soar  to  the  bright  heights  above  (vers.  19—21),  let  it  seek  to  explore  the  unapproachable 
fount  of  light  or  the  seat  ol  darkness.   Still  our  ignorance  blushes  and  hides  her  face  before 


624  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  rsxvnr.  l—U. 


the  Divine  secrets  of  existence.  With  what  keen  irony  does  Jehovah  rebuke  the 
sciolists  of  every  age  in  ver.  21  ?  Shall  short-lived  man  presume  to  know  the  begin- 
ning and  source  of  anything  ?  What  though  we  may  have  cleared  up  some  childlike 
confusions  of  thought,  have  introduced  some  method  and  system  into  our  conceptions 
of  the  universe,  have  reduced  heat  and  light  to  modes  of  motion,  traced  the  correlation 
of  forces,  and  perhaps  are  on  our  way  to  the  conception  of  a  oneness  of  force  in  all  its 
various  manifestations :  what  then?  Whence  force?  Whence  and  what  is  motion? 
Approach  as  indefinitely  near  as  we  may  to  the  last  generalization,  to  the  ultimate 
germ-principle  of  the  genesis  of  the  universe,  there  will  still  remain  the  unknown  and 
the  xmknowable ;  there  will  be  need  and  room  still  for  wonder,  worship,  reverence,  religion. 
(3)  Or  turn  to  the  wonders  of  the  atmosphere :  snow  and  hail,  light  and  wind  (vers. 
22 — 27).  The  questions  here  asked  again  are  those  of  childlike  wonder  and  ignorance. 
We  do  not  put  them  in  the  same  way.  Science  restates  these  questions  for  us;  but 
only  to  give  our  wonder  a  new  direction,  a  wider  scope,  a  more  intelligent  quality. 
3.  7%e  wonders  of  the  air  and  starry,  heavens.  (Vers.  28— 38.)  (1)  Bcve  a  nrnnherof 
natural  phenomena  and  processes  are  mentioned,  and  the  explanation  of  them  in  like 
manner  demanded.  The  generation  of  rain,  of  dew,  of  ice,  of  frost, — science  mediately 
explains  these,  i.e.  traces  them  to  their  secondary  causes,  and  brings  these  causes 
under  certain  general  laws.  But  thus  the  interest  deepens  in  the  phenomena ;  the 
wonder  is  not  less,  but  more.  (2)  The  guidance  of  the  stars,  and  their  influence 
upon  the  earth  (vers.  32,  33).  The  Pleiades,  or  seven  stars,  appear  as  if  threaded 
upon  a  skein,  as  a  necklace  of  jewels.  Who  formed  that  wondrous  thread?  Or 
who  can  loose  the  fetters  of  Orion,  so  that  that  splendid  figure  of  the  heavens  should 
fall  to  pieces  or  descend  from  the  sky?  Can  man  lead  forth  the  splendid  stars 
(Mazzaroth)  in  their  season  ? — Jupiter,  Venus,  Mars,  and  the  Bear  along  with  its  little 
ones  ?  Knowest  thou  the  laws  of  the  heaven,  by  which  the  course  of  the  planets, 
the  changes  of  the  day  and  of  the  year,  are  brought  about  ?  Or  canst  thou  determine 
its  influence  upon  the  earth  ?  Modern  science  has  answered  these  ancient  questions 
with  a  clearness  and  fulness  inconceivable  in  the  days  of  the  patriarch.  But  the 
field  of  contemplation  and  of  wonder  it  thus  opens  to  us  is  infinitely  vaster  (see 
Proctor's  '  Other  Worlds  than  Ours ').  And  the  sentence  holds  good,  "  An  undevout 
astronomer  is  mad."  Perhaps  there  is  no  science  which  more  assists  the  mind  to  the 
sense  of  the  sublimity  of  God  than  astronomy.  And  besides  the  revelation  of  the 
infinitely  great  above  our  heads,  microscopic  science  has  brought  to  light  the  infinitely 
small  beneath  our  feet.  The  longer  Job  stands  gazing,  musing,  the  more  do  the  Divine 
questions  thicken  upon  him.  Prom  every  star,  from  every  cloud  amidst  the  innumer- 
able host  spread  out  in  the  welkin,  from  every  flash  of  lightning  and  from  every  drop 
of  rain,  the  same  voice  speaks,  the  same  challenge  comes.  Man  cannot  create  by  all 
his  science  the  least  of  these  things,  and  how  shall  he  presume  to  penetrate  the 
mysteries  of  the  counsel  of  the  Almighty,  or  question  the  wisdom  and  the  rightness 
of  his  doings  ?  4.  The  animul  world.  (Ver.  39 — ch.  jcxxix.  30.)  A  rich  field  of  study 
is  opened  here  in  the  evidences  of  natuial  history  to  the  creative  power  and  the  loving 
providence  of  God  for  all  his  creatures.  We  cannot  turn  our  sermons  into  lectures  on 
natural  history ;  to  descend  into  details  would  be  to  lose  sight  of  those  grand  elemen- 
tary truths  of  which  nature's  every  page  furnishes  such  abundant  illustrations.  For 
jjurposes  of  teaching,  religion  and  science  must  to  some  extent  be  kept  apart  in  their 
consideration.  That  is,  we  must  not  burden  religious  teaching  with  natural  details, 
however  interesting ;  nor  interrupt  at  every  step  a  scientific  lesson,  in  order  to  pronounce 
a  homily,  or  thrust  forward  a  moral  application.  But  viewed  in  a  general  way  for  the 
purpose  of  stimulating  intelligent  religious  feeling,  the  animal  world  presents:  (1) 
Variety,  rich  and  boundless,  of  form,  of  structure,  of  mode,  and  existence.  How 
difierent  the  powers  of  the  animals  here  enumerated — the  lion,  the  raven,  the  goat,  the 
wild  ass,  the  horse  I  The  limbs  that  spring  and  bound,  that  climb  or  fly,  provided  with 
that  muscular  apparatus  which  no  human  art  can  rival;  the  internal  organs  fitting  the 
creature  for  its  particular  food  and  scene  of  existence ; — these  and  all  the  variety  ot 
facts  that  come  to  light  under  this  head  bespeak  a  power  and  skill  that  can  adapt  the 
instrument  to  every  set  of  circumstances,  can  be  daunted  by  no  difficulty,  can  find 
means  for  all  necessary  ends  (see  the  illustrations  in  McOosh  and  Dickie's  '  Typical 
Forms  and  Special  Ends ').    Whatever  may  be  the  scientific  theory  in.  fashion,  whethet 


OH.  xxxvra.  1— 41.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  626 

teleologlcftl  or  evolutionary,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  true  theory,  i.e.  correctly  repreMnts  the 
facts  of  observation,  it  can  and  must  lend  itself  to  natural  piety,  to  the  confirmation  of 
tlie  great  truths  of  religion.  Separate  the  wild  guesses  of  some  scientific  men  from  the 
sober  theories  of  an  accurate  science,  the  latter  must  ever  remain,  side  by  side  with 
the  Bible,  a  witness  for  God.  (2)  Consider  again  the  marvellous  force  that  we  call 
instinct.  Instinct  may  possibly  be  defined  as  unconscious  reason.  We  see  traces  of  it 
in  plants,  and  more  strikingly  marked  ones  in  animals.  It  is  a  power  by  which  these 
lower  creatures  arrive  at  ends,  execute  designs  of  marvellous  skill  and  beauty,  penetrate 
immediately  to  natural  truth.  Man,  plodding  his  way  slowly  by  the  light  of  reason  to 
his  epds,  stands  in  amazement  before  the  effects  and  results  of  this  mysterious  mind- 
force.  Well  he  may ;  for  what  is  this  force,  so  constant,  so  unerring,  so  matchless,  but 
a  direct  emanation  and  impartation  ftom  the  Creator  himself?  (3)  And  again  our 
sente  of  the  beautiful  and  the  suhlime  is  awakened  by  the  study  of  animal  life.  The 
description  of  the  war-horse  in  ch.  xxxix.  has  always  been  reckoned  among  the  most 
striking  examples  of  the  sublime.  His  strength,  his  vibrating  mane  and  tremblinj; 
neck,  all  quivering  with  emotion,  his  fiery  spirit  breathing,  as  it  were,  fire  through  his 
nostrils,  pawing  the  ground  in  his  impatience,  rushing  to  the  charge  at  the  battle-signal, 
— ^the  whole  is  a  living  expression  of  Divine  force,  awful  and  beautiful  to  behold.  The 
analytic  habits  of  scientific  thought  may  hinder,  if  we  do  not  guard  against  it,  our 
simple  and  intense  appreciation  of  nature  and  nature's  individual  objects  as  appealing  to 
our  sense  of  wonder,  awe,  and  beauty.  These  feelings  were  given  to  lead  us  upward  to 
the  Fountain  of  all  existence,  to  adore  the  beauty  and  the  might  of  God.  Thus  "  the 
book  of  animal  life,  that  God  here  writes  down  for  us,  may  be  to  us  a  true  book  of 
training  for  all  virtues"  (Cramer).  If  God  cares  so  closely  and  so  providently  for 
the  life  of  the  lower  animals,  how  much  more  are  we,  his  children,  his  caref  This 
wondrous  life  in  body,  soul,  and  mind ;  these  capacities  of  moral  improvement,  of 
increasing  knowledge  of  eternal  life  in  communion  with  himself; — will  he  not  care  for 
them  ?  Let  the  cry  of  the  dumb  creatures  remind  us  of  our  need  of  prayer,  and  of  him 
who  delights  to  hear ;  let  the  contemplation  of  the  beauty  and  order  of  their  divinely 
created  life  fill  us  with  disgust  at  the  disorder  of  sin  in  our  own  heart  and  Kfe,  and 
let  us  seek,  in  the  new  redeemed  mode  of  existence,  to  use  and  improve  all  our  powers, 
and  consectttte  them  to  the  service  of  our  faithful  Creator,  our  compassionate  Father 
and  Redeemer, — J. 

Vera.  4, 19, 32,  33. — Human  impotenee  and  ignorance  eapoted.  Job's  affliction  is  a 
mystery — ^a  mystery  that  needs  to  be  revealed.  Job  has  not  given  the  explanation  of  it. 
He  has  not  known  it.  His  friends  have  failed.  It  has  been  attributed  to  his  sin ;  but 
he  is  confident  in  his  honest  integrity,  and  cannot  be  persuaded  that  he  is  sufiering 
punishment,  for  he  has  not' a  consciousness  of  guilt.  Elihu  has  indicated  the  hidden 
nature  of  the  Divine  works,  and  has  not  made  the  mystery  clearer.  But  he  baa  closed 
the  lips  of  them  who  would  accuse  God  of  wrong  and  unjust  dealing.  Job  is  being  led, 
perhaps  blindfold,  to  a  final  exposition  of  the  whola  By  imperfect  knowledge  of  the 
purpose  of  God,  Job  may  be  led  to  wrong  conclusions.  But  God  will  not  forsake  his 
faithful  servant,  of  whom  the  Divine  testimony  at  the  beginning  was  that  he  "sinned 
not  with  his  tongue ; "  and  at  the  end  that  he  had  "  spoken  the  thing  which  is  right." 
It  is  still  night  with  Job ;  he  is  in  the  dark  as  to  the  purpose  of  his  affliction,  but  the 
morning  breaketh.  And  whilst  God  has  appeared  hitherto  as  the  Punisher  of  Job,  he 
will  ere^long  declare  himself  his  Friend,  and  when  he  has  well  tried  his  faithful  servant 
will  amply  reward  him.  But  there  are  processes  in  the  Divine  method.  Job  has  to 
be  humbled  to  the  very  dust,  and  the  present  stage  in  that  process  is  to  reveal  the 
littleness  of  man  in  presence  of  the  Most  High.  Human  impotence  and  ignorance  are 
displayed  in  presence  of  the  \vonderful  creation  of  God. 

L  €k)D'8  woBK  INDEPENDENT  OF  MAN.  "  Where  wast  thou  when  I  laid  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth  ?  "  "  Hast  thou  commanded  the  morning,"  and  "  caused  the  day- 
spring  to  know  his  place?"     "  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  springs  of  the  sea?"  etc. 

IL  God's  work  above  man.    "  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  Pleiades  ?  " 

etc. 

IIL  God's  wobk  unknown  to  man.  "  Knowest  thou  the  ordinances  of  heaven  ?  " 
"  Who  hath  put  wisdom  in  the  inward  parts?"  etc.    Thus  is  Job  taught  amidst  the 


62«  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxvm.  1 — tl. 

wonders  of  God's  creation  how  great  is  the  Creator.  If  his  works  are  past  finding  out 
by  puny  man,  surely  his  purpose  which  he  hath  hidden  is  beyond  the  reach  of  human 
research.  It  is  another  step  in  the  valley  of  humiliation  for  him  who  is  finally  found 
biting  the  dust. — B.  G. 

Ver.  1. — A  theophany.  At  length  Job  has  his  wish.  He  has  been  longing  to  meet 
with  God  and  praying  for  God  to  reveal  himself.  The  time  has  now  come  for  God 
to  hear  his  prayer  and  make  his  will  known.  This  is  far  more  important  than  man's 
speculations. 

I.  The  oomino  of  God.  1.  The  time  of  his  coming.  God  comes  last.  The  tkree 
friends  have  had  their  say,  reiterating  till  they  weary  us.  Job  has  been  free  to  vent 
his  grief  and  his  despair.  Elihii,  more  enlightened,  yet  not  quite  attaining  to  the  full 
light,  has  uttered  his  long  harangue.  All  have  said  all  they  had  to  say,  and  throughout 
God  has  been  silent.  Now  it  is  his  time  to  appear.  God  will  have  the  last  word  in 
every  controversy,  in  every  life's  story,  in  the  great  world's  history.  "  In  the  begin- 
ning God "  In  the  end,  too,  there  is  God.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  also  the  Omega. 

We  have  but  to  wait  in  patience.  The  end  is  not  yet ;  when  it  comes  God  reveals 
himself.  2.  The  manner  of  Ms  cominff.  "  Out  of  the  whirlwind."  When  Elijah  met 
God  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  whirlwind.  God  uses  various  vehicles  of  revelation — the 
"  still  small  voice  "  for  Elijah,  the  whirlwind  for  Job.  He  is  not  tied  down  to  any 
routine.  He  has  no  rigid'  ceremonies.  He  adapts  his  methods  to  circumstances  and 
requivements.  Anything  God  has  made  may  be  a  chariot  in  which  he  will  com.e  to 
visit  his  people.  Sometimes  it  is  best  for  him  to  come  in  storm  and  tempest,  to  hush 
our  vain  babble  and  subdue  our  wayward  spirit.  The  noisy  debate  of  men  is  drowned 
in  the  whirlwind  of  God. 

II.  The  action  op  God.  When  he  comes  it  is  to  answer  Job.  1.  For  Job'*  sake. 
Then  the  first  thought  is  of  the  patriarch.  He  is  the  central  Sgure  in  the  whole  drama. 
But  we  might  have  thought  that  the  three  friends  would  have  been  rebuked  first. 
Yet  their  condemnation  is  postponed. .  It  is  more  necessary  for  Job  to  be  relieved  of 
his  perplexity  and  led  into  a  right  state  of  mind.  2.  An  answer.  Then  God  had 
h(  ard  wliat  preceded.  He  may  not  make  his  presence  manifest,  but  yet  he  is  a  silent 
Auditor  at  all  our  conferences,  debates,  quarrels.  He  hears  our  hasty  words.  He  per- 
ceives our  foolish  doubts.  God's  treatment  of  us  is  not  irrespective  of  our  action.  He 
takes  account  of  all  we  do  and  say,  and  his  action  is  adjusted  accordingly.  Thus  God 
answers  man.  He  meets  the  doubt,  takes  up  the  difficulty,  handles  the  complaint, 
deals  with  the  prayer,  replies  to  the  question.  We  may  have  to  wait  long  for  the 
answer.  It  may  not  come  in  this  life.  But  as  it  came  to  Job,  so  at  last,  in  God's 
time,  it  will  assuredly  come  to  us,  and  when  it  has  come  no  more  need  be  said.  It 
will  certainly  be  full,  sufficient,  satisfying.  3.  In  words.  The  Lord  spoke  out  of  the 
whirlwind.  God  usually  answers  us  on  earth  by  deeds  of  providence,  or  by  the  voice- 
less pleading  of  his  Spirit  in  our  hearts.  But  he  has  given  us  words  in  the  messages 
that  prophets  have  brought  to  us  and  that  are  recorded  in  the  Bible.  For  us,  however, 
God's  great  answer  to  every  question  and  every  prayer  is  the  Word  made  flesh,  Jesus 
Christ.  The  gospel  shows  that  God  has  not  left  us  to  work  out  our  problems  in  the 
dark.  It  reveals  Uod  speaking  to  us,  and  his  message  in  Christ  is  oue  to  give  light 
and  peace. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Ood!»  answer.  This  is  perplexing.  When  after  long  delays  God  has 
at  length  appeared,  we  expect  him  to  clear  up  aU  doubts  and  to  fully  vindicate  his 
providence  to  Job,  while  he  also  vindicates  Job  in  the  presence  of  the  three  friends. 
But  God  acts  in  a  very  different  way,  and  rather  seems  to  defend  darkness  and  mystery 
than  to  shed  light.  Yet  if  we  look  into  the  matter  carefully  we  shall  see  that  all  the 
light  that  could  be  given  with  profit  comes  through  the  new  impression  of  awe  and 
mystery  that  the  language  of  God's  reply  produces. 

1.  Iqkobanoe  must  be  acknowledged  and  humbled.  If  anything  had  been  most 
painfully  apparent  to  Job  throughout  the  whole  debate,  rousing  his  scorn  as  well  as 
his  anger,  it  was  the  fact  that  his  three  friends  had  "darkened  counsel  by  words  without 
knowledge."  Now  God  will  have  Job  see  that  even  he  has  been  making  the  same 
mistake.     The  perplexed  patiiavoh  has  been  throwing  out  a  cloud  of  indignant  words, 


OH.  xxxvni.  1— 41.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOa  627 


but  he  has  not  really  understood  what  he  has  been  talking  about.  Such  words  have 
not  helped  to  the  explanation  of  things ;  on  the  contrary,  they  have  been  misleading, 
darkening  counsel  instead  of  throwing  light  upon  it.  Now,  until  Job  perceives  this, 
he  cannot  be  led  to  a  vision  of  reassuring  truth.  While  we  think  we  know,  our 
ignorance  is  invincible.  So  long  as  we  are  satisfied  with  ourselves,  we  cannot  receive 
the  deliverance  of  God.  The  first  lesson  must  reveal  our  ignorance  and  humble  our 
pride. 

II.  Mystery  must  be  manfully  faoed.  Job  had  Iain  groaning  on  his  ash-heap. 
Let  him  now  gird  up  his  loins  like  a  man.  Humility  should  not  be  thought  to  exclude 
courage.  We  are  most  brave  when  we  think  least  of  ourselves.  Now,  a  courageous 
facing  of  difficulty  is  necessary  if  we  would  conquer  it.  It  is  useless  to  rave  against 
the  mystery  of  life.  Let  us  go  up  to  it  and  confront  it  calmly.  This  is  the  second 
step  to  the  conquest  of  moral  and  intellectual  difficulties.  But  there  may  be  a  touch 
of  irony  in  God's  words  to  Job — merciful  and  not  bitter,  kindly  meant,  to  complete 
his  lesson  of  humility.  Can  the  patriarch  face  the  mystery  ?  Let  him  try.  If  he 
fails  in  the  honest  attempt,  he  will  be  in  the  very  condition  for  receiving  the  help  of 
a  Divine  revelation. 

III.  Thouoht  must  be  boused  and  stimulated.  Job  had  been  questioning  God ; 
God  will  now  question  Job.  God's  first  answer  to  Job  is  to  request  an  answer  from 
the  patriarch.  It  is  easy  to  put  questions.  We  should  be  wiser  if  we  listened  to  ibose 
that  are  addressed  to  us.  The  method  of  the  reply  to  Job  out  of  the  whirlwind  was 
fitted  to  awaken  the  thinking  of  the  patriarch.  We  must  learn  to  approach  the 
mysteries  of  God  with  an  open  and  an  active  mind.  No  help  can  come  to  us  so  long 
as  we  remain  inert.  Perhaps  one  effect  of  the  awakening  of  thought  will  be  to  reveal 
our  own  littleness  by  the  side  of  the  awful  greatness  of  God.  This  is  what  God's 
answer  to  Job  seems  designed  to  produce  in  his  hearer.  Then  we  can  be  no  longer 
perplexed  at  mystery.  We  see  we  must  expect  it.  At  the  same  time,  the  greatness 
and  goodness  of  God  in  his  works  teach  us  to  trust  him  and  not  despair  at  the  mystery. 
— W.  F.  A, 

Ver.  7. — TAe  song  of  creation.  I.  A  glad  song.  This  highly  poetic  picture  describes 
the  joy  of  creation.  When  the  world  was  made  God  saw  that  it  was  good  (Gen.  i.  10). 
There  is  no  Manichaaan  pessimism  in  the  Bible.  Nature  is  full  of  gladness.  This  we 
should  expect  when  we  know  the  character  of  God,  for  he  whose  name  is  love  must 
take  pleasure  in  the  joy  of  his  creatures.  We  may  see  the  same  truth  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  world.  It  is  beautiful,  and  made  to  minister  to  the  happiness  of  the 
myriads  of  living  creatures  that  inhabit  it.  We  may  find  it  hard  to  catch  the  echoes 
of  the  song  of  creation,  yet  even  amid  the  toils  and  cares  of  life  it  is  cheering  to  be 
reminded  of  its  rare  and  ravishing  melody. 

II.  A  SONG  OF  PBAISE.  Thls  was  more  than  gUtdness.  The  Creator's  glory  is  cele- 
brated in  the  joyful  recognition  of  the  greatness  and  beauty  of  his  works.  Nature- 
worship  always  tends  to  grovel  in  the  mire,  twining  itself  most  closely  about  the  lowest 
thing  in  nature.  Wordsworth  was  a  prophet  of  nature  of  the  highest  order,  because 
he  saw  more  than  nature,  and  because  he  took  nature  as  a  mirror  of  the  spiritual  world. 
I'he  glad  praises  of  the  sons  of  the  morning  begin  the  history  of  the  world  with  a  hymn 
to  God. 

III.  A  HOPEFUL  BONO.  It  was  sung  by  morning  stars,  in  view  of  the  new  day  of 
creation.  It  sprang  out  of  the  fresh  youth  of  the  world.  We  praise  God  for  what  he 
has  done  since  that  first  psalm  was  sung.  Yet  we  too  can  sing  in  hope,  for  God  still 
lights  up  the  future  with  glory.  There  is  always  something. melancholy  in  a  song  of 
memory.    The  right  attitude  of  the  sons  of  God  is  the  forward  gaze. 

IV.  A  HARMONIOUS  SONG.  The  morning  stars  sang  together.  Plato  discovered  the 
music  of  the  spheres  in  their  rhythmic  movements.  There  is  no  music  in  war,  con- 
fusion, or  selfishness.  The  joy  of  heaven  is  the  gladness  of  love.  Sympathy  tunes 
the  sweetest  music  the  heart  can  utter.  If  we  would  emulate  the  joyous  praises  of 
the  angels,  we  must  follow  their  willing  obedience,  and  live  in  that  heavenly  atmosphere 
of  love  which  is  their  home. 

V.  An  ANCIENT  SONG.  Vastly  more  ancient  than  any  one  imagined  in  the  days  of 
Job.    The  brain  grows  dizzy  in  the  vain  attempt  to  form  some  idea  of  the  immeasurable 


628  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxviii.  1—41, 


antiquity  that  is  opened  up  to  us  by  the  wonderful  gtory  of  geology.  Before  all  that 
came  the  first  song  of  creation.  This  thought  dwarfs  the  life  of  man.  Job  had  con- 
sidered of  the  brevity  of  life  from  another  point  of  view,  and  with  regard  to  the  melan- 
choly prospect  of  its  termination.  Now  he  is  to  look  b^ck  and  see  how  recent  was 
his  origin.  This  was  to  check  dogmatic  assumptions,  How  can  the  creature  of  a  day 
enter  into  the  age-long  counsels  of  God  ? 

VI.  An  btebnal  sono.  The  far-off  antiquity  was  joyous  in  the  light  and  love  of 
God.  But  the  Divine  light  and  love  have  not  faded  out  of  the  world.  God  is  still 
creating.  Every  fresh  spring  is  a  new  birth  from  God,  every  day  has  its  dawning, 
every  child  its  gladsome  youth.  The  theory  of  evolution  suggests  even  more  joyous 
creations  in  the  future.  But  better  than  them  all  is  the  second  creation,  the  regeneration 
of  souls,  for  which  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  (Luke  iv.  10). 
The  joy  of  creation  is  the  angels'  joy ;  that  of  redemption  is  "  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels,"  For  this  greater  joy  does  not  first  arise  in  them;  it  springs  from  the  very  heart 
ofGod.— W.  F.  A- 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Lesson$  o/the  $ea.  Passing  from  the  thought  of  the  joy  of  creation, 
when  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  we  find  our  thoughts  directed  to  the  sea  in  its 
power  and  pride,  first  formed  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  ever  reined  in  by  his  commanding 
voice. 

I.  ^od's  foweb  oveb  what  is  host  obeat.  The  sea  strikes  our  imagination  chiefly 
because  of  its  vafitness.  It  only  consists  of  water,  which,  when  we  see  it  in  the  trickling 
rill  or  hold  it  in  the  cup,  is  one  of  the  most  simple  and  seemingly  harmless  things  in 
nature.  But  in  gathering  volume  it  gains  strength.  The  little  rill  swells  into  the 
roaring  torrent.  The  water  of  the  sea  grows  into  a  tumult  of  awful  forces  before  which 
the  strongest  man  is  helpless.    To  the  ocean  Byron  saya — 

"  Man  marks  the  earth  with  ruin — his  control 

Stops  with  the  shore ;  upon  the  watery  plain 

The  wrecks  are  all  thy  deed,  nor  doth  remain 

A  shadow  of  man's  ravage,  save  his  own. 

When,  for  a  moment,  like  a  drop  of  rain. 

He  sinks  into  tby  depths  with  bubbling  groan, 
Without  a  grave,  nnknell'd,  nncofSu'd,  and  unknown." 

Yet  the  sea  is  under  God's  complete  control.  Nothing  is  too  strong  for  God.  No 
might  can  escape  his  authority.  Kings  and  emperors,  men  of  genius  and  men  of  vast 
resources,  are  all  subject  to  the  present  rule,  and  must  all  answer  to  the  final  call 
of  God. 

II.  God'b  obdeb  in  what  18  most  TUEBtTLENT.  Nothing  looks  so  wild  and  lawless 
as  the  sea  in  a  storm.  In  the  mixing  of  the  elements,  when  the  wind  shrieks  among 
the  waves,  and  the  waters  leap  up  madly  to  the  sky,  we  seem  to  be  back  in  the  con- 
fusion of  Old  Chaos.  Yet  we  know  that  the  raging  sea  is  aa  truly  under  the  laws  of 
nature  as  the  fields  with  .their  growing  crops.  Every  drop  of  water  is  as  absolutely 
obedient  to  law  as  the  stars  in  their  orderly  courses.  God  rides  upon  the  storm.  He 
rules  over  the  unruly.  WUd  tempests  of  human  passion,  the  fury  of  the  despot  and 
the  rage  of  the  people,  are  all  watched  and  controlled  by  God.  When  black  clouds 
gather  and  angry  waves  rise  on  the  sea  of  human  life,  let  us  remember  that  there 
is  One  who  rules  over  nations  and  cities  as  well  as  over  the  wild  forces  of  nature, 

III.  God's  bbstbaint  of  what  is  host  ohangeifdi,.  The  waters  threaten  to  invade 
the  land-  But  there  is  a  limit  to  their  progress.  Each  wave  that  tries  most  eagerly 
to  outi-un  its  predecessor  is  compelled  to  break  and  fall  back  in  confusion,  hissing  with 
vexation  as  it  is  dragged  Sown  among  the  pebbles.  The  tide  rises,  higher  and  yet 
higher;  but  it  has  its  limit,  God  gives  man  a  certain  scope  for  freedom.  He  can 
rise  and  fall  like  the  wave,  and  ebb  and  flow  like  the  tide.  Sometimes  he  seems  to 
have  a  very  long  leash.  But  it  is  not  endless,  and  God  has  hold  of  it.  At  the  right 
moment  he  will  draw  it  in,  and  then  all  man's  pride  will  be  of  no  use.  Our  life  is  like 
the  shifting  tide,  like  the  restless  wave.  We  are  wearied  with  its  incessant  changeful- 
ness.  It  is  like  the  sea  crawling  up  on  the  beach,  and  creeping  back  again,  moaning 
on  the  shore  night  and  day  without  intermission.  There  is  monotony  even  in  the 
chaugtis.   That  is  just  the  point  to  be  noted-    They  are  all  limited  and  under  restiraini 


oa.  ttxvm,  1— 4t3  tHE  BOOK  Off  JOB.  «2« 

Bo  is  it  with  those  of  life ;  they  are  limited  and  restraiaed  by  the  providential  caia  of 
our  Father.— W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  31,  32. — Agtrology  and  cutronomi/.  The  earliest  science  was  that  which 
concerned  itself  with  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies ;  until  recent  times  this 
science  was  universally  associated  with  the  fortunes  of  men,  and  it  is  still  thus  associated 
by  the  greater  part  of  the  world.     What  is  our  relation  to  the  heavenly  bodies  1 

I.  In  coumon  with  the  stars,  wb  abb  pabt  of  onb  Divine  universe.  The  study 
of  the  heavens  is  the  study  of  God's  works.  He  dwells  in  the  most  distant  systems, 
and  equally  in  this  familiar  world.  All  parts  of  the  universe  obey  the  fixed  laws  of 
God ;  all  move  in  harmony  under  his  directing  hand.  Thus  all  the  worlds  are  linked 
together.     We  are  members  of  a  very  large  "  household  of  God." 

II.  We  are  subject  to  influences  from  the  heavenly  bodies.  We  have  given 
up  astrology  as  a  delusion.  But  we  are  entirely  dependent  for  life  itself  upon  one 
heavenly  £>dy,  the  sun.  This  earth  is  not  self-sufficient.  It  would  be  frozen  to  death 
if  the  sun  were  to  cease  to  pour  into  it  his  streams  of  heat.  Some  have  connected 
sun-spots  with  social  and  financial  crises  1  Although  this  may  be  but  a  survival  of 
an  ancient  superstition,  perhaps  it  is  not  wise  to  affirm  that  it  must  be  nothing  more. 
Now,  the  physical  heavens  hiive  always  been  to  us  a  type  of  the  spiritual  heavens. 
Spiritually  our  life  is  not  self-contained.  Astrology  had  this  in  its  favour,  that  it 
taught  a  certain  largeness  of  view.  It  did  not  permit  a  person  to  confine  his  attention 
to  his  own  parish.  It  compelled  him  to  look  up  and  to  look  to  distant  things.  It  is 
our  duty  to  "  do  the  next  thing,"  and  not  to  waste  our  time  in  star-gazing.  Never- 
theless, we  need  to  be  lifted  in  thought  out  of  the  petty  round  of  interests  that  imme- 
diately concern  us,  even  in  order  that  we  may  best  discharge  our  duty  in  connection 
with  those  interests.  Astronomy  is  an  elevating  and  enlarging  science ;  much  more  so 
is  a  true  theology. 

III.  Wb  cannot  affect  the  heavenly  bodies.  They  roll  on  their  age-long  courses 
in  sublime  indifference  to  our  greatest  achievements  and  strongest  desires.  Job  is 
asked  whether  he  can  bind  up  the  cluster  of  Pleiades,  as  he  would  bind  up  a  bunch 
of  jewels.  Can  he  imclasp  the  belt  of  great  Orion  ?  Here  man  is  nothing.  This  is  a 
lesson  in  humility.  Yet  have  we  not  a  grand  encouragement  in  knowing  that  the 
Lord  of  the  starry  universe  is  our  Father  who  cares  for  us,  listens  to  our  cry,  and  helps 
our  need? 

IV.  We  cannot  bulb  the  bbabons.  As  summer  came  on.  Job  would  see  the 
brilliant  little  group  of  the  Pleiades  rising  before  the  sun  and  the  giant  Orion  sinking 
out  of  sight ;  and  this  woidd  be  a  sign  that  the  fruit;ful  season  was  approaching.  But 
Job  could  not  hasten  it.  The  farmer  cannot  bring  about  the  seasons  he  would  choose. 
It  is  useless  to  murmur  at  their  apparent  inopportuneness.  It  is  wiser  to  learn  the 
lesson  they  teach  us  of  our  absolute  dependence  on  God.  Before  these  great  phenomena 
of  nature  we  are  as  nothing.  Yet  in  the  sight  of  God  we  are  more  than  aU  of  them ;  for 
they  are  material,  we  spiritual ;  they  his  works,  we  his  children. — ^W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  41. — TO«  raven.  Job  is  asked  to  think  of  the  raven,  and  consider  how  it  is 
provided  for.  Christ  answers  the  question :  "  Consider  the  ravens ;  that  they  sow  not, 
neither  reap;  which  have  no  store-chamber  nor  barn  j  and  God  feedeth  them:  of  how 
much  more  value  are  ye  than  the  birds  1"  (Luke  xii.  24).  But  the  lessons  are  not 
the  same  in  both  cases.  While  Job  is  to  see  the  greatness  of  God  in  providence,  Christ 
directs  attention  to  his  care  and  kindness  in  providing  for  his  creatures.  There  are 
some  characteristics  of  the  raven  that  accentuate  the  ideas  of  providential  power  and 

Kin  (1 T1638 

I.  One  of  the  lower  creatures.  God  is  not  only  concerned  with  spiritual  beings. 
He  makes  his  power  felt,  and  he  shows  his  kindness  in  the  animal  world.  Nothing  is 
so  insignificant  as  to  be  beneath  his  notice.  Material  wants  are  thought  of  and  supplied 
by  God.  But  if  he  supplies  these  wants  of  the  lower  creatures,  much  more  will  he 
satisfy  the  deeper  hunger  of  spiritual  beings. 

II.  A  WILD  bird.  Man  cares  for  his  domestic  pets,  and  leaves  the  wild  creatures 
to  shift  for  themselves.  But  these  animals  are  not  neglected  by  God.  Though  building 
its  nest  in  the  depths  of  the  forest  or  in  some  remote  mountain  recess  among  desolate 


630 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXIX.  1 — 30. 


cliffs  and  crags,  the  raven  is  watched  over  and  cared  for  by  God.  Though  no  meek 
caged  bird,  but  a  free  denizen  of  tlie  wilderness,  it  is  not  beyond  his  control.  God 
cares  for  his  wandering  children.  Wild  races,  savage  tribes,  forgotten  peoples,  forlorn 
souls,  are  all  under  the  notice  and  care  of  God. 

III.  A  KBPUL8IVE  BIRD.  The  raven  has  no  gorgeous  plumage;  there  is  no  music 
in  its  croak ;  it  feeds  on  carrion.  Yet  God  provides  for  it.  God  is  very  wide  in  his 
sympathies.  We  are  narrow,  partial,  selective.  While  we  favour  one  person  and 
slight  another,  the  large  bounty  of  God  is  extended  to  all  his  creatures.  God  provides 
for  the  insignificant  sparrow  and  the  croaking  raven.  He  cares  for  both  insignificant 
and  objectionable  men  and  women.  We  must  remember,  however,  that  the  repulsive- 
ness  of  the  raven  is  not  moral.  Sin  is  worse  than  feeding  on  carrion.  God  provides  for 
sinners,  sending  rain  and  sunshine  alike  on  the  good  and  on  the  evil.  Nevertheless, 
his  best  blessings  are  reserved  for  those  of  his  children  who  know  and  love  him. 

IV.  A  NATDRAL  OEBATUBB.  The  raven  is  a  part  of  nature.  It  simply  follows  its 
unconscious  instincts,  and  in  doing  so  it  finds  that  its  wants  are  provided  for.  God 
who  implanted  instincts  satisfies  them.  We  are  to  follow  our  whole  nature,  not  the 
animal  part  only,  but  also  the  spiritual,  which  in  us  is  as  natural  as  the  animal,  and 
more  important.  Then,  just  in  proportion  as  we  keep  to  the  laws  of  our  being  as  God 
has  constituted  us,  shall  we  find  that  our  real  wants  are  provided  for.  But  if  God  has 
given  to  us  reason  and  conscience,  and  only  instinct  to  the  raven,  we  must  use  oar 
higher  faculties  in  obtaining  what  is  needful,  just  as  the  raven  uses  what  is  highest 
in  its  nature.  The  raven  is  not  fed  if  it  lives  idly  like  the  lily,  which  God  still  cares 
for  in  its  own  sphere ;  and  man  will  not  be  satisfied  if  he  lives  only  like  the  iraven. 
Each  creature  must  follow  its  full  nature. 

V.  A  PARENT.  God  implants  parental  love.  When  the  young  ravens  cry,  God  feeds 
them  by  leading  their  parents  to  food.  God  uses  natural  affections  for  the  good  of  his 
creatures.    He  blesses  children  through  their  parents. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Vers.  1 — SO. — This  chapter  completes  the 
survey  of  animate  nature  begun  at  en. 
zxxviii.  39.  The  habits  and  instincts  of 
the  wild  goat,  the  wild  ass,  and  wild  cattle 
are  first  noticed  (vers.  1 — 12) ;  then  a  tran- 
sition is  made  to  the  most  remarkable  of 
birds,  the  ostrich  (vers.  13 — 18).  Next,  the 
horse  is  described,  and,  as  it  were,  depicted, 
in  a  passage  of  extraordinary  fire  and  bril- 
liancy (vers.  19 — 25).  Finally,  a  return  is 
made  to  remarkable  birds,  and  the  habits 
of  the  hawk  and  eagle  obtain  mention  (vers. 
26 — 30).  Throughout,  the  object  is  to  show 
the  infinite  wisdom  of  God,  and  the  utter 
incompetence  of  man  to  explain  the  mysteries 
of  nature. 

Yer.  1. — Enowest  then  the  time  when  the 
wild  goats  of  the  rock  bring  forth?  The 
wild  goats  of  Western  Asia  are  of  two  kinds, 
the  Oapra  agagrus,  and  the  Asiatic  ibex, 
or  Capra  Sinaitica.  The  latter  is  probably 
the  animal  here  intended,  which  is  called 
yd'el  sela',  "the  wild  goat  of  the  rooks," 
and  was  known  to  the  Assyrians  as  yore-li. 
It  is  an  animal  with  large  rough  horns 
curving  backwards,   closely  allied  to  the 


steinbook,  or  bouquetin,  of  the  Swiss  and 
Tyiolian  Alps.  It  is  very  shy  and  wild, 
difficult  of  approach,  and  inhabiting  only 
the  most  rooky  and  desolate  tracts  of  Syria 
and  Arabia.  Eepresentations  of  the  animal, 
whlch-^was  hunted  by  the  Assyrian  kings, 
are  common  upon  the  Ninevite  monuments 
(see  '  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  141). 
Or  canst  thou  mark  when  the  hinds  Ao 
calve  ?  "  The  hinds  "  here  are  probably  the 
females  of  the  species  of  ibex  intended. 
The  clause  is  therefore  a  mere  repetition, 
in  other  words,  of  the  preceding  one. 

Ver.  2. — Canst  thou  number  the  months 
that  they  fulfil  1  With  an  animal  so  wild 
as  the  ibex,  these  secreta  of  nature  would 
be  difficult  to  observe  and  note  down.  In 
Job's  time  probably  no  one  had  made  such 
subjects  an  object  of  inquiry.  Or  knowest 
thou  the  time  when  they  bring  forth  ?  "This 
would  be  less  difficult  to  observe.  The 
breeding-time  of  most  wild  animals  is  known 
in  the  country  which  produces  them. 

Ver.  3.— They  bow  themselves,  they  bring 
forth  their  young  ones,  they  oast  out  their 
sorrows.  Parturition  is  a  pain,  even  to  the 
brute  creation,  though,  comparatively  speak- 
ing, a  light  one.  (For  the  figure  of  speech 
by  which  that  which  causes  pain  is  called 
pain,  see  JSsohyl., '  Agam.,'  L  1427:  Euria. 
'  Ion,' 1.  45  ;  Herod.,  V.  18.) 


m.  zxxix.  1 — 30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


631 


Ver.  4. — Their  young  ones  are  in  good 
liking ;  t'  e.  healthy  and  strong  (oomp.  Dan. 
i.  10).  They  grow  np  with  com;  rather, 
Uiey  grow  up  out  of  doors,  or  in  the  open  air 
(see  Profeasor  Lee,  ad  ho.)  and  Buxtorf, 
'Lex.  Hebr.  et  Chald.,'  p.  87).  They  go 
forth,  and  retnm  not  imto  them.  They 
quit  their  dama  early,  and  "go  forth"  to 
provide  for  themselves — an  indication  of 
health  and  strength. 

Ver.  5.— Who  hath  sent  out  the  wild  ass 
free  ?  or  who  hath  loosed  the  hands  of  the 
wild  asa  t  Two  kinds  of  onager,  or  wild  ass, 
seem  to  be  intended — the  one  called  pere* 
(*^??).'and  the  other  'drSd  (I'TIJJ).  l4ese 
correapond  probably  to  the  Atinue  hemippus 
and  the  Atinue  onager  of  modem  naturalists, 
the  former  of  which  is  still  found  in  the 
deserts  of  Syria,  Mesopotamia,  and  Northern 
Arabia,  while  the  latter  inhabits  Western 
Asia  from  48°  N.  lat.  southward  to  Persia, 
Beloochistan,  and  Western  India.  Sir  H. 
A.  Layard  describes  the  former,  which  he 
saw,  as  a  "  beautiful  animal,  in  fleetness 
equalling  the  gazelle,  very  wild,  and  of  a 
rich  fawn  colour,  almost  pink"  ('Nineveh 
and  its  Kemains,'  vol.  i.  p.  324).  The  latter 
(Aainus  onager')  was  seen  by  Sir  B.  K.  Porttr 
in  Persia  ('  Travels,'  vol.  i.  p.  460),  and  is 
described  in  very  similar  terms.  The  two, 
however,  appear  to  be  distinct  species  (see 
Dr.  Smith's  '  Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  iii. 
pp.  six.,  XX.,  Appendix).  Both  animaU  are 
remarkable  for  extreme  wildness;  and  all 
attempts  to  domesticate  the  young  of  either 
have  hitherto  failed. 

Ver.  6. — Whose  house  I  have  made  the 
wilderness.  The  Mesopotamian  regions  in- 
habited by  the  Atinus  hemippus  are  those 
vast  stretches  of  rolling  plain,  treeless,  pro- 
ducing a  few  aromatic  shrubs  and  much 
wormwood,  which  intervene  between  the 
Sinjar  mountain-range  and  the  Babylonian 
alluvium.  Here  the  wild  asg  was  seen  by 
Xenophon  and  the  Ten  Thousand,  in  com- 
pany with  ostriches,  gazelles,  and  bustards 
(Xen.,  '  Anab.,'  L  5) ;  and  here  Sir  Austin 
Layard  also  made  its  acquaintance  ('  Nineveh 
and  Babylon,'  p.  270).  The  Asinus  onager 
frequents  the  deserts  of  Khorassan  and 
Beloochistan,  which  are  even  more  barren 
than  the  Mesopotamian.  And  the  barren 
land  his  dwellings  ;  rather,  the  salt  land  (see 
the  Revised  Version).  The  great  desert  of 
Khorassan  is  largely  impregnated  with  salt, 
and  in  places  encrusted  with  it.  The  wild 
ass  licks  salt  with  avidity. 

Ver.  7. — He  soometh  the  multitude  of  the 
city.  Avoids,  that  is,  the  haunts  of  men, 
and  is  never  seen  near  them.  Neither  re- 
gardeth  be  the  crying  of  the  driver.  Nothing 
will  induce  the  wild  ass  to  submit  to  domes- 
tication. 

Ver.  8. — The  range  of  the  mountains  is 


his  pasture.  By  "mountains"  we  must 
here  understand  rocky  ranges  like  the  Sinjar 
and  the  mountains  of  Beloochistan,  or  again 
those  of  the  Sinaitio  peninsula.  Wild  asses 
do  not  frequent  the  regions  which  we  com- 
monly call  mountainous.  And  he  searoheth 
after  every  green  thing;  t.e.  he  seeks  out 
the  small  patches  of  pasture  which  are  to 
be  found  in  such  rocky  regions. 

Ver.  9. — Will  the  unicorn  be  willing  to 
serve  thee,  or  abide  by  thy  crib  t  This  is 
an  unfortunate  translation,  since  there  is  no 
word  etymologically  correspondent  to  "  uni- 
corn" in  the  original.  The  word  used  ia 
rem  or  reym;  and  the  rSm  is  distinctly  said 
in  Deut.  xxxiii.  17  to  have  "horns."  All 
that  is  said  of  the  rem  in  Scripture  points 
to  some  species  of  wild  cattle,  and  recent 
critics  are  almost  universally  agreed  thus 
far  at  any  rate.  Assyrian  investigation 
carries  us  a  step  further.  It  is  found  that 
the  wild  bull  .so  often  represented  on  the 
monuments  as  hunted  by  the  Ninevite 
monarchs  was  known  to  the  Assyrians  by 
the  name  of  rimu  or  rim.  Careful  exami- 
nation of  the  sculptures  lias  resulted  in  the 
identification  of  this  animal  with  Bos  primi- 
geniut,  an  extinct  species,  probably  identical 
with  the  urua  of  the  Bomans,  which  Gsesar 
saw  in  Gaul,  and  of  which  he  has  left  a 
description.  "These  uri,"  he  says,  "are 
scarcely  less  than  elephants  in  size,  but  in 
their  nature,  colour,  and  form  are  bulls. 
Great  is  their  strength,  and  great  their 
speed ;  nor  do  they  spare  man  nor  beast, 
when  once  they  have  caught  sight  of  him. 
. .  .  Even  when  they  are  young,  they  cannot 
be  habituated  to  man  and  made  tractable. 
The  size  and  shape  of  their  horns  are  very 
different  from  those  of  our  own  oxen  "  ('  De 
Bell.  GaU.,'  vi.  28). 

Ver.  10. — Canst  thou  hind  the  unicorn 
with  his  band  in  the  furrow  f  That  is,  "  as 
thou  bindest  the  ox?"  Canst  thou  make 
him  plough  for  thee?  Or  will  he  harrow 
the  valleys  after  thee!  Another  common 
employment  of  oxen. 

Ver.  11. — ^Wilt  thou  trust  him,  because 
his  strength  is  great  %  If  a  man  could  bind 
the  urns  to  his  plough  or  to  his  harrow, 
still  he  could  not  "  trust "  him.  The  huge 
brute  would  be  sure  to  prove  unmanageable, 
and  would  only  cause  damage  to  his  owner. 
Or  wilt  thou  leave  thy  labour  to  him  ?  As 
thou  leavest  many  labours  to  thy  oxen, 
confiding  in  their  docility. 

Ver.  12. — WUt  thou  believe  him — rather. 
Wilt  thou  confide  in  him  (see  the  Kevised 
Version) — that  he  wiU  bring  home  thy  seed, 
and  gather  it  into  thy  bam?  i.e.  convey 
the  harvest  from  the  field  to  the  home- 
stead, that  it  may  be  safely  lodged  in  thy 
barn.  The  "  strength "  of  the  urns  (ver. 
11)  would  make  all  such  labours  light  to 


632 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  XXXIX 1 — 36. 


Iiim,  but  his  savage  nature  would  render  it 
impo8sib?e  to  use  him  for  them. 

Ver.  13. — Gftvest  thou  the  goodly  wings 
unto  the  peaoooks  1  rather,  the  wing  of  the 
ostrich  (literally,  of  ostriches)  is  exultatUj  i.e. 
a  thing  that  it  glories  in.  The  allusion  is, 
perhaps,  to  the  flapping  of  its  wings  by  the 
ostrich,  as  it  hurries  over  the  ground,  which 
is  something  like  tliat  of  a  cook  before  crow- 
ing or  After  beating  an  antagonist.  Or 
wings  and  feathers  unto  the  ostrioh  1  This 
clause  is  very  obscure,  but  may  perhaps 
mean.  Are  Mr  feathers  and  plumage  kindly  f 
(see  the  Revised  Version) ;  i.e.  does  she  use 
them  for  the  same  kindly  purpose  as  other 
birds — ^to  warm  her  eggs,  and  forward  the 
process  of  hatching  them  ? 

Ver.  14. — Which  leaveth  her  eggs  in  the 
earth,  and  warmeth  them  in  dust.  The  best 
authorities  tell  us  that  in  tropical  countries 
ostriches,  having  scratched  a  hole  in  the 
sand,  and  deposited  their  eggs  in  it,  cover 
the  eggs  over  with  a  layer  of  sand,  some- 
times as  much  as  a  foot  in  thickness,  and, 
leaving  them  during  tlie  daytime  to  be  kept 
warm  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  only  incubate 
a  t  night.  It  is  evidently  this  habit  of  the 
bird  that  is  here  alluded  to.  That  in  cooler 
countries  ostriches  do  not  do  this  is  not  to 
the  point,  Tho  liabit  was  known  in  Job's 
time,  and  was  so  noticeable  as  to  characterize 
the  bird  to  a  large  extent. 

Ver.  15. — And  forgetteth  that  the  foot 
may  omsh  them,  or  that  the  wild  beast  may 
break  them.  Where  the  eggs  are  covered 
by  a  layer  of  sand  a  foot  thick,  this  danger 
is  not  incurred.  But  when  the  eggs  are 
numerous— and  they  are  sometimes  as  many 
as  thirty — they  are  apt  to  be  very  poorly 
covered,  and  the  results  follow  which  are 
described  in  the  text. 

Ver.  Iti. — She  is  hardened  against  her 
young  ones,  as  though  they  were  not  hers. 
This  is  a  deduction  from  what  lias  preceded, 
and  discloses  uo  Dew  fact.  Becent  careful 
observation  of  the  habits  of  the  ostrioh 
inilicates  that  the  parental  instinct  is  not 
WiUiting,  though  it  may  be  weaker  than  in 
ninst  buds.  Both  the  male  and  the  female 
iucubate  at  night,  and,  when  the  nest  is 
approached  by  the  hunter,  the  parent  bird 
or  birds  will  leave  it,  and  try  to  draw  him 
It  way  from  it  by  running  on  in  front  of  him, 
iir  feigning  to  attack  him,  much  as  peewits 
do  in  our  own  country.  Her  labour  is  in 
vain  without  fear  j  or,  though  her  labour  is 
in  vain,  she  is  withnut  fear  (see  the  Revised 
Version);  {m.  though  she  is  often  disap- 
|)oiuted  of  her  immediate  hope  of  offspring, 
tliiongh  her  eggs  being  crushed  and  de- 
stroyed, yet  slie  grows  no  wiser,  she  does  not 
fear  for  the  future. 

Ver.  17. — Because  God  hath"  deprived  her 
Qf  wisdoni|  neither  hath  he  imparted  to  her 


understanding.  There  is  an  Arab  proverb — 
"  As  stupid  as  an  ostrioh " — which  the 
Arabs  justify  on  five  grouuris :  (1)  The 
ostrich,  they  say,  will  swallow  iron,  stones, 
leaden  bullets,  and  other  things,  which 
injure  and  sometimes  prove  fatal  to  it. 
(2)  When  hunted,  it  thrusts  its  bead  into 
a  bush,  and  imagines  that  the  hunter  doof 
not  see  it.  (3)  it  allows  itself  to  be  captured 
by  transparent  devices.  (4)  It  neglects  its 
eggs.  (J))  Its  head  is  small,  and  contains 
but  a  small  quantity  of  brains.  To  these 
grounds  I  may  add  that  in  the  South-AfricaB 
ostrich-farms,  the  birds  allow  themselves  to 
be  confined  within  a  certain  space  by  a  fence 
of  sticks  and  string  raised  about  a  foot  from 
the  ground.  They  seem  to  think  that  they 
cannot  step  over  it. 

Ver.  18. — What  time  she  lifteth  np  herself 
on  high,  she  scometh  the  horse  and  his 
rider.  The  ostrich  sometimes  tries  to  eliide 
pursuit  by  crouching  and  hiding  behind 
hillocks  or  in  hollows,  making  itself  as 
little  conspicuous  as  possible;  but,  when 
these  attempts  fail,  and  it  starts  off  to  run 
In  the  open,  then  it  "  lifts  itself  up  "  to  its 
full  elevation,  beats  the  air  with  its  wings, 
and  scours  along  at  a  pace  that  no  horse  can 
equal.  The  Greeks  with  Xenophon,  though 
well  mounted,  failed  to  catch  a  single  ostrich 
('Anab.,'i.5.  §3). 

Ver.  19. — Hast  thou  given  the  horse 
strength?  (comp.  Ps.  cxlvii.  10).  Oeburah 
means,  however,  more  than  "  strength."  It 
includes  courage  and  all  martial  excellence. 
Hast  thou  clothed  his  neck  with  thunder  1 
Many  objections  have  been  taken  to  this 
expression ;  und  endeavours  have  been  made 
to  show  that  the  word  used  (nDJ^'i)  does  not 
mean  "  thunder,"  but "  a  tremulous  motion," 
"  quivering  muscles  and  a  tossing  mane,"  or 
else  "scorn,"  "indignation."  But  as  DVI 
aliaays  means  "thunder"  (ch.  xxvi.  14; 
xxxix.  25 ;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  19  ;  IxxxL  8 ;  civ.  7 ; 
iBa.  xxix.  6),  it  seems  unlikely  that  napn 
means  anything  else.  To  the  Objection  that 
the  metaphor  is  "incongruous"  (Professor 
Lee),  it  would  appear  to  be  enough  to  reply 
that  one  of  our  greatest  prose-poets  has  seen 
in  it  peculiar  fitness.  "  So  true  every  way,"  ' 
says  Carlyle,on  the  passage :  "  true  eyesight 
and  vision  for  all  things ;  material  things, 
not  less  than  spiritual ;  '  the  horse — Hast 
thou  clothed  his  neck  with  thunder  t"' 
(*  Lectures  on  Heroes,'  p.  78). 

Ver.  20. — Canst  thou  make  him  afiraid  as 
a  grasshopper  T  rather.  Canst  thou  mahe  him 
leap  forward  as  a  grasshopper  ?  The  bound 
with  which  a  war-horse  rushes  to  battle 
seems  intended.  The  glory  of  his  nostrils 
is  terrible.  When  the  war-horse  snorts,  men 
tremble  (see  Jer.  viii.  16,  "The  snorting  of 
his  horses  was  heard  from  Dan :  the  whole 


aa.  xxxix. 


1-30.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


d3S 


land  trembled  at  the  Bound  of  the  neighing 
of  his  strong  ones  "). 

Ver.  21. — H6  paweth  in  the  valley.  Canon 
Cook  appositely  compares  Virgil's  "cavat 
tellurem  "  ('Georg.,'  iii.  87,  88),  and  Professor 
Lee  Pope's  expression,  that  "  ere  they  start 
a  thousand  steps  are  lost."  The  verb  is 
in  the  plural,  because  a  line  of  cavalry, 
all  pawing  and  eager  to  be  off,  is  intended 
to  be  represented.  And  rejoioeth  in  liis 
strength.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than 
thu  eagerness  and  joy  which  war-horses 
show  when  the  battle  approaches.  They 
are  generally  more  excited  than  their  riders. 
He  goeth  on  to  meet  the  armed  men ;  lite- 
rally, he  ruiheth  upon  the  weapons.  Equally 
true  in  ancient  and  in  modem  warfare.  The 
main  use  of  cavalry  is  in  the  charge  (see 
Denison's  'Hist,  of  Cavalry,'  pp.  507--512). 

Yer.  22. — He  mooketh  at  fear,  and  is  not 
afErighted;  neither  tometh  he  back  £rom 
the  sword.  "  The  cavalry  of  modern  times 
will  rush  undismayed  upon  the  line  of 
opposing  bayonets"  (Professor  Lee).  "We 
do  not  believe  that  a  body  of  infantry  ever 
existed  that,  with  the  bayonet  alone,  un- 
supported by  fire,  could  have  checked  the 
ietermined  charge  of  good  horsemen" 
(Denison,  p.  510). 

Ver.  23. — The  quiver  rattleth  against  him. 
In  the  Assyrian  sculptures  the  quiver  of 
mounted  archers  is  often  hung  at  the  side, 
instead  of  at  the  back.  In  this  position  it 
-would  rattle  against  the  neck  of  the  war- 
horse  (see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii. 
p.  25).  The  glittering  spear  and  the  shield 
would  occasionally  strike  against  his  neck 
or  bis  shoulders. 

Ver.  24. — He  swalloweth  the  ground  with 
fierceness  and  rage.  This  is  a  common 
metaphor  to  denote  tlWrapidity  with  which 
the  horse  covers  the  space  that  lies  before 
him.  Virgil  has,  "  Corripiunt  spatia " 
('.ffineid,'  v.  316);  Silius  Italious,  "0am- 
pum  volatu  rapuere "  (iii.  308) ;  Shake- 
speare, "He  seemed  in  running  to  devour  the 
way."  Arab  poets  have  similar  expressions 
(see  Bochart,  '  Hiero*.,'  pt.  i.  bk.  ii.  c.  8). 
Neither  believeth  he  that  it  is  the  sound  of 
the  trumpet.  (So  Sohultens,  Canon  Cook, 
•nd  our  Bevisers.)  But  most  recent  Critics 
prefer  to  render,  "He  standeth  not  still 
when  the  trumpet  soundeth,"  and  compare 
Viigil's  "  Stare  loco  nescit "  (' Georg.,'  ill. 
84). 

Ver.  25.— He  saith  among  the  tnunpeta, 
Ha,  ha!  literally,  ai  the  trumpet!  i.e.  at  the 
sound  of  the  trumpet.  The  utterance,  "  Ha, 
lia  !  "  (hedhh),  is  an  imitation  of  the  horse's 
snort  or  neigh.  And  he  smelleth  the  battle 
afar  off.  lfi)t  merely  presages  it,  as  Pliny 
saya  ("  Equi  prsasagiuut  pugnam,"  '  Hist. 
Nat ,'  viii.  42),  or  perceives  it,  but  seems  to 
Kent  it.    The  open  and  quivering  nostrils 


raise  this  idea.  The  thunder  of  the  captains, 
and  the  shouting.  On  the  great  noise  made 
by  advancing  armies  in  ancient  times,  see 
2  Kings  vii.  6 ;  Isa.  v.  28—30 ;  Jer.  viii.  16, 
etc. 

Ver.  26.— Doth  the  hawk  fly  (or,  toar)  by 
thy  wisdom  t  The  hawk's  strength  of  wing 
is  extraordinary,  and  one  of  the  greatest  of 
natural  marvels.  Can  Job  claim  to  have 
contrived  it?  Many  as  have  been  the 
attempts  made,  human  ingenuity  has  not 
yet  devised  anything  that  can  fly.  And  , 
stretch  her  wings  toward  the  south  I  Migrate, 
i.e.,  when  winter. approaches,  to  the  warmer 
southern  regions.  Few  things  in  nature  are 
more  remarkable  than  the  instinct  of  migra- 
tory birds. 

Ver.  27. — ^Doth  the  eagle  mount  up  at  thy 
command  I  The  enumeration  of  natural 
marvels  ends  with  the  eagle,  the  monarch 
of  birds,  as  it  began  with  the  lion,  the  king 
of  beasts  (ch.  xxxviii.  39).  The  power  of 
the  eagle  to  "  mount  up,"  notwithstanding 
its  great  size  and  weight,  is  very  surprising. 
The  species  intended  in  this  place  is  pro- 
bably the  golden  eagle  (_Aquila  ehrysaetos)  or 
else  the  imperial  eagle  (Aquila  heliaea), 
which  are  both  of  tbem  common  in  Syria 
and  Mesopotamia.  And  make  her  nest  on 
highl  The  nests  of  eagles  are  almost 
always  built  on  lofty,  generally  on  inacces- 
sible, rocks.  Aristotle  says,  IlaioSvTai  Si 
aifTas  («c.  tAs  i/eoTT^as),  oi/c  iv  ireSivois  T^woiSt 
iO\.\'  iv  v<firi\o7s  liiXtara  fiev,  xal  iv  ■werpais 
ImoKp^/iVois  (comp.  Jer.  Xlix.  16). 

Ver.  28. — Shedwelleth  and  abideth  on  the 
rook,  upon  the  orag  of  the  rook,  and  the 
strong  plaoe ;  literally,  the  tooth  of  the  rock. 
The  craggy  summits  of  rocks  bear  a  re- 
semblance to  the  fangs  of  a  tooth.  Hence 
we  have  in  France  the  Dent  du  Chat,  and 
in  Switzerland  the  Dent  de  Jaman  and  the 
Dent  du  Midi. 

Ver.  29. — From  thence  she  seeketh  the 
prey,  and  her  eyes  behold  afor  off.  Aristotle 
gives  this  as  a  reason  for  the  lofty  flight 
of  the  eagle,  'Tt^oB  Si  i^totoi,  girais  itX 
TKetnTov  r6iTov  KaSop^.  The  keen  sight  of 
the  eap;le  is  recognized  by  modern  savants : 
"Aquila,  genre  d'oiseaui  de  proie  .  .  . 
caract^ris^  par  un  bee  sans  denfelure  et 
droit  ii  sa  base  jusqu'aupiJs  de  I'extremit^, 
oh  il  se  oourbe  beaucoup;  par  des  pieds 
robustes  arm^s  d'ongles  aigus  et  tranchants, 
par  leur  vue  perfante  et  leur  grande  en- 
vergure "  ('  Dictionnaire  Uuiverselle  dee 
Sciences,'  p.  25). 

Ver.  30. — Her  young  ones  also  suok  up 
blood,  It  has  been  asserted  tbat  this  is  not 
the  case,  since  they  are  fed  on  carrion 
(Merx).  But,  as  eagles  are  known  to  seize 
fasvns,  hares,  lambs,  and  other  small  animals, 
and  transport  them  to  their  eyries,  theu 
young  must  certainly  be  nourished,  in  part, 


634 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[cH.  XXXIX.  1 — 30. 


on  the  flesh  of  animali  newly  killed.  And 
where  the  slain  are,  there  is  she  (comp. 
Deut.  xxi.  18;  Matt.  xxlv.  28;  Luke  xvii. 
37).  Eagles,  or  at  any  rate  birds  "  more 
resembling  eagles  than  vultures,"  are  com- 
monly represented  on  the  Assyrian  monu- 
ments, especially   in  battle-scenes,  where 


they  either  feed  on  the  dead  bodied  of  the 
slain,  or  tear  out  their  entrails,  or  soiaetimes 
carry  up  aloft  the  decapitated  head  of  some 
unfortunate  soldier  (see  the  '  Transactioni 
of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,' 
vol.  Tiii.  p.  59,  and  pla.  ii.  «nd  iit). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 30. — Jehovah  to  Job :  the  first  answer — the  examination :  6.  Concerning 
certain  wild  animals.  I.  The  mountain  goat  and  the  hind.  (Vera.  1 — 4.)  1. 
T!ie  creatwres  intended.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  these  are  the  steinbock,  or  ibex, 
and  the  stag.  The  former,  inhabiting  exclusively  the  more  rocky  and  desolate  parts 
of  the  country,  possesses  fore  legs  considerably  shorter  than  its  hinder,  which  enable 
it  to  ascend  with  more  facility  than  to  descend,  and  lead  it,  when  pursued,  to  attempt 
to  gain  the  summits  of  the  mountains.  In  accordance  with  this  peculiarity,  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  Jehovah  describes  the  animals  as  "  rock-climbers."  2.  The 
circumstance  alluded  to.  This  is  not  so  much  the  secrecy  of  their  gestation  as  the 
ease  and  facility  with  which  they  bring  forth.  "  They  bow  themselves,  they  bring 
forth  their  young  ones,  they  cast  out  their  sorrows,"  i.e.  those  things  which  cause  their 
labour-pains,  viz.  their  offspring ;  and  these  young  animals  thus  easily  born,  though 
not  without  pain,  "are  in  good  liking,"  i.e.  grow  up  lusty  and  strong,  not  by  feeding 
upon  corn,  as  the  Authorized  Version  seems  to  imply,  but  in  the  open  country,  away 
from  their  dams,  whom  they  early  forsake,  going  forth  and  not  returning  unto  them. 
3.  The  question  thereanent.  Jehovah  asks  Job  if  he  knows  the  time  when  these 
mountain  goats,  or  rock-climbers,  bear,  or  can  number  the  months  that  the  hinds 
fulfil.  Clearly  not  designed  to  test  the  amount  or  accuracy  of  Job's  information 
concerning  natural  history,  this  interrogation  seems  as  little  meant  to  affirm  that 
everything  connected  with  the  pregnancy  of  these  creatures  was  a  mystery.  Its 
intention  rather  is  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  the  whole  process  of  conception  and  par- 
turition is  carried  on  with  such  admirable  regularity,  ease,  and  success,  as  to  suggest 
the  thought  that  it  must  be  owing  to  the  wise  guidance  and  watchful  care  of  some 
presiding  mind.  "  Well,"  asks  Jehovah,  "  whose  is  it  ?  Is  it  thine,  O  Job  ?  or  is  it 
not  rather  mine  ?  " 

II.  The  wild  ass.  (Vers.  5 — 8.)  1.  Its  swiftness  of  foot.  This  characteristic  is 
alluded  to  in  the  name  pere.  Consul  Wetstein  (quoted  by  Delitzsch)  describes  the 
wild  ass  as  a  dirty  yellow  creature  with  a  white  belly,  single-hoored  and  loug-eared,  fts 
hornless  head  somewhat  resembling  that  of  a  gazelle,  though  much  larger,  and  its  hair 
having  the  dryness  of  the  hair  of  the  deer.  Like  the  wild  ox,  a  large  soft-eyed  creature, 
horned  and  double-hoofed,  it  is  remarkable  for  its  swift  running,  which  enables  it  to 
out-distance  the  fleetest  rider.  2.  Its  love  of  freedom.  This  feature  is  referred  to  in 
the  second  name,  'arod,  which  denotes  its  shyness  and  untamableness,  and  is  further 
represented  by  depicting  it  as  scorning  the  tumult  of  the  city,  i.e.  as  fleeing  from  the 
haunts  of  men,  and  regarding  not  the  crying  of  the  driver,  t.e.  refusing  to  be  subjected 
to  the  yoke,  as  scouring  the  desert  in  its  boundless  independence,  and  finding  for  itself 
a  home  in  the  barren  land  or  salt  places,  i.e.  uncultivated  and  uncultivable  regions. 
3.  Its  means  of  support.  The  wild  ass  licks  the  natron  of  the  desert,  as  "all  wild 
animals  that  feed  on  plants  have  a  partiality  for  licking  salt "  (Delitzsch) ;  and  in 
quest  of  herbage  it  roams  to  the  uttermost  limit  of  the  mountains,  "  sniffing  after 
every  green  thing."  4.  Its  possession  of  a  Master.  This  thought  is  suggested  by 
Jehovah's  interrogations.  "  The  wild  ass  loves  liberty ;  but  who  made  him  free  ?  Who 
loosed  his  bands  ?  Who  sent  him  forth  to  scour  the  plain  and  range  the  hills  ?  Was 
it  thou,  0  Job?  or  was  it  I?  The  wild  ass  scorns  the  yoke  of  the  driver;  but  who 
inspired  him  with  this  indomitable  instinct?  Who  taught  him  to  lick  the  salt  and 
crop  the  herb  ?  Are  not  these  my  doings,  0  my  censurer  ?  Canst  thou  bind  this  ass 
that  I  have  loosed  ?  Canst  thou  set  a  yoke  upon  him  as  I  do  ?  Art  thou  able  to  give 
him  food  as  I  am,  or  to  build  for  him  a  stall  as  I  have  done  in  the  vast  steppe  ?  It  ii 
clear,  then,  that  thou  art  not  the  master  of  a  wild  ass,  much  less  of  a  world." 


OH.  zxxix.  1^30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  635 

^III.  The  unicobn.  (Vers.  9—12.)  1.  The  name  of  the  animal  explained.  The 
rem,  which  our  translators  have  erroneously  supposed  to  be  a  one-horned  beast, 
was  undoubtedly  two-horned — a  wild,  fierce,  untamable  brute,  "  resembling  an  ox  as 
a  wild  ass  resembles  an  ass  "  (Gesenius).  Regarded  by  some  commentators  as  the 
buffalo  (Schultens,  De  Wette,  Umbreit,,  Gesenius),  though  this  animal  "only  came 
from  India  to  Western  Asia  and  Europe  at  a  more  recent  date,"  and  is  besides 
"  tamable"  (Delitzsch),  it  is  more  probably  to  be  identified  with  the  Bos  primigenitis 
Tristram  affirms  that  the  rSm  was  the  urus  of  Csesar,  the  aueroch,  of  which  "  the 
nearest  extant  representative  is  the  bison,  which  still  lingers  in  the  forests  of  Lithuania 
and  the  Caucasus"  (Cox).  2.  The  strength  of  the  animal  described.  This,  with 
inimitable  irony,  Jehovah  depicts  by  asking  Job  if  he  thought  he  could  master  this 
prodigious  brute^ — first  drive  him  home  like  a  peaceful  ox  to  be  shut  up  and  fed  within 
the  narrow  precincts  of  a  stall,  then  take  him  out,  as  a  farmer  now  does  his  horses,  or' 
then  did  his  oxen,  and  yoke  him  to  his  wains  or  carts,  setting  him  to  plough  his  fields 
or  draw  home  his  harvest-sheaves. 

IV.  The  ostrich.  (Vers.  13 — 18.)  1.  77ie  description  of  the  hird.  In  thih  are 
noted  three  points :  (1)  Its  want  of  parental  affection.  "  The  wing  of  the  ostrich 
[female]  exulteth,"  i.e.  vibrates  briskly ;  "  is  she  pious,  wing  and  feather  ?  " — the  allu- 
sion being  to  the  pious  bird,  the  stork,  which  the  ostrich  resembles  in  its  stilt-like 
structure,  the  beauty  of  its  plumage,  the  quivering  of  its  wings,  and  the  gregarious 
habit  of  its  life,  but  from  which  it  differs  in  its  lack  of  maternal  affection.  iSepositing 
her  eggs  in  the  sand,  where  the  foot  of  any  passer-by  may  crush  them,  or  they  may 
fall  a  prey  to  jackals,  wild  cats,  and  other  animals,  although  she  does  not  entirely 
abandon  the  work  of  hatching  them  to  the  sun  or  her  male  companion,  but  also  really 
incubates  herself,  at  least  during  the  night,  yet,  so  easily  is  she  startled  from  her  nest, 
and  so  readily  induced  to  forsake  it,  that  she  may  be  truthfully  described  as  "  hardened 
against  her  young  ones,  as  tjiough  they  were  not  hers,"  and  as  being  quite  indifferent 
to  the  fact  that  her  labour  is  without  result.  In  consequence  of  this  peculiarity,  the 
hen  ostrich  is  called  by  the  Arabs  "  the  wicked  bird."  (2)  Its  remarkably  defective 
intelligence.  This  is  emphasized  as  the  cause  of  the  above-described  unnatural 
behaviour  of  the  bird.  "  God  hath  deprived  her  of  wisdom,  neither  hath  he  imparted 
to  her  understanding ; "  and  yet  that  the  above- described  are  not  the  only  stupidities 
of  which  the  creature  is  guilty  may  be  reasonably  inferred  from  the  circumstance  that 
the  foolishness  of  the  ostrich  is  quite  proverbial  throughout  the  East,  as  the  Arab 
proverb  indicates,  "More  stupid  than  an  ostrich."  (3)  Its  power  of  speedy  flight. 
This  also  is  certified  by  an  Arab  proverb,  "Swifter  than  an  ostrich,"  and  is  here 
poetically  set  forth  with  much  beauty.  Starting  from  her  nest  in  alarm,  and_  lifting 
up  herself  on  high,  i.e.,  as  the  language  probably  imports,  flapping  the  air  with  her 
wings,  "  she  scorneth  the  horse  and  his  rider,"  leaving  them  behind  her  with  perfect 
ease.  2.  The  reason  of  its  introduction.  Job's  attention  appears  to  be  directed  to 
the  ostrich  to  suggest  the  thought  that  here,  too,  in  the  world  of  birds,  there  are  mys- 
teries and  seeming  anomalies  which  he  cannot  understand.  Why  should  the  ostrich 
be  so  differently  constituted  from  the  stork?  Why  should  it  be  devoid  of  intelligence 
and  parental  affection,  while  excelling  most  birds  in  speed  of  foot  and  beauty  of  wing  ? 
When  Job  can  answer  that,  he  will  have  a  title  to  challenge  God  for  making  enigmas 
in  human  life,  and  dark  problems  in  the  moral  history  of  earth. 

V.  The  wak-hobsb.  (Vers.  19 — 25.)  1.  The  poetical  representation.  The  oldest 
description  of  the  war-horse,  it  is  also  the  most  beautiful,  the  most  brilliant,  the  most 
impressive  that  has  in  any  language  been  penned.  As  Carlyle  says,  «  Such  a  living 
likeness  has  never  since  been  drawn."  "  It  deserves  the  praise  of  majestic  simplicity, 
which  is  the  first  feature  of  classic  superiority  "  (Delitzsch).  Ancient  authors  supply 
occasional  touches  which  remind  one  of  the  language  here  employed  {vide  Exposition). 
In  respect  of  fulness  and  accuracy  of  details,  the  present  sketch  stands  unrivalled.  So 
intensely  vivid  is  the  picturing,  that  the  splendid  beast  appears  to  the  imagination  as 
a  living,  jjreathing  reality,  a  richly  caparisoned  steed,  a  perfect  model  of  physical 
strength  and  beauty,  curveting  and  caracoling  in  the  very  exuberance  of  its  animal 
spirits,  pawing  the  ground  in  its  impatience,  snorting  through  its  dilated  nostrils, 
sniffing  the  battle  from  afar,  bounding  as  with  conscious  exultation  when  the  trumpet 
■oundeth,  at  every  blast  thereof  making  known  by  a  joyous  neigh,  as  if  it  cried,  "  Ha, 


636  TBE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xxxix.  1— 30. 

ha !  "  the  fierceness  of  its  lust  for  battle,  advancing  without  a  fear  to  meet  an  armed 
ho.st,  dashing  in  among  the  glancing  spears,  and  shaking  from  its  sides  the  rattling 
quiver.  2.  l%e  Divine  meaning.  It  is  easy  enough  to  find  sermonio  uses  for  this 
piece  of  brilliant  word-painting  about  the  war-horse,  as  e.g.  to  derive  from  it  lessons 
of  courage  in  confronting  difficulties,  and  enthusiasm  in  defying  opposition;  but  the 
first  question  needing  answer  is — For  what  specific  object  is  it  here  introduced  ?  and 
this  was  obviously  to  impress  the  mind  of  Job  with  a  sense  of  his  (and  also  man's) 
weakness  in  comparison  with  God.  Whence  had  such  a  noble  creature  as  this  war- 
horse  sprung?  Job  had  not  produced  its  resistless  strength,  its  heroic  beauty,  its 
visible  terror,  its  indomitable  courage,  its  fierce  enthusiasm  ?  Nay,  what  could  Job  or 
any  other  man  do  as  against  such  a  powerful  animal  ?  Well,  if  Job  cannot  contend 
.  with  the  war-horse,  how  unreasonable  it  must  be  to  suppose  that  he  can  strive  with 
him  whose  handiwork  the  war-horse  is ! 

VI.  The  hawk.  (Ver.  26.)  1.  Its  power  of  flight.  The  name  netz  denotes  "  the 
soaring  one,"  the  high-flyer,  and  "  includes,  besides  the  hawk  proper,  all  raptorial  birds  " 
(Cox),  "which,  even  including  the  shortest- winged,  have  great  powers  of  flight,  are 
remarkably  enterprising,  live  to  a  great  age,  are  migratory,  or  followers  upon  birds  of 
passage  "  (Kitto's '  Cyclopaedia,'  art.  "  Netz  ").  "  The  rapidity  with  which  the  hawk  and 
many  other  birds  fly  is  probably  not  less  than  at  the  rate  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
an  hour"  (Robinson).  The  adaptation  of  a  bird's  wing  for  flying  is  a  singular  instance 
of  (he  Creator's  skill.  2.  Its  instinct  of  migration.  Moved  by  a  secret  impulse,  not 
received  from  or  understood  by  man,  the  hawk  stretches  her  wing,  and  seeks  a  sunny 
clime  at  every  approach  of  winter.  This  also  a  striking  evidence  of  creative  intelli- 
gence. 

VII.  The  baolb.  (Vers.  27—30.)  1.  Its  lofty  flight.  The  king  of  birds,  which 
closes  the  Divine  picture-gallery  of  animals,  as  the  king  of  quadrupeds  opened  it, 
"  soareth  aloft,"  its  great  strength  of  body  and  breadth*of  wing  giving  it  power  to 
sustain  itself  at  a  high  elevation  in  the  air.  2.  Its  inaccessible  eyrie.  Mounting 
upwards, "  she  buildeth  her  nest  in  the  height,  upon  the  crag  or  tooth  of  the  rook  "  and 
fastness,  and  there,  by  reason  of  its  remoteness,  "  she  dwelleth  and  abideth  "  securely. 
3.  lis  keen  vision.  From  the  chfifs  edge  she  can  scan  the  depths  below,  looking  far 
across  the  plain  in  search  of  food  for  herself  and  young  ones  (cf.  oh.  xxviii.  7, 21).  4.  Its 
sanguinary  appetite.  "  Her  young  ones  also  suck  up  blood ;  and  where  the  slain  are, 
there  is  she."  In  the  East  eagles  follow  armies  in  order  to  feed  upon  the  corpses  of 
the  slain  (cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  28). 

Learn:  1.  That  he  can  best  describe  the  creatures  who  knows  all  about  them) 
because  he  made  them.  2.  That  every  creature  on  the  face  of  the  earth  has  its 
peculiar  nature,  instincts,  habitat,  by  Divine  appointment.  3.  That  wherever  God 
assigns  dwelling  to  a  creature,  there  also  he  provides  means  of  subsistence.  4.  That 
a  large  portion  of  the  world's  beauty  consists  in  the  variety  of  animal  life  which  it 
supports.  5.  That  the  study  of  zoology  is  fitted  to  convey  important  lessons  con- 
cerning the  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  and  sovereignty  of  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 30. — The  creatures  not  dependent  upon  man.  We  truly  know  that  of 
man  it  is  written,  "Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet;  "  and  "We  see  not  yet 
all  things  put  under  him."  The  creatures  over  whom  dominion  was  given  to  man  are 
not  wholly  submissive.  And  man  must  learn  his  littleness  in  presence  of  the  great 
creatures  of  God  whom  he  fails  to  subdue.  "  The  wild  goats  "  and  "  the  hinds  "  and 
"  the  wild  ass,"  "  the  unicorn,"  even  "  the  ostrich,"  "  the  "horse  "  and  the  birds  of  the 
air,  "the  hawk"  and  "the  eagle,"  are  all  alike  independent  of  man.  They  have 
neither  their  beauty  nor  their  strength,  their  flight  nor  their  instinct,  from  him. 
With  all  his  knowledge,  his  skill,  his  inventiveness,  his  cunning,  still  the  creatures  are 
independent  of  him,  though  he  is  not  independent  of  them.  They  can  do  without 
him,  but  not  he  without  them.  It  is  another  step  in  the  course  of  the  humiliation 
tlnough  which  the  Lord  is  leading  Job.  Man  may  sling  with  the  atone,  or  shoot  with 
the  arrow,  or  entrap  with  his  skill,  or  train  and  conquer  by  his  superior  wisdom,  yet 


CH.  XXXIX.  1—30,]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  687 


13  he  miserably  impotent  in  their  presence.  An4  roost  certainly  they  derive  neither 
their  life  nor  any  of  their  powers  from  him.  Shall  vain  man,  then,  contend  with  the 
Creator  of  all?  Shall  he  whose  are  all  things  find  him  to  whom  none  belong  entering 
the  lists  with  him  ?  Shall  he  contend  ?  shall  he  instruct  ?  shall  he  reprove  ?  and 
answer?  Nay,  verily.  His  place  is  the  dust,  and  to  the  dust  God  will  humble  him; 
and  in  doing  so,  he  brings  man  into  the  presence  of  his  many  and  beautiful  and 
powerful  creatures,  and  shows  him  how  independent  they  are  of  him.  This  is  the 
teaching  of  the  entire  chapter.  Humility,  therefore,  is  due — 
T.  Beoausb  man  cannot  create  ant  one  of  them. 

II.  Because  they  abe  independent  of  man  fob  theib  oontinuanob  and  sus- 
tenance. 

III.  Because  in  many  of  their  powers  thet  exceed  the  might  of  man,  who 
cannot  give  them  their  speed,  their  strength,  or  their  great  beauty.  How  little  is  man 
amidst  the  wonders  of  the  Divine  hand.s  !  and  how  truly  wise  is  he  who,  in  presence 
of  the  divinely  wrought  creatures,  bows  down  confessing,  "  How  wonderful  are  all  thy 
works,  0  Lord  I "— R.  Or. 

Vers.  5—8. — The  tvild  ass.  The  special  characteristic  of  the  wild  ass  is  said  to  be 
untnictability.  While  no  animal  is  more  tamo  than  the  poor,  ill'treated  donkey  of 
the  London  street,  no  animal  is  more  essentially  untamable  than  the  Syrian  asa  of 
the  desert.  It  is  said  that  though  one  of  these  creatures  had  been  captured  when  young 
and  kept  for  three  years  in  confinement,  it  remained  "as  untractable  as  when  it  was 
first  caught,  biting  and  kicking  furiously  at  every  one  who  approached  it."  It  is  the 
type  of  the  untamable. 

L  GrOD  RULES  ovBB  THE  WILDEST  CREATURES.  When  WO  look  at  the  wlld  ass  we  see 
a  creature  that  is  quite  beyond  the  range  of  man's  dominion.  The  "  lord  of  creation  " 
has  no  authority  here.  His  dominion  ceases  at  the  border  of  the  wilderness.  His  will 
is  scorned  by  the  free  animals  of  the  desert.  Yet  they  are  under  the  rule  of  God,  who 
has  implanted  in  them  their  instincts;  they  live  only  according  to  the  laws  of  the 
nature  that  he  has  made.  Men  break  from  God's  laws  in  self-will  and  thus  they  fall 
into  sin.  Untractable  as  the  wild  ass  is  to  man,  it  is  absolutely  obedient  to  the  will  of 
God,  like  the  sea  that  obeys  the  laws  of  waves  and  tides. 

II.  God  is  the  Author  of  liberty.  The  very  wildness  of  the  creature  is  a  gift  of 
God.  He  has  given  it  its  high  spirits,  its  fleet  running,  its  love  of  the  wilderness. 
God  does  not  keep  his  creatures  like  coweS  and  tamed  beasts  in  a  menagerie.  He 
gives  them  a  wide  field,  and  he  permits  them  to  enjoy  a  large  freedom.  To  beings  of 
a  spiritual  nature  he  also  gives  liberty,  and  that  of  a  higher  order.  Men  are  set  free 
from  external  constraints.  God  treats  us  not  as  slaves,  but  as  children.  Further,  God 
gives  the  highest  liberty  —liberty  of  soul.  He  sets  men  free  from  the  chains  of  ignorance 
and  the  crushing  burden  of  sin.  In  his  glorious  grace  he  deals  most  liberally  with  his 
children.  Not  like  the  despot  who  fears  a  whisper  of  the  word  "  liberty,"  God  grieves 
over  the  self-made  slavery  of  souls,  and  sends  his  gospel  for  the  very  purpose  of  civing 
"liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound  "  (Isa. 
lii.  I).  Surely  liberty  is  a  prize  to  be  eagerly  sought  and  jealously  guarded  in  govern- 
ment, in  thought,  and  in  spiritual  life.    Dryden  writes — 

"  The  love  of  liberty  with  life  is  given. 
And  life  itself  th'  inferior  gift  of  Heaven." 

III,  God  jstendb  us  to  use  our  liberty  in  obedience.  We  must  combine  the  two 
previous  thoughts  to  see  how  the  wild  ass  is  provided  for  by  God.  It  follows  the  laws 
of  its  nature,  and  so  obeys  God  absolutely,  albeit  unconsciously,  while  it  enjoys  the 
largest  liberty.  Thus  jt  cannot  be  said  to  abuse  Its  liberty,  but  oply  to  useit.  Eoam- 
ing  over  the  desert  on  its  swift  feet,  it  espies  the  green  oasis  and  revels  in  the  fresh 
pasturage.  God  expects  us  to  use  our  liberty  in  obedience  to  his  will.  He  does  not 
pour  food  into  our  mouths ;  we  must  seek  it.  He  does  not  force  his  grace  upon  us ; 
we  have  to  follow  the  method  he  has  laid  down,  and  turn  to  him  in  faith.  But  in  doing 
this  we  are  to  use  the  utmost  freedom  of  thought,  and  to  be  absolutely  independent  of 
the  constraints  of  man  on  our  religion,  while  we  ask  for  help  to  be  free  from  t6«  bondage 
of  evil,  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God. — W.  F.  A. 


638  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xxxix.  1— 30 


"Ver.  11. — Trusting  in  mere  strength.  This  chapter  of  n«tural  history  carries  ns  on 
from  one  graphic  picture  to  another,  in  which  we  see  the  glorious  strength  sind  freedom 
of  God's  creatures,  altogether  outside  the  domain  of  man's  rule.  Now  we  are  to  look 
at  the  uruB.  In  bodily  form  he  is  very  like  the  docile  ox ;  yet  how  different  in  habit 
and  temper !  Will  he  serve  us,  lodge  in  our  stall,  plough  our  field  and  drag  our  harrow 
like  his  homely  cousin,  the  drudge  of  the  farm  ?  Yet  he  is  immensely  strong.  We 
cannot  trust  mere  strength. 

I.  Physical  strength  is  not  the  gbbatbbt  gift  of  nature.  There  is  energy 
in  nature.  But  before  we  can  use  it  we  must  apply  mind  to  nature.  A  Samson  may 
do  good  work  in  hard,  rough  times,  but  he  cannot  be  the  Redeemer  of  man.  The 
worship  of  muscle  has  grown  to  enormous  proportions  in  this  age  of  athletics.  Good 
as  it  is  to  be  in  health  and  to  be  strong,  and  natural  as  the  reaction  is  from  extreme 
ascetic  views,  our  modern  glorying  in  health  and  strength  does  not  touch  what  is 
highest  in  man,  and  it  may  lead  to  a  neglect  of  this.  It  may  humble  the  idolizer  of 
strength  for  him  to  consider  how  enormously  his  greatest  power  is  outdone  by  that  ox 
the  urus.     At  best  he  is  creeping  up  far  behind  one  of  the  most  senseless  of  animals. 

II.  Strength  is  fruitless  unless  it  is  turned  to  useful  service.  The  urus 
may  be  stronger  than  the  domestic  ox,  yet  he  wastes  his  powers  in  blundering  about 
in  the  wilderness.  He  cannot  be  put  to  any  good  service,  because  he  will  not  be  con- 
trolled. There  are  men  of  great  power  who  fritter  away  their  energies  aimlessly  and 
fruitlessly,  because  their  minds  and  wills  have  never  been  subdued  and  bent  into  some 
worthy  service.  They  have  ability,  but  they  do  nothing  effectively.  It  is  as  important 
to  train  the  will  as  it  is  to  cultivate  the  faculties.  The  most  useful  service  of  God  and 
man  is  not  always  performed  by  those  who  have  the  greatest  gifts.  The  disposition  to 
serve  will  enable  the  less  gifted  to  do  more  in  life  than  their  brilliant  companions  who 
will  not  stoop  to  wear  the  yoke. 

III.  Strength  can  only  be  of  service  when  it  is  wisely  directed.  The 
urus  is  wild,  senseless,  untamable,  and  not  susceptible  to  educative  influences ;  there- 
fore he  cannot  use  his  strength  for  profitable  work.  Human  strength  needs  Divine 
guidance.  So  long  as  the  soul  is  wild  and  self-willed,  the  powers  of  mind  and  body 
cannot  be  spent  fruitfully.  The  humble  ox  looks  a  less  noble  beast  than  the  wild  and 
daring  bison,  with  his  shaggy  mane,  his  flashing  eye,  his  powerful  neck,  his  thunderous 
charge  ;  yet  the  former  is  useful  because  it  is  obedient.  The  first  lesson  we  have  to 
learn  in  life  is  to  obey  ;  this,  too,  is  the  lastjesson.  As  the  ox  looks  to  its  master,  we 
have  to  look  to  our  Master ;  and  when  we  follow  his  guidance,  whether  our  strength 
be  great  or  small,  it  will  not  be  fruitless. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — The  careless  ostrich.  Each  creature  has  its  own  distinctive  features, 
determined  for  it  by  the  wisdom  and  conferred  on  it  by  the  power  of  God.  Some  of 
these  features  are  not  attractive,  nor  what  we  should  have  selected  if  we  had  had  the 
ordering  of  creation.  They  are  the  more  significant  on  this  account,  because  they 
show  us  the  more  clearly  that  nature  is  not  ordered  according  to  our  thought,  and  yet 
the  whole  description  shows  that  it  is  ordered  well,  and  for  a  grand  total  result  of  life 
far  beyond  anything  we  could  have  imagined.  Now,  we  have  the  special  characteristics 
of  the  ostrich  sketched  with  a  master-hand  in  view  of  these  considerations. 

I.  Excellences.  Here  is  no  caricature,  exaggerating  eccentricities.  Though  what 
look  like  the  defects  of  the  ostrich  are  to  be  referred  to,  its  goodly  wings  are  first 
mentioned.  Let  us  see  merit  wherever  we  can.  In  giving  blame,  let  us  not  condemn 
wholesale.  Although  all  may  not  be  as  we  should  wish,  let  us  generously  acknow- 
ledge that  all  is  not  bad.  It  is  better  to  admire  the  good  in  the  world  than  to  be  only 
on  the  look  out  for  the  evil.  We  shall  be  more  helpful  friends  if  we  rejoice  to  lay  hold 
of  what  is  admirable  in  others,  and  seek  this  first,  instead  of  pouncing  upon  the  ugly 
faults,  like  vultures  who  have  eyes  for  nothing  but  carrion. 

II.  Defects.  The  ostrich  is  not  perfect,  according  to  man's  idea  of  perfection. 
There  are  defects  in  nature,  and  these  defects  are  not  ignored  in  the  natural  theology 
of  "  Job."  It  is  wiser  to  admit  them  frankly  than  to  gloss  them  over.  Although  they 
may  not  be  the  principal  characteristics,  they  startle  us  by  their  very  existence.  The 
ostrich  appears  to  be  lacking  in  maternal  care ;  it  is  a  foolish  creature,  leaving  its  eggs 
without  imagining  the  danger  they  are.  in  of  being  trampled  on  by  the  wild  animals  of 


rat.  XXXIX.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  639 

the  desert.  _  Qtoi  is  leading  nature  on  to  perfection,  but  it  ii  not  yet  perfect.    The  law 
of  nature,  like  that  of  man,  is  progress,  not  stationary  completeness. 

III.  CoMPENSATlONB.  Things  are  not  so  had  with  the  ostrich  as  they  appear  to  us 
at  first  sight.  Although  the  ostrich-eggs  are  left  in  the  sand,  they  do  not  perish  as  the 
eggs  of  most  birds  under  ordinary  circumstances  would  do.  Beneath  the  tropical  heat 
of  the  sun  they  can  bo  deserted  during  the  diiy,  the  bird  returning  to  sit  on  them  at 
night.  Thus  by  the  wonderful  balancing  of  influences  in  nature  the  careless  maternity 
of  the  ostrich  does  not  seriously  endanger  its  offspring.  If  God  has  not  given  the  bird 
wisdom,  it  does  not  need  it.  So  long  as  we  keep  to  the  lines  that  God  has  laid  down, 
we  shall  see  that  most  defects  have  ample  compensation  in  other  directions.  The 
culpable  carelessness  is  that  which  goes  against  the  laws  of  God ;  the  fatal  folly  is  that 
which  departs  from  his  ways.  This  carelessness  and  this  folly  are  not  found  in  the 
ostrich ;  they  are  only  seen  in  man. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  19 — 25. — ITie  war-horse.  This  magnificent  picture  of  the  horse  shows  him 
to  us  as  he  is  about  to  rush  into  battle.  Whilst  asses,  oxen,  and  camels  were  employed 
for  peaceable  work  on  the  farm  and  as  beasts  of  burden,  the  horse  was  almost  confined 
to  war.  He  was  rarely  used  excepting  to  dash  with  the  charioteer  into  the  thick  of 
the  fight.  In  the  poet's  picture  he  is  scenting  the  battle  from  afar.  Let  us  look  at  his 
striking  features. 

L  Stbenoth.  There  are  two  kinds  of  strength — mere  brute  strength  of  muscle,  and 
the  strength  that  is  vitalized  by  nervous  and  mental  influences.  The  urus  is  an 
instance  of  the  former.  In  simple  contractility  of  muscle  he  may  exceed  the  horse. 
But  the  strength  of  the  horse  is  nervous  strength.  It  cannot  well  be  measured,  for  it 
is  continually  fluctuating.  It  varies  in  degree  according  to  the  extent  to  which  the 
sensitive  animal  is  excited.  We  meet  with  the  two  kinds  of  strength  in  men,  and 
especially  in  women.  When  the  mind  fires  the  body,  unheard-of  feats  are  performed. 
In  moments  of  heroism  naturally  feeble  people  seem  to  have  the  strength  of  a  giant. 
God  gives  strength  through  spiritual  influences. 

II.  CouEAGB.  We  may  be  surprised  to  meet  with  this  characteristic  in  •  description 
of  the  horse.  Is  he  not  a  timid  creature,  shying  at  any  unusual  object  by  the  way- 
side ?  This  is  true  when  he  is  dull  and  subdued.  But  our  picture  shows  him  to  us 
as  the  war-horse  rushing  in  to  battle.  Then  he  is  brave  as  a  lion.  His  courage  is  not 
the  dull  indifference  to  danger  that  is  a  trait  of  stupidity,  but  the  fiery  courage  of 
intense  excitement.  It  is  difficult  to  be  brave  in  cold  blood.  It  is  not  easy  to  face  the 
troubles  and  dangers  of  life  without  some  inspiring  influence.  The  Spirit  of  God  in 
him  makes  the  most  timid  brave. 

III.  Ehthusiasm.  The  life  of  the  picture  is  its  enthusiasm.  The  horse  is  impatient 
for  the  rage  of  the  battle,  excited  by  the  distant  sound  of  it  to  a  strong  desire  to  rush 
into  it.  That  is  the  spirit  which  will  give  him  strength  and  courage  to  go  right  into 
the  midst  of  the  danger.  Nothing  succeeds  like  enthusiasm.  Nothing  is  so  beautiful, 
so  inspiriting,  so  full  of  life  and  hope.  It  needs  guidance  or  it  may  plunge  into  disaster ; 
it  is  not  enough  without  the  direction  of  wisdom.  But  wisdoin  is  vain  without 
enthusiasm.  In  the  Christian  life  men  are  uplifted  and  borne  onward  when  they  are 
reached  by  a  wave  of  enthusiasm.  Christ  inspires  the  "  enthusiasm  of  humanity," 
because  he  first  inspires  an  enthusiasm  for  himself.  Now,  the  first  essential  in  a  worthy 
enthusiasm  is  the  perception  of  a  worthy  object.  The  horse  scents  the  battle,  and  the 
horse  knows  its  master.  We  see  the  great  battle  of  sin  and  misery,  and  we  have  a 
glorious  Captain  of  salvation.  The  need  of  the  world  calls  us  to  the  fight ;  the  presence 
of  our  Lord  gives  us  strength  and  courage,  and  ensures  the  victory. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  26 — 30. — 2%e  ?iaw&  and  the  eagle.  L  Nature's  independence  op  man. 
This  is  the  leading  lesson  of  the  whole  chapter,  impressed  upon  us  by  means  of  a  series 
of  most  graphic  illustrations ;  and  it  reaches  its  climax  at  the  concluding  paragraph,  in 
which  the  high-flying  birds  of  prey,  the  hawk  and  the  eagle,  are  described.  These  above 
all  other  creatures  are  independent  of  man.  Denizens  of  the  air,  they  soar  far  above  his 
reach.  No  human  hand  could  give  that  might  of  pinion,  that  keenness  of  vision,  that 
rush  of  life,  which  we  see  in  the  two  bird*— the  one  the  terror  of  all  small  creatures, 
tli»  other  the  dangerous  foe  of  the  young  of  larger  animals.    But  nature  throughout  is 


(AO 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xik.  1—24. 


quite  beyond  the  skill  and  power  of  man.  "By  the  intelligence  God  has  given  us  we 
may  employ  many  of  the  great  natural  forces,  and  subdue  fierce  and  powerful  animals. 
But  this  is  a  small  thing  compared  with  the  thought  that  planned  and  the  energy  that 
wroug'it  in  the  making  of  those  creatures.  Surpassing  us  in  many  enviable  qualities, 
the  kings  of  the  wilderness  teach  us  our  littleaess  in  the  presence  of  the  wonderful 
Great  IT. 

II.  The  triumph  of  movement.  Birds  illustrate  this  most  conspicuously.  Cleaving 
the  air  with  swift,  strong  strokes,  rising  and  falling  at  will,  floating  like  atmospheric 
fishes,  darting  hither  and  thither  with  the  speed  of  an  express  train,  birds  are  the  very 
opposite  of  creatures  that  spend  a  merely  vegetative  existence.  Their  lively  energy  is 
seen  in  dazzling  movements.  Now,  the  movemputs  of  nature  are  typical  of  those  that 
take  place  in  spiritual  regions.  Stagnation  is  death.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  been 
set  right  once  for  all.  The  bird  will  droop  and  fail  if  it  is  always  moping  on  the  perch. 
Souls  must  be  in  movement,  seeking  fresh  enterprises,  pressing  on  to  new  fields  of 
service,  or  at  least  diligently  pursuing  the  line  of  duty.  Souls  want  wings.  We  can 
only  live  our  fullest  life  when  we  rise.  It  is  not  easy  to  soar  into  the  higher  regions, 
The  hawk  mounts  in  a  spiral.  We  cannot  reach  the  altitude  of  spiritual  experience 
at  a  bound ;  and  we  too  may  have  to  work  our  way  up  laboriously.  But  rise  we  must, 
if  we  would  not  fail  in  our  Christian  calling. 

III.  The  victobt  of  vision.  The  eyes  of  the  hawk  and  the  eagle  are  proverbial 
for  strength  and  keenness.  These  birds  can  see  their  prey  irom  afar.  They  would 
perish  if  they  were  blind,  nay,  even  if  they  became  dim-sighted.  Souls  must  have  eyes, 
strong  to  gaze  at  the  light,  keen  to  detect  what  is  valuable.  We  blunder  through  the 
world  in  spiritual  blindness,  seeing  neither  the  glory  of  God  nor  the  best  blessings 
he  has  given  us.  With  clipped  wings  and  hooded  eyes,  how  caQ  vre  enter  into  the 
large  heritage  that  God  has  provided  for  us  ?  Our  souls  need  a  purging  of  their  vision 
from  the  sin  that  blinds  and  maims.  Then  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they 
have  before  them  a  glory  of  sight  and  life  that  leave  the  struggling  attempts  of  hawk 
and  eagle  far  beneath.— W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XL. 


Vers.  1 — 5. — Between  the  first  and  the 
■econd  part  of  the  Divine  discourse,  at  the 
end  of  which  Job  wholly  humbles  himself 
(oh.  xlii.  1 — 6),  is  interposed  a  short  appeal 
on  the  part  of  the  Almighty,  and  a  short 
reply  on  Job's  part,  which,  however,  is  in- 
sufficient. God  calls  upon  Job  to  make  good 
his  charges  (vers.  1,  2).  Job  deelines, 
acknowledges  himself  to  be  of  no  account, 
and  promises  silence  and  submission  for  the 
future  (vera.  S — 5).  But  something  more 
is  needed ;  and  therefore  the  discourse  is 
further  prolonged. 

Vers.  1,  2.— Moreover  the  Lord.  Jehovah, 
as  in  oh.  xxxviii.  1  and  in  the  opening 
chapters  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  xii.  9). 
Answered  Job,  and  said,  Shall  he  that  con- 
tendeth  with  the  Almighty  instruct  him? 
rather,  Can  lie  that  reproveth  oontend  with  the 
Almighty  1  (see  the  Revised  Version).  Does 
Job,  the  reprover,  think  that  he  can  really 
contend  with  the  Almighty?  If  so,  tlieu 
l)»  tUgt  reproTetb  Ogd,  l9t  hini  answer  it ; 


or,  let  him  anraer  thit ;  let  him  answer,  that 
is,  what  has  been  urged  in  ch.  xxxviii.  and 
xxxix. 

Vers.  3,  4.— .Then  Job  answered  the  Lord, 
and  said,  Behold,  I  am  vile ;  literally,  lam 
light;  i.e.  I  am  of  small  account  (see  the 
Revised  Version).  It  would  be  absurd  for 
one  so  weak  and  contemptible  to  attempt  to 
argue  with  the  Almighty.  What  shall  I 
answer  thee  ?  or.  What  should  I  answer  thee  t 
What  should  I  say,  if  I  were  to  attempt  a 
reply  ?  I  wlU  lay  mine  hand  upon  my  month 
(see  the  comment  on  oh.  xxi.  5). 

Ver.  5.— Onoe  have  I  spoken ;  but  I  will 
not  answer :  yea,  twice ;  but  I  will  proceed 
no  further.  The  meaning  is,  "I  have 
already  spoken,  not  onoe,  but  more  than 
onoe.  Now  I  will  be  silent;  I  will  say 
no  more."  There  is  a  sort  of  recognition 
that  the  arguments  used  were  futile,  but  not 
a  full  and  complete  confession,  as  in  ch 
xlii.  3. 

Vers.  6 — 24. — Job's  confession  not  having 
been  sufficiently  ample,  the  Divine  discourse 
is  continued  through  the  remainder  of  this 
chapter,  and  through  the  whole  of  the  next. 


OH.  XL.  1 — 24.] 


♦the  book  of  job. 


641 


the  object  being  to  break  down  the  last 
remnants  of  pride  and  Bolf-trust  in  tlie  soul 
of  the  patriarch,  and  to  bring  him  to  coiu- 
plete  submission  and  dependence  on  the 
Divine  will.  The  arj^ument  falls  under 
three  heads — Can  Job  oopo  with  God  in  his 
general  providence  (vers.  6 — 14)?  can  he 
oven  cope  with  two  of  God's  creatures — 
with  behemoth,  or  the  hippopotamus  (vers. 
15 — ^24);  with  leviathan,  or  the  crocodile 
(oh.  xli.  1— 34)? 

Ver.  6. — ^Then  answered  the  lord  nnto  Job 
cut  of  the  whirlwind,  and  said  (comp.  ch. 
xxxviii.  1).  The  storm  still  continued,  or, 
after  a  lull,  had  returned. 

Ver.  7. — Gird  up  thy  loins  now  like  a  man 
fsee  the  comment  on  ch.  zxxviii.  3) :  I  will 
demand  of  thee,  and  declare  thou  nnto  me. 
Job  is  given  every  opportunity  of  making 
good  his  pleas  before  God.  If  he  has  any- 
thing to  say  that  he  really  wishes  to  urge, 
God  is  ready,  nay,  anxious,  to  hear  him. 

Ver.  8. — Wilt  thou  also  (rather,  even)  dis- 
annul my  judgment  %  i.e.  maintain  that  my 
judgment  towards  thee  has  not  been  just 
and  equitable,  and  therefore,  so  far  as  it  lies 
in  thy  power,  disannul  it  ?  Wilt  thou  con- 
demn me,  that  thou  mayest  be  right  sous  1 
Dost  thou  think  it  necessary  to  accuse  me 
of  injustice,  and  condemn  me,  in  order  to 
establish  thine  own  innocence  ?  But  there 
is  no  such  necessity.  The  two  things — my 
justice  and  tliy  innocence — are  quite  com- 
patible. Only  lay  aside  the  notion  that 
afflictions  must  be  punitive. 

Yer.  9. — Hast  thou  an  arm  like  Godi 
The  might  of  God's  arm  is  often  dwelt  upon 
in  Scripture.  He  brought  Israel  out  of 
Egypt  "  with  a  mighty  hand  and  stretched- 
out  arm  "  (Dout.  v.  15  ;  vii.  19,  etc.).  "  Thou 
hast  a  mighty  arm:  strong  is  thy  hand, 
and  high  is  thy  right  hand,"  says  one  of 
the  psalniists  (Ps.  Ixxxix,  13).  "  Awake, 
awake,  put  on  strength,  O  arm  of  the  Lord!" 
says  Isaiah  (li.  9).  No  human  strength, 
not  the  strength  of  all  men  put  together, 
can  compare  with  it.  Or  canst  thon  thunder 
with  a  voice  like  himi  (comp.  oh.  xxxviii. 
Hi,  35 !  and  for  the  idea  of  thunder  being 
the  actual  "  voice  of  God,"  see  ch.  xxxvii. 
i,  5  ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  33  ;  Ixxvii.  18,  etc.). 

Ver.  10. — Deck  thyself  now  with  majesty 
and  excellency;  and  array  thyself  with 
glory  and  beauty.  God  is  at  all  times 
•'  clothed  vrith  majesty  and  strength  "  (Ps. 
xoiii.  1),  "  with  glory  and  beauty  "  (Ps.  civ. 
1)  He  "  decks  himself  with  Ught  as  with 
a  garment "  (Ps.  civ.  2).  Job  is  challenged 
to  an-ay  himself  similarly. 

Ver  11.— Cast  abroad  the  rage  of  thy 
wrath.     "Give  vent,"  i.e.,  "to  thy  anger 

JOB. 


against  the  wicked,  and  let  it  be  seen  what 
thou  canst  do  in  the  way  of  restraining  evil 
and  punishing  transgressors."  Behold  every 
one  that  is  proud,  and  abase  him.  If  my 
moral  government  does  not  satisfy  thee, 
improve  upon  it.  Put  down  those  wicked 
ones  whom  thou  sayest  that  I  allow  to 
prosper  (ch.  xxiv.  2 — 23);  "  abase"  them  in 
the  dust ;  do  what  thou  accusest  me  of  not 
doing.  Then  wilt  thon  have  established 
•omethihg  of  a  claim  to  enter  into  contro- 
versy with  me. 

Vers.  12, 13. — Look  on  every  one  that  is 
proud,  and  bring  him  low ;  and  tread  down 
the  wicked  in  their  place.  Hide  them  in 
the  dust  together ;  and  bind  their  faces  in 
secret.  The  idea  of  ver.  11  is  still  further 
insisted  on.  Let  Job  manifest  himself  as  a 
power  among  men,  if  he  cannot  rival  God  in 
nature.  Let  him  set  the  world  to  rights. 
Then  he  may  claim  to  be  heard  with  respect 
to  the  moral  government  of  God. 

Ver.  14. — Then  will  I  also  confess  unto 
thee  that  thine  own  right  hand  can  save 
thee.  When  he  has  done  what  he  has  been 
challenged  to  do  in  vers.  9 — 13,  then  Job 
may  venture  to  contend  with  God.  He  will 
have  established  his  own  independence,  and 
God  will  acknowledge  him  na  an  antagonist 
entitled  to  argue  with  him. 

Vers.  15 — 24. — This  passage,  together 
with  the  whole  of  eh.  xli.,  has  been  regarded 
by  some  critics  as  an  interpolation.  Its 
omission  would  certainly  not  affect  the 
argument;  and  it  is  thought,  in  some 
respects,  to  contain  traces  of  a  later  age  than 
that  which  most  commentators  assign  to  the 
remainder  of  the  book,  or,  at  any  rate,  to 
the  greater  portion  of  it.  The  recurrence 
to  the  animal  creation,  when  the  subject 
seemed  to  have  been  completed  (ch.  xxxix. 
SO),  is  also  a  difficulty.  But,  on  the  oj;her 
hand,  as  there  is  no  variation,  eather  in 
the  manuscripts  or  in  the  versions,  and  no 
marked  difference  either  of  style  or  toue  of 
thought  between  the  rest  of  the  book  and 
this  controverted  passage,  it  is  best  regarded 
as  an  integral  portion  of  the  work,  proceed- 
ing from  the  same  author,  although  perhaps 
at  a  Inter  period.  No  one  denies  that  the 
style  is  that  of  the  best  Hebrew  poetry,  or 
that  the  book  would  be  weakened  by  the 
excision  of  the  passage.  "Le  style,"  says 
M.  Eenan,  "  est  celui  des  meillenrs  endroits 
du  po^me.  XuUe  part  la  coupe  n'est  plug 
vigoreuse,  le  paralldlisme  plus  gonore." 

Ver.  15. — Behold  now  behemoth.  "  Behe- 
moth "  is  ordinarily  the  plural  of  behSmdh, 

2  X 


642 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[CH.  XL.  1—24, 


"  a  beast ; "  but  it  is  eoaioely  poBsible  to 
nnderstand  the  word  in  this  sense  in  the 
present  passage,  where  it  seems  to  be  a  noun 
singular,  being  followed  by  singular  verbs, 
and  represented  by  singular  pronouns. 
Hence  modem  critics  almost  unanimously 
regard  the  word  here  as  designating  "  some 
particular  animal."  The  mammutli,  the 
rhinoceros,  the  hippopotamus,  and  the  ele- 
phant have  been  suggested.  Of  these  the 
mammoth  is  precluded  by  the  want  of  any 
evidence  that  it  existed  in  Job's  day,  and 
the  rhinoceros  by  the  absence  of  any  allu- 
sion to  its  peculiar  leature.  Authorities 
are  divided  almost  equally  between  the 
elephant  and  the  hippopotamus;  but  the 
best  recent  Hebraists  and  naturalists  in- 
cline rather  to  the  latter.  Which  I  made 
with  thee;  i.e.  " which  I  created  at  tlie 
same  time  as  I  created  thee  "  (Geu.  i.  24— 
26).  He  eateth  grass  as  an  ox;  i.e.  he  is 
graminivorous,  not  carnivorous.  This  is 
admitted  to  be  true  of  the  hippopotamus, 
which  lives  in  the  Nile  during  the  day, 
and  at  night  emerges  from  the  river,  and 
devastates  the  crops  of  sugar-cane,  rice, 
and  millet. 

Ver.  16. — ^Lo  now,  his  strength  is  in  his 
loins.  The  strength  of  the  hippopotamus' 
IB  its  principal  characteristic.  Weighing 
often  two  thousand  kilogrammes,  and  of  a 
short  thick  make,  when  roused  to  anger  it 
has  a  force  which  is  irresistible.  In  the 
water  it  upsets  large  boats;  on  land  it 
forces  its  way  through  dense  thickets  and 
fences  of  all  kinds.  The  loins  aro  espe- 
cially strong,  being  deep,  broad,  and  im- 
mensely muscular.  And  his  force  is  in  the 
navel  of  his  belly ;  rather,  in  the  mueelea  of 
his  belly.  The  word  used  (Dnn»)  occurs 
only  in  this  place.  It  is  a  plural  form, 
and  therefore  cannot  designate  a  single  ob- 
ject, like  the  navel.  The  root  seems  to  be 
the  .Syriac  egrir,  "  firm,"  whence  Schultens 
proposes  to  translate  annef  hy  firmitates. 

Ver.  17. — He  moveth  his  tailJike  a  cedar. 
The  tail  of  the  hippopotamus  is  remarkably 
short  and  thick.  It  only  bends  slightly, 
being  stiff  and  unyielding,  like  the  stem  of 
a  cedar.  The  sinews  of  his  stones  (rather, 
of  his  thighs)  are  wrapped  together ;  or,  in- 
terwoven one  with  another  (so  Professor  Lee 
and  Mr.  Houghton). 

Ver.  18. — His  bones  are  as  strong  pieces 
of  brass  ;  rather,  as  tubes  of  bronze.  The 
great  thigh-bones— /jripfa  of  the  Greeks- 
are  probably  intended.  These  are  hollow, 
being  filled  with  marrow,  and  are  so  strong 
that  they  may  be  well  compared  to  "  tubes 
of  bronze."  (On  the  identity  of  nglthushah 
or  nSTtlwsheth  with  "  bronze "  rather  than 
"  brass,"  boc  the  article  on  "  Brass,"  in  Dr. 
W.  Smith's  'Dintiuuary  of  tlie  Bible,'  vol. 
i.  p.  225.)    His  hones  (rather,  his  ribs)  are 


like  bars  of  iron.  Either  the  ribs,  or  the 
solid  bones  of  the  lower  leg,  forearm,  etc., 
are  intended. 

Ver.  19. — He  is  the  chief  of  the  ways  of 
God.  This  is  the  main  argument  in  favour 
of  the  elephant,  rather  than  the  hippopota- 
mus, being  intended  (see  Schultens,  ad  loc). 
It  has,  indeed,  been  argued  that  some  speci- 
mens of  the  hippopotamus  exceed  the  ele- 
phant in  height  and  bulk  (Canon  Cook,  in 
the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  iv.  p.  19) ; 
but  no  modern  naturalist  certainly  would 
place  the  former  animal  above  tlie  latter 
in  any  catalogue  raisonn^e  of  animals  ar- 
ranged according  to  their  size  and  impor- 
tance. The  elephant,  however,  may  not  have 
been  known  to  the  author  of  job,  or,  at  any 
rate,  the  Asiatic  species,  which  seems  not  to 
have  been  imported  into  Assyria  before  the 
middle  of  the  ninth  century  B.o.  In  this  case,- 
the  hippopotamus  might  well  seem  to  him 
the  grandest  of  the  works  of  God.  He  that 
made  him  can  make  his  sword  to  approach 
unto  him.  This  is  explained  to  mean, 
"  Only  God  can  attack  behemoth  with  suc- 
cess and  slay  him  ;  man  is  powerless  to  do 
so  "  (Canon  Cook,  Stanley  Leathes,  Revised 
Version).  But  the  Egyptians,  from  very 
early  times,  used  to  attack  the  hippopotamus 
and  slay  him  (Wilkinson,  in  the  author's 
'Herodotus,'  vol.  ii.  p.  100).  It  is  better, 
therefore,  to  translate  the  passage,  with 
Soliultens,  "He  that  made  him  hatii  fur- 
nished him  with  his  sword,"  and  to  under- 
stand by  "his  sword"  tliose  sharp  teeth 
with  which  the  hippopotamus  is  said  to 
"  cut  the  grass  as  neatly  as  if  it  were  mown, 
and  to  sever,  as  if  with  shears,  a  tolerably 
stout  and  thick  stem"  (Wood,  'Natural 
History,'  vol.  i,  p.  762).  Compare  the  •  The- 
riaca '  of  Meander,  U.  566,  567 — 

*H  !Wou,  Tbv  Ne7\os  ujrep  Saiy  ai6a\6eaaav 
BiSo-Kci,  apovpii<riv  Be  kokJ)i' ImjSoAAeToi  &pm]v, 

Ver.  20. — Surely  the  mountains  bring  him 
forth  food.  Neither  the  hippopotamus  nor 
the  elephant  is  an  inhabitant  of  "moun- 
tains," according  to  our  use  of  the  word. 
But  the  harim  (onq)  of  the  original  is  used 
of  very  moderate  eminences.  In  the  highly 
poetical  language  of  Job,  and  especially  of 
tills  passage,  the  term  may  well  be  applied 
to  the  hills  on  either  side  of  the  Nile, 
which  approaoli  closely  to  the  river,  and  to 
this  day  furnish  the  liippopotamus  with  a 
portion  of  its  food  (see  Hasselquist,  '  Tra- 
vels,' p.  188).  Where  aU  the  beasts  of  the 
field  play.  By  "the  beasts  of  the  field" 
seom  to  be  meant  the  cattle  and  other  do- 
mestic animals  whioli  are  not  driven  from 
their  pasture-grounds  by  the  "  river-horse  " 
(Tristram, '  Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Bible,'  p.  52). 

Ver.  21. — He  lieth  nudet  the  shady  trees  j 


CH.  xii.  1 — 24.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


643 


or,  under  the  lotus  trees  C^evised  Tersion). 
The  Lotus  eyhestris,  or  Lotus  Oyrenaiea, 
"grows  abundantly  on  the  hot  bauka  of 
the  Upper  Nile  "  (Cook),  and  ie  thought  to 
be  the  tree  here  intended  (Sohultens,  Cook, 
Houghton,  and  others).  But  the  identifi- 
cation is  very  doubtful.  The  dense  shade 
of  trees  is  sought  alike  l>y  the  hippopotamus 
and  the  elephant.  In  the  covert  of  the  reed, 
and  fens.  This  is  exactly  descriptive  of  the 
hippopotamus;  far  less  so  of  the  elephant. 
Gordon  Cumraing  says,  "At  every  turn 
there  occurred  deep,  still  pools,  and  occa- 
sional sandy  islands,  densely  clad  with 
lofty  reeds.  Above  and  beyond  these 
reeds  stood  trees  of  immense  age,  beneath 
which  grew  a  rank  kind  of  grass,  on 
which  tlie  sea-cow  (hippopotamus)  delights 
to  pasture  "  ('  Lion-Hunter  of  South  Africa,' 
p.  297). 

Ver.  22. — The  shady  trees  (or,  the  lotus 
trees)  cover  him  with  their  shadow  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  21);  the  willows  of  the 
brook  oompass  him  lonnd  abont.  The  "  wil- 
low of  the  brook"  (Lev.  xxiii.  40)  is  pro- 
bably the  Salix  Mgyptiaca,  or  safsdf,  which 
grows  plentifully  in  the  Nile  valley,  fjing- 
ing  the  course  both  of  the  Nile  itself  and 
of  the  many  streams  derived  from  it.    The 


Salix  Babylonica,  or  "  weeping  willow,"  ia 
less  likely. 

Ver.  23. — Behold,  he  drinketh  ap  a  liver, 
and  hasteth  not ;  rather,  behold,  ht  a  river 
overflow,  he  tremhleth  not  {liv  Tr\i]/ji)ivpa  ye- 
mjTai,  ov  n^  alffSriBf,  LXX).  As  an  amphi- 
bious animal,  the  overflowing  of  a  river  has- 
no  terrors  for  the  hippopotamus.  But  it 
would  have  some  terrors  for  an  elephant. 
He  trosteth  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  into 
his  month.  It  is  better  to  translate,  he  is 
steadfast  (or,  confident),  though  Jordan  swell 
even  to  his  mouth.  "  Jordan "  probably 
stands  for  any  large  and  strong-flowing 
river.  The  conjecture  that  pT  is  a  cor- 
ruption of  T,  which  often  stands  for  "the 
Nile,"  is  ingenious,  but  unnecessary. 

Ver.  24.— He  taketh  it  with  his  eyes; 
rather,  Sliall  one  take  him  when  he  is  looking 
on  ?  "  Can  he  be  capture d,"  i.e., "  when  liis 
eyes  are  open,  and  when  lie  sees  what  is  in- 
tended ?  No.  If  captured  at  all,  it  must  be 
by  subtlety,  when  he  is  not  on  the  watch." 
His  nose  pieroeth  through  snares ;  rather. 
Or  can  one  hore  his  nostril  with  cords  ?  i.e. 
can  wo  lead  him  away  captive,  with  a  ring 
or  hook  passed  through  his  nose,  and  a 
cord  attached  (compare  the  next  chapter, 
ver.  2)? 


H0MILETI08. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Jehovah  to  Job:   the  first  answer — the  application.     I.   Jbhovae's 

CONDESCENSION  TOWARDS  JoB.  1.  In  listening  with  patient  silence  to  Job's  censures 
and  complaints.  "Shall  he  that  contendeth  with  the  Almighty  instruct  him?" 
literally,  "  Shall  the  reprover  [i.e.  of  God]  contend  in  contending  with  the 
Almighty  ?  "  This  ia  the  first  formal  notice  taken  by  Jehovah  of  the  fact  that  Job  had 
indulged  in  censorious  reflections  against  the  Divine  character  and  administration. 
They  had  all  been  heard  by  that  ever-listening  ear  which  no  sound  can  escape.  But 
no  sign  or  indication  bad  been  given  that  the  Deity  was  cognizant  of  the  reflections 
cast  upon  him  by  his  angry  servant.  Patiently  he  had  suficred  Job  to  proceed  against 
him  as  far  as  he  thought  good.  And  the  like  meek,  uncomplaining  attitude  does  he 
still  preserve  towards  theuj,  whether  ungodly  unbelievers  or  backsliding  professors, 
who  cast  reproaches  on  his  Name  (Ps.  1.  21).  The  Divine  patience  in  the  face  of  man's 
provocations  to  wrath  is  a  sublime  miracle  of  condescension.  2.  In  seeking  rather  to 
remove  Job's  censures  by  instruction  than  to  silence  them  by  chastisement.  When  at 
length  Job  had  ended  his  long  arraignment  of  the  Divine  government  of  the  world,  it 
would  not  have  been  surprising  had  God  descended  on  him  by  way  of  punishment, 
calling  him  to  account  for  his  over-bold  behaviour.  Instead  of  that,  the  Almighty 
causes  an  ambassador,  Elihu,  to  deal  with  him  by  way  of  education,  imparting  to  him 
such  views  of  God's  character  and  ways  as  might  serve  to  correct  his  misapprehensions. 
Nay,  himself,  the  supreme  Jehovah,  stoops  to  become  his  own  Ambassador  for  the 
selfsame  purpose,  that  he  might  set  before  the  mind  of  his  servant  such  an  image  and 
presentment  of  himself  that  the  misconceptions  which  gave  rise  to  his  censures  might 
be  removed.  What  (Jod  gave  to  Job  out  of  the  whirlwind  he  has  in  the  Person  of 
Jesus  Christ  given  to  the  world — a  manifestation  of  himself— and  for  a  like  purpose, 
not  condemnation,  but  salvation  (John  iii.  17),  through  the  removal  of  those  erroneous 
ideas  which  hinder  men  from  giving  him  their  confidence  and  love  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  S. 
In  submitting  to  discuss  the  question  of  his  own  cliaraoter  with  his  creature.  "  He  that 
reproveth  God,  let  him  answer  it;"  i.e.  if  Job  had  anything  to  urge  in  reply  to  the 
representation  which  God  had  given  of  himself,  God  was  ready  to  attend  to  it.    Sursly 


644  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xl.  1—24 

here  was  a  depth  of  Belf-abasement  to  which  only  a  God  of  love  and  grace  could  stoop ! 
A  prefigurement,  may  it  not  be  said,  of  the  stupendous  condescension  of  the  iDcarnation, 
when  God,  not  arrayed  in  majesty,  but  clothed  in  the  lowly  garb  of  humauity,  stooped 
to  talk  with  sinful  man,  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend  I 

II.  Job's  submission  to  Jehovah.  1.  An  acknowledgment  of  insignificomce. 
"Behold,  I  am  vile;"  literally,  "I  am  mean,  small,  of  no  account,  a  being  to  be  despised 
in  comparison  with  thee."  It  is  not  yet  a  sense  of  moral  imperfection  that  fills  the 
breast  of  Job,  as  afterwards,  when  the  second  Divine  remonstrance  ends  (ch.  xlii.  6), 
but  simply  a  vivid  realization  of  his  utter  feebleness  and  contemptibleness  before  a  God 
of  such  incomparable  majesty  as  Jehovah,  of  such  far-reaching  power  and  wide-ranging 
wisdom.  Man  never  knows  his  real  littleness  until  he  understands  the  greatness  of 
God.  2.  A  confession  of  ignorance.  "  What  shall  I  answer  thee?"  Job  meant  that 
he  felt  utterly  unable  to  reply  to  the  arguments  which  God  had  adduced  in  support  of 
his  right  to  govern  the  world  on  principles  of  his  own  without  taking  Job  or  any  other 
creature  into  his  confidence.  Hence  the  resolution,  "  I  will  lay  my  hand  upon  my 
mouth,"  was  designed  to  intimate  both  his  resolution  to  be  silent  and  his  inability  to 
reply.  The  less  men  attempt  to  answer  God  the  better.  When  God  brings  his 
heavenly  teachings  home  to  the  spirit,  the  proper  attitude  is  silent  admiration  and 
submission.  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  3.  An  admission  of  error. 
"Once have  I  spoken;  but  I  will  not  answer  [literally,  'and  I  will  not  answer,'  i.e.  I 
will  not  reply  again] ;  yea,  twice ;  but  [literally, '  and ']  I  will  proceed  no  further." 
Whether  Job  intended  to  say  that  he  had  twice,  or  only  once,  answered  God,  he  certainly 
meant  that  he  had  spoken  wrongly  in  his  previous  ntterances.  It  was  much  that  he 
had  now  arrived  at  a  clear  perception  of  his  error.  It  was  a  good  preparation  for  his 
ultimate  complete  withdrawal  from  the  false  position  which  all  throughout  the  con- 
troversy with  God  he  had  maintained.  4.  A  profession  of  amendment.  He  had  done 
wrong  in  the  past;  he  wovdd  do  so  no  more — at  least  in  this  respect.  This  becoming 
resolution  was  "  a  fruit  meet  for  repentance,"  a  promise  of  the  final  soul-surrender 
which  was  drawing  nigh. 

Learn :  1.  That  God  deals  with  men  on  the  principles  of  grace,  even  when  they 
richly  deserve  to  receive  only  justice.  2.  That  for  a  puny  creature  to  find  fault  with 
God  is  an  amazing  act  of  presumption.  3.  That  the  first  sign  of  goodness  in  a  human 
soul  is  a  perception,  however  faint,  of  its  own  insignificance.  4.  That  they  who  have 
fallen  into  sin  once  should,  like  Job,  endeavour  to  do  so  no  more. 

Vers.  6 — 14. — Jehovah  to  Job:  the  second  answer:  1.  A  sublime  challenge.  I.  A 
SUMMONS  ISSUED.  "Gird  up  thy  loins  like  a  man :  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  declare 
thou  unto  me."  Here  again  appears  a  series  of  gracious  wonders.  1.  That  Jehovah 
should  propose  to  continue  further  the  instruction  of  his  servant.  But  so  God  deals 
with  all  whom  he  undertakes  to  educate,  teaching  them  with  patience,  perseverance 
minuteness,  giving  them  line  upon  line,  and  desisting  not  until  their  spiritual  enlighten- 
ment is  complete.  2.  That  Jehovah  should  advise  his  servant  of  the  searching 
character  of  the  examination  to  which  he  was  about  to  be  subjected.  He  had  done  so  on 
the  first  occasion.  But  after  Job's  partial  submission  it  might  have  been  expected 
that  the  second  ordeal  would  be  easier  than  the  first.  In  order  to  prevent  the  rise  of 
any  such  misunderstanding,  Job  is  a  second  time  advised  that  the  forthcoming  inter- 
view, like  the  first,  will  require  on  his  part  the  most  strenuous  resolution  and 
endeavour.  God  seldom  takes  his  people  unawares  except  with  mercy.  3.  That 
Jehovah  should  a  second  time  invite  his  servant  to  become  his  instructor.  This  is  practi- 
cally what  he  does_  in  giving  Job  another  opportunity  to  reply  to  his  interrogations. 
But  there  is  no  limit  to  God's  grace  in  stooping  to  help  his  creature  man. 

II.  A  QnEBTiON  ASKED.  "  Wilt  thou  also  disannul  my  judgment  ?  wilt  thou  condemn 
me,  that  thou  mayest  be  righteous?"  Jehovah  means  by  this  to  say  that  Job's 
conduct,  in  maintaining  as  he  had  done  his  own  righteousness,  really  involved  two 
tremendous  assumptions.  1.  That  he  (Job)  covid  govern  the  world  better  (i.e.  more 
justly)  than  Ood.  Hence  Jehovah  inquires  if  Job  proposed  to  disannul  the  Divine 
judgment,  and  take  upon  himself  the  task  of  administering  mundane  affairs.  Even 
good  men  do  not  always  understand  how  much  is  involved  in  the  statements  they 
rashly  utter,    lior  can  any  interpreter  so  clearly  tell  them  as  God.    2.  Tiiat  he  (Job) 


dii.*i.l— S4J  tflfi  BOOK  OF  JOfi.  «46 

was  a  more  righteous  leing  than  his  Maker.  No  doubt  Job  would  have  shrunk 
from  any  such  deification  of  himself,  had  be  clearly  foreseen  how  much  his  utterances 
meant.  Job's  example  should  teach  saints  to  keep  the  door  of  their  lips.  That 
Jehovah  still  urged  these  interrogatioQS  on  his  servant  was  a  proof  that  the  work  of 
reducing  him  to  complete  subjection  was  not  yet  accomplished. 

III.  A  PBOPOSAL  HADE.  That  Job  should  for  once  take  God's  place,  and  show  what 
he  could  do  in  the  way  of  governing  the  world.  "  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  Gk)d  ?  or 
canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like  him?"  On  the  supposition  that  Job  is  com- 
petent to  exchange  places  with  the  Supreme,  he  is  invited :  1,  To  array  himself  in  the 
royal  robes  of  Deity.  "Deck  thyself  now  with  majesty  and  excellency;  and  array 
thyself  with  glory  and  beauty."  Whatever  glory  man  possesses  is  not  inherent,  but 
derived,  and  is  really  as  no  glory  by  the  renson  of  the  glory  that  excelleth,  viz.  the 
glory  of  the  supreme  Creator.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firma- 
ment showeth  his  handiwork.''  God  "  covereth  himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment," 
and  is  "clothed  with  honour  and  with  majesty."  Jehovah  means  that  Job  should 
similarly  array  himself  in  splendours  like  those  of  the  material  creation,  or  that  lie 
should  occupy  the  throne  of  which  these  constituted,  as  it  were,  the  external  trappings 
and  visible  decorations.  2.  To  display  the  righteous  wrath  of  Deity.  "  Cast  abroad 
the  rage  of  thy  wrath;"  literally,  "  Let  the  overflowings  of  thy  wrath  pour  themselves 
forth."     A  characteristic  attribute  of  Deity  to  manifest  holy  indignation  against  evil- 

•  doers  (Isa.  ii.  10 — 21),  it  is  here  suggested  to  Job  for  imitation.  This,  however,  does  not 
warrant  good  men  to  usurp  the  place  and  function  of  him  who  says,  "  Vengeance  is 
mine :  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  God's  people  may  pour  forth  their  righteous 
indignation  against  iniquity ;  upon  the  evil-doer  they  are  only  warranted  to  pour  forth 
pity.  3.  To  exercise  the  judicial  functions  of  Deity.  "  Behold  every  one  that  is  proud, 
and  abase  him; "  or,  "  Behold  all  pride  and  abase  it ;  behold  all  pride  and  bring  it  low  ; 
and  tread,"  or  oast  down,  "  the  wicked  in  their  place."  The  language  sets  forth  (1)  the 
principle  of  the  Divine  administration,  which  is  to  humble  pride  (Lev.  ixvL  19 ;  Ps. 
xviii.  27 ;  Prov.  viii.  13 ;  Isa.  ii.  11 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  12) ;  (2)  the  certainty  of  its  opera- 
tion, indicated  by  the  repetition  of  the  challenge,  "  Behold  all  pride,  and  abase  it," 
i.e.  as  I  do  vnthout  failing ;  (3)  the  ease  with  which  it  is  carried  into  execution, 
"  Behold  pride,  and  abase  it,"  cast  it  down  with  a  look,  as  I  do ;  (4)  the  efficiency  with 
which  it  is  performed,  "  Hide  them  in  the  dust  together,  and  bind  their  faces  in 
secret,"  the  allusion  being  either  to  the  shutting  up  of  prisoners  (Dmbreit,  DelitzscK), 
or  perhaps  to  the  bandaging  of  mummies  or  shrouding  of  corpses  (Carey). 

IV.  A  BE8ULT  STIPULATED.  "  Then  wiU  I  also  confess  unto  thee  [or, '  extol  thee '] 
that  thine  own  hand  can  save  thee  [or,  'bring  to  thee  help']."  The  words  imply: 
1,  JTiat  man  cannot  save,  or  even  effectually  he^,  himself.  The  human  heart  is  pronu 
to  think  it  can  effect  its  own  deliverance  from  misery  and  sin ;  but  the  utter  helpless- 
ness of  man  to  escape  condemnation  and  free  himself  from  the  moral  pollution  in  which 
he.  naturally  lies,  or  even  to  surmount  the  calamities  of  life,  is  not  only  declared  by 
Scripture,  but  confirmed  by  all  experience,  "  Without  me,"  said  Christ,  "  ye  can  do 
nothing."  2.  That  nothing  short  of  Divine  power  is  required  to  accomplish  man's 
salvation.  Only  on  the  hypothesis  that  Job  was  possessed  of  powers  and  attributes 
that  were  Divine  does  Jehovah  admit  that  he  might  achieve  his  own  emancipation 
from  either  the  aflSiclions  that  assailed  his  body  or  the  fears  that  disturbed  his  mind. 
This  thought  lays  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  doctrine  of  the  self-regenerative  power  of 
human  nature.  "  That  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh."  3.  That  mch  power  belongs 
exclusively  to  Jehovah.  Hence  he  alone  is  a  God  of  salvation.  "  I  am  a  just  God  and 
a  Saviour,  and  there  is  none  beside  me."  Hence  also  he  alone  is  the  quarter  to  which 
man  should  look  for  succour.  "0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself;  bnt  in  me  is  thy 
help."  4.  That,  as  a  consequence,  to  Ood  alone  belongs  the  praise  of  man's  salvation. 
Jehovah  admits  that  to  save  a  man  like  Job  would  be  a  creditable  achievement,  an 
extremely  praiseworthy  deed,  and  offers,  moreover,  U>  extol  him  if  he  can  perform  it. 
Bnt  to  God  alone  pertains  the  power  that  is  able  to  redeem.  Hence  also  to  God  alone 
pertains  the  glory  (1  Chron.  xxix.  11 ;  Eev.  iv.  11 ;  v.  9,  12). 

Learn :  1.  That  the  proper  subject  of  man's  judgment  is  not  God,  but  himself.  2. 
That  he  who  thinks  to  rival  God  is  self-deceived.  3.  That  the  visible  part  of  God^s 
glory  is  as  nothing  in  comparison  to  what  is  yet  to  be  revealed.    4.  That  God's 


6i6  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [ch.xl.  1— 24. 


government  of  the  world  in  always  in  the  interests  of  meekness,  truth,  and  righteous- 
ness. 5.  That  man  should  not  stint  the  praise  of  him  who  hath  brought  salvation 
nigh  to  a  fallen  world. 

Vers.  15  —  24.  —  Jehovah  to  Job:    the  second  answer:  2.    Concerning  behemoth. 

1.  The  relation  of  behemoth  to  other  animals.  "  He  is  the  chief  of  the  ways 
of  God  "  (ver.  19).  This  huge  monster,  this  giant  among  beasts,  as  perhaps  the  above- 
cited  phiase  indicates,  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  the  hippopotamus,  or 
Nile-horse.  It  is  here  described  by  a  variety  of  particulars.  1.  Its  terrific  strength. 
Concerning  this  are  noted :  (1)  its  seat  or  source,  the  creature's  inward  parts — "  Lo 
now,  his  strength  is  in  his  loins,  and  his  fovce  is  in  the  navel  [literally,  '  the  cords,' 
i.e.  tlie  sinews  or  muscles]  of  his  belly;"  "the  sinews  of  his  stones,"  or  legs,  "are 
wrapped  together,"  or  firmly  interwoven;  "his  bones  are  as  strong  pieces,"  tubes, 
"  of  brass ;  his  bones  are  like  bars  of  iron "  (vers.  16 — 18) ;  and  (2)  its  exercise  or 
manifestation — "  he  moveth  his  tail  like  a  cedar,"  with  as  much  ease  "  as  the  mighty 
tempest  is  able  to  drive  hither  and  thither  the  loftiest  trees"  (Umbreit).  2.  Its 
herbivorous  appetite.  "  He  eateth  grass  as  an  ox  "  (ver.  15) ;  "  Surely  the  mountains 
bring  him  forth  food"  (ver.  20).  Though  an  animal  of  such  gigantic  proportions,  the 
hippopotamus  is  not  carnivorous  as  might  have  been  anticipated.  The  quantity 
of  food,  however,  which  he  does  devour  is  enormous.  "  He  makes  sad  havoc  among 
the  rice-fields  and  cultivated  grounds,  when  he  issues  forth  from  the  reedy  fens '.' 
(Tristram).  3.  Its  peaceful  disposition.  Whereas  one  might  naturally  have  expected 
to  find  him  ferocious,  "  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  play  around "  (ver.  20)  while  he 
grazes.  If  unmolested,  he  is  harmless.  How  much  of  the  ferocity  of  even  wild  animals 
is  the  natural  response  to  the  cruelty  of  man !  The  creatures  would  seldom  rise  against 
man  if  he  did  not  first  tyrannize  over  them.  4.  Its  amphibious  nature.  While  capable 
of  living  on  the  land,  its  peculiar  habitation  is  under  the  lotus-bushes,  and  among  the 
reeds  and  fens  of  the  river.  "The  shady  trees  cover  him  with  their  shadow;  the 
willows  of  the  brook  compass  him  about "  (ver.  22).  5.  Its  absolute  fea/rlessness.  So 
much  at  home  among  the  water  is  the  brute  that  it  matters  nothing  whether  the  river 
is  in  flood  or  not.  "  Behold,  if  the  stream  be  strong,  he  doth  not  quake :  he  remaineth 
cheerful,  though  a  Jordan  burst  upon  his  mouth"  (ver.  23). 

II.  The  relation  of  behemoth  to  man.  1.  Created  along  with  man.  "  Behold 
bow  behemoth,  which  I  made  with  thee  "  (ver.  15).  The  language  might  certainly 
mean  that  b(  hemoth  was  one  of  those  primeval  animals  which  were  called  into  exist- 
ence with  man  on  the  sixth  of  the  creative  days  (Carey),  but  probably  it  implies 
nothing  more  than  that  behemoth  had  been  created  to  be  with  man  (Bochart,Delitzsch), 
or  as  well  as  man  (Umbreit).  Though  the  firstling  of  the  ways  of  God,  a  very  master- 
piece of  the  Divine  Artificer's  hand,  he  was  still  a  creature  like  Job.  2.  Subordinated 
at  first  to  man.  Though  not  stated  in  the  passage,  it  is  worthy  of  being  here  recalled, 
that  man  was  by  an  original  appointment  of  the  Creator  constituted  lord  of  the 
creatures  (Gen.  i.  28).  What  is  suggested  by  the  passage  is  the  loss  of  this  divinely 
given  supremacy  over  the  animals,  3.  Untamable  by  man.  "He  taketh  it  with  his 
eyes  :  his  nose  pierceth  through  snares  "  (ver.  24).  This  may  signify  that  the  animal 
when  swimming  receiveth  the  water  up  to  his  eyes,  and  is  able  to  drive  right  through 
any  snares  or  nets  that  may  be  spread  to  catch  him  (Carey) ;  but  the  rendering  of  the 
margin  is  commonly  preferred,  "Will  any  take  him  in  his  sight?"  i.e.  can  one  catch 
him  while  he  is  watching?  "or  bore  his  nose  with  a  gin?"  "Neither  the  open  face, 
nor  the  stratagem,  which  one  employs  with  effect  with  other  animals,  is  sufficient  to 
overpower  this  monster  "  (Delitzsch). 

III.  1'he  relation  of  behemoth  to  God.  1.  Behemoth  was  Qod's  creature.  Job 
at  the  best  was  nothing  more.  Jehovah  had  made  Job;  Jehovah  had  also  made 
behemoth.  This  was  fitted  to  remind  Job  (1)  of  his  dependence  upon  Q^d ;  (2)  of 
the  humility  he  should  cherish  when  reflecting  on  his  origin ;  (3)  of  the  relation 
he   sustained  to  the   animals ;  and  (4)  of  the  kindness  he  owed  to  the  creatures. 

2.  Behemoth  was  Cod's  masterpiece.  "  The  chief  of  the  ways  of  God  "  (ver.  19),  as 
above  hinted,  points  to  superiority  of  nature  rather  than  to  priority  of  time.  The 
behemoth  was,  in  its  sphere  or  world,  one  of  the  nobleat  productions  of  God.  Was  man 
also,  in  his  sphere  or  world,  a  masterpiece  of  God  ?    Here  was  food  for  reflection  to  the 


on.XL.  1— 24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  «47 

patriarch,  for  self-examination,  and  doubtless  also  for  self-humiliation.  3.  Behemoth 
was  Ood's  subject.  "  He  that  made  him  can  make  his  sword  approach  unto  him  "  (ver. 
19).  Though  this  verse,  when  properly  translated,  points  rather  to  the  peculiar  sword 
which  God  has  bestowed  on  behemoth,  viz.  "  the  gigantic  incisors  ranged  opposite  one 
another,  with  which  it  grazes  upon  the  meadow  as  with  a  sickle  "  (Delitzsch),  yet  the 
sentiment,  as  it  stands,  is  correct,  and  was  probably  one  Jehovah  intended  to  suggest, 
viz.  that  though  Job  could  not  master  behemoth,  yet  he,  Jehovah,  could. 

Learn:  1.  That  he  who  made  the  world  of  creatures  is  best  able  to  describe  them. 
2.  That  God  rejoices  in  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  lower  creatures.  3.  That  in 
every  sphere  of  creation  there  are  gradations  of  excellence  among  the  works  of  God. 
4.  That  from  the  study  of  zoology  we  may  learn  much  concerning  the  power,  wisdom, 
and  goodness  of  the  Creator.  5.  That  when  man  can  put  a  saddle  on  behemoth  he 
may  begin  to  cherish  the  hope  of  being  able  to  rule  the  world. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOHS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Conclusion  of  Jehovah's  address:  reply  of  Job:  lowliness  in  the  presence 
of  Jehovah.     The  words  of  Jehovah  express  this — 

I.  That  the  Divine  works  peesbnt  a  tbiojiphant  challenoe  to  human 
INTELLIGENCE.  (Ver.  2.)  Can  man  surpass  them?  Can  he  even  imitate  tfiem  ? 
What  can  he  do  but  silently  admire  them,  and  adore  the  Author  of  them?  Therefore 
the  serious  contemplation  of  the  works  of  God  is  well  fitted  to  silence  an  ignorant 
criticism,  and  quell  the  idle  murmurs  of  discontent.  To  trace  his  power,  wisdom,  and 
fatherly  love  through  the  various  departments  of  the  visible  universe  is  to  deepen  in  our 
minds  faith  in  his  order.  We  in  some  way  are  instruments  for  promoting  that  order, 
and  shall  be  blessed  in  proportion  to  our  active  or  resigned  compliance  with  its  laws. 

IL  The  study  of  the  Divine  order,  then,  is  fitted,  not  only  to  silence  the 

CAVILS  of  a  BHOET-SIQHTBD  CRITICISM,    BUT  TO   PRODUCE   BOTH  FAITH  AND  HUMILITY. 

(Vers.  3 5.)     This  is  the  effect  on  the  mind  of  Job.     He  feels  his  littleness  in  presence 

of  the  infinite  Intelligence ;  and,  laying  his  hand  upon  his  mouth,  makes  the  resolve  of 
silence  for  the  future  from  all  questioning  of  his  Maker.  Thus  silently,  as  the  storms 
and  frosts  of  winter  give  place  to  the  genial  warmth  and  gentle  influences  of  spring,  is 
this  proud  and  passionate  heart,  which  want  of  sympathy  and  injustice  at  the  hands  of 
man  had  stung  into  proud  self-consciousness  and  presumptuous  appeals  to  God,  softened 
by  the  voice  and  revelation  of  God  himself  into  the  heart  of  a  little  child.  When  we 
see  ourselves  as  we  are,  because  seeing  ourselves  in  relation  to  him ;  when  we  are  con- 
vinced of  our  insignificance  in  ourselves,  and  of  the  greatness  of  that  grace  which  alone 
sheds  a  true  value  and  significance  upon  our  lives,  peace  begins  to  be  shed  through 
the  heart,  and  in  the  silence  of  a  true  submission  we  wait  for  that  which  God  may 
further  have  to  speak  to  us,  instead  of  assailing  him  with  the  clamour  of  passion  and 
ignorance. — J. 

Yer.  6 ch.  xli.  34. — Second  discourse  of  Jehovah :  the  righteous  government  of  God. 

In  the*  previous  discourse  we  have  had  especially  the  universal  power  and  wisdom  of 
God  impressed  upon  us ;  in  the  present  the  thought  of  the  justice  of  his  rule  is  to  be 
more  fully  brought  into  the  light :  in  order  thus  to  bring  Job  to  full  conviction,  and 
expel  the  last  remains  of  anger  and  pride  from  his  heart;  while  Divine  love  triumphs 
in  his  repentance  (ch.  xlii.  6). 

I.  Rebuke  of  the  presumption  which  doubts  op  the  justice  of  (jOD.  (Vers. 
6_'i4.)  Once  again  is  Job  summoned  to  gird  up  his  loins  and  prepare  for  the  contest 
with  Divine  reason.  Let,  then,  these  questions  receive  an  answer  from  the  murmurer's 
and  the  doubter's  lips.  Will  man  "  disannul "  or  bring  to  nought  the  justice  of  God? 
For  this  he  seems  to  aim  at  who  would  place  his  own  notions  of  what  is  right  m  the 
place  of  the  Divine.  Or,  if  man  would  enter  on  this  competition,  has  he  the  means  to 
carry  out  the  strife?  has  he  the  arm,  the  power  of  God?  can  he  wield  the  thunder  of 
Omnipotence  ?  Let  the  experiment  be  tried.  Let  man  clothe  himself  with  the  Divine 
attributes,  at  least  in  fancy ;  let  him  put  on  glory  and  pride,  splendour  and  pomp.  Let 
his  anger  break  forth  in  fiery  floods,  and  let  him  overwhelm  all  the  pinnacles  of  human 


m  Tfite  BOOK  OP  JOS.  tcs.  ii,.l— ^, 

pride.  Let  him  as  jnst  judge  cast  the  wicked  down ;  strew  them  in  the  dust  before  his 
righteous  retribution.  Let  man  do  these  things,  and  Jehovah  will  praise  him,  and  there 
will  he  no  need  of  self-praise  and  boasting,  because  his  right  hand  helps  him;  because  he 
actually  possesses  the  power  to  carry  out  his  ideas  of  justice  and  make  them  prevail  on 
the  earth  (comp.  Ps.  xlv.  4 ;  Isa.  lix.  18 ;  Ixiii.  5).  If  man  can  do  none  of  these  things, 
how  can  he  venture  to  challenge  him  who  alone  can  and  does  execute  judgment  in  the 
earth?  God  does  ever  punish  and  destroy  the  wicked,  and  is  ever  ready  to  help 
the  faithful;  can  man  excel  or  equal  God  in  his  ideas  or  practice  of  righteousness? 
"  The  Lord  says  to  Job,  Shall  my  judgment,  by  which  1  either  afflict  the  godly  or 
declare  all  men  to  he  liars,  be  empty  and  vain  in  thy  opinion  ?  Doth  it  behove  me  to 
be  unjust,  that  thy  justice  may  stand  ?  Thou  art  indeed  just,  and  thou  hast  my 
testimony  to  this  (ch.  ii.),  but  it  shall  not  therefore  he  lawful  for  thee  to  slander  the  judg- 
ments of  God  in  affliction."  "They  who  ascribe  to  themselves  in  their  own  strength 
righteousness  before  God,  simply  condemn  God  and  make  his  juilgment  void,  as  if  he 
had  not  the  competence  and  power  to  judge  and  condemn  them  (Rom.  iii.  4)  "  (Cramer). 
II.  Bebuke  op  Job's  peide  ;  desokiption  of  the  gebat  beasts.  (Ver.  15 — ch. 
xli.  34.)  These  two  vast  monsters,  behemoth  and  leviathan,  are  types  of  God's  creative 
power.  Their  gigantic  strength  fills  feeble  man  with  wonder ;  and  yet  they  are  but  as 
toys  in  the  hand  of  the  Almighty.  They  are  subject  to  the  Divine  will ;  and  in  them 
we  are  to  see  an  exemplification  of  the  manner  in  which  God  subdues  the  pride  of  the 
creature.  The  behemoth.  (Vers.  15—24.)  This  huge  and  terrible  animal  is  a  fellow- 
creature  of  Job,  an  effect  of  the  same  almighty  power.  Let  Job  consider  him,  and 
perceive  how  small  and  feeble  in  the  presence  of  God  are  all  created  existences,  and  of 
how  little  avail  is  all  haughty  and  proud  confidence  in  external  things  before  him. 
Then  follows  the  striking  description  of  the  power  of  the  hippopotamus,  or  horse  of  the 
Nile,  uniting  elasticity  with  firmness,  so  that  he  is  "  a  firstling  of  the  ways  of  God," 
or  a  masterpiece  of  the  Creator.  Everything  about  this  creature  is  noteworthy ;  his 
sword-like,  gigantic  teeth ;  his  fodder,  which  whole  mountain  tracts  supply.  As  he 
lies  among  the  reeds  and  lotus-plants,  taking  his  noonday  repose,  he  is  the  very  image 
of  living  force.  Were  a  river,  a  very  Jordan,  to  force  its  way  into  his  mouth,  he  could 
make  light  of  it.  Yet  this  huge  beast  is  entirely  in  the  power  of  God.  His  size  and 
strength  avail  him  nought,  if  God  has  determined  to  destroy  him.  How  aptly  says 
the  Boman  poet,  "  Force  devoid  of  judgment  sinks  beneath  its  own  weight ;  while 
that  which  is  self-controlled  Heaven  advances  in  greatness.  QoA  hates  the  strength 
that  sets  in  motion  ill  with  the  mind  "  (Hor., '  0£,'  3.  4) !  He,  amidst  the  obscjcre 
notions  of  the  pagan  mythology,  still  sees  clearly  the  truth  here  and  in  so  maty 
Scriptures  set  forth,  that  no  might,  bestial,  human,  or  superhuman,  can  stand  against 
that  will  which  is  of  almighty  power  and  absolute  righteousness.— J. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — Bumility.  Job,  unconvicted  of  a  lack  of  integrity  or  willing  departure 
from  the  law  of  rectitude,  is  nevertheless  capable  of  self-humiliation,  and,  like  all 
sensitive  spiritual  persons,  is  quick  to  mark  his  own  faults  in  presence  of  a  purer 
model.  He  is  now  bowed  to  the  very  earth.  The  Lord  had  spoken  and  showed  Job 
his  littleness  and  insignificance,  and  yet  Job  had  ventured  to  defend  himself  in  presence 
of  the  dealings  of  Jehovah.  Now  he  is  humbled  and  subdued.  The  process  of  the 
Divine  discipline  of  the  righteous  is  being  unfolded.  Job  knows  that  though  he  can 
reply  to  his  companions  and  friends,  if  he  would  contend  with  God  "he  cannot  answer 
him  one  of  a  thousand."  The  voice  of  the  Lord  has  brought  Job  to  the  dust.  He  is 
convicted  of  his  error  in  pretending  to  justify  himself  in  presence  of  the  Lord's  dealings. 
He,  not  Jehovah,  must  have  been  in  the  wrong.  Then,  in  the  attitude  of  conscious 
sinfulness  before  the  Holy  One,  he  confesses  himself  "of  no  account."  Henceforth 
he  will  "  answer  "  no  more,  but  lay  his  hand  upon  his  mouth  and  keep  silence.  Job's 
attitude  of  lowly  humility  before  the  Lord  is  another  instructive  feature  in  the  drama. 
The  man  who  could  stand  up  before  his  fellow-men  may  well  bow  down  before  the 
Lord.     The  attitude  of  humility  before  the  Lord  the  true  one  for  sinful  man. 

L  It  is  an  attitude  bboomino  man  in  presence  of  the  holiness  and  jiajkstt 
OP  THE  Divine  Name. 

II.  It  is  an  attitude  becoming  to  the  sinfulness  or  man.  Where  should  the 
creatiu-e  so  full  of  impeifection  be  found  but  in  the  dust  ? 


ffl*.tt.l— 24.]  ME  BOOK  Of  36h. 


III.  It  is  an  attitude  becomino  one  who  has  a  just  estimate  of  his  bblation 
OF  dependence  upon  the  wisdom  and  power  op  Jehovah.  One  so  wholly  frail 
and  dependent — *  poor  worm — may  well  bow  in  lowly,  humble  prostration  before  the 
Lord  of  the  whole  earth. 

IV.  It  is  an  attitude  becoming  to  him  who  has  bightlt  bbflbctbd  upon 
the  greatness,  MAJEsa  r,  and  globt  op  God,  and  his  own  littleness  and  inbig- 
NiFiOANCB  IN  PBBBBNCE  THEKEOP.  This  was  precit-sly  Job's  case.  And  it  is  the 
precursor  of  that  lifting  up  which  is  granted  only  to  them  who  are  truly  bowed 
down. — R.  G. 

Ver.  15 — ch.  xli.  34. — Hie  creatwrea  of  his  power.  Out  of  the  storm  and  tempest,  just 
symbols  of  the  Divine  power,  the  Lord  answers  Job  in  words  calculated  further  and 
deeper  to  humble  the  prostrate  one.  The  Divine  hand  is  tempering  the  already  yield- 
ing clay  and  preparing  it  for  the  impress  of  the  Divine  stamp.  The  Lord  calls  Job  to 
compare  himself  with  him.  This  Job  cannot  venture  to  do.  The  next  process  is  to 
show  how  weak  is  man  in  presence  of  the  creatures  of  the  Divine  power.  In  prolonged 
words  the  great  might  of  "  behemoth  "  and  "  leviathan  "  are  set  forth ;  but  it  is  with  a 
view  to  set  forth  the  Divine  might  as  illustrated  in  these  the  creatures  of  his  hands. 
The  process  of  reasoning  is — If  the  creature  of  God  is  mighty,  how  much  more  so  is 
the  Creator  himself!  Thus  the  Divine  works  speak  for  God;  and  their  voice  every 
wise  one  will  hear  and  heed.  The  greatness  of  nature,  the  marvellous  works  of  the 
Divine  hands ;  their  unnumbered  and  innumerable  hosts ;  their  multiplied  variety ; 
their  wonderful  structure;  their  beauty;  their  continuous  preservation;  their  mutual 
adaptation  and  service ; — all  declare  the  wonders  of  the  Divine  hand.  In  later  days  the 
eyes  of  men  were  directed  to  the  insignificant  sparrow,  the  mere  bird  on  the  house-top, 
and  from  the  Divine  care  over  it  men  were  led  to  learn  lessons  of  faith  and  trustful 
hope.  So  here,  by  reference  to  the  greater  creatures  of  the  Divine  power,  frail  man  is 
led  lower  and  lower  into  the  depths  of  humiliation  and  self-abasement.  The  creatures 
display — 

I.  The  depth  op  the  creative  wisdom  of  God. 

II.  The  almightiness  of  the  Divine  power. 

III.  The  infinitude  of  the  Divine  benhii'icbnob.  "All  thy  works  praise  thee, 
0  God." 

IV.  They  teach  the  lesson  to  man  of  humbleness  and  lowly  tbust.  He 
WHO  cares  for  the  birds  of  the  air  and  for  the  beasts  of  the  field  will  not  neglect  frail 
man.  Happy  is  he  who  has  learnt  to  trust  in  the  Lord  and  do  good,  knowing  that 
he  shall  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  he  shall  be  fed. — B.  G. 

Vers.  1,  2< — Contending  with  the  Almighty.  Job  has  been  contending  with  the 
Almighty,  and  now  God  confronts  him  with  the  fact.  This  is  the  practical  point  to 
which  we  have  come  after  being  led  through  the  picture-gallery  of  nature  which  has 
revealed  to  us  the  greatness  of  God  in  contrast  with  the  littleness  of  man. 

I.  Wb  ABE  tempted  TO  CONTEND  WITH  GoD.  1.  By  OUT  liberty.  We  have  freedom 
of  thought  as  well  as  freedom  of  will.  Thus  we  seem  to  be  able  to  turn  round  and  take 
up  a  position  of  our  own  in  opposition  to  God.  2.  By  our  trouble.  It  was  great  distress 
that  drove  Job  into  a  contention  with  God.  We  do  not  find  him  attempting  or  desiring 
anything  of  the  kind  in  the  opening  scene  of  the  story.  When  trouble  comes  upon  ua 
we  are  displeased,  and  not  seeing  why  it  is  sent  we  are  temptedto  murmur.  3.  By 
owr  sin.  Even  Job,  innocent  as  regards  the  gross  charges  of  his  three  censors,  was 
imperfect,  as  he  is  now  brought  to  admit.  Now,  sin  is  opposition  to  God,  and  the 
attempt  to  justify  it  leads  to  contention  with  God.  4.  By  Ood^s  forbearance.  Because 
he  is  long-suffering  we  presume  upon  his  patience.  We  are  like  Jacob  wrestling  with 
the  "  Traveller  unknown,"  who  only  maintained  the  conflict  so  long  as  his  mysterious 
Antagonist  refrained  from  putting  forth  his  strength  (Gen.  xixii.  24—32). 

II.  We  abb  wbono  in  contending  with  God.  This  contention  shows  faults  in 
us.  1.  Ignorance.  If  we  knew  all,  we  should  see  how  foolish  the  whole  contention 
was.  But  we  stumble  into  it  in  our  confusion  and  folly.  2.  Rebellion.  Our  business 
is  to  submit  and  obey.  When  we  dispute  we  are  resisting,  if  only  mentally.  3.  Dis- 
trvst.     God  is  not  trusted  when  we  venture  to  oppose  ourselves  to  him;  for  If  he  were 


650  THE   BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xl.  1—24. 

we  should  be  silent,  not  perhaps  understanding  his  action,  but  possessing  our  souls  in 
patience,  and  waiting  for  the  final  disclosure  that  is  to  explain  God's  treatment  of  his 
children. 

III.  It  is  nsELBss  fob  us  to  contend  with  God.  Our  position  in  relation  to 
God  does  not  offer  us  a  chance  of  success.  1.  Inequality.  This  is  a  contest  of  feeble- 
ness with  almightineas.  How  can  the  finite  hope  for  a  victory  in  wrestling  with  the 
Infinite?  2.  Incompetence.  We  do  not  know  how  to  put  our  case  before  God,  and 
his  action  is  not  understood  by  us.  Therefore  our  contention  is  confused  and  mislead- 
ing. There  is  only  one  way  of  coming  to  terms  with  God,  and  that  is  to  accept  his  terms. 

IV.  It  is  needless  for  us  to  contend  with  God.  We  are  not  left  with  the 
doleful  prospect  of  simply  submitting  to  the  inevitable.  Although  we  cannot  see  the 
good  in  God's  action,  if  only  we  have  faith  in  him  we  may  rest  assured  that  he  is 
doing  just  the  very  best  thing  for  us  and  all  his  creatures.  This  assurance  depends 
on  his  nature  and  character.  He  is  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour,  and  therefore  he  cannot 
be  acting  unjustly  and  injuriously.  Our  indictment  of  God's  goodness  is  a  huge 
blunder  from  beginning  to  end.  Let  us  but  trust  his  goodness  in  the  dark  and  in  the 
face  of  the  most  distressful  events,  and  in  the  end  we  shall  see  that  our  safety  lies  in 
submission. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  4. — Humbled  be/ore  God.  At  length  Job  is  brought  near  to  the  state  of  mind  that 
God  (^esires  to  see  in  him.  Proud  and  defiant  before  tie  unwise  and  unjust  attacks  of 
his  human  accusers,  he  is  humbled  in  the  dust  in  presence  of  the  revelation  of  God. 

I.  The  vision  of  God  in  his  wobes  humbles  us.  Job  has  seen  a  succession  of 
vivid  pictures  of  the  works  of  God  in  nature.  Tbey  all  transcend  human  efforts. 
Then  how  great  must  the  Author  of  nature  bol  How  small  are  we  in  his  awful 
presence !  Pride  is  always  a  form  of  godlessness.  We  forget  God  when  we  exalt  our- 
selves. Our  self-exaltation  is  only  possible  wliile  we  shut  ourselves  up  in  a  little 
world.  When  we  see  God  we  are  humbled.  Now,  this  is  not  only  because  God  !s 
supremely  powerful.  There  is  some  heroism  in  the  weak  maintaining  their  right  in 
the  presence  of  the  strong.  But  God's  greatness  in  nature  is  seen  in  intellectual  and 
moral  featittes.  The  wonderful  thought  of  God  impressed  upon  his  works  reveals  a 
mind  infinitely  greater  than  the  human  mind ;  and  the  care  with  which  God  provides 
for  all  his  creatures — wild  asses,  heedless  ostriches,  and  repulsive  ravens,  as  well  as 
those  creatures  that  seem  more  deserving  of  his  providence— shows  us  how  good  God 
is.  Thus  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  added  to  the  power  that  makes  resistance 
useless,  crown  the  revealed  character  of  God  with  glory,  and  invite  our  humble 
adoration. 

II.  SiLBNOB    BEFOEE   GoD   18    THE    TBUB    EXPRESSION  OF    HUMILITY.      It    Caunot    be 

said  that  Job  is  as  yet  deeply  conscious  of  sin.  The  "  vileness"  of  which  he  makes 
confession  is  rather  hig  mean  estate,  his  poor,  feeble,  human  helplessness,  than  moral 
guilt.  Therefore  it  does  not  need  to  be  made  much  of,  or  regarded  as  anything  like  a 
full  confession.  It  is,  however,  the  mark  of  humility  to  admit  it,  and  then  to  relapse 
into  silence.  This  is  the  condition  to  which  the  great  argument  of  the  drama  is 
designed  to  bring  its  readers.  We  are  too  busy  with  our  own  performances  in  religion. 
In  prayer  we  have  too  many  words  to  speak  to  God.  We  are  always  telling  him  what 
he  knows  already,  and  often  dictating  to  him  what  we  think  he  should  be  doing, 
instead  of  patiently  waiting  for  his  voice  and  humbly  submitting  to  his  will.  There 
is  room  for  more  silence  in  religion  and  in  all  life. 

III.  Silent  husulity  is  a  pbepabation  fob  exaltation.  At  the  end  of  the 
book  we  discover  that  God  exalts  Job  and  loads  him  with  favour  and  prosperity.  But 
he  must  be  humbled  first.  The  later  honour  is  only  possible  after  Job  has  abased 
himself.  So  long  as  he  justified  himself  and  arraigned  the  justice  of  God,  he  could  not 
be  restored  and  exalted.  Thus  the  poem  shows  to  us  the  way  in  which  God  disciplines 
his  servants  and  prepares  them  to  enjoy  his  goodness.  Humility  is  the  door  to  honour 
This  18  a  very  Christian  truth.  It  is  taught  by  Christ :  «  Whosoever  exalteth  himself 
shall  be  abased;  and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  It  is  gloriously 
illustrated  in  the  life  and  death  and  exaltation  of  Christ  (see  Phil.  ii.  5 11).— W.  F.  A. 

V«r.  8.— Impugning  God's  justice.     I.  Mubmubing  at  Pbovidbnob  is  iMPUGNrao 


OH.  XL,  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB  651 


God  s  justiok.  This  may  not  be  clearly  seen  or  admitted  at  once.  The  connectioti 
between  the  occurrences  of  human  history  and  the  Divine  mind  that  controls  tbem 
isnot  visible  to  the  eye  of  sense.  Thus  we  may  complain  freely  of  wbat  God  does 
without  intending  to  charge  God  with  wrong.  And  yet  this  is  what  the  complaint 
leads  to  and  involves.  If  we  do  not  believe  that  things  fall  out  by  chance,  and  if  we 
do  not  hold  that  the  world  is  administered  at  present  by  a  lower  providence,  we  must 
be  virtually  impugning  the  justice  of  God  when  we  object  to  what  we  cannot  deny  to 
be  his  actions.  It  may  be  desirable  that  complaints  should  be  pushed  to  their  ultimate 
results,  for  then  we  shall  see  whether  they  are  reasonable  or  not.  If  we  are  persuaded 
that  God  is  just,  we  shall  see  that  it  is  unwise  and  wrong  to  murmur  at  what  happens 
to  us  in  the  course  of  providence. 

II.  We  abb  tempted  to  impugn  God's  justice.  God  seemed  to  he  acting  unjustly 
to  Job.  The  present  aspect  of  the  world  is  not  that  which  we  should  expect  irom  a 
fair  and  equitable  ruler.  Our  own  lives  are  subjected  to  rude  shocks  that  stril^e  us  as 
perplexingly  unjust.  1.  There  is  injustice  arising  from  unjust  men.  Job  was  unjustly 
treated,  not  by  God,  but  by  his  three  friends.  We  should  not  charge  God  with  the 
sins  of  our  own  brethren,  2.  We  cannot  see  the  whole  of  QoCCs  plan.  The  opening 
appears  to  be  unfair.  But  wait  for  the  end,  God's  justice  is  large  and  far-reaching. 
It  will  be  revealed  when  the  whole  sweep  of  his  dealings  with  us  is  comprehended. 
The  are  ends  in  an  acute  angle.  Only  the  complete  circle  is  without  a  break  and 
smooth  throughout, 

III.  It  is  both  foolish  and  wrong  to  impugn  God's  justice.  1.  It  is  foolish. 
We  are  not  in  a  position  to  judge ;  we  do  not  know  all  the  facts,  and  our  standard  of 
judgment  is  perverted  by  our  own  prejudices  and  unjust  claims.  The  tyro  cannot  wisely 
criticize  the  achievements  of  the  master.  2.  It  is  wrong.  If  we  knew  God  we  should 
not  charge  him  foolishly.  But  we  should  know  him  if  we  drew  near  to  him  in  the 
right  spirit.  Too  often  our  doubt  of  God's  justice  is  not  so  much  the  product  of  a 
purely  intellectual  difSculty  as  the  result  of  a  moral  fault.  It  shows  lack  of  faith  in  his 
goodness,  and  it  springs  from  a  miserable  weakness  that  will  not  venture  to  trust  God. 

IV.  Christian  faith  pobbids  us  to  impugn  God's  justice.  Even  Christ  does 
not  clear  up  the  mystery,  and  still  we  have  to  walk  by  faith.  We  cannot  yet  see  that 
God  is  dealing  justly  with  us.  But  we  have  good  grounds  for  confidence  in  our  Lord's 
revelation  of  the  nature  and  character  of  God.  Christ  shovvs  us  the  fatherly  nature 
of  God,  He  makes  us  see  that  God  is  good  and  full  of  love  for  his  children.  At  the 
same  time,  he  exalts  the  perfect  rectitude  of  God,  Such  a  knowledge  of  God  as  we 
have  in  Christ  should  fill  our  souls  with  faith  and  hope,  because  such  a  God  as  Christ 
has  made  known  cannot  act  unjustly,  although  for  a  time  he  may  appear  to  do  so.  He 
who  knows  God  in  Christ  cannot  Mi  into  pessimism.  He  should  be  able  to  say  with 
Browning — 

« .  .  ,  This  world's  no  blot, 
Nor  blank :  it  means  intensely,  and  means  good." 

W.  F.  A- 

Ver.  12. — The  humiliation  of  the  proud.  The  Idea  is  something  like  this:  If  Job 
can  sit  as  a  judge  over  what  God  does,  he  ought  to  be  able  to  take  (Joel's  judgment-seat 
and  execute  justice  among  men.  But  can  he  do  this?  Can  he  humiliate  the  proud? 
If  he  is  incapable  of  this  act  of  justice,  how  small  a  creature  he  is  before  the  great  God 
who  raises  up  and  casts  down ! 

I.  The  humiliation  of  the  proud  is  gkbatlt  needed.  This  particular  act  of 
justice  is  singled  out  as  though  it  were  pre-eminent  in  importance.  It  is  important  on 
many  accounts,  1,  F<yr  the  sake  of  the  proud.  Pride  is  ruinous  to  the  heart  in  which 
it  has  taken  up  its  abode,  eating  up  the  better  feelings  and  preparing  for  the  incoming 
of  other  sins.  The  only  hope  for  a  proud  man  is  that  he  should  be  brought  low,  and 
so  emptied  of  self.  2.  For  the  sake  of  others.  The  proud  spirit  is  domineering.  Pride 
is  at  the  root  of  tyranny.  If  men  are  to  have  their  rights,  the  pride  of  the  exalted  must 
be  brought  down,  3.  For  OooTs  sake.  Pride  is  an  insult  to  God,  a  usurpation  of  the 
Divine  rights  and  honours.  Before  God  man  is  small,  weak,  sinfuL  His  only  fitting 
condition  is  one  of  humility  and  complete  self-abasement  in  the  sight  of  Heaven, 

IL  THK  HUMIIiATIOK  OT  THK  FBOUD  IS  MOST  DITFTOULT  TO  ACCOMPLISH,      Can  Job  do 


m  f flfi  BOOK  6f  JOB.  Ivn.  u- 1— »«. 


this?  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  he  can.  Pride  Is  doubly  strong.  1.  In  its  mm 
character.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  pride  to  induce  self-confidence.  Even  while  the  world 
is  pointing  the  finger  of  scorn  at  the  proud  man,  he  wraps  himself  in  the  mantle  of  his 
own  self-importance,  and  despises  contempt.  Here  is  a  great  difference  bet-veen  pride 
and  vanity,  for  vanity  is  easily  cast  down,  because  it  lives  on  the  admiration  of  the 
world,  whUe  pride  is  self-contained,  and  may  be  most  intense  when  it  is  least  bonooied. 
2.  In  its  circumstances.  There  are  poor  and  unfortunate  proud  men.  But,  as  a  rule, 
success  and  power  are  the  temptations  to  pride.  Thus  the  proud  man  is  entrenched 
behind  his  good  fortune,  and  he  uses  all  the  means  that  prosperity  has  given  him  to 
defend  his  position. 

III.  The  humiliation  of  the  pkoud  is  bbought  about  by  God.  This  is  most 
decidedly  a  Divine  work.  It  is  beyond  the  rench  of  Job  or  of  any  man.  God  humbles 
pride:  1.  By  Ms  power.  The  proud  man  is  helpless  before  his  Maker.  His  resources 
are  as  poverty  itself,  and  all  his  self-imporlance  is  but  childi.sh  pretence.  God  lifts  up 
the  lowly,  and  sets  down  the  mighty  with  a  word.  2. 1?i  his  Justice.  Man's  pride  is  not 
attacked  simply  because  God  is  jealous  of  it,  but  because  it  is  an  evil  thing.  An  insult 
to  God,  an  injury  to  man,  it  needs  to  be  cast  out  in  order  that  a  right  spirit  of  humility 
and  obedience  may  take  the  place  of  it.  3.  For  the  sake  of  his  love.  God  humbles 
the  proud  man  because  he  loves  him.  The  abasement  is  not  a  vindictive  act,  but  a 
merciful  preparation  for  salvation.  The  goodness  of  God  leads  him  to  cast  down  all 
pretence  and  self-importance,  so  that  he  may  raise  up  a  new  and  more  stable  structure 
of  solid  merit  in  place.of  these  empty  shows.  The  proud  but  useless  forest  is  cleared 
that  the  precious  grain  of  wheat  may  be  sown  in  its  place.  God  cuts  down  man's 
pride  to  make  room  for  Christ's  grace. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  14. — Self-salvation.  When  Job  is  strong  enough  to  humble  the  proud  he  may 
be  able  to  save  himself ;  but  as  he  cannot  do  the  first  work  he  is  not  equal  to  the 
second.    Thus  we  are  introduced  to  the  impossibility  of  self-salvation. 

I.  The  vain  attempt.  Men  are  continually  trying  to  save  themselves.  1.  In 
danger.  We  feel  that  wc  need  deliverance.  Job  desired  to  be  saved  from-disease, 
poverty,  injustice,  cruelty.  We  all  wish  to  escape  from  trouble.  Some  of  us  may  be 
more  anxious  to  escape  from  sin,  our  greatest  enemy.  There  are  evils,  then,  and  the 
perception  of  them  urges  us  to  save  ourselves.  2.  In  distrust.  We  ought  to  look  to  the 
Almighty  for  strength,  and  to  the  All-merciful  for  deliverance.  But  if  we  forget  God 
we  are  tempted  to  rely  on  the  arm  of  flesh.  If  we  had  a  due  appreciation  of  God's 
ability  and  willingness  to  save,  we  should  not  dream  of  trying  to  save  ourselves.  3.  In 
self-confidence.  We  must  think  little  of  our  sin,  or  much  of  ourselves,  if  we  imagibe 
that  we  can  effect  our  own  salvation.  We  have  not  yet  discovered  our  own  weakness, 
nor  the  depth  of  our  fall,  if  we  suppose  that  there  is  no  greater  mischief  with  us  than 
what  wc  can  remedy. 

II.  Tub  certain  failube.  No  man  has  yet  saved  himself.  Is  it  likely  that  the 
latest  to  try  the  experiment  will  succeed?  We  have  not  yet  conquered  our  own  hearts, 
although  we  have  often  determined  to  do  so.  Is  it  probable  that  our  next  attempt  will 
be  more  successful?  There  are  good  grounds  for  being  assured  that  it  will  not.  1.  Z%e 
greatness  and  power  of  sin.  No  one  who  has  not  tried  to  break  its  yoke  knows  how 
terrific  this  is.  We  simply  cannot  get  away  from  our  own  sin.  Not  only  does  the  sin 
harden  into  a  habit  ami  so  become  a  second  nature,  but  it  weakens  the  moral  fibre  of 
the  soul.  The  prisoner  languishing  in  the  dungeon  is  not  only  held  in  by  stone  walls 
and  iron  1  ars,  but  the  unhealthy  condition  of  his  confinement  weakens  his  body  so 
that  he  has  not  strength  to  br<  ak  away  from  even  smaller  constraints.  2.  The  justice 
of  God.  This  does  not  hold  us  to  our  sin,  but  it  binds  us  to  its  consequences.  We 
cannot  deny  that  we  deserve  the  wrath  of  Heaven.  We  cannot  atone  for  sin.  All  our 
subsequent,  service  is  no  more  than  is  due  from  us,  and  the  old  debt  still  remains 
uncancelled. 

IIL  The  glorious  alternative.  We  have  to  learn  that  we  cannot  save  ourselves, 
not  meiely  to  discourage  useless  efforts,  but  to  lead  us  to  the  true  salvation  d[  God. 
What  we  cannot  do  for  ourselves  God  can  and  will  do  if  we  will  let  him.  •  1.  Through 
Jesus  Christ.  Ho  was  called  Jesus  because  he  would  save  his  people  from  their  sing 
(Matt  L  21).     He  is  the  "  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  " 


CH.XIJ.1— 34.]  THB  BOOK  OF  JOB.  653 

(Jbhu  i,  29).  Ohrist  delivers  from  sin  as  well  as  from  its  result — death.  His  power  to 
save  springs  from  his  atoning  sacrifice ;  but  he  saves  now  as  a  living,  present  Redeemer. 
He  is  the  hand  of  God  put  forth  to  deliver  the  helpless  and  ruined.  2.  In  regeneration. 
We  need  to  he  bom  again  (John  iii.  3).  So  great  a  change  cannot  be  brought  aiK>ut 
by  ourselves ;  Christ  alone  can  effect  it.  He  has  not  come  so  much  to  bestow  on  us  gifts 
n  s  to  ch  an  ge  our  whole  life,  so  that  we  may  become  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus  (2  Cor, 
V.  17).— W.  F.  A. 

Vers,  15 — 24. — Behemoth  the  great.  Two  monster  animals,  the  hippopotamus  and 
the  crocodile,  are  set  before  us  in  typical  characteristics,  to  idealize  the  great  works  of 
Grod  in  the  animal  kingdom, 

I.  GkiD  IS  THE  Obeatob  of  THB  ANIMAL  WOBLD,  "  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth 
after  his  kind  "  (Gen,  i,  25),  We  have  not  left  the  presence  of  God  when  we  have 
come  to  study  natural  history.  Here  we  may  see  indications  of  Divine  thought.  Even 
the  cparaest  wild  animals  are  under  the  care  of  God.  1,  Therefore  let  no  one  hurt  them 
needlessly,    2.  If  God  provides  for  behemoth,  will  he  not  much  more  provide  for  man? 

n,   MAeNITCTDE  AND  STEENOTH  HAVE  A  PLACE  IN  THB   DiVINE  ECONOMY.      Behemoth 

is  famous  first  for  his  size,  and  secondly  for  his  physical  strength.  Now,  these  two 
qualities  are  among  the  lowest  of  good  things.  Still,  they  are  good.  God  is  glorified 
even  by  the  physical  greatness  of  his  works.  The  chief  glory  of  the  stars  is  in  their 
magnitude  and  in  the  vastness  of  the  space  which  they  occupy.  A  mere  mass  of  flesh 
is  the  lowest  excellence.  Yet  even  this  may  be  good  if  it  is  not  abused.  How  much 
more  may  higher  gifts  ? 

III.  EXOBLLENOB  IN  LOWER  QUALITIES  IS  NO  aUAIlANTEE  FOB  EXOBLLBNCE  IN  HIOHEB 

QUALITIES.  Behemoth  is  big  and  strong.  But  he  is  stupid  and  brutal.  When  he 
opens  his  cavernous  jaws  and  his  dull  eyes  appear  over  them,  set  in  a  mountain  ol 
'lilack,  shapeless  flesh,  he  is  positively  hideous.  The  gravity  of  his  unconscious  attitudes 
of  supreme  ugliness  has  almost  a  touch  of  humour  in  it.  We  begin  to  wonder  how  the 
Divine  Artist  who  shaped  the  graceful  gazelle  and  gave  the  perfection  of  motion  to  the 
swallow  could  have  fashioned  the  ugly  and  clumsy  hippopotamus.  Perhaps  one  object 
was  to  show  what  a  poor  thing  bulk  of  body  is  m  comparison  with  brains,  with  thought 
and  soui.  The  young  man  who  is  more  proud  of  his  biceps  thaa  of  anything  el^e 
belonging  to  him  may  see  his  ideal  humiliated  in  behemoth.  For  no  man  can  attain 
to  the  strength  of  a  hippopotamus. 

IV.  There  is  a  habmont  in  all  God's  works.  Behemoth  is  suited  to  his  home 
among  the  coarse  grasses  of  the  Nile.  There  his  voracious  appetite  can  find  ample 
sustenance.  God  provides  for  all  his  creatures,  and  he  suits  all  his  creatures  for  the 
spheres  in  which  he  has  called  them  to  live.  Behemoth  is  naturally  of  a  low  and  stupid 
nature,  and  he  has  all  that  his  nature  requires.  Man  is  of  a  higher  nature.  He  must 
not  be  content  to  dream  his  existence  away  in  the  sleepy  land  where  soul-life  is  stifled. 
'I'he  true  "lotus-eateri"  are  not  refiued  Sybarites,  but  hippopotami. 

V.  God,  who  works  in  the  great,  works  also  in  the  little.  He  made  the 
monsters  of  the  deep.  He  also  made  the  microscopic  cell.  From  behemoth  to  the 
amoeba  all  the  living  creatures  of  nature  are  "  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made."  When 
we  think  of  God  behind  the  tiny  cell,  quickening  its  mysterious  life, 

"  The  small  becomes  dreadful  and  immense." 

VI.  Bulk  and  power  are  not  the  most  TBRRinLE  things.  Behemoth  is  a  vegeta- 
rian *  He  is  not  cruel,  like  his  much  smaller  fellow-creature,  the  lion.  The  Uttlo 
asp  that  he  tramples  beneath  his  feet  is  far  more  deadly.  Big  troubles  may  not  be  so 
hurtful  as  troubles  that  we  can  scarcely  see  till  they  have  bitten  us.— W.  F.  A, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLl. 


Vers.  1—34. — The  crowning  description 
of  a  natural  miirvel— the  "leviathan,"  or 


crocodile — ia  now  given,  and  with  an  elabo- 
ration to  which  there  is  no  parallel. in  the 
rest  of  Scripture.  It  forma,  however,  a  fit 
climax  to  the  gradually  more  and   more 


654 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


[oh.  xu.  1—8^ 


elatmrate  descriptioiu  of  oh.  xxxviii.  39 — 11 ; 
xxxix.  1—30 ;  and  xl.  15—24. 

Yer.  1. — Canst  thoa  draw  oat  leviathan 
with  an  hook  1  The  word  leviathan,  or  more 
properly  livyathan,  which  has  previously 
oooun'ed  in  ch.  iii.  8,  and  is  found  also  in 
Pa.  bcxiv.  14 ;  civ.  26 ;  and  Isa.  xxvii.;l,  seems 
to  be  derived  from  'l*?, "  twisting,"  and  jn,  "  a 
monster,"  whence  the  ]'in  or  D'iin  of  the 
Pentateuch  and  also  of  Job  (ch.  vii.  12), 
Jeremiah  (ix.  11),  and  Ezekiel  (nix.  3). 
It  is  thus  a  descriptive  epithet  rather  than 
a  name,  ami  has  not  unnaturally  been  used 
to  designate  more  than  one  kind  of  animal. 
The  best  modem  critics  regard  it  as  applied 
sometimes  to  a  python  or  large  serpent, 
sometimes  to  a  cetacean,  a  whale  or  gram- 
pus, and  sometimes,  as  here,  to  the  crocodile. 
T^B  last  application  is  now  almost  uni- 
versally accepted.  The  crocodile  was  fished 
for  by  the  Egyptians  with  a  hook,  and  in 
the  time  of  Herodotus  was  frequently  caught 
and  killed  (Herod.,  ii.  70) ;  but  probably  in 
Job's  day  no  one  had  been  so  venturous  as 
to  attack  him.  Or  his  tongue  with  a  oord 
which  thou  lettest  down  t  rather,  or  preei 
doien  hii  tongue  with  a  cordi  (see  the 
Revised  Version) ;  i.j.  "  tie  a  rope  round  his 
lower  jaw,  and  so  press  down  his  tongue." 
Many  savage  animals  are  represented  in  the 
Assyrian  sculptures  as  led  along  by  a  rope 
attached  to  their  mouths. 

Ver.  2. — Canst  thou  put  an  hook  into  his 
nose?  rather,  a  reed,  or  o  rope  of  reeds. 
The  exact  meaning  is  doubtful.  Or  bore 
his  jaw  through  with  a  thorn  ?  A  hooh  or 
ring  is  meant,  rather  than  a  "  thorn  " — such 
a  "hook "  or  "  ring  "  as  was  commonly  used 
for  keeping  fish  captive  in  the  water,  or  for 
bringing  prisoners  of  rank  into  the  presence 
of  the  monarohs  who  had  captured  them 
(see  2  Kings  xix.  28;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11 ; 
Amos  iv.  2 ;  '  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  304,  367). 

Ver.  3. — WiU  he  make  many  supplioations 
unto  thee?  will  he  speak  soft  words  unto 
thee  J  Ironical.  Will  he  behave  as  human 
captives  do,  when  they  wish  to  curry  favour 
with  their  captors  ?    - 

Ver.  4. — ^Will  he  make  a  covenant  with 
theel  As  ca|>tivo  monarohs  do.  Wilt  thou 
take  him  as  a  servant  for  ever  ?  (oomp.  Eiod. 
xxi.  6 ;  Deut.  xv.  17). " 

Ver.  5. — Wilt  thou  play  with  him  as  with 
a  bird?  The  Egyptians  were  especially 
fond  of  pet  animals,  and  Job's  countrymen, 
it  may  be  assumed,  were  the  same.  Besides 
dogs,  we  find  the  Bgyptiiins  keeping  tame 
antelopes,  leopards,  and  monkeys.  A  tame 
crocodile  would  certainly  seem  to  be  an 
( xtradrdinary  pet,  but  Herodotus  says  that 
tho  Egyptians  tamed  them  (ii.  39),  vnd  Sir 


GTardner  Wilkinson  informed  me  that  he 
had  known  some  tame  ones  at  Cairo.  The 
Mesopotamian  Arabs  domesticate  falcons 
to  assist  them  in  the  chase  of  the  bustard 
and  the  gazelle  (Layard,  'Nineveh  and 
Babylon,'  pp.  481—48.3).  And  this  usage, 
though  not  represented  on  the  Assyrian 
monuments,  is  likely  to  have  been  ancient. 
Or  wilt  thon  bind  him  for  thy  maidens  ?  i.e. 
Wilt  thou  so  secure  him  that  he  may  be  de- 
livered over  to  thy  handmaidens,  to  be  made 
their  pet  and  playfellow  ? 

Ver.  6. — Shall  the  companions  make  a 
banquet  of  him  ?  rather,  Shall  the  companions 
make  a  traffic  of  him  1  By  "  the  companions  " 
we  may  understand  either  the  guilds  or  com- 
panies of  fishermen,  which  might  be  regarded 
as  engaged  in  making  the  capture,  or  the 
travelling  bands  of  merchants,  who  might  be 
supposed  willing  to  purchase  him  and  carry 
him  away.  As  no  one  of  these  last  could 
be  imagined  rich  enough  to  make  the  pur- 
chase alone,  a  further  question  is  asked. 
Shall  they  part  him  among  the  merchants  1 
i.e.  allow  a  number  to  club  together,  each 
taking  a  share. 

Ver.  7.— Canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with 
barbed  irons?  The  hippopotamus  was 
captured  In  this  way  by  the  P]gyptians  at 
an  early  date,  and  hence  the  idea  of  trying 
the  same  mode  of  capture  with  the  orocodilo 
would  naturally  arise;  but  in  the  time  of 
Job  it  would  seem  that  no  one  had  been  bold 
enough  to  attempt  it.  The  skin  of  the 
crocodile  is  penetrable  in  very  few  places, 
and  his  capture  by  a  single  man  with  a 
harpoon,  though  now  sometimes  practised 
(Wilkinson,  in  the  author's '  Herodotus,'  vol 
ii.  p.  99),  is  still  a  work  of  danger  and 
difficulty.  Or  his  head  with  fish-spears? 
Fish-spears  would  have  small  effect  on  the 
head  of  a  crocodile,  which  is  bony  and 
covered  by  a  very  tou^'h  skin,  There  is 
a  vulnerable  place,  however,  at  the  point 
where  the  head  joins  the  spine,  at  which 
the  ancient  Egyptians,  when  they  ventured 
to  attack  the  crocodile,  were  wont  to  strike 
(see  the  author's  '  History  of  Ancient 
Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  545). 

Ver.  8. — lay  thine  hand  upon  him,  re- 
member the  battle,  do  no  more.  This  is 
again  ironical,  like  vers.  3—6.  •'  Only  just 
put  forth  thy  hand  against  him— bethink 
thee  of  war — ilo  it  once  and  no  more." 
(oomp.  Rosenmiiller,  'Scholia  in  Jobum,' 
p.  976).  The  idea  is  that  ouce  will  be 
enough.  A  man  will  not  live  to  do  it  a 
second  time. 

Ver.  9.— Behold,  the  hope  of  him  is  in 
vain;  i.e.  the  hope  of  capturing  or  killing 
him.  Shall  not  one  be  oast  down  even  at 
the  sight  of  himi  The  very  sight  of  tlia 
savage  and  invulnerable  animal  is  enouglj 
to  make  a  man  fall  to  the  ground  with  fear. 


on.  ILL  1 — 34.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


655 


Yer.  10. — None  is  lo  fierce  that  dare  stir 
him  np.  The  orooodile  ig  ofteu  seen  asleep, 
or  nearly  asleep,  upon  sand-banks  washed  by 
the  Nile.  He  would  be  a  bold  man  who 
sViould  creep  near,  and  stir  him  up.  Who 
then  is  able  to  stand  before  me  1  Here  we 
leaoh  the  point  whereto  the  whole  argument 
has  been  working  up.  If  man  cannot  cope 
with  creatures,  which  are  the  work  of  God's 
hands,  how  much  less  can  he  presume  to 
cope  with  him  who  is  their  Maker ! 

Ver.  11. — Who  hath  prevented  me,  that  I 
should  repay  him?  i.e.  "Who  hath  laid  me 
under  any  obligation,  so  that  I  should  be 
bound  to  fall  in  with  his  views,  and  take 
such  a  course  as  he  might  prescribe  ?  "  The 
allusion  is  to  Job's  persistent  demand  for  a 
hearing — a  controversy  (t  h.  ix.  34,  35 ;  x.  3 ; 
xiii.  3,  22;  xxiii.  3 — ^7,  etc.) — a  trial,  in 
which  he  shall  plead  with  God,  and  God 
with.liim,  upon  even  terms  as  it  were,  and 
so  the  truth  concerning  him,  his  sins,  his 
integrity,  his  sufferings,  and  their  cause  or 
causes,  shall  be  made  manifest.  God  resists 
any  and  every  claim  that  is  made  on  him  to 
justify  himself  and  his  doings  to  a  creature. 
He  is  not  a  debtor  to  any.  If  he  explains 
himself  to  any  extent,  if  he  condescends  to 
give  an  account  of  any  of  his  doings,  it  is  of 
pure  grace  and  favour.  It  has  been  observed 
that  we  might  have  expected  this  to  be  the 
oonclusion  of  the  entire  discourse  begun  in 
ch.  xxxviii. ;  and  that  no  doubt  would  have 
been,  according  to  ordinary  laws  of  human 
composition,  its  more  proper  place.  But 
Hebrew  poetry  is  erratic,  and  pays  little 
regard  to  logical  laws.  If  anything  im- 
portant has  been  omitted  in  its  more  proper 
place,  it  is  inserted  in  one  wliich  is,  humanly 
speaking,  less  proper.  The  dutails  oonoern- 
ing  the  crocodile,  which  are  calculated  to 
deepen  the  general  impression,  having  been 
passed  over  where  we  might  have  expected 
them,  are  here  subjoined,  as  filling  out  the 
description  of  vers.  1 — 10. 

Yer.  12. — ^I  will  not  conceal  his  parts,  nor 
his  power,  nor  his  comely  proportion.  The 
further  description  is  introduced  by  this 
formal  announcement,  which  is  perhaps 
best  rendered,  I  will  not  keep  gilence  conoern- 
ing  Ma  limbs,  nor  concerninij  the  matter  of  his 
might,  or  the  comeliness  of  his  proportion 
(see  the  Revised  Yeision) ;  i.e.  I  will  enter 
upon  these  points  seriatim,  and  set  them 
forth  severally. 

Yer.  13.— Who  can  discover  the  face  of 
his  garment }  Some  critics  understand  this 
in  a  general  sense,  "  Wlio  can  lay  him  open 
to  assault?"  Others  suggest  a  more  defi- 
nite meaning,  "  Who  can  strip  off  his  outer 
covering?"  the  scaly  coat,  that  is,  which 
forms  his  speciiil  defence,  and  expose  the 
comparatively  tender  skin  below  ?  If  this 
were  done,  he  would  then  be  at  the  hunter's 


mercy;  but  who  will  undertake  to  do  it? 
Who,  again,  can  come  to  him  with  his  donble 
bridle  7  Come,  i.e.,  with  a  double  bridle  in 
his  hand,  and  place  it  in  the  monster's  jaws. 
(So  Sohultens  and  Professor  Lee.)  Others 
translate,  "Who  will  come  within  [the  range 
of]  his  double  bridle  ?  "  and  understand  by 
"his  double  bridle  "  his  two  rows  of  teeth — 
Homer's  epxas  oSSvrav  (Rosenmiiller,  Canon 
Cook,  Professor  Stanley  Loathes,  etc.). 

Yer.  14. — Who  can  open  the  doors  of  his 
facet  Who  can  make  him  open  his  huge, 
gaping  jaws,  if  he  chooses  to  keep  them 
shut?  Who  would  dare  to  do  so?  His 
teeth  are  terrible  round  about.  The  croco- 
dile has  "  two  rows  of  sharply  pointed  teeth, 
thirty  or  more  on  each  side "  (Russell's 
'Ancient  and  Modern  Egypt,'  p.  460).  They 
are  "  so  formed  and  disposed  as  to  tear  their 
prey  rather  than  masticate  it "  ('  Diet.  Uni- 
verselle  des  Sciences,'  p.  447).  'The  voracity 
of  the  full-grown  crocodile  is  great ;  and-he 
will  not  scruple  to  attack  and  devour  men, 
if  they  come  in  his  way.  The  natives  of 
Upper  Egypt  have  a  wholesome  terror  of  him. 

Ver.  15. — His  scales  are  iiis  pride;  or, 
his  pride  is  in  the  channeling  of  his  scales 
(literally,  of  his  shields).  The  scales  of 
the  crocodile  arc  arranged  in  five  rows  along 
his  entire  back,  with  a  depression  between 
the  rows  which  is  like  a  "  channel."  Bach 
individual  scale  resembles  a  shield.  They 
are  shut  np  together  as  with  a  close  seal ; 
each,  i.e.,  closely  attached  to  its  fellow,so  thnt 
there  is  no  space  between  them.  "  A  rifle- 
ball,"  according  to  Canon  Tristram, "  glances 
off  from  them  as  from  a  rock "  ('  Natural 
History  of  the  Bible,'  p.  352). 

Yer.  16. — One  is  so  near  to  another,  that 
no  air  can  come  between  them  (see  the 
comment  on  the  preceding  verse). 

Yer.  17. — They  are  joined  one  to  another, 
they  stick  together,  that  they  cannot  be 
sundered ;  litcjrally,  they  are  soldered  one  to 
another  (oomp.  Isa.  xli.  7). 

Yer.  18.— By  his  neesings  a  light  doth 
shine.  "Neesings"  is  old  English  for 
"sneezings."  According  to  Aristotle,  the 
crocodile  is  in  the  habit  of  sneezing,  but  I 
do  not  find  this  fact  noted  by  modern 
writers.  Bochart  asserts  it  very  positively 
('Hieroz.,'  pp.  752 — ^754),  but  he  does  not 
profess  to  speak  from  his  own  knowledge. 
And  his  eyes  are  like  the  eyelids  of  the 
morning.  This  probably  does  not  mean 
more  than  that  his  eyes  flash  with  light 
upon  occasion,  which  is  no  doubt  true,  though 
the  eyes,  being  small,  have  not  generally 
attracted  very  much  attention. 

Yer.  19.— Out  of  his  mouth  go  burning 
lamps,  and  sparks  of  fire  leap  ont.  The 
description  now  beoumea  highly  poetical, 
and  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  endeavour  to 
substantiate  it.    The  intention  is  to  repre- 


666 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xm.  1>-34. 


»ent  the  impression  which  the  animal  would 
make  on  an  impressible  but  unscientifio 
observer  viewing  it  in  its  native  haunte  for 
the  firsttime.  Splaahing,  snorting,  and  throw- 
ing up  spray  all  around,  it  would  seem  to  be 
breathingout  steam  and  smoke,  from  which  the 
idea  of  fire  is  inseparable  (see  the  next  verse). 

Ver.  20. — Out  of  his  noBtrils  goeth  smoke, 
as  out  of  a  seething  pot  or  oaldron ;  rather, 
ae  from  a  teething  pot  and  ruahet ;  i.e.  ai 
from  a  pot  heated  by  Imrning  rushes. 

Yer.  21. — His  breath  kindleth  ooals,  and 
a  flame  goeth  out  of  his  mouth.  All  the 
representations  of  dragons  breathing  smoke 
and  flames,  found  in  the  myths  and  sagas 
of  80  many  countries,  probably  rest  upon 
the  observed  fact  of  steam  or  spray  streaming 
forth  from  the  mouth  and  widely  opened 
nostrils  of  the  crocodile.  The  steam  has 
seemed  to  be  smoke,  and  smoke  has  natu- 
rally suggested  flame  and  fire. 

Ver.  22. — In  his  neck  remalneth  strength. 
It  lias  been  well  remarked  tliat  the  whale 
has  no  neck,  or  at  any  rate  none  that  is 
visible,  while  the  crocodile  has  one  that  is 
of  great  strength,  and  that  naturally  attracts 
observation.  "  Le  cou  assez  marqu^,"  says 
the  'Dictionnaire  des  Sciences'  (l.s.e.).  It 
is  nearly  of  the  same  diameter  with  the  head 
at  the  point  of  junction,  and  where  it  adjoins 
the  body  is  still  larger.  And  sorrow  is 
turned  into  joy  before  him;  rather,  and 
terror  danceth  hefore  him  (see  the  Revised 
Version).  Whithersoever  he  proceeds,  he 
causes  terror ;  people  tremble,  take  to  flight, 
and  disappear. 

Ver.  23. — The  flakes  of  his  flesh  are  joined 
together.  Even  the  softer  muscles,  and 
parts  which  in  most  animals  are  yielding 
and  flabby,  in  the  crocodile  are  bound  up, 
and,  as  it  were,  soldered  together  (comp.  ver. 
17).  They  are  firm  in  themselves ;  rather, 
they  cure  firm  upon  him ;  literally,  fused  upon 
him,  like  detached  pieces  of  metal,  which 
are  melted  one  into  another.  They  cannot 
be  moved.  His  whole  body  is  so  firmly 
compacted  together  that  it  is  all  one  piece ; 
the  separate  parts  cannot  be  moved  sepa- 
rately. One  result  is  that  the  crocodile  has 
great  difficulty  in  turning. 

Ver.  24.— 'His  heart  is  firm  as  a  stone. 
Some  regard  this  as  intended  physically, 
and  note  that  the  great  saurians,  with  their 
cold  and  sluggish  circulation,  have  hearts 
which  are  comparatively  torpid,  not  con- 
tracting or  expanding  readily.  Others  take 
the  "  stony  heart "  to  mean  a  fierce  and 
obstinate  disposition.  In  either  case,  the 
description  will  well  suit  the  crocodile.  Yea, 
as  hard  as  a  piece  of  the  nether  millstone. 
A  repetition  and  slight  exaggeration  of  the 
preceding  idea, 

Ver.  25.  -When  he  raiseth  up  himself,  the 
mighty  art  afraid.   Egyptian  historians  said 


that  one  of  their  early  kings  had  been  slain 
by  a  crocodile  (Manetho  ap.  Buseb.,  '  Chron. 
Can.,'  pars  i.  20,  p.  98),  The  worship  paid 
to  crocodiles  in  some  parts  of  Egypt,  and  the 
hatred  felt  towards  them  in  others,  were 
probably  alike  inspired  by  fear,  .ffilian 
says  that,  in  the  districts  where  crocodiles 
were  worshipped,  it  was  not  safe  for  any 
one  to  wash  nis  feet  or  to  draw  water  at 
the  river,  and  that  in  the  vicinity  of  some 
towns  people  did  not  dare  to  walk  along 
the  bank  of  the  stream  ('  Nat.  An.,'  z.  24). 
In  modern  times  they  have  been  known  to 
precipitate  men  from  the  bank  into  the  water 
by  a  sweep  of  their  tail,  and  then  to  devour 
them  at  their  leisure.  By  reason  of  break- 
ings they  purify  themselves ;  rather,  they 
are  confounded.  The  "breakings  "  may  bo 
either  the  breakings  forth  of  the  animal 
from  his  lair  among  the  Kile  rushes,  or  his 
"  breaking  "  of  the  weapons  of  his  assailants. 

Ver.  26. — The  sword  of  him  that  layeth 
at  him  cannot  hold.  It  either  miikes  no 
impression  or  it  snaps  in  his  hand.  Equally 
vain  are  the  spear,  the  dart,  and  the  javelin. 
Habergeon  is  a  mistranslation. 

Ver.  27. — He  esteemeth  iron  as  straw,  and 
brass  (rather,  hronte)  as  rotten  wood.  Even 
the  hardest  metals  are  useless  against  the 
crocodile.  Modems  observe  that  even  fire- 
arms are  of  little  avail  against  him.  The 
back  and  tail,  at  any  rate,  resist  musket- 
balls  (Bochart);  and  a  rifle-bullet  will  glance 
aside  if  it  strikes  one  of  the  scales  (Tris- 
tram) ;  see  ver.  15. 

Ver.  28. — The  arrow  cannot  make  him 
flee;  literally,  the  ion  of  the  bow  (comp. 
Lanj.  iii.  13,  where  arrows  are  called  "sons 
of  the  quiver  ").  Sling-stones  are  turned  with 
him  into  stnhhle.  (On  the  use  of  the  sling 
as  a  weapon  of  war  in  early  times,  see  the 
author's  '  Hist,  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p. 
449  ;  and  comp.  •  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol. 
ii.  pp.  35,  36 ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  49, 50  ;  2  Kings 
iii,  25.)  (On  "  stubble  "  as  a  metaphor  for 
weakness,  see  above,  oh.  xxi,  18,  and  com- 
pare the  next  verse.) 

Ver.  29. — Darts  are  counted  as  stubble ; 
rather,  the  dub  is  counted  as  stubble.  Maces, 
either  of  hard  wood  or  of  metal,  were  used 
by  the  Assyrians  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  64).  They  had  heavy  heads,  and 
were  quite  as  effective  weapons  ai  either 
swords  or  spears.  If  a  strong  man  could 
have  succeeded  in  dealing  a  blow  with  one 
on  the  head  of  a  crocodile,  it  would  probably 
have  proved  fatal;  but  intending  assailants 
were  doubtless  charged,  and  scattered  "as 
stubble,"  before  they  could  find  opportunity 
to  strike.  He  langheth  at  the  shaking  of 
a  spear ;  rather,  at  the  rushing  of  the  javelin 
(see  the  Revised  Version). 

Ver.  30.— Sharp  stones  are  under  him; 
rather,  jagged  potsherd*  are  uuder  him  ;  i.e. 


OH.  xu.  1—34.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 


657 


"  his  belly  is  covered  with  jagged  scales" — 
a  thing  which  is  true  of  the  crocodile,  but 
Bcaicely  of  any  other  beast.  He  spreadeth 
■harp  pointed  things  (rather,  a  threshing- 
wain,  or  u  corn-drag)  upon  the  mire.  He 
leaves  on  the  mud  on  which  he  has  lain, 
I'.e.,  an  impression  as  of  an  Oriental  threshing- 
wain,  or  corn-drag,  which  is  "a  thick  plank 
of  timber,  stuck  full,  on  the  under  side,  of 
flints  or  hard  cutting  stones  arranged  in  tlie 
form  of  the  palate  or  rough  tongue  of  a 
cow"  (Sir  0.  Fellows,  'Asia  Minor,'  p.  70). 
The  mud-banks  on  which  crocodiles  have 
been  lying  are  said  to  be  scored  all  over 
with  such  impressions. 

Ver.  31. — He  maketh  the  deep  to  boil  like 
a  pot  The  rush  of  the  crocodile  through 
the  water  of  the  stream  or  pool  in  which  he 
dwells  causes  a  stir  and  a  commotion  which 
is  forcibly  compared  to  the  boiling  of  water 
in  a  caldron.  He  maketh  the  sea  like  a  pot 
of  ointment.  It  is  generally  allowed  that 
by  "  the  sea  "  here  is  meant  the  Nile,  as  in 
Isa.  xviii.  2 ;  xiz.  5 ;  and  Nah.  iii.  8.  The 
swirl  of  the  Nile,  as  the  crocodile  makes  his 
rush,  is  like  the  heaving  of  a  pot  of  boiling 
oil  or  ointment 


Ver.  32. — He  maketh  a  path  to  shine  after 
him ;  one  would  think  the  deep  to  be  hoary. 
He  leaves  a  white  trail  behind  him  as  he 
passes  from  sand-bank  to  sand-bank  through 
the  shallows.  It  is  as  if  the  Nile  had  grown 
old  and  put  on  hoar  hairs. 

Ver.  33 — TTpon  earth  .there  is  not  his  like, 
who  is  made  without  fear  (comp.  vers. 
24—29). 

Ver.  34.— He  heholdeth  all  high  things. 
He  looks  without  fear  on  everything  that 
is  high  and  great.  Nothing  alarms  him ; 
nothing  disturbs  his  equanimity.  He  is  a 
king  over  all  the  children  (literally,  loni) 
of  pride  (comp.  oh.  xxviii.  8).  He  feels 
himself  superior  to  all  other  animals  that 
come  within  his  ken.  They  may  be  "  sons 
of  pride,"  but  he  has  more  to  be  proud  of 
than  the  proudest  of  them.  Ordinarily,  the 
lion  poses  as  "  the  king  of  beasts  j "  but 
liere  he  is,  as  It  were,  deposed,  and  relegated 
into  the  second  position  (oh.  xxxviii.  39), 
the  crocodile  being  exalted  into  his  place. 
From  diffLrent  points  of  view,  there  are 
several  great  beasts  which  might  be  regarded 
as  the  lords  of  the  animal  creation. 


HOMILBTICa 

Vers.  1 — 34. — Jehovah  to  Job:  the  second  answer:  3.  Concerning  leviatJum.  I. 
The  animal  intended.  1.  A  serpentine  creature.  This  implied  in  the  name  levia- 
than,  which  signifies  "a  wreathed  or  twisted  animal,"  as  distinguished  from  the  tannin, 
or  "  long-extended  monsters  "  (Gen.  i.  21).  2.  An  aquatic  monster.  Though  amphi- 
bious as  to  its  habits,  the  Tsehemoth  was  essentially  a  land  animal ;  the  entire  descrip- 
tion of  leviathan  points  to  a  tenant  of  the  deep  (vers.  1,  2,  31,  32).  8.  A  gigantic 
crocodile.  Believed  by  earlier  interpreters  to  be  the  whale,  it  is  now  commonly  accepted 
as  the  crocodile,  which,  equally  with  behemoth,  frequented  the  Nile. 

II.  The  monster  described.  1.  Its  wntamahle  ferocity.  (Vers.  1 — 9.)  The  idea 
is  presented  in  a  variety  of  wiiys,  (1)  The  impossibility  of  catching  the  animal  is 
exhibited.  "Canst  thou  draw  out  leviathan  with  an  hook?  or  his  tongue  with  a  cord 
which  thou  lettest  down?"  literally,  "or  with  a  cord  pressest  thou  down  his  tongue," 
The  meaning  is  that  the  croco(iile  cannot  be  caught  like  a  fish  ;  hence  men  cannot  do 
with  it  as  fishers  do  with  fish,  "  put  a  hook  [literally, '  a  rope  of  rushes ']  into  his  nose, 
or  bore  his  jaw  through  with  a  thorn,"  rather  "  with  a  hook  or  ring  " — the  allusion  being 
to  the  Egyptian  mode  of  dealing  with  fish  that  have  been  canght.  "  They  passed  the 
stalk  of  a  rush  through  the  gills,  and  thus  attached  them  together,  in  order  more  con- 
veniently to  carry  them  home  "  (Wilkinson's  '  Ancient  Egyptians,'  vol.  ii.  p.  121).  (2) 
The  impossibility  of  utilizing  the  animal  is  next  represented.  "Will  he  make  many 
supplications  unto  thee  ?  will  he  speak  soft  words  unto  thee  ?  "  in  order  to  be  spared 
when  caught  P — persuading  thee,  perhaps,  that  thou  canst  turn  him  to  good  and  profit- 
able account.  Well,  what  canst  thou  make  of  him  ?  A  bond-servant  like  one  of  the 
domesticated  animals  ?  "  Will  he  make  a  covenant  with  thee,  to  take  him  as  a  per- 
petual slave?"— a  toy  or  plaything  for  thyself  or  children?  "  Wilt  thou  play  with 
him  as  a  little  bird  ?  or  wilt  thou  bind  him  for  thy  maidens  ?  " — an  article  of  trade  for 
the  merchants  ?  Wilt  thou  kill  him  and  cut  him  up  for  the  fish-market  ?  "  Shall  the 
companions  [literally, '  the  partners,'  i.e.  of  the  fish-guild]  banquet  of  him  [or  rather, 
as  the  parallel  shows,  '  trade  upon  or  with  him ']  ?  shall  they  part  him  among  the 
merchants?"  literally,  "  the  Oanaanite"  or  Phoenician  merchants.  (3)  The  impossibility 
of  destroying  him  is  further  portrayed.  "  Canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with  barbed  Irons  ? 
TOB.  2tJ 


668  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xu,  1—34. 


or  Mb  head  with  fish-spears?"  Nay,  wert  thou  only  to  lay  thine  hand  upon  him, 
thou  shouldst  have  speedy  cause  to  repent  thy  rashness ;  "  thou  shouldest  remember 
the  battle "  so  decidedly  that  thou  wouldst  not  care  to  repeat  it.  Nay,  the  hope  of 
any  assailant  being  able  to  prevail  against  the  formidable  creature  is  absolutely  vain, 
the  very  sight  of  it  being  such  as  to  fill  one  with  dismay.  Probably  no  one  in  Job's 
time  had  ever  thought  of  attacking  the  monster,  although  crocodiles  were  caught  in 
Egypt  prior  to  the  days  of  Herodotus.  2.  lU  terrifying  aspect.  (Vers.  12 — 24.) 
Jehovah  invites  attention  to  three  points :  the  parts  of  the  animal,  i.e.  the  separate 
limbs  or  members ;  the  power  of  the  brute,  i.e.  the  great  strength  of  which  it  is  pos- 
sessed ;  and  the  comely  proportion  of  the  creature,  is.  the  beauty  of  his  armour,  or 
hide.  (1)  The  limbs  of  the  animal.  Its  massive  jaws  set  round  with  a  twofold  row 
of  teeth:  "Who  can  come  to  him  with  [or,  'within*]  his  double  bridle?"  ».e.  who 
can  enter  within  his  double  teeth,  which  "  are  terrible  round  about "  ?  Its  mouth 
emitting  violent  puffs  of  hot  breath:  "  Out  of  his  mouth  go  burning  lamps,  and  sparks 
of  fire  leap  out.  His  breath  kindleth  coals,  and  a  flame  goeth  out  of  his  mouth."  Its 
nostrils  sneezing  as  it  lies  basking  in  the  sun  :  "  By  his  neesings  a  light  deth  shine." 
Its  eyes  flashing  in  the  morning  light  as  they  rise  above  water.  "  His  eyelids  are  like 
the  eyelids  of  the  morning ; "  i.e.  they  appear  first  above  the  water,  intimating  that 
the  creature's  body  is  about  to  rise  as  the  first  streaks  of  dawn  announce  the  approach 
of  day.  Hence  to  describe  the  dawn  the  Egyptians  depict  two  eyes  of  the  crocodile. 
(2)  The  strength  of  the  brute.  "  In  his  neck  remainetb  strength,"  so  that  "  sorrow 
rejoioeth  before  him  "  (margin),  which  falls  below  the  original — "  On  his  neck  strength 
dwells,  and  horror  danceth  before  him,"  meaning  that  wherever  the  monster  appears 
he  spreads  consternation  befoie  him,  which  is  represented  by  a  lively  poetic  fancy  as 
if  those  who  ran  before  the  animal  were  dancing  before  him.  The  effect  of  his  appear- 
ance is  likewise  vividly  portrayed.  "  When  he  raiseth  up  himself,  the  mighty  are 
afraid  :  by  reason  of  breakings  they  purify  themselves,"  literally, "  from  (or  by)  break- 
ings," i.e.  the  breakings  forth  of  the  creature  from  his  lair,  they  miss  the  way,  becoming 
utterly  confounded  in  presence  of  the  huge  brute.  (3)  The  comely  proportion  of  the 
creature.  The  impenetrable  hide  of  the  crocodile  is  one  of  its  most  characteristic  features. 
Jehovah  describes  its  close-fitting  scales,  which,  like  strong  shields  soldered  together 
(ver.  15),  are  so  close  that  no  air  can  come  between  (ver.  15),  and  so  fast  together  that 
they  cannot  be  sundered  (ver.  17),  and  so  impervious  that  "  darts  are  counted  as  stubble, 
and  he  laugheth  at  the  shaking  of  a  spear"  (vers.  26—29).  Even  the  under  parts  of  thi» 
creature's  body,  unlike  those  of  other  animals,  are  compact  and  firm  (ver.  28),  being  fur- 
nished also  with  splinters  of  potsherd,  i.e.  sharp  scales,  so  that  on  the  mud-bank  where 
it  lies  it  leaves  the  impression  of  a  threshing-sledge  (ver.  30) ;  while  its  "  heart  is  firm  as 
a  stone ;  yea,  as  a  piece  of  the  nether  millstone  "  (ver.  24).  3.  Its  impetuous  movement. 
One  who  saw  two  alligators  fighting  says  "  that  their  rapid  passage  was  marked  by  the 
surface  of  the  water  as  if  it  were  boiling  "  (ver.  23).  The  animal  also  moves  with  such 
velocity  as  to  leave  behind  it  a  bright  white  trail  of  foam,  as  if  the  deep  were  hoary 
(ver.  32).  4.  Its  incontestable  supremacy.  "Upon  earth  there  is  not  his  like,  who  is 
made  without  fear."  Hence  all  other  creatures  shrink  before  him.  "  He  beholdeth  all 
high  things :  he  is  a  king  over  all  the  children  of  pride,"  i.e.  over  all  other  beasts  of  prey. 

III.  The  lesson  indicated.  1.  The  impossibility  of  contending  with  God.  If  no 
man  can  hope  successfully  to  encounter  a  crocodile,  how  foolish  must  it  be  to  think  of 
striving  against  God  (ver.  10)  I  2.  The  sovereignty  of  God's  procedure  in  the  world. 
If  God  in  fashioning  so  wonderful  a  beast  had  acted  solely  on  his  own  irresponsible 
will,  was  it  not  probable  that  he  inight  in  the  same  manner  act  in  connection  with 
man  (ver.  11)?  3.  The  probability  of  Ood's  works  in  providence  being  marked  by 
wisdom.  If  in  the  structure  of  a  crocodile  there  was  so  much  appearance  (and  reality) 
of  design,  it  was  not  surely  unreasonable  to  hope  that  the  same  characteristic  of  design 
would  not  be  absent  from  the  Creator's  doings  in  the  higher  realm  of  intelligence.  \. 
The  likelihood  of  finding  mysteries  in  God's  dealings  with  men.  If  Job  had  been  asked 
to  say  why  God  had  made_  so  ferocious  a  beast,  he  could  not  have  done  so.  It  is 
doubtful  if  any  one  can  satisfactorily  explain  the  introduction  of  carnivorous  animals 
among  other  peaceful  creatures.  Why,  then,  should  there  not  be  found  enigmas  in  the 
higher  world  of  human  life  ? 

Learn:  1.  The  great  power  of  God,  who  can  control  the  fiercest  of  creatures.    2.  The 


OH.  xu.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  659 

weakness  of  man,  whom  an  unreasoning  animal  can  affright.  3.  The  wisdom  of  faith, 
which  always  trusts  where  it  cannot  understand. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Vers.  1 — 34. — Description  of  the  leviatJum,  or  crocodile.  The  description  is  in  two 
parts. 

I.  The  first  part  shows  the  DiFFictrLTT  ob  well-kioh  impossibilitt  of  circum- 
venting  AND    CAPTUKINO   THIS   HUGE   AND  SLIPPERY  CREATURE.       (Vers.   1 7.)       In 

language  of  irony  and  almost  of  taunt  this  fact  is  set  forth.  Here,  then,  is  a  mere 
creature  of  Grod  before  which  man  must  feel  his  helplessness.  If  man  cannot  overcome 
the  creature,  how  much  less  shall  he  pretend  to  vie  with  the  Creator,  make  his  imper- 
fect will  the  rule  of  the  world,  and  bend  the  pride  of  the  wicked  beneath  him  ? 

II.  The  second  part  (vers.  8 — 34)  is  a  description  in  detail  or  the  parts,  the 
■  organs,  the  terrible  aspect,  the  fubt,  the  obstinate  power  of  defence,  and 

the  proud  dominion  of  this  terrible  creature  over  all  others  in  his  river- 
haunts.  Without  at  all  straining  the  language  or  the  sense,  the  crocodile  may  be 
regarded  as  the  type  or  allegory  of  the  wicked — in  his  destructive  fierceness  and 
passion,  his  callousness,  his  place  of  pride  and  worldly  defences — the  alarm  and  con- 
fusion which  he  spreads  around  him.  So  fearful  and  so  real  does  wickedness  seem  in 
the  high  places  of  the  earth.  Inwardly,  tl[ie  good  man  may  escape  from  its  power  and 
influence ;  outwardly,  he  seems  exposed  to  its  baneful  sway,  and  seeks  in  vain  for 
dominion  over  it.  The  leviathan  is  the  symbol  of  those  "  kings  of  the  children  of 
pride."  The  conquest  over  the  kingdoms  of  force  and  fraud  is  reserved  for  the  Divine 
might  of  righteousness  alone. 

The  great  lesson  of  this  chapter  is,  then,  that  almighty  power  and  justice  are 
inseparable.  Separate  in  thought  for  a  moment  these  principles,  and  imagine  either 
without  the  other  to  be  associated  with  the  nature  of  God,  and  we  have  a  world  that 
is  horrible  to  contemplate — a  world  where  force  without  right  is  the  only  law,  or  a 
world  where  right  is  ever  vainly  struggling  against  force.  Put  these  cases  before  the 
mind,  and  we  at  once  see  that  they  are  not  only  dreadful  but  impossible  alternatives. 
Neither  is  that  human  world,  in  which,  with  all  its  mysteries  and  seeming  inconse- 
quences, pious  and  dutifid  souls  are  thankful  and  content  to  live,  the  world  that  is 
firmly  and  broadly  based  upon  the  eternal  will  of  absolute  power  and  justice.  Thus, 
too,  we  are  taught  the  truth  concerning  ourselves.  Till  we  know  both  our  weakness  and 
our  moral  frailty,  we  know  nothing  truly  about  ourselves.  To  be  conscious  of  impotence 
in  presence  of  evil  is  to  confess  that  we  are  unrighteous.  And  this  leads  to  that 
humble  conviction  of  dependence  in  which  is  the  great  root  of  piety.  Dependence,  m 
the  natural  and  in  the  moral  life,  is  the  law  of  our  being.  In  the  recognition  of  it,  in 
the  acceptance  of  those  relations  and  the  fulfilment  of  those  duties  which  the  gospel  builds 
upon  this  foundation,  consists  man's  health  and  peace.  The  thought  of  a  God  who 
is  mere  arbitrary  power,  as  the  gods  and  fates  of  the  heathen,  can  never  inspire  loving 
trust  or  holiness.  The  thought  of  a  God  who  is  just,  but  not  all-powerful,  so  that  he 
cannot  carry  out  his  righteous  purposes  (as  in  ancient  Manichseism  and  in  the  strange 
theory,  e.g.,  of  J.  S.  Mill),  can  never  support  the  feeble  soul  in  the  midst  of  the  tempta- 
tions of  the  world,  in  its  struggle  against  evil.  The  foundation  laid  in  Zion  is  buUt  of 
no  such  crumbling  material ;  it  is  raised  upon  a  truth  on  which  to  rest  is  to  be  secure 
from  disturbance,  for  upon  it  all  the  history  of  time  and  the  life  of  mankind  are  built. 

"  Frabe,  everlasting  praise,  be  paid 
To  him  that  earth's  foundations  laid ; 
Praise  to  the  Lord  whose  strong  deoreei 
Sway  the  creation  as  he  please." 

Ver».  1—34. Leviathan  the  terribh.    This  terrible  monster  hM  a  whole  chapter  to 

himself  His  portrait  is  painted  on  a  broad  canvas,  and  it  is  as  full  of  life  and  move- 
ment as  it  is  of  form  and  colour.  Eepresenting  the  crocodile,  though  enlarged  and 
idealized,  leviathan  is  a  picture  of  +'     most  terrible  of  the  works  of  nature. 


660  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB,  [oh.  xu.  1—34. 


L  Thebe  abb  tereiblb  things  in  nature.  When  we  look  at  the  cruel  jaws  of 
the  crocodile,  gaping  in  readiness  for  its  prey,  and  the  little  snake-like  eyes  watcliing 
intently,  in  spite  of  an  inert  attitude  of  body  that  tempts  us  to  despise  the  creature  as 
no  hetter  than  a  log  of  wood,  we  have  before  us  the  mystery  of  natural  terror.  'Could 
God  have  made  this  horrible  monster  ?  Is  there  something  in  the  animal  world  like  the 
tares  in  the  field,  that  an  enemy  sowed  in  tbe  night  ?  The  unity  and  harmony  of  nature 
forbid  such  a  thought.  Moreover,  the  crocodile  has  as  much  right  to  live  as  the  fish 
or  the  calf  that  it  feeds  on.  Even  when  it  snaps  at  an  innocent  and  beautiful  young 
creature,  it  is  but  fulfilling  that  great  natural  instinct  of  hunger,  without  which 
the  world  would  perish.  Far  more  terrible  than  the  crocodile  is  the  old  serpent,  who 
brought  into  the  world  not  natural  death,  but  sin  and  the  death  of  the  soul. 

II.  Natukb  is  advancing  in  beauty  and  jot.  Both  behemoth  and  leviathan — 
the  idealized  hippopotamus  and  the  idealized  crocodile — are  survivals  of  a  more  ancient 
order  of  creatures  than  those  which  now  inhabit  our  globe.  Geology  teaches  us  that 
once  such  creatures,  and  greater  ones,  were  the  chief  if  not  the  sole  Inhabitants  of  the 
earth.  They  are  really  akin  to  the  huge  mastodon,  a  monster  that  would  dwarf  an 
elephant ;  and  the  dinosaurus  and  ichthyosaurus,  in  comparison  with  which  the  most 
tremendous  reptile  of  our  own  day  is  an  insignificant  animal.  While  these  monsters 
crashed  through  the  forests  or  plunged  in  the  rivers  the  world  was  no  fit  place  for  man. 
But  since  their  time  God  has  peopled  the  earth  with  a  fairer  and  more  docile  fauna. 
At  all  events,  with  such  animals  as  now  inhabit  it,  he  has  made  it  possible  for  so 
weak  a  being  as  man  to  rule  the  world.  The  older  ugly  and  fearful  creatures  remain 
to  bear  witness  to  the  past.  But  by  their  contrast  with  the  general  life  of  the  present 
they  show  how  God  is  improving  the  earth. 

III.  The  most  feakful  cbbatuebs  have  theib  lives  adjusted  bt  God.  There 
is  poetry  in  the  magnificent  description  of  leviathan,  especially  because  the  whole  hangs 
together  in  harmony.  There  are  no  real  "freaks  of  nature."  The  most  eccentric 
creatures  have  their  spheres.  The  terror  and  fury  of  the  lower  life  of  nature  is  all  calmly 
provided  for  by  God.    We  may,  perhaps,  think  that  something  must  have  been  wrong, 

"  When  dragons  in  their  prime 
Tare  each  other  in  theix  slima" 

To  us  this  fury,  this  agony  of  nature,  is  fearful  and  mysterious.  Bnt  in  tbe  sight  of 
God  it  is  innocence  itself  compared  with  fury  of  sin  and  the  agony  of  remorse.  The 
terrible  things  of  nature  may  possibly  prove  to  have  come  from  some  perversion  of 
God's  original  plan  by  the  influence  of  evil  beings;  this,  however,  is  but  a  wild  conjec- 
ture. But  the  terrible  sin  of  man  is  a  certain  fact,  and  the  evil  of  the  heart  from  which 
it  springs  is  worse  than  the  cruel  rage  of  leviathan,  just  because  the  human  evil  is  quite 
out  of  harmony  with  the  will  of  God  and  in  direct  antagonism  to  his  law. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  11. — The  universal  rule  of  Ood.  This  is  witnessed  to  even  by  leviathan.  The 
splendid  terror  of  the  water-master  is  depicted  in  order  that  we  may  be  made  to  feel 
in  some  way  how  great  God  must  be,  who  made  him  and  who  rules  over  him. 

I.  It  includes  the  physical  universe.  All  nature  is  as  much  under  the  hand 
and  power  of  God  to-day  as  when  it  first  appeared  at  the  dawn  of  creation.  Even  the 
disorder  and  confusion  that  have  entered  into  nature  have  not  been  able  to  tear  it 
away  from  the  rule  of  God.  God  rules  through  terror  and  confusion  and  death  as 
truly  as  through  beauty  and  life.  God  does  not  confine  himself  to  what  we  call  the 
spiritual.  He  is  not  only  concerned  with  that  which,  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the  word, 
we  understand  as  "  the  religious."  He  is  the  great  Architect,  Mechanic,  Engineer,  of 
the  universe. 

II.  It  is  not  always  visible  to  man.  The  hand  that  guides  is  unseen.  The 
reign  of  law  seems  to  drive  back  the  reign  of  God.     Thus  Matthew  Arnold  writes — 

"The  sea  of  faith 
Was  once,  too,  at  the  full  and  round  earth's  shore, 
Lay  like  the  folds  of  a  bright  girdle  furled; 
But  now  I  only  hear 
Its  melancholy,  long,  withdrawing  iMUr, 
Ketnating,  to  the  breath 


flB.  xti.  1— 84,]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  C61 

Of  the  night  wind,  down  the  vast  edges  drear 
And  naked  shingles  of  the  world." 

III.  It  IB  NOT  THE  LESS  PEAL  BKOAUSK  IT  IS  tfNSEEN.  We  cannot  868  the  gulding 
hand,  but  ofteu  we  can  most  thankfully  detect  its  presence  by  the  providential  result. 
We  may  not  be  able  to  discern  the  steersman  for  the  driving  spray,  but  if  we  have 
come  safely  into  port  we  may  be  sure  that  he  is  at  the  helm.  The  reign  of  law 
cannot  dispense  with  the  rule  of  God,  if  God  is  the  great  Lawgiver.  The  most 
wonderful  scientific  truth  that  has  been  brought  home  to  recent  generations  is  the 
fixed  and  uniform  system  of  law  in  nature.  How  came  this  to  be  so  ?  and  how  is  it 
that  the  vigorous  laws  make  for  the  well-being  of  God's  creatures,  as  they  obviously 
do?  Surely  law  itself  points  to  a  ruling  mind.  The  world  is  not  left  to  itself,  or  it 
would  be  in  chaos.  The  order  of  the  world  throughout,  extending  to  the  most  distant 
galaxy  of  stars,  proclaims  the  universal  rule  of  its  one  Lord. 

IV.  It  will  make  itself  felt  by  those  who  do  not  ACKNOWLEDaE  IT  AT  PBESENT. 

Our  denial  of  God's  universal  rule  does  not  destroy  it.  We  do  not  abrogate  God's 
laws  by  ignoring  them.  The  existence  of  an  atheist  does  not  mean  the  non-existence 
of  God.  For  the  present  God  waits,  giving  us  our  trial,  and  opportunities  for  knowing 
him  peaceably  and  happily.  But  some  day  we  must  behold  his  throne  of  glory,  if  that 
throne  exists  at  all.  Then  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  have  acknowledged  it  first,  and  to 
approach  it  as  his  obedient  servants  coining  home  from  their  toil. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  34. — "  A  king  over  all  the  children  of  'pride"  This  magniloquent  title  crowns 
the  elaborate  description  of  leviathan,  which  occupies  the  whole  chapter.  It  gives  us 
a  vivid  idea  of  the  supremacy  and  kingship  that  are  to  be  found  in  nature. 

I.  Thebe  ABE  QEADATiONS  OF  BANK  IN  NATUBB.  Nature  is  not  democratic  or 
communistic.  Among  her  various  orders  we  observe  ascending  ranks  of  living  creatures. 
There  is  a  natural  aristocracy;  there  is  a  natural  kingship.  All  creatures  are  not 
endowed  alike.  Some  are  gifted  with  powers  that  lift  them  above  their  fellows.  We 
see  the  same  facts  in  the  human  world.  All  men  are  not  endowed  equally.  Some 
have  five  talents,  some  two  talents,  some  but  one  talent.  There  are  men  who  seem 
born  to  rule ;  power  is  native  to  them.  Now,  these  facts  may  seem  to  justify  a  rigid 
adherence  to  dififerences  of  rank  and  a  repression  of  efforts  to  bring  about  a  state  of 
equality.  But  we  must  modify  the  application  of  them  to  men  in  two  or  three  respects, 
1.  Men  are  all  of  one  species,  of  one  great  family,  and  are  therefore  all  brethren,  whereas 
in  the  animal  world  we  have  been  considering  differences  of  species.  2.  Men  have 
a  moral  nature,  and  can  discern  a  higher  right  than  that  of  might,  3.  Men  have 
a  reZtVjrion,  which  teaches  them  that  their  own  insti'  cts  and  wills  are  to  be  subordinate 
to  the  will  of  God. 

II.  The  highest  einoshif  is  mental  and  mobal.  It  is  only  in  a  highly  rhetorical 
description  that  the  crocodile,  even  when  idealized,  can  be  described  as  "a  king  over 
all  the  children  of  pride,"  for  he  does  not  really  rule  over  the  beasts  and  birds  and 
fishes  of  the  Nile.  It  is  his  dragon-like  size  and  form  and  power  that  suggest  to  us  an 
idea  of  royalty.  And  what  royalty  I  Here  we  have  the  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  the 
kingship  of  force.  It  is  natural  and  right  in  the  crocodile,  who  lives  up  to  his  nature. 
Yet  with  all  his  toughness  and  terror  this  animal  is  one  of  the  most  senseless  of 
creatures.  It  is  not  much  to  be  able  to  boast  of  physical  supremacy.  The  born  kings 
of  men  are  the  great  leaders  in  the  higher  life — Pleaders  of  thought,  as  Plato,  Augustine, 
Aquinas,  Bacon,  Newton,  Kant;  lesSers  of  religious  life  and  conduct,  as  St.  Paul, 
Athanasius,  Luther,  Wesley, 

III.  God  is  Kino  op  kings.  It  would  be  a  fearful  thing  if  the  power  and  supremacy 
that  are  entrusted  to  the  larger  animals  had  been  given  to  them  without  limits  or 
restraints.  But  the  kingly  animals,  the  lion  and  the  eagle,  as  well  as  leviathan  himself, 
are  all  obedient  subjects  of  the  Lord  who  rules  over  all  the  works  of  nature.  They 
could  not  rebel  against  their  Suzerain  if  they  would.  Their  kingdoms  are  but  satrapies 
of  the  grand  empire  of  nature  which  God  rules  absolutely.  Hence  the  order  of  the 
world  in  spite  of  the  power  of  these  monstrous  creatures.  Man  alone  is_  able  to  rebel. 
Yet  God  overrules  the  rebellion  even  of  the  human  world,  and  brings  kings  to  do  his 
will,  although  they  may  recognize  him  as  little  as  leviathan  recognizes  his  Lord  and 
MsSer.    Thus  God  gives  power  within  limits.    Men  of  the  largest  liberty  and  the 


6«9 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xLn.  1 — 17. 


highcBt  privUeges  will  be  called  to  account  before  their  iupreme  Master.  Therefore 
it  is  for  us  to  look  up  above  all  earthly  greatness  and  rule  to  that  perfect  kingship  and 
that  one  supreme  authority  which  ias  been  revealed  to  us  in  Ohiist  for  the  guidance  of 
our  lives  into  the  path  of  loyti  obedience. — W.  F.  A. 


BxonON  ylL      HlBTOBIOAL  SeQUKL  to  THB   DlAIiOOuai 


JSPOSITION, 


OHAPTBK  XLn. 


Vers.  1 — 17. — This  concluding  chapter 
divides  into  two  parts.    In  the  first  part 

'  (vers.  1 — 6)  Job  makes  his  final  submission, 
humbling  himself  in  the  dust  before  God. 
In  the  second  (vers.  7 — 17)  the  historical 
firamework,  in  which  the  general  dialogue 
is  set,  is  resumed  and  brought  to  a  close. 
Gtod'e  approval  of  Job  is  declared,  and  his 
anger  denounced  against  the  three  friends, 
who  are  required  to  expiate  their  guilt  by  a 
sacrifice,  and  only  promised  forgiveness  if 
Job  will  intercede  on  their  behalf  (ver.  8). 
The  sacrifice  takes  place  (ver.  9);  and  then 
a  brief  account  is  appended  of  Job's  after 
Ufe — his  prosperity,  his  reconciliation  with 
his  family  and  friends,  his  wealth,  his  sons 
and  daughters,  and  his  death  in  a  good  old 

.age,  when  he  was  "full  of  days"  (vers. 
10 — 17).  The  poetic  structure,  begun  in 
oh.  iii.  3,  is  continued  to  the  end  of  ver.  6, 
when  the  style  changes  into  prose  of  the 
same  character  as  that  employed  in  eh.  L, 
ii.,  and  in  oh.  xxxii.  1 — 5. 

Vers.  1,  2. — ^Then  Job  answered  the  Lord, 
and  said,  I  know  that  thou  canst  do  every 
thing;  i.e.  I  know  and  acknowledge  thy 
omnipotence,  which  thou  bast  set  forth  so 
magnificently  before  me  in  oh.  xxxviii. — 
xli.  It  is  brought  home  to  me  by  the  grand 
review  of  thy  works  which  thou  hast  made, 
and  the  details  into  which  thou  hast  con- 
descended to  enter.  I  know  also  and 
acknowledge  that  no  thought  can  be  with- 
holden  firom  thee;  t.e.  I  confess  also  thy 
omnisoienoe — that  thou  knowest  even  the 
thoughts  of  all  created  beings  (oomp.  Ps. 
xliv.  21;  ozzzix.  2;  Heb.  iv.  13,  etc.). 

Ver,  S. — ^Who  is  he  that  hideth  oonnsel 
without  knowledge  t  As  these  are  nearly 
the  words  of  God  in  eh,  xxxviii.  2,  some 
suppose  that  they  must  be  his  words  again 
here,  and  imagine  a  short  dialogue  in  this 
place  between  Job  and  the  Almighty, 
assigning  to  Job  ver.  2,  the  latter  half  of 
ver.  8,  and  the  whole  of  veiB,  S  and  6,  while 
they  assign  to  God  ver.  4  and  the  first 
elauaa  of  ver.  8.    But  it  is  far  more  natural 


to  regard  Job  as  bringing  up  the  words 
which  God  had  spoken  to  him,  to  ponder 
on  them  and  answer  them,  or  at  any  rate  to 
hang  his  reply  upon  them,  than  to  imagine 
God  twice  interrupting  Job  in  the  humble 
confession  that  he  was  anxious  to  make. 
We  must  understand,  then,  after  the  word 
"knowledge,"  an  ellipse  of  "thou  sayest." 
Therefore  have  I  uttered  that  I  understood 
not,  JTterefore,  because  of  that  reproof  of 
thine,  I  perceive  that,  in  what  I  said  to  my 
friends,  I  "darkened  counsel" — ^I  "uttered 
that  I  understood  not,"  words  which  did 
not  clear  the  matter  in  controversy,  but 
obscured  it.  I  desilt,  in  fact,  with  things 
too  wonderful  for  me — ^beyond  my  compre- 
hension— ^whioh  I  knew  not,  of  which  I  had 
no  real  knowledge,  but  only  a  semblance  of 
knowledge,  and  on  which,  therefore,  I  had 
better  have  been  silent. 

Ver.  4. — Hear,  I  beseech  thee,  and  I  will 
speak;  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  declare 
thou  nnto  me.  Job  refers  to  God's  wurds 
in  ch.  xxxviii.  3  and  xl.  7,  and  realizes 
the  humbling  effect  which  they  had  had  on 
him.  They  made  him  feel  how  little  he 
knew  on  the  subject  of  God's  works  and 
ways,  and  how  little  competent  he  was.to 
judge  them.  Hence  he  bursts  into  the  con- 
fession— 

Ver.  5. — I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear.  Hitherto,  t'.e.,  I  have 
had  nothing  but  hearsay  knowledge  of  thee; 
I  have  not  known  thee  in  any  true  sense; 
but  now — now  that  thou  hast  revealed  thy- 
self— ^mine  eye  seeth  thee;  my  spiritual  eye 
is  opened,  and  I  begin  to  see  thee  in  thy 
true  might,  thy  true  greatness,  thy  true 
inscrutableness.  Now  I  recognize  the  dis- 
tance which  separates  us,  and  feel  how 
unreasonable  it  is  that  I  should  contend 
with  thee,  argue  with  thee,  assume  myself 
to  be  competent  to  pass  judgment  on  thy 
doings.    "  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,"  etc. 

Ver.  6.— Wherefore  I  abhor  myself;  or,  I 
loathe  my  vjords  (see  the  Eevised  Version). 
And  repent  in  dust  and  ashes.  Job  was 
still  sitting  on  the  ash-heap  on  which  he 
had  thrown  himself  when  his  disease  first 
smote  him  (oh.  ii.  8).  He  had  thrown  him- 
self on  it  in  grief  and  despair;  he  will 
remain  seated  on  it  in  compunction  and 
penitence.  His  self-humiliation  is  now 
complete.    He  does  not  letraot  what  he  has 


CH.  XLn.  1— 17J 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


663 


g'.iid  conccrniDg  his  essential  integrity,  but 
he  admits  that  his  words  have  been  over- 
bold, and  his  attitude  towards  God  one 
anbefitting  a  creature.  Ood  accepts  his 
Bubmission,  and  proceeds  to  vindicate  him 
to  bis  "friends,"  and  to  visit  them  with 
condemnation. 

Yer.  7. — And  It  was  so,  that  after  the 
Lord  had  spoken  these  words  unto  Job. 
The  "  words  "  intended  seem  to  be  those  of 
ch.  xxxviii. — ^xli.,  not  any  words  in  the 
earlier  portion  of  this  chapter.  God  heard 
Job's  confession  in  silence,  and,  without 
further  speech  to  him,  addressed  Eliphaz 
and  his  "friends."  The  Lord  said  to  Eliphaz 
the  Temanite,  My  wrath  is  kindled  against 
thee,  and  against  thy  two  friends.  The 
superior  position  of  -Eliphaz  is  here  very 
strongly  recognized — he  alone  i«  mentioned 
by  name,  he  alone  addressed  directly.  The 
precedence  thus  giveu  to  him  accords  with 
that  which  he  holds,  both  in  the  earlier 
historical  narrative  (ch.  ii.  11)  and  in  the 
dialogue  (oh.  iv.  1 ;  zv.  1 ;  xxii.  1).  For 
ye  have  not  spoken  of  me  the  thing  that  is 
right,  as  my  servant  Job  hath.  Job  had, 
on  the  whole,  spoken  what  was  right  and 
true  of  God,  and  is  acknowledged  by  God 
as  his  true  servant.  The  "comforters," 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  had  spoken 
what  was  false.  Even  if  they  said  what 
they  believed,  they  ought  to  have  known 
better. 

Ver.  8. — Therefore  take  unto  yon  now 
seven  bullocks  and  seven  rams.  (On  tlie 
early  and  widespread  prevalence  of  the 
rite  of  sacrifice,  see  the  comment  upon  oh. 
i.  5.)  (On  the  preference,  for  sacrificial  pur- 
pc^es,  of  the  number  seven,  see  Lev.  xiiii. 
18:  Numb,  xxiii.  1,  14,  29;  xxviii.  11,  19, 
27 ;  xxix.  2, 8, 36 ;  1  Chron.  xv.  26 ;  2  Chron. 
xxix.  21 ;  Ezra  viii.  35 ;  Ezek.  xlv.  23,  etc.) 
It  is  noticeable  that  "seven  bullocks  and 
seven  rams"  was  exactly  the  ofiering  of 
the  Moabite  king  Balak,  and  his  prophet 
Balaam,  contemporary  with  Moaes.  And 
go  to  my  servant  Job,  Humble  yourselves 
before  the  man  whom  you  have  striven  to 
abase  and  bring  low.  Go  to  him — make 
application  to  him,  that  he  will  be  pleased 
to  come  to  your  aid,  joining  and  assisting 
in  the  offering  which  I  require  at  your 
hands.  And  offer  np  for  yourselves  a  burnt 
offering.  Do  as  Job  had  done  for  his  suns 
(ch.  i.  5), "  offer  a  burnt  offeiing ; "  and  then 
my  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you.  Present 
at  your  sacrifice,  and  sharing  in  it,  he  shall 
assume  the  highest  priestly  function,  and 
intercede  on  your  behalf.  For  him  will  I 
accept ;  literally,  hit  face,  or  hi$  person,  will 
I  accept.  It  IB  implied  that,  apart  from 
Job,  the  three  "  comforters  "  would  not  have 
been  listened  to,  much  less  have  obtained 
pardon.    LMt  I  dp*l  with  yon  after  your 


folly,  in  that  ye  have  not  spoken  of  me  the 
thing  which  is  right,  like  my  servant  Job 
(see  tbe  comment  on  the  preceding  verse). 

Ver.  9. — So  Eliphaz  the  Temanite  and 
Bildad  the  Shnhite  and  Zophar  the  Naa- 
mathite  went,  and  did  acoording  as  the 
Lord  commanded  them;  i.e.  "went"  to  Job, 
and  asked  his  aid  and  interposition,  and 
obtained  it.  The  Lord  also  accepted  Job; 
i.e.  looked  favourably  on  Job's  intercesbion, 
and  for  his  sake  pardoned  those  for  whom 
he  made  his  prayer.  Job  is  thus  a  type  of 
Christ,  not  merely  in  his  sutferings,  but  also 
in  his  mediatorial  character. 
.  Ver.  10. — And  the  Lord  turned  the  cap- 
tivity of  Job.  The  literal  use  of  this  phrase 
is  common,  the  metaphorical  use  of  it 
uncommon,  in  Scripture.  Still,  it  is  so 
simple  a  metaphor,  and  captivity  so  common 
a  thing  among  ancient  peoples,  that  it  may 
well  have  been  in  general  use  among  the 
nations  of  Western  Asia  from  very  primitive 
times.  It  signifies,  ai  Professor  Lee  remarks, 
"a  restoration  to  former  happy  circum- 
stances." When  he  prayed  for  his  friends. 
Perhaps  his  complete  forgiveness  by  God 
was  contingent  on  his  own  complete  for- 
giveness of  his  "friends"  (Matt.  vi.  12,  14, 
15 ;  xviii.  32 — 35) ;  at  any  rate,  his  restora- 
tion immediately  followed  his  intercession. 
Also  the  Lord  gave  Job  twice  as  much  as 
he  had  before;  literally,  added  to  all  thai 
had  been  JoVt  to  the  double  (comp.  ver.  12). 

Ver.  11. — Then  came  there  unto  him  all 
his  brethren.  Job's  "brethren,"  and  his 
desertion  by  them  in  his  misfortunes,  had 
been  mentioned  in  ch.  xix.  13.  Now  these 
fair-weather  friends  flocked  to  him  again, 
and  professed  affection  and  interest,  ignoring 
probably,  or  excusing,  their  long  absence 
and  neglect.  And  all  his  sisters.  Uae  sex 
had  behaved  no  better  to  him  than  the 
other.  His  nearest  female  relatives  had 
failed  to  show  themselves  the  "  ministering 
angels  "  that  they  are  commonly  accounted, 
even  when  "  pain  and  anguish "  most 
"  wrung  his  brow."  And  all  they  that  had 
been  of  his  ac(inaintanca  before.  Job,  like 
other  wealthy  and  prosperous  men,  had 
during  the  time  of  his  prosperity  had 
"  troops  of  friends  "  (see  oh.  xxix.  8—10, 
21 — 25).  When  adversity  swooped  down 
they  fell  away.  Now  they  had  the  effron- 
tery to  claim  his  acquaintance  once  more, 
and  to  come  and  be  his  guests ;  they  did 
eat  bread  with  him  in  his  house.  Nay,  more, 
they  bemoaned  him,  and  comforted  him  over 
all  the  evil  that  the  Lord  had  brought  upon 
him,  whereof  the  worst  part  was  their  own 
coldness  and  desertion  (ch.  xix.  13,  14, 19). 
Finally,  to  establish  the  renewed  friendship, 
every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece  of  money, 
and  every  one  an  ear-ring  of  gold.  The 
money  given  is  said  to  have  been  a  hgtitah. 


m 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOB. 


[oh.  xlh.  1— W. 


whiolj  meauti  probably  a  certain  weight  of 
silver,  though  whether  a  shekel  or  not  ii 
uncertain.  The  word  belongs  to  the  earlier 
Hebrew,  being  found  only  in  Gen.  xxxiii. 
19;  Josh.  xxiv.  32,  and  in  the  present 
passage.  Bar-rings  were  commonly  worn  in 
the  East  by  men  as  well  as  women,  as  appears 
from  the  Egyptian,  Assyrian,  and  Persian 
sculptures. 

Ver.  12. — So  the  Lord  blessed  the  latter 
end  of  Job  more  than  his  beginning  (comp. 
above,  ver.  10).  The  restoration  of  pros- 
perity, prophesied  by  Eliphaz  (ch.  v.  18  -  26), 
Bildad  (ch.  viii.  20,  21),  and  Zophar  (ch. 
xi.  13 — 19),  but  not  expected  by.  Job,  came, 
not  in  consequence  of  any  universal  law, 
but  by  the  will  of  God,  and  his  pure  grace 
and  favour.  It  in  no  way  pledged  God  to 
compensate  worldly  adversity  by  worldly 
prosperity  in  the  case  of  any  other  sufferer; 
and  certainly  the  general  law  seems  to  be 
that  such  earthly  compensation  is  withheld. 
But,  in  combination  with  the  instinct  which 
demands  that  retribu  tive  justice  shall  prevail 
universally,  it  may  be  taken  as  an  earnest 
of  God's  ultimate  dealings  with  men,  and  a 
sure  indication  that,  if  not  on  earth,  at  least 
in  the  future  state,  each  man  shall  receive 
"the  deeds  done  in  the  body,"  according 
to  that  he  bath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or 
evil.  For  he  had  (rather,  and  he  had) 
fourteen  thousand  sheep,  and  siz  thousand 
camels,  and  a  thousand  yoke  of  oxen,  and  a 
thousand  she-asses.  In  every  case  the  exact 
double  of  his  original  possessions  (see  ch.  i. 
3;  and  comp.  above,  ver.  12).  We  need  not 
suppose,  however,  that  either  the  round 
numbers,  or  the  exact  duplicity,  are  his- 
torical. 

Yer.  13 — He  had,  also  seven  sons  and 
three  daughters.  The  same  number  as  pre- 
viously (oil.  i.  2),  neither  more  nor  fewer. 

Ver.  14. — And  he  called  the  name  of  the 
first,  Jemima,  The  name  "  Jemima  "  is  pro- 
bably derived  from  ydm  (dv),  "day,"  and 
means  "  Fair  as  the  day."  And  the  name  of  the 
second,  Kezia.  "  Kezia  "  (rather,  "  Keziali  ") 
was  the  Hebrew  name  of  the  spice  which 
the  Greeks  and  Romans  called  "  cassia,"  a 
spice  closely  allied  to  cinnamon,  and  much 
esteemed  in  the  East  (see  Herod.,  iii.  110). 
And  the  name  of  the  third,  Keren-happuoh ; 
literally,  horn  of  stibium — alibium  being  the 


dye  (antimony)  with  which  Oriental  women 
have  from  a  remote  antiquity  been  in  the 
habit  of.  anointing  the  upper  and  lower 
eyelids  in  order  to  give  lustre  to  the  eye 
(compare  the  '  Pulpit  Commentary '  on  the 
'  Second  Book  of  Kings,'  p.  194).  The  three 
names,  according  to  Oriental  notions,  implied 
either  sweetness  or  beauty. 

Ver.  15. — And  in  all  the  land  were  no 
women  found  so  fair  as  the  danghterB  of 
job.  Beauty  has  always  been  highly  valued 
in  the  East ;  and  Job  would  feel  himself 
highly  favoured  in  having  three  beautiful 
daughters.  It  may  have  been  on  account 
of  their  great  beauty  that  their  father  gare 
them  inheritance  among  their  brethren, 
which  was  certainly  an  unusual  practice  in 
the  East. 

Yer.  16. — After  this  lived  Job  an  hundred 
and  forty  years.  It  has  been  concluded  from 
this  statement,  combined  with  that  at  the 
close  of  ver.  10,  that  Job  was  exactly  seventy 
years  of  age  when  his  calamities  fell  upon 
him  ('Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  p.  1087, 
note) ;  but  this  is  really  only  a  conjecture, 
since  the  statement  that  "  God  added  to  all 
that  had  been  Job's  to  the  double,"  does 
not  naturally  apply  to  anything  but  his 
property.  We  may,  however,  fairly  allow 
that  (as  Professor  Lee  sayi)  he  "  could 
scarcely  have  been  less  than  seventy  "  when 
his  afflictions  came,  having  then  a  family 
of  ten  children,  who  were  all  grown  up  (ch. 
i.  4).  In  this  case,  the  whole  duration  of 
his  life  would  liave  been  210  years,  or  a 
little  more,  which  cannot  be  regarded  aa 
incredible  by  those  who  accept  the  ages  of 
the  patriarchs,  from  Peleg  to  Jacob,  as  re- 
spectively 239,  230,  148,  205,  175,  180,  and 
147  years.  And  saw  his  sons,  and  his  sons' 
sons;  i.e.  his  descendants — grandchildren, 
and  great-grandchildren.  Even  four  gene- 
rations.  According  to  the  Hebrew  inclusive- 
practice  of  reckoning,  we  may  regard  his 
own  generation  as  inci  nded. 

Yer.  17. — So  Job  died,  being  old  and  full 
of  days.  The  lowest  estimate  places  the 
occurrence  of  the  afflictions  of  Job  at  the 
time  when  be  was  a  little  more  than  fifty 
("  Supponitur  quinquagenario  baud  multo 
.  majorem  fuisse  Nostrum,  quum  conflictari 
coepit,"  Scbnltens).  Thus  bis  age  at  his 
death  would  be  at  leatt  a  hundred  and  ninety. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 17. —  TTie  conclusion  of  the  drama.  I.  The  settlement  of  the  thibd 
OONTBOVBESY  BETWEEN  Jehovah  AND  JoB.  (VeiB.  1—6.)  This  Controversy,  it  will 
be  remembered,  arose  out  of  the  intensity  of  Job's  sufferings  and  the  perplexity  of 
Job's  spirit,  which  caused  him  on  the  one  hand  to  form  too  favourable  an  opinion  of 
his  own,  and  on  the  other  hand  too  unfavourable  an  opinion  of  God's,  righteousness; 
to  misinterpret  the  facts  of  providence  almost  as  egregiously  as,  though  in  an  opposite 
direction  from,  the  friends;  to  misapprehend  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  Divine 


oltttiLl— 1?.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  665 

administration,  which,  if  it  was  not  strictly  retributive  justice,  as  the  friends  alleged, 
was  still  less  a  heartless  indifiEerence  to  human  happiness,  as  Job  occasionally  seemed 
to  insinuate,  but,  as  Elihu  maintained,  a  principle  of  grace ;  to  misconstrue  the  purpose 
at  which  Gt)d  aimed  in  hii  aflSiction,  and,  as  a  consequence,  to  recklessly  charge  God 
with  paitiality,  injustice,  and  enmity.  Accordingly  this,  the  last  controversy  to  emerge, 
was  the  first  which  required  to  be  disposed  of;  and  this  is  done  by  Job's  unconditional 
surrender  to  Jehovah.  1.  A  dear  recognition  of  the  Divine  supremacy.  "I  know 
that  thou  canst  do  everything,  and  that  no  thought  can  be  withholden  from  thee." 
The  conception  of  Jehovah's  omnipotence  and  omniscience,  of  his  infinite  capability 
of  elaborating  plans  and  carrying  them  forward  into  execution,  though  not  wholly 
unfamiliar  to  the  mind  of  the  patriarch,  now  stands  out  before  his  quickened  imagi- 
nation with  a  luminosity  which  was  previously  wanting.  The  contemplation  of  a 
wisdom  that  could  fashion  and  a  power  that  could  govern  such  strange  and  wondrous 
monsters  as  behemoth  (the  hippopotamus,  or  Nile-horae)  and  leviathan  (the  crocodile 
or  alligator),  had  enabled  him  to  see  that  in  the  higher  sphere  of  man  also  similarly 
elaborated  thoughts,  counsels,  plans,  might  be  formed  by  the  Supreme,  and  even 
projected  into  actual  realization.  Thac  Job's  afiSiotion  was  one  such  exquisitely 
fashioned  thought  of  God  had  at  last  dawned  upon  the  troubled  soul  of  the  patriarch. 
2.  A  humble  acknowledgment  of  sin.  "  Who  is  he  that  hideth  counsel  without  know- 
ledge?" So  Jehovah  at  the  opening  of  the  theophany  had  charged  the  patriarch  with 
doing  (ch.  xxxviii.  2);  and  to  this  at  length  the  patriarch,  with  sorrow  in  his  heart, 
assents.  It  is  a  sure  sign  that  a  man  has  entered  on  the  path  of  penitence  when  he  owns 
himself  prepared  not  alone  to  admit  his  fault,  but  also  to  accept  the  rebukes  of  God 
(Lev.  xxvi.  41).  So  David  did  when  God  reproved  him  for  his  great  transgression  in 
the  matter  of  Uriah.  And  here  Job  with  perfect  frankness  concedes  that  God's  language 
concerning  him,  however  severe,  was  not  undeserved ;  that  in  speaking  as  he  did  about 
God  and  his  transcendently  glorious  administration  of  mundane  affairs  he  had  simply 
been  babbling  in  ignorance,  talking  about  sublimities  immeasurably  beyond  his  con- 
ception. "  Therefore  have  I  uttered  that  I  understood  not ;  things  too  wonderful  for 
rue,  which  I  knew  not."  3.  An  earnest  desire  for  Divine  illumination.  A  second 
time  taking  up  the  words  of  God  (ch.  xxxviii.  3),  Job,  as  it  seems  to  us,  applies  them  to 
himself.  Formerly  he  had  deemed  himself  qualified  to  answer  God,  so  confident  did 
he  feel  as  to  the  fulness  of  his  knowledge  and  the  clearness  of  his  convictions.  On 
this  assumption  God  had  challenged  him  to  stand  forth  and  submit  to  examination. 
Now,  however.  Job  has  been  brought  to  see  what  every  one  must  be  brought  to  see 
before  he  can  be  either  wise  or  good,  viz.  his  native  ignorance,  his  mental  and  moral 
darkness,  his  comparative  blindness,  especially  as  regards  the  things  of  God.  Hence, 
with  the  true  spirit  of  a  penitent,  he  exclaims,  "Hear,"  I  beseech  thee,  and  I  wiU 
speak :  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  declare  thou  unto  me."  So  did  Asaph  confess  his 
ignorance  and  supplicate  instruction  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  22).  So  David  (Ps.  xxv.  4),  and  either 
he  or' a  later  Hebrew  poet  (Ps.  cxix.  12,  18,  19,  27,  33).  God  instructs  not  the  wise 
in  their  own  conceits;  or,  if  he  does,  the  first  lesson  he  imparts  is  to  show  them  their 
folly.  Hence  the  words  of  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  iii.  18).  4.  A  penitential  expression  of 
selfrobasement.  The  insight  Job  had  gained  from  the  Divine  teaching  had  com- 
pletely revolutionized  his  soul.  From  being  proud  and  self-confident,  he  had  become 
humble  and  subdued.  Prostrate  in  the  dust  of  contrition,  he  was  full  of  spiritual  self- 
loathing.  "  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  Job  felt  ashamed 
of  his  behaviour  in  condemning  God ;  he  was  not  less  ashamed  of  his  own  moral  weak- 
ness and  imperfection.  Thus  practically  he  confessed  that,  in  the  controversy  he  had 
waged  with  God,  the  right  lay  with  God,  the  wrong  with  him. 

II.  The  settlement  of  the  second  controversy  between  Job  and  the  three 
FMBND8.  (Vers.  7—9.)  This  controversy,  as  formerly  explained  (ch.  ii.  11,  homi- 
letics),  turned  upon  the  relation  existing  between  sin  and  suffering ;  the  friends  main- 
taining that  suffering,  in  the  Divine  administration,  was  so  invariably  connected  with 
sin  by  the  principle  of  a  strictly  retributive  justice,  that  it  was  always  possible  to 
estimate  the  amount  of  an  individual's  guilt  by  the  depth  of  his  calamity ;  while  Job, 
on  the  other  hand,  not  only  resented  the  application  of  such  a  principle  to  himself,  but 
contended  that  many  facts  existed  which  were  wholly  irreconcilable^  with  such  a 
principle.    On  this  controversy  also  Jehovah  pronounces  an  authoritative  verdict,  to 


668  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xlii.  1—17. 


the  effect  that  truth  lay  upon  the  side  of  Job  rather  than  upon  that  of  the  friends, 
to  whom  accordingly  he  now,  in  turn,  directs  his  address.  1.  The  imputation  made. 
Eliphaz  and  his  fnends  had  not  spoken  concerning  him  that  which  was  right,  as  Job 
had.  They  had  erred  in  two  ways — in  presenting  an  erroneous  view  of  the  Divine 
dealings  with  mankind  in  general,  and  in  maintaining  it  at  the  expense  both  of 
God  and  of  Job.  In  order  to  make  good  their  theory,  they  had  alleged,  in  defiance  of 
all  evidence  to  the  contrary,  that  Job  was  a  wicked  man,  and  that  God  was  incensed 
against  him  with  righteous  indignation — both  of  which  assertions  were  incorrect. 
Neither  was  God  punishing  Job,  nor  was  Job  a  wicked  man,  but  one  whom  all  through 
the  tremendous  ordeal  God  recognized  as  his  servant.  And  if  Eliphaz  and  his  friends 
had  transgressed  against  God  in  misrepresenting  the  Divine  character  and  ways,  they 
had  offended  scarcely  less  by  misjudging  the  character  and  ways  of  Job.  If  Job  himself 
was  not  entirely  free  from  blame  in  the  views  he  was  sometimes  driven  in  anguish  to 
express,  it  must  still  be  remembered  that  he  was  nearer  the  truth  than  they  were,  and  that 
occasionally  he  was  able  to  recognize  the  Divine  justice  and  love  in  his  tribulation, 
2.  The  direction  given.  "  Therefore  take  unto  you  now  seven  rams,  and  go  to  my  servant 
Job,  and  offer  up  for  yourselves  a  burnt  offering."  Interesting  as  showing  the  antiquity 
of  sacrificial  worship  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  Holy  Land,  this  statement  is  also  valuable 
a.s  pointing  out  the  close  correspondence  as  to  fundamental  ideas  and  prevailing  forms 
between  the  worship  observed  in  heathen  countries  and  that  subsequently  practised 
in  Israel.  Here,  as  afterwards  in  the  Mosaic  cultus,  the  burnt  offering  is  the  appointed 
medium  of  pardon  and  acceptance,  proclaiming  to  Job  and  his  contemporaries,  as 
later  to  Abraham's  descendants,  that  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission, 
that  reconciliation  is  impossible  except  upon  the  ground  of  an  atoning  sacrifice.  Here, 
as  afterwards,  bullocks  and  rams  are  the  animals  selected  for  the  sacrificial  ritual, 
perhaps  also  for  a  like  purpose,  to  typify  the  holy  Lamb  of  God  who  should  in  the 
end  of  the  ages  become  the  world's  Propitiation,  while  at  the  same  time  they  suggested 
forcibly  their  own  insiifScienoy  (Heb.  ix.  11 — 14 ;  i.  1 — 5)  to  cleanse  the  conscience 
from  sin.  Here  also,  as  afterwards,  the  offering  is  directed  to  be  presented  through 
an  ofiiciating  priest  (in  this  case  Job),  to  siftnify  that  no  man  can  come  to  God  except 
through  the  intei-vcntion  of  a  Mediator.  Thus  the  rudiments  of  the  gospel  may  tie 
said  to  have  existed  in  that  early  age — the  work  of  Christ  being  clearly  symbolized, 
his  great  propitiation  by  the  sacrificial  victims,  his  heavenly  intercession  by  the  prayer 
of  Job.  3.  Z%e  encouragement  offered.  "  My  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you :  for  him 
[literally,  'his  face  or  person']  will  I  accept."  Having  graciously  constituted  Job 
a  Mediator  between  himself  and  the  friends,  Jehovah  guarantees  that  if  they  will 
avail  themselves  of  his  services,  he  will  be  accepted,  and  of  course  they  also  in  him. 
Here,  again,  it  is  impossible  not  to  descry  another  shadow  of  the  gospel.  God,  having 
constituted  Christ  a  High  Priest  for  ever,  distinctly  engages  to  accept  all  who  through 
him  supplicate  his  favour.  Hence  Christ  says,  "  I  am  the  Way :  ...  no  man  cometh  unto 
the  Father,  but  by  me ;  "  and  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews  declares  that  "  he  is  able  to 
save  unto  the  uttermost  all  them  that  come  unto  God  through  him."  4.  The  warning 
appended.  "  Lest  I  deal  with  you  after  your  folly."  That  is  to  say,  unless  they  fled 
for  refuge  to  this  hope  set  before  them,  they  could  not  escape  the  punishment  their 
folly  merited.  If  they  complied  with  the  Divine  instruction,  they  were  safe ;  if  they 
declined,  they  would  suffer.  So  likewise  has  the  gospel  its  warning.  If  sinful  men 
flee  to  Christ,  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  they  will  certainly  be  delivered ; 
if  they  do  not,  they  shall  just  as  certainly  be  destroyed.  5.  The  obedience  rendered.  "  So 
Eliphaz  the  Temanite,  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and  Zophar  the  Naamathite  went,  and  did 
according  as  the  Lord  commanded  them."  And  in  so  doing  they  expressed  their 
penitence — they  tacitly  acknowledged  their  offence ;  their  faith — they  acted  precisely 
as  the  Lord  had  commanded ;  their  humility — they  sought  the  friendly  ofiSces  of  one 
whom  they  had  regarded  as  an  outcast ;  their  submission — they  acquiesced  in  the  Divine 
verdict,  though  it  had  gone  against  them.  In  all  this  they  show  to  sinful  men  a  pattern 
of  how  the  guilty  should  draw  near  to  God. 

III.  The  settlement  op  the  first  or  fundamental  oonteovbrbt  between 
Jehovah  and  Satan.  (Vers.  9—17.)  It  has  been  repeatedly  explained  (ch.  i.  9, 
homiletics)  that  controversy  is  here  also  ended  by  the  action  of  God,  who,  by  delivering 
his  servant  from  the  furnace  of  affliction  and  reinstating  him  in  even  more  than  his 


CH.  XLH.  1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  667 


former  prosperity,  virtually  pronounces  judgment  against  the  devil.  Job  has  not  been 
a  fair-weather  professor  of  religion,  but  an  earnest  and  sincere  follower  of  Heaven,  cling- 
ing to  his  piety  amidst  the  severest  reverses,  and  not  only  serving  God  for  nought,  but 
adhering  to  him  even  when  it  seemed  that  God  had  cast  him  off.  It  was,  therefore,  use- 
less to  continue  the  experiment  a  moment  longer.  Accordingly  it  is  stated, "  The  Lord 
also  accepted  Job."  Four  things  are  mentioned  as  giving  unmistakable  evidence  of 
Jehovah's  acceptance  of  his  servant.  1.  The  cessation  of  his  trial.  "  And  the  Lord  " 
— that  marks  the  Author  of  Job's  deliverance — "  turned  the  captivity  of  Job ; "  that 
describes  its  joy,  it  was  like  the  coming  home  from  exile ;  "  when  he  prayed  for  his 
friends;"  that  specifies  its  time,  when  Job  was  interceding  with  Heaven  in  behalf  of 
others.  2.  The  return  of  his  prosperity.  "  Also  the  Lord  gave  Job  twice  as  much  as 
he  had  before ; "  "  fourteen  tbousand  sheep,  and  six  thousand  camels,  and  a  thousand 
yoke  of  oxen,  and  a  thousand  she-asses ;  "  but  only  the  same  number  of  children  as 
before — "  seven  sons  and  three  daughters,"  perhaps  because  the  former  seven  and  three 
were  not  lost,  but  only  gone  before.  They  who  lose  all  for  God  on  earth  will  not  be 
losers  in  the  end.  Job  received  twice  as  much  as  he  had  before.  Christ's  followers  are 
promised  "  an  hundredfold  more  in  this  world,  and  in  the  world  to  come  life  ever- 
lasting." 3.  The  sympathy  of  his  friends.  "  Then  came  there  unto  him  all  his 
brethren,  and  all  his  sisters,  and  all  they  that  had  been  of  his  acquaintance  before." 
During  the  time  of  his  desolation  they  had  deserted  him,  as  he  pathetically  complained 
(ch.  xix.  13 — 19),  thinking  him  an  object  of  Divine  displeasure.  Now  they  return  with 
the  first  symptoms  of  returning  prosperity.  "  And  they  bemoaned  him,  and  comforted 
him  over  all  the  evil  that  the  Lord  had  brought  upon  him."  A  little  of  this  would 
have  cheered  him  when  in  the  depths;  but,  alas!  then  it  was  awauting.  Let  it  not, 
however,  be  asserted  that  their  display  of  sympathy  was  purely  superficial,  that  in  fact 
they  were  a  company  of  hypocrites,  since  they  at  least  offered  a  small  token  of  their 
honesty  in  every  one  presenting  him  with  gifts.  "Every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece  of 
money,  and  every  one  an  ear-ring  of  gold."  4.  The  liappiness  of  his  old  age.  Sur- 
rounded by  a  family  of  fair  daughters  and  noble  sons,  as  in  the  beginning  of  his  days, 
and  possessed  of  a  constantly  augmenting  estate,  the  devout  patriarch  glided  peacefully 
along  the  stream  of  life,  till  at  length  he  reached  the  grave  an  old  man  and  full  of  days, 
having  lived  after  the  cessation  of  his  afSictions  a  hundred  and  forty  years,  and  seen 
his  sons,  and  his  sons'  sons,  even  four  generations. 

Learn :  1.  That  only  that  piety  is  sincere  which  exalts  God  and  abases  selfl  2. 
That  no  man  can  truly  know  himself  until  he  has  first  known  God.  3.  That  true 
repentance  ever  springs  from  a  believing  apprehension  of  God.  4.  That  God  is  deeply 
displeased  with  those  who  misrepresent  either  himself  or  his  ways.  5.  That  a  good 
man  may  commit  many  faults  without  forfeiting  the  Divine  favour.  6.  That  the  Law 
of  Moses  was  not  the  first  or  the  only  shadow  of  the  good  things  to  come.  7.  That 
from  the  first  the  sinful  world  possessed  a  way  of  salvation.  8.  That  the  essential 
element  in  justifying  faith  is  for  all  men  the  same,  viz.  obedience  to  the  revealed  will  of 
God.  9.  That  God's  people  are  commonly  most  blessed  themselves  when  trying  to 
promote  the  good  of  others.  10.  That  God  will  yet  turn  the  captivity  of  all  his  suffering 
people,  causing  their  night  of  sorrow  to  be  followed  by  a  morning  of  joy.  11.  That  God 
will  not  forsake  his  people  who  adhere  to  him.  12.  That  a  peaceful  old  age  in  the 
bosom  of  a  pious  family  is  one  of  the  choicest  blessings  a  saint  can  enjoy  on  this  side  of 
heaven.  13.  That  notwithstanding  God  can  give  a  saint  on  earth  unspeakable  felicity, 
it  is  better  that  the  saint  should  ultimately  die  and  go  to  heaven. 

Vers.  6,  6. — Hearsay  and  vision.  L  Hbabbat  is  not  vision.  Hearsay  may  be 
distinguished  from  vision  two  ways.  1.  In  respect  of  Us  nature.  Hearsay,  as  the  term 
signifies  in  common  speech,  is  information  received  at  second  hand,  by  report,  in  con- 
trast to  that  derived  from  personal  observation  and  experience,  which  it  is  usual  to 
describe  as  seeing.  When  applied  to  our  knowledge  of  Divine  things,  the  former  may 
be  understood  as  signifying  all  that  instruction  which  comes  to  us  from  without,  all 
that  we  receive  from  tradition,  whatever  is  imparted  to  us  by  parents,  teachers,  minis- 
ters, that  which  we  extract  from  catechisms,  religious  books,  and  even  from  our  Bibles 
by  our  ordinary  faculties  of  perception  and  reason — in  short,  everything  commonly 
included  in  the  phrase,  "  the  letter  of  the  truth ; "  the  latter  points  to  such  a  direct, 


668  THE  BOOK  Of  JOB.  [oa.  an.  1— If . 


personal,  intimate  acquaintance  with  God  and  truth  as  the  soul  obtains  when, 
breathed  on  by  that  heavenly  breath  which,  according  to  Elihu,  is  the_  source  of  all 
spiritual  illumination,  it  looks  outward  and  upward  through  the  opened  window  of  faith. 
2.  In  respect  of  its  effect*.  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,"  exclaims 
the  patriarch ;  but  what  then  ?  This  hearsay  knowledge  left  me  a  prey  to  serious  mis- 
conceptions both  as  to  thyself  and  myself — ^permitted  me  to  fancy  thee  an  nnjust  Judge, 
an  inequitable  Sovereign,  an  arbitrary  Ruler,  an  implacable  Foe ;  and  myself  a  harshly 
treated  and  cruelly  oppressed  saint.  And  so  for  the  most  part  that  knowledge  of  God 
whi«h  is  purely  external,  intellectual,  dogmatical,  has  little  power  to  change  the  heart 
and  life,  or  even  to  conduct  the  mind  to  just  conceptions  of  the  character  of  God.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  when  this  hearsay  has  been  transmuted  into  rision,  and  the  soul  has 
arrived  at  a  truthful  idea  of  the  character  of  God  as  a  Being  all-powerful,  holy,  wise, 
just,  and  loving,  lo!  immediately  the  self-righteous  sinner  is  discovered  prostrate  in 
the  dust,  like  Job,  crying,  "  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes ; " 
like  Isaiah  in  the  temple, "  Woe  is  me  I "  like  St.  Peter  in  his  boat  upon  the  sea  of  Galilee, 
"  Depart  from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord  I " 

II.  Hearsay  uat  become  vision.  This  may  be  held  as  proved  by  the  case  of  Job. 
1.  The  manner  ^  its  transmutation.  An  experience  similar  to  that  of  Job  must  take 
place  in  every  instance  in  which  a  soul  passes  from  a  mere  hearsay  knowledge  to  a 
believing  vision  of  God.  (1)  As  Jehovah  came  to  Job  in  the  whirlwind,  and  made  to 
him  a  personal  revelation  of  his  character  as  a  Being  of  awful  majesty,  ineffable  wisdom, 
aud  infinite  power,  so  must  God  with  a  like  disclosui-e  of  himself  approach  the  human 
soul.  This  God  has  done ;  not,  however,  "  in  rainbow  wreath  and  robe  of  storm,"  but  in 
the  meek  and  lowly  form  of  a  sinless,  suffering  humanity — ^in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(2)  As  in  Job's  case  there  must  have  been  a  corresponding  influence  exerted  on  the 
mmd  of  Job  to  enable  him  to  apprehend  the  revelation  given,  so  in  that  of  all  who 
attain  to  his  position  of  spiritual  perception,  "  the  eyes  of  the  understanding  must  be 
opened."  2.  The  time  of  its  transmutation.  The  season  in  which  Job  was  honoured 
to  receive  the  sublime  theophany  which  exerted  such  a  marvellous,  subduing  influence 
upon  his  soul,  was  one  of  intense  bodily  affiction,  and  deep  mental  and  spiritual  anxiety ; 
and  so  mostly  it  is  found  that  such  are  the  seasons  God  selects  for  discovering  himself 
and  his  grace  to  the  soul.  As  Christ  came  to  his  disciples  on  the  sea  of  Galilee  when 
they  were  toiling  in  rowing,  and  said  to  them,  "  Be  of  good  cheer :  it  is  I ;  be  not  afraid," 
so  does  be  (till  come  to  souls  when  they  are  tossed  upon  the  sea  of  doubt  and  fear. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — JoV*  answer  and  confession.     It  consist!  of — 

I.  The  H0MBLE  acknowledgment  of  God's  power.  (Ver.  2.)  God  can  do  every- 
thing ;  and  no  "  beginning,"  no  germinating  or  budding  thought,  is  hidden  from  him  ; 
he  sees  it  alike  in  its  origin,  development,  and  end.  Both  the  fearful  forms  of  force 
in  the  animal  life  of  nature,  and  the  striking  destinies  of  individual  men,  are  constant 
proofs  of  the  presence  of  him  who  governs  the  world  in  power  and  in  justice. 

II.  An  acknowledgment  of  hib  own  ignorance  and  weakness.  (Ver.  3.) 
Justly  did  God  rebuke  him  in  the  question,  "  Who  darkeneth  counsel  without  under- 
standing?"  He  has  been  passing  judgment  on  matters  he  did  not  understand,  drawing 
conclusions  from  imperfect  premisses,  dealing  with  things  that  are  and  must  remain 
to  US  mysterious,  as  if  they  could  be  explained  by  the  rules  of  a  limited  experience. 
It  is  this  haste,  this  childish  impatience  of  suspense,  which  drives  some  into  discontent 
and  murmuring,  others  into  unbelief  and  atheism.  A  haste  to  speak  before  our  thought 
is  ripe,  a  haste  to  judge  before  the  materials  of  judgment  are  at  hand, — these  lead  in 
human  intercourse  and  In  Divine  relations  to  false  positions,  which  must  be  sooner  or 
later  abandcmerl.    But  we  see  in  Job — 

IlL  Tms  EXPRESSION  AND  THE  ACT  OF  PENITENCE.  (Vors.  4 — 6.)  Quoting  (ver.  4) 
the  summons  of  Jehovah  at  the  beginning  of  his  discourses  (oh.  xxxviii.  3  and  xl.  7),  he 
gives  the  answer  alone  befitting  and  required.  He  had  before  heard  of  God,  i.e.  had 
bad  an  indirect  and  imperfect  acquaintance  with  God.  There  is  a  knowJedge  of  God  at 
leoowi  hand,  which  ia  insufiBcient  to  bring  us  to  the  sense  of  our  true  relations  to  him 


OH.  XLH.  1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOa  ««9 

(comp.  Pb.  xlviii.  9).  We  hear  about  God  from  the  sources  of  early  instruction,  parents, 
teacherB,^pulpitB,  and  books,  and.yet  may  thus  not  be  brought  into  personal  communica- 
tion with  God.  In  contrast  to  this  is  the  personal  vision  of  Qroi.  Not  with  the  eyes  of 
the  body,  but  with  the  deeper  view  of  the  mind — the  intellectual  intuition,  the  con- 
templation of  the  Invisible  through  his  creative  manifestations  (Rom.  i.  19,  20).  This 
immediate  view  of  God  produces  at  once  a  new  view  of  self.  To  see  that  God  is  infinite  is 
to  see  that  we  are  finite ;  to  behold  his  perfection  is  to  be  sensible  of  our  own  imperfection ; 
to  acknowledge  him  to  be  in  the  right  is  to  confess  that  our  thoughts  are  wrong ;  to 
be  amazed  and  enraptured  with  his  glory  is  to  loathe  our  own  meanness.  Yet  these 
thoughts  may  exist  in  the  mind,  and  yet  be  without  result  except  that  of  conscious 
misery.  But  their  tendency  and  their  purpose  are  to  produce  repentance,  as  we  see  in 
the  example  of  Job.  And  here  we  mark  the  traits  of  a  true  repentance.  It  is  to  "  recall " 
the  idle  word,  the  impious  thought ;  and  it  is  to  reverse  the  attitude  of  the  mind  from 
that  of  presumption  and  pride  to  that  of  submission  and  humility.  So  in  dust  and 
ashes,  ■with  pride  abased,  overcome  by  the  Divine  majesty,  would  Job  offer  those 
sacrifices  which  God  does  not  despise  (Ps.  li.).  In  returning  to  God  he  returm  to  his 
true  spirit  and  attitude  of  patience.  Out  of  this,  by  the  provocation  of  his  friends,  he 
had  allowed  himself  to  be  roused.  But  now  hearing  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed 
it,  kissing  the  hand  that  hath  smitten,  he  waits  in  silence  until  th«  blessing  of  the 
Most  High  anew  exalts  the  sincere  penitent. — J. 

Vers.  7 — 17. — Concltision  of  the  story.  I.  The  Ditmb  jtjbtipioatioh  of  Job. 
(Vers.  7 — 10.)  The  cure  of  the  inward  sickness  of  the  sufferer's  spirit  is  followed  here, 
as  we  often  see  in  the  course  of  life,  by  outward  health  and  happiness.  1.  The  reproof 
of  the  friends.  (Yet.  7.)  Addressing  Bliphaz,  as  then:  chief  spokesman,  Jehovah  declares 
his  displeasure  that  they  have  not  spoken  the  truth  concerning  him.  Not  that  they 
have  spoken  with  wilful  dishonesty,  but  that  they  have  been  in  error.  There  has  been 
a  want  of  heart,  and  therefore  a  want  of  right  thought.  They  have  refused  to  receive 
the  testimony  of  a  brother's  substantial  innocence ;  have  persistently  tried  to  fix  on  him 
a  guilt  which  did  not  exist.  The  habit  of  censoriousness,  the  habitual  exclusion  of 
charity  from  our  feelings,  vitiates  and  falsifies  the  whole  course  of  our  thought.  The 
grave  question  arises,  whether  any  intellectual  error  can  in  the  end  escape  condemna- 
tion ;  whether  the  very  definition  of  such  error  is  not  the  thought  arising  from  an  evil 
state  of  heart.  But  Job,  on  the  other  hand,  has  spoken  the  substantial  truth,  and 
for  the  opposite  reason.  Again  and  again  we  have  seen  how  his  contention  is  for 
trath  5  and  how,  beneath  all  the  irritation  of  his  hasty  words,  there  has  been  throbbing 
a  heart  true  to  God.  And  now  comes  the  hour  of  recognition,  as  it  ever  will  come  for 
every  faithful  soul.  What  a  blissful  sound  is  there  in  tliose  words  of  recognition  and  of 
pardon  and  of  justification,  "  My  servant  Job  "  I  What  grace  in  the  long-delayed,  but 
now  fully  granted  answer  to  the  prayer  (ch.  xvi.  21)  that  right  may  be  done  before  God 
and  his  friends  I  But  let  us  clearly  grasp  and  retain  the  principle  and  the  contents  of  this 
Divine  judgment.  The  friends  spoke  ill,  and  Job  spoke  well.  This  is  the  Divine  judg- 
ment. On  what  ground  is  it  based?  Their  one  point  was  this:  afiliction  is  the 
evidence  of  God's  wrath,  and  of  the  afflicted  one's  gnilt.  And  they  were  wrong.  Job's 
insistence  is  that  afflictions  are  not  always  the  sign  of  the  sufferer's  guilt  nor  of  the 
ant-er  of  God.  And  Job  is  right.  And  there  remains  the  grand  principle  illustrated 
by°the  discourses  of  Jehovah,  and  on  which  this  judgment  rests,  that  affliction  comes 
from  the  will  of  supreme  power  and  justice.  And  this  is  so,  altlough  the  reasons  of 
affliction  cannot  by  our  imperfect  intelligence  be  fully  known.  At  the  same  time,  the 
judgment  on  this  great  point  at  issue  does  not  exclude  the  elements  of  truth  and 
beauty  to  be  richly  found  in  the  discourses  of  the  friends;  nor  does  it  excuse  the 
passion  and  the  hasty  speeches  of  Job.     2.  Sacrifice  for  sin  and  intercessory  prayer. 


to  renounce  his  sin  and  be  at  one  with  his  God.  Blood  was  the  most  saci  ed  symbol, 
becauge  it  was  the  expression  of  life.  The  life  of  the  animal  offered  in  sacrifice  repre- 
■euU  the  life  of  the  worshippsr  surrendered  to  God.    Hence  for  us  the  deep  Bigmfiowice 


f70  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xlii.  1—17. 

of  the  "blood  of  Christ ; "  and  the  highest  Mt  of  worship  is  the  presenting  ourselves, 
body,  sold,  and  spirit,  to  Qoi  through  Christ  and  his  sacrifice;  that  is,  with  his 
spiritual  sacrifice  present  to  the  eye  of  the  spirit,  as  the  ancient  animal  sacrifice  was 
present  to  the  bodily  eye  of  the  early  worshipper.  Then,  on  the  other  hand,  sacri- 
fice as  divinely  ordained  is  a  language  from  God  to  us,  as  well  as  one  on  our  part  to 
God.  It  bespeaks  the  williugness  of  God  to  enter  into  relations  of  peace  with  man. 
It  therefore  announces  the  possibility  of  repentance  and  of  forgiveness  conditional  upon 
repentance;  and  so  calls  man  to  turn,  to  be  converted  and  healed.  Thus  regarded  and 
used,  the  great  Christian  sacrament  is  a  powerful  means  of  grace,  and  is  most  appro- 
priately resorted  to  at  such  great  epochs  of  spiritual  history  as  that  here  set  before  us. 
Again,  the  passage  brings  to  notice  the  privilege  of  intercession.  "  Pray  for  one  another, 
tliat  ye  may  be  healed."  As  the  intercession  of  AViraham  for  Abimelech  is  honoured, 
so  now  is  Job  ap[jointed  a  mediator  and  intercessor  for  those  who  have  forfeited  a 
measure  of  Divine  grace,  and  thus  the  prophecy  of  Eliphaz  (ch.  xxii.  30)  is  realized., 
We  are  encouraged  in  the  New  Testament  to  pray  for  one  another.  The  great  law  of 
mediation  runs  through  life  (comp.  Butler's  '  Analogy  *),  and  this  is  one  of  its  illustra- 
tions. A  value  is  justly  attached  to  good  men's  prayers.  How  far  this  privilege 
extends,  and  what  are  its  limits,  we  do  not  know.  It  belongs  to  spiritual  laws,  the 
operation  of  which  cannot  be  fully  verified  in  the  field  of  experience.  It  is  a  truth 
revealed  in  the  heart  and  for  the  heart ;  and  the  heart  has  reasons,  as  Pascal  says,  which 
reason  knows  not.  Let, us  sacredly  guard  the  oracles  of  the  heart,  and  thankfully 
receive  every  ray  of  confirmatory  light  that  actual  experience  afibrds.  The  song  of  a 
tiny  bird  by  the  wayside  which  brings  us  comfort,  may  be  a  messenger  of  God  to  the 
soul ;  and  the  prayer  of  our  feebleness  for  those  whom  we  know  not  otherwise  how  to 
assist  may  effect  a  far-working  good,  as  may  theirs  for  us.  But  what  a  beautiful  touch 
is  this  in  the  narrative,  "  Jehovah  turned  the  captivity  of  Job  while  he  was  praying 
for  his  friends  "  I  For  it  points  to  the  fact  that  amongst  the  best  moments  of  our  life 
are  those  in  which  we  lose  sight  of  self  in  thought  for  others ;  when  we  can  forgive  and 
forget  the  injuries  we  have  received  from  others,  and  seek  their  good  in  deeds  of 
kindness,  in  words  of  frayer. 

II.  Eestoeation  of  outwakd  peosperitt.  (Vers.  11 — 17.)  "  Twice  as  much  as 
he  had  before."  God  takes  away  only  to  enrich,  never  to  ruin  and  destroy,  the  faithful 
heart.  He  knows  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptation;  and  as  we  have  seen 
throughout  the  book  the  powers  by  which  he  leads  souls  to  himself  more  nearly,  so  heie 
we  see  his  "  end  "  (Jas,  v.  7 — 11 ;  1  Cor.  x.  13).  The  swallow-like  friendship  of  men, 
vanishing  as  the  winter  of  trouble  draws  on,  returning  when  the  sun  of  prosperity  gains 
power  once  more,  is  contrasted  with  the  enduring,  never-changing  friendship  of  the  eternal, 
one  God.  The  life,  then,  the  sufferings,  the  triumph  and  happy  end  of  Job,  are  a 
type  for  all  ages  of  the  lot  of  the  Christian,  of  the  child  of  God.  A  harmony  of  the 
inward  spirit  with  the  outward  surroundings  is  necessary  to  the  completeness  of  life. 
This  restored  possession  of  wealth  and  honour  is  a  happier  state  than  his  life's  beginning, 
because  it  is  a  state  more  truly  in  relation  to  God.  All  that  he  has  and  enjoys  he  now 
possesses  for  God's  sake.  God  is  revealed  in  his  gifts,  and  from  his  presence  and  love 
they  derive  their  savour.  Deus  mens  et  omnia  1  "  My  God  and  my  all  1 "  is  the  motto  of 
the  heart  purified  and  hunjbled  by  afiliction.  The  darkness  and  the  mystery  pass  away 
from  the  life  when  the  great  secret  is  discovered  that  in  all  outward  changes  "  God  is 
God  to  me."  Here  is  a  type  of  him  who  was  humbled  to  the  death  of  the  cross,  and 
who,  because  he,  though  a  Son,  learned  obedience  by  the  things  he  suffered,  received  a 
name  above  every  name.  What,  then,  have  we  to  do,  as  followers  of  him,  but  to  commit 
ourselves  to  God  as  to  a  faithful  Creator ;  to  receive  what  he  assigns  us  humbly,  and 
enjoy  it  thankfully,  knowing  that  by  denying  us  many  things  on  which  our  hearts 
are  set,  he  is  doing  us  the  greatest  kindness  in  the  world,  which  is  to  "  keep  us  from 
temptation,"  and  by  keeping  us  from  temptation,  to  "deliver  us  from  evil,"  and  by 
delivering  us  from  evil,  to  prepare  and  fit  us  for  all  the  good  that  can  be  desired, 
and  for  himself,  the  endless  inexhaustible  Fountain  of  it,  "in  whose  presence  there  is 
fulness  of  joy,  and  at  whose  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore"?  To  whom 
be  ascribed  all  praise,  might,  majesty,  and  dominion  for  ever.     Amen. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. —  Contrition.   Job,  chastened  with  severe  afflictions,  harassed  by  the  bitino 


OH.  XLii.  1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  671 

words  of  incompetent  teacWs,  and  now  by  the  Divine  voice  humbled  into  the'  very 
dust,  makes  his  lowly  confession  unto  Almighty  God,  and  casts  himself  upon  the 
Divine  forbearance  and  mercy.  The  confession  of  this  truly  humble,  lowly,  contrite, 
and  obedient  heart  embraces^  • 

I.  A  JUST  APPKEHEN8I0N  OF  THE  DiviNE  POWEB.  The  ability  of  God  to  work  all  in 
all — to  do  whatsoever  he  pleaseth.     "  Now  I  know  that  thou  canst  do  everything." 

II.  A  LOWLY  RECOGNITION  OP  THE  DiVINE  KNOWLEDQE.      "  No  thought  Can  be  with- 

holden  from  thee."  Not  only  the  visible  works  of  the  world  are  before  the  eye  of  the 
Almighty,  but  the  very  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  mind  (ver.  2). 

III.  A  BECOMING  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  PERSONAL  IGNORANCE,  ERROR,  AND  PRESUMP- 
TION. (Ver.  3.)  Before  God  Job  confesses  his  faults,  though  in  presence  of  man  he 
maintained  his  untaroished  integrity.  But  he  who  may  feel  himseK  able  to  answer  to 
his  fellow  may  fall  silent  before  the  infinitely  Holy  One.    Job's  confession  reveals — 

IV.  A  LOWLY  PENITBNOB,  which  finds  its  expression  in  fervent  prayer  (ver.  4).  Job 
is  willing  to  be  taught  of  God.  He  abandons  his  own  self-confident  boasting.  He  is 
truly  humbled.     All  this  is  produced  by — 

V.  A  VIVID  PERCEPTION  OP  THE  SUPREME  NATURE  OP  GoD.  He  is  Dot  dependent  for 
this  upon  the  teachings  of  friends.  "  Now  mine  eye  seeth  thee."  The  true  vision  of 
God  humbles  the  proudest  heart.    It  is  finally  perfected — 

VI.  In  bblf-abhorrence  and  sincere  repentance.  This  is  the  end  of  all.  When 
man  has  reached  his  lowest  estate  he  may  be  lifted  up.  The  whole  course  of  Job's 
afiBiction  with  the  whole  teaching  of  the  poem  brings  the  sufferer  in  penitent,  contrite 
humiliation  to  the  footstool  of  Divine  mercy.  "In  dust  and  ashes"  Job  repents, 
renounces  all  his  claim  to  self-righteousness,  and  casts  himself  upon  that  God  who 
has  declared  himself  to  be  just,  to  care  for  his  creatures,  and  to  wait  as  with  open 
ear  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  their  cry.  Job  is  truly  broken  before  God.  All  his  pride  is 
crushed.  He  is  a  lowly  suppliant.  He  justifies  God  in  his  own  self-condemnation. — B.  G. 

Vers.  7 — 17. — Vie  Divine  vindication  of  Job.  The  poem  ends  in  undimmed  bright- 
ness. The  great  ends  of  sufFering  have  been  answered.  Job  has  been  put  to  the  proof 
and  tried,  and  he  has  been  found  faithful.  God  has  permitted  all  the  joy  and  light 
of  his  life  to  be  wiped  out.  His  faithful  servant  of  whom  it  was  said,  "  There  is  none 
like  him  in  the  earth,"  has  been  subjected  to  the  severest  tests ;  yet,  according  to  the 
Divine  assertion,  he  has  spoken  of  God  "  the  thing  that  is  right."  Now  he  who  had 
appeared  to  be  Job's  enemy  appears  as  his  true  Vindicator,  and  bears  his  witness  and 
high  testimony  to  Job's  fidelity.     The  Divine  vindication  of  Job  embraces — 

I.  An  assertion  of  the  error  op  his  enemies.  (Ver.  7.)  They  had  not  spoken  of 
God  the  thing  that  was  right,  and  their  unjust  accusations  of  Job  are  found  to  have 
had  no  foundation  in  truth. 

II.  A  testimony  to  Job's  righteousness.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  As  the  heart  is  so  the  lips 
speak ;  and  Job  had  spoken  that  which  was  right.  To  this  Jehovah  bears  witness. 
But  a  higher  testimony  is  forthcoming — 

III.  In  the  declaration  or  the  aoobptability  op  his  priestly  service.  "Him 
will  I  accept."  Even  the  self-assured  teachers  who  could  find  so  many  faults  with 
Job  are  now  directed  to  bring  their  offermg  to  him  that  he  may  intercede  for  them.  It 
was  the  utmost  humiliation  of  them  (ver.  9)  and  the  utmost  elevation  of  him.  "  The 
Lord  also  accepted  Job." 

IV.  A  further  vindication  is  given  in  the  special  marks  op  the  Divine  favour 
bhown  to  Job.  1.  His  afdiotion  was  removed.  "  His  captivity  was  turned."  2.  He  was 
enriched  with  abundant  possessions.  "  The  Lord  gave  Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had 
before"  (ver.  12).  3.  His  friendships  were  restored  (ver.  11).  i.  He  was  enriched  by 
the  tokens  of  sympathy  and  good  will.  "  Every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece  of  money, 
and  every  one  an  ear-ring  of  gold."  5.  His  family  joys  were  restored  to  him  (verf.  13— 
16).  6.  His  life  was  prolonged  in  honour  and  happiness  (vers.  16,  17).  bo  the  Lord 
blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  more  than  his  beginning." — R.  G. 

Yer  17 27i«  gathered  hssont.    This  remarkable  book  we  close  with  the  persuasion 

that  whilst  its  separate  statements  are  full  of  teaching,  the  whole  idea  is  to  be  summed 
ip  in  a  few  plain  and  obvious  lessons ;  such  as  the  following : — 


672  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xlh.  1—17. 

I.  ThB  OOOS  man  mat  KEOBIVE  tokens  op  THB  DiVINK  BLBSBINa  IN  THE  FOBM  OF 
HEALTH,   HONOUR,   AND   FAMILY   JOT. 

II.  The  aooD  man,  though  maintaining  his  intbobitt,  mat  lose  his  possessions, 

HIS    HEALTH,    AND   HIS   FAMILY    JOT   THBoAh    THB    TESTINQfl    AND    TEMPTATIONS    OF 

Satan. 

III.  That  the  honodb  or  even  a  good  man  may  be  tempobabilt  ovebshadowed 
BY  untoward  circumstances, 

IV.  That  the  loss  of  ai,l  things,  and  the  endurance  of  suftebinos  by  the 
faithful,  abb  not  always  to  be  intbbpbbtbd  into  tokens  of  THB  Divine 
displbabueb. 

V.  That  it  is  possible  for  the  good  to  maintain  theib  integrity  unimpaired 
amidst  great  loss,  pain,  and  sorrow. 

VI.  That  to  him  who  maintains  his  integrity  and  righteousness  in  the 
time  of  calamity  God  will  give  a  final  testimony  of  approval. 

VII.  That  the  end  of  affliction  and  bobbow  is  the  pdrifioation  of  the 
character,  and  the  glory  op  God. 

VIII.  That  the  vindioatioh  of  ths  ohabaoteb  of  the  good  n  ih  the  hands 

OF  THB   LOBD. 

So  the  Book  of  Job  harmonizes  with  the  general  teaching  of  the  entire  Word  of  God. 
Its  many  beautiful,  simple  truths  scattered  in  such  profusion  are  as  so  many  separate 
flowers ;  but  the  whole  presents  the  appearance  of  a  well-watered  garden.  The  book 
has  its  place  of  high  importance  in  that  book  which  is  for  the  education  of  the  world. 
It  has  served  its  purpose  as  a  medium  for  the  revelation  of  important  truths,  and  it  has 
been  made  a  means  of  blessing  to  thousands  of  afflicted  ones  who  have  "  heard  of  tlie 
patience  of  Job,  and  have  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord;  how  that  the  Lord  is  full  of  pity, 
•nd  merciful"  (Jas.  T.  11).— R  G. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  confession  of  Ood's  mpremaet/.  At  last  the  end  has  come  to  the 
discipline  of  Job.  He  is  brought  to  more  than  resignation — to  a  clear  perception  of  the 
supremacy  of  God,  and  to  a  humble  submission  to  it. 

I.  The  pact  of  God's  supremacy.  This  is  what  Job  has  now  come  to  see.  God  is 
supreme  both  in  power  and  in  wisdom.  1.  In  power.  There  is  no  resisting  his  might. 
He  does  as  he  will  with  the  children  of  men.  Even  "  the  king  of  the  children  of 
pride  "  is  one  of  his  creatures,  endowed  with  the  might  he  has  given,  and  subject  to  the 
laws  he  has  imposed.  All  rebellion  against  God's  will  must  be  fatile.  It  can  be  no  better 
than  dashing  one's  self  against  a  granite  cliff.  But  if  God  is  so  powerful  when  opposed 
to  us,  he  is  equally  powerful  as  our  Saviour.  He  uses  his  might  to  further  what  is  good 
as  well  as  to  thwart  what  is  evil.  If  he  can  cast  the  mighty  down,  he  can  lift,  the  help- 
less up.  2.  In  knowledge.  There  is  thought  in  all  the  woik  of  God.  But  God's 
thought  also  penetrates  to  all  that  we  do.  No  excuses  or  subterfuges  can  enable  us  to 
elude  his  searching  glance.  He  knows  the  hidden  sin.  But  he  also  knows  the  hidden 
sorrow ;  and  the  misjudged  sufferer  is  quite  understood  by  Gbd.  Friends  may  calum- 
niate, as  they  calumniated  Job;  but  God  knows  all. 

II.  The  knowledge  of  this  fact.  Job  is  now  brought  to  see  that  God  is  supreme 
in  power  and  knowledge.  He  may  have  admitted  the  truth  in  words  all  along.  But 
he  did  not  ajipreciate  it  until  the  end  of  his  long  trial.  In  his  very  natural  but  very 
foolish  complaints  he  was  virtually  ignoring  the  great  truth  which  he  is  now  con- 
fessin?.  How,  then,  has  he  come  at  length  to  perceive  it  as  by  the  flash  of  a  new 
revelation?  1.  Through  luffering.  Many  lessons  are  being  taught  by  the  strange 
experience  of  Job ;  among  them  some  are  for  his  own  benefit.  Suffering  opens  our 
eyes  to  our  own  littleness  and  to  the  greatness  of  God.  2.  By  means  of  the  vmrks  of 
nature.  The  great  theophany,  wherein  God  called  to  Job  out  of  the  whirlwind,  led 
to  a  display  of  some  of  the  grandest  works  of  God,  first  in  the  physical  forces  of  the 
universe,  and  then  in  the  most  wonderful  creatures  of  the  animal  worl<L  A  study  of 
nature  should  lead  us  to  perceive  both  the  power  and  the  wisdom  of  God. 

in.  The  confession.  It  is  one  thing  for  God  to  be  supreme,  and  another  thing  for 
man  to  know  that  he  is.  Yet  a  third  stage  is  reached  when  the  truth  is  frankly  admitted 
and  openly  confessed.  It  is  our  duty  to  confess  the  supremacy  of  God.  1.  For  the 
glory  of  Ood.    "We  rob  him  of  hia  own  when  we  ignore  his  great  power  and  wiidom. 


CH.  XLH.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  673 

Worship,  which  acknowledges  the  greatnesi  of  God,  and  adores  him,  not  only  for 
might  and  knowledge,  but  also  for  righteousness  and  love,  is  a  right  and  fitting  exer- 
cise for  all  spiritual  beings.  2.  Fw  our  own  guidance  and  assurance.  The  co^ession 
will  help  us  to  obey  God.  It  will  also  aid  us  in  the  attempt  to  bear  the  strange  dis- 
tresses of  life.  When  the 'confession  advances  beyond  what  Job  saw,  surely  lubmis- 
lion  should  be  more  perfect.  If  we  are  to  be  patient  when  we  see  that  God  is  almighty 
and  all-wise,  we  should  be  confident  when  we  go  on  to  see  that  he  i*  just  and 
mercifuL— W.  F,  A. 

Ver.  6. — Th»  souVs  experience  of  God.  This  is  a  grand  experience  for  Job  to  attain 
to.  It  is  worth  all  the  agony  and  mystery  of  his  bitter  afiSiction.  Suddenly  the  black 
clouds  break  open  and  the  glorious  vision  of  God  appears  beyond  them.  Job  now 
contrasts  his  new,  direct  seeing  of  God  with  his  former  hearsay  knowledge. 

I.  A  HBAB8AY  KNOWLEDaE  OF  GoD.  This  is  what  Job  possessed  in  the  old  days. 
Not  that  he  was  without  any  religious  experience  in  those  prosperous  times.  But  the 
shallowness  of  it  in  comparison  with  what  he  has  now  atttuned  makes  it  look  of  little 
worth.  Most  of  us  begin  in  this  way.  We  hear  of  God  "  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear." 
Tliis  is  especially  true  in  a  Christian  country.  Here  we  seem  to  breathe  a  Christian 
atmosphere,  and  Christian  ideas  float  in  upon  us  uasought.  But  the  faint  perception 
of  G^  that  is  acquired  in  this  way  cannot  be  of  very  great  value  to  us.  Historical  facts 
can  only  be  known  by  testimony,  and  the  facts  of  the  gospel  must  reach  us  through 
"  the  hearing  of  the  ear."  But  we  have  got  a  very  little  way  when  we  have  only  come 
to  understand  and  believe  in  the  historical  character  of  those  facts.  We  are  still  only 
among  the  antiquarian  relics  at  a  museum.  There  is  no  life  in  such  a  knowledge,  and 
it  has  little  influence  over  us. 

n.  A  FEBSONAL  VISION  OF  GoD.  "  Now  mine  eye  seeth  thee."  Job  had  longed  for  a 
revelation  of  God ;  at  length  he  has  received  one.  But  this  was  not  in  a  vision  like  those 
of  Jacob  at  Bethel  or  Moses  at  Horeb.  It  was  not  after  the  manner  of  the  startling  appa- 
lition  that  Eliphas  describes  with  so  much  pomp  and  self-importance  (ch.  iv.  12 — 21), 
It  was  the  calm  inward  vision  of  spiritual  experience,  which  is  indeed  an  experience 
of  Gk)d.  1.  Z%ts  hat  been  brought  about  through  trouble.  In  his  great  distress  Job 
has  been  continually  seeking  God.  His  grief  has  strengthened  his  hold  upon  the 
unseen  world  by  making  him  feel  that  world  to  be  most  real.  2,  Ood  has  epohen  and 
manifested  himself.  Beligion  is  not  a  one-sided  effort  of  man  to  reach  after  God. 
God  descends  to  man,  and  the  communion  of  God's  Spirit  with  man's  spirit  is  the 
deepest  fact  in  religious  experience.  3.  This  interior  vision  of  Ood  is  what  all  out 
souls  need.  We  have  to  go  beyond  the  hearing  of  sermons  to  our  own  personal 
experience  of  God.  Then  we  begin  to  understand  him ;  then  he  becomes  real  to  us  j 
then  we  can  say  with  Tauler,  "  I  am  more  certain  of  the  being  of  God  than  I  am  of 
my  own  existence." 

in.  Thb  BiTlCT  OF  THE  HEW  EXPEBIENOX.  1.  It  leads  to  Self-humiliation.  It  is 
vain  any  longer  to  boast  of  our  own  rights  and  to  make  the  most  of  ourselves.  We 
cannot  think  of  ourselves  but  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face  in  the  light  of  the  new 
vision  of  God.  When  once  he  manifests  himself  to  us,  he  is  everything.  2.  It 
aumhens  repentance.  In  the  light  of  God  we  not  only  see  our  littleness,  we  perceive 
our  sin.  This  vision  had  done  for  Job  what  all  the  harangues  of  his  three  friends  had 
failed  to  effect.  They  had  charged  him  falsely,  and  his  pride  had  been  hardened  by 
their  unjust  accusations.  God  had  not  charged  him  at  all,  but  the  very  vision  of 
the  Divine  at  once  revealed  his  mistaken  position  to  Job.  He  saw  that  he  had  been 
wrong  in  arraigning  the  justice  of  God.  So  it  will  ever  be.  We  never  know  ourselves 
till  we  see  ourselves  in  the  light  of  God.T—W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  7—9. — The  accusers  accused.  Job  is  first  dealt  with ;  when  he  has  been 
brought  to  a  right  state  of  mind,  God  turns  to  the  three  friends.  They  have  been  per- 
mitted to  play  their  part  without  any  interference  on  the  part  of  God,  and  perhaps 
they  have  regarded  his  silence  as  a  mark  of  acquiescence.     Now  their  time  has  come. 

L  They  who  accuse  othebs  lay  themselves  out  to  be  accused.  Even  when 
they  act  innocently  this  is  the  case.  The  censor  should  be  above  reproach.  His 
MtioD  shows  that  he  is  awake  to  moral  considerations,  that  he  is  not  unable  to  per- 

^08.  ^^ 


674  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  [oh.  xtn.  1—17. 


ceive  them,  that  he  sets  a  high  value  on  them.  Then  he  shonld  appl^  them  to  him- 
self. "  Therefore  thou  art  inexeugahle,  0  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that  judgest :  for 
wherein  thou  judgest  another,  thou  condemnest  thyself;  for  thou  that  judgest  doest 
the  same  things  "  (Eom.  ii.  1).  Further,  the  habit  of  censoriousness  provokes  accusa- 
tions. It  shows  an  unkind  and  a  proud  spirit.  There  is  not  the  motive  of  compassion 
to  lead  us  to  pass  lightly  over  his  faultn  in  the  case  of  a  censorious  person,  which 
influences  us  when  we  have  to  do  with  one  of  a  modest  and  kindly  disposition  (Matt. 
flii  1—7). 

II.  God   is    ANGBT   with    those   who   advocate   HU  cause  DNBIOHTKOnSLY.      Tbjg 

was  the  great  fault  of  the  three  friends.  They  represented  themselves  as  God's 
champions,  and  professed  to  speak  for  God  when  they  arraigned  Job.  Yet  they  spoka 
what  was  not  right.  God  cannot  but  be  angry  when  he  is  thus  misrepresented.  He 
does  not  seek  the  low-toned  homage  of  the  courtier  who  cares  only  to  propitiate  his 
Master,  regardless  of  right  and  truth.  Some  of  the  people  who  think  themselves 
God's  best  friends  will  have  a  great  deal  to  answer  for  when  their  just  and  righteous 
Lord  calls  them  to  account.  No  falsehood  can  please  God,  and  least  of  all  can  one 
please  him  that  professes  to  be  uttered  for  his  benefit.  This  is  not  a  case  in  which 
the  end  justifies  the  means.  It  is  most  grievous  in  the  sight  of  God,  because  it  dis- 
honours his  Name.  We  cannot  depend  on  unjust  actions  by  representing  them  as 
beneficial  to  the  cause  of  religion.  A  false  theology  is  not  redeemed  by  the  pretext 
that  it  glorifies  Gtxl. 

III.  The  tbub  bevbnge  is  to  "  heap  coals  or  fibe  "  ok  men  by  deeds  of  kind- 
ness. Job  is  fully  and  gloriously  avenged.  Not  only  is  his  innocence  of  the  gross  charges 
brought  against  him  by  his  friends  made  clear,  not  only  are  they  condemned  by  God, 
but  Job  is  called  upon  to  intercede  for  their  pardon.  Thus  in  the  first  place  they  are 
thoroughly  humiliated,  as  Haman  was  when  he  was  condemned  to  lead  the  horse  of 
Mordecai  ?Bsth.  vi.  9,  10).  But  Job  is  far  too  magnanimoui  to  triumph  over  their 
defeat.  Even  when  he  is  interceding  for  them,  we  may  be  sure  that  his  action 
betrays  no  pride.  For  has  he  not  been  repenting  himself  in  dust  and  ashes  (ver,  6)  ? 
Assuredly  Job's  intercession  was  generous  and  heartfelt.  He  could  afibrd  to  forgive 
when  he  had  himself  been  graciously  accepted  by  God.  The  best  vengeance  we  can 
have  on  those  who  Ul-treat  us  is  to  pray  for  them,  not  in  hypocritical  self-righteous- 
ness, but  in  true-hearted,  unaffected  kindness.  This  is  Christ^  method.  He  subdues 
his  enemies  by  dying  for  them. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  10. — The  captivity  turned.  I.  The  bevebsau  1.  A  true  reversal.  Job's 
troubles  have  come  to  an  end.  That  was  a  long  avenue  of  fire  which  he  was  made  to 
pass  through ;  but  the  terminus  was  reached  at  last.  Man  may  be  "  born  unto  trouble 
as  the  sparks  fly  upward  "  (ch.  v.  7) ;  but  he  is  not  born  to  everlasting  trouble,  St. 
Paul  writes  of  "our  light  af3iction,  which  is  but  for  •  moment"  (2  Cor.  iv.  17). 
Present  distress  is  not  a  presage  of  future  eviL  The  very  blackness  of  the  clouds  that 
siather  about  our  heads  in  the  dark  hour  prevents  us  from  seeing  the  distant  prospect 
where  sunshine  awails  those  who  are  faithful  in  trial.  There  is  room  for  hope,  even 
if  we  see  no  light,  for  though  trouble  may  be  lengthy,  love  outlasts  it ;  "  the  mercy  of 
the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  2.  A  Divine  reversal.  Satan  inflicted  the  blows,  thou<'h 
with  the  permission  of  God.  It  is  God  himself  who  brings  back  prosperity.  Through 
whatevei-  channels  and  instruments  evil  may  come  upon  us,  good  comes  from  the  hand 
of  God.  Satan  simply  disappears  from  the  drama.  His  bold  assertions  are  so  abso- 
lutely refuted,  and  he  is  so  completely  discomfited,  that  he  passes  into  oblivion.  In 
the  day  of  the  Lord,  God's  action  is  everything. 

II.  Its  occasion.  Why  did  the  reversal  come  when  it  did?  Why  not  earlier? 
Why  not  later  ?  The  note  of  time  is  significant.  God  reversed  the  fortune  of  Job 
"  when  he  prayed  for  his  friends."  1.  In  humility.  Job  was  first  brought  very  low. 
His  fidelity  had  been  severely  tested,  and  it  had  stood  the  strain.  Job  did  not  "  curse 
God  and  die."  Satan's  charge  was  abundantly  refuted.  Job  was  not  serving  God  only 
for  the  profits  accruing  from  religion.  Disinterested  devotion  was  proved  to  be  possible. 
Yet  Job  was  not  faultless.  At  least  there  were  advantages  to  be  gained  by  discipline. 
It  would  have  been  cruel  to  have  used  him  as  an  unconscious  example  for  the  settlement 
of  a  quegtiQtt  with  which  he  had  no  concern,  like  the  victim  of  vivisection.    ThU  wa« 


nt  xm.  1-17.]  THE  BOOK  Of  JOB.  675 


not  th«  oaie.  E15hu  showed  how  God  trained  and  educated  his  children  in  the  school 
of  affliction.  Job  had  been  to  that  school,  and  there  he  had  learnt  humility  and  a  true 
appreciation  of  the  greatness  of  God,  whom  man  cannot  judge.  2.  In  kindness.  Job 
hears  no  grudge  against  his  three  friends.  He  intercedes  for  them  in  genuine  concern 
for  their  condition  under  the  wrath  of  God.  When  he  shows  a  forgiving  spirit  God  ii 
most  merciful  to  him.  This  is  not  the  formal  return  of  payment ;  but  it  is  a  gracious 
reward,  and  it  ia  a  favour  shown  to  one  who  is  fit  to  accept  it.  For  we  are  never  so 
fit  to  receive  good  fortune  as  when  wo  are  chiefly  occupied  in  kindly  concern  for  others. 
Selfish  prayers  do  not  bring  a  blessing.  We  are  most  blessed  when  we  forget  ourselves 
in  praying  for  others. 

in.  It8_  bbtbotb.  Job's  fortune  is  doubled.  God  never  blesses  imperfectly.  He 
does  not  simply  mend  and  patch  up  the  broken  life.  He  heals  and  renews  and  blesses 
with  superabundant  kindness.  Job's  fortune  was  but  external.  This  was  according 
to  the  ideas  of  primitive  times.  Christ  has  led  us  to  look  for  higher  blessings.  The 
Christian  Job  may  never  recover  his  property  or  his  health ;  and  yet  in  his  afflictions  he 
may  receive  his  greatest  heritage  of  blessing  from  Heaven.  But  whatever  be  the  form 
of  God's  blessing,  it  is  great  and  wonderful.  The  Christian  has  more  than  a  Paradise 
regained.  The  second  Adam  brings  a  kingdom  of  heaven  that  is  more  precious  than 
the  lost  Eden.  The  soul  that  has  been  tried  by  fire  has  a  richer  inheritance  in  God 
than  it  ever  had  in  the  old  days  of  p^ice.  The  discipline  of  sorrow  is  the  key  to 
wonderful  treasures  of  heavenly  joy. —  w.  P.  A. 

Vers.  11 — 17. — The  return  of  prosperity.  Job  is  now  restored  to  the  favour  of  God. 
The  result  is  earthly  prosperity.  With  our  Christian  light  we  know  that  this  does 
not  always  follow,  nor  is  it  the  best  blessing.  But  as  the  portrait  of  Job  is  painted 
in  the  colours  of  his  day,  we  must  accept  the  lessons  which  it  contains  in  sympathy 
with  his  age  and  circumstances.  Let  us,  then,  look  at  the  ingredients  of  the  new 
piosperity. 

I.  A  BivrvAL  OF  OLD  FKiBNDSHiPS.  We  are  horrified  to  have  it  brought  distinctly 
before  us  on  the  last  page  of  the  book  that  Job  had  had-  brpthers  and  sisters  as  well 
as  other  acquaintances  during  the  whole  time  of  his  affliction ;  and  yet  they  had 
discreetly  retired  from  the  unpleasant  neighbourhood  of  the  afSicted  man.  Now  they 
reappear  with  his  prosperity.  This  common  experience  of  life  is  often  commented  on 
with  some  bitterness.  But  Job  shows  no  bitterness.  His  grand  soul  forgets  the  previous 
unkindness.  In  his  own  humility  he  ignores  the  faults  of  his  brethren.  With  princely 
magnanimity  he  accepts  their  presents  when  he  does  not  need  them,  though  they  had 
not  thought  fit  to  offer  them  him  in  the  time  of  his  dire  necessity.  This  is  the  Christ- 
spirit.  There  is  no  true  happiness  in  selfish  isolation.  Even  though  our  acquaintances 
may  not  deserve  much  attention,  it  is  a  miserably  selfish  thing  to  throw  them  off. 
Generosity  is  a  mark  of  genuine  health  of  soul.  The  Christian  must  learn  to  be 
brotherly  and  to  cultivate  social  sympathies. 

II.  A  BECOVEBT  OF  OBEAT  F0S8B8SI0N8.  Job  is  uow  richer  than  ever,  and  he  is 
now  more  than  ever  fitted  to  hold  wealth.  He  will  receive  it  back  with  double 
gratitude.  He  will  recognize  more  clearly  that  it  all  comes  from  the  hand  of  God. 
Having  himself  suffered  from  hardships  and  troubles,  he  will  be  the  better  able  to 
succour  the  afflicted.  Therefore  he  can  well  be  trusted  with  great  wealth.  It  is  not 
every  good  man  to  whom  wealth  would  be  a  blessing,  or  who  would  make  a  good  use 
of  it.  But  when  God  gives  temporal  prosperity  to  one  of  his  true  servants,  this  should 
be  accepted  not  only  as  a  token  of  his  kindness,  but  also  as  a  trust.  The  talents  are 
increased ;  so  is  the  responsibility. 

III.  The  gift  of  a  new  family.  Property  is  a  poor  recompense  to  offer  to  the 
bereaved  and  desolate  man.  A  true  father  values  his  children  above  all  flocks  and 
herds.  Job  is  to  be  restored  in  all  respects.  •  And  yet  we  cannot  but  feel  that  to  have 
more  children,  but  other  ones,  could  not  make  up  for  the  loss  of  the  first  family.  Job's 
fatherly  heart  cotUd  not  have  been  thus  easily  satisfied.  All  we  can  say  is  that  th« 
picture  of  the  return  of  prosperity  is  made  as  complete  as  it  could  be.  But  we  have  a 
orighter  prospect  through  Christ  in  again  meeting  the  blessed  dead,  who  are  not  lost, 
iMit  who  have  only  gone  on  before  us. 

IV.  Thb  KjHOTlMtJfT  OF  FCLKisg  Of  MTi.    Job  Uves  to  •  green  old  age.    Is  his 


«7«  THE  BOOK  OP  JOB.  [oh.  xlu.  1—17. 

misery  he  had  prayed  for  death ;  in  his  renewed  prosperity  life  ii  a  boon.  The  value 
of  life  depends  on  the  use  that  it  made  of  it.  In  Christ  the  poorest  earthly  life  b 
rich ;  and  the  most  unfortunate  life  is  well  worth  living  when  it  is  given  to  God. 
But  the  Old  Testament  blessedness  of  long  life  is  enlarged  in  the  New  Testament,  and 
appears  as  the  gift  of  eternal  life — th«  greate«t  blefsiag  enjojed  by  God't  redeemed 
children.— W.  f.  A. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


THE   BOOK   OF   JOB. 


OHAFTBB  L 

rAsa 

The  Hero  of  the  Poem      ,„            ^,  7 
Job       ...            ...            M4            ...  0, 28 

Wealth  and  Fietf              ^            ...  9 

Banqueting          ...             ...             ...  9 

Family  Worship  ...             ...             ...  9 

The  Fundamental  Oontroversy  of  the 

Poem                ...             ...             ...  9 

▲  Sermon  on  Satan            ...             ...  11 

"Doth  Job  feaf   God  for  Nought P"  11 
The  First  Trial  of  the  Patriarch      ...  12 
Introdnotory :  on  the  General  Teach- 
ing of  the  Book               ...             „,  13 
Job's  Life  and  Character  ...            ...  16 

Connsels  in  Heaven  oonoemiag  Man's 

Life  on  Earth  ...            ...            ...  81 

The  Invasion  of  Tronble,  and  its  First 

Effect  OB  Job   ...            ...            ...  23 

The  Typical  Oonditions  of  Domestic 

Happiness        ...             ...             ...  26 

The  Sanotifioation  of  the  Homai  or, 

Parental  Priesthood        ...             ...  26 

The  Trial  of  the  Bighteons   -an      ...  26 

The  Bighteons  Man            ...             ...  27 

The  Triumph  of  Faith       ...             ...  27 

The  Dangers  of  Prosperity              «.  28 

Satan's  Wanderings           ...             ...  29 

Disinterested  Piety            ...             ...  80 

In  Satan's  Power                ...             ...  81 

?ob'8  Unparalleled  Calamities         ...  81 

Job's  Besignation               ...             ...  82 

Rtaudiag  Fir*     ...            ^            ...  88 


OHAPTBE  XL 

THIOT  ,^, 

A  New  Trial  moved  for     .„  „.  86 

The  Value  of  Life              ...  ...  88 

Satan's  Proverb  ...             ...  ,..  88 

The  Patriarch's  Second  Trial  ...  89 

Job  and  his  Wife                 ...  ...  40 

Four  Yoioes         ...             ...  ...  40 

Job  and  Adam:    a   Parallel  and   a 

Contrast           ...             ...  ...  40 

The  Patriarch's  Third  Trial  i  or,  the 

Coming  of  the  Friends  ...  ...  40 

Benewed  Assaults  and  Temptations 

of  the  Adrersary            ...  ...  42 

A  Picture  of  Friendship    ...  ...  43 

The  Severer  Tests  of  Faith  ...  44 
Human    Impotence    in   Presence  of 

Great  Sorrow  ...             ...  ...  46 

"  Satan's  Old  Saw "           ...  ...  46 

Job's  Leprosy       ...            ...  ...  40 

Husband  and  Wife             ...  ...  47 

Job's  Comforters...             ...  „.  4S 


OHAPTBB  in. 

The  Stricken  Patriarch's  Lament  i  1. 

Deploring  his  Birth        ...  ...       6S 

The  Stricken  Patriarch's  Lament :  3. 

Bewailing  his  Life  ...  ...       66 

The  Grave  ...  ..  ...       68 

"  To  be  or  not  to  be  '        ...  „.       66 

The  Stricken  Patriarch's  Lament  i  M. 

Desiring  his  Death         ...  «,      M 


INDEX. 


THEKB  rAOB 

Two  Marrels  tbat  are  no  Mysteries...  68 
The  Two  Hedges  j  or,  the  Hedge  of 
Froaperitj  and  the  Hedge  o{  Ad- 
versity             ...             ...             ...  68 

The  Eloquence  of  Grief      ...            ...  69 

Hnman   Infirmity  revealed  in   Deep 

AfSiotion           ...             ...            ...  60 

The  Grave  a  Best               ...             ...  61 

The  Unanswered  Qnestion               „.  62 

The  Curse  of  Despair        .«             ».  62 

The  FyramidB      ...             ^             ...  63 

The  Peace  of  the  Grave    ...            ...  64 

Death,  the  Leveller            ...             ...  65 

The  Mystery  of  Limitations            ...  65 

Feaii  confirmed  by  Facts                ,„  66 


OHAPTEB   IV. 

Eliphaz  to  Job  :  the  Opening  of  the 
Second  Oontroversy:  1.  The  Bela- 

tion  of  SnfEering  to  Sin  . . .  ...  70 

Affliction  ...  ...  ...  72 

Eliphaz  to  Job :  2.  A  Message  from 

the  Spirit- World  ...  ...  73 

Eliphas  and  Job:  Forgotten  Troths 

called  to  Mind  ...  ...  76 

The  Oracle  in  a  Dream  of  the  Night  76 

The  Teacher  tested  ...  ...  78 

The  Consequences  of  Evil-doing      ...  79 
The  Condemnation  of  Man  in  Pre- 
sence of  the  Divine  Holiness        ...  79 
Eliphaz  the  Visionary        ...             ...  80 

irrepressible  Speech  ,.,  ...  80 

The  Teacher  at  Fault        ...  ...  81 

A  True  Principle  falsely  applied     ...  82 

An  Apparition     ...  ...  ,..  83 

A  Message  from  the  Unseen  ,„  88 


OHAPTEB  V. 

Eliphaz  to  Job :  8.  The  History  of  • 

Fool  ...             ...             ...             ...  88 

Eliphas  to  Job :  4.  The  Saint's  Con- 
fidence in  God ...             ...             ...  90 

Seeking  unto  God               ...              91,  100 

...  91 

...  91 

...  92 


The  Great  Works  of  God  ... 
Bain      ...  ...  ... 

The  Poor  Man's  Hope         ... 
Eliphaz  to  Job  :   6.  The  Blessedness 
of  Chastening  ... 


92 


TaSMI 

Befnge  from  Trouble  in  the  Thought 
of  God 

The  Lot  of  the  Foolish 

The  Common  Lot 

God  the  True  Befuge  in  Affliction  ... 

The  Blessedness  of  the  Divine  Cor- 
rection 

The  Final  Consequences  of  the  Divine 
Chastisement  ... 

"  The  Foolish  taking  Boot " 

Inevitable  Trouble  ...  ... 

Seeking  unto  God 

The  Happiness  of  Chastisement 

In  League  with  Nature 

God's  Harvest  Home         ^t  •>. 


OHAPTEB  VL 


1.  Apologies    and 
.  Beproofs  and  Be- 


Job    to   Eliphaz: 
Prayers 

Job  to  Eliphaz  :  i 
torts  ... 

The  Sufferer's  Self-Justification 

The  Illusions  of  Friendship 

Friendship:  its  Bights  and  its  Dis- 
claimers 

A  True  Estimate  of  Grief  under  the 
Severities  of  Affliction   ... 

The  Claims  of  the  Suffering  on  the 
Pity  of  Friends 

The  Power  of  Bight  Words ;  or,  Com- 
plaining stayed  by  Instruction    ... 

Scales  for  Misery 

"  The  Arrows  of  the  Almighty  "      ... 

Satisfaction  and  Discontent  ... 

The  Prayer  of  Despair 

The  Bedeeming  Power  of  Sympathy 

The  Force  of  Bight  Words 


94 
96 
96 
96 

»7 

97 
98 
99 
100 
100 
101 
102 


107 

108 
110 
112 

113 

114 

114 

116 

116 
117 
117 
118 
119 
119 


OHAPTEB  Vn. 

Job    to  Ood:    1.  The    Soliloquy   of 

Sorrow              ...             ...             ...  123 

Job  to  God :  2.  The  Opening  of  the 

Third  Controversy          ...             ...  126 

"  I  would  not  live  alway ''                  ...  128 
Job  to  God :  3.  A  Bemonstrance  with 

Heaven             ...             ...             ...  128 

"  Lord,  what  is  Man  ?  "     ,.,  130, 134 

A  Sinner's  Inquiry             ^             ...  130 


INDEX, 


iu 


Tbo  Weakness  of  Man  :  Appeal  to  the 

Oleraeuoy  of  God            ...             ...  130 

Fresh    Beconrse    to   the    Belief   of 

Words               ...             ...             ...  131 

The  Days  of  the  Hireling                132,  134 

The  Weariness  of  Sorrow  ...             ...  133 

The  Speedy  Flight  of  Life               ...  133 

The  Cry  of  Despair            ...             ...  133 

The  Weaver's  Shnttle        ...             ...  135 

The  Vanishing  Cloud         ...             ...  136 

Scared  with  Dreams          ...             ...  137 

The  Littleness  of  Man        ...            ...  187 

Limits  to  Forgiveness        ...             ...  138 

CHAPTER  VIIL 

Bildad.  to  Job  i  1.  A  Bundle  of  Mis- 
takes               ...             ...             ...  142 

The  Picture  of  a  Good  Man's  Home  144 
Bildad  to  Job  :  2.  Wisdom  from  the 

Ancients           ...            ...             ...  144 

The  Hypocrite's  Hope        ...  146,  148 

"  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  All  ...  do 

Bight  P"           ...             ...             ...  147 

The  Divine  Justice             ...             ...  148 

The  Unimpeachable  Character  of  the 

Divine  Judgment            ...             ...  148 

God's  Care  of  the  Perfect  Man         ...  149 

Bildad  the  Pedant               ...             ...  150 

The  Justice  of  God             ...             ...  160 

A  Small  Beginning  and  a  Great  In- 
crease              ...             ...             ...  151 

Lessons  from  History        ...              ...  152 

The  Bush  and  the  Papyrus              ...  152 

The  Spider's  Web              ...             ...  153 

CHAPTEB  IX. 

JoV  to  Bildad :  1.  Bildad's  Theology 

refuted              ...             ...             ...  159 

A  Gospel  Outline                ...            ...  160 

Job  to  Bildad :  2.  The  Majesty  of  God 

depicted           ...             ...             ...  160 

Job  to  Bildad:  3.  Creator  and  Creature 

in  Conflict        ...             ...             ...  163 

Job  to   Bildad:    4.  The  Cries  of    a 

Despairing  Soul              ...            ...  165 

Second  Reply  of  Job :  the  Fearfulness 

of  God's  Power                ...              ...  168 

God  vieweiJ  as  Absolute  and  Arbitrary 

Power              ...           •■•           •••  168 


THXHS  PAGE 

Rebellion  of  the  Conscience  against 

this  Picture  of  Terror    ...             ...  169 

Melancholy  Reflections      ...             ...  169 

Man  unable  to  answer  God              ...  169 

The  True  Attitude  of  the  Afflicted  ...  170 

The  Mediator      ...             ...             ...  171 

The  Problem  of  Justification           ...  171 

Self-Justiflcation                ...            ...  172 

The  Injustice  of  Equality  ...            ...  173 

The  Swift  Da,ys  ...            ...            ...  174 

Despair  of  Purification       ...            ...  174 

The  Daysman      ...            ...            ...  176 

CHAPTER  X. 

Job   to   God :    the   Progress   of    the 
Third  Controveray:  1.  The  Pathetic 
Wail  of  a  Crushed  Heart              ...  179 
Job  to   God :    the    Progress  of    the 
Third  Controversy :    2.  An   Inex- 
plicable Contradiction    ...             ...  181 

Job  to  God :    the   Progress  of    the 
Third    Controversy:     3.     An    Old 

Complaint  renewed        ...             ...  182 

Appeal  to  the  Justice,  Knowledge, 

and  Goodness  of  God      ...             ...  184 

The  Supplicatory  Cry  of  Deep  Sorrow  186 

Man  the  Creature  of  God  ...             ...  186 

Ths  Hidden  Purposes  of  Affliction  ...  187 

Weariness  of  Life                ...              ...  188 

God's  Vision  of  Man          ...             ...  188 

Creation  and  its  Consequences        ...  189 

Life  and  Favour  from  God                ...  190 
The  Things  that  are  hidden  in  God's 

Heart               190 

The  Land  of  Darkness       ...             ».  191 


CHAPTER  XL 

Zophar  to  Job :  1.  The  Opinions  ot  a 

Dogmatist        ...  ...  •••  196 

A  Sermon  on  the  Divine  Forbearance  196 
Zophar  to  Job  :  2.  God's  Wisdom  and 

Man's  Folly       ...  ...  ...  197 

Zophar  to  Job  :  3.  An  Exhortation  to 

Repentance      ...  ...  •••  198 

"  Humble    yourselves    beneath    the 

Mighty  Hand  of  God "   ...  ...  200 

Self-Complaoency  condemned  ...  202 

Man  humbled  before  God  ...  ...  202 

The  Invitation  to  Repentance  ...  203 


Ir 


INDEX. 


THCHE  PAOE 

Zophar,  (he  Man  of  the  World  ,.,  204 

The  Frorooation  of  a  Keplj  ...  204 

"  Oh  that  God  would  speak!  "  ...  205 

The  Unsearchable  Depth  of  God  ...  206 

The  Blessedness  of  Betnrning  to  God  207 

The  Security  of  Hope        ...  ...  207 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Job  to  Zophar:   1.  The  Conduct  of 

the  Friends  criticized     ...  ...  211 

Job  to  Zophar :  2.  The  Dogma  of  the 

Friends  demolished  ...  ...  212 

Job  to  Zophar:  3.  The  Providence  of 

God  described  ...  ...  ...  214 

The  Resentment  of  a  Wounded  Spirit  216 
The  Wisdom  and  the  Power  of  God  a 

Truth  universally  known  ...  217 

Images  of  the  Irresistible  Power  of 

God    ...  ...  ...  ...  217 

Instances  of  the  Overruling  Wisdom 

of  God  ...  ...  ...  218 

Contempt  the  Lot  of  Misfortune  ...  218 
The   Testimony  of   the  Creature   to 

the  Divine  Government  ...  219 

The  Divine  Supremacy  illustrated  ...  220 

Irony     ...  ...  ...  ...  220 

Contempt  for  the  Unfortunate         ...  221 

Lessons  of  Nature  ...  ...  222 

Discrimination     ...  ...  ...  223 

The  Wisdom  and  Might  of  God        ...  223 

"  Deep  Things  oat  of  Darkness  "      ...  224 


OHAPTBE  XIII. 

Job  to  Zophar :  4.  A  Wounded  Soul 

at  Bay  ...  ...  ...  228 

Faith  and  Assurance  ...  ...  231 

Job  to  God  :  Resumption  of  the  Third 
Controversy  :  1.  The  Pleading  of  a 

Saint  with  Heaven         ...  ...  231 

The  Knowledge  of  Sin       ...  ...  234 

Man's  Injustice  and  the  Justice   of 

God   ...  ...  ...  ...  234 

Correction  of  the  Friends  ...  234 

Job's  Appeal  to  God  ...  ...  236 

Self -Defence    before    God  i     1.   The 

Weak  against  the  Strong  ...  236 

Faith  in  God,  bringing  Resignation  236 

The  Beaeons  for  Sorrow    ...  ...  237 


Trite  Sayings       ...  ... 

"  Phys.icians  of  no  Value  " 
Speaking  wickedly  for  God 
Sin  revealed  by  Gbd 
The  Hiding  of  God's  Face 


239 
239 
240 

241 


Suffering  for  the  Sins  of  One's  Youth    242 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Job  to  God  I  2.  The  Death- WaU  of 

Uamanity        ...  ...  ...  246 

Man  as  a  Flower  ...  ...  248 

Job  to  God  :  3.  A  Glimpse  into  the 

Life  beyond  -   ...  ...  ...  248 

Job  to  God:    4.   Falling  back  into 

the  Darkness   ...  ...  .  .  250 

Blighted  Hopes   ...  ...  ...  2.52 

Self-Defence  before  God:    2.  Plaint 
of  the  Weakness  and  Vanity  of 

Mankind  ...  ...  ...  252 

Self-Defence  before  God:  3.  Dawn- 
ing of  a  New  Hope         ...  ...  253 

Self-Defence  before  God:  4.  Relapse 

into  Despondent  Imaginations     ...  254 
Lessons  from  the  Brevity  of  Human 

Life   -  ...  .»  :..  254 

Sad  Views  of  Life  ...  ...  255 

The  Future  Life  ...  ...  255 

The  Flower  and  the  Shadow  ...  256 

"  A  Clean  Thing  out  of  an  Unclean  "  257 

The  Day's  Work  ...  ...  ...  257 

Is  there  a  Life  beyond  the  Grave  ?  ...  258 

Sealed  Transgression         ...  ...  259 

How  Waters  wear  the  Sionei  ...  259 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Bliphaz  to  Job;  Resumption  of  the 
Second  Controversy  :  1.  An  Over- 
whelming  Indictment     ...  ...     265 

Restraining  Prayer  ...  267  275 

Eliphaz  to  Job:    2.    More  Wisdom 
from  the  Ancients  ...  ...     268 

Perversity  and  Impenitence  rebuked      271 
Warnings  from  the  Wisdom  of   Ex- 
perience ...  ...  ...     272 

The  Wise  Han  speaketh  Wisdom     ...     273 
Human  Sinfulness  ...  ...     273 

The  Consequences  of  Evil-doing      ...     274 
A    Man    condemned     by     hia     own 
Mouth  ...  ...  ...     275 


moBX. 


TBXm  FAOE 

Unappreoiated  Consolations             ...  276 

Heart-Wanderings              ...             ...  277 

God's  Holiness  and  Man's  Sin          ...  278 

Trmsting  in  Vanity            ...             ...  278 

CHAPTER  xn. 

Job  to  Eliphaz :  1.  XTnacceptable  Com- 
fort and  DnaBBuaged  Grief           ...  282 
Job    to    God :    Besamption    of    the 
Third  ControTersy  ;  1.  The  Sorrows 
of  a  Weary  Man              ...             ...  283 

Aooeptable  Prayer              ...             ...  285 

Job  to   God :  2.  An  Appeal   to  God 

against  God      ...             ...             ...  286 

Deep    Dejection    and     Irrepressible 

Hope                 ...             ...             ...  287 

Sorrow  without  Hope         ...             ...  288 

The    Severity  of    the    Divine   Judg- 
ments              ...             ...             ...  289 

The  Appeal    of    Innocence    to    the 

Highest  Tribunal            ...             ...  289 

Miserable  Comforters         ...             ...  290 

Incurable  Grief  ...             ...             ...  290 

Shattered  when  at  Ease    ...             ...  291 

Purity  of  Prayer...             ...             ...  292 

The  Witness  in  Heaven     ...             ...  292 

Pleading  with  God             ...             ...  293 

CHAPTER  XVn. 

Job  to   God:  S.  The  Requiem   of   s 

Dying  Man       ...             ...             ...  296 

The  Just  holds  on  his  Way               ...  300 

Progress  in  Virtue              ...             ...  301 

The  Premature  Arrest  of  the  Purposes 

of  Life              ...             ...             ...  302 

The  Darkened  Hope           ...            ...  302 

A  Pledge  from  God            ...             ...  303 

The  Heart  that  is  Hidden  from  Un- 
derstanding     ...             ...             ■■•  304 

The  Bye  that  is  made  Dim  by  Sorrow  304 

Holding  on  and  growing  Stronger   ...  305 

Broken  Purposes ...             ...             ...  806 

The  Lost  Hope    ...             ...             ...  806 

CHAPTER  XVin. 

Bildad  to  Job  i  an  Arabian  Orator's 

Discourse          ...             •■•             •••  '10 

Beuewed  Rebukes  and  Warnings    ...  813 


The  Fruits  of  Impiety        ...  ...  814 

The  Home  of  the  Wicked  Insecure . . .  814 
The  Curse  upon  the   Family  of  the 

Wicked  ...  ...  ...  316 

The  Individual  Need  and  the  Univer- 
sal Order  ...  ...  ...  816 

The  Light  extinguished      ...  ...  316 

The   Sinner  entrapped   by   his  own 

Feet  ...  ...  ...  ...  317 

The  King  of  Terrors  ...  ...  318 

Root  and  Branch...  ..,  ...  319 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Job  to  Bildad :  1.  A  Reply,  an  Appeal, 

a  Complaint     ...  ...  ...  323 

Job  to  Bildad  :  2.  The  Inscription  on 
the   Rook  j    or,   Job's   Faith   in   h 

Redeemer         ...  ...  ...  326 

Unconquerable  Convictions  ...  330 

An  Appeal  for  Pity  ...  ...  332 

The  Divine  Vindicator       ...  ...  832 

A  Final  Judgment  ...  ...  833 

The  Erring  Soul  and  its  God  ...  834 

The  Cry  unheard...  ...  ,„  834 

The  Fenced  Way  ...  ...  835 

Touched  by  the  Hand  of  God  ...  836 

Written  Words    ...  ...  „.  336 

The  Great  Hope  ...  ...  ...  837 

"  The  Root  of  the  Matter "  „.  838 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Zophar  to  Job :  an  Orthodox  Cham- 
pion to  the  Rescue          ...             ,.,  343 
Godless  Prosperity  Short-lived        ...  847 
The     Temporary    Triumph    of    the 
Wicked            ...             ...              849,360 

Disappointment  to  the  Wicked         ...  349 
The    Final    Testimony  against   Un- 
godliness         ...             ...             ...  350 

The  Sweet  Taste  of  Sin  and  its  Bitter 

After-Taste       ...            ...            ...  851 

Oppressing  the  Poor          ...             ...  861 

Straitened  in  the  Time  of  Fulness  ...  862 

Iniquity  revealed                ...             .m  863 


CHAPTER  XXL 

Job  to  Zophar  :  Audi  Alteram  Partem    358 
Diverse  Interpretations  of  Life        „,    861 


vi 


INDEX. 


The  Perrerse  MUspplioation  of  the 

Divine  Goodneai             ...             ...  863 

The  Beservatioa  of  the  Divine  Jndg> 

ment...              ...              ...              ...  364 

The  Eight  of  Reply             ...             ...  365 

The  Complaint  that  goes  beyond  Man  366 

The  Prosperity  of  the  Wicked          ...  366 

Teaching  God      ...             ...             ...  367 

The  Common  Fata             „.            ...  368 

Yain  Oomfort      ...             ...             ...  868 


OHAPTEE  XXn. 

Eliphtn,  to  Job :  the  Third  OoUoqay : 
the  Second  Controversy :  1.  A  Fal- 
lacious Syllogism            ...             ...  373 

Uliphaz  to  Job :  2.  ▲  False  Aocnsa- 

tion    ...             ...             ...             ...  875 

Eliphaz  to  Job :   3.  An  Uncalled-for 

Exhortation      ...             ...             ...  377 

Censorions  and  TTncharitable  Season, 

ing      ...            ...             ...             ...  379 

The  Impartiality  of  the  Divine  Judg- 
ment ...             ...            ...             ...  381 

The  Unseen  Eye ...             ...             ...  882 

Peace  with  God  ...             ...             ...  883 

Whether  Man  can  be  Profitable  to 

God   ...             ...             883 

Help  for  the  Needy            „.             ...  384 

God's  Knowledge                ...             ...  885 

Peace  from  the  Knowledge  of  God  ...  386 

Heart-Treasures...             ...             ...  886 

The  Penitent's  Betom  and  Beatora. 

tioB    ...             ...             ...             ...  887 

Bich  in  God         ...             ...            ...  388 

The  Joy  of  the  Lord           ...             ...  388 

The  Prayer  that  shall  be  heard        ...  889 

Uplifting  the  Fallen          ...             ...  890 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 

Job  to  Eliphaz  t  1.  The    xpirienceof 

a  Seeker  after  God  ...  393 

A  Great  Qaestion  answered  ...  895 

Job  to  EUphaz :  8.  A  Child  of  Light 

walking  in  Darkness       ...  ...  395 

Job  to  Eliphtiz :  8.  A  Meditation  on 

the  Divine  Being  ...  ...  897 

The  Unchanging  God         ...  ...  899 

Struggles  of  Faith  with  Donbt         ...  400 


Longing  for  the  Appearance  of  the 

Delivering  and  Justifying  God     ...  400 
The   True   Support   under  Deferred 

Judgment          ...             ...              ...  401 

The     Humbled    and     Overwhelmed 

Sufferer            ...             ...             ...  401 

The  Bitter  Complaint        ...             ...  402 

The  Search  for  God            ...             ...  403 

The  Unseen  God...             ...             ...  403 

God's  Knowledge  and   Man's   Disci- 
pline ...             ...             ...             ...  404 

A  Faithful  Life    ...             ...             ...  405 

The  Inflexibility  of  God     ...             ...  405 

Troubled  at  the  Presence  of  God     ...  406 


OHAPTBB  XXrV. 

Job  to  Eliphaz :  4.  An  Answer  wanted 
to  a  Great  Question        ...  ...     410 

A  Threefold  Beligions  Emblem ;  or, 

the  Shelter  of  the  Bock  ...     413 

Job  to  Eliphaz:    6.  Ancient  Babels 
against  the  Light  ...  ...     413 

Examples  of  God's  Incomprehensible 
Dealings  ...  ...  ...     416 

Pictures  of  Secret  and  Unpunished 
Evil-doers        ...  ...  ...     416 

Apparent  Anomalies  in   the   Divina 
Judgment         ...  ...  ...     417 

The  Prosperity  of  the  Wicked   un- 
solved ...  ...  ...     417 

God's  Special  Days  ...  ...     418 

BemoTing  the  Landmarks  .„  ,.,     419 

Oppressing  the  Poor  ...  ...     419 

The  Bitter  Cry  of  the  City  ...     420 

The  Death-Penalty  of  Sin  ...     421 

"A  Little  While"  ...  ...     «21 


OHAPTBB  XXV. 

Bildad  to  Job  :  the  Greatness  of  God 
and  the  Littleness  of  Man  :  an  Old 

Sermon  reproduced         ...             ...  423 

The  Majesty  of  God  and  the  Weakness 

of  Man              ...             ...             ,„  425 

Condemnation      ...             ...             ,,.  426 

"  Peace  in  High  Places "   ...             ...  426 

The  Innumerable  Armies  of  God      ...  427 

The  Awe  of  God's  Holiness               „.  428 


INDEX, 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

THEmi  rAsi 
Job  to  Bildad  :  Another  Sermon  on 

the  Foregoing  Text        ...             ...  481 

Praises  of  the  Eternal        ...             ...  484 

Gruel  Reproof  helps  not  the  Snfferer  436 
The  Dirme  Ways  bat  partially  re- 
vealed             ...            ...            ...  486 

Helping  the  Weak              „•             •••  487 

God's  Yisioa  of  Death       ^            ...  438 

Olonds    ...             ...             ...             ...  488 

"  The  Thunder  of  hii  Poww"         ».  489 


OHAPTEB  XXTU. 

Job's   First  Parable:   1.  The  Traiu- 

gressions  of  a  Qodly  Man  ...  443 

Job's  First  Parable :  2.  The  Portion 

of  a  Wioked  Man  with  God  ...  446 

Job  a  Victor  in  the  Controversy      ...  4-17 

Determined  Integrity         ...  ...  449 

The  Hope  of  the  Hypocrite  ...  450 

The  Reward  of  Iniquity    .m  •••  451 

Moral  Honesty    ...  ...  ..<  451 

An  Empty  Hope  ...  ...  ...  452 

Teachings  concerning  God  ...  462 

The  Portion  of  a  Wioked  Man  ...  458 

The  Wioked  working  for  the  Good  ...  454 

The  East  Wind   ...  ...  ...  iSS 


CHAPTER  XXVIIl. 

JoVb  First  Parable:  8.  A  Diicoane 

upon  True  Wisdom        ...  ...  *W 

Praises  of  Divine  Wisdom  ...  468 

The  Path  of  Tme  Wisdom  ...  465 

Wisdom  hidden  from  Man  ...  466 

The  True  Wisdom              ...  ...  466 

The  Miner            ...             ...  •••  466 

The  Minei-'s  Path                ...  ...  467 

Thr.  Search  for  Wisdom     -.  —  468 

The  High  Price  of  Wiadom  ...  468 

God's  Access  to  Wiidom    ...  ...  469 

The  Revelation  of  WUdom  ...  470 


OHAPTBE   SXVL 

Job's  Second  Parable;  1.  Regretfnl 
Memories  of  Bygoae  Days  ...     474 

Wistful  Retrospect  ef  Ptat  Happy 
Days ...  ■••  •»•  '•'     ^' 


THBHB  PAOl 

A  Mournful  Reflection  upon  a  Happy 

Past  ...             ...             ...             ...  479 

Regrets  for  the  Happy  Past              ...  479 

The  Character  that  wins  Respect    ...  480 
"  The  Blessing  of  him  that  was  ready 

toperish"         ...             ...             ...  481 

Clothed  with  Righteousness              ...  482 

The  Phoenix         ...             ...             ...  482 

Welcome  Oonnael               ...            ...  483 


OHAPTEB   XXX. 

Job's  Seoond  Parable:  2.  A  Lamen- 
tation OTer  Fallen  Greatness        . . .  487 
Job's  Second  Parable :  3.  A  Sorrow- 
ful Snrrey  of  Present  Misery        . . .  490 
The  Troubles  of  the  Present            ...  492 
A  Sorrowful  Contrast        ...             ...  494 

The  Fall  from  Honour  to  Contempt  494 

The  Thraldom  of  AfiBiotion  ...  495 

Charging  God  with  Cruelty  ...  496 

The  House  of  Death  ...  ...  497 

Disappointment  ...  ...  ...  497 

The  Harp  tamed  to  Monming         ...  49a 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Job's  Second  Parable :  4.  A  Solemn 

Protestation  of  Innocence  ...  504 

Solemn  Assurances  of  Innocence  ...  511 

The  Oonsoiousness  of  Integrity  ...  515 

God's  Watchfulness  ...  ...  515 

An  Even  Balance  ...  ...  516 

A  Heinous  Crime  ...  ...  517 

The  Hope  of  Gold  ...  ...  517 

The  Shame  of  Public  Exposure  ...  513 

The  Indictment   ...  ...  ...  619 


OHAPTBE  XXJn, 

The  Intervention  of  Elihn...             ...  t)23 

The  Apology  of  Elihn         ...             ...  625 

Elihn  and  Us  Discourse     ...             ...  527 

Appearance  of  Elihn  :  the  Motives  of 

his  Address      ...            ...            ...  627 

TheToioe  of  Juvenile  Self -Confidence  529 

Silence  after  the  Storm     ...             ...  530 

Elihn  the  Young  Mao        ...             ...  630 

Tenth  and  Age   ...             ...             ...  531 

The  Common  Inspiration  of  Mao     ...  532 


rtU 


INDlSLa, 


The  Befroahment  of  Speeoh 
Flattetj 


FAOB 

632 
633 


OHAPTEB  XXXin. 

Elihn'g  First  Address  to  Job :  1.  An 

EicposTire  of  Job's  Sin     ...             ...  638 

Eliha'B  First  Address  to  Job  :  2.  The 

Philosophy  of  Divine  InBtmotion...  640 
Elibn'8  First  Discourse :  the  Onilt  of 

Man  in  the  Sight  of  God               ...  643 

The  Divine  Oorraotion       ...             ...  644 

The  Inspiration  of  Creation              ...  645 

The  Haman  Mediator        ...            ...  646 

Divine  Yoices      ...             ...             ...  646 

Chastisement       ...             ...             ...  647 

The  Messenger  and  the  Bansom      ...  648 

The  Bestored  Penitent      ...             ...  648 


CHAPTBB  XXXIV, 

Klihn  to  the  Bystanders :  the  Case  of 

Job  tried  ...  ...  ...  653 

Elihn's  Second  Discourse:  Man  has 

no  Bight  to  Donbt  of  God's  Justice  558 
The  BighteousnesB  of  the  Divine  Deal- 
ings   ...             ...             ...            ...  669 

The  Test  of  Tmth  ...  ...  660 

The  Certain  Justice  of  Ckid  ...  661 

The  Peace  of  God  ...  „.  661 

Lessons  of  AfBiction  ...  ...  662 

The  Limits  of  Private  Judgment     ...  663 

The  Oompletion  of  Trial  ...  ...  663 


OJHAPTEE  XXXV. 

Elihu  to  Job  I  the  Trial  of  Job  con- 
tinued ...  ...  ...  566 

Man's  ForgetfulnesB  of  God,  and  God's 

Bemembrance  of  Man     ...  ...  669 

Elihu's   Third  Speech  :  the  Profit  of 

GodUness         ...  ...  ...  670 

The  C17  that  is  not  unto  God  m.  671 

*Ad  Unjiist  Inference         ...  ...  671 

Is  Goodness  Profitable  P     ...  ...  672 

God's  Independence  of  Man  ...  672 

"  Songs  in  the  Night "       ...  ...  573 

The  Superiority  of  Men  to  Animals  674 

From  Despair  to  Trust      ,.,  ...  676 


OHAPTEE  XXXVL 

tAOM 

Elihu  to  Job:  3.   A  Sermon  on  the 

Divine  Administration  ...  ...  679 

Elihn  to  Job:  4.  A  Sermon  on  the 

Greatness  of  God  ...  ...  683 

Elihn's    Fourth    Speech:    God    the 

Loviog,  the  Just,  and  the  Holy    ...  686 

The  PerfeotnesB  of  the  Divine  Ways  688 

Speaking  on  God's  Behalf  ...  ...  689 

Knowledge  fetched  from  Afar         ...  690 

The  Might  and  Meroy  of  God  ...  690 

The  Kingship  of  Bighteonsness        ...  691 

The  Ear  that  is  Open  to  Discipline  ...  691 

Affliction  as  a  Deliverer    ...  ...  692 

"A  Broad  Place"  ...  ...  693 

The  Uselessness  of  a  Great  Bansom  694 

Exaltation  and  Instruction  ...  694 

God  praised  for  his  Works  ...  695 

"God  is  Great"...  ...  ...  696 

OHAPTKB  XXXVn. 

Elihn    to    Job:    6.   The   Wonderful 

Works  of  God  ...             ...             ...  69» 

On  Considering  the  Works  of  God  ...  603 

The  Voice  of  the  Thunder                ...  603 

The  Bainstorm     ...             ...            ...  604 

"  The  Wondrous  Works  of  God  "      ...  605 

The  Prayer  for  Prayer       ...             ...  605 

Unbearable  Light               ...            ...  606 

The  Mystery  of  God           ...             ...  607 

OHAPTEE  XXXVm. 

Jehovah  to  Job :  the  First  Answer— 
the  Theophany  ...  ...    613 

Jehovah  to  Job :  the  First  Answer — 
the  Examination:  1.  Conoeruing 
(he  Creation    ...  ...  ...    616 

The  Songs  of  the  Angels    ...  ...     617 

Jehovah  to  Job :  the  First  Answer — 
the  Examination:  2.  Concerning 
the  Sea  ...  ...  ...    617 

Jehovah  to  Job :  the  First  Answer— 
the  Examination:  8.  Concerning 
the  Light         ...  ...  ...    618 

Jehovah  to  Job :  the  First  Answer — 
the  Examination :  4.  Oonoeming 
the  Mysteries  of  Creation  ...     619 

Jehovah  to  Job :  the  First  Answer — 
the  Examination:  6.  Concerning 
four  Worlds    ...  ».  ,^    621 


INDEX 


The  DiBOonrses  of  Jehovah 

Fir»t  Discourge  of  Jehoyah ;  God  the 
Almighty  and  the  All-wise:  Man 
may  not  contend  with  him 

Hnman  Impotence  and  Ignorance  ex- 
posed,.,  ...  ...  ... 

A  Theophany       ...  ...  „, 

God's  Answer      ...  ... 

The  Song  of  Creation         ... 

Lessons  of  the  Sea  ...  ... 

Astrology  and  Astronomy ...  ... 

The  Baven  ...  .„  „ 


OHAPTBB  TXXIX 

JehoTah  to  Job :  the  First  Answer — 
the  Examination :  6.  Conoerning 
Certain  Wild  Animals    ... 

The  Creatures  not  Dependent  upon 
Man  ...  ...  ... 

The  Wild  Ass 

Tnuiting  in  Mere  Streng^  ... 

The  Careless  Ostrich  ...  ... 

The  War- Horse   ...  .„  ... 

The  Hawk  and  the  Eagle  ...  ... 


OHAFTEB  XL. 

JehoTsh  to  Job :  the  First  Answer — 

the  Application 
Jehovah  to  Job :  the  Second  Answer : 

1.  A  Snblime  Challenge 
Jehovah  to  Job :  the  Second  Answer : 

8.  Concerning  Behemoth 
Conolnsion    of    Jehovah's    Address: 

Beply  of    Job:   Lowliness  in  the 

Presence  of  Jehovah      ...  ... 


PAOI 

622 


623 

625 
626 
626 
627 
628 
629 


634 

636 
637 
638 
638 
639 
639 


643 


644 


646 


M7 


Second  Disoonrse  of  Jehovah:    the 

Bighteons  Government  of  God     ... 

Humility 

The  Oreatnres  of  his  Power 
Contending  with  the  Almighty 
Hnmbled  before  God 
Impugning  God's  Justice  ... 
The  Humiliation  of  the  Proud 
Self-Salvation      ...  ... 

Behemoth  the  Great  ... 


647 
648 
649 
649 
650 
650 
651 
652 
663 


OHAPTEB  XLL 

Jehovah  to  Job :  the  Second  Answer : 

3.  Concerning  Leviathan 
Description    of   the    Leviathan,    or 

Crocodile 
Leviathan  the  Terrible 
The  Universal  Bnle  of  God 
"A  King  over  all  the   Children  of 

Pride" 


657 

659 
659 
660 

661 


OHAPTBB  XLIL 

The  Conclusion  of  the  Drama  ...  664 

Hearsay  and  Vision  ...  ...  667 

Job's  Answer  and  Confession  ...  668 

Conclusion  of  the  Story     ...  ...  669 

Contrition  ...  ...  ...  670 

The  Divine  Vindication  of  Job  ...  671 

The  Gathered  Lessons       ...  ...  671 

The  Confession  of  God's  Supremacy  672 

The  Soul's  Experience  of  God  ...  673 

The  Accusers  aocased        ...  ...  673 

The  Captivity  turned         m  ...  674 

The  Betam  of  Prosperity  .„  ^  676 


