tihvavy  of  Che  trheolojical  ^^minavy 

PRINCETON  •  NEW  JERSEY 


PRESENTED  BY 

Dr.  Thomas  C.  Pears 

BV  250  .M325  1911 
Maclaren,  Alexander,  1826- 
1910. 

Pulpit  prayers 


PULPIT    PRAYERS 


PULPIT     PRAYERS 


BY 


ALEXANDER    MACLAREN 


D.D.,  LiTT.D. 


SECOND    SERIES 


HODDER   AND    STOUGHTON 
NEW    YORK    AND    LONDON 


Printed  in  1911 


O  Lord  our  God,  from  Whom  cometh  every  good  and 
perfect  gift,  give  us,  we  pray  Thee,  the  consciousness 
of  Thy  presence  in  this  hour  of  worship,  and  grant 
that  whatever  we  may  each  of  us  most  need  for  our 
inward  life  we  may  find  here  and  now.  Draw  our 
hearts  to  Thyself,  we  beseech  Thee ;  prepare  us  for 
better  service  ;  help  each  of  us  to  pass  beyond  the  out- 
ward forms  of  worship  ;  and  to  come,  in  the  silence  of 
our  minds,  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High. 
Flash  Thy  truth  upon  all  our  hearts  and  minds,  help 
us  in  hearing  and  in  speaking,  bless  us  each  as  we 
severally  require,  receive  our  thanks  for  the  individual 
and  private  blessings  which  we  each  possess,  and  for 
the  universal  gift  which  we  each  may  have — the 
unspeakable  gift  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  Hear  us,  we 
pray  Thee,  and  grant  us  Thy  presence  and  help  now, 
for  our  Saviour  Christ's  sake. 


II 

O  Lord,  we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast,  in  some 
measure,  drawn  back  the  veil,  and  shown  us  the 
things  which  are  at  Thy  right  hand.  And  we  beseech 
Thee  to  help  each  of  us,  so  long  as  we  tarry  here 
below,  that  we  may  press  toward  the  mark  for  the 
prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  May 
we  forget  the  things  that  are  behind,  our  failures,  our 


2  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

disappointments,  our  attainments,  or  only  remember 
them  to  make  us  more  earnest  in  seeking  that  to- 
morrow may  not  be  as  this  day,  but  much  more  con- 
formed to  Thy  holy  will.  Help  all  of  us,  we  pray 
Thee,  to  live  as  those  whose  home  is  beyond  the  stars, 
and  in  the  depths  of  God.  And  may  this  our  life 
here  below  be  so  used  by  us  as  that  it  shall  fit  us 
to  be  '  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light.' 

We  beseech  Thee  for  this  in  regard  of  all  of  us 
gathered  here  this  evening,  and  especially  we  pray  for 
the  younger  members  of  this  congregation  that  they 
may  be  kept  innocent  of  much  transgression,  that  they 
may  begin  aright,  and  so  be  delivered  from  many  a 
pang  and  many  a  sorrow,  many  a  disenchantment, 
and  many  a  stain.  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee  to  be 
near  them,  especially  any  amongst  them  who  may  be 
living  solitary  lives,  and  exposed  to  the  temptations 
of  this  great  city.  We  beseech  Thee  that  these  young 
men  may  abhor  youthful  lusts,  which  war  against  the 
soul.  We  pray  that  they  may  be  armed  against  the 
suggestions  of  evil  that  lie  on  every  side,  that  they 
may  be  kept  from  the  corrupting  influences  of  com- 
panionship that  may  be  necessary  for  them,  that  they 
may  be  wise  to  understand  the  snares,  the  bait,  and 
the  hook.  We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  bless 
them  all  in  their  several  courses,  granting  to  them 
such  prosperity  in  this  world's  matters  as  Thou  seest 
is  best  for  them,  and  helping  them  to  keep  their 
hearts  above  the  world,  and  with  all  their  getting  to 
seek  most  to  get  the  durable  riches  and  righteousness 
which  are  more  precious  than  rubies,  and  none  of  the 
things  that  they  desire  are  to  be  compared  to  it. 

O  Lord !  bless  us  in  our  meeting  now.    We  beseech 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  3 

Thee  to  give  us  some  word  to  speak ;  though  our  own 
words  be  feeble  let  Thy  strength  come  with  them. 
Do  Thou  help  us,  and  give  us  wisdom  and  utterance 
and  earnestness,  and  may  the  word  of  the  Lord  be 
magnified  among  us,  and  the  message  of  the  great  love 
of  the  Christ  Who  keeps  us  from  evil  find  entrance 
into  many  hearts.  O  Lord,  bless  us  each  in  our  several 
callings  and  condition;  be  near  any  of  us  who  may 
have  any  special  temptations  or  difficulties.  If  any 
of  us  are  proving  the  loneliness  of  life,  or  its  sadness, 
or  its  difficulties,  and  if  our  way  may  seem  to  be 
barred  against  us,  do  Thou  help  us  to  patience  and 
courage,  to  wise  effort,  to  dependence  upon  Thee.  O 
Lord,  do  Thou  keep  us  all,  and  may  every  one  of  us 
from  this  time  forth  say  unto  Thee,  '  My  Father !  Thou 
art  my  Guide.'  These  young  men  and  maidens  we 
commend  to  Thee  that  they  may  grow  up  serving 
God,  His  faithful  witnesses  and  soldiers,  hating 
covetousness  and  all  evil,  and  binding  sound  wis- 
dom and  discretion  on  their  hearts  and  their 
foreheads. 

And  now.  Lord,  we  would  pray  for  others  than  our- 
selves. We  would  remember  the  many  thousands 
who,  at  this  time,  are  gathered  together  in  different 
churches,  in  different  lands,  and  with  different  tongues, 
to  praise  Thee  and  seek  Thy  face.  And  we  beseech 
Thee  that  upon  all  Thy  children  Thy  love  may  come 
down  like  the  dove,  and  abide  with  them  for  ever. 

Hear  us  now,  when  we  cry  to  Thee,  for  all  that  are 
in  any  kind  of  sorrow  or  trouble,  and  humbly  ask 
Thee  that  where  Thou  art  chastening  there  may  be 
the  sense  of  the  Father's  love,  even  in  the  chastise- 
ment, and  that  Thy  rod  as  well  as  Thy  staff  may 
comfort  many  a  troubled  heart. 


4  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Take  us,  O  Lord,  we  pray  Thee  now,  into  Thy 
gracious  care,  and  what  we  have  failed  to  ask,  or  have 
asked  amiss,  do  Thou  give  in  large  abundance,  not  for 
our  sakes  but  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  Thy  own  Name 
and  love's  sake. 

Ill 

Set  us  free,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  from  the  fetters 
of  sin  and  earth,  that  we  may  indeed  joyfully  serve 
Thee,  and  labour  on  at  Thy  command.  We  would 
say,  '  O  Lord !  truly  I  am  Thy  servant ;  Thou  hast 
loosed  my  bonds.'  Thou  dost  set  us  free  that  in  Thy 
service  we  may  find  liberty.  Thou  dost  honour  us  by 
letting  us  do  Thy  will.  Thou  dost  incline  our  hearts, 
when  we  wait  before  Thee,  to  the  joy  of  obedience  and 
the  blessedness  of  action  for  Thee.  Thou  dost  draw 
us  by  mighty  motives,  Thou  dost  inspire  us  with  power 
not  our  own.  Grant,  O  Lord,  that  we,  enriched  by  so 
many  gifts  of  Thine  hand,  and  enabled  by  so  many 
inspirations  of  Thy  grace,  may  indeed  joyously  wait 
upon  God,  in  all  holy  obedience ;  and  as  the  eyes  of 
a  servant  are  towards  his  master,  so  may  ours  be  to 
Thee,  O  our  God. 

We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  gathered  us  together 
this  morning,  and  that  so  many  mercies  have  crowned 
our  path  since  last  we  met  together.  Another  week 
of  blessing  from  Thy  hand  has  gone  over  our  heads. 
We  are  another  week  nearer  the  time  of  rest.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  we  may  be  conscious  of  some  growth 
in  Thy  grace  and  knowledge,  and  that  we  may  be 
aware  of  some  weakening  in  us  of  anything  that  is 
contrary  to  Thy  will,  and  may  gather  together  here 
better  prepared  and  more  desirous  to  receive  Thy 
great  gifts  of  grace  and  goodness. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  5 

We  thank  Thee,  Lord,  for  all  Thy  blessings  to  us. 
We  praise  Thee  for  daily  care  and  nightly  mercies. 
We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  offer 
up  to  Thee  not  only  the  words  of  thanksgiving  but  the 
sacrifice  of  loving,  trustful,  and  obedient  hearts,  and 
that  our  characters  may  become  more  like  what  Thou 
wouldst  have  us  to  be.  We  have  to  pray  for  the  for- 
giveness of  many  imperfections  and  sins.  We  could 
not  lose  the  consciousness  of  our  own  shortcomings. 
We  pray  Thee  to  deliver  us  from  all  illusions  as  to  our 
own  strength  and  our  own  righteousness.  We  pray 
Thee  for  quickened  consciences,  enlightened  by  Thee ; 
and  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  preserve  us 
from  ever  losing  sight  of  our  own  deep  necessities,  or 
from  ever  seeing  them  so  mountainous  and  great  as 
that  they  obscure  Thy  greater  mercy  and  Thy  more 
than  sufficient  supplies.  May  we  ever  hold  in  one 
grasp  our  own  need  and  Thy  infinite  riches,  our  own 
sinfulness  and  Thy  free  blessing,  our  own  deficiencies 
and  Thy  wealth. 

We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  use  our  many  necessities 
and  wants  as  open  doors  through  which  Thy  grace  may 
come  into  our  hearts.  We  pray  that  we  may  keep 
open  the  door  for  the  entrance  of  all  Thy  gifts.  Draw 
near  to  us  now,  and  help  us  always  to  wait  on  the 
Lord  so  that  we  shall  not  want  any  good.  Thine  ears 
are  open  to  the  cry  of  the  righteous ;  make  us 
righteous  that  our  cry  may  '  enter  into  the  ears  of 
the  Lord  of  Sabaoth.'  Teach  us  how  and  what  to 
desire.  Help  us  to  subordinate  all  our  wishes  for 
earthly  things  to  the  higher  aspirations  after 
greater  and  deeper  good.  May  our  lives  be  in 
accordance  with  that  prayer ;  and  may  we,  in  all  our 
daily  pursuits  and  amidst  all  the  temptations    and 


6  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

distractions  that  belong  to  our  earthly  life,  be  seek- 
ing first  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness. 
Lord,  we  feel  that  our  lives  would  be  very  different  if 
that  prayer  were  fulfilled,  and  we  know  that  it  is  in 
Thy  heart  to  fulfil  it  unless  we  hinder  Thee.  So  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thouwouldst  mould  us,  and  discipline 
us  so  that  we  may  cease  to  set  our  affections  and  minds 
on  things  of  earth  shutting  out  the  things  that  are 
above  where  Christ  is.  We  may  not  know  what  we 
ask,  we  do  not  know  how  Thou  mayest  be  pleased  to 
fulfil  the  petition  ;  but  we  ask  Thee  to  help  us  that  we 
may  stand  to  it,  and  even  if  Thou  dost  answer  it  by 
disappointment  and  by  sorrow  may  believe  that  they 
too  are  working  together  for  our  good.  Hear  us ;  in 
Thy  mercy  forgive,  quicken,  strengthen  and  answer 
us,  through  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 


IV 

O  Lord,  Who  dwellest  in  the  light,  and  hast  immortal 
life,  we,  out  of  the  darkness  and  ringed  about  with 
death,  do  lift  up  our  hearts  to  Thee,  and  beseech  Thee 
that  some  beams  of  the  light,  and  some  touches  of  the 
life,  may  be  ours.  May  they  grow  in  us,  may  we  see 
light  more  clearly  in  Thy  light  day  by  day,  and  drink 
ever  deeper  draughts  from  the  fountain  of  life,  and  the 
river  of  Thy  pleasures. 

We  draw  near  to  Thee  now,  compassed  about  with 
many  infirmities,  and  some  of  us  carrying  in  our  hearts 
some  sorrows,  and  all  of  us  conscious  of  much  weak- 
ness which  often  foils  our  efforts ;  and  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  not  only  to  trust  in  the 
living  God,  Who  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy, 
but  to  flee  all  the  things  that  are  contrary  to  His  will, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  7 

and  earnestly  to  pursue  after  till  we  possess,  godliness, 
faith,  love,  righteousness,  and  all  manifold  beauties 
and  blessings  with  which  Thou  canst  and  dost  desire  to 
clothe  our  spirits. 

Look  upon  us  in  this  our  assembly.  Be  very  near 
each  of  us  according  to  our  different  necessities.  Thou 
knowest  these  better  than  any  others  can  know  them, 
better  than  we  ourselves  know  them.  Thou  dost 
interpret  the  cries  of  our  spirits  which  we  often 
misunderstand,  and  thou  knowest  how  to  still  the 
hunger  of  our  souls  which  we  often  try  to  satisfy  with 
things  not  much  better  than  the  husks  that  the  swine 
did  eat.  We  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  come  to  us, 
and  help  us,  giving  to  us  the  things  that  we  most  need, 
whether  they  are  the  things  that  we  wish  most  or 
not.  Do  Thou  discipline  and  train  us,  instruct  and 
educate  us.  Bring  us  near  to  Thyself,  and  fashion  us 
more  after  the  likeness  of  Thy  Son.  May  we,  too,  be 
transfigured,  that  our  faces  may  shine  as  the  light,  and 
by  the  renewing  of  our  minds  may  we  altogether  be 
transformed  from  conformity  to  this  world.  Guide  us 
day  by  day  by  Thy  wise  counsels ;  may  they  never  be 
neglected  by  us.  Mould  us  by  Thy  shaping  hands  ; 
may  we  be  as  the  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter. 
Preserve  us  from  struggling  against  Thy  gifts,  from 
leaving  them  untaken.  Preserve  us  from  misusing 
any  of  them  for  lower  purposes  than  those  for  which 
they  are  sent ;  and  help  us  that  in  all  our  doings,  setting 
the  Lord  before  us,  we  may  be  steadfast,  unmovable, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

We  would  commend  each  other  to  Thee,  in  all  the 
variety  of  our  condition.  Especially  we  pray  that 
Thou  wouldst  be  near  any  who  may  have  a  hard  fight 
in  the  world,  who  may  have  burdens  to  carry  that  they 


8  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

do  not  expect  ever  to  lose,  or  ever  to  be  fit  to  carry  in 
their  own  strength.  Comfort  all  sad  hearts,  enlighten 
all  that  may  need  guidance  and  light.  Be  near  us  in 
all  the  variety  of  our  circumstances,  and  mould  Thy 
gifts  according  to  our  characters  and  dispositions. 
And  we  pray  that  by  whatever  variety  of  method  Thy 
providence  may  be  working  with  any  of  us,  may  we  be 
able  to  recognise  the  unity  of  purpose  in  all  the  various 
ways  which  Thou  dost  take,  and  may  work  together 
with  God  to  make  all  things  contribute  to  the  highest 
end,  even  our  perfecting. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  us  in  our  worship  of  this 
morning,  and  with  like  blessings  draw  near  to  all  our 
brethren  of  every  communion  and  tongue  who  on  this 
day  may  be  bowing  their  hearts  before  Thee.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  large  blessings  may  come  down 
upon  praying  souls.  We  beseech  Thee  that  they  may 
treasure  the  blessings  which  Thou  dost  bestow,  and 
since  Heaven's  gates  are  open  may  our  gates  not  be 
shut. 

Now,  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  take  us 
into  Thy  holy  care  and  keeping,  to  forgive  all  our 
many  sins ;  and  grant  us  now  Thy  help,  according  to 
our  need,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


O  Lord,  our  gracious  and  glorious  Lord,  who  dwellest 
in  the  light  inaccessible,  and  inhabitest  the  praises  of 
Eternity,  we  would  worship  before  Thee  with  the 
reverence  and  godly  fear  becoming  us.  Thou  art  holy, 
separated  from  all  the  limitations  of  Thy  creatures, 
and  far  above  our  thoughts.  But  we  bless  Thee  that 
Thou  hast  come  near  us,  near  us  in  Thy  daily  gracious 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  9 

providences,  near  us  in  the  voice  in  our  own  hearts, 
near  us  best  of  all  in  Thy  Son.  And  we  thank  Thee  that, 
impassable  for  us  as  is  the  gulf  between  us  and  Thee, 
Thou  hast  bridged  it  over ;  and  there  is  for  us  now  a 
way  into  the  Holiest  of  all,  by  which  thoughts  and  love 
and  trust  and  obedience  can  pass  into  Thy  presence, 
and  be  united  to  Thee. 

We  beseech  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us, 
while  we  lose  nothing  of  our  reverence,  to  gain  much 
of  childlike  confidence  that  Thou  may  est  be  our 
dearest  faith,  and  not  only  our  fear  and  our  dread. 
We  beseech  Thee  to  help  us  now,  by  that  spirit  of 
adoption,  whereby  even  we  can  take  upon  our  lips  our 
Lord's  prayer  in  Gethsemane,  and  like  Him  can  pray 
'  Abba  !  Father  ! ' 

Teach  us  all  that  lies  in  that  great  Name,  and  may  it 
ever  be  present  in  our  hearts  and  lives,  so  that  we  may 
bring  Thee  not  only  the  honour  due  to  a  Father,  but 
the  love  which  Thou  dost  wish  more. 

We  bless  Thee  for  all  Thy  great  mercies  to  us.  We 
draw  near  to  Thee  now,  laden  with  benefits.  Thou 
crownest  our  days  with  Thy  goodness ;  and  we  believe, 
though  it  is  sometimes  hard  to  feel  it  and  be  sure  of  it, 
that  all  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth  to 
such  as  keep  His  covenant.  Help  us  to  keep  it.  Teach 
us  to  accept  Thy  commandments,  to  believe  Thy  pro- 
mises, to  live  in  the  light  of  Thy  Presence,  and 
whether  present  or  absent  to  labour  that  we  may 
be  well-pleasing  to  Thee;  and  then  do  Thou  help  us 
that  we  may  ever  be  compassed  about  with  Thy  favour 
as  with  a  shield,  and  may  feel  that  in  union  with  Thee 
all  our  need  is  greatened  and  purified  and  glorified. 

Be  with  each  of  us  in  our  daily  lives,  guide  us  by  Thy 
wisest  counsel,  draw  near  to  us  as  we  wait  before  Thee, 


10  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  let  our  gatherings  together  be  for  the  better  and 
not  for  the  worse.  May  we  each,  coming  in  Christ's 
Name,  find  Him  in  the  midst.  Hear  us  ;  in  Thy  mercy 
forgive  and  answer  and  bless  us,  for  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour's  sake. 


VI 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  we  come  to  Thee  to  pray 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  have  our  loins  girded  and 
our  lamps  burning ;  and  that  Thou  wouldst  strengthen 
us,  with  all  energy  and  faithfulness,  to  labour  at  Thy 
command,  and  to  offer  all  our  works  to  Thee.  May  we 
increasingly  be  able  to  look  beyond  the  things  seen  and 
temporal.  May  they  be  transparent  to  us,  and  shew 
us  the  things  unseen  and  eternal.  Help  us  not  to  make 
snares  of  what  Thou  dost  mean  for  merciful  occasions 
for  growth  in  Thy  likeness  to  Thee.  Help  us  not  to 
shut  Thee  out  with  the  screens  of  our  duties  or  of  our 
blessedness.  May  we  day  by  day  be  looking  for,  and 
hasting  unto,  the  Lord  in  the  brightness  of  His  coming ; 
and  may  our  lips  be  all  the  more  full  of  earnest  service, 
because  we  know  that  the  night  is  far  spent  and  the 
day  is  at  hand. 

Regard  us  all  now,  in  the  light  of  our  circumstances. 
Thou  knowest  these  better  than  we  know  ourselves, 
and  far  better  than  we  know  one  another.  May  Thy 
gracious  wisdom  guide  us,  and  may  we  not  resist  Thy 
guidance.  May  they  not  fail  to  give  us  what  Thou  seest 
our  condition  most  requires.  May  we  not  turn  away 
from  Thy  gifts,  nor  squander  or  misuse  them.  Keep  us 
from  wasting  our  Lord's  substance,  from  wasting  the 
substances  that  Thou  dost  give  us.  May  we  feel  that 
we  are  stewards  as  well  as  possessors  ;  and  may  we,  in 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  11 

all  things,  seek  to  praise  and  glorify  Thee.  Bless  us 
each  according  to  our  diverse  requirements.  Comfort 
any  that  are  in  sorrow ;  be  near  all  lonely  and  sad 
hearts.  Let  sorrow  and  loss  be  ministers  to  us  of  joy 
and  gain.  And  may  any  tribulation  of  any  kind,  great 
or  small,  any  difficulty  or  perplexity,  anything  dis- 
agreeable or  unwelcome  that  comes  to  us  in  the  way  of 
our  duty  be  useful  to,  and  minister  good  to,  as.  And  do 
Thou  grant  that,  amidst  all  losses  and  pains,  we  may 
hear  the  great  Voice  that  says  to  us, '  Come  up  hither ! ' 
and  may  we  more  and  more  set  our  affections  on  the 
things  above,  where  Christ  is ;  and  with  Him  so  many 
whom  we  know  and  loved,  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God. 

Help  us  each  in  our  several  parts  in  this  service,  that 
hearing  we  may  hear  what  God  the  Lord  shall  speak, 
and  speaking  we  may  preach  the  preaching  that  He 
bids  us.  Hear,  and  forgive  us,  and  accept  our  petitions 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 


VII 

With  lowly  love,  and  loving  trust,  and  trustful 
obedience,  we  would  come  to  Thee  now,  O  Lord.  With 
Thee  is  the  fountain  of  life.  All  our  seeing  is  by  Thy 
light,  and  all  our  joys  are  in  the  drinking  of  the  river 
of  Thy  pleasures.  Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  drawn  by 
Thy  grace,  and  driven  by  our  sins,  and  knit  into  such 
close  communion  with  Thyself,  that  there  may  flow 
into  our  hearts  the  life,  the  light,  the  joy,  which  Thou 
dost  mean  us  to  possess.  We  acknowledge  that  we, 
by  our  own  faults,  have  been  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins.  We  acknowledge  that  we  have  loved  darkness 
more  than  the  light  of  life.     We  acknowledge  that  we 


12  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

have  sought,  and  in  some  partial  measure  found,  our 
joys  elsewhere  than  in  Thee.  And  we  come  to  Thee 
now,  not  without  some  sense  of  our  follies,  and  beseech 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  deliver  us  from  the  snares  of 
falsely  fixed  desires,  and  wouldst  keep  us  from  the  folly 
of  seeking  in  the  world  for  what  it  can  never  give,  and 
wouldst  stir  us  up  that  we  may  take  hold  upon  Thee, 
and  laying  hold  of  Thee  may  find  that  we  have  Thee 
for  our  very  own. 

O  Lord,  whether  we  know  it  or  not,  and  we  often  do 
not  know  it,  our  heart  and  our  flesh  crieth  out  for  the 
living  God.  We  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  turn  these 
cries  into  prayers,  and  that  they  may  be  the  prayers  of 
faith,  and  that  they  may  be  seconded  and  backed  up  by 
our  daily  lives,  and  that  so  we  may  receive  that  with- 
out which  we  shall  continue  always  to  be  miserable 
and  poor  and  blind  and  naked,  and  all  the  while  con- 
ceiting ourselves  to  have  need  of  nothing.  O  Lord ! 
teach  us  our  great  wants,  and  then  give  us  Thy  great 
gifts,  and  fill  us  with  the  power  and  the  peace  of  Thine 
own  life  bestowed  through  Jesus  Christ  Who  is  our  Life. 
And  help  us,  day  by  day,  to  live  the  lives  that  we  live 
in  the  flesh  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  Who  loved 
us  and  gave  Himself  for  us. 

Do  Thou,  we  beseech  Thee,  pour  out  upon  this  con- 
gregation the  blessing  of  Thy  good  Spirit,  that  its 
divine  influences  may  move  upon  all  our  minds  and 
hearts  and  wills ;  and  that  whether  we  hear  or  speak 
the  word  of  the  Lord  may  to  us  be  mighty  as  the 
hammer  that  breaks  the  rock  in  pieces,  gentle  as  the 
rain  upon  the  mown  grass,  and  full  of  blessing  as  it 
only  can  be. 

We  pray  Thee  to  help  us  in  our  worship,  to  guide  our 
thoughts  when  we  meditate  upon  Thy  truth,  to  keep 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  13 

us  from  wandering  away  in  mind  and  imagination  and 
fancy  into  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  with  all  its 
trivialities  and  its  trials.  Help  us  as  we  draw  near  to 
Thee  in  worship,  and  as  we  open  our  minds  and  hearts 
to  the  teaching  of  Thy  truth.  Grant  that  our  meeting 
may  be  full  of  blessing  and  of  lasting  good  for  every 
one  of  us.  We  would  come  to  Thee  with  humble 
thanksgiving  for  all  Thy  great  mercies  to  us,  and  for 
Him  Who  is  the  sun  of  them  all,  and  in  Whom  all  the 
sweets  of  Thy  giving  lie  compacted,  even  Jesus  Christ 
our  Saviour. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  receive  our  acknowledgments ; 
we  pray  that  they  may  become  more  adequate  and 
more  operative  in  our  lives,  so  that  to  us  all  the  service 
shall  be  an  honour,  and  all  that  the  Lord  lays  upon  us 
shall  be  a  joy  to  accept  and  to  do.  Forgive  our  many 
sins,  cleanse  our  hearts  from  their  manifold  evils, 
deliver  us  from  all  our  errors,  lead  us  into  the  full  truth. 
May  we  live  by  the  truth  that  we  know,  and  be  ever 
growing  in  the  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
and  Saviour.  Hear  us  in  our  prayer,  and  in  Thy  great 
mercy  forgive  and  accept  us,  through  Christ  our  Lord. 

VIII 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  pray  that  we  may  not  be  of  those 
who  think  they  see  and  are  blinded  by  the  light.  Help 
us  all  to  fix  our  faith  and  our  hope  on  that  Son  of  God, 
and  to  be  His  in  very  deed  and  truth,  not  only  in  word 
but  in  our  inmost  lives,  in  the  depths  of  our  hearts,  in 
the  foundations  of  our  thinking,  and  in  all  the  energies 
of  our  activity.  We  come  to  Thee  with  humble  thanks- 
giving that  Thou  dost  permit  us  thus  to  gather  our- 
selves together,  and  together  to  receive  from  Thee,  as 


14  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

we  trust,  some  impulses  that  may  help  us  on  our 
journey.  Thou  knowest  each  of  us  here  before  Thee, 
and  all  our  present  want ;  and  we  pray  that  every  one 
of  us  may  wish  for,  and  may  get  from  God,  the  things 
that  we  most  require.  Thou  hast  often  seen  our  foolish 
desires;  some  of  them  Thou  hast  granted,  and  some  of 
them  Thou  hast  withheld.  We  thank  Thee  that  there 
are  desires  which  are  sure  to  be  granted,  and  we  pray 
that  we  may  increasingly  long  for  the  things  which 
Thou  dost  long  to  give,  and  confine  our  seeking  to 
those  gifts  which  we  shall  be  sure  to  find.  We  thank 
Thee  that  there  is  one  region  in  which  Thou  canst  do 
exceeding  abundantly  above  all  we  can  ask  or  think, 
and  will  do  it.  O  Lord,  help  us  to  wish  most  for  what 
is  best,  and  to  influence  desire  and  hope,  as  well  as  faith 
and  trust,  and  submission,  and  obedience,  that  Thou 
hast  Thyself  manifested  and  brought  to  us  in  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 

Teach  us  this  evening  how  to  speak  Thy  word,  guide 
our  thoughts,  preserve  us  from  saying  anything  that 
might  be  a  stumbling-block  to  any.  May  the  simplicity 
of  motive  mark  all  that  we  say,  and  may  the  word  of 
the  Lord  shine  even  through  the  imperfect  medium  of 
the  human  utterance  and  vindicate  its  own  divine 
power  and  sufficiency,  whatever  becomes  of  the  vase 
in  which  it  is  carried.  We  pray  for  one  another ;  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  be  near  us  according 
to  our  different  circumstances  and  needs.  If  there  are 
any  amongst  us  who  are  in  sorrow  or  trouble,  any 
from  whom  Thou  hast  taken  away  earthly  treasures, 
any  who  have  been  brought  near  to  the  gates  of 
death,  any  who  may  be  laden  with  anxiety,  or  per- 
plexity, or  cares,  and  surely  there  are  many  such 
among  us,  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help 


PULPIT  PRAYEKS  15 

us  to  cast  our  burdens  upon  the  Lord,  Who  bears  our 
burdens,  and  Who  gives  us  strength  to  bear  them, 
and  to  live  in  the  possession  of  that  peace  that 
passes  understanding,  because  we  have  ceased  to  be 
anxious  about  ourselves,  and  anxiety  has  been 
svrallowed  up  in  faith. 

Comfort  all  sad  hearts,  O  Lord,  we  pray  Thee.  Be 
near  us  according  to  our  different  difficulties  and  con- 
flicts. Guide  us  by  Thy  counsel,  and  make  us  willing  to 
accept  Thy  guidance.  Hear  our  prayers,  make  us  more 
prayerful,  receive  our  thanksgiving  and  deepen  our 
gratitude,  answer  our  petitions,  and  make  us  more 
earnest  in  asking.  We  pray  Thee  to  hear  us,  and  to 
grant  us  Thy  blessing,  and  help  now,  for  our  Lord 
Christ's  sake. 

IX 

O  Lord  our  God,  many  are  the  wonderful  works  which 
Thou  hast  done,  and  Thy  thoughts  which  are  to  usward 
are  thoughts  of  good  and  not  of  evil.  And  we  bless 
Thee  for  the  peaceful  confidence  we  have  that  there  is 
nothing  in  Thy  heart  or  mind  towards  us  but  a  Father's 
pitying  love.  Strong  in  that  confidence  which  we  have 
learned  from  our  elder  Brother,  and  His  unveiling  of 
Thy  heart,  we  draw  near  to  Thee  now,  and  seek  that 
the  flame,  the  immortal  flame,  of  Thy  love  may  kindle 
in  our  hearts  some  answering  and  kindred  glow. 

When  we  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  we  are  overwhelmed 
with  the  number  of  Thy  mercies.  They  cannot  be 
reckoned  up  in  order  unto  Thee ;  they  can  only  be 
reckoned  up  in  order  by  Thee.  And  yet  we  pray  that 
we  may  have  a  clear  perception  of,  and  a  more  adequate 
thankfulness  for,  and  a  more  entire  dependence  upon. 
Thy  loving    heart    and    Thine    innumerable    mercies. 


16  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Draw  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  Thyself  by  thoughts  of 
Thee ;  and  when  there  rise  up  in  our  consciences  the 
sins  that  are  more  than  the  hairs  of  our  heads,  and  we 
feel  as  if  we  durst  not  look  up,  may  the  thought  of 
Thy  greater  mercies,  more  numerous  still  than  these, 
strengthen  and  encourage  us.  What  should  we  do  if 
the  measure  of  Thy  forgiveness  did  not  overlap  and 
exist  far  beyond  the  measure  of  any  man's  or  of  all 
men's  sin  ?  We  thank  Thee  that  we  can  cast  ourselves 
on  Thee,  and  flee  to  Thee  from  ourselves ;  and  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thy  good  Spirit,  which  Thou  dost 
give  to  them  that  ask  Thee,  may  indeed  dwell  in  our 
hearts,  and  mould  us  by  the  power  of  thankfulness  for 
Thy  service.  May  it  be  true  of  us,  too,  that  we  delight 
to  do  Thy  will,  and  that  Thy  law  is  within  our  hearts. 
We  come  to  Thee  empty-handed,  sacrifice  and  offering 
Thou  dost  not  require;  Thou  hast  provided  it.  We 
come  to  Thee  to  receive,  not  to  give ;  we  come  as  those 
for  whom  the  great  offering  has  already  been  presented 
which  makes  all  ours  needless,  except  as  thank-offerings. 
And  we  pray  Thee  to  help  us  to  render  ourselves  to 
Thee  in  entire  surrender  and  devotion,  as  the  token  of 
our  grateful  acceptance  of  Thy  greatest  gift. 

O  Lord,  regard  each  of  us  as  we  are  here  before  Thee 
this  morning,  and  in  Thy  great  mercy  help  us  really  to 
draw  near  to  Thee.  How  often,  how  long,  and  how  far 
we  have  wandered  from  Thee  Thou  knowest,  and  we 
partly  know.  We  are  glad  that  our  brethren  do  not 
know.  We  pray  that  we  may  know  it  better ;  and  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  now,  in  Thy  grace  and 
according  to  Thy  promises,  move  upon  all  our  hearts 
and  bring  us  very  near  to  Thyself  in  grateful  love  and 
quiet  dependence,  and  longing  aspiration  after  Thee ; 
that  our  minds  and  hearts  and  wills  may  all  be  filled, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  17 

hallowed,  strengthened  by  Thy  felt  presence ;  and  that 
we  may  be  able  more  and  more  to  do  Thy  will,  and  to 
rejoice  in  Thyself.  We  need  Thy  strength  at  every  turn 
in  our  daily  lives,  and  we  bless  Thee  that  we  get  all  that 
we  need  if  only  we  will  take  it.  Lord !  be  Thou  near 
each  of  us,  our  Light  and  our  Salvation,  the  strength  of 
our  hearts  and  our  portion  for  ever.  And  help  us, 
whatever  burdens  we  have  to  carry,  and  whatever 
sorrows  Thou  layest  upon  us,  and  whatever  heavy 
tasks  we  may  have  to  bear,  whatever  perplexities  may 
gnaw  at  our  hearts,  whatever  difficulties  may  block 
our  paths,  help  us  to  cast  ourselves  into  Thy  out- 
stretched hands,  and  commit  the  keeping  of  bodies  and 
souls  unto  Thee  as  to  a  faithful  Creator  and  a  loving 
Father.  May  we  have,  in  all  times  and  in  all  conflicts 
deeper  than  the  strife,  the  peace  which  passes  under- 
standing and  garrisons  heart  and  mind. 

Take  us  now  into  Thy  loving  care,  forgive  all  our 
evils,  quicken  and  strengthen  in  us  any  little  spark  of 
good,  and  bring  it  to  a  flame.  Hast  Thou  not  promised 
that  Thou  wilt  not  quench  the  dimly  burning  wick  ? 
We  pray  Thee  to  tend  the  fire  in  our  hearts,  and  help 
us  not  to  quench  it.  We  pray  Thee  to  hear  us,  and  in 
Thy  mercy  to  accept  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 

X 

O  Lord  our  Father,  Who  hast  stored  for  us  in  Jesus 
Christ  all  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  and 
righteousness  and  power,  we  bless  Thee  that  the 
Storehouse  is  open,  that  the  box  has  been  broken,  and 
the  ointment  poured  forth.  We  thank  Thee  for  our 
access  to  the  wealth  of  God  in  Christ  our  Saviour,  and 
we  beseech  Thee  that  each  of  us  may  fill  up  our  empti- 


18  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

ness,  and  enrich  our  poverty,  and  strengthen  our  weak- 
ness by  laying  hold  of,  and  drawing  into  the  very 
substance  of  our  lives,  the  riches  of  God  in  Him.  We 
pray  for  grace  that  we  may  be  more  completely  and 
gladly  and  constantly  receiving  of  '  His  fulness,  grace 
for  grace,'  and  that  all  in  us  which  is  low  and  weak  and 
dark  may  be  lifted,  confirmed  and  enlightened  by  the 
inflow  into  our  poor  lives  of  the  triumphant  risen  life 
of  our  Saviour.  Help  us  day  by  day  to  find  that  He  is 
made  unto  us  wisdom  and  righteousness  and  sanctifica- 
tion  and  full  redemption.  And  in  all  our  daily  conflicts 
may  we  have  the  presence  of  our  Captain,  and  in  all 
our  daily  journeyings  may  we  have  the  guidance  of  our 
Leader. 

We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  knowest  our  hearts,  our 
circumstances,  and  our  needs,  as  well  as  our  desires,  for 
our  desires  are  often  false  and  our  needs  are  always 
real.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  regard  them  rather 
than  our  wishes,  and  that  Thou  wouldst  minister  to  us 
as  Thou  surely  wilt,  if  we  will  only  let  Thee,  of  the 
things  that  are  requisite  and  necessary  both  for  body 
and  for  soul.  We  cast  ourselves  upon  Thee.  If  any  of 
us  are  weighed  down  by  any  sorrow,  or  are  feeling  the 
desolations  that  sometimes  come  into  every  life,  or 
have  been  called  upon  to  part  from  the  desire  of  our 
eyes,  and  have  aching  and  empty  hearts,  we  pray  that 
Thou  wouldst  draw  near  to  such,  and  comfort  and  help 
them  to  take  the  comfort  that  God  gives.  We  bless 
Thee  that  we  do  not  need  to  doubt  Thy  loving  care  of 
us  and  our  dear  ones,  and  we  pray  that  we  may  stand 
firm  in  that  confidence,  not  only  when  the  sun  is  in  the 
sky,  and  all  the  winds  are  still,  but  when  clouds 
darken  the  heavens,  and  tempests  desolate  the  earth. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  regard  us  in  our 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  19 

various  duties  and  occupations,  and  keep  us  from  the 
snares  of  our  callings,  and  the  defects  of  our  qualities, 
and  the  weaknesses  of  our  characters ;  and  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  us  day  by  day  to  set  before  ourselves  more 
constantly  the  great  Pattern  after  which  we  have  to 
walk,  and  the  great  Reward  that  is  at  the  end  of  the 
journey.  May  we  live  by  Christ.  May  we  live  for 
eternity.  Watch  over  each  of  us.  May  we  make  all 
things  here  helps  to  the  truer  possession  of  the  un- 
failing treasures.  In  the  days  to  come,  be  they  few  or 
many,  bless  us  with  more  of  the  life  of  God  in  our 
hearts.  Speak  Thy  gracious  word  to  us  as  we  worship 
here  in  Thy  presence.  May  the  treasure  be  marred  by 
the  earthen  vessel  as  little  as  possible,  and  grant  that 
we  may  not  darken  counsel  nor  weaken  Thine  entreat- 
ing by  any  poor  words  of  ours. 

O  Lord,  we  would  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious 
care.  Be  near  us  now  to  bless  us ;  be  with  us  in  this 
act  of  worship,  and  answer  our  petitions,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XI 

Gladly,  O  Lord,  would  we  come  to  Thee,  as  homeless 
wanderers  to  our  home  ;  and  we  bless  Thee  that  unto 
all  generations  Thou  hast  been,  and  wilt  be,  their  habi- 
tation and  their  strength.  May  we  each  enter  in  now, 
by  lowly  faith,  by  longing  and  love,  by  obedience  and 
submission  ;  and  may  we  feel  that  we  are  indeed 
temples,  and  together  for  this  hour  a  temple  of  the 
living  God. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  regard  us  in  our  meeting  this 
morning,  and  as  Thou  hast  opened  Thy  heart  and 
Thine  ear,  ere  we  did  cry,  and  opened  Thine  hand  to 


20  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

bestow,  what  we  have  to  ask  Thee  for  most  is  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  us  to  take  the  things  that  are  freely  given 
to  us,  without  our  desiring  them,  of  God. 

Look  down  on  us,  we  beseech  Thee  ;  draw  us  to  Thy- 
self, and  help  us  with  purged  eyes  to  see  the  unseen 
things  and  to  lose  sight  of  the  things  temporal,  if  they 
would  interfere  with  our  vision  and  possession  of  the 
things  eternal. 

Hear  us  now,  mercifully  accept,  and  answer  us, 
through  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

XII 

Help  us,  O  our  gracious  God,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  come 
into  Thy  presence  with  the  offerings  of  our  hearts. 
Thou  art  not  worshipped  with  men's  hands  ;  Thou 
needest  nothing.  We  praise  Thee  when  we  bring  our 
empty  hands  to  Thee,  and  hold  them  up  in  faith  to  be 
filled  out  of  Thy  fulness.  And  we  would  recognise 
that  Thou  art  He  that  giveth  unto  all  men  all  things 
liberally,  and  art  indeed  the  giving  God. 

O  Lord,  let  Thy  love  be  upon  us,  and  such  of  its 
tokens  in  outward  things  as  Thou  knowest  to  be  best 
for  us ;  and  help  us  ever  rigidly  to  keep  our  desires 
within  the  limits  of  Thy  manifest  providence,  and  not 
to  mar  the  gifts  that  we  have  by  vain  murmurings  for 
those  that  we  have  lost,  or  have  never  possessed.  We 
would  come  to  Thee  now,  with  lowly  thankfulness  ; 
for  surely  when  we  measure  Thy  benefits  by  our 
deserts  it  becomes  us  to  accept  the  least  of  all  Thy 
gifts  as  the  manifestation  of  the  love,  great  beyond  all 
our  thoughts.  Thou  stoopest  from  Thy  Heaven.  Thou 
dost  not  deal  with  us  according  to  our  sins,  but  accord- 
ing to  Thy  own  heart,  and  the  depth  and  the  fulness  of 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  21 

Thy  own  loving  purposes.  So  we  have  to  render  thanks 
for  our  smallest  benefits,  but,  alas  !  Thine  assiduity  in 
giving  robs  us  often  of  our  thankfulness  ;  and  we  have 
become  so  accustomed  to  Thy  manifold  and  uninter- 
rupted light  that  we  do  not  recognise  it,  or  know  that 
we  are  walking  in  it,  until  sometimes  a  cloud  comes, 
and  the  beams  are  shorn. 

O  Lord !  may  we  not  lose  our  good  gifts  before  we 
understand  and  appreciate  them.  May  we  make  them 
a  thousandfold  better  because  our  clear  eyes  behold, 
and  our  grateful  hearts  recognise,  their  connection 
with  Thyself.  And  into  every  corner  of  our  daily  life, 
whether  looked  at  as  Thy  gift,  or  as  devolving  upon  us 
our  duties,  may  we  carry  the  strengthening  and  the 
calming,  the  purifying  thought,  that  God  is  here,  and 
that  we  rest  upon  Him.  We  come  to  Thee  this  morn- 
ing, especially,  with  devout  thankfulness  for  all  which 
this  day  has,  for  so  many  days,  brought  to  our 
memories,  of  Thy  greatest  and  most  wondrous  gift. 
We  thank  Thee  '  for  the  Christ  that  died,  yea  !  rather, 
that  is  risen  again.  Who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  Who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us.'  We  thank 
Thee  for  that  risen  life.  We  pray  that  even  whilst  we 
are  passing  the  time  of  our  sojourning  here  we  maybe 
sitting  with  Him  in  the  heavenly  places ;  and  may,  in 
the  depths  of  our  being,  partake  of  that  glorified  life  of 
our  Brother  and  our  Saviour.  May  it  be  true  of  us  that 
'  our  lives  are  hid  with  Christ  in  God.' 

O  Lord,  look  upon  our  gathering  now,  and  since  Thou 
hast  given  us  the  opportunity  of  bringing  our  own 
dying  embers  of  faith  and  love  together,  may  our 
united  supplications  break  into  a  brighter  flame ;  and 
may  we  find  here  that  whilst  Thou  hast  benefits  to  give 
which  only  those  who  are  left  alone  with  Thee  do  ever 


22  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

truly  receive,  Thou  hast  also  benefits  to  give  to  the 
great  congregation.  Give  us  these,  O  Lord,  and  help 
each  of  us,  bearing,  as  we  must  do,  our  own  individual 
burdens,  that  we  may  receive  from  Thee  the  common 
grace  w^hich  takes  in  our  spirit  the  shape  that  is  most 
required,  and  help  us  to  bear  each  his  own  burdens,  and 
so  far  as  may  be  his  brother's. 

We  pray  for  one  another,  therefore  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  be  near  each  of  us,  according  to  all 
the  variety  of  our  callings  and  our  circumstances  and 
characters.  Deliver  us  from  the  faults  of  our  qualities, 
and  from  the  temptations  of  our  vocations.  Deliver  us 
from  the  weaknesses  that  creep  over  us  all  by  reason  of 
associations  and  circumstances.  And  help  us,  day  by 
day,  to  renew  and  to  increase,  and  to  be  faithful  to,  our 
consecration  of  ourselves  to  Thee,  that  we  may  adorn 
the  teaching  in  all  things.  Let  Thy  counsel  guide  us, 
and  may  we  not  be  of  those  who  have  no  understanding, 
and  can  be  taught  by  nothing  but  blows  and  bridles. 
Guide  Thou  us  with  Thine  eye,  and  may  we  be  so  near 
Thee  that  we  can  see  what  that  eye  means,  and  catch 
at  once  its  directions  and  its  benedictions.  If  any  of  us 
have  any  special  weight  of  sorrows,  cares,  perplexities, 
losses,  regret  or  mourning  upon  our  minds  and  hearts, 
we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  come  near  to  such.  Thou 
emptiest  places,  but  it  is  that  Thou  mayest  fill  them. 
And  we  pray  that  we  may  ever  find  in  our  trials,  be 
they  great  or  small,  in  all  our  losses  be  they  reparable 
or  no,  that  God  Himself  is  our  gain,  and  God  Himself  is 
our  strength. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  all  Thy  faithful  servants 
who,  in  any  communion  and  in  any  land,  tongue, 
or  fashion,  are  this  day  trying  to  make  Christ's  glory 
shine  more  widely,  and  His  Name  to  be  more  loved  and 
trusted.     The  Lord  be  with  all  those  that  love  Jesus 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  23 

Christ  in  incorruption  ;  and  upon  all  faithful  efforts, 
however  humble  and  poor,  let  Thy  blessing  rest,  we 
pray.  Be  with  us  all,  and  may  our  meeting  together 
this  morning  be  a  help  to  each  of  us,  in  the  road  that 
we  ought  to  travel,  and  draw  each  of  us  nearer  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  help  to  make  us  in  some  small  measure 
more  like  Him. 

Give  Thy  blessing  to  us  when  we  try  to  meditate 
together  on  Thy  word,  and  guide  the  thoughts  of 
hearers  and  of  speaker,  we  beseech  Thee;  and  grant 
that  Thy  voice  may  manifestly  be  heard  even  through 
the  imperfect  instrument  to  which  Thou  hast  been 
pleased  to  commit  the  task  of  preaching  Thy  word. 
And  we  ask  that  here  Christ's  Kingdom  may  be  estab- 
lished and  His  name  magnified.  O  Lord !  in  like 
manner  bless  all  good  people  who  are  in  their  several 
ways  doing  the  same  work.  Establish  Thou  the  work 
of  their  hands  upon  them.  May  it  be  the  work  of  Thy 
hands,  that  so  Thy  glory  may  pour  into  Thy  servants. 

Now  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious 
care.  We  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  us  and  bless  us  ; 
accept  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  mercies  to  us,  and  still 
manifest  Thy  grace  and  love  in  its  strange  fulness  and 
condescension  to  such  poor  empty  lowly  creatures  as 
we  are,  whom  Thou  dost  exalt  and  enrich  by  the 
unspeakable  gift  of  Thy  dear  Son.  In  His  Name  we 
ask  all. 

XIII 

O  Lord,  Thou  art  our  All-in-all.  May  we  know  Thee 
for  such,  and  may  we  take  Thee  for  ours,  and  find  that 
Thou  dost  supply  all  our  need  according  to  Thy  riches 
in  glory  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  would  draw  near  to 
Thee  now,  empty,  to  be  filled ;  dark,  to  be  illumined ; 
weak,  to  be  made  strong;  low,  to  be  raised  and  sup- 


24  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

ported.  And  we  bless  Thee  that  beyond  what  we  can 
ask  or  think  Thou  art  exceeding  abundantly  able  to 
give,  and  dost  long  to  give.  We  have  often  hindered 
the  flow  of  Thy  mercy  and  power  into  our  hearts  and 
lives  by  our  own  faithlessness,  by  our  own  want  of 
desire  to  possess  Thee,  and  by  our  eager  distracting  of 
ourselves  over  many  things,  to  the  obscuring  of  the 
one  thing  needful.  But  we  beseech  Thee  at  once  for 
forgiveness  and  for  help,  that  we  may  understand 
better  how  all  our  wealth  is  in  one  pearl  of  great  price  ; 
and  may  be  willing  to  give  up  all  other  if  needful ;  and 
when  needful,  that  we  may  clasp  Thee  to  our  hearts 
and  keep  Thee  in  our  safest  treasure-house. 

We  would  draw  near  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  with  humble 
prayer  for  the  enlightenment  of  Thy  wisdom,  for  the 
firm  grasp  of  what  is  true,  for  hearts  submitted  to  Thy 
will  and  spirits  that  walk  close  with  Thee,  and  are 
therefore  strong  and  blessed.  We  pray  for  forgive- 
ness for  all  the  past;  we  look  back  and  see  many 
blunders,  many  shortcomings,  many  sins.  O  Lord, 
arm  us  against  ourselves,  lift  us  above  ourselves,  make 
us  willing  to  be  what  Thou  dost  will  us  to  be,  and  to 
do  what  Thou  dost  desire  we  should  do ;  and  do  Thou 
fit  us  day  by  day  for  all  the  work,  for  all  the  blessings, 
for  all  the  possibilities  of  our  daily  lives.  Keep  us 
from  temptation,  build  up  the  weak  places  in  our 
characters,  and  help  us  to  build  them  up.  Show  us  the 
things  where  we  fall  conspicuously  short  or  go  alto- 
gether contrary  to  Thy  holy  will.  And  do  Thou  grant, 
we  beseech  Thee,  that  we  may  have  no  hankering  after 
the  things  that  we  ought  to  get  rid  of,  and  no  unwill- 
ingness to  be  parted  from  our  weaknesses  and  our 
sins.  Thou  art  ready  with  Thy  mighty  word  to  discern 
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,  and  to  sever  the 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  25 

sinful  and  evil  growths  from  us.  We  pray  that  we 
may  submit  ourselves  to  Thy  grace,  and  more  and 
more  find  that  Thou  art  near  us,  helping  us  to  be  better 
than  we  are,  and  drawing  us  under  the  fuller  influence 
of  Thy  full  Spirit. 

Hear  us,  O  Lord,  in  these  our  prayers,  and  reveal 
Thyself  to  us  in  this  our  service,  accompanying  all  its 
parts  with  the  appropriate  blessing,  and  making  each 
of  us  to  feel  that  we  have  really  been  in  touch  with 
God,  and  have  got  some  blessing  from  His  open  hand. 
Hear  us  now  in  our  petitions,  forgive  our  many  sins, 
and  in  Thy  mercy  accept  and  bless  us,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XIV 

O  Lord  our  Father,  Who  hast  set  before  us  the  perfect 
'  love  which  suffereth  long  and  is  kind,  is  not  easily 
provoked  nor  soon  angry,'  but  beareth  all  our  evil 
ways,  and  hopeth  all  things  of  the  worst  of  us,  help  us, 
we  beseech  Thee,  that  we  may  be  '  imitators  of  God  as 
beloved  children,'  and  walking  in  love  as  Thou  hast 
loved  us.  Dwell  in  our  hearts  that  they  may  be  gentle 
and  good.  Dwell  in  our  minds  that  we  may  know  and 
love  and  hold  by  Him  Who  is  the  Truth  and  the  Life. 
Dwell  in  our  wills  that  we  may  run  in  the  way  of  Thy 
commandments  with  glad  hearts,  and  never  be  unwill- 
ing to  do  any  of  the  things  that  Thou,  in  our  con- 
sciences and  in  Thy  word,  dost  bid  us  to  do. 

Grant  that  this  hour  of  worship  may  be  full  of  bless- 
ings for  each  of  us.  Thou  knowest  what  each  of  us 
most  requires  in  the  spiritual  life.  We  can  but  par- 
tially interpret  our  own  necessities,  but  we  bless  Thee 
that  we  have  recourse  to  One  Who  understands  our 


26  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

needs  altogether.  So  we  would  not  dictate  to  Thee, 
O  Lord,  but  would  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  arm 
each  of  us  with  the  special  qualities  and  graces  which 
our  vocations  and  characters  and  circumstances  most 
require.  Be  near  any  of  us  that  may  have  special 
burdens  of  sorrow  or  solitude  to  carry.  If  any  of  us 
are  rejoicing  in  hope,  and  the  world  seems  bright  to  us, 
may  we  learn  not  to  be  dazzled  by  the  light,  but  carry 
a  full  cup  without  loss  or  spilling.  Whatever  be  our 
tasks  or  our  condition,  come  Thou  to  us,  and  we  shall 
be  lords  of  all  things,  and  fit  for  every  duty.  Abide  in 
our  hearts,  and  may  we  not  shut  their  doors  against 
Thee  ever.  Lead  us  by  Thy  grace  and  counsel,  and  be 
to  each  of  us  that  which  we  most  need. 

Now,  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  to  Thee  others 
than  ourselves,  to  pray  for  the  good  estate  of  the 
whole  Catholic  Church ;  and  to  beseech  Thee  that  all 
Thy  children  may  growingly  know  the  Father's  will, 
and  delight  to  do  it,  and  that  all  may  more  fully  dis- 
charge the  functions  which  Thou  hast  laid  upon  them, 
and  be  Thy  witnesses  in  the  world. 

We  pray  for  our  Sovereign  and  our  country,  and  all 
can  influence  its  action  or  opinion.  '  Give  peace  in  our 
time,  O  Lord.'  Turn  away  men's  thoughts  from  the 
false  glories  of  battle  to  the  conflicts  and  contests  and 
possibilities  of  Peace  which  '  hath  her  victories  no  less 
renowned.'  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
graciously  grant  that  the  perturbations  of  human 
society  may  drive  and  draw  many  to  Him  Who  alone 
can  speak  peace  to  the  nations,  and  give  rest  to  the 
world. 

And  now  we  pray  Thee  to  take  us  into  Thy  gracious 
care,  and  mercifully  be  with  us  as  we  wait  before  Thee, 
for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  27 

XV 

O  Lord  our  God,  help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  our 
hand  of  faith  may  indeed  grasp  that  strong  Refuge, 
and  that  our  souls  may  be  bound  close  to  Thee.  We 
thank  Thee  that  though  our  hand  be  weak  Thine  is 
strong.  Thou  dost  lay  hold  of  us  by  all  the  manifesta- 
tions of  Thy  love  around  and  within  us.  Thou  dost  lay 
hold  on  us  most  chiefly  by  Him  Who  is  the  Arm  of  the 
Lord ;  and  we  pray  that  we  may  never  shift  ourselves 
away,  or  wrench  ourselves  away,  from  that  loving  grasp 
wherewith  we  are  apprehended  of  God.  We  beseech 
Thee  to  help  us  rather  to  respond  to  it,  to  lay  hold  on 
Him  Who  lays  hold  of  us,  and  by  our  humble  faith 
answering  to  Christ's  great  faithfulness ;  and  working 
to  make  our  own  all  the  blessings,  the  sweetness,  the 
power,  the  purity  which  Thou  hast  treasured  for  the 
world  in  Him,  we  come  to  Thee  now,  O  Lord,  with 
thanksgivings  for  Thy  great  mercies  to  us.  Strange 
they  are,  and  numberless  too.  We  bless  Thee  that  we 
have  a  place  in  Thy  heart,  and  that  Thou  dost  make 
it  plain  to  us  that  we  have  by  a  hundred  blessings 
bestowed  upon  us  day  by  day.  And  we  beseech  Thee 
that  whatever  be  our  present  circumstances,  what- 
ever drops  of  bitterness  Thou  mayest  have  been 
pleased  to  mingle  in  our  cup,  we  may  still  take  it  as 
the  cup  of  salvation,  and  drink,  calling  upon  the  Name 
of  the  Lord. 

Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  all  circumstances  to  keep 
an  untrembling,  unchanging  faith,  and  at  all  times 
to  be  ready  to  do  Thy  will,  and  to  bear  Thy  will. 
Strengthen  our  weakness,  lighten  our  darkness, 
accompany  us  in  our  loneliness,  lead  our  feeble  feet  in 
the  paths  of  righteousness  which  Thou  hast  before 


28  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them,  and  give  us  ever 
to  see  the  recompense  of  the  reward,  and  to  be  drawn 
towards  the  great  Light  beyond. 

We  thank  Thee  for  this  opportunity  of  uniting  our 
prayers,  praises,  and  meditations  together  again.  We 
pray  that  we  may  find  not  only  our  fellow-worshippers, 
but  our  Father  and  our  High  Priest  in  this  service  ;  and 
that  all  of  us  may  be  drawn  nearer  to  Thee,  comforted 
and  helped,  rebuked  and  guided,  stimulated  and  inspired 
by  our  meeting  together  this  morning,  and  that  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  may  be  magnified  among  us.  Hear 
us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  this  our  prayer;  in 
Thy  mercy  accept  of  us,  and  forgive  and  bless  us, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

XVI 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  given 
to  us  Thyself  as  our  Pattern,  even  whilst  we  shrink 
from  the  duties  thereby  laid  upon  us.  But  we  believe 
that  Thou  dost  give  what  Thou  commandest  unto  them 
that  desire,  for  dear  love's  sake,  to  do  Thy  will ;  and  we 
would  take  these  great  words  which  still  linger  in  our 
ears,  and  dwell  in  our  hearts,  as  Thy  promises,  even 
more  than  as  Thy  commandments ;  and  believe  that 
Thou  dost  intend  that  we  all  should  be  partakers  of 
Thy  holiness.  O  Lord,  the  darker  our  thoughts  of  our 
present  selves  the  more  may  we  cleave  to  the  tran- 
scendent hopes  of  what  we  may  become  which  Thou 
dost  allow  us  without  presumption  to  cherish  ;  the  more 
may  We  seek  to  live  under  the  daily  sweet  pressure  of 
that  great  commandment  that  we  are  to  be  '  imitators 
of  God,  as  beloved  children.'  Help  us  that  we  may  so 
live,  forgive  us  that  we  have  not  so  lived.    Reveal  to  us 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  29 

more  and  more  of  the  grace  and  help  which  Thou  art 
ready  to  give  us  all,  in  order  that  we  may  be  holy  as 
Thou  art  holy.  And  strengthen  us  in  every  detail  of 
daily  life,  and  in  all  the  work  of  suppression  and  of 
stimulus  which  we  have  to  apply  to  the  good  and  the 
evil  of  it.  Help  us  when  we  try  to  meditate  upon  Thy 
truth  this  morning  in  our  worship,  and  when  we  try  to 
speak  a  word  in  Thy  Name.  May  it  truly  be  in  Thy 
Name.  May  it  be  felt  to  be  so  by  us,  and  may  the  power 
of  the  Lord  be  present  in  our  midst,  made  perfect  in 
man's  weakness. 

O  Lord  !  we  would  commend  one  another  to  Thy  lov- 
ing care  and  keeping,  and  beseech  Thee  that  whatever 
may  be  the  diversified  needs  of  us  Thy  servants,  the 
one  great  gift,  which  can  take  so  many  shapes,  may  be 
granted  to  us,  and  may  be  felt  by  each  of  us  to  be  the 
very  thing  that  we  require.  May  we  be  more  aware 
than  we  often  are  of  a  Divine  Helper  by  our  side.  May 
we  feel  the  touch  of  Thy  hand  with  us.  May  we  ever 
yield  to  that  touch.  Guide  us  in  all  our  ways,  comfort 
any  sad  hearts  that  are  here,  speak  peace  to  any 
troubled  minds  or  hearts.  According  to  our  characters 
or  circumstances  be  near  us  all.  Give  us  all  the  grace 
to  live  as  those  who  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious. 

We  commend  to  Thee  all  whom  we  love,  all  whom 
we  should  remember,  the  whole  of  Thy  servants 
throughout  the  world,  in  all  lands  and  communities,  in 
all  forms  of  faith,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
bless  them  and  help  them  to  be  true  to  their  convictions 
and  to  their  Lord,  and  guide  them  all,  and  us  with  them 
into  fuller  light.  And  help  us  that  we  may  possess  the 
blessing  of  those  who  do  the  things  that  they  know. 
We  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  care,  we  beseech  Thee  to 


30  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

accept  and  to  bless  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour. 

XVII 

O  Lord  our  God,  from  Thee  cometh  our  salvation, 
may  our  expectation  come  from  Thee,  and  be  fixed  on 
Thee.  May  our  souls  truly  wait  on  the  Lord.  May  we 
hear  in  our  hearts  that  power  belongeth  unto  God, 
and  also  mercy;  and  in  that  blessed  twin  assurance  may 
we  bring  our  prayers  and  our  trust  to  Thee,  and  rest 
in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him,  and  have 
such  desires  as  He  is  sure  to  give.  We  come  to  Thee 
with  thankfulness,  O  Lord,  for  Thy  hand  has  been 
laden  with  good ;  and  when  we  praise  Thee  we  would 
praise  Thee  for  all  the  way  by  which  the  Lord  our 
God  hath  led  us.  Our  song  shall  be  of  mercy,  and  of 
judgment,  which  is  mercy  too.  We  praise  Thee  for 
all  the  plain  and  felt  good,  and  we  would  not  withhold 
our  praise  from  the  good  which  has  a  bitter  taste. 
But  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  bring  us  into 
closer  unity  with  Thyself,  that  our  wills  and  Thine 
may  be  set  on  the  same  things  for  us,  and  that  we 
may  thereby  be  able  to  understand  the  loving-kind- 
ness of  the  Lord  when  He  changes  the  methods  of 
His  dealings,  but  preserves  the  one  purpose  of  His 
grace. 

O  Lord !  look  upon  the  cold  hearts  which  we  bring 
to  Thee  now  to  be  warmed,  the  feeble  faith  which  we 
would  fain  have  strengthened,  the  desires  which  have 
need  to  be  far  stronger  in  order  to  bring  down  Thy 
blessings.  We  come  to  Thee  with  confession  as  well 
as  with  thanksgiving ;  we  feel  that  we  have  set  up  in 
our  hearts  many  false  images,  and  that  we  have 
turned  away  from  Thee  far  too  often,  and  have  sought 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  31 

in  broken  cisterns  for  what  we  can  only  find  in  the 
fountain  of  living  water.  But  we  pray  for  Thy 
pardoning  mercy,  and,  O  Lord !  if  we  dare  say  it,  we 
pray  still  more  for  Thy  purifying  grace,  for  Thy  con- 
firming steadfast  spirit,  and  beseech  Thee  that  we 
may  be  kept  more  constantly  on  the  level  of  our 
highest  selves,  and  that  these  highest  selves  may  be 
drawn  ever  higher  and  nearer  to  Thee.  We  pray  for 
guidance,  for  surely  we  are  blind  and  dark.  We  pray 
for  strength,  for  if  we  have  any  power  it  is  too  much 
for  ill,  and  all  the  strength  is  Thine  both  for  doing  and 
for  willing  that  which  is  good.  Come  to  us,  then,  we 
pray  Thee,  that  we  may  strongly  resolve,  and  resolutely 
perform,  the  things  that  are  pleasing  in  Thy  sight. 
Deliver  us  from  all  the  oppression  of  our  own  faults, 
and  past  evils.  May  they  not  have  dominion  over  us. 
Lead  us,  we  pray  Thee,  into  a  large  land  of  liberty  and 
light  and  life,  and  may  we  walk  before  Thee  there 
with  glad  hearts.  We  praise  Thee  for  Thy  love  ;  we 
thank  Thee  for  the  assurance  of  it,  which  we  have. 
We  bless  Thee  for  Him  Who  is  its  seal  and  pledge,  and 
its  channel  to  us;  and  we  ask  that  we  may  be  more 
entirely  and  continually  knit  to  Jesus  Christ  in  faith, 
love,  fellowship,  and  obedience,  and  so  may  be  brought 
more  fully  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Father  and  of  the 
Son. 

O  Lord!  regard  us  in  our  morning's  worship.  Be 
near  us,  receive  us  graciously,  so  will  we  render  to 
Thee  the  sacrifice  of  praise,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 

XVIII 
Bring  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  a  clear  vision 
of  the  world  and  the  things  unseen,  and  to  a  right 


32  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

comparison  of  their  value  with  that  of  the  things  seen 
and  temporal.  May  we  learn  and  practise  the  belief 
that  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  posses- 
sions, but  in  fellowship  with  Thyself.  And  to  us  may 
it  more  and  more  be  true  that  everything  is  precious 
in  the  measure  in  which  it  leads  us  to  our  true  riches, 
the  wealth  and  the  fulness  of  God. 

O  Lord,  Thou  knowest  how  hard  it  is  for  us  day  by 
day  to  keep  ourselves  at  that  height  of  serene  con- 
templation of  Time  and  Eternity,  Earth  and  Heaven, 
the  world  and  God,  to  which  we  sometimes  attain. 
And  we  pray  for  Thy  grace  to  aid  us  that  it  may 
become  more  and  more  our  settled  conviction,  opera- 
tive in  our  lives,  that  Thou  art  the  Truth  of  our  hearts 
and  our  Portion  for  ever.  Forgive,  we  pray  Thee,  all 
our  wanderings,  our  unworthiness,  our  falling  below 
our  own  knowledge  of  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  how 
we  ought  to  live.  And  enlighten  us,  and  not  only 
enlighten  us  but  inspire,  that  we  may  do  the  things 
which  we  know,  and  possess  the  benediction  which  the 
Lord  has  uttered  on  such. 

We  pray  for  Thy  gracious  help  in  our  worship  of 
this  morning,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
teach  us  how  to  hear  and  to  speak  Thy  word.  Be  to 
us  a  mouth  and  wisdom,  give  the  hearing  ear,  the 
docile  heart,  the  cheerful  will.  And  may  glad 
obedience  follow  the  reception  of  Thy  message. 
Bless  each  of  us  here  before  Thee,  as  our  several  con- 
ditions and  characters  may  require ;  and  give  each  of 
us  the  gifts  that  we  need  for  the  daily  contest,  for  the 
daily  march,  for  the  daily  duty  and  growth  in  grace. 
If  any  of  us  have  sorrows  in  our  hearts,  Thou  art  the 
Lord  that  healest.  Thou  delightest  to  bind  up  the 
wounds  which  Thou  hast,   in  Thy  loving  providence 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  33 

made.  May  we  never  spurn  the  balm  which  Thou  dost 
provide,  nor  seek  the  futile  solace  of  earthly  things. 
Be  near  each  of  us  in  our  temptations,  in  our  joys,  in 
our  work  ;  dwell  in  our  homes,  move  upon  our  hearts. 
Be  with  us  in  our  trades  and  professions,  and  in  all 
our  occupations  and  walks  in  life ;  and  help  us  to  adorn 
the  teaching  in  all  things,  and  to  shew  Whose  we  are, 
and  Whom  we  serve. 

Draw  near  to  us  now,  and  bless  all  our  fellow- 
worshippers  and  fellow-believers  throughout  the 
world.  Be  with  all  of  us  who  are  seeking  the  truth, 
all  who  are  trying  to  do  the  right,  all  who  are 
endeavouring  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ 
throughout  the  world;  and  all  who,  in  any  way,  are 
seeking  unselfishly  to  help  their  fellows.  We  pray  that 
Thy  Kingdom  may  come,  in  our  hearts,  in  our  own 
land,  amongst  the  churches  that  profess  to  be  Christ's, 
in  this  England  and  throughout  the  world.  And  now, 
O  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves  to  Thee,  and 
pray  Thee  to  accept  and  bless  us,  for  our  Lord  and 
Saviour's  sake. 

XIX 

O  Lord,  we  thank  Thee  that  though  Thou  art  the  High 
and  Holy  One,  far  above,  and  separate  from,  our  lowli- 
ness and  limitations,  we  can  come  near  to  Thee,  and 
draw  close  to  Thy  presence,  and  find  our  Home  in  Thy 
heart.  We,  too,  would  sing  of  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  for 
ever,  and  bless  Thee  for  all  the  manifestations  of  Thy 
loving  heart  which  Thou  dost  make  to  us ;  and  would 
pray  for  eyes  to  see,  and  hearts  to  welcome,  the  revela- 
tion of  Thyself,  the  open  secret  that  is  all  around  us.  May 
we  never  be  of  those  who  walk  in  darkness  even  when 
drenched  with  Thy  light.    May  we  never,  for  lack  of 

o 


34  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

insight  and  sympathy,  look  upon  Thy  works  and  see 
nothing  of  Thee  in  them.  May  our  hearts  be  more  and 
more  filled  with  God,  and  may  Thy  great  Name  interpret 
for  us  all  difficulties,  strengthen  us  for  all  duties,  be  the 
very  life  of  our  joys  and  our  consciousness. 

We  come  to  Thee  with  thankfulness  for  the  many 
mercies  which  we  have  each  received  from  Thee,  and 
for  the  common  blessings  which  belong  to  us  all.  And 
we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to-day,  whatever 
may  be  our  special  circumstances,  or  the  burdens  that 
any  of  us  may  have  to  carry,  to  enter  into  the  fulness 
of  the  rest  of  God,  and  to  make  our  own  the  abundant 
blessings  stored  for  us  in  this  day  and  in  this  service. 
Be  near  each  of  us,  we  pray  Thee,  and  make  our 
worship  this  morning  full  of  power  and  blessing  for  us. 
May  we  be  drawn  nearer  to  Thee,  may  our  eyes  be 
opened  that  we  may  behold  the  things  that  are  unseen 
and  eternal,  and  so  be  delivered  from  the  tyranny  and 
the  misery  of  the  things  seen  and  temporal. 

We  pray,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  wouldst  teach  all  our 
hearts  as  we  bow  here  before  Thee,  and  wouldst  help 
us  to  enter  into  all  the  blessedness  which  Thou  dost 
mean  us  to  find  in  our  gathering  of  ourselves  together 
thus.  Thou  hast  been  our  help  in  days  that  are  gone 
by ;  and  we  would  look  forward  with  quiet  hope,  know- 
ing that  whatsoever  the  future  may  take  away  it 
cannot  take  Thee  away,  and  knowing  that  from  what- 
ever we  may  be  parted  by  the  changes  of  life,  and  the 
great  change  of  death,  neither  life  nor  death,  nor  things 
present  nor  things  to  come,  can  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  May  we 
be  thus  indissolubly  united  to  that  great  force  which 
moves  the  Universe,  and  may  we  there  find  our  true 
life,  our  peace  and  joy. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  35 

O  Lord !  be  near  each  of  us  this  morning ;  accept  us 
as  we  come  to  Thee  now ;  in  Thy  great  mercy  forgive 
all  our  sins,  and  grant  us  the  help  of  Thy  Divine  Spirit 
that  our  meeting  together  may  not  be  in  vain  because 
it  is  in  the  Lord.  Hear  us,  accept  and  answer  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  for  our  Saviour  Christ's  sake. 


XX 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  God,  Who  dost  give  strength  to 
them  that  desire  it  to  run  in  the  way  of  Thy  command- 
ments, with  enlarged  hearts,  come  to  us,  and  give  us 
the  power  to  do  Thy  will.  We  beseech  Thee  that  all 
these  great  injunctions  which  we  have  been  reading 
may  be  the  very  guides  of  our  lives,  and  may  shape  and 
mould  not  only  our  doings  but  our  inmost  selves.  May 
our  lives  indeed  be  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  and  the  deep 
roots  of  them  strike  far  beneath  the  things  that  are  on 
the  earth.  Help  us  that  day  by  day  we  may  increas- 
ingly set  our  affections  and  our  minds  by  it ;  and  seek, 
by  effort  and  aspiration,  the  things  that  are  above, 
where  Christ  is,  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

O  Lord  !  look  upon  us  here  before  Thee  now  ;  give  to 
each  of  us  from  Thine  own  great  storehouses  the 
special  gifts  that  we  may  require  not  only  for  this  hour 
of  worship,  but  for  the  struggles  and  the  difficulties  of 
daily  life.  If  any  of  us  have  any  special  burdens  laid 
upon  us,  of  endurance  or  of  toil,  do  Thou  help  us  in  our 
work;  and  in  our  suffering  give  the  patience  which 
never  murmurs,  give  the  courage  which  never  falters  ; 
may  we  run  the  race  set  before  us ;  and  however  rough 
the  road  is,  may  our  eyes  be  fixed  upon  Christ,  Who  for 
the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him  endured  the  Cross, 
and  despised  the  shame. 


36  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Help  us  day  by  day,  and  do  Thou  be  near  us  in  all  the 
variety  of  our  conditions  and  circumstances.  We  pray 
for  all  the  sad  and  the  burdened,  for  all  the  weak  and 
the  weary,  for  all  the  glad  and  the  hopeful,  and  for  each 
in  Thy  presence,  that  we  may  each  hold  communion 
with  Thee,  and  in  fellowship  with  Thyself  may  find  all 
that  we  require.  Give  us  strength  for  our  daily  duties, 
of  whatever  kind  these  may  be,  and  abide  with  us  in  all 
the  changing  circumstances,  that  we  may  have  the 
unchanging  treasure  in  Thyself. 

And  now.  Lord,  we  would  commend  to  Thee  all  whom 
we  love ;  all  our  brethren  in  the  faith  of  every  com- 
munion and  of  every  land;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that 
Christ's  people  may  understand  Him  and  one  another 
better,  and  may  be  drawn  nearer  to  each  other,  and 
may  be  led  more  and  more  to  live  the  lives  that  He 
would  have  them  live,  and  to  show  forth  the  praises  of 
Him  that  hath  called  them  out  of  darkness  into  His 
marvellous  light.  May  all  Thy  professed  servants  be 
mirrors  and  imitators  of  Thee,  and  show  forth  Thy 
holy  Name.  Take  us  into  Thy  care ;  bless  us  as  we  wait 
before  Thee ;  accept  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  past 
mercies,  and  still  be  near  us  and  keep  us,  for  Christ 
our  Saviour's  sake. 


XXI 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  have  not  only  to  look  to  Thee  for 
answers  but  also  for  supplications ;  and  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  move  upon  our  hearts,  and  draw  our 
desires  away  from  vanities  to  fix  them  upon  Thyself. 
We  would  seek  most  earnestly  for  the  highest  things, 
we  would  desire  Thy  best  gifts  most,  and  we  beseech 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  listen  and  wouldst  help  us. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  37 

Set  us  free,  O  Lord,  from  the  deceits  and  shows  of  Time. 
Deliver  us  from,  our  tendencies  to  idolatry  of  the 
things  seen  and  temporal,  and  from  the  fault  which 
we  are  so  prone  to  commit  of  setting  the  creature  on 
the  throne  of  the  Creator,  and  diverting  from  Thee 
to  it  our  love  and  admiration  and  our  longing  and 
trust. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  in  our 
public  worship.  We  know  that  if  we  regard  iniquity  in 
our  hearts  the  Lord  will  not  hear  us.  But  though  we 
are  conscious  of  much  that  is  contrary  to  Thy  holy  will, 
yet  we  bless  Thee  that  we  too  can  say  '  Blessed  be  God 
which  hath  not  turned  away  my  prayer  nor  His  mercy 
from  me.'  O  Lord !  Thou  art  near  us,  we  believe,  and 
Thou  wilt  help  us.  We  would  bring  ourselves  to  Thee, 
and  submit  ourselves  to  Thy  dealings,  to  the  touches  of 
Thy  grace,  and  the  monitions  of  Thy  providence ;  and 
beseech  Thee  that  one  and  the  other  may  be  blessed  in 
order  to  bring  us  all  nearer  to  Thyself,  and  to  draw  us 
away  from  the  vanities  of  life. 

O  Lord !  cleanse  our  hearts,  we  beseech  Thee,  and 
plant  within  them,  dominant  and  deep,  the  highest 
principles  of  Thy  Revelation,  the  greatest  truths  of  Thy 
grace,  Thy  own  sweetness  and  all-sufficiency  mani- 
fested in  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.  And  grant  that 
we  may  not  be  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision,  but 
since  Thou  dost  deign  to  reveal  Thyself  to  us  may  our 
hearts  be  ever  drawn  towards  that  great  light,  and 
following  it  may  we  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  ever- 
more have  the  light  that  guides  and  leads  to  life.  We 
beseech  Thee  to  cleanse  our  evil,  to  forgive  our  sins,  to 
disclose  to  us  by  that  candle  of  the  Lord  which 
searcheth  the  inmost  secrets  of  the  heart  all  the 
lurking  evils  of  which  we  ourselves  may  be  unaware. 


38  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

though  they  may  be  monstrous  and  plain  to  others. 
We  ask  for  self-knowledge ;  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst 
teach  us  what  we  are;  that  Thou  wouldst  teach  us, 
too,  what  we  may  become ;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that 
Thy  good  Spirit  in  us  may  keep  us  from  self-com- 
placency and  from  despair,  and  show  us  plainly  all  that 
we  ought  not  to  be,  and  all  that  we  ought  to  be.  We 
ask  Thee  to  forgive ;  we  ask  Thee  to  strengthen,  to 
confirm,  to  settle,  to  ennoble  us.  And  we  cast  our 
hopes  and  confidence  upon  Thee,  since  we  bring  our 
prayer  through  Him  in  Whom  Thou  hast  shown  us 
what  is  Thy  will  for  the  world  ;  and  by  Whose  sacrifice 
our  sins  can  all  be  taken  away,  and  through  the  spirit 
of  Whose  life  we  too  may  live  free  from  condemnation 
and  die  to  sin. 

We  beseech  Thee,  then,  to  draw  near  to  us  this  morn- 
ing, and  to  bless  each  of  us  according  to  our  several 
parts  in  this  service.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  dost 
permit  us  thus  to  gather  ourselves  together.  We  pray 
that  our  assembling  may  never  be  for  the  worse ; 
always  for  the  better.  Let  Thy  grace  descend  upon  us 
now,  O  Lord,  and  may  we  find  that  it  is  no  vain  thing 
to  call  upon  the  Lord. 

Hear  us  ;  accept  our  thanks  for  Thy  wondrous  mercy ; 
teach  us  the  thankfulness  that  shall  ever  come  back  to 
give  glory  to  God  when  we  find  ourselves  suddenly 
possessed  of  great  blessings,  or  delivered  from  great 
evils.  And  in  all  time  of  our  tribulation,  in  all  time  of 
our  wealth,  when  we  are  planning  and  purposing,  when 
we  are  full  of  hope  and  anticipation,  when  we  are 
struggling  with  the  difficulties  of  realisation,  when  we 
are  sorrowing  over  the  irrevocable  past.  In  all  times 
help  us  to  come  near  to  Thee,  in  Whom  all  changing 
circumstances  may  be  harmonised  and  made  blessed, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  39 

and  Who  alone  changest  never,  but  art  the  same  Friend 
and  Helper  of  us  all.  We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  to 
grant  us  Thy  blessing  in  our  worship  this  morning,  and 
to  accept  and  answer  us,  through  Christ  our  Saviour. 


XXII 

O  Lord,  Who  art  our  God  and  our  Father,  ever  ready  to 
hear  us,  and  ever  more  willing  to  give,  and  to  give 
more  than  we  are  to  ask  or  to  receive.  May  the 
abundant  supplies  of  Thy  grace  not  be  spilled  by  us 
or  wasted,  or  not  taken  up  and  into  ourselves.  We 
sometimes  cry  to  Thee  for  what  Thou  hast  given  to  us, 
and  what  we  should  only  ask  Thee  to  help  us  to  take. 
We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  not  wait  to  be  besought, 
and  Thou  dost  forgive.  We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost 
not  wait  to  be  asked  ere  Thou  dost  pour  out  Thy 
quickening  and  sanctifying  grace,  but  we  pray  that  we 
may  take  the  things  that,  before  we  ask,  were  freely 
given  to  us  of  God. 

O  Lord !  we  know  that  we  have  not,  often  not  only 
because  we  fail  to  ask  or  ask  amiss,  but  because  we 
keep  our  lips  closed  when  Thy  showers  of  blessing  are 
coming  down  on  us.  Forgive  all  our  sluggishness  to 
receive,  and  help  us  that  we  may  open  our  mouths  wide 
in  the  assurance  that  Thou  wilt  fill  them.  Strengthen 
us  day  by  day  for  all  the  variety  of  our  circumstances 
and  duties,  and  if  any  of  us  are  in  heaviness  through 
manifold  temptations,  may  we  find  that  the  trial  of 
faith  is  good  for  us  even  whilst  it  is  painful,  and  may 
we  learn  that  wonderful  secret  of  being  sorrowful  yet 
always  rejoicing.  Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  not  to  keep 
our  eyes  on  the  clouds  only,  but  on  the  clear  sky  and 
the  bright  sunshine.     May  we  not  be  so  engrossed  by 


40  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

our  difficulties  that  we  cannot  see  our  Helper,  nor  ever 
walk  with  our  sight  glued  to  earth  and  careless  of  the 
Heaven  above  us.  Be  Thou  near  us,  and  then  all 
things  will  be  well  with  us ;  and  our  days,  however 
burdened  and  laden,  however  sad  and  solitary,  will 
not  be  dark,  seeing  that  there  is  light  in  our  hearts 
from  Thee.  '  In  Thy  light  we  shall  see  light.'  May  it 
be  so  with  us  all. 

Look  upon  us  now,  help  us  to  enter  '  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  the  glory'  of  which  we  have 
been  reading,  and  to  take  the  right  road  to  it  by 
believing  in  and  loving  the  unseen  Christ.  We  pray 
Thee  to  help  us  in  our  worship,  to  speak  through  our 
lips  unworthy  as  they  are,  to  deliver  us  from  all  the 
errors  and  imperfections  that  cleave  to  us  when  we 
try  to  handle  Thy  holy  Word,  to  make  the  motives 
of  all  who  open  their  lips  for  Thee  this  day  simple 
and  pure,  and  to  give  to  all  Thy  servants  who  speak 
to  others  their  own  portion  in  due  season,  that  they 
may  believe  before  they  speak,  and  speak  because 
they  do  believe.  We  pray  that  Thy  grace  may  help 
us  in  hearing  as  well  as  in  speaking,  and  that  care- 
lessness and  indifference,  and  the  urgent  cries  of 
worldly  occupations  and  distractions  may  not  be  per- 
mitted to  deaden  Thy  voice,  or  to  deafen  our  ears ; 
but  that  we  may  hear,  and  hearing  may  remember, 
and  hearing  and  remembering  may  practise.  Lord  ! 
be  near  us  all  as  we  severally  require.  The  Lord  bless 
each  of  us  in  our  daily  life  and  struggles ;  the  Lord 
help  us  that  we  turn  not  aside  to  any  *  by-ends,'  nor 
be  discouraged  by  any  difficulties,  but  in  peace  and 
patience  by  continuance  in  well-doing  to  inherit  the 
promises. 

We  commend  ourselves  now,  O  Lord,  to  Thy  holy 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  41 

keeping ;  we  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  us  according  to 
our  different  necessities,  conditions,  and  requirements. 
We  thank  Thee  with  one  heart  for  the  mercies  received 
by  each,  and  pray  Thee  still  to  be  gracious  to  us, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XXIII 

O  Lord  our  God,  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  earthly 
vanities  may  depart  as  we  draw  near  in  outward  seem- 
ing to  Thyself,  and  may  the  light  divine  be  kindled  in 
our  hearts,  and  our  eyes  behold  the  Fountain  of  life 
and  fire.  Accept  our  praise,  O  Lord,  for  all  Thy  past 
mercies  to  us,  for  the  light  of  a  new  day,  for  the  sun 
that  shines  upon  Thy  world,  for  the  peace  and  quiet 
of  this  day  of  the  Lord,  for  all  the  associations  and 
remembrances  that  it  brings  to  us  of  past  times  when 
we  have  gone  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the 
yet  more  blessed  remembrances  that  it  brings  of  that 
day  when  Jesus  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  the  Con- 
queror for  us  all.  We  beseech  Thee  that,  as  we  draw 
near  to  Thee,  we  may  indeed  find  that  it  is  no  vain 
thing  to  wait  upon  the  Lord.  We  thank  Thee  for  the 
assurance  we  have  that  however  feeble  our  desires, 
Thy  heart  is  full  of  love,  and  Thy  hands  full  of  bless- 
ing. And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  open 
our  hearts  for  the  reception  of  what  Thou  dost  infin- 
itely desire  to  bestow  upon  us,  and  to  widen  our  desires 
to  the  measure,  if  it  may  be,  of  Thine  immeasurable 
gift. 

O  Lord !  we  bring  to  Thee  many  weaknesses,  many 
which  we  do  not  know,  and  many  which  we  do  know. 
We  bring  to  Thee  sins,  errors  and  practices,  habits  that 
are  contrary  to  Thy  holy  will.    We  bring  to  Thee  our 


42  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

feeble  aspirations  after  good,  and  the  often-broken 
resolutions  which  we  make.  We  come  to  Thee  as 
circled  with  temptations  which  have  allies  in  our  own 
weak  hearts.  We  come  to  Thee  knowing  that  we 
ought  to  long  very  much  for  what  we  long  for  very- 
little.  And  yet  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  consult  not 
so  much  our  wishes  as  Thine  own  great  heart  of  love 
to  us,  and  that  Thou  wouldst  'look  upon  the  face  of 
Thine  Anointed';  for  His  sake  receive  us,  cleanse  us, 
make  us  more  desirous  of  the  best  things,  and  less 
desirous  of  the  inferior  ones.  Help  us  day  by  day  to 
live  as  we  pray  when  we  are  wisest  and  nearest  to 
Thee. 

O  Lord!  we  come  to  Thee  with  thanksgiving  and 
with  confession.  We  feel  in  some  measure  our  weak- 
ness, but  alas !  how  difficult  it  is  for  us  when  we  speak 
to  Thee  to  see  it  as  clearly  as  Thou  seest  it,  and  as  we 
sometimes  see.  We  pray  Thee  to  make  our  confessions 
and  all  our  supplication  very  real  and  simple  and 
earnest.  We  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  not  deceive 
ourselves,  or  transgress  against  Thee,  by  saying  the 
conventional  words  that  we  have  learnt  from  others, 
but  may  speak  out  of  our  own  experience  and  hearts. 
O  Lord  !  forgive,  we  pray  Thee,  for  there  is  much  to 
forgive ;  quicken,  for  there  is  much  that  is  dead.  Help 
us  to  be  earnest,  for  we  are  often  unconscious  hypo- 
crites. Teach  us  Thy  holy  will,  and  make  that  will 
very  sweet  to  us ;  and  bow  ours  to  the  glad  acceptance 
of  its  yoke,  and  may  we  find  it  easy  because  it  is  laid 
upon  our  necks  by  love,  the  love  that  helps  us  to  bear. 
O  Lord,  we  pray  for  enlightenment,  for  emancipation, 
for  new  vigour  to  be  given  to  what  is  good  in  us,  for 
Thy  holy  and  gracious  Spirit  to  help  us  to  suppress  all 
that  is  contrary  to  Thy  will.    Teach  our  faint  desires 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  43 

to  rise,  and  may  we  pass  through  forms  and  the  out- 
ward signs  and  ceremonies,  and  come  into  the  secret 
place  of  the  Most  High,  and  feel  that  God  is  near  us  of 
a  truth. 

And  do  Thou  shed  Thy  blessing  upon  us  in  all  our 
worship  of  this  morning.  We  confess  much  lack  of 
proportion  of  heart  and  mind.  We  feel  that  what  is 
meant  to  be  help  is  often  hindrance,  and  we  tarry 
amongst  the  visible  things,  and  listen  to  men's  words, 
when  we  ought  to  be  passing  beyond  all  these  and 
coming  into  Thy  Presence.  O  Lord!  do  Thou  shed 
abroad  Thy  grace  upon  us  as  we  are  gathered  here 
together,  and  make  this  service  full  of  spiritual  im- 
pulse and  power  to  each  of  us.  May  none  of  us  come 
without  desire,  and  none  of  us  depart  without  posses- 
sion. 

We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  great  mercies  to  us  in 
days  gone  by.  We  bless  Thee  that  we  can  cast  our 
care  upon  Thee,  and  we  pray  for  grace  to  live  as  those 
ought  to  do  who,  though  they  have  no  continuing 
city,  have  an  abiding  God,  and  feel  His  presence  all 
the  more,  the  more  they  realise  that  here  they  are 
strangers  and  sojourners.  Be  near  us  now,  we  be- 
seech Thee  ;  grant  us  Thy  help  in  our  worship  ;  accept 
our  prayer,  our  praise,  and  our  act  of  confession ;  and 
take  us  to  Thyself,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour. 


XXIV 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  bring  our  emptiness  to  that  great 
storehouse,  Thy  riches  in  glory  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  we 
pray  that  Thou  wouldst  supply  all  our  need  ;  and  since 
Thou  hast  stored  more  than  enough  in  Him  for  each 


44  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

of  us,  and  hast  put  into  our  hands  the  key  of  the 
treasure-house,  may  we  not  waste  Thy  gifts,  nor  bring 
away  a  little  when  we  might  be  enriched  with  much, 
nor  be  content  with  small  supplies  out  of  an  infinite 
store. 

O  Lord,  we  draw  near  once  more,  and  would  desire 
Thy  help  to  fulfil  Thy  own  commandment  that  we  may 
be  careful  for  nothing,  '  but  in  everything  by  prayer 
and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  make  our  requests 
known  unto  Thee.'  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thy 
gracious  promise  may  be  fulfilled  in  our  quiet  hearts, 
and  that  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  understand- 
ing, may  keep  them  in  Christ  Jesus. 

O  Lord,  strengthen  us,  we  pray  Thee,  day  by  day  for 
all  Thy  will  concerning  us,  and  for  all  work  in  the 
world.  May  we  make  a  conscience  of  daily  seeking  to 
receive  into  ourselves,  and  to  work  out  in  all  things 
that  are  lovely  and  of  good  report,  the  life  of  Jesus 
Christ.  And  help  us  that  thus  living  the  God  of  Peace 
may  indeed  be  with  us.  We  look  back  upon  a  past 
which  we  sorrowfully  recognise  to  have  been  very 
imperfect,  and  often  contrary  to  Thy  holy  will.  But 
we  pray  that  whatever  may  yet  remain  to  us  of  this 
probation  life  here  we  may  fill  it  full  of  holy  deeds,  of 
devout  desires,  of  noble  purposes,  and  strenuous  resolu- 
tions, and  earnest  toil.  We  beseech  Thee  to  be  near 
each  of  us  in  our  daily  lives,  to  deliver  us  from  our 
own  weak  and  foolish  selves,  to  set  us  free  from  the 
limitations  which  we  bring  upon  our  best  selves  by  our 
indulgences  in  vanities  and  evil,  and  help  us  day  by 
day  to  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high 
calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

O  Lord,  if  any  of  us  have  special  burdens,  and  have 
brought  them  here  hoping  to  find  some  strength  to 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  45 

bear  them,  or  some  alleviation  in  their  pressure,  we 
pray  that  Thou  wouldst  come  near  to  such  and  would st 
help  them  and  us  in  our  ministration  and  service  to 
help  them  that  they  may  be  able,  with  renewed  vigour, 
to  set  themselves  to  the  race  that  is  set  before  them, 
bearing  the  Cross  of  their  Master.  And  we  beseech 
Thee  that  for  each  of  us,  according  to  our  diverse 
circumstances  and  necessities.  Thy  abundant  grace 
may  be  poured  out,  and  may  we  welcome  it  into  our 
hearts,  and  use  it  for  many  days  to  come. 

Be  near  each  of  us  in  our  daily  duties,  strengthen  us 
for  all  the  conflict  of  life,  for  its  disappointments  and 
its  weights,  for  its  wearinesses  and  losses.  And  grant 
that,  rough  or  smooth  the  path  that  we  tread,  it  may 
be  the  path  of  righteousness  which  is  ever  the  path  of 
peace,  and  the  right  way  to  the  City  of  Habitation. 

We  commend  ourselves  now  to  Thy  gracious  care. 
Give  our  feebleness  strength,  O  Lord,  we  pray,  and 
give  us  words  to  speak  that  may  be  true  and  mighty. 
Help  us  and  all  Thy  servants  this  day  who  try  to  open 
their  lips  in  Thy  name ;  that  aims  may  be  simple,  and 
that  self  may  be  forgotten,  and  the  power  of  Christ 
may  be  magnified,  and  the  presence  and  teaching  of 
Thy  Spirit  felt.  And  let  all  good  people  who  are  absent 
from  the  communion  of  Thy  saints  this  day  have  a 
little  sanctuary  wherever  they  are,  and  be  able  to  draw 
near  to  Him  Who  heareth  in  secret,  and  rewardeth 
openly.  Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  these  our  prayers ; 
pour  Thy  blessing  upon  us  according  to  our  several 
necessities,  forgive  all  our  sins,  and  grant  us  Thy 
gracious  presence  and  help,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour  Lord. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS 


XXV 


We,  too,  O  Lord,  would  ascribe  to  Thee  glory,  humble 
though  our  voices  be,  amidst  the  praises  of  Eternity. 
And  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  breathe  upon 
this  gathered  congregation  this  evening,  and  give  us 
all  to  aspire  after  Thee,  and  to  rejoice  in  Thee.  May 
we  rise  above  the  things  seen  and  temporal,  and  be 
brought  close  to  Thyself,  and  feel  that  Thou  indeed  art 
with  us  and  speaking  to  us.  How  much  we  have  for 
which  to  praise  Thee  we  never  can  measure,  but  we 
know  that  Thou  art  love,  and  we  believe  that  Thou  art 
our  Father.  We  would  recognise  Thy  gracious  hand  in 
common  things,  and  pray  that  the  daily  round  may 
not  shut  Thee  out  from  us,  or  us  from  Thee,  but  that 
we  may  be  able  so  to  pass  through,  and  so  to  use,  the 
things  temporal  that  finally  we  lose  not  the  things 
eternal. 

Regard  us  here  before  Thee  this  evening  ;  give  us  Thy 
blessing,  for  without  Thee  all  our  gathering  together 
is  as  nought ;  and  help  us  in  hearing  and  in  speaking 
Thy  word,  in  prayer  and  praise,  in  meditation  upon 
Thy  truth,  and  in  all  parts  of  this  service.  We  bless 
Thee  for  all  Thy  mercy,  thankfully  we  acknowledge 
Thy  constant  goodness,  humbly  we  confess  our  own 
ill-desert,  our  often  unthankfulness,  our  often  forget- 
f ulness,  our  often  misuse  of  Thy  benefits ;  but  we  pray 
Thee  to  receive  and  to  bless  us  now,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

XXVI 

We  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  in  the  confidence  that  Thy 
Name  is  Love,  and  Thou  hast  made  such  confidence 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  47 

easy  for  us  by  Thy  many  mercies  to  us.  We  feel  that 
if  we  did  rightly  observe  Thy  dealings  with  us  we 
should  understand  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord. 
We  beseech  Thee  to  help  us  that  we  may  rise  above  all 
doubts  and  discouragements,  and  all  in  our  own  hearts 
which  may  make  Thee  our  Dread,  and  that  we  may 
come  to  Thee  now  as  children  should,  rejoicing  to  be 
beside  their  Father,  and  feeling  that  no  place  is  so 
good  for  us  as  at  Thy  right  hand. 

O  Lord,  we  bring  Thee  many  sins  for  forgiveness ; 
we  do  need  Thy  cleansing  grace.  We  feel  when  we  are 
wisest,  and  understand  ourselves  and  Thee  best,  that 
we  have  fallen  far  beneath  Thy  purposes  concerning 
us,  and  have  often  gone  right  against  Thee.  Lord  ! 
we  have  in  some  measure  learnt  that  it  is  hard  for  us 
to  kick  against  the  pricks.  Thou  dost  lay  Thy  com- 
mands upon  us,  and  we  have  never  broken  them,  but  we 
have  suffered  for  it.  We  pray  Thee  to  help  us  that  in 
days  to  come  the  deepest  voice  in  our  hearts  may  be 
'  Lord  !  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? '  And  we  bless 
Thee  that  such  a  question  Thou  dost  never  leave 
unanswered.  May  our  ears  be  acute  to  catch  the 
whispers  of  Thy  will,  and  so  not  need  its  thunders. 
May  we  dwell  in  Thee,  and  love  the  Commander  so 
much  that  we  delight  in  all  that  He  commands.  We 
pray  for  more  of  that  love  in  our  hearts  which  is  '  the 
fulfilling  of  the  Law,'  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  each  of  us  here  to  open  our  hearts  for 
the  entrance  of  Thy  love,  that  it  may  constrain  us  with 
the  sweet  constraint  of  swift  obedience. 

O  Lord !  Thou  knowest  all  our  circumstances,  our 
weaknesses,  our  work,  our  difficulties,  our  duties. 
Thou  seest  many  struggling  hearts  before  Thee,  and 
some  sad  ones.    We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 


48  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

be  near  us  all,  and  if  in  any  measure  or  manner  we 
may  be  learning  the  vanity  of  things  here  below,  and 
may  be  called  upon  to  walk  in  darkness,  with  sorrows 
gnawing  at  our  hearts,  or  anxiety,  come  Thou  to  us, 
we  pray  Thee,  and  strengthen  us  that  we  may  appre- 
hend Thy  loving  purpose  even  in  the  darkness,  and 
that  the  night  may  be  light  about  us.  If  any  of  us 
are  fighting  with  temptation,  and  ready  to  yield,  O 
Lord,  confirm  the  feeble  hands,  and  strengthen  Thy 
servants  that  they  may  stand  fast  though  in  slippery 
places.  Do  thou  come  to  each  of  us  as  we  severally 
require.  We  cannot  speak  each  other's  specific  wants. 
We  thank  Thee  that  whatever  be  our  necessities  there 
is  infinite  fulness  in  Thee,  and  that  Thou  hast  the 
bandages  and  the  balm  for  every  wound,  light  for  all 
darkness,  guidance  for  the  perplexed,  strength  for  the 
weak,  hope  for  the  downcast,  and  a  Christ  for  every 
one  of  us.  We  pray  that  our  service  may,  in  some 
cases,  and  in  some  measure  in  all,  help  us  to  take 
firmer  hold  of  that  great  love  which  is  brought  to  us 
all  in  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  and  that  we  may  all  be 
indeed  His  servants. 

Be  with  us  when  we  try  to  speak  a  word  in  Thy 
Name;  take  away  all  unfitness,  imperfection,  and  weak- 
ness ;  and  give  us  some  message  which  may  be  felt  to 
be  Thy  message,  and  bring  forth  fruit  that  shall  be 
found  after  many  days  unto  Thy  praise  and  glory. 

Now,  Lord,  we  commend  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious 
care;  we  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  us,  to  bless  us  all, 
and  now  to  accept  and  answer  us,  through  Christ  our 
Saviour. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  49 


XXVII 


O  Lord  our  Father,  Who  art  ready  to  hear  us  always, 
we  beseech  Thee  for  the  Spirit  of  supplication.  And 
since  we  know  not  what  to  pray  for  as  we  ought,  we 
ask  before  all  else  that  that  Spirit  which  maketh  inter- 
cession in  us  may  move  on  our  heart's  desires  now, 
and  may  help  us  to  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts,  and 
to  trust  perfectly  that  when  we  ask  we  shall  receive. 
O  Lord !  we  need  Thy  gracious  help,  for  our  hearts  are 
very  weak,  and  we  are  ever  turning  aside  to  earthly 
things  and  to  creatures  ;  and  making  these,  which  are 
meant  to  help  us  towards  Thee,  barriers  to  shut  us  out 
from  Thee.  We  pray  Thee  for  that  good  Spirit  of 
adoption  whereby  we  may  indeed  cry  to  Thee  as  to  our 
Father,  and  may  feel  that  Thy  fatherly  love  is  very 
real,  and  is  possessed  by  us.  Give  us  that  Holy  Spirit 
of  promise  whereby  we  may  be  withdrawn  from  all 
earthly  and  sinful  desires,  and  sealed  unto  the  day  of 
redemption.  Give  us  that  strong  spirit  by  which  we 
shall  overcome  all  our  difficulties,  conquer  all  our  foes, 
be  fit  for  all  our  work,  and  be  strengthened  with  might 
within  for  every  part  of  Thy  purpose  and  command. 
Give  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  Spirit  of  truth  which 
shall  guide  us  into  all  truth,  setting  us  free  from  our 
errors,  delivering  us  from  our  prejudices,  taking  away 
from  us  all  false  thoughts  and  false  desires,  and  teach- 
ing us  to  cleave  to,  and  to  love,  and  to  live  by,  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Give  us,  we  pray  Thee,  that 
tender  Spirit  that  our  souls  may  be  purged  from  all 
the  harshness  and  hardness  of  self-regard,  and  made 
gentle  and  full  of  compassion  and  of  all  loving-kindness. 
May  we  thus  be  imitators  of  God  as  beloved  children, 
and  walk  in  love  as  Thou  also  hast  loved  us. 

D 


50  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Regard  us  as  we  are  here  before  Thee  this  morning ; 
and  shed  abroad  upon  us,  gathered  together  thus, 
Thy  gracious  influences  that  all  our  deadness  may  be 
quickened,  our  slothfulness  stirred  up,  and  all  that  is 
within  us  be  led  to  praise  and  trust  the  living,  loving 
God.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  gracious  mercies  and 
gifts  to  us ;  we  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  us  in  our  wor- 
ship of  this  morning.  We  commend  all  whom  we  love, 
and  one  another,  to  Thy  gracious  care  and  keeping  now, 
and  beseech  Thee  to  accept  and  bless  and  strengthen  us, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XXVIII 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  let  that '  rushing  mighty 
wind '  bring  life  to  us  too,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  make 
the  tongues  of  fire  be  ours ;  and  that  gracious  gift,  of 
which  these  are  but  the  emblems,  to  be  realised  in  all 
its  greatness,  by  Thy  professing  servants.  Thou  hast 
taught  us  that  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
he  is  none  of  His.  Give  us  more  fully  to  possess,  more 
earnestly  to  desire,  more  faithfully  to  use,  that  divine 
gift.  And  may  the  life,  and  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus,  make  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin 
and  death.  We  beseech  Thee  to  regard  each  of  us 
here  in  Thy  presence  this  morning ;  and  to  grant  to  us, 
according  to  all  the  variety  of  our  characters  and  con- 
ditions, the  gifts  that  Thou  seest  we  most  need,  not  so 
much  for  happiness  as  for  godlikeness  and  holiness. 

O  Lord !  strengthen  us  day  by  day  to  take  up  the 
burden  of  the  day,  and  to  receive  the  gifts  which  Thou 
dost  mean  for  the  day.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  dost 
draw  near  to  us  all,  and  art  waiting  to  bless  and  be 
gracious.     And  we  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  not  shut 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  51 

our  hearts  against  Thy  greatest  mercies,  but  may  ever 
bring  Thee  near  to  ourselves  by  fervour  of  desire  and 
by  faithfulness  of  service.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy 
blessings  to  us  in  the  days  that  are  gone  by.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  Who  hast  been  our  help  wouldst 
still  be  with  us  and  strengthen  us,  and  wouldst  fulfil 
Thine  own  promises  that  Thou  wilt  not  leave  the 
souls  that  put  their  trust  in  Thee  until  Thou  hast 
done  unto  them  that  Thou  hast  spoken  to  them  of. 
We  bless  Thee  that  we  have  the  assurance  that  we 
need  never  be  left  alone.  Help  us  to  set  the  Lord 
always  at  our  right  hands,  and  then  do  Thou  keep  us 
amidst  the  slippery  paths  of  life,  and  at  the  last  set  us 
at  Thy  right  hand,  where  there  is  fulness  of  joy  and 
pleasures  for  evermore. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  on  our  service 
of  this  morning.  We  would  cast  ourselves  on  Thy 
gracious  promises,  encouraged  by  the  remembrance  of 
many  past  times  when  Thou  hast  blessed  the  provisions 
of  Thy  house,  and  satisfied  us  with  the  goodness  of  Thy 
holy  place.  We  thank  Thee  for  days  gone  by  in  which 
Thou  hast  drawn  near  to  us  as  we  have  gathered 
together.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  be  with  us  once 
more,  and  still  wouldst  help  us,  and  pour  out  of  Thy 
blessing  upon  hearers  and  upon  speaker.  And  grant 
that  whatever  else  this  service  may  accomplish,  or  may 
fail  in  achieving,  it  may  be  successful  in  bringing  us 
into  closer  fellowship  with  Thyself,  and  make  more 
assured  and  deep  and  constant  our  possession  of  Thy 
holiest  gifts. 

Bless  us  in  our  daily  lives,  go  with  us  in  our  conflicts 
and  struggles  and  toils,  and  in  all  our  enjoyments  and 
pleasures  and  gladnesses,  and  in  all  our  rest.  And 
grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  through  all  the  variety  of 


52  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

our  earthly  conditions  we  may  be  brought  to  a  firmer, 
a  more  assured  possession  of  Thyself,  and  may  be 
changed  into  Thy  likeness  from  glory  to  glory. 

O  Lord,  we  pray  for  all  Christian  communities,  for 
all  Thy  servants  in  the  world,  for  all  who  are  seeking 
to  bless  their  fellows,  for  all  honest  earnest  workers  for 
God  and  man  ;  and  pray  that  motives  may  be  purified 
and  elevated,  and  methods  may  be  wise  and  suitable, 
and  that  Thy  blessing  may  come  down  upon  all  the  work 
of  Thy  people  in  every  form. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  abide  with  us  in  what  remains 
of  this  service,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour. 

XXIX 

O  Lord,  we  would  come  with  thanksgiving  for  that 
Angel  of  the  Covenant  in  Whom  Thou  hast  set  Thy 
Name.  And  we  bless  Thee  that  in  that  Name  which  is 
above  every  Name  we  have  all  and  abound.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  in  mind  and  heart  we  may  more  and 
more  explore  and  possess  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge,  grace  and  peace,  power  and  patience, 
liberty  and  love,  and  joy,  which  are  laid  up  for  us  in 
Christ  our  Lord.  And  we  ask  Thee  to  help  us  this 
morning  that  we  may  bring  ourselves,  with  all  our 
needs  and  emptiness,  into  contact  with  Thyself,  with 
Thy  fulness  and  all-sufficiency.  Give  us,  O  Lord,  we 
pray  Thee,  strength  for  our  weakness,  light  in  our 
darkness,  liberty  in  our  bondage,  life  in  our  death,  and 
all  that  we  need.  And  help  us  to  take  the  things  that 
are  freely  given  to  us  of  God,  and  to  experience  more 
and  more  how  true  it  is  that  Christ,  and  God  in  Christ, 
have  more  than  enough  for  heart  and  mind,  for  will 
and  strength. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  53 

We  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  with  thankfulness  for 
all  Thy  manifold  mercies  to  us,  by  which  Thou  dost 
brighten  every  day,  by  which  Thou  dost  reveal  Thyself 
to  us,  if  only  our  eyes  were  open  to  behold  Thee,  at 
every  moment,  and  in  every  circumstance.  We  confess 
that  we  have  often  stayed  our  thoughts  and  vision  on 
Thy  creatures  and  Thy  gifts,  that  we  have  often 
allowed  these  to  shut  Thee  out  from  our  thankfulness 
and  from  our  hearts.  But  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  us  in  time  to  come  to  see  through  the 
things  that  are  seen  and  temporal,  and  by  their  help  to 
see  more  clearly  the  things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal, 
instead  of  finding  that  the  present  is  a  veil  to  hide 
from  us  the  realities  at  Thy  right  hand.  We  acknow- 
ledge our  shortsightedness,  and  how  often  we  have 
yielded  to  the  temptation  to  forget  Thee  in  Thy  works, 
and  lose  sight  of  the  Giver  in  the  very  enjoyment  of 
His  gifts.  But  we  ask  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  draw 
near  us,  and  help  us  to  keep  ourselves  near  to  Thee, 
that  the  world  may  be  more  and  more  filled  with  God 
to  us;  and  a  very  common  sight  be,  as  it  were,  the 
bush  that  burned  and  is  not  consumed,  aflame  with 
God. 

O  Lord,  regard  us  here  before  Thee  this  morning. 
We  thank  Thee  for  permitting  us  to  gather  together 
thus,  and  we  believe  that  Thou  wilt  draw  near  to 
seeking  souls  as  Thou  ever  hast  done.  And  we  pray 
that  in  our  minds  and  hearts  there  may  be  the  desire  and 
the  feeling  after  Thee  which  is  no  more  '  if  haply  we 
may  find  Thee,'  but  is  the  assured  search  of  those  who 
know  where  to  get  what  they  seek,  and  know  that 
what  they  seek  they  will  assuredly  find.  May  it  be 
so  with  us.  We  are  not  straitened  in  Thee,  we  know, 
but  we  have  often  limited  Thy  power  to  give  Thyself 


54  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

to  us  by  the  narrowness  of  our  desires,  the  feebleness 
of  our  expectations,  the  coldness  of  our  confidence,  the 
tremulousness  of  our  faith.  We  beseech  Thee  to  for- 
give all  these  imperfections  in  our  seeking  after  Thee, 
and  to  shame  and  surprise  us  by  the  large  gifts  which 
Thou  dost  give  even  to  us  ;  that  we  may  have  Thee  in 
full  possession,  and  rejoice  in  the  possession,  and  be 
thereby  quickened  and  heartened  to  expect  more  from 
Thee,  and  to  seek  it  in  Thy  own  appointed  way. 

O  Lord,  forgive  our  many  sins ;  we  beseech  Thee  to 
draw  near  to  us  now  ;  in  Thy  grace  and  mercy  quicken 
and  help  us  that  our  worship  may  be  of  real  service  to 
ourselves,  and  truly  acceptable  to  Thee,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XXX 

O  Lord,  gracious  and  longsuffering,  grant,  we  beseech 
Thee,  that  none  of  us  may  fail  to  possess  that  blessing 
which  Christ  has  come  to  bestow  upon  us  too,  in 
turning  away  every  one  of  us  from  his  iniquities.  We 
pray  for  clean  hearts,  we  pray  for  grace  to  discern,  and 
to  detest,  and  to  dislodge  from  our  hearts  all  the  evils 
that  may  lurk  there,  and  which  often  are  unknown  to 
ourselves  ;  and  pour  upon  us  all  the  good  Spirit  which 
Christ  has  come  to  impart,  that  by  that  fire,  kindled  in 
our  hearts,  the  dross  may  be  melted  and  run  away  from 
us,  and  we  be  as  silver  tried  in  the  fire. 

O  Lord  !  we  need,  and  we  daily  feel  that  we  need, 
the  succour  of  Thy  mighty  power,  and  the  cleansing  of 
Thy  purifying  Spirit ;  for  day  by  day  temptations  are 
brought  to  bear  upon  us,  and  day  by  day  we  are 
pressed  upon  with  duties  and  cares  too  great  and  too 
heavy  to  be  undertaken,  and  to  be  upborne  by  our  own 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  55 

unaided  strength.  But  we  would  cast  ourselves  on  Thy 
mercy,  Who  dost  never  send  Thy  servants  a  warfare 
at  their  own  charges,  and  dost  always  give  what  Thou 
dost  command  to  them  who  seek  Thy  face.  Strengthen 
us  then,  we  beseech  Thee,  day  by  day,  to  run  with 
patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  and  to  tread 
firmly  in  the  footsteps  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation. 
Regard  each  of  us  according  to  our  several  require- 
ments. If  there  are  any  among  us  who  may  have 
special  cause  of  thankfulness  to  Thee  for  restoring 
and  healing  mercy,  we  beseech  Thee  to  accept  our 
praise,  and  to  help  us  to  devote  to  Thee  lives  which 
Thou  hast  continued  to  us.  If  there  are  any  of  us 
that  are  in  sorrow,  and  bearing  heavy  hearts  into  Thy 
presence,  speak,  we  beseech  Thee,  peace  and  consola- 
tion to  Thy  children,  and  grant  that  none  of  us  may 
put  away  from  ourselves  either  the  lessons  of  our 
sorrows,  or  the  healing  of  them  which  Thou  art  ready 
to  give.  And  do  Thou  help  us  all,  day  by  day,  in  the 
variety  of  our  circumstances  and  duties,  to  set  the 
Lord  always  before  us,  and  to  glorify  His  Name  in  our 
daily  lives. 

We  commend  to  Thee  all  that  we  love.  We  pray  for 
all  Christian  people  in  all  churches  and  forms  of  faith 
wherever  there  are  true  hearts  that  love  Jesus  Christ 
and  desire  to  serve  Him ;  we  pray  that  the  light  may 
broaden  and  greaten  for  them,  and  that  we  and  they 
may  all  be  drawn  nearer  to  our  Master  and  made  able 
to  apprehend  more  fully  in  our  minds,  and  to  reproduce 
more  fully  in  our  lives,  the  lessons  of  Thy  great 
gospel. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  all  work  done  in  the  world 
for  the  spread  of  the  Name  of  Christ  and  the  glory  of 
His  Kingdom,  and   that   Thou  wouldst  bless  all  Thy 


56  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

servants  who  are  at  work  in  divers  places  throughout 
the  world,  in  seeking  to  establish  that  Kingdom  which 
is  '  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit.' 
Hear  us,  we  pray  Thee  ;  in  Thy  great  mercy  forgive  us  ; 
grant  us  larger  blessings  than  we  ask  or  expect,  and 
help  us  in  this  hour  of  worship,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XXXI 

O  Lord,  Thou  art  good  and  ready  to  forgive  and 
plenteous  in  mercy  to  all  that  call  upon  Thee.  So  we 
come  to  Thee,  claiming  our  portion  in  these  great 
blessings  which  flow  to  men  from  Thy  goodness  and 
readiness  to  pardon,  and  abundance  in  mercy  for  all. 
Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  the  depths  of  our  hearts 
and  not  merely  with  our  tongues,  to  call  upon  Thee. 
We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  taught  us  Thy  Name, 
and  that  we  speak  not  to  an  unknown  power,  but  to 
the  God  and  Father  of  us,  because  the  God  and  Father 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Help  us,  O  God, 
we  beseech  Thee,  then,  to  draw  near  to  Thee  like 
children,  loving,  trusting,  not  afraid,  and  feeling  the 
blessedness  that  the  good  hand  of  the  good  Father  is 
upon  us  for  good.  We  look  back  upon  ourselves,  and 
our  past,  and  we  come  with  all  its  imperfections  and 
our  stains,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  turn 
away  our  hearts  from  vanities,  and  wouldst  help  us  day 
by  day,  with  increasing  decision,  concentration,  and 
success,  to  war  against  our  own  evil,  and  to  make  our 
own  the  large  blessings  which  Thou  hast  sent  for  the 
world  in  Thy  spirit  of  holiness. 

Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  Lord,  that  we  may  indeed  be 
Thy  servants,  devoted  to  Thee,  calling  upon  Thee,  and 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  57 

trusting  in  Thee,  and  living  according  to  Thy  command- 
ments. And  then  give  us,  we  pray  Thee,  all  the  bless- 
ings which  then  we  shall  be  fit  to  receive,  and  bestow 
upon  us  larger  and  constantly  increasing  gifts  of  Thy 
grace  and  mercy.  We  need  Thy  pardoning  love  ;  we 
thank  Thee  that  we  can  believe  that  before  we  call 
Thou  dost  answer,  and  that  Thou  art  in  Christ  reconcil- 
ing the  world  to  Thyself,  not  imputing  unto  them  their 
trespasses. 

O  Lord  !  help  each  of  us  rightly  to  understand  our 
need  of  a  pardoning  God,  and  joyfully  to  accept  the 
pardon  which  Thou  dost  send  us.  We  pray  that  none 
of  us  may  cling  to  our  evil,  and  none  of  us  bear  about 
with  us  consciences  either  speaking  reproach  or  dumb 
seers,  but  that  they  may  testify  for  us,  having  received 
from  Thyself  the  assurance  that  Thou  art  pacified 
towards  us,  for  all  that  we  have  done.  And,  O  Lord, 
surely  we  need  more  than  forgiveness.  We  wish,  when 
we  are  wisest,  to  be  set  free  from  the  dissensions  and 
the  dominion  of  our  own  evil,  and  to  be  strengthened 
to  resist  the  manifold  temptations  which  our  weakness 
finds  even  in  Thy  best  gifts. 

O  Lord,  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  drawing  ever  nearer 
to  Thyself,  to  be  ever  further  away  from  the  desire  to 
transgress  Thy  loved  will.  And  may  it  seem  to  us 
more  and  more  to  be  sweeter  to  be  in  harmony  with 
Thy  purposes,  and  to  yield  ourselves  to  Thee — be 
sweeter  than  any  other  sweetness  that  the  world  can 
give.  We  have  had  enough  of  trial  to  drink  from 
bitter  streams.  We  pray  Thee  that  we  may  treasure 
in  our  inmost  convictions  the  assurance  that  it  is  a 
bitter,  as  well  as  an  evil,  thing  to  sin  against  the  living, 
loving  God,  and  may  carry  with  us  that  conviction 
when  we  need  it  most — when  fiery  temptations  assail 


58  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

us,  and  our  own  weakness  is  ready  to  surrender  ;  then 
we  pray  Thee  come  to  us  and  help  us.  Set  our  feet 
upon  the  rock,  and  establish  our  goings,  and  may  we 
become  capable  of  receiving  such  sustained  strength 
because  we  have  a  wholesome  and  wise  distrust  of  our 
own.  It  is  when  we  say  that  our  feet  had  well-nigh 
gone  that  Thou  dost  stretch  out  Thine  hand  to  hold  us 
up. 

This  morning  we  beseech  Thee  to  look  upon  us  as  we 
gather  together  professing  to  seek  Thy  face.  May  it 
be  our  real  purpose  when  we  come  together  thus,  and 
whatever  other  motives  may  have  their  right  place  in 
drawing  us  together  now,  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that 
high  above  them  all,  and  more  conscious  to  ourselves 
than  any  of  them,  may  be  the  wish  that  our  fainting 
good  may  be  strengthened,  and  our  spirits,  wearied 
and  worn  with  contact  with  the  world  through  another 
week,  may  once  again  receive  food  for  many  days, 
in  the  strength  of  which  we  may  go  forth  again 
to-morrow  to  our  tasks. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  be  very  near  each  of  us  in  our 
worship.  We  thank  Thee  for  that  great  truth  com- 
memorated by  all  Thy  people  this  day,  the  Resurrection 
of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  in  which  all  our  death 
both  of  body  and  of  spirit  is  abolished,  and  in  which 
life  and  immortality,  life  here,  life  in  union  with  God, 
life  hereafter  in  blessedness  for  evermore,  are  sealed 
and  certified  to  faithful  souls.  May  we  each  enter  into 
all  the  joy  and  the  power  of  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ.  And  may  we  too,  in  our  measure  and  degree, 
reckon  ourselves  also  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin  and 
alive  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  In  Him 
we  pray  Thee  to  accept  all  our  petitions. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  59 


XXXII 


O  Lord,  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  that  we  can  cry- 
Abba  !  Father  !  Our  Saviour  prayed  so  in  His  agony, 
and  we  bless  Thee  that  through  Him  we  too  become 
sons  of  God,  and  can  take  that  great  Name  on  our  lips 
with  joy  and  filial  confidence.  Help  us  then,  we  pray 
Thee,  that  we  may  all,  by  humble  faith  and  true 
obedience,  enter  into  the  liberty  and  the  glory  of  being 
the  children  of  God.  And  do  Thou  deliver  us  thereby 
from  bondage,  from  servile  fear,  from  all  doubt,  and 
dark  thoughts  of  Thee,  and  make  us  feel  that  we  are 
heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ.  Lord ! 
truly  Thou  art  our  Portion,  and  though  we  have  often 
behaved  as  though  Thou  wert  not  ours  and  we  not 
Thine,  yet  in  our  deepest  hearts  we  have  been  sure 
that  there  is  no  abiding  for  any  of  us  except  in 
possessing  God.  We  pray  Thee  that  this  conviction 
may  be  deepened  in  us,  and  that  we  may  more  and 
more  claim  and  possess  the  riches  of  the  glory  of 
our  inheritance  in  Thee,  and  may  carry  into  all  our 
daily  life  the  assurance  that  we  have  Thee  for  our 
enduring  substance  and  our  righteousness. 

Give  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  the  help  which  Thou 
knowest  we  sorely  need,  and  we  hope  though  feebly 
we  all  sincerely  seek.  Teach  us  to  understand  the 
great  depths  of  Thy  law,  and  to  see  more  than  we 
ever  have  seen,  the  revelation  of  Thyself  in  Jesus 
Christ.  And  may  that  great  message,  which  we 
venture  to  take  upon  our  lips  to  proclaim,  be  given  to 
the  speaker  in  its  purity,  and  come  to  the  hearers  in 
its  power.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  all, 
bowing  here  before  Thee  this  morning,  and  coming  in 
contact  with  Thy  word  and  will,  to  bow  our  hearts  and 


60  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

minds,  and  not  only  our  hearts  and  minds,  but  to 
regulate  and  conform  all  our  action  to  what  we  know 
to  be  the  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  each  of  us  in  our  daily 
struggle  and  pilgrimage,  teach  our  hands  to  war  and 
our  fingers  to  fight,  be  the  covering  of  our  heads  in 
the  day  of  battle.  May  no  sin  have  dominion  over  us, 
and  no  evil  thing  lead  us  captive.  May  we  be  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us  ;  and  grant, 
we  pray  Thee,  that  into  all  the  darkness  of  the  darkest 
life  there  may  shine  the  bright  hope,  the  hope  of 
immortality.  We  pray  Thee  to  give  us  patience  to 
wait  for  all  which  Thou  dost  give  us  faith  to  expect, 
and  we  pray  that  our  waiting  may  not  be  indolent, 
but  that  we  may  ever  be  trying,  day  by  day,  to  bring 
into  our  lives,  characters,  and  conduct  more  and  more 
of  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come. 

O  Lord,  bless  each  of  us  in  our  several  spheres  of 
service  and  duty,  in  all  the  various  relationships  of 
life,  in  all  the  tasks  and  trials  and  joys  which  Thou 
dost  give  us.  May  they  all  tend  to  bring  us  nearer  to 
Thyself.  Make  us  masters  of  the  world  because  we  are 
the  servants  of  God,  and  may  we  find  Thee  everywhere 
because  we  take  Thee  everywhere.  And  if  any  of  us 
have  special  burdens,  and  seem  to  ourselves  to  stand 
in  special  need  of  Thy  help,  shape  Thy  gifts,  O  Lord, 
according  to  our  necessities,  and  give  to  each  of  us 
that  which  we  most  need  in  order  to  get  the  highest 
good  out  of  everything  that  befalls  us. 

We  pray  for  all  Christian  people,  for  all  communities 
of  such.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  strengthen  the 
hands  and  purify  the  hearts  of  Thy  servants,  and  that 
Christian  men  by  Christian  lives  may,  in  their  own 
spheres,  be  the  apostles  of  Jesus  Christ.     And  now  we 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  61 

beseech  Thee  to  bless  us,  to  forgive  all  our  sins,  and  to 
grant  us  Thy  help  and  presence  as  we  worship  this 
morning,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

XXXIII 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  and  ever-present  and 
loving  Friend,  draw  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  near  to  Thy- 
self now,  for  we  feel  that  we  need  Thy  help  to  lift  up 
our  hearts'  desires  to  Thee,  and  to  leave  behind  and 
beneath  us  the  things  of  time  and  sense.  Four  into 
our  minds  some  clear  and  blessed  thoughts  of  Thyself, 
not  only  in  Thy  glory  but  in  Thy  gentleness  which 
makes  us  great.  And  fulfil  Thine  own  promises  of 
speaking  to  our  hearts  that  they  may  return  loving 
answers  to  Thee.  We  feel,  O  Lord,  that  the  cares  of 
this  world,  and  the  necessary  duties  that  have  come 
upon  us,  have  too  often  drawn  us  away  from  Thee; 
and  we  gather  this  morning  wearied  with  our  day's 
work,  and  finding  it  hard  to  rise  above  our  ordinary 
selves,  and  to  enter  into  Thy  presence.    O  Lord, 

'  Kindle  a  flame  of  sacred  love 
In  these  cold  hearts  of  ours.' 

And  help  us  now  to  gather  ourselves  together,  and 
turn  our  faces  to  seek  the  Lord. 

We  bless  Thee,  Father,  for  all  Thy  mercies  to  us. 
Surely  Thou  dost  seek  to  draw  us  to  Thyself  lovingly, 
with  wise  surprises  in  Thy  mercy,  and  wonders  in  Thy 
continual  grace  besetting  us  behind  and  before.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  we  may  recognise  more  fully  the 
movements  of  Thy  hand  in  all  our  daily  affairs,  and  be 
concerned  to  find  out  the  deepest  meaning  of  these, 
and  to  draw  from  them  the  highest  blessings.  And 
may  we  always  believe  and  feel  that  they  are  working 


62  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

together  for  our  good,  and  that  the  will  of  God  in 
them  all  is  our  sanctification.  O  cleanse  our  hearts, 
and  help  us  to  cleanse  them ;  strengthen  in  us  all  the 
feeble  good,  and  cast  out  all  the  strong  evil. 

Give  us,  O  Lord,  the  grace  to  live  according  to  our 
highest  thoughts,  and  make  these  highest  thoughts 
more  in  accordance  with  Thy  holy  will,  and  Thy  blessed 
manifestations  of  Thyself.  Teach  us  the  rigid  and  wise 
judgment  of  ourselves.  May  we  examine  ourselves,  to 
find  there  all  that  is  discordant  with  Thy  holy  will  and 
therefore  disturbing  our  peace  and  rest,  and  give  us 
grace  to  cast  it  out.  We  are  very  apt  to  read  ourselves 
wrongly,  and  leniently  to  interpret  our  own  faults  and 
failures ;  and  because  they  are  ours,  and  natural  to  us, 
they  blind  our  eyes  and  silence  our  consciences  often. 
We  pray  for  a  clearer  vision  of  all  we  ought  to  be,  and 
might  be.  May  no  self-love  ever  come  between  us 
and  the  clear  sight  of  duty  and  transgression.  Help  us 
day  by  day  to  labour  as  those  who  have  received  Thy 
forgiving  love,  and  to  make  ourselves  less  unworthy  of 
Thy  mercy,  and  more  capable  of  receiving  it. 

O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee  to  lift  up  all  our  hearts  into 
the  full  blessedness  of  this  hour  of  worship.  May  it 
not  be  to  us  a  mere  form,  or  a  task,  but  the  very  gate 
of  Heaven.  Grant  that,  as  we  bow  before  Thee  now, 
the  presence  of  our  brethren  may  help  our  feebleness. 
Grant  that  the  cares  that  infest  us  may  steal  away, 
and  be  lost  to  our  consciousness ;  and  that  we  may  feel 
the  realities  which  we  so  often  forget,  and  understand 
better  that  great  love  which  we  so  often  neglect  and 
put  away  from  us. 

Draw  near  to  us  now  in  the  fulness  of  Thy  grace,  the 
largeness  of  Thy  pity,  the  tender  compassion  of  Thy 
promises  ;  and  in  Thy  faithfulness  give  to  each  of  us  as 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  63 

we  severally  reqviire,  making  this  an  hour  of  true  com- 
munion with  Thyself,  in  which  we  shall  see  the  things 
that  are,  and  grasp  in  hope  the  things  that  shall  be 
hereafter.  In  Thy  great  mercy  hear,  answer,  and  bless 
us,  for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


XXXIV 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  Who  hast  revealed  Thy 
love  to  us,  help  us  to  answer  it  with  our  love  to  Thee. 
And  since  Thou  hast  taught  us  to  call  Thee  our  Father, 
may  we,  in  the  consciousness  of  Thy  love  and  father- 
hood, be  imitators  of  God,  as  beloved  children,  and 
walk  in  love. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  for  all  which  Thou  dost 
give  to  Thy  servants  to  help  them  to  grow  like  Thee. 
We  pray  that  we  may  rightly  use  and  faithfully  em- 
ploy all  these  great  gifts  of  Thine,  so  that  day  by  day 
we  may  be  tending  nearer  to  being  perfect  as  our 
Father  in  Heaven  is  perfect.  Thou  knowest  our  weak- 
ness ;  we  beseech  Thee  for  the  large  hope  and  the  great 
aim  and  possibility  which  such  commandments,  being 
promises  as  well  as  commandments,  set  before  the 
feeblest  of  us.  We  ask  Thee,  Lord,  that  we  may  rise 
to  the  height  of  the  possibilities  which  Thou  dost  open 
to  us,  and  may  increasingly  and  daily  be  approaching 
Thyself,  and  receiving  into  ourselves  more  and  more 
of  the  likeness  of  the  heavenly.  Help  us  to  put  off  all 
ancient  evil,  and  to  put  on  that  new  nature  after  the 
image  of  Him  that  created  us.  And  grant,  we  beseech 
Thee,  to  each  of  us  so  to  use  circumstances,  callings, 
duties,  as  that  these  may  all  tend,  in  some  measure,  to 
our  bearing  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  in 
Whom  is  Thine  image. 


64  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

O  Lord,  whatever  may  be  the  thoughts  that  have 
been  busy  in  our  minds  ere  we  entered  into  Thy  house, 
and  however  unworthy  we  may  be  to  handle  such  holy 
things  as  we  here  come  into  contact  with,  do  Thou 
graciously  help  each  of  us  that  we  may  get  some 
strength  for  daily  work,  some  insight  into  Thy  truth, 
some  clear  knowledge  of  ourselves,  some  happy  confi- 
dence in  Thee,  by  our  gathering  together  thus.  And 
may  our  profiting  appear  unto  all  men,  and  our  daily 
lives  bear  witness  for  us  concerning  the  motives  by 
which,  and  the  Example  after  which,  we  seek  to  regu- 
late our  lives. 

Help  us  in  all  our  common  work,  O  Lord ;  to  carry 
into  it  the  spirit  of  Thy  children,  and  do  the  least 
thing  from  the  greatest  principles,  and  bring  all  the 
force  and  the  glory  of  Thy  truth  to  bear  on  all  the 
trifles  of  our  daily  commonplace  routine.  Be  with  any 
of  us  that  may  have  more  than  the  ordinary  course  of 
familiar  life  to  face  to-day,  whether  it  be  in  regard  of 
greater  duties  than  ordinary,  or  with  deeper  anxieties 
and  more  gnawing  sorrows  than,  thank  God  !  fall  to 
the  lot  of  most  of  us  in  most  of  our  lives.  Whatever 
be  our  burdens,  do  Thou  help  us  to  bear  them,  and  help 
us  to  cast  them  upon  Thee  to  bear  them.  And  grant, 
we  beseech  Thee,  that  disciplined  by  sorrow  and  by 
joy,  and  taught  by  all  the  changes  of  life,  we  may  in 
them  all  hear  the  great  voice  which  says  to  us,  '  Come 
up  hither,  and  dwell  in  the  unchanging  realm  of  love 
and  purity  with  God.' 

We  beseech  Thee  to  comfort  them  that  need  consola- 
tion, to  direct  such  as  are  in  want  of  guidance,  to  clear 
the  paths  of  those  whose  ways  may  be  encumbered 
with  many  hindrances ;  and  to  make  us  all  willing  to 
learn  by  Thy  providences,  and  to  see  in  our  daily  life 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  65 

Thy  providences,  as  well  as  to  learn  by  Thy  grace  and 
word. 

And  now,  Lord,  we  commend  ourselves,  and  all  whom 
we  love,  and  all  our  brethren  who  hold  the  Head,  and 
profess  and  call  themselves  Christians,  to  Thy  gracious 
care,  beseeching  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  lead  them, 
and  help  them  to  lead  the  world,  into  paths  of  righteous- 
ness and  peace.  Bless,  we  pray  Thee,  all  honest  work 
done  for  Thee  and  for  men,  and  help  all  those  to  whom 
Thou  hast  entrusted  any  precious  things  of  mind  or 
estate  to  impart  these  to  their  fellows,  and  to  feel  that 
Thou  dost  give  to  them  Thy  grace  in  its  manifold  forms, 
that  through  them  it  may  pass  to  all  others. 

Now,  Lord,  we  would  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  care, 
and  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  us  and  help  us  in  our 
worship,  and  accept  it,  and  accept  us,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

XXXV 

O  Lord,  Thou  art  the  giving  God,  and  when  we  ask 
ourselves  what  shall  we  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all 
His  benefits  towards  us,  we  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast 
taught  us  the  answer,  that  we  shall  take  the  cup  of 
salvation,  and  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  We 
bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  delight  in  us  when  we  come 
to  Thee  empty-handed,  lifting  up  our  empty  hands  to 
Heaven  that  they  may  be  filled,  our  stained  hands  that 
they  may  be  cleansed. 

We  would  come  to  Thee,  now,  O  Lord,  in  the  confid- 
ence that  Thou  art  ever  giving  from  Thy  fulness,  and 
dost  rejoice  in  us  when  we  receive  Thy  gifts  remember- 
ing the  Giver.  O  Lord,  bestow  upon  us  all  those  holy 
desires,  all  that  lowly  consciousness  of  our  own  empti- 
ness, all  that  triumphant  confidence  in  Thy  fulness,  and 


66  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Thy  loving  delight  in  giving  Thyself  to  us  which  Thou 
dost  rejoice  to  see  in  us,  and  wilt  impart  to  us  when  we 
are  seeking  Thee.  We  thank  Thee  that  before  we  call 
Thou  dost  answer,  and  that  so  often  we  have  found  it 
true  that  whilst  we  are  yet  speaking  Thou  wilt  hear. 
We  bless  Thee  that  even  we,  without  presumption,  can 
come  into  Thy  presence  when  we  stand  praying  believ- 
ing that  we  have  the  things  which  we  desire.  Surely 
there  is  nothing  which  Thou  dost  desire  more  than 
that  we  shall  let  Thee  give  us  Thyself,  and  surely  what- 
ever wishes  may  be  disappointed  there  is  a  region  in 
which  to  ask  is  to  have,  and  to  have  more  exceeding 
abundantly  than  we  can  ask  or  think.  Lead  us,  then, 
we  pray  Thee,  into  that  safe  region  where  desire  can 
move  unfearing;  and  bestow  upon  us  all,  in  such 
measure  as  shall  make  us  ashamed  of  our  diffidence 
and  our  small  petitions,  the  very  fulness  of  Thy 
gracious  self. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  hast  already 
drawn  near  to  us,  and  given  to  the  world  and  to  each 
of  us  that  in  which  all  sweets  lie  compacted,  and  all 
needs  are  more  than  supplied.  May  we  have  that 
rejoicing,  filial  confidence  which  shall  always  say, '  My 
God  shall  supply  all  our  needs,  through  His  riches  in 
glory  in  Christ  Jesus.'  We  come  to  Thee  with  many 
necessities,  but  most  of  all  we  need  Thee.  We  pray  for 
purifying,  we  pray  for  strengthening,  we  pray  that  our 
feet  may  be  kept  firm  even  when  in  slippery  places. 
We  pray  for  self-knowledge,  for  self-distrust,  for  con- 
fidence in  the  better  self  which  Thou  dost  breathe  into 
the  spirits  of  Thy  children,  and  we  beseech  Thee  that 
day  by  day  our  experience  may  enlarge  with  our  desires, 
and  we  may  have  and  long  more  for  more  and  more  of 
the  fulness  that  is  in  God. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  67 

O  Lord,  cleanse  us  from  our  evil,  deliver  us  from  our 
foolish  loves,  and  false  desires,  and  vain  hopes,  and 
aimless  struggles  in  which  we  are  tempted  to  pass  so 
much  of  our  lives.  And  give  to  us  a  more  rooted,  firmer, 
and  more  powerful  and  transforming  conviction  that 
Thou  art  our  Portion  and  our  Joy,  and  that  possessing 
Thee  we  may  reach  to  all  the  intents  of  bliss.  We 
beseech  Thee  to  forgive  our  wanderings  and  short- 
comings, our  rebellions  and  murmurings,  our  postponing 
the  best  things  to  the  inferior  things,  and  the  greater 
ardour  with  which  our  hearts  go  out  after  Time  than 
that  with  which  they  launch  themselves  into  the 
great  Eternity.  Oh  do  Thou  fit  us,  day  by  day,  for  the 
discharge  of  every  duty,  for  the  facing  of  all  circum- 
stances, for  the  conflicts  over  every  evil.  We  beseech 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  search  our  inmost  parts  as 
with  the  candle  of  the  Lord,  and  tell  us  what  Thou  hast 
found  there  of  evil.  Speak  to  our  consciences,  Lord ; 
make  them  more  sensitive  to  all  that  is  contrary  to 
Thy  will,  and  more  firm  in  their  proclamation  to  us  of 
our  own  evil  deserts.  Preserve  us  from  deceiving  our- 
selves by  the  outward  forms  and  professions  of  godli- 
ness, and  deliver  us  from  all  temptations  to  lower  the 
standard  of  our  living  according  to  those  around  us, 
or  ever  to  make  it  less  than  Thy  will,  which  is  our 
sanctification.  May  we  be  holy  as  Thou  art  holy,  and 
in  that  fear  of  the  Lord  which  is  full  of  blessedness 
may  we  perfect  our  holiness. 

We  thank  Thee  that  for  many  of  us  there  are  precious 
memories  of  past  seasons  of  blessedness,  when  we  have 
met  Thee  here,  strong  in  our  hearts.  And  whilst  we 
praise  Thee  for  all  the  past  blessings  of  our  union  in 
worship,  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  still  be 
near  us,  and  wouldst  help  us  now,  and  strengthen  us  as 


68  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

we  bow  here  before  Thee  ;  that  we  may  indeed  leave 
behind  cares  and  sorrows  and  purposes  and  aims,  and 
only  remember  all  these  in  so  far  as  they  may  make 
more  grateful  to  us  this  day  of  the  Lord,  and  our 
gathering  together  in  Thy  Name ;  and  may  make  us 
feel  more  our  need  for  help,  to  be  received  here,  and 
for  meat  in  the  strength  of  which  we  may  go  for  many 
days.  We  pray  Thee  to  be  near  us.  We  thank  Thee 
for  all  Thy  mercies;  in  everything  by  prayer  and 
supplication,  not  forgetting  thanksgiving,  we  would 
make  our  requests  known  unto  Thee,  and  beseech 
Thee  that  on  Thy  part  Thou  wilt  fulfil  Thy  promises,  in 
so  far  as  we  have  fulfilled  the  conditions,  and  to  grant 
that  the  peace  of  God  which  passes  understanding  may 
now  be  keeping  our  hearts  and  minds  in  Christ  Jesus. 
For  His  sake  grant  it.  Lord. 


XXXVI 

Give  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  strength  and 
courage,  faithfulness  to  confess  Christ  before  men ; 
and  may  we  have  Him  in  our  hearts  the  very  joy  of 
our  lives,  and  Him  before  us  the  aim  of  all  our  living. 
We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  abide  with  us  day 
by  day,  amidst  all  the  various  duties  and  difficulties  of 
this  life ;  and  help  us,  by  actions  and  words,  to  make 
known  Whose  we  are  and  Whom  we  serve.  We  pray 
for  faithfulness,  for  meekness,  and  for  courage ;  we  pray 
that  the  peace  of  God  in  our  hearts  may  rule,  and  sit 
there  as  umpire,  and  so  deliver  us  from  all  the  delusions 
as  to  what  may  be  allowable  for  us,  and  may  make  us 
strong  to  do  and  to  fight.  Help  us  to  be  wise  as 
serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves.     May  Thy  Spirit  abide 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  69 

in  us,  and  always  prepare  us  for  any  obstacles  that  we 
may  encounter.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  through 
all  we,  Thy  poor  servants,  who  are  so  feeble  and 
irresolute,  may  be  made  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the 
power  of  His  might. 

Help  us,  day  by  day,  in  our  work ;  be  with  each  of  us 
according  to  our  various  necessities  and  circumstances ; 
fit  us  for  our  various  tasks,  of  whatever  sort  they  may 
be.  May  we  carry  Thy  Name  into  them  all ;  may  all 
life  tend  to  make  our  possession  of  Thee  more  assured ; 
and  may  we  thereby  be  exercised  and  disciplined,  and 
so  prepared  for  the  better  and  more  perfect  life  which 
this  leads  towards.  If  any  of  us  have  need  of  Thy 
special  help  by  reason  of  heavy  tasks,  perplexing 
circumstances,  sore  temptations,  or  gnawing  anxieties, 
or  sorrows  that  weigh  us  down,  Thou  wouldst  be  near 
such,  and  according  to  all  the  variety  of  our  necessities 
wouldst  shape  Thy  manifold  grace  in  which  there  is 
more  than  sufficient  for  our  deepest  needs.  And  we 
pray,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  understand 
where  our  true  comfort  and  our  true  strength  are.  And 
if  in  anything  we  need  consolation,  O  Lord,  preserve 
us  from  seeking  it  in  the  broken  cisterns  which  can 
hold  no  water.  And  help  us  to  turn  to  the  Father  of 
mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  comfort,  Whose  consolations 
are  neither  few  nor  small.  Help  us  to  be  Thy  faithful, 
humble,  loving,  lowly  servants  and  soldiers  till  our  life's 
end.  May  like  blessings  rest  upon  all  Thy  servants 
throughout  the  world ;  and  whatever  in  individuals  or 
in  communities  may  stand  in  the  way  of  the  full  know- 
ledge of  Thy  will,  and  the  full  possession  of  Thy  grace, 
may  these  hindrances  be  swept  away,  so  that  all  Thy 
people  may  be  more  worthy  to  be  Thy  witnesses  in  the 
world,  and  their  testimony  sound  out  clear  and   full 


70  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

among  men,  making  known  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
the  salvation  of  our  God. 

O  Lord,  make  all  good  people  better,  bring  them 
nearer  to  Thyself,  strengthen  the  hands  of  all  workers 
for  God  and  men,  enlighten  them  to  know  what  the 
world  needs  most,  and  strengthen  them  to  bear  the 
true  message  of  love  and  peace  unto  all  dark  and 
saddened  souls. 

We  desire  to  commend  to  Thee  our  Sovereign,  our 
country,  all  rulers,  all  persons  who  can  influence 
opinion  and  action  in  this  and  other  lands.  We  pray 
that  peace  may  prevail  in  our  time,  and  that  those  who 
delight  in  war  may  be  suppressed  and  scattered.  We 
ask  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  further  Thine  own 
gracious  promises,  and  hasten  the  time  when  the 
kingdoms  of  this  world  may  be  the  kingdoms  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  Hear  us,  and  grant  us 
Thy  blessing,  for  His  sake. 


XXXVII 

Give  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  the  spirit  of  prayer, 
and  help  us  to  be  aware  of  Thy  presence,  and  to  lift  up 
confident  desires  and  desiring  confidence  unto  Thee, 
the  Friend  and  Giver  of  all  good.  We  beseech  Thee 
for  Thy  blessing  to  come  down  upon  this  congregation, 
and  we  pray  that  our  hour  of  worship  this  evening 
may  avail  to  make  us  see  more  clearly,  and  feel  more 
the  importance  of,  the  things  that  are  unseen  and 
eternal. 

O  Lord,  let  Thy  presence  be  with  us.  May  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  be  in  our  midst,  and  the  power  of  the 
Lord  be  present  to  heal  them  that  have  need  of  heal- 
ing.     We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  past  mercies  to  us ; 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  71 

and  beseech  Thee  that,  as  the  crown  of  them  all,  Thou 
wouldst  help  us  to  possess  grateful  hearts  that  love 
Thee  for  Thy  love's  sake,  and  yield  ourselves  to  Thee 
in  obedience  and  trust  because  we  love.  Forgive, 
accept,  hear,  and  answer  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 


XXXVIII 

Draw  near  to  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  Thy 
great  mercy,  and  help  us  to  draw  near  with  full  filial 
faith  to  Thy  Fatherly  heart.  We  bring  to  Thee  many 
burdens  which  Thou  only  canst  help  us  to  bear,  for  to 
all  of  us  love  is  a  struggle,  and  we  have  daily  to  fight 
and  endure,  and  to  put  forth  effort.  And  we  turn  to 
Thee,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  draw  near 
to  each  of  us,  in  all  the  various  duties  and  conflicts, 
difficulties  and  trials,  tasks  and  circumstances,  which 
Thy  providence  appoints  for  us.  Help  us,  we  beseech 
Thee,  to  recognise  Thy  presence  in  all  things,  and  to 
feel  that  the  smallest  of  our  duties  is  enjoined  us  by 
Thee ;  and  that  he  who  is  faithful  in  that  which  is 
least,  and  he  only,  will  be  faithful  in  that  which  is 
much. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  when  we  know  our 
weakness  most  we  may  be  the  nearest  to  Thy  divine 
strength ;  and  we  pray  that  Thy  power  may  be  made 
perfect  in  our  weakness;  and  that  whatsoever  Thy 
providence  appoints  or  Thy  will  enjoins,  we  may,  by 
Thy  help,  be  able  to  accept  and  to  do.  Go  with  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  into  all  our  daily  duties ;  may  we  carry 
the  light  of  Thy  countenance  into  them  all.  May  we 
do  everything  as  realising  that  we  are  in  Thy  presence 
Whose  will  is  that  we  should  be  perfect.    We  thank 


72  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Thee  that  Thou  dost  not  send  us  a  warfare  at  our  own 
charges.  Come  to  us  with  Thy  power,  and  then  we 
shall  be  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that 
loveth  us.  Regard  each  of  us  here  before  Thee; 
Thou  knowest  our  deepest  needs,  whether  we  know 
them  or  not.  We  bless  Thee  that  however  various 
may  be  our  characters  and  wants  there  is  all- 
sufficiency  for  all  of  us,  and  more  than  enough  for  a 
universe,  in  Thyself.  If  any  of  us  have  any  special 
need  of  Thy  help,  either  to  comfort,  or  to  sustain,  or 
to  direct,  draw  near  to  such,  we  pray  Thee,  with  Thy 
consolations,  which  are  neither  few  nor  small.  Thy 
hand  is  tender,  and  never  wounds  when  it  tries 
to  bind  up,  as  ours  are  so  often  apt  to  do. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  the  great  consolations  which 
come  to  those  who  submit  and  accept  Thy  will  may 
belong  to  all  of  us,  who  may  have  any  special  burdens 
of  sorrow,  of  perplexity,  or  of  duty,  to  carry.  And 
we  beseech  Thee  that  if  any  of  us  have  to  face  great 
temptations.  Thou  wouldst  be  near  such;  and  if  our 
temptations  are  the  continually  recurring  clouds  of 
small  ones,  be  with  us  then. 

O  Lord,  look  upon  all  the  young  persons  in  this 
congregation,  the  young  men  who  may  be  here  in  this 
city  alone,  and  in  slippery  places.  May  they  feel  that 
Thou  art  with  them,  not  only  to  know  what  they  do, 
but  to  help  them  to  do  what  Thou  dost  desire.  And  if 
any  of  them  have  fallen  into  evil,  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thy  grace  may  be  realised  by  such,  and  may 
deliver  them  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler  and  from 
the  noisome  pestilence. 

We  pray  for  Thy  blessing  to  rest  upon  us  as  we 
try  to  meditate  together  upon  Thy  word  and  will,  and 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us,  giving  us  a 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  73 

portion  for  all  this  congregation.  And  do  Thou  help 
us  to  speak  Thy  word  as  it  ought  to  be  spoken,  with 
earnestness,  and  full  faith  with  simplicity.  And  may 
the  power  of  God  flow  through  our  poor  words,  and 
the  manifestation  of  Thy  Spirit  be  granted  to  our 
worship  this  evening. 

O  Lord,  draw  many  hearts  to  Thyself,  we  pray  Thee  ; 
and  shine  into  many  spirits  with  the  light  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

We  pray  Thee  to  bless  all  good  people,  all  Christian 
souls  who  may  be  seeking  to  do  Thy  will,  all  the  com- 
munities and  churches  of  such.  And  grant  that  all 
Thy  servants  may  have  a  larger  measure  of  Thy 
divine  Spirit,  and  may  be  walking  more  closely  in  the 
footsteps  of  the  great  Shepherd  of  all  the  flock.  We 
pray  Thee  to  hear  the  prayers  which  have  gone  up  in 
many  tongues  and  lands  this  day,  and  in  answer  to 
pour  out  upon  Thy  waiting  people  the  graces  that  they 
need  for  the  work  of  the  world,  for  life  and  for  death. 
Hear  us,  O  Lord ;  mercifully  accept  us  ;  forgive  all  our 
sins,  and  grant  us  the  consciousness  of  Thy  presence, 
for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XXXIX 

Give  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  the  spirit  of  suppli- 
cation ;  knowing  our  need  and  believing  in  Thy  suffi- 
ciency and  Thy  love,  may  we  come  to  Thee  as  with  our 
empty  vessels  to  the  ever-springing  fountain,  and  with 
joy  draw  water  from  the  wells  of  salvation.  We  thank 
Thee  that  however  feeble  are  our  desires.  Thou  art 
waiting  to  be  gracious,  and  art  able  to  give  us  exceed- 
ing abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask. 


74  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  thank  Thee  that  however  tremulous  our  faith 
Thy  faithfulness  is  as  the  Rock  of  Ages.  We  bless 
Thee  that  our  very  deserts  do  not  stand  in  the  way  of 
Thy  great  mercy.  And  so,  O  Lord,  we  come  to  Thee, 
compassed  with  infirmity,  because  Thou  art  strong ; 
and  when  tempted  to  yield  to  sin,  because  Thou  art 
righteous.  We  come  to  Thee,  for  Thou  art  our  Father, 
and  Thy  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  Give  us  then,  we 
beseech  Thee,  whatever  we  may  each  severally  require 
now;  and  help  us,  in  the  triumphant  confidence  of 
faith,  to  put  far  away  from  us  all  fear,  all  indifference, 
all  coldness,  and  to  press  near  Thyself,  that  into  our 
hearts  there  may  come  the  very  life  of  God,  in  the 
plenitude  of  its  power.  Cleanse  us,  we  beseech  Thee, 
from  all  our  evil;  lift  us  from  our  low  estate;  our  souls 
cleave  unto  the  dust.  Quicken  Thou  us  according  to 
Thy  word,  O  Lord.  We  need  Thee  in  order  that  we 
may  truly  desire  Thee,  and  we  need  Thee  to  make  us 
fit  to  possess  Thee.  And  so  we  cast  ourselves  on  Thee 
for  everything,  and  pray  that  as  from  Thee  come  the 
preparation  of  the  heart  and  the  answer  Thou  wouldst 
give  us  both  now. 

We  have  to  acknowledge  before  Thee  many  short- 
comings, and  we  feel  that  our  confession  is  faulty  as 
that  which  it  confesses.  But  do  Thou  teach  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  a  deeper  and  a  clearer  consciousness  of 
our  own  defects  and  shortcomings ;  and  may  we  realise 
more  fully  than  ever  we  have  done,  not  only  our 
responsibility  to  Thee  for  all,  but  that  great  pattern  of 
perfectness  which  Thou  hast  given,  and  which  it  is 
possible  for  us  to  attain.  May  we  be  intolerant  of  all 
shortcomings  and  failures.  May  we  be  rigid  and  right- 
eous judges  of  ourselves.  May  we  have  no  secret  sins 
lurking   in    our   characters   or  diffused    through    our 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  75 

conduct  without  our  knowledge.  May  our  desires  be 
quickened  after  perfect  holiness.  May  we  be  making 
daily  progress  in  the  life  that  is  drawn  from,  and  is 
like  unto,  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ.  Whatsoever  we  do 
may  we  do  it  as  to  the  Lord.  May  we  bring  Thee  into 
all  our  acts,  and  walk  before  Thee,  and  so  be  perfect. 

Help  us  that  we  may  find  it  no  vain  thing  to  wait 
upon  the  Lord,  but  may  we  be  aware  of  a  mighty 
power  raising  us  above  the  lowness  of  our  daily  lives, 
and  bringing  into  clearer  vision  and  more  solid  reality 
the  things  that  are  at  Thy  right  hand  where  Christ  is 
sitting,  our  Forerunner  and  our  Friend.  Thankfully 
we  recognise  the  mercy  which  permits  us  thus  to 
assemble  and  help  and  strengthen  one  another ;  may 
the  one  spirit  be  diffused  throughout  this  congregation, 
and  may  we  receive  our  portion  in  due  season  from 
those  liberal  hands  that  satisfy  the  desire  of  every 
living  thing,  from  that  loving  Heart  that  fulfils  the 
desires  of  them  that  fear  Him.  Hear  us,  grant  Thy 
blessing,  quicken  each  of  us  by  the  touch  of  Thy  divine 
hand,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 


XL 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  it  is  good  to  draw  near 
unto  Thee,  and  we  would  come  with  our  empty  hands, 
and  pray  for  the  blessings  which  Thou  dost  delight  to 
give  even  more  than  we  to  receive  them.  Teach  us 
how  to  pray,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  make  us  aware  of 
our  necessities,  and  shine  into  our  hearts  with  the 
great  assurance  that  Thou  art  our  Portion,  and  that 
with  Thee  we  are  rich  indeed. 

O  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  of  us,  our  sins  and  failures, 
our  defects  of  character,  and  the  weak  places  where 


76  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

we  lie  open  to  temptation.  And  we  pray  for  Thy 
discipline ;  we  pray  for  Thy  direction.  Help  us  in  all 
things  to  apprehend  Thy  purpose,  and  in  all  things  to 
fulfil  Thy  purpose,  that  that  will  of  Thine,  even  our 
sanctification  which  Thou  art  apparently  working  out 
by  all  the  diversity  of  Thy  dealings  with  us,  may  be 
deeper  to  us,  and  may  be  recognised  by  us,  too,  as  the 
main  thing  for  which  we  ought  to  live.  Help  us,  we 
pray  Thee,  that  we  may  be  holy  as  Thou  art  holy,  and 
bring  all  our  religion  to  bear  constantly  so  that  we 
may  have  nothing  in  our  faith  which  is  not  unusual  in 
our  conduct,  and  nothing  in  our  conduct  which  is  not 
regulated  and  influenced  by  our  faith. 

We  pray,  O  Lord,  that  if  any  of  us  here  before  Thee 
have  any  special  need,  known  to  us  or  unknown.  Thou 
wouldst  graciously  meet  it.  Guide  us  day  by  day  by 
Thy  counsel.  Help  us  to  be  of  quick  understanding 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  we  may  know  what  Thou 
wouldst  have  us  do,  and  may  gladly  close  with  all  Thy 
commandments  and  with  Thy  appointments.  Thou 
dost  send  to  some  of  us  heavy  duties.  Make  the  back 
strong  for  the  burden.  Thou  dost  appoint  to  some  of 
us  days  of  darkness,  solitariness,  anxiety.  Do  Thou 
strengthen  Thy  servants  to  look  beyond  the  darkness 
to  the  light  that  abides.  And  do  Thou  comfort  all  sad 
hearts,  and  speak  Thy  grace  to  all  those  who  are  in 
any  way  afflicted  in  mind,  body,  or  estate.  And  help 
each  of  us,  in  our  several  ways,  to  glorify  our  Lord  and 
Saviour,  and  to  live  as  in  communion  with  Him,  and  as 
setting  forth  His  saving  power,  and  as  showing  to  the 
world  how  fair  a  thing  a  human  character  may  be, 
lightened  and  purified  by  a  present  Christ. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  us  in  our  worship,  to 
forgive  all   the   imperfections  of   our  preparation  for 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  77 

this  service,  and  to  speak  through  our  lips.  And  give 
us  grace  to  hear  with  our  ears,  that  the  word  of  the 
Lord  may  be  magnified,  whatever  becomes  of  the  word 
of  man. 

We  pray  for  like  blessings  to  rest  upon  all  congrega- 
tions of  Christian  people  this  morning.  And  wherever 
there  are  loving  hearts  seeking  to  draw  near  to  Thee, 
whether  in  the  companionship  of  their  fellows,  or  in 
the  solitude,  be  Thou  near  to  them.  And  be  Thou  a 
little  sanctuary  to  those  of  Thy  people  who  may  be 
shut  out  from  the  great  congregation.  And  bless  our 
Sovereign  and  our  country,  and  all  rulers  and  guides  of 
opinion  and  action  in  this  and  other  lands.  And  over- 
rule the  voices  of  men's  conflicting  desires  to  bring 
about  the  great  purposes  of  Thy  love.  Cast  down  the 
Babels  that  men  have  built,  and  build  upon  their  ruins 
the  Holy  City,  the  new  Jerusalem. 

Hear  us,  forgive  us,  grant  us  Thy  blessing  beyond 
our  deserts,  and  beyond  even  our  desires,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XLI 

O  Lord,  Who  hast  taught  us  Thy  last  best  name  of  Love, 
we  thank  Thee  that  when  Thou  lookest  down  from  the 
height  of  Thy  sanctuary  it  is  to  hear  the  moaning  of 
the  prisoner,  and  to  loose  those  that  are  appointed 
to  death.  And  we  would  lift  up  our  eyes  to  Thee  Who 
dwellest  on  high,  and  visitest  us,  with  wondering  thank- 
fulness that  Thou  dost  remember  the  Son  of  Man,  and 
dost  lavish  upon  us  the  gifts  of  Thy  love. 

We  come  to  Thee  now,  O  Lord,  with  many  burdens, 
with  many  weights ;  and  our  hearts  do  not  glow  as 
they  ought  at  the  remembrance  of  Thy  Name,  nor  do 


78  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

we  aspire  after  Thee  as  we  ought  if  we  knew  what  the 
blessedness  is.  But  we  pray  that  notwithstanding 
our  imperfection,  and  though  our  call  to  Thee  be  so 
feeble,  Thou  wouldst  open  Thine  ear  and  hear,  that 
Thou  wouldst  bow  Thy  heavens  and  come  down.  We 
believe  that  Thou  canst  touch  our  hearts.  Surely 
Thou  knowest  the  way  to  our  spirits,  and  there  is  no 
gulf  between  us  and  Thee  which  Thy  love  and  grace 
cannot  triumphantly  bridge  over.  Therefore  we  be- 
seech Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  enter  into  our  hearts 
now,  and  breathe  upon  us  with  Thy  quickening  breath, 
that  we  may  know  Thee,  and  love  Thee,  and  cleave  to 
Thee,  and  serve  Thee. 

We  pray  for  pardon,  O  Lord,  for  the  cleansing  of  all 
our  evils  from  us.  Subdue  our  evil,  root  out  of  us  any 
inclinations  that  are  contrary  to  Thy  will  and  our 
highest  good ;  and  make  us,  we  pray  Thee,  as  Thou  dost 
desire  that  we  should  be,  pure  and  holy,  and  conformed 
to  the  image  of  thy  dear  Son.  We  pray  that  our 
relation  to  Thy  holy  law  may  be  set  right.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  Thy  fatherly  love,  and  the  assur- 
ance of  it,  may  fill  our  hearts  and  minds.  We  beseech 
Thee  to  loosen  our  hold  upon  anything  that  comes 
between  us  and  the  full  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Thee, 
and  the  continuous  discharge  of  our  daily  duties. 
Teach  us  our  secret  sins,  and  set  them  before  us  in 
the  light  of  Thy  countenance.  And  we  pray  that 
our  knowledge  of  ourselves  may  go  hand  in  hand  with 
our  knowledge  of,  and  our  faith  in,  Thy  quickening  and 
restoring  grace ;  that  we  may  never  be  driven  either 
from  our  confidence  by  the  sense  of  our  unworthiness 
or  be  led  to  build  presumptuously  on  our  own  deserts, 
in  ignorance  of  Thy  righteous  judgments.  Give  us,  as 
we  are  gathered  here  in  Thy  presence  this  morning, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  79 

deeper  and  stronger  desires  than  we  often  possess ;  and 
help  us  in  receiving  from  Thy  hand  some  measure  of 
Thy  great  gifts  intended  for  us  in  such  services,  to  use 
the  possession  as  a  means  of  enlarging  our  desire,  and 
of  capacity  for  Thy  gifts.  Be  with  us  in  our  worship, 
shed  abroad  Thy  love  upon  our  hearts,  forgive  all  our 
sins,  strengthen  and  help  us  as  we  wait  before  Thee, 
and  accept  us  now,  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 

XLII 

O  Lord  our  God,  Who  knowest  our  hearts,  and  under- 
standest  our  needs  better  than  we  do,  help  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  to  hallow  all  our  desires  by  submission 
to  Thy  holy  will.  And  in  regard  of  all  things  here 
below,  and  the  uncertain  and  perishable  good  that  we 
need  and  wish,  to  breathe  our  desires  to  Thee,  and  to 
say,  'Nevertheless  not  my  will,  but  Thine,  be  done.'  We 
thank  Thee  for  the  peace  that  comes  to  us  when  we 
thus  cease  from  our  own  works,  and  delight  in  what 
Thou  dost  appoint  and  command.  We  bless  thee  for 
all  the  rest  of  God  which  Thou  dost  give  in  Thy  mercy 
to  them  that  live  by  Thee  and  near  Thee.  And  we  pray 
that  we  may  never  be  so  engrossed  with  the  things 
that  are  seen  and  temporal,  and  may  never  so  follow 
after  them,  as  to  lose  our  hold  upon  Thyself.  Help  us, 
day  by  day,  to  take  what  Thou  dost  give ;  to  do  what 
Thou  dost  command ;  to  learn  both  how  to  be  abased 
and  how  to  be  exalted,  both  how  to  abound  and 
how  to  suffer  need.  May  we,  in  whatsoever  state  we 
are,  therein  and  therewith  be  content.  And  may  our 
supreme  desires  ever  be  turned  towards  the  perfect  and 
eternal  good  which  Thou  dost  freely  give  to  all  them 
that  ask. 


80  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  day  by  day,  in  our  tasks  and 
difficulties,  in  our  joys  and  sorrows.  May  we  discern 
Thy  will  in  all  things,  and  may  all  things  to  us  be 
sacred  as  the  symbols  of  Thine  own  love  of  which  they 
are  the  tokens  and  the  results.  Help  us,  we  pray  Thee, 
strenuously  to  labour  to  fulfil  all  our  Father's  com- 
mandments, and  to  receive  all  our  Father's  blessings. 
Guide  us  by  Thy  counsel,  defend  us  by  Thy  present 
encompassing  grace,  put  a  well-spring  of  life  within 
our  hearts  that  may  ever  be  rising  up  into  life  ever- 
lasting. Keep  us  in  all  our  ways ;  in  so  far  as  Thou 
knowest  it  to  be  for  our  good  accomplish  our  desires 
and  fulfil  our  petitions.  But  above  all  teach  us  to 
count  that  Thou  art  our  Portion  and  our  Strength,  and 
that  having  Thee  we  are  rich. 

Help  us  to  draw  near  to  Thee,  from  whatever  circum- 
stances we  come.  May  we  find  in  Thy  house  and  in 
Thy  worship  all  that  we  need.  Thou  givest  to  us  the 
matter  of  a  day  in  its  day.  Give  us  this  day  what  this 
day  requires.  May  Thy  truth  enter  into  our  hearts  and 
minds,  and  fill  our  lives  with  peace  and  light. 

Hear  us  in  our  prayers  for  one  another,  for  all  Thy 
servants  who,  in  various  lands  and  ways,  are  seeking 
to  spread  the  various  manifold  blessings  of  Thy  love. 
Help  all  thy  people  to  live  as  becometh  the  gospel. 
Bless  all  those  who  in  this  land  or  elsewhere  are  in 
positions  to  influence  opinion  and  action.  Let  Thy 
Kingdom  come.  May  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  be 
magnified,  and  the  Cross  be  more  and  more  the  throne 
from  which  He  rules  the  earth. 

Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  our  prayer ;  forgive  our 
many  sins,  and  grant  us  Thy  gracious  help  and  presence 
now,  for  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  81 


XLIII 


We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thy  thoughts  are  not  as 
our  thoughts,  but  high  above  them  as  the  heavens  are 
above  the  earth.  And  we  humbly  confess  that  our 
ways  are  not  as  Thy  ways,  but  have  wandered  far  from 
the  paths  which  Thou  wouldst  have  us  to  walk  in ;  and 
yet  we  come  back  to  Thee,  rejoicing  in  the  assurance 
that  Thou  dost  abundantly  pardon  when  we  forsake 
our  ways  and  thoughts,  and  make  Thine  ours  and  ours 
Thine.  So  we  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to 
turn  our  back  upon  all  that  has  been  evil  and  contrary 
to  Thy  holy  will  in  our  characters  and  lives,  and  that 
Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  lay  hold  upon  Thy  great  mercy, 
the  abundant  pardon,  and  the  unstinted  love  which 
Thou  dost  give  to  all  that  seek  it.  We  beseech  Thee  to 
pour  out  upon  us  to-day  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  of  sup- 
plication, that  we  may  indeed  draw  near  to  Thee,  and 
be  raised  above  our  ordinary  selves,  and  brought  into 
closer  fellowship  with  Thee ;  and  taught  to  think  more 
wisely,  and  more  as  Thou  wouldst  have  us  to  think,  of 
Time  and  Eternity,  of  Earth  and  God,  of  ourselves  and 
of  our  Saviour. 

We  bless  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  Thy  great  mercies  to 
us  in  days  gone  by,  and  for  all  the  thousand  benefits 
which  flow  in  an  unbroken  stream  of  light  from  the 
Father  of  lights.  Truly  every  good  and  perfect  gift  is 
from  above,  and  nothing  but  what  is  good  and  perfect 
comes  from  Thee.  And  we  bless  Thee  that  we  need 
fear  no  exhaustion  either  in  Thy  will  or  in  Thy 
resources,  for  with  Thee  is  no  variableness,  nor  shadow 
of  turning.  Help  us  then  to  think  of  Thee  always  with 
gladness  and  peace  as  the  giving  God  Who  giveth  unto 
all  men  liberally. 

F 


82  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  not  upbraid.  We 
thank  Thee  that  unworthiness  does  not  provoke  Thee 
to  withhold.  We  thank  Thee  that  in  all  our  wander- 
ings Thou  dost  follow  us  with  benefits,  and  dost  seek  to 
bring  us  back  to  Thyself.  And  we  pray  Thee  to  help 
us  that,  moved  by  the  mercies  of  God  and  most  of  all 
by  that  one  great  mercy  which  holds  all  the  rest,  the 
unspeakable  gift  of  Thy  dear  Son,  we  may  yield  our- 
selves living  sacrifices,  and  be  holy  and  acceptable  to 
Thee.  Cleanse  our  hearts,  O  Lord  ;  strengthen  in  us  any 
feeble  good,  subdue  any  ruling  evil,  take  away  from  us 
all  divergence  from  Thy  will  and  purpose,  all  slothf ul- 
ness  in  keeping  Thy  commandments,  all  the  blindness 
which  so  often  sees  but  the  things  that  are  nearest  to 
us,  and  sees  them  wrongly.  May  we  not  be  of  those 
who  cannot  see  afar  off,  and  have  forgotten  that  they 
have  been  purged  from  their  own  sins. 

Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  our  daily  lives  to  adorn 
the  teaching.  Give  us  grace  to  subdue  ourselves,  to 
aspire  after  Christ,  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
Shepherd.  And  grant  that  in  our  obedient  and 
striving  hearts  there  may  ever  sound  the  great  voices 
that  call  us  to  come  up  hither,  forsaking  that  which 
is  beneath,  and  leaving  it  behind.  May  we  ever  be 
steadily  tending  towards  Thyself,  and  receiving  into 
our  open  hearts  more  and  more  of  the  life  and  the 
fullness  of  God.  Accept,  O  Lord,  we  pray  Thee,  our 
thanksgivings  and  petitions.  We  acknowledge  before 
Thee  our  many  evils  and  sins.  We  cast  ourselves  on 
that  great  mercy,  sealed  and  conveyed  to  us  in  the  gift 
of  Thy  dear  Son.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wilt  accept  us  now ;  bless  us  in  our  worship  here  before 
Thee,  and  ever  be  to  us  our  Light  and  our  Salvation, 
the  strength  of  our  hearts  and  our  portion  for  ever. 
Hear  us  in  Christ  our  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS 


XLIV 


Help  us,  O  Lord,  that  we  too,  in  the  solitude  of  our  own 
souls,  may  find  refuge  in  Thee  from  an  intrusive  world. 
And  do  Thou  give  us  grace  to  keep  near  Thee  when 
duty  calls  us  again  into  the  low  levels  of  life.  '  Help 
us  ever  to  bear  about  with  us  as  a  sweet  memory 
and  a  silent  impulse,  the  thought  of  Thy  love,  of  Thy 
presence,  of  Thy  judgment,  of  Thy  help. '  And  may 
we  daily  live  as  making  real  to  ourselves  the  truths 
which  we  profess  to  believe. 

Forgive,  O  Lord,  all  our  blindness  to  Thy  highest 
gifts,  and  our  preference  of  the  lower  benefits  of  Thy 
providence  to  the  higher  blessings  of  Thy  grace.  May 
we  look  for  something  better  from  the  Prophet  that 
should  come  into  the  world  than  the  bread  that 
perishes.  May  we  labour  most  for  that  meat  which 
endures  unto  eternal  life,  which  the  Son  of  Man  will 
give  us.  And  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  take  and 
nourish  our  souls  upon  the  things  that  are  freely  given 
to  us  of  God,  given  before  we  ask,  continuing  to  be 
given,  or  offered,  though  we  often  refuse.  Draw  near 
to  each  of  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  gathered  here  in  Thy 
presence  this  morning,  and  help  us  in  this  hour  of 
worship.  Speak  Thou,  O  Lord,  through  the  lips  that 
speak,  and  open  the  ears  that  hear  the  outward  words, 
that  they  may  receive  Thy  message.  And  may  we  all 
feel  that  God  Himself  is  speaking  to  us,  and  all  be 
touched  by  that  mighty  word.  We  know  that  it 
cannot  return  unto  Thee  void ;  and  we  would  humbly 
believe  that  even  when  weakened  and  mingled  with 
men's  words,  it  may  still  retain  something  of  its  pris- 
tine power,  and  may  still  be  mighty,  through  God,  to 
the  purpose  for  which  Thou  dost  send. 


84  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  pray  Thee  to  be  with  us  in  our  worship,  to 
deliver  us  from  all  unworthy  motives  and  thoughts, 
to  bring  our  hearts  into  real  contact  with  Thyself  and 
Thy  truth,  to  bow  our  wills  that  they  may  be  submis- 
sive, and  to  open  all  our  understanding  and  our  nature 
that  into  every  corner  of  our  being  there  may  flow 
the  great  tide  of  Thy  revealed  will  and  word,  cleansing 
and  blessing  and  life-giving  whithersoever  the  river 
cometh. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  look  upon  us  in  our  daily 
circumstances  and  duties,  especially  to  be  with  any  of 
us  that  have  heavy  burdens  of  responsibility  or  care 
or  sorrow  to  carry.  We  pray  that  strength  may  be 
given  to  us  according  to  our  day,  and  the  peaceful 
assurance  that  Thou  sendest  no  man  a  warfare  at  his 
own  charges,  but  that  when  Thou  commandest  Thou 
dost  empower  and  fit  Thy  people  for  all  which  Thou 
dost  expect  of  them.  Be  near  each  of  us,  then,  day 
by  day,  and  strengthen  us  that  no  false  glitter  may 
draw  away  our  eyes  from  Thee,  nor  any  conflicting 
loves  shut  our  hearts  to  Thy  love.  And  may  our 
wills  ever  be  conformed  to  Thine,  and  our  conduct 
ever  be  in  accordance  with  what  we  know  to  be  Thy 
will  concerning  us.  We  commend  ourselves,  and  all 
whom  we  love,  to  Thy  gracious  care ;  help  us  now  as 
we  wait  before  Thee,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour- 
Lord. 

XLV 

O  Lord,  most  merciful  and  near,  we  would  come  to 
carve  and  take  away  our  portion  in  Thy  mercy, 
and  to  feel  in  our  hearts  that  we  are  indeed  near  to 
Thee.  Blessed  be  Thy  name  for  all  Thy  loving-kindness 
and    tender  care.     We  thank    Thee  that  Thou  hast 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  85 

brought  us  together  again  to  worship  Thee ;  and  beseech 
Thee  that  now,  and  in  such  time  to  come  as  may  yet 
remain  for  us  in  this  fellowship  of  praise,  we  may  have 
Thy  presence  with  us  whensoever  we  gather  together, 
and  that  Thou  wouldst  pour  out  of  Thy  Spirit  upon 
the  congregations  gathering  here  from  time  to  time. 
And  help  us  who  have  to  approach  Thy  word  that  with 
faithfulness  and  simplicity,  and  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  we  may  ever  stand  up  before  this  people. 

O  Lord,  some  of  us  can  look  back  upon  many  years 
of  mercy  and  blessing  vouchsafed  to  us  in  our  gatherings 
here.  We  remember  those  that  have  joined  in  prayer 
with  us,  and  have  passed  hence  to  the  worship  of  the 
heavens.  We  remember  the  days  and  the  years  that 
are  gone.  And  we  beseech  Thee  to  be  with  us  still; 
and,  if  it  please  Thee,  yet  more  specially  and  abundantly 
than  Thou  hast  been  in  the  past.  And  help  us  all  to 
love  as  becometh  the  gospel,  adorning  the  teaching  of 
Christ  the  Master  in  all  things.  May  the  word  of  the 
Lord  sound  out  as  with  a  trumpet-note  from  us  and 
our  lives.  And  may  Thy  blessing  be  granted  to  us  in 
all  our  happy  fellowship.  We  draw  near  to  Thee  to 
pray  that  Thou  wouldst  strengthen  and  quicken  us  for 
all  Thy  service,  that  Thou  wouldst  manifest  Thyself  to 
us  more  graciously  and  abundantly  in  our  hearts  and 
thoughts,  that  Thou  wouldst  deliver  us  from  our  own 
weaknesses,  and  arm  us  against  the  temptations  of  our 
characters,  circumstances,  and  callings. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  be  with  each  of 
us  in  the  walks  of  daily  life,  and  wouldst  lead  us  there 
in  paths  of  righteousness  and  peace.  We  adore  Thee 
for  all  Thy  great  mercies  revealed  to  us,  and  gathered 
for  the  race  of  men  in  the  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And 
we  beseech  Thee  that  that  Name  which  is  above  every 


86  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

name  may  ever  sound  as  music  in  our  ears  and  hearts, 
and  that  we  may  live  in  the  closest  communion  w^ith 
Him,  and  in  daily  imitation  of  His  example,  and  faith 
in  His  sacrifice. 

O  Lord,  give  us  Thy  blessing  in  our  worship ;  teach 
each  of  our  hearts ;  help  us,  whatever  be  our  condition 
and  present  necessities,  to  have  recourse  to  the  one  all- 
sufficient  fountain  of  all  supply ;  and  from  Thee,  in  the 
fullness  of  Thy  love  and  spirit  bestowed  upon  us 
through  Jesus  Christ,  may  we  draw  grace  for  grace, 
and  that  yet  more  abundantly  day  by  day. 

We  commend  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious  care ;  we 
beseech  Thee  to  accept  our  thankfulness.  We  pray 
Thee  to  look  upon  our  weakness,  to  pardon  our  sins, 
to  teach  us  our  faults,  to  deliver  us  from  the  dominion 
of  evil,  and  to  bring  us  more  and  more  into  the 
possession  of  Thy  kingdom,  which  is  righteousness  and 
peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hear  us,  for  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour's  sake. 


XL  VI 

O  Lord,  our  God,  how  many  are  our  needs,  how  great 
are  Thy  treasures,  how  little  of  these  we  take,  how' 
poorly  we  use  what  we  do  possess.  But  we  come  to 
Thee,  for  it  is  Thou  that  must  give  the  desire  after 
Thee,  and  it  is  Thou  that  art  the  giving  God  Who 
upbraidest  not.  And  from  Thy  fullness  do  we  all 
receive,  according  to  our  hunger  and  our  sense  of  need. 
O  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  we  may  covet  most 
earnestly  the  best  gifts,  and  may  not  waste  our 
energies,  nor  fix,  as  we  have  done,  our  desires  on 
fleeting  and  uncertain  riches  and  gifts,  but  on  the 
living  God,  Who  giveth  all  things  to  enjoy. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  87 

Guide  our  thoughts  in  this  hour  of  worship,  help  us 
to  fix  them  on  Thyself,  and  on  the  things  that  belong 
to  our. peace.  Teach  us,  O  Lord,  we  pray,  wise  and 
true  words  to  speak,  words  that  are  strong  with  Thy 
strength,  and  filled  with  the  power  of  Thy  gospel. 
Keep  us  from  pouring  the  water  of  our  own  thoughts 
into  the  wine  of  the  Kingdom,  and  help  us  that  the 
lips  that  speak  may  be  touched  with  the  live  coal  from 
the  altar  of  sacrifice.  And,  O  Lord,  open  all  hearts 
and  minds,  and  grant  that  our  service  this  morning 
may  be  of  use  to  us  all,  and  redound  to  the  glory  of 
Thy  great  name. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  each  of  us  according  to  our 
several  necessities.  Thou  knowest  those  amongst  us 
who  may  have  come  into  Thy  house  burdened.  We 
pray  that  Thou  wouldst  bear  their  burdens  with  Them, 
and  Thyself  fulfil  the  law  which  Thou  hast  given  to  us. 
And  help  us  all  in  our  time  of  need,  to  lay  a  firm  hold 
of  faith  upon  Thyself,  and  whatever  may  be  our 
wants,  may  we  draw  from  Thee  a  sufficiency  for 
them.  Strengthen  us  where  we  are  weak,  what  is 
low  do  Thou  raise  and  support,  illumine  what  is  dark, 
and  guide  us  all  more  and  more  in  the  way  of 
peace. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  us  gathered  in  Thy  presence, 
to  accept  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  great  mercy,  and  now 
to  manifest  Thyself  to  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour-Lord. 


XLVII 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  the  Fountain  of  gladness,  to  rejoice  in 
the  Lord  always,  and  may  our  deepest  blessedness  be 
sought  where  it  can  be  found,  in  Thyself.     Look  upon 


88  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

us  here  gathered ;  give  us  Thy  peaceful  presence  and 
Thy  strong  help  that  our  hearts  may  all  be  drawn  into 
fellowship  with  Thee,  and  however  various  our  char- 
acters and  needs,  may  we  receive  from  Thee  the 
blessings  which  we  most  require.  Help  us  to  praise 
Thee,  to  loosen  the  ties  which  bind  us  to  the  world 
and  the  things  seen  and  temporal.  And  may  God,  and 
His  Christ,  and  His  Gospel,  and  His  Heaven  be  very 
real  and  very  near  to  us  all. 

We  ask  it  for  our  Saviour's  sake. 


XLVIII 

O  Lord,  Who  dwellest  in  the  light  inaccessible,  we 
thank  Thee  that  we  can  draw  near  and  walk  in  the 
light  by  Him  Who  is  the  Way  and  the  Truth  and  the 
Light.  And  we  would  come  to  Thee  now,  though  our 
eyes  be  feeble  and  Thy  light  full  of  glory.  Yet  we 
draw  near  as  Thy  children,  and  would  come  close  to 
Thy  heart  and  bless  Thee,  that  though  Thou  art  far 
beyond  all  thought  and  blessing,  hearts  can  touch- 
And  Thou  dost  let  us  love  Thee,  and  nestle  close  to 
Thee.  We  pray,  then,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  wouldst  do 
more  than  permit  us  to  come  to  Thee.  We  ask  Thee 
to  draw  us  to  Thyself,  for  surely  Thou  dost  know  the 
way  to  the  hearts  and  minds  that  Thou  hast  made, 
and  the  touch  of  Thy  finger  can  be  laid  upon  us.  Bring 
us  near  to  Thyself,  and  help  us  that,  day  by  day,  amidst 
all  our  changing  circumstances,  perplexities,  and 
duties,  we  may  still  be  able  to  keep  up  our  communion 
with  Thee,  and  to  walk  in  Thy  presence  rejoicing  to 
think  that  Thou,  God,  seest  us. 

We  come  to  Thee,  Lord,  conscious  of  our  sins,  but 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  89 

not  made  afraid  to  draw  near  to  Thee  by  reason  of 
them,  for  we  thank  Thee  that  we  have 
An  offering  and  a  sacrifice. 
And  we  beseech  Thee  that  all  of  us  united  in  a  common 
sinfulness  may  be  more  blessedly  knit  together  in  a 
common  faith ;  and  may  each  find  that  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  Thy  Son  cleanses  from  all  sin. 

We  pray  for  Thy  pardon,  for  more  than  Thy  pardon, 
for  Thy  righteousness  to  be  put  into  our  minds;  and 
that  our  characters  may  be  moulded  after  the  likeness 
of  Thy  dear  Son,  Who  is  the  perfect  embodiment  of  Thy 
perfect  will. 

Go  with  each  of  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  into  all  our 
spheres  of  duty,  and  keep  us  from  going  anywhere 
where  we  cannot  carry  Thee.  Teach  us  the  meaning 
of  circumstances,  the  message  of  providence,  the  duties 
that  spring  from  Thy  appointments  of  lot  and  task. 
And  help  us  to  do  all  things  heartily,  and  that  we  may 
do  them  heartily  may  we  do  them  as  to  the  Lord. 
Guide  us  by  Thy  counsel,  strengthen  us  by  Thy  grace. 
If  any  of  us  are  in  any  kind  of  trouble  or  perplexity  be 
near  such,  and  give  counsel  in  the  lot  of  each,  and  in 
due  time  the  dawn  of  gladness  and  peace.  Help  all 
Thy  people  who  are  afflicted  in  mind,  body,  or  estate, 
to  bring  all  their  sorrows  unto  Thee,  and  to  realise 
that  blessed  and  wondrous  truth  that  '  in  all  their 
afflictions  He  was  afflicted,'  and  the  Angel  of  His 
Presence  saved  them.  We  pray  that  it  may  be  so 
with  us,  and  with  all  who  may  be  known  to  us,  and 
with  the  many  unknown  on  whom  Thy  hand  lies  heavy 
may  Thy  right  hand  hold  them  up. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee  to  be  with  us  in 
our  hour  of  worship,  to  guide  our  thoughts  when  we 
try  to  speak  some  words  in  accordance  with  Thy  holy 


90  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

will.  May  Thy  blessed  Spirit  teach  us  how  to  speak 
and  how  to  hear.  And  whatever  else  may  be  accom- 
plished, or  fail  to  be  achieved,  by  this  our  service,  may 
many  hearts  be  brought  into  living  and  loving  contact 
with  the  one  great  living  and  loving  heart,  the  heart 
of  the  Christ.  And  may  the  message  of  Thy  grace  not 
be  marred  by  its  passage  through  the  human  medium ; 
but  be,  and  manifest  itself  in  many  a  mind  and  life,  to 
be  what  it  is,  the  word  of  God  which  endureth  for 
ever. 

O  Lord,  hear  us  in  our  prayer  ;  grant  us  Thy  help  in 
our  service,  be  near  each  of  us,  and  forgive  our  sins 
and  answer  our  petitions,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 


XLIX 

O  Lord,  near  us  when  we  think  not  of  Thee,  near  us 
to  pity  even  when  we  transgress  against  Thee,  near  us 
to  restore  and  forgive  when  we  turn  again  to  Thee, 
we  would  draw  near  to  Thee  and  hide  ourselves  from 
all  our  weaknesses,  from  all  our  guilt,  beneath  the 
shadow  of  Thy  wing.  '  We  thank  Thee  that  we  need 
not  to  flee  from  Thee  but  rather  to  flee  to  Thee  when 
we  are  most  conscious  of  the  gulf  between  us  and  Thee, 
and  when  we  have  separated  ourselves  from  our  God 
by  our  sin.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
bring  us  into  that  sweet  and  strong  fellowship  with 
Thyself  in  which  we  may  be  careless  of  outward  evils, 
and  laugh  at  calamity.  We  pray  Thee  to  strengthen 
us  for  all  holy  living  in  time  to  come,  and  to  grant  that 
more  and  more  we  may  live  priestly  lives  of  consecra- 
tion, and  self-surrender,  and  brotherly  mediation,  and 
may  walk  amongst  men  representatives  of  God. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  91 

We  bring  to  Thee  the  whole  burden  of  our  manifold 
evils,  and  pray  Thee  to  deal  with  them,  for  they  are 
too  great  for  us ;  '  iniquities  prevail  against  us.' 
Blessed  be  Thy  Name  !  we  can  go  on  to  say,  '  As  for 
our  iniquities,  Thou  wilt  purge  them  away.'  May  it 
be  so  !  We  ask  not  only  for  pardon,  which  we  know  we 
have,  but  we  ask  for  Thy  Divine  influence,  for  the  life 
of  Christ  Himself  to  dwell  in  our  hearts  and  lives,  and 
there  to  work  the  blessed  transformation  and  cleansing 
and  triumph  over  our  own  weaknesses,  and  all  tempta- 
tions which  our  waywardness  finds  in  even  Thy  bless- 
ings and  our  duties.  Lord  !  we  come  to  Thee  rejoicing 
in  Thy  great  Name,  and  in  the  assurance  that  Thou  art 
faithful  to  that  Name,  and  that  all  which  Thou  hast  been 
in  past  days  Thou  art  this  day,  and  will  be  to  us,  if  we 
choose,  for  ever.  Fulfil  then,  we  beseech  Thee,  the 
promises  whereon  Thou  hast  caused  us  to  hope  by  Thy 
past  dealings  ;  and  be  to  us  Deliverer,  and  Strength,  and 
Emancipator,  and  Guide,  and  Portion,  that  we  too  may  be 
able  to  say  that  the  Lord  is  our  God  and  we  His  people. 

O  Lord  !  receive  our  thanks  for  Thy  manifold  mercies 
to  us,  and  for  all  the  gifts  of  Thy  gracious  love  filtered 
to  us  moment  by  moment  through  the  dealings  of  Thy 
providence.  And  pour  upon  us  in  a  flood  in  the  one 
great  gift  which  carries  all  else  in  it,  the  unspeakable 
gift  of  Thy  dear  Son.  Help  us  in  this  hour  of  worship 
that  we  may  be  delivered  from  all  our  weakness  and 
evil,  that  we  may  be  able  to  gather  in  all  our  thoughts 
and  desires,  and  fix  them  upon  Thyself  and  the  things 
unseen.  We  bless  Thee  for  the  triumphant  memories 
that  cluster  round  this  day  of  the  Lord.  We  thank 
Thee  for  a  Saviour  Who  died ;  yea  !  rather  that  is  risen 
again,  Who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  Who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  us.;  And  we  beseech  Thee  that 


92  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

we  may  each  feel  that  in  Him  we,  too,  triumph  over 
death,  and  have  already  died  to  sin,  and  risen  to  a  new, 
a  better,  and  undying  life  to  God. 

We  pray  Thee  to  manifest  Thy  presence  as  we 
worship  here  before  Thee,  and  to  accept  us  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 


O  Lord  !  help  us  to  be  holy  as  the  Father  in  Heaven  is 
holy;  and  to  that  end  may  we  all,  by  humble  faith  an^ 
loyal  love  and  true  communion  with  Thee,  submit  our- 
selves to  the  cleansing  which  Thou  hast  stored  for  the 
whole  world  in  the  Lamb  of  God.  We  pray  Thee  to 
keep  us  near  Thyself,  in  submission,  in  obedience.  May 
our  thoughts  not  be  absorbed  by  other  things,  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  greatest  thing.  May  we  all  get  the 
wisdom  which  shall  bring  all  our  works  to  Thee,  and 
offering  up  the  trivialities  of  daily  life  on  the  great 
altar  may  we  have  the  Giver  and  the  gift,  the  offering 
and  the  offerer  hallowed  and  magnified. 

O  Lord,  our  different  characters,  and  circumstances, 
and  past  history,  and  present  duties  and  prospects,  are 
all  so  diverse  that  it  is  hard  for  one  voice  to  express  all 
our  needs.  But  Thou  knowest  them,  and  we  pray  that 
we,  too,  may  know  them  more  wisely  than  we  some- 
times are  apt  to  apprehend  them.  We  bless  Thee  that 
we  do  know  that  Thou  art  all-sufficient.  May  the 
knowledge  have  more  influence  on  our  daily  lives,  and 
shape  these  more  thoroughly  than  it  has  done  in  the 
past.  And  help  us  that  we  may  find  a  help  to  every- 
thing that  is  good,  and  that  whatsoever  in  us  is  weak 
and  wrong  may  be  subdued,  and  whatever  is  feebly 
right  may  be  strengthened  and  confirmed  and  deepened. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  93 

And  grant  that  our  religion  may  not  only  be  a  thing  of 
Sundays,  and  chapels,  and  of  spoken  prayers,  but  a 
power  that  rules  all  our  lives,  and  is  manifest  to  men 
as  the  motive  of  all  our  conduct. 

Bless  each  of  us  in  all  our  duties.  Be  present  in  all 
sick-chambers,  and  give  patience  in  bitter  weakness 
and  pain  and  weariness,  and  the  ebbing  away  of 
strength.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  give  wisdom 
and  tender  hands  and  tender  hearts  to  all  that  watch 
by  sick-beds ;  and  that  Thou  wouldst  grant  that  what- 
soever afflictions  any  of  us,  or  of  those  dear  to  us,  may 
now  be  exercised  by,  there  may  be  sent  more  than 
sufficient  weight  of  consolation  and  of  power.  Grant 
that  though  the  outward  man  perishes  the  inward  man 
may  be  renewed  day  by  day. 

O  Lord,  guide  our  thoughts,  and  help  us  to  speak  and 
to  hear  Thy  truth,  and  to  receive  it.  Guide  our  actions 
when  we  go  hence,  and  help  us  to  live  Thy  truth,  and  be 
near  each  of  us  day  by  day. 

We  commend  to  Thee  ourselves,  and  all  whom  we 
love ;  all  good  people  who  are  trying  to  do  Thy  will.  We 
pray  that  Thou  wouldst  speedily  put  an  end  to  war, 
and  that  Thou  wouldst  subdue  and  hold  in  check  evil 
passions  that  may  hinder  the  coming  of  peace.  And 
we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  diffuse  throughout 
the  world  the  gracious  principles  and  the  mighty 
powers  of  that  Kingdom  which  is  righteousness  and 
peace  and  joy ;  and  that  Jesus  Christ  may,  not  in  name 
only  but  in  reality,  be  the  Lord  of  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  May  His  professing  followers  learn  to  hate  war, 
to  hang  the  trumpet  in  the  hall,  and  learn  war  no  more. 
Hear  us ;  speak  through  us  and  to  us,  and  grant  us  Thy 
blessing,  and  give  us  the  hearing  ear,  for  our  Saviour 
Christ's  sake. 


94  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

LI 

Gladly  and  thankfully,  O  Lord,  would  we  come  to 
Thee.  We  bless  Thee  that  we  can  lift  our  thoughts  to 
the  place  where  Thou  art,  and  though  we  cannot  com- 
prehend we  can  draw  near  and  rejoice  that  all  which 
we  can  know  of  Thee  is  so  blessed  as  to  make  us  sure 
that  what  we  do  not  know  is  blessed  even  more.  We 
thank  Thee  for  the  darkness  which  is  light  inaccessible. 
We  thank  Thee  for  the  light  in  which  we  can  walk. 
We  thank  Thee  for  the  light  which  has  come  near  to 
us  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  brightness  of  Thy  glory.  We 
thank  Thee  for  the  light  which  comes  into  heart  and 
conscience  there,  and  we  pray  that  in  Thy  light  We  may 
see  light.  Too  often  we  have  thought  it  darkness  ;  too 
often  we  have  been  blind,  as  they  that  grope  sightless 
in  the  noontide.  Too  often  we  have  shut  our  eyes 
against  Thee.  Clothe  our  spirits  with  the  sweet 
radiance  of  Thy  loving  presence,  and  help  us  more  and 
more  to  rejoice  in  the  dayspring  from  on  high  which 
hath  visited  us. 

We  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  bless  Thee  for  all  Thy 
great  mercies  to  us ;  to  spread  before  Thee  our  many 
wants.  Often  we  construe  them  wrongly,  and  think 
we  need  things  that  we  do  not  need,  and  are  insensible 
to  the  true  supply  of  our  true  needs.  We  beseech  Thee 
to  teach  us,  O  Lord,  what  we  really  want,  and  to  help 
us  to  seek  jBrst  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous- 
ness, and  '  all  things  that  are  lovely  and  of  good  report ' ; 
and  the  sweetness  of  communion  with  Thee,  and  the 
power  of  yielding  ourselves  submissively  to  Thy 
governance  and  control.  And  we  ask  that  Thou 
wouldst  deliver  us  from  foolish  choosing  after  folly, 
from  the  seeking  after  vanity  which  makes  us  vain, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  95 

and  wouldst  help  us  more  and  more  to  discern  where 
our  true  riches  are,  even  in  Thyself. 

O  Lord,  we  bring  to  Thee  our  weakness,  and  pray  for 
Thy  strength.  Day  by  day  we  have  to  encounter 
things  that  are  too  much  for  us.  It  is  not  only  our 
iniquities  that  prevail  against  us,  but  our  duties  often 
press  very  heavily  upon  us,  and  make  us  feel  that  we 
are  insufficient  for  these  things  ;  and  the  varying  deal- 
ings of  Thy  providence  with  us,  with  the  swift  alterna- 
tions of  shadow,  sunshine,  good  and  evil,  call  for  more 
than  we  can  live  rightly  to  grasp  and  confess  them, 
rightly  to  use  and  to  profit  by  them.  So  we  ask  that  in 
all  the  maze  of  daily  life  Thy  hand  may  lead  us,  smooth- 
ing out  the  rough  places,  and  making  the  crooked 
places  straight  for  the  feet  that  would  walk  in  Thy 
commandments.  And  we  pray  that  whatever  we  may 
have  to  encounter  we  may  have  God  with  us,  and  so  be 
more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us.  Be 
Thy  mercy  upon  us  now,  as  our  hope  is  in  Thee,  and 
not  only  according  as,  but  exceeding  abundantly  above, 
all  that  we  can  ask  or  think. 

Thou  dost  sometimes  surprise  and  shame  Thy 
petitioners  with  the  abundance  of  Thy  dealings.  May 
it  be  so  with  us  this  morning,  and  if  it  please  Thee 
come  into  our  assembly;  and  although  our  petitions 
and  praises  are  but  poor,  as  compared  with  what  they 
ought  to  be,  let  Thy  gracious  Spirit  be  granted  to  each 
of  us,  and  may  we  feel  that  it  is  no  vain  thing  to  wait 
upon  the  Lord.  We  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious 
care,  and  beseech  Thee  to  remember  all  whom  we 
remember,  and  to  speak  Thy  grace  to  waiting  souls,  and 
Thy  loving  rebukes  to  forgetful  ones  ;  to  draw  us  all  out 
of  the  mire  in  which  we  are  too  apt  to  walk,  and  to  set 
our  feet    upon  the  rock,   and    establish    our    goings. 


96  ,  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Hear,  and  in  Thy  great  mercy  accept  and  answer  us, 
for  our  Saviour  Christ's  sake. 


LII 

O  Lord,  may  it  be  true  of  us,  when  we  pray,  that  it  is 
not  we  that  speak,   but  Thy  Spirit  in  us.    May  our 
desires  be  inbreathed  by  Thyself,  that  our  prayers  may' 
be  sweet  and  acceptable   since  Thou  hast  given  the 
Spirit  by  which  we  pray. 

O  Lord,  we  would  not  prescribe  to  Thee,  we  would 
not  bring  to  Thee  our  hot  and  foolish  longings  and 
wishes  to  Thy  Throne.  We  ask  that  deepest  of  all  in 
us  may  be  the  Master's  prayer, '  Nevertheless  not  my 
will,  but  Thine.'  So  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  live  in 
peace  because  we  live  in  submission  and  in  trust.  And 
may  we  find  that  all  things  are  good  to  us  because  we 
are  ready  to  accept  what  God  appoints,  and  to  be 
fellow-workers  with  Him  in  getting  the  most  out  of  it, 
for  our  profit  and  growth  in  godlikeness.  We  pray 
Thee  to  lead  each  of  us  in  paths  of  righteousness,  to 
strengthen  our  feeble  desires  and  resolves  that  we  may 
run  with  patient  perseverance  the  race  which  Thou 
dost  appoint,  and  carry  the  solemn  sanctions  of  Thy 
gracious  will  which  makes  duty  of  everything  that 
we  do. 

Forgive,  O  Lord,  all  the  imperfection,  the  blots  and 
stains,  the  interruptions  and  the  rebellions  in  our  daily 
lives ;  and  help  us  more  and  more  to  bring  our  whole 
being  into  union  with  Thyself,  that  thoughts,  wishes, 
affections,  purposes,  efforts,  aims,  may  all  be  taught, 
inspired,  and  directed  by  Thee. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  we  pray  for  Thy  blessing  to  rest 
upon  us  in  our  various  occupations  ;  be  near  us  accord- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  97 

ing  to  our  special  present  circumstances.  Reveal 
Thyself  to  the  sorrowful  as  Thou  indeed  art,  the 
only  sufficient  Comforter  Who  knows  how  to  handle 
wounds  without  hurting  them,  and  to  so  bind  them  up 
that  the  bandage  shall  not  pain.  Be  near  any  of  us 
that  are  in  trial  or  difficulty,  and  we  beseech  Thee  to 
be  in  sick-chambers  with  those  that  are  in  pain,  and 
with  those  that  watch  them  in  anxiety  and  sorrow. 
We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  guide  us  all,  according  to 
Thy  diverse  will  concerning  us,  which  yet,  in  all  its 
diversity,  is  one  at  bottom. 

Bless  all  Christian  people,  all  Christian  workers  at 
home  and  abroad.  Send  out  Thy  light  and  Thy  truth, 
and  let  them  guide  the  stumbling  nations,  and  those 
that  sit  in  darkness,  into  wholesome  activity,  and 
walking  in  the  way  of  God.  Break  Thou  the  bow,  O 
Lord,  and  cut  the  spear  in  sunder,  and  turn  the  swords 
into  ploughshares,  and  the  spears  into  pruning-hooks. 
We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  subdue  passions 
and  hatreds,  and  all  the  selfish  purposes  which  lead 
men  to  wage  war  against  each  other,  and  that  Thou 
wouldst  establish  the  Kingdom  of  peace  throughout  all 
the  earth.  Be  near  us  now ;  grant  us  Thy  blessing  in 
our  worship ;  guide  us  and  teach  us,  and  help  us  to 
receive  Thy  teaching  and  guidance,  for  the  sake  of 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


LIII 

O  Lord,  Thou  art  our  Light  and  our  Salvation.  Help 
us,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  make  Thee  the  strength  of  our 
lives  and  our  portion  for  ever.  We  come  to  Thee  now, 
needing  Thee  all  the  more  the  less  we  feel  our  need, 
and  we  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  not  wait  to  be 
Q 


98  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

asked  but  dost  pour  out  Thy  lo\e  and  Thy  grace 
upon  unfaithful  and  disobedieiit  and  forgetful 
children.  Lift  our  hearts  to  Thyself,  we  beseech 
Thee,  and  breathe  Thou,  by  that  Spirit  of  supplica- 
tion Who  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints,  desires 
into  our  hearts  according  to  Thine  own  heart.  May 
we  long  most  for  the  best  things  ;  may  our  wishes 
not  be  led  astray  by  our  earthly  senses  and  inclina- 
tions; may  we  see  clearly  what  is  the  chief  good  for 
man  in  all  the  days  of  his  else  vain  life.  And  may  we 
cherish  the  conviction  that  Thou  art  our  portion,  our 
joy,  and  our  all.  Help  us  to  order  our  lives  accord- 
ingly, and  not  only  when  we  stand  before  Thee  in 
prayer,  but  in  all  the  hurry  and  struggle  of  our  daily 
work;  when  so  many  duties,  and  so  many  intrusive 
things,  press  upon  us  to  press  Thee  out,  may  we  keep 
our  hearts  and  minds  fixed  upon  Thee. 

We  thank  Thee  for  times  like  these,  when  all  around 
us  and  without  us  helps  us  to  come  nearer  Thee,  and 
for  once  sense  and  habit  become  the  allies  of  the  soul. 
And  we  pray  that,  surrounded  as  we  are  by  the  tokens 
of  worship,  and  with  this  day  filled  as  it  is  with  associa- 
tions and  memories  which  bring  the  risen  Saviour  to 
our  minds  and  hearts,  we  may  find  it  somewhat  easier 
than  we  often  do,  in  the  strife  and  solitude  of  daily 
tasks,  to  draw  near  to  God,  and  make  sure  that  He  is 
beside  us. 

We  pray  for  Thy  blessing  in  this  hour.  We  come  to 
Thee  with  cares  and  sorrows  and  burdens  of  duty  and 
of  endurance.  Some  of  us  with  foiled  desires,  some 
with  broken  and  disappointed  hopes,  some  with  per- 
plexities and  troubles,  some  of  us  with  aching  and  sad 
hearts,  all  of  us  needing  Thee,  O  Lord.  We  beseech 
Thee  that  it  may  not  be  in  vain  that  we  gather  our- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  99 

selves  together.  Thou  dost  say  to  us  by  Thy  pro- 
vidences, as  well  as  by  outward  associations  to-day, 
and  the  recurrence  of  this  hour  of  worship,  'Seek 
ye  My  face ! '  Oh  that  our  hearts  may  answer,  '  Thy 
face.  Lord,  will  I  seek ' ;  and  then  we  can  venture  to 
offer  the  prayer,  'Hide  not  Thy  face  far  from  us.' 
'  Thou  hast  never  said  to  any  of  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek 
ye  My  face  in  vain.' 

We  bless  Thee  that  when  we  seek  Thou  art  found  of 
us,  and  Thou  hast  found  us  before  we  sought.  O  Lord, 
we  beseech  Thee,  then,  to  cleanse  our  hearts ;  to  fix 
them  on  Thyself ;  to  make  our  lives  fuller  of  God, 
consciously  to  ourselves  ;  and  to  give  us  grace,  day  by 
day,  to  fight  the  good  fight  which  faith  involves,  and  in 
which  faith  is  triumphant.  Keep  us.  Lord,  from  our 
own  weaknesses,  and  from  all  the  subtle  temptations 
which  lie  in  our  hearts,  and  are  so  ready  to  be 
awakened  into  malignant  activity,  even  by  duties  and 
blessings.  Strengthen  us  to  follow  the  Lord,  whither- 
soever He  goeth;  and  give  us  wisdom,  we  pray,  that 
we  may  apprehend  all  our  duties,  and  grace  and 
strength  to  will  and  to  do  them. 

We  pray  for  Thy  pardoning  mercy,  we  need  the  touch 
of  Thy  forgiving  hand,  we  need  the  live  coal  from  the 
altar  of  sacrifice  to  be  laid  upon  lips  and  hearts  that 
our  iniquity  may  be  taken  away  and  our  sin  purged. 
And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  give  us  all  which 
Thou  seest  we  require  for  life  and  godliness,  and  keep 
us  from,  and  help  us  to  be  victors  over,  whatever  holds 
of  death  and  sin.  We  pray  Thee  to  hear  these  our 
supplications,  to  grant  the  forgiveness  of  our  many 
sins,  and  accept  us  in  Christ  our  Saviour. 


100  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

LIV 

Help  us,  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  our  faith  and 
hope  may  follow  that  great  Forerunner,  and  pass 
within  the  vail,  and  there  be  surely  and  steadfastly 
fixed.  Strengthen  us  day  by  day,  by  the  light  and  grace 
of  that  great  hope,  to  live  here  as  those  ought  to  do 
who  look  for  the  City  which  hath  the  foundations,  and 
are  strangers  and  pilgrims  here  on  earth.  Take  away 
from  us  all  the  doubts  and  darkness  that  may  lie  upon 
that  future,  and  may  we  show  the  same  diligence  unto 
the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end,  and  be  heirs 
and  followers  of  them  who  through  faith  and  patience 
inherit  the  promises. 

Regard  us,  O  Lord,  gathered  here  before  Thee  now, 
and  needing  so  much  that  we  know  not  where  to  begin 
with  the  catalogue  of  our  wants ;  but  having  so  much 
in  Thee  that  we  are  sure  that  Thou  art  able  to  supply 
all  our  need,  according  to  Thy  riches  in  glory  which 
Thou  hast  treasured,  that  we  may  find  them  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Help  us,  whatever  burdens  of  care  or  sorrow 
or  work  we  may  bring  with  us  into  Thy  presence, 
to  cast  all  our  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and  may  we  find 
not  only  in  the  moment's  peace  and  ease,  but  in  the 
strength  that  is  breathed  into  us  in  daily  life,  that  it  is 
no  vain  thing  to  invoke  Thy  help,  or  to  bring  Thee  into 
the  field  to  fight  for  us. 

And  now  help  us  to  speak  some  words  in  Thy  Name 
which  may  have  in  them  the  power  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit. 
And  do  Thou  deliver  us  from  all  that  may  mar  the  full- 
ness of  our  yielding  of  heart  and  mind  to  Thy  truth  and 
its  influences  now.  May  speaker  and  hearers  alike  be 
helped,  each  in  our  several  ways ;  and  may  we  all  feel 
that  God  has  been  speaking  to  us  of  a  truth,  and  that 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  101 

our  ears  have  been  opened  to  hear  the  blessed  words 
which  make  for  life  and  blessedness. 

O  Lord !  accompany  with  Thy  Spirit's  help  and  grace 
all  the  work  done  to-day,  in  any  form,  in  any  com- 
munion, and  in  every  land  which  has  the  glory  of  God, 
and  the  good  of  men,  for  its  aim.  And  do  Thou 
graciously  give  to  all  Thy  servants  who  minister  of 
Thy  truth  the  firm  faith  in  it  for  themselves  that  they 
may  believe,  and  therefore  speak,  and  their  words 
have  the  power  which  no  unbelieving  words  can  ever 
have  on  men's  hearts.  O  Lord!  guide  us  all  in  our 
different  ways,  and  be  near  each  of  us,  according  to 
our  varying  interests.  Comfort  any  that  are  in  sorrow, 
be  with  those  who  may  be  bereaved  and  darkened. 
Let  desolate  hearts  find  a  sufficiency  in  God,  Who 
empties  no  places  which  He  does  not  wish  to  fill. 

We  pray  Thee  to  comfort  all  that  mourn,  to  appoint 
for  them  that  mourn  in  Zion  'beauty  for  ashes,  and 
the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness.' 

And  now  we  would  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious 
care.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  past  mercies  to  us ; 
we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  be  near  us  still, 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  and  bless  us,  and  that  Thou 
wouldst  make  us  day  by  day  to  walk  in  the  footsteps 
of  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  cherish  the  bright  hope  of 
being  with  Him  for  evermore. 

Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee ;  in  Thy  mercy  answer  and 
accept,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


LV 

O  Lord,  to  Whom  belongeth  mercy,  we  would  bring 
Thee  our  adoration  and  praise  thus  unceasing ;  and 
love,  poor  as  it  is,  for  Thine  unspeakable  gift.    Thou 


102  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

art  the  fountain  and  the  home  of  love  ;  may  we  know 
and  believe,  and  by  believing  know,  the  love  that  God 
hath  to  us  ;  and  may  we  dwell  in  Thee  as  our  peaceful 
home  and  our  sure  habitation,  where  no  evil  can  befall 
us  nor  any  plague  come  nigh  our  dwelling.  And  we 
thank  Thee,  Lord,  that  Thou  hast  scattered  all  the 
clouds  born  of  our  own  evil,  and  rising  like  mists  from 
our  own  hearts,  which  have  often  hid  Thy  face,  and 
made  us  dread  Thee  instead  of  cleaving  to  Thee,  and 
sometimes  made  us  forget  Thee  to  get  rest  instead  of 
rejoicing  to  remember  Thee. 

O  Lord !  we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  lifted  away 
doubts,  and  darkness,  and  dread,  from  all  those  who 
see  in  Jesus  Christ  the  visible  Love  of  God.  And  we 
beseech  Thee  that  we  all  may  be  so  blessed.  Our  eyes 
have  been  blinded.  We  know  our  treacherous  hearts 
have  often  gone  astray,  our  feeble  wills  have  resolved, 
and  our  strong  inclinations  have  broken  the  resolu- 
tions. But  we  bring  to  Thee  all  our  unworthiness,  all 
our  wandering ;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  in  Thy  great 
mercy  Thou  wouldst  fix  our  affections,  subdue  and  fill 
our  wills  and  all  our  powers,  and  help  us  to  make  all 
our  love  full  of  God,  and  so  full  of  peace  and  nobleness. 
We  crave  Thy  pardoning  mercy.  Thy  sustaining  grace ; 
we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  impel  and  restrain 
us,  urging  us  with  sweet  power  to  '  all  things  that  are 
lovely  and  of  good  report,'  and  keep  us  back  with  a 
strong  hand  from  all  their  opposites. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  each  of  us, 
day  by  day,  as  we  go  about  our  ordinary  avocations  ; 
that  we  may  find  God  in  our  work  because  we  bring 
Him  there ;  and  that  all  our  tasks,  and  perchance  our 
difficulties  and  disappointments,  may  be  as  means  by 
which  we  come  more  close  to  Thyself,  with  a  wiser 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  103 

knowledge  of  our  own  necessities,  and  a  fuller  faith  in 
Thy  sufficiency. 

We  pray  Thee  to  help  us  to  make  our  religion  a  daily 
reality.  May  it  penetrate  all  our  actions  in  forming 
and  purifying.  What  we  do  may  we  do  it  from  the 
heart,  because  we  do  it  as  to  the  Lord  and  not  to  men. 
And  whatever  may  be  the  difference  of  circumstances 
in  each  of  us  before  Thee  now,  may  we  all  have  the 
one  all-sufficient  good,  Thine  own  gracious  presence, 
strengthening  and  lifting  us  up.  If  there  are  any  of 
us  with  special  burdens  to  carry,  either  of  sorrow  or  of 
sin  or  of  duty,  help  us  to  cast  them  on  Thee ;  and  Thou 
wilt  help  us  to  bear  them.  If  there  are  any  of  us 
struggling  with  anxieties  or  perplexities,  or  with 
hearts  aching  from  loss,  or  with  foreboding  of  the 
things  that  may  be  coming,  or  with  our  feet  in  slip- 
pery places  and  appealed  to  by  strong  temptation,  we 
pray  for  grace  to  resist,  to  stand  fast,  to  keep  our 
integrity,  and  to  follow  Jesus  Christ. 

We  pray  for  Thy  blessing,  O  Lord,  to  rest  upon  Thy 
services  this  evening.  Thou  knowest  our  need.  Lord  ! 
so  give  us,  we  pray,  some  words  to  speak  that  shall  be 
Thy  words,  and  let  them  have  the  power  of  Thy  truth, 
and  of  Thy  Son  and  His  Spirit  in  Thee,  that  whatever 
human  weaknesses  must  necessarily  cleave  to  our 
utterances,  there  may  still  shine  through  the  earthen 
vessel  glances  of  the  gold  and  the  light  of  life. 

O  Lord !  help  us  to  hear  as  well  as  to  speak.  May  it 
not  be  a  vain  thing  for  us  thus  to  gather  together. 
Oh  that  Thy  word  might  find  its  way  through  hear- 
ing ears  and  waiting  hearts,  and  that  it  may  not  be  for 
any  of  us  that  we  have  come  together  for  the  worse, 
and  not  for  the  better. 

We  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious  care  now,  and 


104  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

trustfulness  born  of  thankfulness,  and  experience  for 
all  the  future,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  be 
our  Portion  for  ever,  as  Thou  hast  promised  to  be.  In 
Thy  great  mercy  forgive  and  answer  us.  Bless  all 
whom  we  love,  listen  to  the  many  petitions  that  have 
gone  up  from  Thy  people  this  day,  and  shower  down 
large  answers  and  blessing,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 

LVI 

O  Lord  !  Who  dost  bless  us  at  all  times,  may  we 
bless  Thee  at  all  times.  And  since  Thy  benefits  are 
continually  in  our  lives,  may  Thy  praise  be  as  continu- 
ally in  our  mouths.  We  too  have  to  say, '  This  poor 
man  cried,  and  the  Lord  helped  him.'  Oh  that  we  had 
cried  oftener,  and  more  earnestly;  our  lives  would  have 
been  more  illuminated  and  calmed  by  Thy  manifest 
answers. 

O  Lord !  we  confess  with  wonder  at  our  own  folly 
that  we  have  so  little  used  the  right  of  access  to  the 
Throne,  and  so  often  employed  it  for  unworthy  pur- 
poses. Our  prayers  have  too  often  been  our  passionate 
desires  to  bend  Thy  will  to  ours,  and  to  force  our 
notions  of  good  upon  Thee.  We  pray  that  Thou 
wouldst  teach  us  more  of  the  nobleness  and  loftiness 
of  what  a  true  prayer  is,  and  that  we  may  desire  more 
earnestly  than  anything  beside  that  our  wills  may  be 
conformed  to  Thine,  and  that  we  may  hold  all  our 
wishes,  and  desires,  and  fancies  of  what  is  best  for 
us  in  subordination  and  submission  to  Thy  better  will, 
to  Thy  clearer  knowledge,  to  Thy  more  tender  and  wise 
and  mighty  love.    And  so  help  us  that  we 

May  travel  on  life's  common  way 

In  cheerful  godliness, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  105 

in  patient  acceptance  of  Thy  providences,  and  in 
earnest  desires  to  draw  from  them  all  the  good  which 
Thou  hast  stored  in  them  for  us. 

We  would  come  to  bless  Thee  for  Thy  dealings  with 
us,  and  to  pray  that  we  may  increasingly  learn  the 
wisdom  and  the  blessedness  in  everything  of  giving 
thanks,  and  so  rejoicing  evermore.  We  do  believe  that 
none  of  them  that  trust  in  Thee  shall  be  desolate. 
Therefore,  we  beseech  Thee  that  as  our  guard  against 
all  transient  evil,  lowliness,  and  sorrow,  we  may  be 
able  to  feel  always  the  bond  that  knits  us  to  Thee,  and 
to  live  in  quiet  and  constant  trust.  Help  us  to  learn 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  that  waits  on  trust,  to  hate  evil 
and  to  do  good,  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  Thy  command- 
ments, and  to  be  of  those  righteous  whom  no  harm  can 
touch.  Strengthen  us  to  take  upon  our  shoulders  the 
yoke  which  is  easy,  and  to  bear  upon  our  backs  the 
burden  which  is  light,  that  our  days  may  indeed  fly 
happily  in  that  dear  service. 

Teach  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  draw  very  near  to  Thee, 
and  by  fixed  wills  and  conscious  remembrance  of  Thee 
to  pass  our  days  in  communion  with  Thyself,  that  so 
we  may  be  guided  by  Thine  eye,  and  discern  the  lightest 
monitions  of  Thy  will.  We  thank  Thee  that  they  who 
wait  to  know  God's  will  are  never  long  left  in  ignor- 
ance of  it.  We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  keep 
us  from  misreading  any  of  Thy  purposes  concerning  us, 
and  help  us,  day  by  day,  to  be  willing  to  do  the  will  that 
we  may  know  of  its  teaching.  So,  O  Lord !  do  Thou 
guide  us  through  all  perplexity.  May  the  light  that  is 
in  us  ever  be  attended  by  us.  May  it  be  our  guiding 
star,  so  that  wo  shall  not  walk  in  darkness.  May 
Christ  Himself  be  our  Light,  and  we  His  followers,  who 
know  the  path. 


106  PULPIT  PRAYEKS 

And  now,  O  Lord  !  shed  abroad  Thy  grace  and  love 
upon  all  our  hearts.  We  pray  Thee  to  take  away  any- 
thing that  may  hinder  our  fellowship  with  Thee.  May 
we  learn  to-day  something  more  of  what  our  Lord 
and  Father  is  to  us,  and  means  for  us,  and  would 
have  us  to  be.  And  may  old  truths  have  new  fresh- 
ness and  power  as  applied  to  the  new  circumstances  of 
our  lives.  We  have  to  say  every  day,  however  unevent- 
ful and  unchanging  the  duties  of  our  familiar  lives  may 
be,  that  we  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore.  Ever 
guide,  and  strengthen  us  to  accept  Thy  guidance.  Be 
near  any  that  have  any  special  need  of  Thy  presence 
and  help.  Strengthen  us  all  to  draw  near  to  Thee 
now,  and  let  the  light  of  Thy  countenance  shine  into 
our  hearts  and  lives,  and  the  joy  of  the  Lord  be  our 
strength.  Hear  us,  Lord  !  forgive  all  our  need,  and  win 
us,  we  pray  Thee,  from  our  wayward  ways,  and  many 
faults,  and  help  us  to  hear  and  worship  for  our  Saviour 
Christ's  sake. 

LVII 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  God,  we  thank  Thee  for,  and 
would  respond  with  all  our  hearts  to,  that  great  love 
wherewith  Thou  hast  loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead 
in  trespasses  and  in  sins.  Thou  hast  come  nigh  to  us, 
who  were  afar  off,  in  that  the  Word  was  made  flesh 
and  dwelt  among  us.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that, 
humbly  and  gladly,  we  may  come  near  to  Thee  through 
Whom,  by  Whom,  we  have  access  unto  the  holiest  of 
all ;  and  can  lay  our  faces,  full  of  confusion,  because  of 
our  unworthiness,  on  the  very  heart  of  our  Father  God. 
Help  us  daily  to  live  close  by  Thyself,  and  in  our  spirits 
may  that  mighty  power  dwell  which  shall  build  us  up 
for  a  habitation  of  God  that  dwells  in  us. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  107 

O  Lord!  lead  us  into  the  blessed  depths  of  com- 
munion with  Thyself.  May  we  know  what  it  is  to 
dwell  in  love,  and  so  to  dwell  as  in  our  home,  and 
habitually  in  God.  We  beseech  Thee  that  this  may  be 
so,  even  whilst  our  hands  are  busy  with  the  tasks  of 
life.  Thou  dost  not  mean  that  these  should  part  us 
from  Thee.  Our  weakness  too  often  permits  them  to 
do  so.  We  ask  Thee  that  a  better  mind  may  be  in  us, 
and  that  we  may  understand  more  how  all  these 
common  things  are  provided  in  order  that  in  them  we 
may  have  access  to  Thee ;  and  by  reason  of  our  very 
necessities  realise  to  ourselves,  in  our  conflicts  and  toils, 
that  we  are  drawn  and  driven  closer  to  Thyself.  Thus 
help  us  to  turn  all  our  work  into  worship,  and  at  every 
step  along  the  road  have  the  presence  of  our  Guide  and 
our  God. 

And  now  to  Thee,  Who  knowest  our  necessities  better 
than  we  ourselves  do,  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  teach 
us  to  see  Thy  loving  will  in  everything  that  befalls  us. 
We  do  not  venture  to  tell  Thee  what  is  best  for  us,  but 
may  we  be  exempt  from  care,  from  carking  anxieties, 
from  all  unsubmissive  kicking  against  the  pricks,  from 
all  bootless  murmuring  at  what  cannot  come  back,  from 
all  dark  and  enfeebling  dread  of  what  may  or  must 
come  in  the  future  ;  to  live  at  liberty  because  we  keep 
Thy  precepts.  Give  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  Thy  presence 
and  help  as  we  remain  in  our  hour  of  worship.  We 
thank  Thee  that  we  have  often  found  Thee  here.  We 
thank  Thee  for  all  the  blessings  that  have  been 
ministered  to  us  in  past  years.  Still  be  with  us  and  help 
us  in  hearing  and  speaking  Thy  word,  in  all  the  acts 
and  exercise  of  Christian  fellowship  and  worship.  And 
grant  that  each  of  us,  as  we  go  forth  into  the  various 
duties  of  life,  may  carry  with  us  the  savour  of  the  Name 


108  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  whether  by  word  or  by  life,  by  both 
as  occasion  may  serve  us,  by  either  as  Thy  providence 
does  appoint,  may  be  Thy  witnesses  in  the  world. 

And  we  beseech  Thee  to  remember  all  sad  hearts, 
to  send  Thy  grace  and  Thy  peace  to  all  such,  to  speak 
words  of  strong  consolation  which  are  more  than 
words  or  realities  to  all  that  are  afflicted.  And  help  us, 
O  Lord,  in  all  our  various  trials,  greater  or  smaller, 
not  to  put  away  from  ourselves  Thy  solace,  any  more 
than  in  our  various  works  we  neglect  Thy  command- 
ments. And  now  we  beseech  Thee  to  bestow  some 
quickening  impulse  from  Thy  good  Spirit,  and  some 
truths  to  meditate  upon  which  may  help  and 
strengthen,  guide  and  correct,  and  all  we  ask  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


LVIII 

Thankfully,  O  Lord,  would  we  come  to  Thee  now, 
rejoicing  that  we  can  think  of  Thee  as  our  unfailing 
Friend ;  and  praying  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to 
cleave  close  to  Thee,  by  faith  and  love,  by  obedience 
and  desire.  Thou  art  good  and  upright,  therefore 
Thou  wilt  teach  sinners  in  the  way.  Thou  art  the  God 
of  our  salvation,  and  on  Thee  would  we  wait  all  the 
day ;  and  pray  that  in  our  hearts  there  may  ever  abide 
that  meekness,  the  possessors  of  which  Thou  wilt 
guide  in  judgment  and  teach  Thy  ways.  We  thank 
Thee  that  we  do  know  that  all  the  paths  of  the  Lord 
are  mercy  and  truth  ;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  if  ever 
our  feeble  sight  fails  to  discern  the  majesty  and  the 
mercifulness  of  Thy  goings,  and  if  ever  Thy  path  seems 
to  us  to  be  in  the  deep  waters,  unfathomable  and 
untraceable,  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  apprehend  that 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  109 

every  cloud  that  veileth  love  itself  is  love;  and  that 
the  paths  which  to  us  seem  to  be  in  the  deep  are  really 
in  the  sanctuary.  Help  us  thus  to  live  lords  of  the 
world  and  of  ourselves,  and  in  all  the  duties  that 
devolve  upon  us. 

And  strengthen  us,  we  pray  Thee,  that  our  vision 
may  not  be  wholly  occupied,  nor  our  hearts  entirely 
absorbed,  in  the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal. 
May  they  be  transparent  to  our  faith,  so  that  through 
them,  and  even  by  means  of  them,  we  may  be  able  to 
bring  more  closely  to  our  minds  and  hearts  the  things 
and  the  persons  that  are  eternal.  May  we  live  as 
seeing  the  Invisible,  and  may  we  walk  in  the  light  of 
His  face,  rejoicing  for  all  that  we  can  see  of  the 
brightness,  and  rejoicing  that  there  is  so  much  of  it 
which  is  too  bright  for  our  eyes. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  what  we  know  of  Thee. 
We  would  thank  Thee  not  less  for  what  we  never  can 
know.  We  are  sure  from  what  Thou  hast  revealed  to 
us  of  Thyself  that  all  the  rest  must  be  of  the  same 
texture,  and  that  nothing  that  is  hid  in  God  can  con- 
tradict what  is  manifested  of  God.  And  so  we  fall 
back  upon  the  plain  truth  that  Thou  preservest  man 
and  beast,  and  bow  with  submission  before  the  judg- 
ments which  are  a  mighty  deep,  believing  that  deeper 
than  they  is  the  righteousness  which  is  as  the  great 
mountains,  and  spreads  its  roots  beneath  the  judgments 
of  the  Lord. 

We  beseech  Thee,  then,  to  help  us  thus  to  live,  thus 
to  labour,  thus  to  endure  as  knowing  that  Thou  art  the 
faithful  Creator,  the  faithful  redeeming  God.  We 
beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  to  rest  upon  us  gathered 
here  before  Thee  this  morning,  that  we  may  enter  into 
the  calm  sweetness,  the  stable  blessedness,  of  those 


110  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

who  dwell  beneath  the  shadow  of  Thy  wing,  and  in 
Thy  secret  place  are  kept  as  in  a  sure  habitation,  far 
from  danger  and  far  from  fear. 

We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  great  mercies,  for  the 
blessings  of  every  day  that  come  punctual,  precious, 
and  sufficient.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  greater  mercy 
that  lies  behind  all  these,  and  is  but  partially  manifested 
by  them.  Thou  hast  before  the  sons  of  men  wrought 
for  us  great  goodness.  We  bless  Thee  that  in  Thy 
deep  storehouses  Thou  hast  still  greater  goodness  laid 
up  for  them  that  fear  Him.  And  so  we  would  take  all 
the  transient  blessings,  and  the  things  that  perish 
with  the  using,  and  use  them  in  that  they  are  perishing 
for  the  imperishable  good  of  bringing  us  to  Thyself. 
And  we  trust  Thee  for  the  things  in  the  future,  and 
beyond  the  grave,  as  well  as  for  the  future  of  the  next 
moment,  sure  that  Thou  doest  all  things  according  to 
the  purpose  of  Thy  own  will,  which  is  the  purpose  of 
Thy  own  heart's  love. 

Hear  us  now,  O  Lord  ;  cleanse  our  hearts  and  minds 
from  all  evil ;  break  any  bonds  that  may  still  be 
knitting  us  to  low  things,  even  whilst  we  come 
together  thus  ;  and  help  us  now,  with  true  hearts  and 
full  assurance  of  faith,  to  draw  near  to  Thee,  and  to 
rejoice  in  the  light  of  Thy  face.  Hear  us,  we  beseech 
Thee,  for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


LIX 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  we  thank  Thee  that 
already,  ere  we  ask.  Thou  hast  blessed  us  with  all 
spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ ;  and 
since  Thou  hast  not  tarried  nor  withheld  Thy  goodness 
until  we  have  felt  our  need  of  it,  and  brought  petitions 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  111 

for  it,  we  come  to  Thee  to  ask  especially  that  we  may 
be  strengthened  to  take  the  things  that  are  freely 
given  to  us  of  God,  and  to  make  our  own  all  that 
fullness  of  power,  purity,  peace,  and  blessedness  which 
Thou  hast  stored  as  in  an  accessible  place  for  all  the 
world  in  Jesus  Christ.  Help  us  that  we  may  not 
starve  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  nor  want  whilst  such 
abundance  streams  around  us.  We  often  come  to 
Thee  with  desire  for  what  Thou  hast  already  given. 
O  Lord  !  we  need  far  more  hearts  and  hands  to  take 
the  blessings  that  invite  us  to  participate. 

Strengthen  our  faith  and  desire,  O  Lord.  Thou  hast 
taught  us  that  Thou  wilt  fill  every  open  mouth,  and 
that  according  to  our  faith  it  will  be  unto  us.  Thou 
hast  told  us  we  have  but  to  ask  and  have,  to  desire 
and  to  possess.  Therefore  do  we  come  to  Thee,  O 
Lord !  acknowledging  the  sluggishness  of  our  own 
desires.  How  often  have  we  misused  them  for  lesser 
and  all  uncertain  good ;  how  seldom  we  have  lifted 
them  to  the  height  of  that  longing  which  never  can 
remain  unsatisfied  since  Thou  art  faithful  and  good. 
Help  us  to  wish  most  for  what  is  best  worthy  of 
being  wished.  Help  us  to  strive  most  for  that 
which  we  are  sure  to  possess  if  we  believingly  strive. 
May  the  sweet  possession  of  Thyself  be  our  true  and 
enduring  riches.  Help  us  thus  to  live,  and  so  to  use 
all  passing  events,  duties,  joys,  sorrows  as  that  they 
may  make  more  sure,  more  deep,  more  blessed,  our 
possession  of  our  true  Portion,  Thine  own  Self. 

Help  us  to  hear  and  to  speak  Thy  message,  take 
away  all  the  hindrances  which  may  attach  to  the 
messenger,  and  to  give  this  message  its  glory  and  its 
power.  We  commend  one  another  to  Thy  gracious  care. 
Comfort  all  the  sorrowful,  help  all  the  struggling,  and 


112  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

give  our  feeble  wills  strength  to  resolve  what  is  good 
for  any  of  us  who  are  struggling  with  temptations. 
O  Lord !  be  Thou  our  strength,  and  give  us  the  victory- 
through  Jesus  Christ.  In  all  changing  conditions  be 
Thou  beside  us  with  the  appropriate  gifts  as  Thou 
knowest  how  to  give  them.  May  Thy  word  have  free 
course  and  be  glorified,  and  so  all  the  sorrows,  all  the 
desires,  all  the  sins,  of  this  poor  distracted  yet  redeemed 
world  be  soothed  and  healed  and  gladdened. 

And  now,  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves  to 
Thy  gracious  care,  and  beseech  Thee  to  take  us  into 
Thy  loving  keeping,  and  help  us,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord. 


LX 

Blessed  be  God!  Who  hath  not  turned  away  our 
prayer  nor  His  mercy  from  us.  We  thank  Thee, 
O  Lord,  that  even  our  poor  tongues  are  permitted  to 
extol  Thee.  May  our  hearts  be  filled  and  deeply  im- 
pressed with  the  sense  of  Thy  love,  Thy  sweetness,  Thy 
readiness  to  hear.  Thy  loving  forbearance  with  the 
imperfection  of  our  praises,  and  the  folly  too  often  of 
our  petitions. 

We  bless  Thee  that  not  only  hast  Thou  an  ear  and 
a  hand  to  help,  but  that  Thou  dost  teach  us  how  to 
pray,  and  what  to  pray  for.  We  need  Thy  teaching, 
for  surely  our  hearts  often  deceive  us  and  lead  us 
away,  and  our  notions  of  what  is  good  for  us  are  not 
Thy  will.  But  we  bless  Thee  that  though  sometimes, 
in  the  mystery  of  Thy  providence  Thy  ways  are 
different  from  what  we  would  have  them,  yet  they 
are  always  higher  than  our  ways  as  the  heavens  are 
higher    than    the    earth.      And    they  always,  as  the 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  113 

heavens  do,  send  down  on  earth  sweet  influences,  of 
dew  and  sunshine  and  rain,  which  make  the  barren 
places  to  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose.  May  it  be 
so  with  us,  O  Lord !  May  our  emptiness  be  more  and 
more  filled  with  Thy  fulness,  our  weakness  transformed 
into  Thy  strength,  and  all  our  ignorant  wishes  brought 
into  submission  to  the  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect 
love  of  Thy  dealings  with  us ;  so  that  our  hearts  may 
be  set  free  to  desire  most  earnestly  the  best  things, 
and  to  covet  strongly  the  true  and  only  good. 

Bring  us,  we  pray  Thee,  more  and  more  into  fellow- 
ship with,  and  possession  of.  Thine  own  self.  Who  art 
our  Portion  and  the  Strength  of  our  hearts  for  ever. 
Clear  out  of  our  thoughts  and  wishes  everything  that 
is  contrary  to  Thy  holy  will,  O  Lord !  Give  us  strength, 
we  beseech  Thee,  to  subdue  and  to  hold  well  in  hand 
all  our  tastes  and  tendencies,  our  passions  and  desires, 
and  that  we  may  more  and  more  be  able  to  bring  our 
whole  selves  to  be  governed  by  Thee.  '  If  we  regard 
iniquity  in  our  hearts  the  Lord  will  not  hear  us.'  We 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  fight 
against  all  evil  that  may  be  lurking  there,  and  to 
submit  ourselves  more  willingly,  consciously,  constantly 
to  Thy  discipline,  which  has  no  other  end  in  view  but 
our  perfecting  in  the  participation  of  Thy  holiness. 
Teach  us  the  meaning  of  life ;  teach  us  to  see  great 
possibilities  and  purposes  in  the  small  things  that 
befall  us.  Interpret  for  us  our  difficulties  and  our 
trials.  May  our  temptations  minister  strength  by 
being  overcome  in  Thy  power.  May  our  joys  feed  the 
flame  of  our  thankful  devotion,  and  everything  that 
we  meet  with  in  this  life  bring  us  nearer  to  Thyself, 
and  put  us  more  fully  in  possession  of  the  life  which 
is  life  indeed. 

H 


114  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  beseech  Thee  to  cleanse  our  hearts  from  every- 
thing that  is  contrary  to  Thy  holy  will,  to  clear  our 
eyes  that  we  may  see  more  plainly  and  substantially 
the  things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal,  to  draw  our 
hearts  more  and  more  to  Thee,  and  detach  them  more 
and  more  from  any  intimate  attachment  to  the  things 
that  are  seen  and  temporal.  Thus,  we  pray  Thee,  train 
and  educate  us  through  our  days,  and  help  us  to  be 
willing,  docile,  profiting  scholars  in  Thy  great  school. 
In  Thy  great  mercy  draw  near  to  us,  and  grant  that 
to-day  our  public  worship  and  our  private  meditation, 
and  any  work  that  we  may  seek  to  do  for  Christ's  sake, 
may  be  full  of  blessing  to  ourselves  and  to  others. 
Grant  Thy  gracious  help  for  our  Saviour  Christ's  sake. 

LXI 

Give  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  more  and  more  of 
that  helping  Spirit  to  shape  our  desires  and  to  make 
our  petitions  for  ourselves  and  intercession  for  others 
conformable  to  Thy  holy  will.  We  thank  Thee  for  all 
the  breadth  of  assurance,  that  if  we  make  intercession 
according  to  Thy  will  Thou  hearest  us ;  and  we  would 
not  complain  of  the  limits,  for  when  we  are  wisest  we  do 
not,  in  our  deepest  hearts,  desire  anything  that  is  not 
in  accordance  with  Thy  will.  But  bow  us,  we  pray  Thee, 
in  continual  and  peaceful  submission,  and  so  help  us  to 
live  exempt  from  care,  and  having  that  great  tran- 
quillity which  comes  to  those  whose  wills  are  filled 
with  Thine.  O  Lord,  strengthen  us  day  by  day  that  we 
may  live  in  accordance  with  our  highest  conceptions 
of  our  duty  and  relations  to  Thee,  to  ourselves,  and 
to  others.  Keep  us  from  the  many  temptations  and 
errors  which  are  always  seeking  to  lower  our  standards, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  115 

and  dwarf  our  vision,  and  make  our  aims  worldly  and 
mean.  And  help  us  to  follow  in  Christ's  footsteps,  and 
walking  to  that  Light  of  life  as  our  guiding  pillar  may 
we  know  nothing  of  darkness. 

Help  us  in  our  worship ;  give  us  Thy  words.  So 
shape  our  utterance,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  it  may 
present  no  obstacle  to  the  reception  of  Thy  truth,  but 
may  in  some  humble  measure  further  the  same.  Oh  ! 
purify  our  motives  as  we  hear  and  speak.  May  we  not 
allow  by-ends  to  come  in  and  mar  our  service  and 
pollute  it.  Teach  us  what  to  say  and  how  to  say  it, 
what  to  hear  and  how  to  obey  and  live.  Bless  each  of 
us  according  to  our  different  needs.  Go  with  us  in 
all  the  variety  of  the  earthly  circumstances,  difficulties, 
and  joys.  If  any  of  us  are  in  sorrow  and  in  trouble  let 
Thy  light  shine  through  the  mist,  change  it  into  a 
golden  glory,  and  may  our  sorrows  lead  us  nearer  and 
nearer  to  Thyself,  and  then  they  will  be  Thy  messengers. 
May  we  hear  in  them  all  the  great  voice  that  says 
to  us  '  Come  up  hither.'  Take  us,  O  Lord,  into  Thy 
gracious  keeping ;  watching  over  us,  love  and  bless  us. 
Thou  wilt  be  with  all  who  love  Thee  and  try  to  do  Thy 
will.  Clear  away,  then,  our  minds  from  errors,  deepen 
in  our  lives  the  influences  of  Thy  truth.  May  all  Thy 
servants  be  brought  nearer  to  Thee  and  from  Thee,  by 
word  and  work.  May  the  word  of  the  Lord  sound  out. 
The  Lord  bless  all  the  many  thousands  of  His  Israel,  and 
watch  over  all  who  are  seeking  in  this  confused  and  jar- 
ring world  to  bring  about  the  great  harmony  and  order 
which  comes  to  those  who  yield  to  the  heavenly  law, 
and  the  heavenly  Lawgiver,  Who  is  Love.  Hear  us  as 
we  wait  before  Thee;  answer  and  forgive,  we  pray, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 


116  PULPIT  PRAYERS 


LXII 


O  Lord  !  Who  dwellest  in  the  high  and  holy  place,  we 
thank  Thee  that  though  Thou  art  lifted  so  high  above 
us  we  can  draw  near  to  Thee,  and  claim  our  place  in 
Thy  heart,  and  in  Thy  thoughts,  and  our  share  in  Thy 
merciful  deeds  to  a  universe.  We  bless  Thee  that  not- 
withstanding all  that  hang  upon  Thee  we  can  come 
with  our  little  cry,  with  our  small  wants.  And  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us,  whatever  may 
be  our  special  present  condition,  to  come  to  Thee  with 
true  hearts  in  full  assurance  of  faith,  believing  that  of 
a  truth  it  is  no  vain  thing  to  call  upon  the  Lord.  Let 
not  our  oblations  be  vain,  we  beseech  Thee.  May  our 
hands  be  clean  and  our  hearts  pure,  that  Thou  mayest 
hear  us.  Teach  us  what  we  need  most;  give  us  the 
wisdom  that  shall  desire  most  earnestly  the  most 
necessary  and  best  things,  and  honour  our  confidence 
and  faith  with  Thy  love  on  the  great  sacrifice  of  Thy 
dear  Son,  on  His  intercession  before  the  Throne,  and  on 
Thy  assurance  that  Thou  wilt  give  Thy  Holy  Spirit  to 
them  that  ask  Thee,  that  it  may  correct  our  foolish 
desires,  and  coax  our  wishes  and  inclinations  and 
longings  and  petitions  to  flow  in  the  channels  marked 
out  for  them  by  Thy  holy  will. 

O  Lord !  whatever  burdens  we  may  have  on  our 
hearts  we  dare  not  ask  Thee  to  take  them  away  unless 
it  be  Thy  will  to  do  so,  but  we  dare  to  ask  Thee  to  fit 
us  to  carry  the  load,  and  to  get  out  of  it  good.  And 
grant  that  if  clouds  and  darkness  may,  in  any  measure, 
wrap  our  faith  or  our  minds  these  may  only  be  the 
background  on  which  the  light  of  the  love  of  a  present 
God  may  be  the  more  brightly  displayed.  We  thank 
Thee  even  for  the  depths  of  the  mysteries  of  Thy  provi- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  117 

dence  which  have  often  made  us  stagger,  which  may 
be  darkening  some  of  our  hearts  now.  And  we  pray, 
O  Lord  !  that  we  may  more  and  more  rise  into  a  higher 
region  where  there  is  light  only ;  and  being  taught  of 
God  may  be  able  in  some  measure  to  look  upon  all  His 
providences  as  He  does;  and  to  realise  not  only  in 
thought  but  in  experience  the  great  purpose  for  which 
Thou  dost  send  all  Thy  varying  dealings  and  gifts,  that 
we  may  be  partakers  of  Thy  holiness,  and  out  of  the 
ways  of  Time  may  gather  the  treasure  that  shall  never 
pass. 

O  help  us,  of  Thy  great  mercy,  that  drawing  near  to 
Thee  of  a  truth  we  may  find  ourselves  ever  coming 
nearer  and  more  blessedly  near  to  the  great  Light,  the 
great  Love,  the  great  Peace.  We  thank  Thee  that  we 
can  thus  bring  our  poor  selves,  our  petitions  and  desires 
to  Thy  Throne.  And  we  pray  Thee  to  help  us  to-day  in 
all  our  public  worship,  in  all  our  various  duties,  in  our 
private  meditations,  in  our  solitary  prayers  ;  and  to 
grant  that  from  this  day's  peaceful  rest  and  cessation 
from  ordinary  avocations,  and  from  the  memories  and 
the  hopes  of  a  risen  Saviour  and  a  resurrection  of  all 
that  sleep  in  Him,  and  from  all  the  associations  and 
habitudes  of  this  day  of  public  worship,  we  may  gather 
some  blessings  that  shall  deepen  our  faith,  confirm  our 
confidence,  warm  our  love,  and  make  more  thorough- 
going and  more  operative  in  our  lives  the  resolve  to  do 
Thy  holy  will  and  to  please  Thee. 

We  pray  Thee  to  be  near  us  all,  to  forgive  our  many 
shortcomings,  our  errors  of  judgment  and  of  practice. 
Enlighten  us,  we  pray  Thee,  by  Thy  continual  illumina- 
tion, and  may  we  never  quench  nor  darken  that  light 
by  clouds  rising  from  our  own  evil  hearts ;  but  that 
Thou  wouldst  help  us,  having  light,  to  rejoice  in  the 


118  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Light,  and  to  walk  by  the  Light,  that  we  may  all  be 
children  of  the  Light.  Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee; 
mercifully  forgive  and  accept  and  bless  us,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 


LXIII 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  for  that  assurance 
that  Thou  art  the  Father  of  lights  with  Whom  is  no 
variableness,  and  that  all  gifts  which  come  from  that 
Fountain  of  light  are  like  itself — perfect.  So  with 
thankful  acceptance  of  all  which  Thou  dost  appoint, 
and  desiring  to  be  fellow- workers  with  Thee,  in  so  far 
as  that  we  shall  try  to  sympathise  with  Thy  meaning, 
and  to  follow  out  Thy  purpose  in  all  the  changes  of 
our  condition  and  lot,  we  would  bow  before  Thee  now. 
Of  Thy  great  love  give  us  some  message  which  may  be 
from  Thyself,  and  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us 
all  to  hear  as  well  as  to  speak  the  word  of  the  living 
God  '  which  abideth  forever.' 

Grant  to  us,  as  a  Christian  community,  more  and 
more  of  the  conformity  of  our  Master,  and  consistency 
in  our  lives.  May  we  day  by  day,  as  we  take  up  the 
burden  of  common,  familiar,  and  often  wearisome 
duties,  find  that  strength  comes  to  us  according  to  our 
needs,  and  that  holding  Fellowship  with  Thee  through 
Thy  dear  Son,  the  crooked  things  may  become  straight 
and  the  rough  places  plain.  May  we  be  helped  to 
understand  all  that  we  ought  to  be  and  do ;  may  we 
be  quickened  gladly  to  perform  Thy  holy  will,  and 
clearly  to  apprehend  Thy  blessed  presence;  do  Thou 
help  any  of  us  that  have  any  special  need  of  special 
aid.  Give  patience,  give  trust,  give  victory ;  and  grant, 
we  pray  Thee,  that  all  of  us  who  may  be  anyways 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  119 

exercised  by  any  sorrow  may  find  there  the  peaceable 
fruits  which  it  is  meant  to  bring  to  bear,  and  will  bear 
for  them  who  are  rightly  exercised  thereby. 

We  thank  Thee  for  all  mercies  which,  individually, 
and  as  a  church,  and  congregation,  we  have  received 
at  Thy  hands.  And  we  pray  Thee  to  forgive  all  the 
imperfections  of  our  service ;  and  to  grant  that  in  the 
days  yet  to  come,  be  they  few  or  many,  the  word  of 
the  Lord  may  be  faithfully  preached  here,  and  the 
message  of  God's  great  love  find  its  way  into  many 
hearts  and  lives.  With  like  blessings  we  beseech  Thee 
to  visit  all  communions  of  Christian  people  in  this  city, 
in  this  land,  and  throughout  the  world.  And  grant 
that  Thy  servants  may  become  more  completely  Thy 
instruments,  and  more  manifestly  before  men  be  the 
worthy  bearers  of  Thy  word  and  the  faithful  witnesses 
to  their  Lord. 

Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  when  we  cry;  let  Thy 
blessings  descend  upon  us,  and  upon  all  who  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  upon  all  wandering  souls;  on 
each  let  fall,  O  Lord !  some  gleam  of  light.  And  lead 
this  weary,  warring,  distracted  world  to  the  appre- 
hension of  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
possession  of  the  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy 
which  belong  to  it. 

We  would  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  loving  hands, 
and  pray  for  Thy  gracious  presence  and  help,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


LXIV 

O  Lord  !  Who  art  the  Sun  and  Shield,  giving  light  and 
life  and  defence  and  every  good,  we  thank  Thee  for  all 
the  blessedness  that  comes  to  those  who  dwell  in  Thy 


120  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

house,  and  to  those  who  journey  towards  it.  We 
thank  Thee  for  the  joy  of  the  search  after  Thee,  for 
the  joy  of  the  possession  of  Thee.  We  thank  Thee  that 
there  are  desires  which  are  only  less  blessed  than  their 
satisfying.  And  we  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help 
us  by  faith  and  trust  in  Thyself  to  have  in  ourselves 
both  the  blessing  of  them  that  dwell  in  Thy  house,  and 
of  them  '  in  whose  heart  are  the  ways '  towards  it. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  each  of  us  this  morning 
in  our  worship  here,  and  to  lift  away  from  hearts  and 
minds  any  and  every  thing  that  may  stand  between  us 
and  God.  May  no  wandering  thoughts  rob  us  of  the 
joy  of  fellowship  with  thee.  May  no  doubts  darken  our 
sky,  may  no  indifference  or  negligence  keep  us  from 
the  light  of  Thy  face.  May  we  be  able  to  leave  behind 
anything  and  everything  that  would  rob  us  of  the  true 
fellowship  with  God.  May  we  remember  weaknesses 
and  difficulties  and  trials,  or  joys  or  sorrows,  or 
treasures  or  conflicts,  and  everything  that  belongs  to 
this  present,  only  in  so  far  as  memory  may  make  us 
cleave  the  closer  to  Thyself,  and  apply  to  our  special 
wants  more  closely  Thine  all-sufficiency. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  in  all  our  weakness 
we  can  confidently  turn  to  Thee,  and  we  bless  Thee 
that  none  have  ever  sought  Thee  and  found  Thee  not, 
though  sometimes  our  finding  is  very  different  from 
what  we  in  our  search  expected.  And  yet,  O  Lord,  we 
bless  Thee  for  all  the  manifold  ways  in  which  Thou 
dost  reveal  Thyself  to  us,  and  we  praise  Thee  that  we 
can  believe  that  Thou  dost  make  Thyself  known  even 
when  we  think  Thou  art  hiding  Thyself.  And  we  thank 
Thee  that  we  can  cast  ourselves  upon  Thee,  and  leave 
to  Thee  to  determine  in  what  shape  Thy  strength  shall 
come.     O  Lord !   we  only  know  we  need  Thee ;  we  do 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  121 

not  know  how  Thou  canst  best  give  us  Thyself.  So  we 
pray  for  submission  as  well  as  for  trust;  and  we  beseech 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  give  us  that  patient  wisdom 
and  clear  insight  which  shall  rightly  interpret  all 
which  else  might  be  baffling  mystery,  and  shall  untie 
all  the  knots  in  Thy  providence,  in  so  far  as  these  need 
to  be  lessened  and  solved  to  our  present  knowledge. 

We  pray  Thee  to  lift  all  our  hearts  now  to  Thyself. 
We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  associations  of  this  place, 
for  all  the  influences  of  our  present  occupation,  for  the 
memories  of  the  past,  for  the  great  truths  which  this 
day  preaches  to  us  all,  of  a  Christ  that  died,  yea! 
rather,  that  is  risen  again,  Who  is  even  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  who  is  with  us,  though  He  is  in  the 
heavens,  and  ready  to  help  us  that  we  too  may  rise 
from  the  death  of  sin  and  live  unto  God.  May  it  be  so 
with  us  all.  May  we  this  day  find  that  it  is  no  vain 
thing  to  wait  upon  the  Lord.  We  beseech  Thee  to 
hear  us,  and  grant  Thy  presence  in  our  worship,  for 
Christ  our  Saviour's  sake. 


LXV 

O  Lord  !  we  thank  Thee  that  we  see  the  heavens 
opened,  and  that  great  ladder  between  earth  and 
Heaven,  even  Thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  through  Whom  all 
Thy  blessings  come  down  to  us.  And  we  can  climb 
to  Thee ;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  our  hearts  and 
thoughts  may  more  constantly  turn  to  Him,  and  that 
to  us  earth  may  be  more  crowded  with  Heaven,  and  life 
with  God,  than  it  ever  has  been  in  the  past.  Help  us 
day  by  day,  in  all  the  smallnesses  of  our  continually 
returning  duties,  to  apprehend  the  greatness  of  Thy 
purpose,  and  to  feel  that  we  have  Thy  strength  being 


122  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

ministered  unto  us  according  to  our  need,  and  according 
to  our  desire.  And  help  us,  O  Lord,  day  by  day  to  walk 
in  the  light  of  Thy  face,  and  to  be  continually  blessed 
with  the  vision  of  greater  and  greater  things,  because 
we  continually  draw  nearer  to  Thyself.  Help  us  in 
this  our  act  of  worship.  Give  us,  we  pray  Thee,  Thy 
word  to  speak ;  grant  that  there  may  be  nothing  in  our 
utterance  of  it  which  may  mar  its  effect ;  but  may  it 
find  its  way,  by  Thy  gracious  influence  accompanying 
it,  into  the  very  depths  of  our  lives,  and  there  mould 
us  more  and  more  according  to  Thine  own  will. 

We  thank  Thee,  Lord,  for  the  strength  and  blessing 
that  many  of  us  have  received  in  our  meetings  together 
here ;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  still  be 
with  us,  and  grant  that  the  light  of  Thy  face  may  not 
be  less  bright,  but  growingly  clear  and  radiant  to  us  in 
what  may  yet  remain  for  us  of  worship  together  in  this 
place.  And  we  would  commend  one  another  to  Thy 
loving  care,  and  pray  Thee  to  be  near  us  all,  according 
to  our  different  necessities. 

We  pray  Thee  to  hear  us  for  all  Christian  people,  and 
we  ask  that  they  may  have  understanding  of  the  times, 
to  know  what  they  ought  to  do  ;  and  keep  us,  we  pray 
Thee,  from  anything  of  our  individual  lives  and 
influences  that  may  foster  the  disposition  against  each 
of  Thy  counsels,  and  of  Thy  commandments. 

We  Gommend  all  whom  we  remember  at  this  hour  to 
Thy  gracious  care;  and  thank  Thee  that  still,  in  the 
hour  of  clouds  and  darkness,  we  can  believe  that  verily 
there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth. 

Hear  us  and  forgive  our  sin ;  grant  us  Thy  help,  for 
our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  123 

V 

LXVI 

O  Lord,  we  would  come  into  Thy  presence  not  only 
though  but  because  Thou  art  a  consuming  fire.  With 
reverence  and  godly  fear  we  would  draw  near,  with 
that  fear  which  has  in  it  no  torment ;  and  we  bow  our- 
selves before  Thee,  and  pray  that  we  may  be  baptised 
in  the  Holy  Ghost  and  in  fire ;  and  that  the  merciful 
cleansing  flame  may  purge  away  all  our  dross  and 
tin,  and  may  deliver  our  souls  from  all  their  stain,  and 
make  us  pure  after  the  pattern  of  Thine  own  purity. 

O  Lord,  we  bless  Thee  that  none  of  us  need  to  dread 
Thee  whilst  all  of  us  are  bound  to  fear  Thee.  We  bless 
Thee  for  that  perfect  love  which  casts  out  dread  and 
deepens  reverence.  And  we  pray  that  in  our  hearts  it 
may  always  dwell,  making  us  very  peaceful  and  very 
strong  to  do  Thy  will,  and  to  bear  Thy  will.  O  help  us 
to  hold  fast  the  grace  that  Thou  hast  given  us,  and 
since  the  Kingdom  cannot  be  moved  may  we  who 
partake  of  such  stable  and  unchangeable  good  be  stable 
and  unchangeable  likewise.  Help  us  to  be  steadfast 
and  immovable,  to  grasp  Thy  firm  salvation  with  a 
firm  hold  ;  and  always  to  realise  in  our  daily  experience, 
and  in  the  little  things  of  life,  that  God  is  with  us  of  a 
truth,  and  that  to  bless. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  the  great  gifts  which 
Thou  dost  bestow  upon  us.  We  beseech  Thee  that  we 
may  indeed  come,  even  whilst  here  on  earth,  to  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem  ;  and  may  have  for  our  companions 
the  Judge  of  all,  and  the  Mediator  of  the  new  Covenant, 
and  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect,  and  be  part  of 
that  innumerable  assembly  which  rejoices  in  Thee. 
Surround  us,  we  pray  Thee,  with  all  Thy  good  gifts 
according  to  our  need,  and  oh  !  help  us,  day  by  day,  to 


124  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

set  ourselves  with  more  vigour  and  perseverance  to  run 
the  race  that  is  set  before  us.  May  we  ever  indeed  be 
looking  to  Christ.  Oh  that  our  lives  were  fuller  of  Him. 
Oh  that  we  knew  more  of  the  power  of  His  Resurrection, 
lifting  us  above  our  death  of  sin  and  bringing  us  into 
joyfulness  of  life  in  God,  hid  there  with  Jesus  Christ. 
Grant  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  grace  day  by  day  to  be 
looking  away  from  all  else  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and 
Finisher  of  our  faith  ;  and  may  we  have  Him  for  our 
Leader  and  Commander,  Him  for  our  example.  Him  for 
our  Companion,  Him  for  our  Guide.  May  He  be  with 
us  the  way  to  God,  and  our  Friend  on  the  way. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  pour  upon  us  all 
needful  grace  for  daily  duty.  O  Lord,  work  Thou 
through  us  and  help  us  to  submit  ourselves  to  Thy 
gracious  influences.  May  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God 
dwell  in  our  hearts,  and  we  be  coming  nearer  and  nearer 
to  Thee,  O  Lord,  every  day  that  we  live.  Help  us  to 
accept  all  Thy  varying  providences  with  thankfulness 
and  trust.  If  any  of  us  are  even  now  having  to  pass 
through  dark  valleys  and  deep  waters,  do  Thou  give  us 
grace  to  trust  in  Thee,  and  to  lay  to  heart  the  blessed 
words  which  we  have  been  reading,  which  encourage 
us  to  take  our  sorrows  as  the  sign  of  our  Sonship.  May 
they  be  so  indeed  to  us  all,  and  may  none  of  us  waste 
these  precious  gifts  of  Thy  hand.  Let  Thy  rod  and  Thy 
staff  comfort  us,  and  whatever  Thou  dost  please  to 
appoint  for  us  may  we  so  receive  it  as  that  it  shall 
work  for  us  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness.  Help 
us  therefore  never  to  faint  or  fear,  but  lift  up  the  hands 
that  hang  down,  and  strengthen  the  feeble  knees,  and 
make  paths  for  our  feet. 

Guide  us  by  Thy  gracious  counsel.  Set  us  free  from 
the  bonds  which  we  ourselves  have  not  the  strength. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  125 

and  often  not  the  inclination,  to  break.  And  grant 
that  every  one  of  us  may  day  by  day  make  it  our 
business  to  grow  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  O  Lord,  lift  away  all 
weights  from  our  spirits  and  help  us  to  cast  them  away ; 
and  as  for  the  sin  that  surrounds  us,  and  is  within  us, 
may  we  put  it  away  too,  and  run  with  perseverance  the 
race  that  is  set  before  us.  Help  us  as  we  try  to  meditate 
together  upon  what  may  be  profitable  to  our  spirits. 
Do  Thou  speak  some  word  to  each  of  us,  and  grant  that 
as  we  have  often  found  it  in  time  past,  so  we  may  often 
find  it  now  that  Thou  art  present  with  us  in  our  worship, 
and  that  Thou  Thyself  art  speaking  comfortably  to  our 
hearts. 

We  pray  that  each  of  us,  according  to  our  various 
occupations,  circumstances  and  temptations,  may  find 
Thee  near  us,  to  bless  us  and  guide  us  in  all  our  ways. 
Prosper,  in  so  far  as  Thou  seest  it  to  be  good,  the  work 
of  our  hands  upon  us  ;  and  grant  that  it  may  indeed  be 
Thy  work  which  we  do,  and  so  bless  it  to  the  springing 
thereof. 

We  commend  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious  care.  We 
would  not  forget  thankfulness  for  all  Thy  merciful 
benefits  towards  us ;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  our 
hearts  and  minds  may  now  be  brought  into  closer 
fellowship  with  Thee,  and  that  Thou  wouldst  draw  very 
near  to  each  heart  in  Thy  presence,  and  help  us  all  to 
wait  upon  our  God. 

We  pray  for  all  that  are  in  any  kind  of  sorrow  or 
trouble.  We  beseech  Thee  to  comfort  the  hearts  of 
Thy  servants,  and  to  grant  light  to  them  that  sit  in 
darkness,  and  a  happy  issue  out  of  all  their  troubles — 
the  happiest  issue,  that  they  shall  by  them  be  brought 
nearer  to  God.     O  Lord,  hear  us  now ;  in  Thy  mercy 


126  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

forgive  us  ;  pardon  the  sins  of  our  low  faith,  and  look 
upon  our  Intercessor  before  the  Throne,  in  Whom,  and 
in  Whose  past  and  present  work  we  trusting  may  bring 
our  petitions,  even  Jesus  Christ  our  crucified  and 
crowned  Lord. 


LXVII 

O  Lord  our  God,  Who  art  always  near  us,  and  ready  to 
come  down  to  us,  lift  us  up  to  Thee,  we  beseech  Thee ; 
and  help  us  now  that  in  our  deepest  hearts  we  may  be 
aware  of  Thy  sweet  and  strength-giving  Presence,  and 
may  reach  out  our  desires  towards  Thyself. 

We  thank  Thee  that  amidst  the  many  occupations, 
and,  peradventure,  troubles  and  cares  of  another  day, 
we  have  the  opportunity  of  gathering  ourselves  to- 
gether, and  helping  each  other's  weakness  to  be  strong. 
We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  blessings  that  come  to  those 
who  in  secret  and  solitude  seek  Thy  face.  We  thank 
Thee  for  all  the  blessings  which  come  to  those  who, 
in  company  with  others,  draw  near  to  Thee  ;  and  we 
beseech  Thee  that  we  may,  in  our  own  experience  now, 
unite  both  conditions  and  possess  both  blessings.  We 
would  draw  near  to  Thee  each  for  ourselves.  We 
would  feel  that  we  are  not  alone  when  we  approach 
Thee.  We  pray  that  Thy  Spirit  may  be  poured  out 
upon  us,  and  that  we  may  be  helped  in  all  the  hour  of 
our  service  now ;  that  our  thoughts  may  be  lifted  up 
towards  Thee,  and  we  may  hear  that  voice  which 
Christ's  sheep  do  hear,  and  hearing  follow. 

We  thank  Thee  for  that  good  Shepherd,  we  thank 
Thee  for  that  Door  into  the  fold  of  God.  We  bless 
Thee  that  He  hath  laid  down  His  life  for  the  sheep. 
We  thank  Thee  that  this  sacrifice  of  His  brings  life  to 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  127 

us,  and  abundance  of  all  needful  good.  We  beseech 
Thee  that  for  none  of  us  may  it  be  in  vain  that  we 
hear  the  good  news.  May  we  never  self-willedly 
wander  in  paths  of  our  own  choosing,  but  may  we 
ever  follow  the  footsteps  of  the  flock,  and  be  guided 
by  the  Shepherd's  care.  We  thank  Thee  that  we  can 
so  fully  cast  ourselves  upon  Thy  promised  help  and 
mercy ;  and  that  we,  as  Thy  servants  of  old,  can  say 
that  if  the  Lord  is  our  Shepherd  we  shall  not  want, 
and  can  be  sure  that  goodness  will  follow  us,  as  it  has 
followed  us,  all  the  days  of  our  lives  ;  and  that  when 
these  days  are  over,  we  may  still  hope  to  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord  for  ever. 

O  Lord,  accept  our  praises  for  Thy  continual  mercies 
to  us,  for  all  the  faithful  fulfilment  of  these  great 
promises  which  Thou  hast  bestowed ;  and  draw  us 
nearer  to  Thee  that  we  may  live  more  doubly  obedient 
to  Thy  leading,  and  more  sweetly  dependent  upon  Thy 
grace  and  strength,  more  aware  of  Thy  guidance  and 
more  disposed  to  obey  it. 

We  come  to  Thee  this  evening,  and  acknowledge 
our  own  weakness  and  manifold  sins.  O  Lord,  do 
Thou  purge  our  hearts,  we  pray  Thee,  from  every  drop 
of  bitterness.  May  there  be  no  recognised  and  per- 
mitted evil  thing  in  us.  May  we  have  grace  given  to 
us  to  search  our  own  spirits  as  with  the  candle  of  the 
Lord,  and  do  Thou  Thyself  search  us  and  try  us,  and 
reveal  to  us,  we  pray  Thee,  our  secret  faults,  the  things 
of  which  we  are  not  aware  in  us,  which  are  contrary 
to  Thy  holy  will.  May  we  possess  the  happiness  of 
the  man  who  condemneth  not  himself  in  the  things 
that  he  alloweth,  and  we  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
forgive  all  that  has  been  contrary  to  Thy  will.  And, 
O  Lord,  help  us,  day  by  day,  to  learn  more  deeply  the 


128  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  that  we  may  be  transformed  by 
the  renewing  of  our  minds,  and  may  yield  ourselves,  in 
the  fullest  sense,  living  sacrifices. 

We  bless  Thee  for  all  the  blessedness  that  comes  to 
those  who  are  not  their  own,  and  do  not  desire  to  be 
so ;  and  we  pray  for  deliverance  from  ourselves,  and 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  be  the 
priests  and  the  temples  and  the  sacrifices,  offering  up 
ourselves  to  God  in  reliance  on  that  great  Sacrifice, 
which  does  for  each  of  us  what  no  sacrifice  of  ours  can 
do  for  ourselves,  as  the  propitiation  for  our  sins. 

Be  with  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  our  worship  of  this 
evening ;  and  help  us  to  hear,  to  speak,  and  to  meditate 
upon  Thy  great,  true,  and  blessed  promises,  and  to 
carry  away  from  this  meeting  some  impulses  that 
may  abide  with  us,  and  may  go  to  strengthening  the 
good  in  our  souls,  and  to  weakening  all  the  evil.  We 
desire  to  commend  one  another  to  Thy  care,  and  we 
beseech  Thee  to  be  near  any  of  us  who  may  have  any 
specially  felt  need  of  grace  and  help  from  Thyself. 
We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  as  of  old  it  is  true  that 
in  all  Thy  children's  afflictions  Thou  art  afflicted, 
and  the  Angel  of  Thy  Presence  saves  them.  May  it 
be  so  with  each  of  us,  and  if  there  are  any  of  us  to 
whom  the  promise  may  be  specially  needful  and 
grateful  this  evening,  fulfil  it,  O  Lord,  even  now  in 
our  own  experience.  We  bless  Thee  that  we  do  not 
need  to  ask  Thee  for  the  removal  of  the  sorrows  so 
much  as  that  we  may  be  chastened  and  disciplined 
and  profited  thereby.  We  ask  Thee  to  help  us  to 
yield  ourselves  to  God,  and  to  stand  to  the  surrender 
in  regard  to  disappointments,  losses,  and  crosses,  and 
all  the  burdens  of  this  earthly  life,  as  well  as  in  regard 
to  all  the  work  and  activity  of  mind  and  hand. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  129 

O  Lord,  bless,  we  pray  Tbee,  with  the  outpouring  of 
Thy  own  Spirit  all  our  work  as  members  of  a  Christian 
communion ;  bring  us  closer,  we  pray  Thee,  to  our 
Lord  ;  and  stir  up  in  all  the  hearts  who  love  and  profess 
to  serve  Thee  here  a  purer  spirit  of  consecration  and  a 
clearer  understanding  of  the  purpose  for  which  Thou 
hast  set  us  in  the  world,  and  given  us  Thy  grace,  that 
we  may  be  Thy  witnesses  to  men.  May  the  word  of 
the  Lord  fructify  through  us  to  many.  May  we  all  be 
able  to  declare  to  our  brethren  and  to  others  that  we 
have  found  the  Messias,  and  may  the  declaration  be  a 
large  part  of  our  felt  duty  here  on  earth.  We  thank 
Thee  for  the  many  ways  by  which  Thy  people  can 
show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  that  hath  called  them 
out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light.  We  ask 
Thee  that  increasingly  the  members  of  this  Church 
and  congregation  may  be  distinguished  by  the  faithful 
use  of  all  their  duties  and  declaration,  for  the  glory 
of  God,  of  the  mission  of  Jesus  Christ. 

And  now  we  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of  all  that  has 
been  am.is8  in  our  service,  and  that  Thou  wilt  give  the 
consciousness  of  Thy  presence  and  Thy  favour,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


LXVIII 

O  Lord  our  Father,  Thou  seest  all  our  souls  cleave  to 
the  dust,  but  we  come  pleading  Thine  own  word,  and 
asking  Thee  to  quicken  us  according  to  it ;  and  lift  us 
up  now,  by  some  bright  and  happy  thought  of  Thee, 
Thy  sweetness,  love,  and  power.  Thy  nearness  and 
tenderness,  that  we  may  come  gladly  to  our  Father's 
heart,  and  speak  to  Thee  with  confidence  and  childlike 
trust.    We  bless  Thee  that  prayer  is  a  very  real  thing. 

I 


130  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  thank  Thee  that  we  do  not  speak  into  an  empty 
Heaven,  nor  into  a  dull  cold  ear.  We  bless  Thee  that 
Thou  hast  taught  us  that  it  is  better  for  us  to  keep  our 
wills  within  Thy  will,  and  that  the  confidence  which 
we  have  is  that  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  that 
will  Thou  hearest  us.  We  know  it  is  better  for  us  so 
than  if  any  cries  of  ours  could  reach  Thy  purposes. 
And  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us,  as 
the  beginning  of  all  our  prayers,  to  bring  our  wills  into 
harmony  with  Thine,  that  every  petition  may  have 
wrapped  up  in  it,  '  Nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as 
Thou  wilt.' 

O  Lord,  we  thank  Thee  for  all  the  peace  that  comes 
to  those  who  are  wont  to  make  all  their  requests 
known  unto  God,  and  then  to  leave  them  in  His  hand. 
We  pray  that  each  of  us  may,  in  our  daily  experience, 
possess  that  secret  of  all  tranquillity  which  rests  in 
delighting  ourselves  in  the  Lord,  that  He  may  then 
give  us  the  desires  of  our  hearts.  May  these  desires  all 
centre  in  Thyself,  and  whatever  we  wish,  and  cannot 
but  wish,  in  regard  of  outward  things,  may  all  these, 
too,  in  our  eyes,  be  most  precious  in  the  measure  in 
which  they  may  be  truly  good  things.  When  we  ask 
good  things  of  Thee  we  often  condemn  ourselves ;  and 
we  feel  that  the  petition  can  never  be  presented  with- 
out the  confession  of  how  beneath  such  thoughts  our 
daily  lives  have  fallen.  And  yet  we  praise  Thee  with 
confidence,  O  Lord,  for  Thou  '  knowest  our  frame,  and 
rememberest  that  we  are  dust.'  And  '  like  as  a  father 
pitieth  his  children,  even  so  Thou  pitiest'  us.  And 
though  Thou  dost  disapprove  of  our  failures  and  sins, 
we  thank  Thee  that  there  is  compassion  as  well  as 
disapproval  in  Thy  heart  for  us.  Help  us  then  to  come 
to  Thee  with  loving  trust  and  lowly  confidence,  and 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  131 

may  we  day  by  day  be  enabled  more  completely  to 
walk  in  Thy  light,  and  to  drink  in  the  river  of  Thy 
pleasures,  and  to  live  the  lives  that  we  live  in  the  flesh 
by  the  life  that  we  have  derived  from  the  fountain  of 
life.  We  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  for  all  Thy  good  gifts 
to  us,  for  the  manifold  mercies  that  perish  with  the 
using,  and  often  unrecognised  and  unremembered,  and, 
alas !  not  seldom  pass  away  misused. 

We  bless  Thee  for  every  benefit  of  Thy  providence, 
and  for  all  the  little  things  that  make  up  the  sum  of 
our  daily  mercies ;  and  we  pray  Thee  for  clear-sighted 
and  grateful  hearts  that  in  everything,  by  prayer  and 
supplication  with  thanksgiving,  we  may  hallow  the 
smallest  of  Thy  blessings,  and  make  them  serve  our 
attaining  of  greater  ones.  We  bless  Thee  for  all  which 
Thou  hast  given  us  to-day,  for  all  which  Thou  hast 
averted  from  us.  We  thank  Thee  for  guidance;  we 
thank  Thee  for  companionship ;  we  thank  Thee  for 
strength  to  work  ;  we  thank  Thee  for  patience,  for 
endurance  ;  and  bless  Thee  that  though  we  have  so 
little  served  Thou  hast  so  largely  bestowed,  even  whilst 
we  acknowledge  that  the  guidance  and  the  companion- 
ship and  the  strength  and  the  light  would  all  have 
been  far  more  if  we  had  let  them  have  Thy  way  with 
us. 

We  thank  Thee  for  the  opportunity  which  we  have 
now  of  withdrawing  for  an  hour  from  the  daily  tasks 
and  renewing  our  communion  with  Thyself.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  we  may  have  Christ  in  our  midst. 
May  we  each  of  us,  coming  in  His  name,  have  brought 
our  Lord  into  this  assembly.  And  grant,  we  beseech 
Thee,  that  light  from  Him,  and  teaching  from  Thy 
word,  and  gracious  influences  from  Thy  good  Spirit, 
may  be  breathed  out  upon  us  all  this  evening ;  and  that 


132  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

our  hour  of  worship  may  be  an  hour  of  blessing  with 
each  of  us,  that  it  may  abide  with  us  for  many  a  day. 

We  would  commend  to  Thee  all  whom  we  love.  We 
pray  for  all  that  are  in  any  kind  of  sorrow  or  trouble. 
Thou  takest  away  from  the  midst  of  Thy  children's 
homes  and  hearts,  and  from  the  midst  of  Thy  Church. 
But  we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  livest,  and  we  beseech 
Thee  to  fill  all  empty  places  in  private  homes  and  in 
public  work,  and  that  Thou  wouldst  graciously  manifest 
Thyself  to  all  that  are  in  any  way  afflicted,  in  mind, 
body,  or  estate,  and  help  them  to  take  the  consolations 
which  are  freely  given  to  them  of  God.  Thou  dost 
never  fail  to  comfort,  though  we  foolishly  often  fail  to 
be  comforted,  and  it  is  all  our  own  fault.  We  beseech 
Thy  forgiveness,  we  beseech  Thy  wisdom.  And  we 
pray  that  any  of  us,  or  any  known  to  us,  who  may  this 
evening  be  in  any  kind  of  sorrow  or  perplexity,  may 
have  the  Lord  with  them.  Who  bears  all  burdens  and 
Who  lightens  all  darkness. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  we  would  commit  ourselves  to 
Thy  care  once  more.  We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  us  in 
our  meeting  this  evening,  and  always  when  we  gather 
together  for  Thy  service  and  worship ;  and  pray  that 
Thou  wouldst  give  us  words  to  speak,  at  all  times, 
which  may  be  in  accordance  with  Thy  holy  will ;  and 
that  Thou  wouldst  revive  Thy  work  amongst  us,  and 
make  Thy  servants  more  like  what  Christ  would  have 
them  to  be ;  and  bring  many  wanderers  back  into  the 
fold,  that  there  they  may  be  saved,  '  and  go  in  and  out 
and  find  pasture.'  We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us  now, 
to  give  us  Thy  blessing  in  our  worship,  to  forgive  all 
our  sins,  and  to  speak  through  us,  and  to  us,  and  in  us 
all,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  133 


LXIX 

O  Lord  our  God,  Thou  hast  bid  us  to  have  faith  in 
Thee,  and  Thou  hast  given  us  enough  knowledge  of 
Thyself,  and  possession  of  Thy  blessings,  to  make  it  a 
sin  and  a  shame  if  we  do  not  trust  in  Thee.  But  our 
hearts  are  very  weak,  O  Lord,  and  we  cleave  to  the 
things  here  far  too  strongly,  and  so  strongly  does  the 
current  of  our  affections  and  desires  set  towards  the 
things  seen  and  temporal  that  it  is  hard  for  us  to  have 
any  living  and  working  faith  in  the  unseen  and  the 
eternal.  So  Thy  commandments  drive  us  to  Thyself 
to  give  what  Thou  commandest.  And  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  each  of  us  to  believe  in  God, 
and  to  believe  also  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  especially, 
Lord,  when  we  come  to  Thee  in  the  outward  form  and 
action  of  prayer,  may  there  be  a  triumph  of  faith  in 
our  hearts,  believing  that  we  have  the  things  which 
we  desire.  That  we  may  so  believe,  keep  us,  we  pray 
Thee,  from  all  foolish  desires  about  which  we  never 
can  be  sure  that  it  is  Thy  will  to  give  them.  Concern- 
ing all  these  may  our  prayer  be  humbly  submissive, 
and  ever  having  in  its  depths,  '  Not  my  will,  but  Thine.' 
And  the  less  eagerly  we  set  our  affections  and  desires 
on  this  doubtful  good,  may  we  fix  them  on  that  which 
is  certainly  for  our  good,  and  which  Thou  art  certainly 
longing  to  give  us. 

Lord !  we  pray  for  light,  we  pray  for  love,  we  pray 
for  guidance,  we  pray  for  grace,  we  pray  for  peace,  for 
power,  for  pardon,  and  for  all  mercies  which  Thou 
hast  laid  up  for  us  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  we  pray  that 
our  faith  in  Him  may  be  more  deep,  real,  constant,  and 
effective  in  our  lives ;  and  may  do  more  to  lift  us  into 


134  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

the  likeness  of  our  Lord,  and  to  make  us  ashamed  of 
our  own  past  selves  and  follies. 

We  would  not  limit  Thy  grace,  O  Lord ;  we  believe 
that  Thou  canst  do  exceeding  abundant  above  all  that 
we  can  ask  or  think.  And  so  we  would  come,  and  with 
steadfast  confidence  would  beseech  Thee  for  the  great 
things  which  Thou  hast  promised,  and  which  Thou 
hast  laid  up  for  us  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Thou 
hast  taught  us  to  open  our  mouths  wide,  and  Thou 
hast  promised  to  fill  the  widest  opened.  Thou  hast  put 
petitions  into  our  lips  which  we  durst  not  have  framed 
for  ourselves.  And  so  we  ask  Thee  that  Christ  may- 
dwell  in  our  hearts  by  faith,  and  that  we  may  know 
'  the  height  and  breadth  and  depth  and  length  of  that 
love  which  passeth  knowledge' ;  that  we  may  be  'filled 
with  all  the  fulness  of  God.'  And  in  regard,  O  Lord,  to 
other  things.  Thou  knowest  what  we  have  need  of. 
Thou  hast  declared  to  us  that  it  is  Thy  good  pleasure 
to  give  us  the  Kingdom,  and  Thou  wilt  not  starve  Thy 
children  on  the  road  to  it. 

We  beseech  Thee,  then,  that  Thou  wouldst  be  near 
us  day  by  day,  and  deal  out  to  us,  by  Thy  loving  wis- 
dom, the  things  that  we  most  need.  And  help  us,  in 
Thy  loving  wisdom,  to  acquiesce  in  Thine  appointment, 
and  not  to  murmur  at  what  is  withdrawn,  nor  to  com- 
plain because  of  what  is  not  given. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  lead  us  by  Thy  counsel,  and  to 
help  us  that  we  may  in  everything,  by  prayer,  and 
supplication,  and  thanksgiving,  make  our  requests 
known  to  Thee.  And  then,  O  Lord,  let  Thy  peace, 
which  passeth  understanding,  come  into  our  hearts 
and  minds. 

Be  near  us  as  we  are  gathered  in  Thy  presence ; 
help  us  in  this  hour  of  worship.    Give  us  some  thoughts 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  135 

and  words  which  may  be  helpful  and  profitable,  and 
may  lead  us  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High. 
And  strengthen  us  for  all  duty  ;  we  pray  that  Thy  good 
Spirit  may  be  upon  us  in  all  our  work  and  worship  as  a 
congregation,  and  that  Thou  wouldst  guide  us  by  Thy 
counsel ;  that  Thou  wouldst  make  us  more  fit  to  receive 
the  blessing,  and  more  worthy  to  be  Thy  instruments  ; 
and  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  all,  day  by  day,  to 
remember  Whose  we  are  and  Whom  we  ought  to  serve  ; 
and  let  Thy  power  be  present  among  us  in  all  our 
gatherings,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  be  magnified. 

We  commend  one  another  to  Thy  care  ;  we  pray  for 
all  the  weary  and  the  sorrowful.  We  would  especially 
commend  to  Thee  those  on  beds  of  sickness,  and  those 
that  watch  by  them ;  and  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  come 
near  to  all  such  suffering  souls  or  households,  and  give 
Thy  peace  and  Thy  felt  presence. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  take  us  into  Thy  gracious  care, 
and  in  Thy  mercy  forgive  and  bless  us,  through  Christ 
our  Saviour. 


LXX 

O  Lord  our  God,  teach  us  to  pray,  we  beseech  Thee ; 
and  help  us  now  to  feel  that  we  are  indeed  speaking  to 
one  that  hears,  and  that  Thy  heart  is  open  of  a  truth 
for  us,  and  Thy  hands  laden  with  gifts  which  Thou  dost 
infinitely  delight  to  bestow.  O  Lord!  we  sometimes 
think  it  strange  that  we  can  ever  forget  Thee  as  com- 
pletely as  we  do,  and  when  we  draw  near  again  to  Thee 
in  this  hour  of  prayer  we  cannot  but  be  conscious  of 
the  difference  between  the  attitude  of  our  minds  and 
hearts  when  we  seek  to  join  ourselves  to  Thee  in  that 
which  is  common  to  them  throughout  so  much  of  our 


136  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

days.  Therefore  we  would  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  with 
humble  petitions  that  Thou  wouldst  pardon  all  that 
Thou  hast  seen  amiss  in  us  ;  and  whatever  there  may- 
have  been  in  us,  in  the  ordering  of  our  lives,  or  in  the 
work  which  has  occupied  us,  that  has  borne  us  away 
from  Thee,  Thou  wouldst  forgive  the  weakness  that  we 
have  displayed  ;  and  wouldst  help  us  now  to  come  near 
to  Thyself,  though  it  be  ashamed  and  confounded,  yet 
sure  of  Thy  forgiveness,  and  able  to  say  that  we  trust 
in  the  Lord  our  God. 

Strengthen  and  help  us  in  our  service  now,  O  Lord  ; 
may  the  great  words  that  we  have  been  reading 
together  enter  into  our  hearts  and  minds,  and  influence 
us  in  our  daily  lives.  May  we  all  be  pressing  towards 
the  mark.  May  we  all  be  looking  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  our  Saviour,  and  forget  the  things  that  are 
behind  except  in  so  far  as  remembering  them  may 
make  us  thankful  to  Thee,  and  distrustful  of  ourselves 
and  confident  in  Thyself.  And  may  we  all  be  reaching 
forth  unto  the  things  that  are  before. 

O  Lord,  we  have  had  enough  of  our  own  righteous- 
ness, and  we  pray  that  we  may  know  Jesus  Christ  more 
deeply,  more  entirely,  more  happily  and  constantly, 
and  may  have  Him  dwelling  in  our  hearts  as  the  very 
Life  of  our  lives,  and  our  Portion,  our  Righteousness, 
and  our  Strength.  We  bless  Thee  for  the  excellency 
of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  which  makes 
all  heavy  weights  of  earthly  sorrow  light  as  feathers, 
and  dims  the  glory  of  all  earthly  good.  And  we  pray 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  more  and  more  to  come  to 
that  knowledge,  that  it  may  keep  us  in  the  paths  of 
righteousness,  and  fill  our  hearts  and  minds  with  the 
joy  that  cannot  be  taken  from  us,  and  the  peace  that 
passes  understanding. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  137 

And  help  us,  O  Lord,  we  pray  Thee,  in  our  daily  life, 
to  be  rigid  with  ourselves,  and  charitable  and  gracious 
with  all  others.  Help  us  to  measure  ourselves  by  the 
measuring-rod  of  the  Angel,  and  not  by  the  measure- 
ment of  man.  And  may  we  ever  seek  to  be  conformed 
to  the  likeness  of  Thy  dear  Son ;  and  to  carry  out  in  all 
the  small  affairs  of  daily  life,  and  in  the  common  things 
of  constantly  recurring  duty,  the  great  precepts  of  Thy 
Word,  and  the  great  Example  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 
We  would  confess  before  Thee  how  often  we  have 
fallen  beneath  the  one,  and  contradicted  the  other ;  and 
we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  growingly 
to  become  filled  with  Thy  Spirit,  and  growingly  to 
manifest  that  we  are  so  by  our  holy  living  amongst 
men. 

We  pray  Thee  to  look  down  upon  each  here  before 
Thee  this  evening.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  great 
mercies  that  we  have  realised  in  our  daily  lives  and 
experience  ;  and  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  still  be  with 
us,  and  guide  us  by  Thy  counsel,  and  help  us  to  accept 
Thy  guidance  and  to  follow  without  reluctance  in  the 
path  which  the  Lord  marks  out  for  us,  whatever  it  may 
be.  Oh  that  we  may  have  hearts  and  wills  more  com- 
pletely in  conformity  with  Thine  own,  so  that  we  shall 
never  murmur,  and  never  regret,  and  never  rebel, 
but  always  sit  at  Thy  feet,  and  follow  our  Master's 
call. 

We  pray  Thee  to  remember  all  that  are  in  any  kind 
of  sorrow  or  trouble,  and  to  comfort  and  succour  such. 
O  Lord,  bind  up  all  broken  and  wounded  spirits,  and 
grant  that  we  may  none  of  us  ever  turn  away  from 
Thy  consolations,  or  waste  the  precious  discipline  of 
which  the  end  is  that  we  should  be  partakers  of  Thy 
holiness. 


138  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Now,  O  Lord,  we  would  commit  ourselves  once  more 
to  Thy  gracious  care,  beseeching  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  be  very  near  us,  and  bless  us  now.  Help  us  in 
this  hour  of  service  and  worship,  directing  thoughts 
and  opening  hearts  and  minds  for  the  reception,  the 
belief,  and  the  practice  of  Thy  holy  will.  Be  with  us 
when  we  try  to  speak,  be  with  us  in  hearing  Thy  truth, 
and  grant  that  our  meeting  may  tend  to  make  us  more 
partakers  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  and 
sharers  in  His  righteousness  and  glory. 

Hear  us  in  our  prayer,  mercifully  forgive  and  accept 
us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


LXXI 

O  Lord,  we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  taught  us  to 
call  Thee  the  Father  of  Lights,  and  to  think  that  every 
good  and  perfect  gift  is  from  Thee,  and  that  nothing 
that  is  not  good  and  perfect  does  come  from  Thee.  We 
bless  TJiee  for  all  that  sure  confidence  which  we  have 
that  with  Thee  is  no  variableness,  that  Thou  art  ever 
mindful  of  Thy  covenant,  mindful  of  Thine  own  past 
dealings,  mindful  of  the  claims  that  Thy  poor  creatures 
have  upon  Thee ;  and  that  Thou  dost  so  abundantly 
shower  down  upon  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy,  and  all 
things  requisite  and  necessary  as  well  for  the  body  as 
for  the  soul.  Help  us  then,  we  pray  Thee,  to  draw  near 
to  Thee  now  with  grateful  hearts,  recognising  how 
full  of  blessing  Thy  dealings  with  each  of  us  has  been, 
and  how  behind  all  the  daily  mercies  there  lies  the 
unspeakable  gift  which  does  not  perish  with  the  using, 
but  becomes  the  greater  and  more  blessed  to  each  of  us 
the  more  we  possess  and  enjoy  it. 
We  thank  Thee  for  life,  we  thank  Thee  more  for  the 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  139 

life  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  Who  died — nay,  rather,  Who 
is  risen  again.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  the  blood 
which  shed  avails  for  the  cleansing  away  of  our  guilt, 
may,  poured  into  our  veins,  avail  for  the  hallowing 
and  sanctifying  of  our  whole  nature ;  and  may  we  be 
partakers  of  His  holiness,  and  know  the  power  of  His 
Resurrection,  because  we  know  and  are  conformed  to 
the  fellowship  of  the  servants. 

We  have  come  this  evening  from  very  different  cir- 
cumstances. The  day's  work  has  called  for  different 
qualities  from  us.  We  have  left  behind  us  homes  in 
divers  conditions,  but  we  thank  Thee  that  whatever 
variety  there  may  be  in  our  necessities  the  deepest 
needs  of  us  all  are  one,  and  the  great  Supply  for  all  our 
needs  is  One.  We  would  come  then  to  Thee,  Lord,  and 
pray,  because  we  have  learnt  that  Thou  art  the  God 
that  givest  unto  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not. 
We  bless  Thee  that  though  there  is  much  for  which  we 
might  be  upbraided  in  the  misuse  that  we  have  made 
of  Thy  mercies,  in  our  neglect  to  take  the  thijjgs  that 
are  freely  given  to  us  of  God,  in  the  slow  progress  that 
we  have  made  in  the  Christian  life  when  its  powers 
were  so  abundantly  waiting  to  enter  into  our  lives,  yet 
we  draw  near  to  Thee,  blending  with  our  visions  of 
unworthiness  and  shortcomings  the  prayer  that  Thou 
wouldst  come  to  us  now,  and  help  us  that  we  may 
indeed  open  our  hearts  for  the  entrance  of  Thy  mercy, 
and  may  have  that  unwavering  faith  which  shall 
receive  everything  of  the  Lord.  We  would  keep  stead- 
fast hearts  that  Thou  mayest  pour  Thy  grace  into 
them.  We  beseech  Thee  to  make  our  desires  after  the 
best  things  more  continual  and  more  operative  in  our 
lives,  and  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  subdue 
our  wishes  for  lesser  good,  and  our  false  estimates  of 


140  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

what  we  need  most,  and  wouldst  help  us  day  by  day  to 
realise  that  it  is  God  that  is  the  Portion  of  our  hearts 
and  our  Strength  for  ever. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  us  as  we  are  gathered  here 
this  evening,  and  to  give  to  each  of  us  Thy  Holy  Spirit 
in  our  hearts,  that  our  desires  may  be  drawn  out  to 
Thee,  and  the  eyes  of  our  understandings  being  opened 
we  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  Thy  law  and  of 
Thy  grace  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.  May  none  of 
us  be  forgetful  hearers  and  not  doers  of  Thy  word. 
May  none  of  us  go  away  from  its  mirror  'for- 
getting what  manner  of  man  we  are,'  but  may  we 
all  treasure  in  our  hearts  the  truths  which  Thou  hast 
continued  to  reveal  to  us  in  Thine  Incarnate  Word, 
and  in  the  written  Word  which  bears  record  of  Him ; 
and  may  we  manifest  these  truths  in  our  lives,  and 
find  how  true  it  is  that  such  a  man  is  blessed,  not  only 
for,  and  after,  but  in  his  deeds. 

Be  Thou  near  us  as  we  try  to  meditate  on  Thy  truth. 
May  it  be  the  guide  of  our  hearts  and  thoughts.  We 
pray  Thee  to  pour  the  light  of  Thy  grace  into  our 
spirits,  that  we  may  behold  what  Thou  dost  mean  us  to 
see,  the  glory  of  Thy  love  in  the  words  of  Thy  Revela- 
tion. We  pray  for  each  in  Thy  Presence  according  to 
all  our  diverse  circumstances.  Especially  we  would 
commend  to  Thee  any  present  with  us,  or  belonging  to 
us,  though  absent  from  us  now,  that  may  be  in  any  kind 
of  sorrow  or  trouble.  We  pray  Thee  to  draw  near  to 
such  now,  and  to  speak  Thy  gracious,  gentle  whispers 
of  consolation  and  of  peace  to  such  troubled  souls. 
We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thy  children  have  free 
access  to  Thee,  and  that  Thou  art  ever  wont  to  come 
near  to  them  who  are  in  any  sorrow.  We  pray  that 
none  of  us  may  ever   shut  Thee  out  from  our  sad 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  141 

moments,  and  try  to  find  comfort  elsewhere  than  in 
saying,  '  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done.' 

And  now,  Lord,  be  with  all  Thy  servants  of  every 
communion  and  name.  Be  with  all  such  in  our  city. 
Grant  that  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  grace  may  be 
more  powerfully  made  by  all  professing  Christian  com- 
munities, and  that  this  great  city  may  be  more  and 
more  penetrated  by  the  message  of  God's  love  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  evils  that  abound  among  us  may  be  sub- 
dued. And  lay  the  responsibilities  of  their  position 
and  the  obligations  of  their  possessions  upon  Thy 
servants'  hearts ;  and  help  all  Christian  men  and 
women  in  this  and  every  part  of  our  land  to  be  faithful 
to  their  Master,  and  to  do  the  work  for  which  God  has 
put  them  here.  We  pray  that  Thy  blessing  may  rest 
upon  us.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  great  mercies  to 
us.  We  humbly  acknowledge  our  many  unworthi- 
nesses  and  sins,  and  we  lay  our  hands  upon  the  head  of 
that  Sacrifice,  and  know  that  our  guilt  is  there. 

Hear,  answer,  and  bless  us,  Lord,  through  Jesus  our 
Saviour. 


LXXII 

O  Lord,  our  merciful  Father,  we  thank  Thee  for  the 
privilege  of  worship,  and  that  we  can  draw  near  to 
Thee,  and  be  sure  that,  notwithstanding  all  our  in- 
firmities and  sins,  Thou  dost  not  turn  away  our  prayer 
nor  Thy  mercy  from  us.  Help  us  that,  in  deepest 
reality,  and  not  in  mere  form  and  void  words,  we  may 
all  enter  into  Thy  secret  place  now,  and  hold  fellow- 
ship with  our  Father  God.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou 
canst  speak  to  us,  and  that  we  do  not  only  need  to 
speak  to  Thee.     We  thank  Thee  that  there  is  such  a 


142  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

thing  as  conversing  with  God ;  and  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst,  by  Thy  good  Spirit,  speak  in  all  our 
hearts  now,  and  may  our  hearts  answer  Thee,  Lord! 
And  when  Thou  sayest,  'Seek  ye  My  face,'  may  they 
straightway  answer,  '  Thy  face.  Lord,  will  we  seek.' 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  us  gathered  together  thus, 
turning  aside  for  an  hour  from  daily  occupations,  cares, 
sorrows,  joys,  temptations  and  conflicts.  And  we  pray 
that  Thy  grace  may  be  very  manifest  to  us,  and  that 
we  may  find  in  our  own  hearts  what  Thou  hast  told  us 
from  of  old,  that  it  is  no  vain  thing  to  wait  upon  the 
Lord.  We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  so  often  drawn 
near  to  Thy  servants,  and  that  so  many  of  us  can  say, 
'  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him,  and 
delivered  him  from  all  his  fears.'  And  we  beseech 
Thee  that  we  may  realise  such  experiences  in  our 
meeting  this  evening.  We  feel  that  the  world  is  too 
much  with  us,  late  and  soon.  We  feel  that,  day  by 
day,  our  own  weakness  makes  the  things  which  Thou 
dost  mean  to  minister  to  our  strength,  and  to  draw  us 
nearer  to  Thyself,  too  often  occasions  for  forgetting 
Thee,  and  for  falling ;  and  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst, 
by  means  of  such  services  as  this,  and  by  all  the  other 
appointments  of  Thy  grace,  pour  into  our  hearts  Thine 
own  Divine  power,  and  the  life  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus, 
that  thereby  our  daily  lives  may  be  raised  nearer 
to  what  we  know  they  ought  to  be,  and  may  in  some 
measure  reflect  the  glory  that  we  have  seen  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ.  May  we  be  mirrors  of  God,  and  walk- 
ing in  the  world  adorning  the  teaching,  and  whatever 
we  have  to  do  may  we  so  do  it  that  it  shall  become  a 
sacrifice. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  as  we  are  here  this 
evening,  direct  all  our  thoughts,  draw  us  nearer  to 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  143 

Thyself,  quicken  within  us  any  decaying  or  dying 
graces,  set  our  feet  fast  on  the  rock ;  and  if  any  of  us 
have  to  say  that  our  footsteps  have  well-nigh  slipped, 
do  Thou  establish  our  goings,  and  confirm  us  in  all  that 
is  good  and  holy,  and  all  that  is  Christlike  and  Christ- 
pleasing.  To  this  end  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  bless  all  the  ministrations  of  Thy  truth 
amongst  us  from  time  to  time.  We  thank  Thee  for 
many  past  occasions  on  which  to  some  of  us  Thou  hast 
been  pleased  to  make  Thyself  known  through  our 
services  together  here.  And  we  pray  that  Thou 
wouldst  still  be  with  us,  and  yet  more  abundantly 
in  the  days  that  may  still  be  to  come  in  our  relation- 
ship together  here.  And  pour  out,  O  Lord,  we  beseech 
Thee,  of  Thy  Spirit  upon  us  as  a  worshipping  congrega- 
tion, that  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  may  be  magnified 
in  our  midst,  and  from  us  may  sound  out  the  word  of 
the  Lord. 

We  would  commend  to  Thee  all  Christian  brethren 
in  all  communions  and  churches,  and  beseech  Thee 
that  the  many  thousands  of  Thy  Israel  may  have  more 
and  more  of  the  felt  presence  of  Christ  with  them,  and 
that  their  arms  may  be  strengthened  to  fight  vigorously 
for  the  advancement  of  that  Kingdom  which  is  right- 
eousness and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 

We  would  commend  to  Thee  any  amongst  us  that 
may  be  in  any  kind  of  trouble  or  sorrow.  We  beseech 
Thee  to  be  near  all  such,  to  counsel  those  that  are  in 
perplexity,  to  behold  those  that  are  ready  to  fall,  to 
speak  Thy  grace  and  peace  to  troubled  hearts.  And 
for  any  of  us  that  have  heavy  burdens  to  bear  do  Thou 
come  and  help  us  to  get  strength  from  Thee.  We 
thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  past  mercies,  we  bless  Thee  for 
the  hope  which  Thou  hast  given  us  far  beyond  these 


144  PULPIT  PRAYEKS 

changing  scenes  of  earth  and  time.  And  we  pray  that 
we  may  so  live  whilst  we  still  are  amongst  the  things 
that  are  seen  and  temporal  as  that  finally  we  lose  not 
the  things  unseen  and  eternal.  Hear  us  now,  O  Lord ; 
prepare  our  hearts  to  hear  and  our  lips  to  speak  Thy 
gracious  message,  and  accept  us  and  our  poor  prayer, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


LXXIII 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  bow  down  before  Thee,  the 
blessed  and  only  Potentate,  and  from  the  midst  of 
death  and  the  grave  lift  up  our  thoughts  to  Him  Who 
only  hast  immortality ;  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  shine  into  our  hearts  with  Thine  own  light, 
with  that  light  which  we  can  approach  unto,  and  give 
us  to  see  Thee  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  thank 
Thee  that  all  in  Thyself  which  puts  us  so  far  from  Thee 
is  brought  near  us  in  that  Word  that  was  made  flesh, 
so  that  we  can  come  even  to  Thy  majesty  and  draw 
near  to  Thy  heart,  sinful  as  we  are,  and  beseech  Thee 
to  love  us  as  Thy  children,  and  to  give  to  us  the  spirit 
of  adoption  whereby  we  may  cry, '  Abba !  Father ! ' 

O  Lord !  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  looking  up  to  Thee, 
to  see  in  Thee  the  living  God  Who  giveth  us  richly  all 
things  to  enjoy,  and  so  to  bring  all  our  gladness  to  be 
hallowed  in  Thy  presence,  and  all  our  possessions  to  be 
held  in  stewardship  for  Thee,  and  to  be  used  to  Thy 
glory.  And  go  with  us,  we  pray  Thee,  through  all  the 
various  scenes  of  daily  life,  and  help  us  in  them  all  to 
lay  hold  on  the  eternal  life  that  is  brought  near  to 
them  by  our  faithful  use  of  the  life  that  passes  away. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  we  can  come  to  Thee 
thus  with  all  the  burden  of  our  weakness  and  weari- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  145 

ness,  of  our  cares  and  sorrows,  of  our  failures  and  sins  ; 
and  can  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  take  all  the 
weight  away  from  us,  and  help  us  with  free  hearts  to 
draw  nearer  to  Thyself  and  to  live  evermore  in  the 
light  of  Thy  face.  When  we  think  of  what  we  are,  and 
what  Thou  wouldst  have  us  to  be,  and  of  what  we 
might  be  if  we  were  faithful  in  our  use  of  Thy  gifts  to 
us,  we  feel  that  no  confession  can  be  too  humble.  But 
we  thank  Thee  that  the  lightest  word  of  penitence  is 
music  in  Thy  ear.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  teach 
us  to  understand  ourselves  fully,  and  to  realise  more 
completely  than  we  have  ever  done  how  solemn  and 
great  are  the  demands  that  Thou  dost  make  upon  us, 
and  the  possibilities  which  Thou  dost  open  to  us. 

O  Lord !  help  us  to  gather  into  our  hearts,  and  to 
make  influential  in  our  lives,  larger  and  ever-increasing 
measures  of  Thy  grace  that  is  stored  for  us  in  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  may  we  be  able  to  do  and  to  bear  all  things 
through  that  Christ  Who  '  strengthens  us  with  might 
by  His  Spirit  in  the  inner  man.'  Go  with  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  according  to  all  the  variety  of  our  daily 
duties  and  present  circumstances.  We  believe  that 
Thou  dost  appoint,  with  fatherly  care,  to  each  of  us 
our  necessary  share  of  joy  or  sorrow,  of  health  and 
pain.  And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to 
recognise  more  fully  than  we  ever  have  done,  and 
more  constantly  than  we  have  done.  Thy  real  presence 
in  our  daily  lives,  and  Thy  sweet  ordering  of  all  that 
is.  And  we  beseech  Thee  to  strengthen  us  to  get  all 
the  good  that  Thou  dost  mean  out  of  every  changing 
condition  here  below,  that  these  may  all  tend,  like 
breaking  waves  of  the  sea,  to  carry  us  in  th^ir  current 
to  the  harbour. 

We  pray  Thee  to  strengthen  us  with  might  by  the 

K 


146  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Spirit  in  the  inner  man,  that  we  may  use  all  things 
here  as  helps  and  leaders  to  Thyself. '  Forgive  all  the 
imperfections  of  our  past,  strengthen  us  for  better 
service  in  the  time  to  come.  ,  Enable  us  to  realise 
more  completely  and  joyously  Thy  continual  presence 
with  us.  May  it  never  be  a  dread,  but  always  a  delight, 
to  have  to  say,  '  Thou,  God,  seest  us,'  and  in  the  light  of 
Thy  countenance  may  we  walk  unto  all  pleasing. 

Give  us  Thy  presence  in  our  worship  this  evening. 
Forgive  all  the  imperfection  of  our  motives,  the 
feebleness  of  our  desires,  the  sluggishness  and  sloth- 
fulness  of  our  faith.  And  help  us  as  we  bow  here 
before  Thee  this  evening  that  Thy  word  may  shine  out 
in  its  glory  to  us,  and  that  we  may  be  led  nearer  to 
Thyself,  and  made  more  fit  for  all  the  duty  of  our 
daily  lives  by  our  gathering  together  thus. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  each  of  us  in  our  various 
conditions.  Comfort  all  sad  hearts — speak  Thy  peace 
to  troubled  ones.  Be  very  near  us  each,  in  all  our 
perplexities  and  difficulties.  And  help  us  in  all  of 
them  to  follow  the  Lord  Who  leads  us.  We  pray  for 
Thy  help  to  be  given  to  all  Christian  people  in  their 
various  circumstances,  that  wherever  Thy  servants 
are  there  may  be  Thy  witnesses,  and  that  all  men 
may  know  whose  are  Thy  children,  and  Whom  they 
serve. 

Accept  us  as  we  come  near  to  Thee  now,  O  Lord ; 
forgive  our  many  sins  ;  break  up  the  fallow  ground  of 
our  hearts ;  put  into  our  coldness  earnest  desires  after 
Thee ;  and  make  this  hour  of  prayer  for  us  an  hour  of 
blessing,  and  of  true  communion  with  the  living  God. 
We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  and  forgive  all  our  sins, 
and  to  bless  us  now  in  that  great  Saviour  in  Whose 
Name  we  present  all  our  petitions. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  147 

LXXIV 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  bow  before  Thee  with  reverence 
and  trust  and  godly  fear.  And  we  dare  to  thank  Thee 
that  Thou  art  a  consuming  fire,  for  so  we  have  hoped 
that  Thou  wilt  burn  away  all  our  dross,  and  melt  all 
our  hearts,  and  help  us  to  be  as  flaming  spirits  before 
Thy  Throne,  having  the  fire  of  God  within  us.  Baptize 
us  in  that  fire  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  and  help  us  to  draw 
near  with  confidence  to  Thee,  rejoicing  in  all  Thy 
majesty  and  in  all  Thy  gentle  love,  and  casting  our- 
selves on  that  great  mercy  which  none  have  ever 
sought  in  vain.  May  it  be  true  of  us,  O  Lord,  that  we 
come  to  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  the  Mediator  of  the 
new  covenant,  and  to  that  blood  of  sprinkling  which 
speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel.  Coming 
thus,  may  we  have  all  our  sin  purged  away,  all  our 
iniquity  forgiven,  all  our  deadness  quickened,  and  our- 
selves made  more  worthily  to  dwell  with  Thee,  and  to 
walk  in  the  light  of  Thy  face.  And  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  day  by  day  to  live  as  those 
who  have  indeed  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  even 
whilst  we  are  sojourners  and  pilgrims  here  below  do, 
in  the  depths  of  our  being,  dwell  in  our  true  home, 
and  sit  with  Jesus  Christ  in  the  heavenly  places. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  that  blessed  union  with 
Thyself,  through  Thy  dear  Son,  and  the  outpoured 
spirit  of  Thy  grace  by  which  we  can  bring  Heaven 
round  us  whilst  we  hear  and  possess  as  well  as  desire 
the  fullness  of  joy  that  is  at  Thy  right  hand.  And  may 
our  daily  experience  be  more  like  what  Thou  dost 
wish  it  to  be,  and  we  more  continually  and  deeply  and 
calmly  possessors  of,  as  well  as  hoping  for,  the  inherit- 
ance which  is  ours. 


148  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  thank  Thee  that  we  not  merely  shall  be,  but  are, 
heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ.  And  though 
it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,  we  live  here 
by  the  faith  of  joys  to  come.  May  we  also  live  by  the 
joy  of  knowing  that  now  we  are  the  sons  of  God, 
and  Thou  art  with  us  as  our  Father.  Help  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  to  carry  such  brightening  and  quickening 
thoughts  into  all  the  difficulties  and  duties  of  our  daily 
life;  and  if,  as  is  perchance  the  case,  some  of  us  may 
have  special  burdens  to  bear  to-day,  do  Thou  give 
special  gifts  to  such,  and  help  each  of  us  to  find  in  that 
great  truth  which  belongs  to  us  all  the  message  that 
we  each  require.  May  Jesus  Christ  be  more  and  more 
the  Object  of  all  our  desires,  the  Home  of  our  hearts, 
the  Goal  of  our  efforts.  And  by  Him  and  for  Him 
may  we  live,  and  ever  be  journeying  towards  Him. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  us  now.  May  Thy  loving 
hand  be  upon  each  of  us,  and  Thy  Spirit  open  our 
minds  to  understand,  and  our  hearts  and  wills  to 
receive  and  to  obey  the  great  message  of  Thy  salvation. 
We  bless  Thee  for  all  the  assurance  we  have  that  Thy 
word  shall  not  return  unto  Thee  void,  and  we  pray 
that  nothing  in  us  may  be  able  to  make  it  void,  neither 
imperfection  of  hearer  nor  of  speaker ;  but  that  we, 
weak  as  we  are,  may  yet  be  brought  closer  together  to 
our  Father  in  Heaven,  and  made  to  carry  away  for 
some  operative  influence  in  our  lives  the  great  words  of 
Thy  truth  and  our  salvation. 

Be  merciful  to  all  of  us  according  to  our  several 
requirements.  Guide  each  of  us  in  our  daily  duties  ; 
help  us  to  put  Thy  love  into  them ;  and  however  small 
they  may  be,  and  however  often  we  may  have  had  to  do 
them,  and  however  often  symptoms  of  monotony  may 
be  likely  to  breed  discord  or  contempt,  may  we  gather 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  149 

ourselves  together  for  our  smallest  tasks,  and  let 
nothing  be  done  except  for  Thy  sake.  And  help  us  to 
win  the  victory  over  our  own  foolish  weak  selves. 
May  the  old  man  be  more  and  more  depressed  in  each  of 
us,  and  the  new  man  exaltedi)  May  the  life  of  Christ 
drive  out  the  life  of  self,  and  may  the  joy  of  the  Lord 
abide  in  us  to  make  us  fruitful. 

O  Lord,  accept  us  as  we  come  to  Thee  now.  Bless  all 
our  brethren,  present  or  absent.  Be  with  any  of  them 
who  may  be  in  sick-chambers  or  on  sick-beds.  And  to 
watchers  and  to  those  tended  do  Thou  give  the 
consciousness  of  Thy  presence  as  the  great  Physician 
Who  heals  the  spirit  even  when  the  body  is  decayed. 
We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  all  Christian  people,  all  com- 
munities of  such,  and  all  the  work  of  Thy  servants 
throughout  the  world,  done  imperfectly,  we  know,  and 
with  very  mingled  motives,  and  with  much  folly  and 
weakness,  but  yet  in  some  measure  done  for  Thy  dear 
sake,  and  to  spread  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Whom  we 
love.  We  beseech  Thee  that  He  may  more  and  more  be 
recognised  by  men  as  what  He  is,  the  Saviour  of  the 
world;  and  that  Thy  people  may  understand  better, 
and  realise  more  in  their  own  daily  experience  the 
abundance  of  the  wealth  and  the  all-sufficiency  of  the 
power  which  they  have  in  Christ  their  Saviour,  in 
Whose  Name  we  pray  Thee  to  hear  us  now. 


LXXV 

O  Lord,  most  merciful,  and  near  us,  we  seek  to  be  near 
Thee,  and  to  feel  Thy  presence,  the  touch  of  Thy  hand, 
and  the  joy  of  Thy  Spirit.  Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee, 
to  approach  Thee  now,  not  only  in  outward  form  or 
with  words  of  course,  but  in  our  lowly  and  trustful 


150  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

hearts  may  we  realise  Thy  presence.  We  thank  Thee 
that  the  light  has  been  manifested,  that  the  darkness  is 
past;  and  beseech  Thee  that  it  may  be  past  in  our 
hearts,  and  that  we  may  walk  in  the  light.  May  our 
joy  be  full  because  we  know  that  which  was  from  the 
beginning ;  and  may  our  eyes  behold,  and  our  hands 
handle  that  Word  of  Life  by  the  vision  and  the  touch 
of  humble  faith,  and  constant  cleaving  to  Him. 

We  thank  Thee  that  we  are  not  left  to  grope  in  the 
darkness.  We  thank  Thee  that  we  are  not  left  to 
fight  alone.  We  thank  Thee  that  for  mind  and  heart 
and  will,  and  all  our  being,  there  is  enough  and  more 
than  enough  in  that  one  Name  which  is  above  every 
name,  and  in  the  great  truth  that  God  is  manifest  in 
the  flesh.  Blessed  be  Thy  gracious  dealings  with  us 
which  have  taught  us  how  true  it  is  that  in  Thee  is  no 
darkness  at  all.  We  have  often  been  afraid  of  Thee, 
often  thought  hard  things  of  Thee,  often  clothed 
Thine  image  in  the  garb  of  our  own  weakness,  and 
have  thought  of  Thee  as  seen  through  the  mists  of  our 
own  sin.  But  we  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  swept 
away  all  that,  and  that  we  know  now  that  Thou  art 
not  austere,  reaping  where  Thou  didst  not  sow,  and 
gathering  where  Thou  didst  not  straw,  but  that  Thou 
art  the  giving  God,  the  forgiving  God,  Who  dost  bestow 
upon  Thy  people  that  which  Thou  dost  command,  and 
dost  give  unto  them  all  the  things  which  Thou  dost 
delight  in  beholding  them  possess.  So  we  come  to 
Thee  and  ask  that  into  our  emptiness  Thy  fullness  may 
flow,  and  that  we  may  not  only  be  made  to  drink  of 
the  river  of  Thy  pleasures,  but  may  draw  the  better 
life  from  the  fountain  of  life,  even  as  we  draw  the  life 
of  the  body  from  Thyself,  and  that  in  Thy  light  we 
may  see  light. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  151 

We  thank  Thee  for  every  good  gift  of  Thy  hand. 
"We  beseech  Thee  to  raise  us  to  the  full  apprehension 
of  all  which  Thou  dost  mean  us  to  possess.  Surely 
Thou  hast  given  us  a  great  deal  that  we  have  not 
taken,  and  we  would  confess  our  own  shame  and 
negligence  in  that  we  have  left  Thy  gifts  lying  uncared 
for  and  unused.  But  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help 
us  to  take  the  things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of 
God,  and  taking  them  to  call  upon  Thy  Name.  Help 
us  thus  to  associate  Thee  with  all  our  blessings,  with 
every  kind  of  good,  the  smallest  and  the  most  fleeting 
as  well  as  the  greatest  and  the  eternal.  And  strengthen 
us,  we  pray  Thee,  that  our  whole  lives,  and  our  whole 
selves,  which  are  more  than  our  lives,  may  be 
rendered  up  in  sacrifice  to  God  for  His  unspeakable 
gift. 

We  thank  thee,  O  Lord,  for  this  opportunity  of 
turning  away  from  the  daily  cares  of  pleasure  and 
constant  duties.  We  beseech  thee  that  whatever 
burdens  any  of  us  may  have  brought  here  we  may  get 
light  upon  our  paths  from  Thyself,  and  from  Thee 
derive  new  strength  for  the  old  duties  which  abide, 
-and  be  prepared  for  any  new  duties,  sorrows,  or  trials 
which  may  emerge  upon  us  from  out  of  the  dim  future. 
Help  us  through  all  the  changing  scenes  to  keep  firm 
hold  of  the  unchanging  God,  and  may  we  realise  more 
and  more  that  Thou  art  near  us  and  ready  to  bless  us. 
Help  us  when  we  try  to  meditate  together  upon  Thy 
word,  and  speak  Thou  to  us  through  Thy  strength. 
Give  us  the  hearing  and  the  understanding  heart,  and 
the  obedient  will ;  and  may  we  carry  into  our  daily  life 
all  that  we  gain  here  of  insight  into  Thy  mind  and 
heart,  and  of  wish  to  serve  and  love  Thee.  Pour  out 
Thy  blessing  upon  us  whensoever  we  gather  together. 


152  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

And  make  us,  united  here  together  in  the  bands  of 
professed  Christian  fellowship,  more  truly  a  church  of 
Jesus  Christ  after  His  mind  and  heart.  May  all  the 
members  of  this  community  love  their  profession,  and 
adorn  the  teaching  in  all  things.  And  may  each  of  us 
find  work  to  do  in  the  Master's  vineyard,  and  none  of 
us  take  refuge  in  the  pretext  that  no  man  hath  hired 
us.  Surely  Thou  hast  hired  us,  and  given  us  plentiful 
wages  beforehand.     Help  us  all  to  be  Thy  workers. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves 
to  Thy  gracious  care,  beseeching  Thee  to  forgive  all 
that  is  amiss  in  our  dispositions  and  characters,  and 
all  that  has  been  sinful  and  wrong  in  our  conduct,  and 
anything  that  to-day  has  been  contrary  to  Thy  holy 
will.  And  hear  us  now,  and  accept  and  bless  us,  for 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


LXXVI 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  Him  Who  intercedes  for 
us  before  the  Throne.  We  thank  Thee  for  that  Divine 
Spirit  that  intercedes  in  us.  And  we  beseech  Thee 
that  we,  who  know  not  what  to  pray  for  as  we  ought, 
may  be  helped  by  that  indwelling  Spirit  of  supplica- 
tion, that  our  desires  may  be  such  as  Thou  dost  delight 
to  give,  and  be  according  to  the  will  of  God.  And  we 
beseech  Thee  that  when,  as  now,  we  come  to  Thee, 
we  may  ever  be  resting  our  whole  hope  and  confidence, 
and  grounding  all  our  plea  upon  that  perfect  sacrifice, 
Him  Who  hath  entered  within  the  veil  for  us,  and  is 
in  Thy  presence  our  High  Priest  and  Intercessor. 

We  beseech  Thee,  Lord,  to  strengthen  us  that  we 
may  indeed  keep  firm  hold  of  the  love  of  God  which  is 
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord ;  and  that  nothing  may  be 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  153 

able  to  separate  us  therefrom,  because  nothing  has 
power  to  draw  away  our  faith  and  confidence  from 
our  Saviour.  We  beseech  Thee  that  in  all  the  variety 
of  our  daily  conflicts  and  struggles,  and  whatever  other 
influences  may  be  brought  to  bear  upon  us,  and  what- 
ever allies  these  may  find  in  our  own  hearts,  Thou 
wouldst  steady  our  tremulous  faith  and  increase  our 
feeble  desires.  Unite  our  hearts  to  fear  Thy  Name,  O 
Lord,  and  may  there  be  less  distance  than  there  often 
is  between  Thy  requirement  that  we  should  love  Thee 
with  all  our  heart,  and  mind,  and  will,  and  strength, 
and  the  love  that  we  do  bring  to  Thee. 

Forgive  the  imperfections  of  our  highest  desires,  of 
our  purest  faith,  of  our  warmest  love,  of  our  most 
submissive  obedience.  We  bless  Thee  that  He  Who 
bears  upon  His  heart  the  names  of  the  tribes  bears 
the  iniquity  of  our  holy  things,  and  bears  it  away. 
And  we  beseech  Thee  that  through  Jesus  Christ 
there  may  now  come  to  every  one  of  us  some 
communication  of  Thine  own  life-power,  some  gift 
that  may  make  the  things  unseen  and  eternal  more 
real  and  clear  and  dear  to  every  one  of  us,  and  we  be 
lifted  up  in  some  measure  above  our  ordinary  selves 
by  the  hour  of  united  worship  in  Thy  presence.  O 
Lord,  we  have  to  thank  Thee  for  a  thousand  blessings, 
for  many  daily  gifts  which  we  too  often  accept  with- 
out remembering  the  hand  that  gave,  and  so  without 
feeling  our  responsibility  to  Thee  and  to  Thy  stewards. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  carry  a  clear  discern- 
ment of  Thy  presence  with  us  into  all  our  daily  duties 
and  all  our  daily  mercies.  And  we  pray  that  day  by 
day  Thou  wouldst  go  with  us  in  our  various  occupa- 
tions and  tasks,  and  wouldst  teach  us  to  hallow  the 
common  things  of  life,  and  to  offer  all  our  works  to 


154  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Thee.  May  we  so  live  as  to  be  ever  in  the  secret 
place  of  the  Most  High,  beholding  Thy  beauty  and 
inquiring  in  Thy  Temple.  And  strengthen,  we  pray 
Thee,  the  hope  within  us  that  is  never  put  to  shame, 
and  grant  that  the  brightness  of  our  hope  may  be  the 
measure  of  the  patience  of  our  waiting.  And  do  Thou 
strengthen  us  in  the  midst  of  all  our  various  work 
ever  to  be  looking  beyond  to  the  things  unseen,  and 
ever  to  be  walking  in  the  light  of  Thy  face. 

O  Lord,  receive  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  past  mercies 
to  us,  which,  for  many  years  for  some  of  us,  Thou  hast 
manifested  in  these  services.  We  pray  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  still  be  with  us ;  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us 
ever  to  draw  near  to  Thee ;  and  that  the  word  of  the 
Lord  may  be  ministered  among  us,  in  its  purity  and 
in  its  power,  and  with  the  demonstration  of  Thy 
present  Spirit.  We  pray  for  all  whom  we  may  love, 
present  or  absent.  We  would  desire  to  commend  to 
Thee  all  Thy  sorrowing  servants ;  if  there  are  any 
such  here,  do  Thou  give  them  wisdom  and  patience, 
peace  and  victory.  And,  wherever  Thou  art  trying  Thy 
children  by  Thy  paternal  discipline,  help  them  to 
recognise  the  Father's  hand,  and  to  be  sure  that  their 
sorrows  are  tokens  of  His  love.  And  we  pray  Thee  to 
prosper  in  like  manner,  as  we  have  asked  for  ourselves, 
all  our  brethren  who  are  in  any  form  seeking  to 
magnify  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  spread  His 
Kingdom.  Lord!  be  with  the  many  thousands  of 
Israel,  with  all  them  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  incorruption.  And  now  give  us  Thy  blessing, 
and  draw  near  to  our  hearts,  and  help  us  to  hear,  and 
help  us  to  speak,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and 
Saviour. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  155 


LXXVII 


O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  from  Whom  cometh  the 
preparation  of  the  heart,  and  the  answer  as  well,  we 
would  lift  up  our  hearts  to  Thee  now,  and  submit  them 
to  Thy  preparation  ;  and  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help 
us  to  do  so,  that  we  may  feel  that  it  is  no  vain  thing 
thus,  in  outward  seeming,  to  draw  near  unto  God.  We 
would  not  be  of  those  who  worship  with  their  lips 
whilst  their  hearts  are  far  from  Thee.  We  would  not 
take  upon  our  tongues  words  that  do  not  correspond 
to  our  inmost  feelings  and  desires.  We  beseech  Thee 
that  we  may  never  be  put  to  shame  by  our  prayers, 
and  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  pray  aright.  O 
Lord,  we  need  Thee  in  all  ways,  for  all  things,  at  all 
times,  and  in  all  corners  of  our  souls,  and  in  every 
part  of  our  lives.  So  we  ask  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
help  us  to  withdraw  ourselves  from  all  vain  things. 
May  we  not  be  of  those  who  follow  after  vanities  and 
become  vain ;  but  may  we  follow  after  Thee,  and 
become  like  Thee,  partakers  in  some  measure  of  the 
Godhead,  as  Thou  dost  promise  that  Thou  wilt  bestow 
Thyself  upon  seeking  hearts,  and  wilt  never  be  far 
from  those  that  turn  their  faces  to  Thee. 

We  come  out  of  very  different  circumstances ;  our 
day's  work  and  trials  and  joys  have  been  very  diverse. 
But  we  thank  Thee  that  in  all  this  infinite  variety  and 
complexity  of  circumstances  and  events  which  make 
up  our  lives  Thou  art  seeking  the  same  ends  with  us 
all,  and  art  expressing  the  same  love  that  embraces  us 
all.  And  so  we  would  thank  Thee  for  all  the  way  by 
which  the  Lord  our  God  has  led  us,  and  beseech  Thee 
that  we  may  be  taught  more  clear-sightedly  because 
more  believingly  to  consider  what  Thou  dost  with  us, 


156  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  observing  these  things  may  we  understand  the 
loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.  Oh  !  do  Thou  deliver  us 
from  the  many  things  in  ourselves  which  we  partly 
know  and  suspect  to  be  contrary  to  Thy  will,  and  show 
us  more  clearly  the  loftiness  and  the  greatness  of  the 
possibilities  of  Thy  grace  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  Thy 
purpose  of  love  concerning  each  of  us.  May  we  make 
more  earnest  work  of  our  sanctifying,  and  feel  more 
and  more  that  it  is  our  highest  joy,  as  well  as  our 
bounden  duty,  to  be  perfect  as  our  Father  in  Heaven 
is  perfect ;  '  and  forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind, 
may  we  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the 
high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.' 

O  Lord,  Thou  knowest  how  little  we  have  been  true 
to  Thy  calling.  Thou  hast  daily  to  forgive  our 
departures  from  the  paths  of  righteousness  and 
our  many  fallings  short  of  Thy  holy  will,  even  as 
we  recognise  and  know  it.  But  we  bless  Thee  that 
with  Thee  there  is  forgiveness  and  plenteous  redemp- 
tion that  Thou  mayest  be  sought  unto.  Graciously 
help  us,  then,  to  recognise  our  own  defects  and  failures, 
to  be  thankful  for  everything  that  helps  us  to  see  Thee, 
and  not  even  to  resent  the  words  of  others  that  may 
painfully  lead  to  apprehend  Thee ;  but  help  us  at  the 
same  time  to  realise  even  more  clearly  the  infinite 
forgiveness  of  our  Father,  and  His  infinite  power  to 
mend  the  marred  vessels,  and  make  them  as  He  would 
have  them  to  be.  And  lead  us  day  by  day  to  yield 
ourselves  to  Thy  moulding  and  working.  We  believe 
that  Thou  art  working  in  Thy  people  for  that  selfsame 
thing,  that  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  of  life. 
And  we  believe  that  that  is  the  meaning  of  all  Thy 
dealings  with  us.  May  we  realise  it  more  completely, 
and  feel  it  more  hopefully,  and  so  be  helped  to  take 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  157 

all  things  by  their  right  handle,  to  understand  all 
things  in  their  deepest  meaning,  and  to  recognise 
that  all  work  together  for  good. 

O  Lord !  draw  near  to  us  now,  and  help  us  all  who 
wait  before  Thee  to  lay  to  heart  the  message  that 
Thou  dost  bring  to  us  ;  and  do  Thou  give,  too,  the 
message  to  speak  which  shall  manifestly  be  Thy  will 
for  each  of  us  ;  and  let  Thy  Holy  Spirit  touch  lips  and 
ears,  hearts  and  wills,  that  our  lives  may  be  the  better 
for  our  gathering  together  thus. 

We  pray  for  one  another,  in  all  the  diversity  of  our 
conditions.  If  there  are  any  that  have  any  sorrow  or 
trouble  in  our  hearts  or  lives  or  homes  we  pray  Thee 
to  reveal  Thy  strong  and  gracious  presence  to  us  all 
that  are  thus  miserable.  And  where  there  is  weakness 
or  pain  of  body  do  Thou  give  us  patience,  and  as  the 
outward  man  perishes  may  the  inward  man  be  renewed 
day  by  day.  We  pray  Thee  to  sustain  all  sad  hearts 
and  comfort  all  sorrowful  souls,  and  speak  Thy  peace 
to  all  troubled  minds,  and  let  Thy  blessed  presence  be 
felt  to  brood  over  all  storms  in  life,  and  to  say,  '  Peace  ! 
be  still ! ' 

O  Lord,  accept  our  thanks  now  for  Thy  great  mercies 
to  us,  and  help  us  to  embrace  in  the  thanksgiving  all 
Thy  dealings  with  us  without  exception.  And  now  be 
with  us  as  we  wait  here  before  Thee,  help  and  bless  us 
in  our  several  parts  of  this  service,  and  accept  and 
answer  us  through  Christ  our  Saviour. 


LXXVIII 

O  Lord  !  our  Father,  if  we  knew  Thee  as  Thou  art, 
and  ourselves  as  we  are,  how  easy  and  blessed  it 
would  be  for  us  to  come  into  Thy  presence  with  ardent 


158  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

love,  with  grateful  thanksgiving,  with  unshaken  trust, 
and  with  earnest  petitions.  But  we  thank  Thee  that 
though  we  but  dimly  see  Thee,  and  but  partly  know  the 
depth  of  our  own  necessities,  Thou  dost  welcome  even 
our  imperfect  petitions  and  our  imperfect  love  and 
trust ;  and  so  we  would  draw  near  to  Thee  now  with 
thankfulness  that  Thou  dost  let  us  come,  and  that 
Thou  dost  inhabit  even  the  praises  of  Israel,  and 
dwell  with  us  who  are  so  far  beneath  Thee.  Lift  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  nearer  to  Thyself,  and  may  the  gracious 
influences  of  Thy  Divine  Spirit  work  upon  all  our 
hearts  now,  and  bring  us  into  true  fellowship  with  Thee. 

We  bless  Thee  for  a  renewed  opportunity  of  uniting 
with  one  another  in  calling  upon  Thee,  and  we  thank 
Thee  for  all  the  strength  which  in  time  past  has  been 
given  to  Thy  people  when  they  have  made  supplication 
in  Thy  Name.  May  we  each  of  us  bring  Christ  with  us 
into  our  gathering.  We  do  bring  weakness  and  cold- 
ness, and  our  presence  will  chill  rather  than  warm  our 
brethren's  hearts.  But  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  be  near  us  all,  and  breathe  Thy  grace  upon 
each  of  us.  Help  us  now  to  realise  to  Whom  we  speak, 
and  through  Whom  we  speak,  and  who  we  are  that 
speak,  that  our  petitions  may  be  in  accordance  with 
Thy  holy  will,  and  in  some  measure  in  accordance  with 
the  greatness  of  our  necessities,  and  the  still  greater 
greatness  of  Thy  gifts. 

O  Lord !  when  we  begin  to  think  of  what  we  need, 
we  know  not  which  to  speak  to  Thee  of  first  ;  but  we 
bless  Thee  that  all  is  gathered  together  in  one ;  that 
we  do  not  need  many  things,  but  the  one  thing.  We 
pray  Thee  that  more  and  more  Thy  love  may  root 
itself  in  our  hearts,  that  more  and  more  we  may  live 
by  the  power  of  the  Christ  that  lives  in  us,  that  more 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  159 

and  more  we  may  be  able  to  subdue  wandering  and 
rebellious  wills,  and  more  and  more  receive  into 
waiting  and  wide-opened  hearts  the  fullness  of  God, 
and  then  all  things  will  be  well  with  us. 

Strengthen  us  by  Thy  all-powerful  and  all- victorious 
grace  for  all  our  work,  for  all  our  difficulties,  for  all 
our  sorrows  and  trials.  Help  us  in  everything  to 
recognise  Thy  presence  and  Thy  hand,  and  to  set 
ourselves  to  our  various  occupations,  feeling  that  in 
them  all  we  may  worship,  and  that  in  them  all  we 
have  a  right  to  expect  Thy  presence  and  Thy  help. 
And  do  Thou  clear  our  eyesight  that  we  may  behold 
the  things  that  are  not  yet  as  though  they  were  ;  and 
may  find  in  the  future,  which  is  made  sure  to  all 
believing  souls  by  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
and  His  sitting  at  Thy  right  hand,  the  great  recom- 
pense of  reward,  the  lustre  and  light  of  which  shall 
shine  down  upon  our  earthly  paths,  and  make  all 
things  blessed  and  easy  for  us.  Abide  with  us  day 
by  day,  teach  us  Thy  holy  will  in  each  new  circumstance 
that  meets  us.  Guide  us  by  Thy  counsel  in  everything 
large  and  little  which  we  have  to  undertake,  to  reflect 
upon,  and  to  decide  about.  And  give  us,  we  pray  Thee, 
grace  with  which  to  recognise  Thy  will  and  submit  to 
it,  and  try  to  carry  out  Thy  will.  Help  us  to  conquer 
the  evil  in  ourselves,  any  inclination  or  habits  contrary 
to  Thy  holy  purpose  concerning  us,  even  our  sanctifica- 
tion.  And  strengthen  us,  we  pray  Thee,  for  the  daily 
conflict.  May  the  peace  of  God  be  in  our  hearts  in  the 
midst  of  it,  and  make  us  more  than  conquerors  through 
Christ  that  loveth  us. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  give  us  Thy  blessing  now,  and 
some  word  which  shall  be  in  accordance  with  Thy 
holy  will,  and  be  of  use  to  us  in  our  daily  life  and 


160  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Christian  experience.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  times 
when  we  have  found  Thee  when  we  sought  Thee 
thus.  We  bless  Thee  for  past  days  of  mercy  and  good- 
ness granted  to  this  people.  We  praise  Thee  that 
Thou  art  still  with  us,  and  beseech  Thee  not  to  leave 
us  nor  forsake  us,  but  make  this  congregation  more 
and  more  a  power  for  God  in  this  city ;  and  make  each 
of  us  more  and  more  worthy  to  be,  and  to  call  ourselves, 
disciples  of  Jesus  Christ.  May  men  take  knowledge  of 
us  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus.  Give  us  Thy  presence 
now,  we  pray;  let  the  word  of  the  Lord  run  and  be 
glorified.  We  commend  one  another  to  Thy  gracious 
care ;  we  pray  for  all,  present  or  absent,  who  may  be  in 
our  hearts,  especially  for  any  that  are  in  any  kind  of 
trouble  or  sorrow,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
succour  and  sustain  Thy  children;  when  Thou  dost 
send  Thy  strokes  send  also  Thy  solace,  and  grant  that 
all  Thy  people  may,  being  exercised  by  Thy  discipline, 
reap  hereafter  '  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness.' 

Accept  us  as  we  come  to  Thee  now,  O  Lord !  Speak 
in  us,  speak  through  us,  speak  to  us.  May  we  have 
the  hearing  ear,  and  the  understanding  heart,  and  the 
obedient  hand,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour. 


LXXIX 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  we  thank  Thee  for  that 
'  faithful  saying  .  .  .  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners.'  And  we  beseech  Thee  that 
Thou  wouldst  show  forth  Thy  longsuffering  in  us,  and 
draw  us  to  Thyself  more  and  more,  that  we  may 
partake  more  freely  of  that  perfect  salvation  which  is 
in  Him.    We  bless  Thee  that  whilst  we  have  to  lift  up 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  161 

our  hearts  and  thoughts  to  Thee  as  the  King  eternal, 
immortal  and  invisible,  we  can  draw  far  nearer  to 
Thyself  when  we  think  of  Thee  as  the  God  and  Father 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  when  we  feel  that  in  the 
salvation  of  us  sinners  Thou  hast  manifested  Thyself 
more  tenderly  and  more  blessedly  than  in  all  the 
mighty  works  of  Thy  hands.  We  come  to  Thee  then, 
and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  each  of  us  to 
accept  that  '  saying '  which  '  is  worthy  of  all  accepta- : 
tion';  and  in  the  strength  of  it  may  we  daily  live,  and 
in  the  joy  and  peace  of  it  may  we  more  and  more  rise 
to  the  end  of  all  Thy  mercies,  as  well  as  of  Thy 
commandments,  which  is  love,  out  of  a  good  conscience 
and  a  pure  heart,  which  come  through  faith  unfeigned. 
Oh,  deepen  and  strengthen  in  us  our  confidence  in 
that  great  Lord,  and  in  the  might  of  His  work  for  us. 
And  may  we  experience  more  and  more  the  power  of 
His  salvation,  so  that  it  may  be  not  only  a  matter  of 
faith  but  a  matter  of  daily  experience. 

Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  day  by  day,  to  'cleanse 
ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit, 
perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.'  Help  us 
daily  to  govern  ourselves,  our  own  tastes  and  inclina- 
tions, and  to  submit  our  purposes  and  thoughts,  and 
all  our  plans  and  works,  habitually  to  Thee,  that  we 
may  have  this  approval  consciously  in  our  hearts  ere 
we  undertake,  and  Thy  felt  presence  with  us  while  we 
prosecute,  the  various  duties  and  occupations  of  our 
daily  lives. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  art  ever  ready  to 
stand  by  them  that  stand  by  Thee,  and  to  be  a  fellow- 
worker  with  those  whose  deepest  desire  is  to  work  the 
work  of  the  Lord.  May  we  realise  more  the  greatness 
of  the  dignity  to  which  Thou  dost  lift  even  such  poor 

L 


162  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

creatures  as  we  are,  in  making  us  fellow- workers  with 
the  Truth;  and  that  Thou  wouldst  more  and  more 
come  into  our  lives  and  cause  us  to  feel  that  God  is  of 
a  truth  '  working  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do,  according 
to  His  own  good  pleasure.'  Thou  knowest  our  weakness, 
the  weakness  which  belongs  to  us  by  reason  of  being 
creatures  such  as  we  are,  and  that  greater  weakness 
which  belongs  to  us  by  reason  of  having  rebelled 
against  Thee.  We  pray  that  in  Thy  great  mercy  Thou 
wouldst  take  out  of  our  hearts  all  alien  and  sinful 
desires,  inclinations,  and  tastes.  We  pray  Thee  to 
strengthen  our  feeble  hands  for  warfare  against  our 
own  besetting  sins.  We  beseech  Thee  for  grace  to 
•  lay  aside  every  weight '  as  well  as  every  sin,  that  we 
may,  unhampered  and  unhindered,  run  with  patient 
perseverance  the  race  that  Thou,  in  Thy  mercy,  dost 
set  before  us. 

We  pray  for  forgiveness  for  all  past  failures,  that 
we  may  make  the  future  brighter  and  nobler  than  the 
past  has  been.  We  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  have 
the  consciousness  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit's  presence  in 
heart  and  mind,  and  that  men  may  see  in  our  lives 
that  we  are  guided  and  governed  by  something  higher 
and  nobler  than  men  in  the  world. 

Graciously  do  Thou  bless  our  gathering  together  at 
all  times,  and  especially  now  as  we  are  here  before 
Thee.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  opportunity  of  ap- 
proaching Thy  Throne  together.  We  bless  Thee  for 
all  the  quickening  which  sluggish  faith  has  received, 
and  for  all  the  impulse  which  has  been  given  to  holier 
living  by  our  gathering  together  in  times  that  are 
past.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  be  with  us  still ;  and 
help  us  in  Thy  great  mercy  that  we  may,  at  all  times, 
when  we  assemble  thus,  have  Thy  presence  manifestly 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  163 

with  us ;  and  that  we  ourselves  may  feel  that  the  Lord 
our  God  is  speaking  to  us,  and  is  hearing  the  prayers 
which  Himself  hath  taught. 

We  pray  for  one  another,  for  all  that  are  dear  to  us, 
present  or  absent,  for  all  the  families  represented 
here,  for  any  in  sorrow  or  trouble.  And  we  beseech 
Thee  that  where  Thou  dost  send  Thy  providences  to 
shroud  homes  and  hearts  in  darkness  Thou  wouldst 
send  the  light  of  Thy  face,  and  the  consciousness  of 
Thy  presence.  And  may  all  Thy  people  hear,  in  their 
varying  sorrows,  the  voice  of  their  Father  inviting 
them  nearer  to  Himself. 

And  now  we  pray  Thee  to  bless  us  in  this  hour  of 
worship,  speak  through  us  and  to  us,  and  help  us  to 
accept  Thy  message,  and  to  live  according  to  Thy  will 
in  the  time  that  is  yet  to  come.  Hear  our  supplications, 
O  Lord !  pardon  our  many  sins ;  quicken  and  help  us 
now,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

LXXX 

vO  Lord,  Who  hast  been  the  dwelling-place  of  Thy 
people  in  all  generations,  and  art  still  our  strong 
habitation  whereunto  we  may  continually  resort,  we 
would  draw  near  to  Thee  now,  and  remember  with 
thankfulness  and  submission  all  the  way  by  which  the 
Lord  our  God  has  led  us.  We  partly  understand  Thy 
loving  meaning  in  our  lives,  and  we  pray  for  a  clearer 
vision,  and  a  more  settled  faith,  that  observing  these 
things  we  may  in  them  all  perceive  the  loving-kindness 
of  the  Lord. 

We  would  come  to  Thee  this  morning,  O  Father,  and 
in  the  exercise  of  the  faith  would  bring  Thee  our 
thankfulness,   and   beseech    Thee    to    deepen    in    our 


164  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

hearts  and  minds  the  quiet  confidence  that  all  things 
work  together  for  good  to  us  if  we  love  Thee.  Thou 
dost  weave  the  mingled  web  of  our  lives.  We  would 
believe  that  Thy  goodness  has  put  every  thread  into 
it.  We  bless  Thee  for  guidance,  for  protection,  for 
abundant  mercies,  often  received  without  recognition 
of  their  Source,  and  used  without  remembrance  of  our 
responsibility,  and  dismissed  without  the  memory  of 
their  sweetness.  But  we  thank  Thee  for  all  things, 
and  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  come  near  to  us  in  and 
through  Thy  varying  gifts  and  dealings,  so  that  all 
things  may  be  good  because  they  whisper  to  us  of 
Thyself. 

We  would  cast  ourselves  on  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  the 
time  to  come,  be  it  long  or  short,  of  our  pilgrimage 
here.  We  thank  Thee  that  we  do  not  need  to  be  sad 
when  we  remember  that  we  are  as  pilgrims  and 
sojourners,  because  we  can  say  that  we  are  pilgrims 
and  sojourners  with  Thee,  and  dwell  in  Thy  house,  if 
we  will,  all  the  days  of  our  lives.  May  the  assurance 
of  Thy  presence  go  with  us,  and  give  us  the  rest  which 
nothing  else  can  give.  May  the  sense  that  God  is  not 
far  from  every  one  of  us  be  a  perpetual  light,  and  the 
lamp  of  our  lives,  giving  guidance,  companionship,  and 
good  cheer  at  all  times. 

Help  us  to  make  the  most  of  our  time,  of  ourselves, 
and  of  all  Thy  gifts  to  us ;  and  may  we  be  more  con- 
cerned to  grow  what  Thou  wouldst  have  us  to  be,  and 
to  do  with  an  increasing  promptitude  and  cheerfulness 
whatsoever  Thou  wouldst  have  us  to  do,  than  to  win 
earthly  joys,  or  to  secure  our  transitory  wishes. 

We  pray  Thee  to  guide  us  by  Thy  counsel.  We  thank 
Thee  that  we  can  leave  to-morrow,  the  next  moment, 
and  the  Eternity  beyond,  alike  in  Thine  hands.    Since 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  165 

we  must  trust  Thee  for  even  the  nearest  future  may 
we  trust  Thee  for  the  greatest  and  remotest.  And 
since  Thou  hast  replenished  all  our  past  so  wisely  and 
abundantly,  may  our  faith  never  fail,  but  in  quietness 
and  in  confidence  may  our  strength  be  found ;  and  may 
we  be  anxious  about  nothing,  because  everything  we 
commit,  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving, 
unto  Thy  loving,  mighty,  wise  hands. 

Hear  us,  O  Lord ;  grant  to  us  individually  and  as  a 
congregation  of  professing  disciples  in  Christ  Jesus 
Thy  blessing  in  this  year.  We  know  not  what  shape 
the  blessing  may  take.  We  ask  Thee  for  help  to 
conquer  our  sins  and  faults ;  for  increasing  knowledge 
and  delight  in  Thy  holy  will.  We  ask  Thee  to  give 
us  such  outward  gifts  as  Thou  knowest  to  be  for  our 
good,  and  help  us  to  subdue  our  limit  and  wishes 
according  to  Thy  providence,  and  neither  to  be  en- 
cumbered with  regrets  for  what  Thou  hast  taken, 
nor  tortured  with  anxiety  as  to  what  thou  mayest 
give. 

O  Lord!  pour  out  upon  this  Church  and  congrega- 
tion a  larger  measure  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit.  Help  us, 
rather,  that  we  may  more  completely  make  our  own 
that  which  Thou  hast  given  us,  for  we  are  not  straitened 
in  Thee  but  in  ourselves.  Help  us  more  and  more  to 
derive  the  impulse  for  our  lives,  the  pattern  for  our 
lives,  and  the  power  to  reproduce  that  pattern  accord- 
ing as  Thine  own  gracious  promise  has  told  us,  that 
we  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fullness  of  God.  O  Lord, 
mercifully  hear  us,  forgive,  accept,  and  bless  us,  for 
Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


166  PULPIT  PRAYERS 


LXXXI 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  Who  art  ever  near  us, 
ready  to  teach  us  what  to  pray  for,  and  ready  to 
answer  the  petitions  in  accordance  with  Thy  holy  will, 
help  us  to  make  our  prayers  not  only  askings  but 
longings.  And  when  we  draw  near  to  Thee  may  we 
not  only  be  conscious  of  our  own  wants,  but  sure  of 
Thy  fullness  and  sufficiency  and  sweetness. 

We  thank  Thee  that  we  can  think  of  nothing  that 
we  need  which  Thou  dost  not  know,  and  art  not  ready 
to  give  us.  Wherefore  we  pray  Thee  that  our  prayers 
may  be  full  of  faith,  and  full  of  willingness  to  accept 
what  Thou  dost  send.  Thou  knowest  each  of  us  here 
before  Thee  this  morning,  and  all  the  variety  of  our 
wants  and  circumstances,  of  our  present  experiences, 
and  our  purposes  and  hopes.  We  pray  that  Thou 
wouldst  come  near  to  each  of  us,  and  whatever  other 
gifts  thou  mayest  bestow  upon  us,  according  to  our 
special  necessities,  give  us,  O  Lord,  and  help  us  to  long 
most  for,  and  most  gladly  to  accept,  that  gift  which 
is  best  for  all  of  us,  the  gift  of  Thy  own  self.  Canst 
Thou  not  be  to  every  man  the  thing  that  he  desires 
most  truly,  the  thing  that  he  needs  most  profoundly  ? 

We  bless  Thee  for  the  infinite  variety  of  Thy  gifts, 
and  of  Thyself.  Thou  art  all  in  all.  May  we  find  our 
all  in  Thee.  If  any  have  special  burdens  of  sorrow 
do  Thou  graciously  speak  to  sad  hearts,  and  grant 
that  the  light  of  Thy  presence  may  shine  into  all  the 
darkness,  and  that  we  may  not  be  sorry  for  the  dark- 
ness which  brings  out  the  brightness  of  Thy  face.  If 
any  of  us  have  special  duties  to  discharge  which  our 
circumstances  make  us  to  feel  very  heavy,  be  near  to 
such,  we  pray,  and  give  Thy  power  according  to  their 


PULPIT  PKAYERS  167 

need,  and  the  strength  of  the  Most  High  perfected  in 
their  weakness.  Help  those  who  are  in  slippery  places 
to  stand  fast  in  the  Lord ;  looking  forward  may  we  be 
at  peace,  looking  backward  may  we  be  grateful,  look- 
ing inwards  may  we  be  humble,  looking  upwards  may 
we  be  confident. 

O  Lord !  we  pray  for  all  our  brethren  throughout 
the  world,  and  beseech  Thee  that  this  year  on  which 
We  have  entered  may  be  a  year  in  which  the  churches 
of  the  living  God  may  be  drawn  nearer  to  their  Lord, 
may  be  filled  fuller  of  His  Spirit,  and  may  be  made 
mightier  witnesses  for  Him  in  the  world. 

Hear  us  now ;  grant  us  Thy  blessing.  Let  us  speak 
some  word  in  Thy  Name ;  take  away  all  our  unfitness 
in  hearing  and  in  speaking,  and  shed  abroad  Thy  grace 
upon  our  hearts,  for  Christ  our  Saviour's  sake. 

LXXXII 

O  Lord,  Love  eternal.  Truth  immovable.  Power  un- 
wearied. Our  Father  which  art  in  Heaven,  draw  our 
hearts  to  Thyself,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  grant  that  we 
may  each  of  us  now  feel  that  we  are  indeed  speaking 
to  One  that  hears,  pities,  and  will  help.  Surely  we 
need  Thy  help,  and  great  and  infinite  as  Thou  art  Thou 
art  not  more  than  we  require  for  our  hearts'  peace,  for 
our  lives'  nobleness  and  serenity. 

O  Lord,  may  each  of  us  desire,  and  desiring  possess, 
God.  Whatever  else  life  may  bring  us  or  take  from  us, 
may  it  bring  us  that  which  nothing  but  ourselves  can 
rob  us  of,  the  eager  consciousness  of  Thy  present  help, 
and  of  Thy  all-sufficiency.  Be  near  us  now,  we  beseech 
Thee ;  bless  us  in  our  worship  this  evening ;  guide  the 
heart  and  thoughts  of  the  speaker  and  of  the  hearers ; 


168  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  may  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  made 
very  real,  and  very  precious  to  each  of  us  by  reason  of 
this  service.  Hear  us,  O  Lord,  in  our  petitions  ;  grant 
us  Thy  presence  as  we  worship  here,  and  accept  us,  in 
Christ  our  Lord. 


LXXXIII 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  would  thank  Thee  for  Thy  count- 
less gifts  of  love,  and  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  con- 
nect more  constantly  all  our  good  with  Thyself,  the 
Chief  Good.  Surely  '  every  good  and  perfect  gift 
cometh  from  Thee,'  and  all  the  lesser  lights  are  kindled 
at  Thy  beam.  We  bless  Thee  for  the  manifold  ways  in 
which  Thou  dost  impart  Thyself  to  every  portion  of 
our  nature  and  our  need.  And  we  pray  Thee  that  Thy 
lesser  gifts  may  help  us  to  understand  and  possess  Thy 
greater  ones,  and  that  none  of  us  may  be  like  the  crea- 
tures who  know  not  the  hand  that  feeds  them ;  but 
may  we  ever  find,  and  find  increasingly,  that  Thy 
presence  in  our  joys  is  the  gladness  of  our  joys,  and 
that  Thy  presence  in  our  tasks  makes  our  burdens 
light,  and  Thy  presence  in  our  sorrows  brings  a  glow 
even  into  the  darkness. 

O  Lord !  look  upon  us  and  graciously  help  us  in  our 
words  and  meditations,  that  Thy  truth  may  run 
amongst  us  and  be  glorified,  and  that  many  gathered 
here  this  evening  may  by  reason  of  this  gathering  be 
brought  face  to  face  with  Thyself,  and  led  to  yield 
their  hearts  to  Thee. 

We  pray  for  all  assembled  here,  especially  for  the 
younger  portion  of  our  congregation,  and  ask  that 
each  of  them  may  be  led,  from  this  time  forth,  to  say, 
'  My  Father,  Thou  art  the  Guide  of  my  youth.'    Keep 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  169 

any  that  are  in  slippery  places.  Look  upon  the  young 
men  here,  who,  perchance,  far  from  earlier  associations, 
and  the  security  of  being  known  and  surrounded  by 
those  that  love  them,  may  be  in  danger  of  falling  into 
the  temptations  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil, 
which  are  rife  in  this  great  city.  In  their  solitude  may 
they  have  Thyself,  and  may  they  keep  themselves  pure, 
and  innocent  from  the  great  transgression.  In  the 
early  flush  of  their  days  may  they  consecrate  their 
youth  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  find  in  Him  all  that  youth 
or  age  can  ever  need.  And  if  it  please  Thee,  O  Lord, 
give  us  some  message  this  evening  that  may  be  felt  to 
come  from  Thyself,  and  grant  that  Thy  good  Spirit 
may  go  with  Thy  word,  and  write  it  deep  on  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  all  of  us. 

O  Lord!  help  us  each  according  to  our  different 
duties,  difficulties,  and  circumstances.  Strengthen  and 
give  patience  to  those  in  sorrow.  If  any  of  us  are  in 
anxiety,  or  nourishing  forebodings  of  coming  possible 
evil,  help  us  to  cast  our  burden  on  the  Lord,  and  seek 
not  to  be  anxious  about  anything  ;  but '  in  everything, 
by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving,  make 
our  requests  known  unto  Thee,'  that  Thy  peace  may 
steal  into  our  hearts.  Whatever  may  be  our  present 
condition,  help  us  to  use  it  as  Thou  dost  mean  it,  to 
bring  us  nearer  to  Thyself,  to  build  up  within  us 
Christ-like  and  Christ-pleasing  characters.  And  may 
we  so  use  the  things  seen  and  temporal  that  they  may 
make  more  clear  and  firm  to  us  our  possession  of  '  the 
things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal.' 

Hear,  accept,  and  bless  us  now,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


170  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

LXXXIV 

O  Lord  our  Father,  Who  dwellest  in  Thine  eternal 
rest,  we  thank  Thee  that  there  is  a  Sabbath-keeping 
for  the  people  of  God.  We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  come  into  our  hearts  this  morning,  calming  all 
disturbance,  dissipating  fears,  brightening  the  dark- 
ness of  sorrow,  and  helping  us  to  cast  all  our  care  upon 
Thee,  that  we  may  know  the  rest  of  submission,  and 
the  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding,  of  com- 
munion with  Thee.  Teach  all  our  hearts,  we  beseech 
Thee ;  draw  near  to  each  of  us,  and  may  we  all  find 
that  of  a  truth  it  is  no  vain  thing  to  wait  upon  the 
Lord!  Hear  us,  grant  us  Thy  presence  and  blessing 
now,  for  our  risen  Lord's  sake. 

LXXXV 

Thankfully,  O  Lord,  we  draw  near  to  Thee,  for  surely 
the  closer  we  are  to  Thee  the  sweeter  and  the  nobler 
our  lives,  and  the  more  blessed  our  hearts,  and  the 
stronger  we  are  to  do  and  to  bear  Thy  will.  We  need 
Thy  pardon  because,  though  we  know  all  this,  we  so 
often  forget  it,  and  stray  away  from  the  guardianship 
of  Thine  hand,  and  from  the  sweet  security  of  Thy 
presence,  in  the  midst  of  the  struggles  and  legitimate 
objects  of  our  daily  work.  So  we  thank  Thee  that 
Thou  hast  had  pity  upon  our  weakness,  and  given  us 
the  public  ordinances  of  this  day  wherein  even  sense 
may  help  the  spirit,  and  we  may  come  the  closer  to 
Thee  because  of  our  surroundings  and  our  associates. 

O  shed  abroad  upon  us  Thy  gracious  influences,  with- 
out which  these  very  helps  of  Thine  appointing  will, 
by  our  weakness,  become  hindrances.  May  we  pass 
through  the  forms  into  the  realities,  and  may  this  be  a 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  171 

true  hour  of  worship  for  each  of  us,  wherein  we  may- 
see  clearly  what  is  so  often  wrapped  in  mist  and  dark- 
ness ;  and  what  we  so  often  do  not  care  to  look  at, 
though  it  shines  around  us.  May  we  feel  that  we  are 
very  near  to  God  Who  is  our  life.  May  we  learn  all 
the  sweetness  and  the  power  in  that  Name,  'Our 
Father  in  Heaven.'  And  may  we  come  like  children, 
glad  to  be  beside  Thee,  and  having  rest  in  Thy  pre- 
sence even  though  no  word  pass. 

O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  Thy  mercies.  Thy  loving- 
kindnesses  close  us  round  day  by  day,  and  moment  by 
moment.  Thy  punctual  goodness  brings  us  not  only 
each  day  our  daily  bread,  but  each  instant  our  needed 
blessings.  We  beseech  Thee  to  make  us  more  obser- 
vant of  these  things  that  we  may  understand  the 
loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.  And  we  beseech  Thee  to 
help  us  in  the  strength  of  the  assurance  that  we  are 
Thy  beloved  children,  to  pass  on  through  all  our  days, 
and  have  them  brightened  by  the  light  of  Thy  face 
and  the  love  of  Thy  heart. 

O  Lord !  receive  our  gratitude  for  any  special  bless- 
ings which  any  of  us  may,  during  these  past  days,  have 
had  from  Thine  hand.  If  Thou  hast  heard  any  of  our 
prayers,  if  Thou  hast  answered  not  by  terrible  things 
in  righteousness  but  by  gracious  things  in  love,  we 
would  praise  Thee,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thy  mercies, 
like  Thine  afflictions,  may  not  be  wasted  upon  us.  And 
we  pray  Thee  for  Thy  help  to  go  with  us  through  all 
the  variety  of  our  circumstances  and  duties.  Thou 
knowest  what  may  press  most  upon  each  of  us  here 
to-day.  The  heart  knoweth  its  own  bitterness ;  blessed 
be  Thy  Name.  Thou  art  not  a  stranger  who  cannot  in- 
termeddle with  its  joy  and  its  grief  alike.  So  we  would 
spread  out  our  words  and  our  lives   before  Thee,  O 


172  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Lord !  and  implore,  as  the  greatest  of  all  our  blessings, 
that  Thou  wouldst  lighten  and  fill  every  corner  of  our 
being  with  Thyself. 

Thou  hast  put  a  great  prayer  into  our  lips  when 
Thou  hast  led  and  bidden  us  ask  that  we  may  '  be  filled 
with  all  the  fullness  of  God.'  And  we  pray  that  it  may 
be  so  with  us.  O  Lord !  help  us,  day  by  day,  in  our 
tasks.  May  we  do  them  for  Thee,  and  by  Thee,  and  in 
fellowship  with  Thee.  And  so  may  all  the  things  that 
are  seen  and  temporal  help  us  to  a  clearer  perception, 
and  a  more  entire  possession  even  here  and  now,  of 
'  the  things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal.'  For  us  too 
may  all  the  diversities  of  our  life's  engagements  be 
summed  up  in  doing  this  one  thing,  '  pressing  toward 
the  mark  for  the  prize.'  May  we  look  up  to  Thee  this 
morning  in  our  meetings,  and  pray  that  Thou  wouldst 
help  us,  not  only  in  our  words  to  Thee,  but  in  our  words 
to  one  another. 

O  Lord !  give  us,  we  pray  Thee,  some  message  from 
Thyself  that  shall  have  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit's 
power  in  it,  and  shall  find  a  witness  in  the  hearts  of  all 
that  hear.  And  do  Thou  help  hearers  and  speaker 
alike  to  forget  the  human  element,  to  look  to  God  and 
to  listen  to  Him.  And  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that 
this  morning,  by  our  service,  faint  hearts  may  be 
strengthened,  and  wandering  souls  be  brought  back, 
and  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  be  advanced  in  our  hearts. 
May  such  blessings  rest  upon  this  congregation,  upon 
Thy  dear  servant  its  pastor ;  and  may  like  mercies  be 
granted  to  all  our  brethren,  of  every  communion  and 
name  in  our  city.  We  pray  that  the  people  of  the  Lord 
in  this  place  may  more  and  more  be  conscious  of  the 
responsibilities  and  privileges  to  be  witnesses  for  Christ 
here  ;  and  that  in  their  lives  and  in  their  work,  in  their 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  173 

words  from  pulpits,  and  schools,  and  places  of  instruc- 
tion, and  by  their  efforts  as  citizens  of  no  mean  city, 
and  the  members  of  this  mighty  nation,  that  the 
righteousness  which  exalteth  a  community  may 
spread  among  us. 

We  desire  to  commend  very  tenderly  to  Thee  any 
that  are  in  sorrow  or  trouble ;  and  beseech  Thee  to  draw 
near  to  darkened  homes,  to  empty  hearts,  and  to  pour 
Thy  grace,  and  the  consolations  which  are  neither  few 
nor  small  into  such. 

And  now  we  commend  ourselves  to  Thee.  We 
beseech  Thee  to  hear  and  answer  and  forgive  all  our 
sins,  and  accept  us  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 

LXXXVI 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  God !  Thou  art  indeed  our  rest, 
and  we  would  call  upon  our  souls  and  all  that  is  within 
us  to  return  unto  Thee,  for  surely  Thou  dost  draw  us  to 
Thyself  by  Thy  bountiful  dealings  with  us  ;  and  we,  too, 
have  to  lift  up  our  thankful  voices,  and  say  that  Thou 
hast  delivered  our  souls  from  death,  hast  often  kept  our 
eyes  from  tears,  and  hast  always  been  waiting  and 
wishing  to  keep  our  feet  from  falling.  So  we  pray  that 
we  indeed  may  walk  before  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the 
living,  in  the  land  where  Thou  dost  still  permit  us  to 
stay.  And  may  we  be  of  those  who  live  indeed  because 
the  life  of  God  is  in  us.  And  may  we  be  of  those  who 
render  unto  Thee  that  which  Thou  dost  most  desire 
when  we  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  the  many  blessings 
which  Thou  dost  bestow  upon  us,  and  most  chiefly  that 
highest  of  all,  the  gift  of  Thyself,  Who  art  our  life  and 
our  salvation,  and  taking  these  benefits,  call  upon  Thy 
Name. 


174  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Help  us  to  come  into  that  large  place  where  we  know 
that  we  draw  near  to  Thee,  to  honour  Thee  most,  not 
by  rendering  but  by  receiving.  And  do  Thou  help  us 
to  realise  in  our  own  hearts,  and  daily  lives,  the  blessed- 
ness of  those  who  are  continually  drawing  from  the 
one  fountain  of  life,  and  so  are  perpetually  satisfied. 

We  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord !  with  our  thanksgivings 
for  all  the  way  by  which  Thou  hast  led  us.  We  some- 
times murmur,  we  sometimes  think  that  we  could  have 
ordered  our  lives  better  than  Thou  hast  done.  We 
sometimes  kickagainst  the  pricks,  and  wound  ourselves  ; 
but  we  pray  Thee  to  bring  us  up,  and  to  keep  us  in  that 
high  region  of  fellowship  and  love  wherein  all  things 
shall  be  seen  to  be  full  of  blessings,  and  felt  to  be  work- 
ing together  for  good.  So  we  would  leave  out  nothing, 
O  Lord,  in  our  thanksgiving,  and  pray  Thee  for  grace, 
honestly  and  entirely,  to  take  upon  our  lips  the  acknow- 
ledgment and  in  our  hearts  the  sense  of  Thy  unbroken 
unmingled  goodness.  May  we  feel  that  every  gift  is 
good  and  perfect  since  in  all  there  is  something  of  the 
light  of  the  Father  of  Lights  from  Whom  they  all  come. 
Blessed  be  Thy  Name !  Thou  hast  no  variableness. 
Thou  dost  not  live  soinetimes,  and  do  good  by  fits  and 
starts. 

We  thank  Thee  for  the  equable  and  continual  flow  of 
Thy  mercy,  which  endureth  for  ever  through  all  the 
variety  of  Thy  dealings  with  us  day  by  day,  and  stretches 
out  into  the  dimmest  distance.  Lord !  be  near  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  in  our  worship ;  accept  our  thanks  when 
Thou  hast  gathered  us  together  this  morning.  We 
bless  Thee  for  all  the  associations  of  this  day  and  place  ; 
most  of  all  we  bless  Thee  for  the  hallowing  memory  of 
that  great  Day  of  the  Lord  when  Christ  rose  from  the 
dead.    And  we  beseech  Thee  that  we  too,  here  and  now, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  175 

may  be  partakers  of  His  Resurrection,  and  may  rise 
again  from  the  death  of  sin  and  live  unto  righteousness 
and  God. 

Speak  in  our  hearts,  O  Lord !  that  we  may  speak  to 
Thee,  for  our  prayers  are  then  only  sweet  when  Thou 
dost  inspire  them.  And  we  pray  that  our  hearts  may 
be  visited,  that  we  may  feel  that  we  are  being  visited  by 
Thy  supernal  grace  which  may  find  its  way  into  all  our 
minds,  and  bring  strange  flashes  of  light,  and  a  strange 
sense  of  restful  blessedness  and  willingness  to  be 
merged  in  Thy  will. 

O  Lord !  forgive  our  past  sins ;  help  us  to  make  the 
future  better  and  brighter  than  what  lies  behind. 
May  we  be  reaching  forth  to  the  things  that  are 
before,  and  live  with  the  joyous  and  buoyant  energy 
of  a  continual  aspiration  towards,  and  realisation  of, 
unattained  yet  unattainable  heights,  of  likeness  to 
Thyself,  of  possession  of  Thyself,  and  of  blessedness  in 
Thyself.  We  pray  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  forgive  all  our 
sins,  and  in  Thy  great  mercy  to  accept  and  bless  us  now, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

LXXXVII 

O  Lord  our  God !  help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  some- 
thing of  that  triumphant  persuasion  may  pass  into 
and  abide  in  our  hearts  and  minds.  May  we  feel  the 
bonds  that  knit  us  to  Thee,  the  sweet  and  immortal 
bonds,  not  of  our  love  to  Thee,  but  of  Thy  love  flowing 
out  to  us,  and  grasping  us.  May  we  never,  we  who 
only  can,  may  we  never  break  these  bonds,  or  separate 
ourselves  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 
Help  us,  day  by  day,  to  tighten  the  bond,  to  yield 


176  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

ourselves  more  to  Thy  stringent  embrace.  Help  us  to 
live  in  the  fuller  possession,  and  the  more  joyful 
response  of,  and  to.  Thy  great  love  to  us;  and  may 
that  love,  dwelling  in  our  hearts,  work  there  all  things 
lovely  and  of  good  report.  Lift  us  up  above  our  own 
weaknesses  and  meannesses.  Breathe  strength  into 
us  that  shall  be  made  perfect  in  our  weakness.  Make 
us  lords  of  our  selves  and  circumstances  and  times. 
May  we  live  as  the  sons  of  God,  without  rebuke.  May 
we  have  in  our  hearts  the  consciousness  that  Thou  art 
with  us.  May  the  voice  of  our  deepest  spirits  be 
'  Abba !  Father ! '    May  we  be  saved  by  hope. 

Guide  us,  O  Lord,  day  by  day,  according  to  all  the 
diversity  of  our  characters  and  necessities.  Thou 
appointest  a  path  for  us;  we  would  not  hew  it  out 
for  ourselves,  but  ask  Thee  to  lead  us  with  that 
'  kindly  light '  which  Thou  dost  grant  to  them  that  keep 
the  single  eye.  We  pray  that  we  may  not  be  left  in 
perplexity  as  to  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  And 
may  we  be  always  equally  ready  to  ascertain  and  to  obey. 

We  pray  for  Thy  help  in  our  various  occupations,  and 
all  the  callings  which  Thou  hast  laid  upon  us.  May  we 
realise  that  they  are  callings  from  God,  summonses  to 
His  service,  invitations  to  come  up  higher,  though  we 
so  often  make  them  excuses  for  tarrying  down  below. 
We  beseech  Thee  to  deliver  us  from  the  temptations  of 
our  callings,  from  the  snares  of  our  duties,  and  from 
all  which  our  own  weakness  turns  into  occasions  of 
stumbling  when  Thou  dost  mean  them  to  be  means  of 
rising  to  Thyself.  Help  us  to  live  to  Thy  praise ;  give 
us  Thy  presence  in  our  hour  of  worship ;  speak  in  our 
hearts  and  to  each  of  us,  and  strengthen  us  to 
accept  and  to  obey  the  message  which  Thou  dost 
give  us. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  177 

Now,  O  Lord !  take  us  into  Thy  care ;  forgive  our 
many  sins;  and  grant  us  Thy  gracious  help  and  presence 
this  morning,  for  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


LXXXYIII 

O  Lord  !  Who  hast  taught  us  to  think  of  Thee  as  our 
help  and  our  shield,  strengthen  us  now  that  our  hearts 
may  indeed  wait  upon  Thee,  and  in  still  dependence 
may  draw  from  Thee  rich  blessing  suited  to  the  several 
conditions  of  each  of  us.  We  thank  Thee  for  that  great 
fullness  to  our  emptiness.  We  pray  that  we  may  not 
hinder,  by  anything  in  us,  the  communication  of  Thy 
grace  and  strength.  May  our  hearts  lie  open  to  the 
sunshine,  and  ever  be  turned  to  the  noontide,  that  into 
our  souls  there  may  pass  all  that  we  need  of  Thy 
grace,  strength,  wisdom,  purity,  and  blessedness. 

We  acknowledge  before  Thee,  O  Lord  !  that  we  have 
not  held  our  hearts  quiet  that  Thy  grace  may  flow  into 
them,  and  since  the  cup  has  been  unsteadily  held  much 
of  the  precious  gift  has  been  spilt.  We  pray  that  we 
may,  in  time  to  come,  ask  nothing  doubting,  and  so 
receive  of  the  Lord.  May  we  not  contradict  and 
neutralise  the  desires  that  we  sometimes  have,  and 
put  into  prayer,  by  the  daily  life  which  makes  it 
impossible  for  Thee  to  answer  the  supplications  we 
present. 

Help  us  to  bind  ourselves  to  Thee  by  the  strong  curbs 
which  Thou  dost  supply  to  us.  May  we,  in  simplicity 
and  continuity  of  dependence,  walk  through  life  before 
God,  with  God,  and  draw  from  Thee  whatever  we  need. 
We  thank  Thee  for  the  helps  to  such  daily  living  which 
this  day  has  often  given  us  in  the  past.  We  thank 
M 


178  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Thee  for  any  illumination  or  impulse  to  holier  and 
better  things  of  which  we  have  sometimes  been 
conscious  when  we  have  gathered  together  here ;  for 
the  many  hours  in  past  days  and  years  of  communion 
with  Thyself,  and  with  one  another,  which  Thou  hast 
granted  to  us.  And  we  pray  that  to-day  we  may  all 
be  helped,  and  all  be  brought  into  contact  with  that 
great  truth,  and  that  great  Lord  of  truth,  by  Whom 
our  falsities  may  be  scattered,  and  Who,  dwelling  in 
our  hearts,  makes  life  and  peace  there. 

May  Jesus  Christ,  the  '  Conqueror  renowned,'  abide 
in  our  souls  increasingly,  conquer  all  our  evil,  scatter 
our  vanities,  and  shine  in  us  with  His  own  truth.  And 
help  us  in  our  worship  to  lift  up  our  hearts  to  Thee, 
and  pass  beyond  the  mere  forms  into  the  reality  of 
communion  with  God.  We  bring  to  Thee  very  much 
weakness  ;  may  we  know  it  more.  We  bring  to  Thee 
many  sins,  many  tendencies  to  evil,  much  that  is  averse 
to  God,  and  too  indolent  to  lay  hold,  and  keep  hold,  of 
the  things  that  belong  to  our  peace.  We  pray  that  the 
sluggishness  of  our  spirits,  and  the  wanderings  of  our 
desires,  and  the  feebleness  of  our  wills,  and  the 
strength  of  the  distractions  that  tear  us  away  from 
Thee,  or  try  to  do  it,  may  all  be  taken  in  hand  and 
cured  and  helped  by  Thy  good  Spirit  that  the  life  of 
Jesus  Christ  in  us  may  make  us  free  from  the  law  of 
sin  and  death. 

Lord !  look  upon  us  coming  with  many  thanksgivings, 
with  lowly  petitions,  and  with  faith  that  does  reach 
out  to  Thee,  however  tremulously,  and  grant  large 
blessings  which  shall  make  us  ashamed  of  our  small 
desires.  Let  Thy  mercy  be  upon  us,  not  '  according 
as,'  but  since  '  our  trust  is  in  Thee,'  however  imperfect 
that  trust  may  be. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  179 

Hear    us ;    grant    Thy    gracious    presence  and    all- 
sufficient  help,  for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake . 


LXXXIX 

O  Lord!  help  us  to  come  before  Thee,  heartened  by 
that  prayer  which  we  have  been  reading,  to  ask  of  Thee 
great  things,  and  expect  the  answer.  May  we  indeed 
have  the  eyes  of  our  understandings  enlightened,  and 
by  our  own  blessed  experience  know  the  greatness  of 
that  power  with  which  Thou  workest  in  the  hearts  of 
them  that  trust  Thee.  May  we  ever  be  aware  of  that 
Spirit  of  Thine,  bearing  witness  for  our  spirits,  and 
by  the  purifying  and  the  perfecting,  enlarging  and 
elevating  which  this  trust  brings  with  it.  May  we 
know  that  we  are  the  children  of  God. 

We  pray  for  Thy  gracious  help  in  our  service  of  this 
morning.  We  humbly  cast  ovirselves  upon  Thee,  and 
pray  that  Thy  spirit  may  help  the  infirmity  of  hearers 
and  speaker,  that  we  may  hear  what  God  the  Lord 
shall  speak,  whether  it  be  our  office  in  this  service  to 
utter  what  Thou  dost  whisper  in  our  ear,  or  to  receive 
what  comes  from  human  lips.  Give  Thy  servants  grace 
to  discern  between  what  is  human  and  may  mar  and 
weaken  Thy  message,  and  the  omnipotence  of  that 
message.  Help  us  to  pass  beyond  external  and  human 
infirmities,  and  to  be  taught  of  God.  May  our  lives 
increasingly  bear,  to  ourselves  as  to  others,  the  tokens 
of  Thine  influence.  Breathe  upon  us,  and  may  we 
daily  take  up  the  burdens  which  thou  dost  lay  on  us ; 
and  walk  in  cheerful  godliness,  accepting  humblest 
duties,  and  not  shrinking  from  the  hardest. 

Help  us  to  fight  the  good  fight,  to  wrestle  with  the 
temptations  around  us,  and  the  base  tendencies  of  a 


180  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

compliance  within.  May  we  learn  more  and  more  of 
the  weaknesses  of  our  own  characters  against  which 
we  have  to  be  on  our  guard.  And  may  we  be 
strengthened  to  keep  our  hearts  with  all  diligence, 
and  to  watch  ever  the  sort  of  life  that  issues  from 
them. 

We  pray  Thee  to  give  us  grace  to  war  against  special 
temptations.  Thou  knowest  how  often  our  best  resolu- 
tions break  down  and  crumble  to  nothing  before  the 
fires  of  temptation.  We  beseech  Thee  to  strengthen 
that  which  is  weak,  to  establish  the  feet  that  are  ready 
to  slide,  to  give  us  that  power  which  shall  make  us 
more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loves  us. 

And  now  we  would  commend  one  another,  and  all 
our  orethren,  to  Thee,  with  especially  tender  remem- 
brance of,  and  supplications  for,  all  such  as  are  in  any 
way  afflicted.  Some  such  there  must  be  here  this 
morning.  Let  Thy  peace,  which  passes  all  under- 
standing, calm  their  hearts,  and  prepare  the  way, 
in  due  time,  for  the  saving  and  uplifting  joy  of  the 
Lord  which  may  exist  even  with  the  sadness  from  the 
world. 

We  pray  Thee  to  take  us  all  into  Thy  care  now ;  in 
Thy  mercy  help  and  bless  us  in  our  service ;  and  when 
we  need  Thy  help,  at  all  moments,  and  never  more 
than  when  we  would  stir  ourselves  up  to  take  hold  of 
Thee,  and  of  Thy  truth,  and  of  Thy  Son. 

Hear  us  then,  we  pray ;  accept  and  bless  us  now,  for 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


XC 

0  Lord  !  Whose  Name  alone  is  exalted.  Whose  glory  is 
above  the  praises  of  earth  and  Heaven,  we  come  to 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  181 

Thee  with  thankful  hearts,  and  desire  to  bless  Thee 
that  we  have  access  with  confidence  to  Thee,  and  can 
lose  all  our  fears  and  dread,  and  face  the  sense  of  our 
own  unworthiness  and  weakness  without  fear  when  we 
think  of  Thee,  of  Thine  infinite  heart  of  love,  and  of  all 
that  Thou  hast  said  to  us  by  Thy  mighty  works  which 
are  Thy  Word,  and  by  Him  Who  is  Thy  Word  con- 
cerning Thy  loving  heart,  Thy  pardoning  grace.  Thy 
cleansing  power.  May  we  lose  ourselves  in  Thee,  to 
find  ourselves  hallowed  and  ennobled  and  blessed. 

We  would  come  to  Thee  to  praise  Thee  for  whatever 
sadness  may  mingle  in  our  praise.  We  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  neither  to  think  of  ourselves 
and  our  unworthiness  so  as  to  forget  Thine  c^ver- 
abundant  love,  nor  to  think  of  the  darkness  and  the 
sorrows  of  our  own  and  of  other  lives  so  as  to  lose 
the  peaceful  faith  that  all  which  we  behold  is  full  of 
blessing. 

We  pray  Thee  to  help  us  to  come  very  near  to 
Thyself,  in  lowly  communion,  and  the  reaching  out  of 
our  souls  towards  Thee  this  morning,  that  we  may  rise 
above  the  ordinary  things  of  this  life  and  make  them 
the  means  of  getting  nearer  Thyself  and  climbing  into 
Thy  presence.  We  thank  Thee  that  we  do  not  need 
so  much  to  climb  as  to  let  Thee  lift  us.  And  we  pray 
that  we  may  not  resist  the  great  Voice  that  is  ever 
saying  to  us  '  Come  up  higher,'  or  the  great  Power  that 
is  ever  seeking  to  raise  us  from  our  low  estate. 

We  bless  Thee  for  all  the  quickening,  elevating 
influences  of  Thy  holy  Word,  and  of  Thy  mighty 
Spirit;  and  we  thank  Thee  that  to-day,  and  at  this 
hour,  even  outward  things  do  lose  their  frequent 
antagonism  to  the  best  in  ourselves,  and  do  help  us 
instead  of  hindering  us  in  our  approach  to  Thee. 


182  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  bless  Thee,  for  we  are  weak,  for  the  external  aids 
to  inward  communion ;  we  thank  Thee  for  the  associa- 
tions of  this  day,  for  the  memories  which  many  of  us 
have,  through  long  years,  of  this  place,  and  for  all  the 
blessings  received  in  such  services  as  these.  We  thank 
Thee  for  the  return  of  this  day  of  rest.  We  pray  that 
it  may  be  to  us  a  day  of  the  true  rest,  rest  in  God- 
fearing service.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  us,  as  we  come  near  to  Thee  this  morning, 
to  open  our  hearts  to  the  full  radiance  of  Thy  Son,  and 
to  give  ourselves  without  reserve  to  the  sacred  in- 
fluences and  the  sanctifying  influences  of  this  place 
and  hour. 

And,  O  Lord,  we  would  come  to  Thee,  drawn  by  Thy 
great  mercy,  and  impelled,  too,  by  our  sense  of  need. 
We  look  back  on  the  past,  and  we  see  that  its  one 
failure  has  been  that  we  have  wandered  from  Thee, 
and  have  had  so  little  of  Thy  life  in  our  lives.  Clothe 
us,  we  beseech  Thee,  with  all  the  grace  and  glory  which 
Thou  hast  to  bestow  upon  waiting  souls.  Make  us 
wise,  make  us  Christlike.  May  we  manifest  that  we 
are  His  in  our  daily  lives,  and  may  all  the  little  things 
that  make  up  so  much  of  our  lives  be  made  great 
because  we  connect  them  with  Him  and  with  Thee, 
and  with  that  solemn  Eternity  which  lies  beyond,  and 
yet  so  near. 

Help  us  to  live  in  the  light  of  Thy  face,  strong  to  do, 
patient  to  bear,  whatever  Thou  dost  command  and 
appoint,  and  wise  to  see  the  motions  of  Thy  hand  and 
the  hints  of  Thy  will  which  Thou  dost  give  us  in  our 
daily  experience,  and  which  we  so  often  pass  un- 
observed. We  pray  Thee  to  forgive  all  that  has  been 
contrary  to  Thy  supreme  purpose  concerning  us.  We 
pray  Thee  to  help  us  in  what  may  yet  remain  to  us  of 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  183 

our  probation  and  apprenticeship  period  here  on  earth, 
to  grow  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour,  and  to  become  more  and  more  what  Thou 
dost  desire  us  to  be,  and  what  Thou  hast  made  it 
possible  for  us  to  be  by  Thy  great  gift  of  Thy  Son 
and  His  Spirit  to  us. 

Forgive  all  that  has  been  wrong,  strengthen  all  that 
is  right,  bring  us  nearer  to  Thyself,  and  may  we  habitu- 
ally live  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High.  Hear  us 
in  these  our  prayers,  we  beseech  Thee;  in  Thy  great 
mercy  answer ;  Thou  surely  hast  taught  us  to  desire, 
and  Thou  surely  wilt  not  refrain  from  satisfying  the 
desires  which  Thou  dost  inspire ;  may  we  be  a  people 
near  unto  Thee,  and  being  near  Thee  grow  like  Thee. 
Hear  us  in  our  prayer,  in  Thy  mercy  forgive  and 
answer  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


XCI 

O  Lord  !  help  each  of  us  to  say  *  My  God ! '  and  may 
we  trust  in  Thee  peacefully  to  supply  all  our  need 
'according  to  Thy  riches  in  glory  in  Christ  Jesus.' 
We  thank  Thee  for  the  confidence  which  Thou  dost 
permit  us  to  cherish  that  our  heavenly  Father  knoweth 
what  things  we  have  need  of  before  we  ask  Him.  And 
we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  dost  let  us  ask  Thee,  and 
that  when  we  mistake  stones  for  bread,  and  sometimes 
desire  them,  or  poisonous  for  nutritious  food.  Thou 
knowest  better,  and  art  wont  to  give  us,  even  in  dis- 
appointing us,  the  bread  that  we  seek  really,  though 
we  do  not  ask  it  knowingly. 

We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  wisdom  of  Thy  providence ; 
we  thank  Thee  for  disappointed  hopes,  for  fulfilled 
desires.    And  in  the  disappointments  and  the  fulfilment 


184  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

we  pray  for  grace  to  see  the  same  loving  wisdom  of 
the  Father  Who  knoweth  how  to  give  good  things  to 
His  children.  Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  this  confidence 
to  live  and  work;  help  us  to  cast  all  our  cares  and 
burdens,  perplexities  and  sorrows,  wishes  and  purposes, 
upon  Thyself,  and  to  realise  that  perfect  peace  which 
comes  from  unbroken  communion  with  our  Father- 
God. 

O  Lord  !  be  near  us  as  we  are  gathered  here  together, 
and  help  us  in  our  meditations  and  in  our  word,  that 
the  great  glory  of  Thy  great  word  may  not  be  dimmed 
by  passing  through  human  lips,  but  that  the  message 
from  Thyself  may  be  clear,  and  may  be  received  by  us, 
whatever  may  befall  the  message  through  men  in 
which  we  hope  it  is  wrapped. 

O  Lord !  strengthen  us  to  hear  and  to  speak  and  to 
obey.  Guide  us  each  by  Thy  counsel,  comfort  any  of 
us  that  are  in  any  kind  of  sorrow,  perplexity,  or  trouble. 
Be  near  all  sad  and  solitary  souls.  And  if  the  weight 
and  burden  of  this  weary  world  is  pressing  heavily 
upon  any  of  us  may  we  be  aware  of  a  mightier  power 
upholding  us,  and  may  we  be  able  to  do  and  to 
endure  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth 
us  within. 

We  pray  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  grant  us  Thy  gracious 
help  and  presence  in  our  worship,  and  to  accept  us  as 
we  come  through  Christ  our  Saviour. 


XCII 

O  Lord,  Who  art  the  God  of  our  salvation,  we  thank 
Thee  that  a  man  may  be  called  the  Friend  of  God.  We 
beseech  Thee  to  help  us  to  make  that  name  ours  as  it 
was  Thy  servants'  of  old.    When  we  were  enemies  we 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  185 

were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son,  much 
more  being  friends  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  light. 
Help  us,  drawing  near  to  Thee  now,  to  come  with 
loving  hearts,  with  frank  confidence.  May  there  be 
no  dread  of  Thee  in  any  corner  of  our  thoughts  or 
feelings.  May  there  be  reverence  for  Him  throughout 
our  whole  being.  We  bless  Thee  that  the  High  and 
the  lowly,  God  and  we,  can  come  together.  Thou  art 
our  Friend;  we  are  Thine.  The  Lord  shall  be  to  us  a 
God,  and  we  will  be  to  Him  a  people.  May  we  possess 
Thee  and  be  possessed  by  Thee,  and  so  possess  our- 
selves. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  we  can  come  to  Thee 
with  such  peaceful  confidence  and  quiet  hearts^  and 
we  beseech  Thee  to  help  us  to  pass  beyond  all  thoughts 
of  ourselves,  and  to  enter  into  the  great  liberty  and 
blessedness  of  losing  ourselves  in  Thee.  Not  by  the 
works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  by 
Thy  mercy,  Thou  hast  saved  us.  And  we  come  content 
and  thankful  to  owe  everything  to  Thy  gracious  heart, 
and  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  give  us  what  we  can 
never  earn,  the  light  that  never  dies.  Cleanse  us  from 
all  our  death  in  life,  from  all  our  separation  from 
Thee,  in  will  and  thought  and  deed.  May  we  more 
and  more  have  Thee  with  us  in  our  work,  and  in  us  in 
our  spirits.  May  we  live  the  lives  that  we  live  in  the 
flesh  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God  Who  loved  us. 
May  we  walk  not  only  before  Thee,  as  ever  in  our 
great  Taskmaster's  eye,  but  as  companioned  by  our 
heavenly  Friend.  And  may  we  walk  after  Thee,  as 
directed  by  our  heavenly  Guide. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  accept  us  as  we  bring  our 
supplications  now,  and  to  help  us  to  remember  all  the 
reasons  which  this  day  preaches  to  us  for  thankfulness 


186  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  confidence.  We  praise  Thee  for  a  risen  Christ,  our 
Brother  and  our  Forerunner,  Who  is  even  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  has  gone  in  to  prepare  a  place  for 
us.  We  thank  Thee  for  our  Advocate  before  the 
Throne ;  that  our  cause  is  wrapped  up  in  Christ's,  and 
that  it  cannot  be  that  the  Head  and  the  members  can 
be  parted  in  destiny  and  blessedness. 

Thou  hast  often  drawn  near  to  us  and  spoken  to  our 
hearts  in  past  times  in  our  worship  here.  So  we  pray 
Thee  that  it  may  be  again ;  that  our  weakness  may  be 
strengthened  and  our  sadness  lifted  up  and  changed 
into  joy  in  the  Lord,  and  all  our  waywardness  corrected, 
and  our  wills  subdued,  and  our  whole  nature  bettered 
and  quickened  and  made  more  Christlike  and  more 
God-pleasing  by  our  service  this  morning.  Accept  our 
thanks  for  every  mercy  Thou  hast  bestowed  upon  us, 
and  be  near  us  still,  for  our  hope  is  in  Thee.  And  we 
bring  to  Thee  empty  hearts  and  hands  to  be  filled 
with  Thy  blessings,  and  many  demerits  to  be  forgiven 
by  Thy  love. 

Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee ;  accept  and  answer  us 
now,  for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


XCIII 

O  Lord,  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  that  we  have  learnt 
not  to  think  that  the  visitation  of  God  means  judg- 
ment and  sorrow.  These  are  Thy  strange  work,  but 
Thou  delightest  when  Thou  canst  come  to  us ;  in  Thy 
coming  be  as  the  morning  which  breaks  upon  a  dark 
world. 

We  thank  Thee  for  such  visitations  and  drawings 
near  of  Thy  sweet  power  and  of  Thy  strong  mercy. 
We  thank  Thee  for  life  breathed  into  death,  for  healing 


PULPIT  PRAYEKS  187 

from  the  lip  of  the  Life  and  the  Healer.  We  thank 
Thee  for  all  the  great  gifts  which  flow  to  us  through 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  since  Thou  hast  lavished  so  much 
upon  us  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thy  mercy  may  not  be 
for  any  of  us  as  waters  spilt  upon  the  ground  which 
cannot  be  gathered  up.  May  our  cup  be  ever  held 
forth  to  receive  the  showers  of  blessings.  May  our 
hearts  never  be  closed  to  Thine  open  heart,  nor  our 
hands  held  back  when  Thy  hand  is  stretched  forth. 
"We  feel  that  Thy  giving  is  perfect ;  alas !  for  our 
receiving.  And  we  pray  Thee  to  forgive,  and  to  make 
us  capable  of  larger  gifts  of  Thine.  And  may  we 
indeed  open  our  mouths  wide  that  Thou  mayest  fill 
them.  Enlarge  our  desires,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  our 
expectations  and  our  faith,  for  Thou  art  able  to  give 
us  '  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or 
think.' 

Forgive  us,  then,  if  we  have  been  starving  in  the 
midst  of  plenty ;  poor  when  Thy  riches  are  held  forth 
to  us,  or  lacking  anything  when  we  have  a  God  to  go 
to  that  gives  liberally.  Make  us  more  and  more  faith- 
ful in  our  use  of  Thy  benefits,  for  surely  '  to  him  that 
hath  shall  be  given.'  And  strengthen  us  to  use  all 
which  Thou  dost  bestow  upon  us,  whether  in  the  way 
of  natural  capacity  or  providences,  bright  or  dark, 
sorrowful  or  joyful,  for  opportunities  of  any  kind  to 
make  ourselves  and  others  better  and  more  like  Thee. 
Help  us  to  use  them  all  as  stewards,  and  so  to  enter 
upon  the  fuller  possession  of  them  as  sons. 

Bless  each  of  us  here  before  Thee,  Lord !  Thou 
knowest  our  necessities,  our  circumstances,  our  tasks, 
our  temptations,  our  weaknesses  of  nature  and  the 
greater  weaknesses  that  our  own  bad  guiding  of  our- 
selves has  brought  us  into.     Shape  Thou  Thy  gifts 


188  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

according  to  our  needs,  we  beseech  Thee ;  and  since 
we  all  need  Thee,  and  each  need  Thee,  in  a  separate 
way,  we  pray  Thee  that  the  one  inexhaustible  benefit 
may  come  to  each  of  us  in  the  shape  which  we  most 
require.     And  so  '  give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.' 

We  beseech  Thee  to  comfort  and  succour  any  of  us 
that  are  in  sorrow,  to  draw  near  to  any  that  are 
burdened  in  heart,  to  shed  light  upon  any  whose  paths 
may  be  dark  and  perplexing,  to  deliver  us  from  errors 
of  thought  and  from  faults  of  practice ;  and  to  keep 
us  in  all  changing  circumstances,  in  the  perfect  peace 
of  those  who  have  yielded  their  wills  to  Thee. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  help  when  we  try  to  speak 
a  word  in  Thy  Name.  Thou  knowest  the  weakness  of 
hearers  and  of  speaker,  and  the  many  things  which 
come  in  to  distract  and  disturb  and  weaken  our 
thoughts  and  Thy  Word;  but  we  pray  that  Thou 
wouldst  be  near,  that  Thou  wouldst  lift  us  above  our 
ordinary  selves,  that  Thou  wouldst  open  our  minds 
and  hearts  to  the  full  influences  of  the  radiance  of  Thy 
sunshine,  and  wouldst  speak  through  us,  even  us  also, 
that  lips  may  be  touched  with  the  live  coal,  and  the 
word  of  the  Lord  be  magnified. 

Hear  us  in  our  prayer,  forgive  our  many  sins,  and 
draw  near  to  us  and  bless  us  now,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


XCIV 

Lift  up  our  hearts,  we  beseech  Thee,  O  Lord,  and  give 
us  strength  to  lift  them  upwards.  May  we  enter  into 
the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High;  and  now,  not  in 
word  or  in  outward  form  only,  but  in  the  depths  of  our 
own  hearts,  and  in  the  submission  of  our  own  wills, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  189 

hold  fellowship  with  Thee.  Truly  when  we  know  what 
is  good  for  us  we  do  turn  away  from  Thy  creatures 
which  do  bring  to  us  good  meant  for  us  by  Thee,  and 
we  turn  to  Thyself  from  Whom  they  get  all  their  power 
to  bless  us,  and  in  Whom  there  is  all  that  each  and  all 
of  them  lack. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  dost  not  put  us 
off  with  the  imperfect  joys  that  come  from  created 
things,  but  that  the  feeblest  of  us,  and  the  least  worthy, 
may  come  joyfully,  confidently,  closely  unto  Thyself, 
and  touch  Thee  heart  to  heart  and  mind  to  mind.  May 
it  be  so  with  us  this  morning,  whatever  may  be  our 
history,  whatever  our  present  condition,  whatever  the 
burdens  that  any  of  us  bear,  whether  of  tasks  or 
sorrows  or  sin ;  may  none  of  these  come  between  us 
and  Thee,  nor  anything  have  power  to  hinder  us  from 
yielding  our  whole  selves  to  thy  sweet  and  strong 
influences,  drawing  us  to  thyself.  May  we  all  hear  the 
great  voice  calling  to  us  to  come  up  hither,  and  may 
we  yield  to  the  gracious  invitation. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  we  can  rise  above  our- 
selves when  we  hold  by  Thy  hand  which  lifts  us.  And 
we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  come  near  to  each 
of  us  now,  and  in  Thy  great  mercy  bow  Thy  heavens 
and  speak  to  our  hearts. 

We  bring  Thee  our  praise  for  all  Thy  blessings.  Surely 
showers  and  crowds  of  these  have  entered  into  our 
daily  lives,  but  alas !  we  pass  through  the  things  seen, 
and  instead  of  making  them  means  of  seeing  and 
coming  to  the  things  unseen  and  eternal,  how  often 
our  own  weakness  makes  these  barriers  between  us 
and  our  true  good  and  wealth. 

We  thank  Thee  for  Thy  mercies  ;  we  pray  Thee  that 
we  may  so  use  them  that  they  may  be  mercies  to  us  by 


190  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

the  might  and  the  magic  of  love  to  God.  May  we 
constrain  all  things  to  work  together  for  our  good. 
We  cannot  but  feel  how  much  we  have  to  confess  in 
the  matter  of  our  handling  of  the  things  temporal. 
Strengthen  us  more  and  more  that  we  may  live  as 
those  to  whom  the  Eternal  is  the  real,  and  the 
temporal  is  only  the  transient. 

We  ask  Thee  for  Thy  gracious  help  day  by  day  in 
duties,  in  tasks,  in  struggles.  We  beseech  Thee  that 
Thou  wouldst  hold  up  our  goings  that  our  footsteps 
slip  not.  May  we  compel  all  things  to  minister  to  our 
true  progress  and  well-being.  We  ask  for  strength  to 
do,  for  patience  to  bear,  for  cheerful  faith,  that  all 
which  we  behold  is  full  of  blessing.  And  may  we  come 
into  the  world  as  those  who  bear  with  them  a  charm 
and  a  secret  which  changes  all  things ;  and  come  in 
from  the  world  unto  our  home  in  Thy  presence  all  the 
better  fitted  for  the  great  joys  of  communion  with  God, 
because  in  the  market-place  and  in  the  street  we  have 
been  true  to  Him. 

Bless  us  in  our  worship  this  morning;  draw  near 
to  each  of  us,  O  Lord!  Breathe  Thy  grace  over  this 
gathered  congregation.  Thou  knowest  all  our  hearts, 
all  our  secrets,  all  our  needs.  We  beseech  Thee  that 
Thou  wouldst  come  to  each  of  us  with  that  gift  which 
we  most  require,  whether  we  know  what  it  is  or  not ; 
that  we  may  find  Thee,  and  be  found  of  thee,  which  is 
better.  And  whether  we  have  come  seeking  Thee  or 
no,  may  we  apprehend  Thy  presence  even  if  it  comes  to 
us  as  a  surprise. 

O  Lord,  answer  these  poor  petitions,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  191 


XCV 


O  Lord  !  give  us  grace  to  trust  in  Thee  for  the 
supplies  of  all  our  needs,  that  our  prayers  may  be  full 
of  confidence ;  and  we  may  speak  as  unto  Him  Who 
knoweth  how  to  give  good  things,  and  the  best  of  all 
things,  His  Holy  Spirit,  to  them  that  ask  Him. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  be  near  each  of 
us  according  to  our  different  vocations  and  temptations, 
in  our  daily  duties  and  the  circumstances  in  which  Thou 
hast  appointed  us  to  live.  As  we  pass  through  these 
may  we  be  able  to  apprehend  in  them  Thy  holy 
meaning,  and  to  work  in  harmony  with  Thee,  that  so 
we  may  be  fellow-labourers  with  God,  and  not  miss  the 
rich  blessings  which  are  stored  for  us  in  all  the  various 
operations  of  Thy  loving  and  wise  hand.  If  any  of  us 
have  come  into  Thy  house  weary  for  help  and  consola- 
tion, bearing  but  saddened  hearts  and  faltering  tongues, 
help  us  to  cast  all  our  cares  upon  Thee,  knowing  that 
Thou  art  concerned  for  us.  And  may  we  feel  that  it  is 
good  for  us  to  be  afflicted  that  we  may  draw  near  unto 
God. 

And  do  Thou  strengthen  us,  we  pray  thee,  in  all  our 
various  duties  and  tasks  of  our  calling.  May  they  not 
come  between  us  and  Thee.  May  we  bring  the  highest 
motives  to  bear  upon  them  all,  great  and  small.  May 
our  daily  lives  be  an  embodiment  of  the  will  of  the  Lord, 
and  in  everything  may  we  walk  not  to  please  ourselves 
but  Him  Who  hath  called  us  to  be  His  soldiers  and 
servants. 

O  Lord  !  guide  us,  and  be  with  all  whom  we  love ;  be 
with  all  who  are  in  sickness,  in  solitude,  in  sorrow,  and 
who  are  feeling  after  a  stay  for  their  hearts,  and  may 
they  not  fail  in  their  search.    Be  with  all  who  may  have 


192  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

laid  upon  them  great  responsibilities  and  heavy  duties. 
May  the  least  and  the  greatest  among  us  use  our 
influence  and  our  possessions  and  opportunities  as  in 
God's  sight.  Bless  all  Christian  people  in  all  churches, 
all  lands.  Be  with  all  who  may  be  feeling  after  if  haply 
they  may  find  Thee,  and  who  may  be  far  away  from 
outward  organisations  of  Christian  people.  We  pray 
thee  to  lead  seeking  souls  into  the  light.  Neutralise 
all  their  errors,  and  ours,  and  help  us  to  hold  by  Christ 
our  Head. 

We  ask  Thee  to  be  with  us  now,  to  draw  near  to  ua 
and  help  us,  and  to  speak  by  us,  through  us,  and  to  each 
of  us  ;  and  forgive  and  accept  us  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Saviour-Lord. 


XCVI 

O  Lord!  we  thank  Thee  that  we  do  know  Thee  as 
measureless  might,  that  all  that  might  is  wielded  by 
changeless  love.  We  beseech  Thee  to  help  us  ever  to 
think  of  Thee  as  our  chief  good.  May  no  dread  that 
enslaves  and  separates  cloud  our  minds  and  close  our 
hearts  when  we  think  of  God.  May  we  enter  into  the 
blessedness  of  that  great  word,  that  Thou  lovest  each 
of  us.  And  do  Thou  help  us  day  by  day,  in  all  our  daily 
duties,  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God. 

Help  us,  too,  to  this  end,  as  we  are  gathered  here 
now;  and  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  the  outpouring  of 
Thy  divine  Spirit  on  this  gathered  people,  hearers  and 
speaker,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  may  have  free 
course  and  be  glorified  in  us.  Draw  us  near  to  Thyself 
in  worship  ;  help  us  to  bring  all  our  burdens,  our  cares, 
our  circumstances,  to  Thee ;  and  do  Thou  bless  us 
gathered  in  Thy  Name,  and  help  us  to  use  the  outward 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  193 

forms  of  worship  as  means  by  which  we  may  each  for 
himself  and  for  herself  enter  into  the  secret  place  of  the 
Most  High,  and  worship  in  the  sanctuary  there. 

We  pray  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  grant  us  Thy  blessing ; 
forgiving,  upholding,  inspiring,  and  guiding ;  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


XCYII 

Draw  all  our  hearts,  we  beseech  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  Thy- 
self; and  help  us  to  lift  them  above  our  earthly 
vanities  and  realities,  our  tasks,  sorrows,  enjoyments, 
and  to  come  very  near  to  Thyself  in  lowly  love,  in  lofty 
aspiration,  in  full  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Thee. 

We  come  in  that  great  Name,  the  only  Name  given 
unto  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved,  and  we  bless  Thee 
that  every  one  of  us  has  the  right  to  say  that  He  was 
slain  for  us.  May  all  of  us  know  how  much  we  need  a 
Saviour,  for  ourselves  and  for  our  sins,  and  how  strong 
and  sufficient  a  Saviour  we  have  in  the  Lamb  of  God 
that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world. 

We  bless  Thee  for  the  Word  ;  and  we  would  crown 
Him  as  our  King,  and  bring  to  Him  majesty  and 
honour  and  power  and  riches,  unceasing  praise  and 
measureless  love.  May  it  be  so,  O  Lord,  with  us  all ; 
and  may  our  devotion  to  Jesus  Christ  be  the  power 
that  moulds  our  lives,  that  lifts  us  above  temptation, 
that  arms  us  against  sorrows  and  cares,  that  teaches  us 
to  expect ;  and  helps  us  to  attain  heights  of  nobleness 
and  goodness  else  inaccessible  to  our  feeble  feet.  We 
thank  Thee  for  all  the  strength  which  has  been  given 
in  time  past  to  souls  that  have  builded  upon  Him,  and 
taken  their  refuge  through  Him  in  Thee. 
We  pray  that  to  each  of  us,  according  to  our 
N 


194  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

different  duties  and  circumstances  in  the  world,  our 
tasks,  temptations,    relationships  and   opportunities, 
there  may  be  granted  the  needful  grace  out  of  the  rich 
storehouse  which  Thou  hast  laid  up  for  the  world  in 
Thy  well-beloved  Son.     Oh  !  help  us,  day  by  day,  to 
run  with  patient  perseverance  the  race  set  before  us, 
feeling  no  duties  too  small  to  be  done  with  the  best 
effort  of  heart  and  mind,  and  none  too  great  to  be  suc- 
cessfully accomplished  by  Thy  help.     May  none  of  the 
many  applications  in  our  daily  lives  break  our  fellow- 
ship with  God.     May  all  things  visible  help  us  to  see 
through  them  more  clearly  the  things  that  are  unseen. 
If  any  of  us  have  any  special  weight  of  responsibility 
or  duty  that  seems  to  our  faithlessness  too  strong  for 
our  strength  ;  any  sorrow  that  our  hearts  find  it  hard 
to  bear  and  be  thankful,  draw  near  to  such  with  the 
sustaining,  enlightening,  comforting  influences  which 
Thou  hast  at  hand,  and  speak  to  our  hearts  that  they 
may  be  of  good  courage,  and  wait  upon  the  Lord.     Do 
Thou  help  us  in  all  slippery  places  to  stand  fast  because 
our  feet   are  on  the   Rock,  and  our  hands  grasping 
Christ's  hands.    May  we  tread  in  His  footsteps,  and  so 
walk  in  the  ways  which  are  peace  and  righteousness. 
Do  Thou  forgive  all  our  imperfections,   cleanse  our 
hearts  from  our  besetting  sins,   deliver  us  from  the 
dominion  of  transgressions  unsuspected  and  unknown 
by  ourselves.    Help  us  to  have  loftier  views,  day  by 
day,  of  what  is  the  walk  that  is  worthy  of  our  vocation; 
and  strengthen  us  that  we  may  never  see  anything  as 
duty  which  we  do  not  gladly  endeavour  to  appropriate, 
and  to  make  our  own. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  help  us,  that  in  our  worship  some 
words  may  be  spoken  that  shall  be  in  accordance  with 
Thy  holy  will,  that  may  be  felt  by  many  of  us  to  be 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  195 

God's  own  voice  to  us.  Take  Thou  our  own  thoughts 
and  words,  and  put  Thine  own  Divine  power  into 
them ;  and  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  this  evening 
many  may  be  drawn  nearer  to  the  Source  of  all 
strength  and  blessedness,  of  all  forgiveness  and  holi- 
ness, by  Jesus  Christ  Himself. 

Guide  any  of  us  that  are  in  circumstances  of  per- 
plexity and  difficulty,  O  Lord,  we  pray.  If  any  here 
have  special  cause  for  thanksgiving,  the  Lord  help 
them  to  enjoy  His  mercy  with  grateful  hearts,  and  to 
take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  not  forget  to  call  upon 
the  Name  of  the  Lord.  Bless  all  Christian  people  who 
this  day  have  gathered  and  offered  up  their  sacrifices 
of  prayer  and  praise  to  Thee.  May  many  be  drawn 
into  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  by  this  day's  services, 
and  many  whose  faith  shall  be  built  up  by  the 
communion  of  saints  enjoyed  this  day. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  we  would  commend  ourselves  to 
Thy  gracious  care.  We  pray  for  Thy  help,  without 
which  nothing  is  strong.  We  beseech  Thee  to  take 
away  all  hindrances,  in  ourselves  and  in  our  circum- 
stances, which  may  interfere  with  our  full  enjoyment 
and  profit  by  the  service  of  this  evening. 

Hear  us,  O  Lord,  in  these  our  prayers ;  and  in  Thy 
great  mercy  forgive,  answer,  and  bless,  for  our  Saviour 
Christ's  sake. 


XCVIII 

O  Lord,  from  Whom  cometh  the  preparation  of  the 
heart,  and  from  Whom  cometh  the  answer  of  peace, 
help  us  to  direct  our  thoughts  and  our  desire  to  Thy- 
self, and  to  look  up  in  faithful  acceptance  that  Thou 
wilt  hear.    Thou  hast  heard.  Thou  art  the  same  yester- 


196  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

day  and  to-day  and  for  ever,  and  Thou  hast  won  for 
Thyself  the  name  of  the  God  that  heareth.  We  beseech 
Thee  to  hear  us.  We  come  laden  with  many  burdens, 
some  of  us  with  sorrows,  all  of  us  with  cares,  duties, 
and  sins.  And  we  all  need  the  one  help,  though  we 
need  it  in  manifold  ways,  according  to  our  present 
necessities  and  our  diverse  characters.  But  give  to  us 
that  manifold  grace  of  Thine  which  takes  all  shapes 
according  to  our  needs,  and  is  ever  of  the  right  sort 
and  sufficient  measure. 

We  thank  Thee  that  the  light  of  Thy  presence  is 
enough  for  direction,  for  strength,  for  everything. 
Help  us,  then,  that  we  may  not,  as  we  so  often  have 
done,  cast  away  the  blessing  of  Thy  presence,  and  shut 
up  our  hearts  against  Thee.  May  no  indulged  and 
unknown  evil  part  us  from  Thee.  And  teach  us  our 
faults  ;  we  need  to  learn  them  more  clearly  and  to  feel 
them  more  deeply,  that  we  may  fight  against  them 
more  resolutely.  We  pray  Thee  to  give  us  this  light, 
though  often  it  be  a  light  that  pains ;  we  thank  Thee  it 
is  always  a  light  that  would  heal.  Reveal  to  us  our 
thoughts  then,  we  pray,  and  keep  us  back  from  the  sins 
that,  though  we  know  them,  we  may  yet  run  into. 
And  may  we  be  impelled  more  and  more  to  all 
righteousness  and  holiness,  all  nobleness  and  goodness 
of  life  and  character.  When  we  are  wisest  we  feel 
most  certainly  that  we  are  here  that  we  may  grow 
more  like  Thyself.  And  whilst  we  acknowledge  how 
little  we  have  used  circumstances  and  providences  and 
opportunities  in  order  to  increase  in  the  knowledge  of, 
and  likeness  to,  Thee,  and  pray  that  Thy  pardon  may 
be  granted  to  us  for  all  that  has  been  amiss,  may  we  in 
time  to  come  learn  better,  and  feel  more  deeply,  the 
solemn  issues  connected  with  our  fleeting  days ;  and 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  197 

may  strive,  in  and  through  them,  to  obtain  a  more 
assured  possession  of  the  inward  good  that  can  never 
be  taken  away  from  us. 

We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  associations  and  memories 
of  this  day  and  of  this  place.  We  thank  Thee  most 
chiefly  for  the  most  sacred  of  all  remembrances,  the 
rising  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  ;  and  we  pray  that  that 
Resurrection  may  not  only  be  for  us  the  pledge  of  our 
own  immortality,  but  that  it  may  be  the  Pattern 
whereunto  our  present  lives  are  conformed,  so  that  we 
may  indeed  be  risen  with  Christ ;  and  even  whilst  we 
labour  here  on  earth  in  the  diligent  discharge  of  our 
duties  in  connection  with  the  fleeting  things  in  time, 
may  be  '  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,'  with  Him  in 
the  heavenly  places. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  and  the  power  of 
Thy  Spirit  to  rest  upon  us  in  our  gathering  this  morn- 
ing. We  thank  Thee  for  the  opportunity  of  uniting 
together  thus,  to  strengthen  one  another,  as  we  hope. 
Our  many  feeblenesses  brought  together  may  minister 
somewhat  more  of  strength  to  each  of  us,  because 
Thou  art  present  not  only  with  the  solitary  souls  that 
seek  thy  face  hiddenly,  but  with  the  gathered  assembly 
of  Thy  people  who  with  one  accord  call  down  Thy 
blessings  upon  their  heads.  May  that  *  one  accord '  be 
felt  by  us  this  morning,  and  may  we  here  realise  that 
it  is  no  vain  thing  to  call  upon  the  Lord,  and  that  our 
gathering  together  is  for  the  better,  not  for  the 
worse. 

Receive  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  blessings  towards  us. 
Help  us  to  be  more  observant  of  these  things,  that  we 
may  understand  better  the  loving-kindness  of  the 
Lord.  May  our  faith  not  stumble  on  blessings  that 
come  to  us  in  the  disguise  of  sorrows.    They  are  Thy 


198  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

angels,  though  their  faces  be  dark.  Teach  us  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  all  Thy  dealings  with  us,  and  so 
to  influence  our  thoughts  and  our  hearts  now,  and 
always,  as  that  we  may  be  able  to  bless  Thee  truly 
and  honestly  for  the  way  by  which  Thou  hast  led  us, 
though  sometimes  it  has  been  in  rough  and  stormy 
places,  and  sometimes  through  the  very  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death.  We  beseech  Thee  to  accept  us  now, 
to  forgive  all  our  evil,  to  grant  us  Thy  gracious  and 
quickening  and  perfecting  help  and  presence,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


XCIX 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  Who  kuowest  all  our 
needs  yet  better  than  we  know  them  ourselves,  we 
often  ask  for  stones  thinking  them  to  be  bread.  Thou 
knowest  better.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  refusal  of 
foolish  petitions,  we  thank  Thee  for  the  granting  of 
all  that  are  in  accordance  with  Thy  will  which  is  love. 
We  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  carry  into  our  daily 
lives  the  firm  assurances  that  no  evil  befalls  them  who 
put  their  hope  on  the  Lord  their  God.  Give  us  more 
of  that  sweet  and  ennobling  love  which  shall  work 
like  magic  upon  all  sorrows  and  pains,  and  make  them 
all  ministers  of  blessing.  If  any  of  us  here  this  morning 
have  come  into  Thy  house  with  heavy  hearts,  breathe 
Thy  peace  into  their  spirits,  and  help  us  to  rise  above 
whatever  may  be  sad  and  dark  in  our  present  experi- 
ences, and  lead  us  into  the  light  and  gladness  of  Thy 
own  gracious  presence,  and  accepted  will. 

O  Lord !  guide  us  day  by  day  in  the  little  and  in  the 
great  things  of  life.  May  we  feel  that  we  have  Thee 
near  us.    Keep  us  from  the  sluggishness  of  spirit  that 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  199 

often  creeps  over  us.  Deliver  us  from  the  indifference 
to  our  highest  good,  and  our  blindness  to  the  most 
solemn  and  important  realities ;  and  help  us  to  order 
our  lives  wisely,  making  the  first  things  first,  and  seek- 
ing chiefly  and  primarily  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  His 
righteousness.  We  feel  that  our  lives  have  been  too 
often  misordered  and  distracted  with  a  multiplicity  of 
trifles.  Help  us  to  be  willing  to  exchange  the  many 
for  the  One,  the  goodly  pearls  for  the  Pearl  of  great 
price,  which  we  are  rich  if  we  part  with  all  and  so 
possess. 

O  Lord !  speak  to  us  in  Thy  grace  this  morning. 
Breathe  Thy  word  into  our  hearts  and  minds.  May 
hearers  and  speaker  alike  feel  that  they  are  in  the 
presence  of  the  oracle  of  God,  and  that  Thou  Thyself 
art  with  us  now. 

We  commend  to  Thee  all  whom  we  love ;  we  pray 
Thee  to  bless  all  good  people  who  are  trying  to  do  Thy 
holy  will,  especially  those  who  are  seeking  to  spread 
the  knowledge  of  Jesus,  and  of  His  great  salvation 
throughout  the  world. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves 
to  Thee.  We  pray  Thee  to  bless  us  and  be  with  us, 
to  forgive  and  answer  us,  through  Christ  our  Saviour. 


C 

O  Lord  !  we  have  to  look  to  Thee  to  teach  us  what 
and  how  to  pray.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  dost 
breathe  into  waiting  hearts  desires  in  accordance  with 
Thy  holy  will ;  and  we  would  ask,  first,  that  we  may 
be  delivered  from  the  dominion  of  false  and  foolish 
wishes,  and  learn  more  than  ever  what  is  our  true 
good,  and  where  it  is  to  be  found.    We  have  hewed 


200  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

out  for  ourselves  broken  cisterns,  often  broken  in  the 
very  act  of  hewing  them,  always  broken  sooner  or 
later.  But  we  thank  Thee  that  we  have  the  Fountain 
of  living  water  to  come  to  when  our  lives  are  parched. 
Help  us  now,  that  our  souls  may  thirst  for  good,  and 
thirsting  be  satisfied,  and  being  satisfied  may  press 
hard  after  Thee. 

O  Lord !  deliver  us  from  the  bondage  to  which  we 
are  only  too  willing  to  submit,  and  against  which  we 
sometimes  feebly  and  vainly  struggle.  We  thank  Thee 
that  Thou  canst  break  our  chains,  that  Thou  canst  lift 
our  heavy  hearts  that  cleave  to  earth.  How  much 
there  is  in  this  day,  if  we  rightly  used  it,  to  help  us 
upwards  to  Thee !  We  thank  Thee  for  the  memories 
of  past  days  here,  and  above  all  for  that  great  remem- 
branceof  the  Resurrection  of  JesusChristfromthedead. 
May  we  be  upborne  by  the  hand  of  that  risen  Saviour, 
and  may  we,  too,  have  life  breathed  into  us  from  His 
eternal  life.  May  we  die  to  sin,  and  be  alive  unto  God, 
through  Christ  our  Lord. 

May  we  worship  towards  Thy  holy  temple,  in  Thy 
fear,  that  fear  which  hath  no  torment.  And  do  Thou 
graciously  help  us  that  the  world  may  loosen  its  hold 
upon  us,  and  Heaven  increase  and  tighten  its  hold. 
May  the  things  seen  and  temporal  diminish,  and  the 
things  unseen  and  eternal  become  greater  in  our  eyes. 
May  we  this  day  realise  more  and  more  how  our  true 
life  lies  far  beyond  this  vale  of  tears ;  and  that  true 
life  which  comes  in  union  with  Thyself  be  strong  in 
each  of  us,  and  we  feel  the  beatings  of  a  better  life, 
and  take  it  to  our  feebly  throbbing  heart.  May  the 
memory  of  Thy  benefits  lead  us  to  quiet  faith  and  calm 
hope  that  to-morrow  will  be  as  this  day,  and  much 
m.ore  abundant. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  201 

We  bless  Thee  that  Thy  great  storehouse  is  not 
emptied  by  any  giving,  and  that  Thou  dost  never  lack 
the  opportunity  to  bestow  upon  us  Thy  kindness  and 
Thy  care.  Help  us  that  we  may  welcome  into  our 
hearts  as  Thy  gifts  all  good  things,  and  use  them  as 
those  ought  to  do  who  possess  nothing  but  as  stewards, 
and  are  administrators  unto  others  of  Thy  benefits  to 
ourselves. 

Be  near  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  our  worship  now ;  for- 
give everything  in  us  which  has  interfered  with  the 
full  preparation  of  heart  and  mind  for  this  service, 
and  the  full  possession  of  the  blessings  which  it  is 
meant  to  give.  Graciously  loosen  our  bonds,  and  help 
us  in  our  sluggishness  and  coldness  to  rise  nearer  to 
Thyself  and  shake  off  the  oppression  of  daily  cares  and 
low  occupations,  and  to  live  near  Thee  now  for  this 
brief  time  that  in  it  there  may  lie  the  seeds  of  good  for 
many  days  to  come,  and  quickening  influences  which 
shall  spread  through  all  our  lives.  We  thank  Thee  for 
Thy  mercies;  we  beseech  Thee  to  forgive  our  many 
imperfections  and  sins,  and  help  us  in  our  hour  of 
worship,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CI 

O  Lord,  Who  givest  what  Thou  dost  command,  give 
unto  us  that  new  creature  coming  through  faith  by  our 
participation  in  the  life  of  Thy  dear  Son.  Help  us 
that  our  Christianity  may  not  be  concerned  with  out- 
ward things  so  much  as  with  the  recreation  and  renova- 
tion of  our  inmost  nature.  Help  us  to  walk  according 
to  this  rule,  and  thereby  be  of  the  true  Israel  of  God, 
and  have  Thy  praise  on  us  and  with  us. 
We  thank  Thee  that  in  all  our  weakness  Thou  art 


202  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

near  us.  Be  our  strength,  and  since  Thou  knowest 
our  frame,  and  dost  remember  that  we  are  dust,  come 
and  deliver  us  from  the  burden  of  our  own  weakness, 
and  help  us  to  grow  in  our  possession  and  use  of  the 
life  that  is  in  Jesus. 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  to  bear  one  another's  burdens  and 
our  own,  and  to  cast  all  upon  Thyself.  Some  of  us 
have  heavy  ones  to  carry,  but  do  Thou  be  gracious 
unto  us,  and  deliver  us  from  the  vain  effort  to  be 
sufficient  for  ourselves,  either  in  our  duties  or  in  our 
sorrows.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  sendest  no  man 
a  warfare  at  his  own  charges,  and  art  ever  ready  to 
bestow  the  power  to  do  what  Thy  will  enjoins  or  Thy 
providences  point  out  as  our  duty.  Help  us  to  live 
in  the  peace  of  dependence  upon  Thyself,  and  in  the 
joy  of  a  felt  communication  from  Thee  of  power 
according  to  our  tasks  and  strength  according  to  our 
day. 

Be  near  us  in  all  the  variety  of  duty  and  of  circum- 
stances represented  here  before  Thee  amongst  us  this 
morning.  Though  we  know  so  little,  and  can  do  less, 
to  supply  each  other's  deepest  needs,  we  thank  Thee 
that  we  can  help  one  another  by  common  prayer. 
However  diverse  our  various  walks  of  life,  we  thank 
Thee  that  we  may  still  be  all  doing  the  same  thing ; 
for  though  there  be  diversities  of  service  it  is  the  one 
Lord,  and  all  His  servants'  works  are  one,  since  they 
are  all  done  for  Him.  May  we  carry  the  thought  with 
us  into  all  the  great  and  small  things  of  daily  life,  that 
great  or  small  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  acceptance  of 
our  service ;  and  that  it  is  required  of  stewards  that 
whether  in  regard  to  that  which  is  least,  or  in  regard 
to  that  which  is  much,  a  man  may  be  found  faithful. 
Make    us   increasingly    so,    we    pray,    and    do    Thou 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  203 

graciously  keep  Thy  hands  upon  us  to  bless  our  work, 
and  to  prevent  it  from  ever  drawing  us  away  from 
Thyself.  And  we  would  bring  these  our  friends  to  Thy 
throne  who  are  in  sorrow;  lovingly  remember,  O 
Lord,  the  many  whom  Thou  dost  love  who  are  sick. 
Keep  Thy  children  close  to  Thyself. 

Accept  us  in  our  prayer  for  all  who  love  Thee,  who 
try  to  serve  Thee.  Pour  out  Thy  blessing  upon  all  pro- 
fessing Christians.  May  the  lips  of  those  who  call 
themselves  Thine  bear  witness  for  Thee,  Whose  they 
are  and  Whom  they  serve.  Give  Thy  Holy  Spirit's 
influence  to  all  true  words  spoken  in  the  world  for 
God  and  man.  And  may  the  Kingdom  which  is 
above  all  kingdoms  of  this  world  be  established  with 
righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  be  the  possession  of  all  mankind. 

And  now  we  pray  Thee  to  hear  us ;  we  beseech  Thy 
forgiveness,  and  commit  ourselves  to  Thy  gracious 
care  in  the  confidence  that  Thou  wilt  be  near  us  if  we 
depart  not  far  from  Thee,  and  that  Thou  wilt  keep  us 
from  departing  from  Thee  if  we  leave  ourselves  in  Thy 
hands.  Pity  and  accept  and  answer  us,  O  Lord,  for 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour's  sake. 


CII 

Unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  would  we  lift  up  our  souls,  but 
Thou  knowest  how  hard  we  find  it  to  loose  them  from 
the  bonds  which  bind  them  to  earth.  And  so  we  cry 
to  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  come  down  to  us  that  we 
may  rise  to  Thee.  Thou  hast  promised  that  Thou  wilt 
breathe  into  waiting  hearts  the  desires  which  Thou 
dost  delight  to  implant  and  to  impart.  And  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  look  upon  our  earthly- 


204  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

mindedness  with  pity,  and  give  us  the  buoyancy  of 
earnest  desire  after  Thee  that  we  may  have  Thy 
hand  upholding  us  whilst  our  souls  follow  hard  after 
Thee. 

We  thank  Thee  for  the  helps  which  sense  gives  to 
spirit  on  this  day  and  in  this  place.  May  we  not 
tarry  in  the  means,  but  pass  beyond  them  to  their 
great  purpose,  and  hold  fellowship  in  the  depths  of  our 
hearts  with  our  Father-God. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  accept  our  humble  thankfulness 
for  all  Thy  loving-kindness  and  tender  care,  filtered 
to  us  through  daily  blessings,  of  the  things  that  perish, 
and  poured  upon  us  in  all  its  fulness  in  Thy  unspeak- 
able gift  which  carries  with  it  the  free  gift  of  all 
things. 

We  thank  Thee  for  Jesus  Christ ;  we  thank  Thee  for 
the  love  in  Him ;  we  thank  Thee  for  that  Divine  Spirit 
which  comes  to  abide  in  men's  hearts  through  faith  in 
Thy  Son.  We  thank  Thee  that  unto  them  that  believe 
in  His  Name  Thou  givest  the  authority  to  become  sons 
of  God.  We  pray  that  He  in  Whom  are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  may  be  ours,  and 
we  be  His,  that  all  things  may  be  ours  also.  We  thank 
Thee  for  daily  benefits ;  we  beseech  Thee  to  help  us  to 
look  upon  them  more  wisely,  as  the  sacraments  and 
pledges  of  Thy  changeless  love,  and  of  the  higher  gifts 
which  Thou  art  ready  to  bestow  upon  us  ;  and  that  we 
may  so  use  the  things  seen  and  temporal  as  that  they 
shall  confirm  and  increase  our  possession  of  the  things 
that  are  unseen  and  eternal.  May  the  life  that  now  is, 
in  outward  things,  lead  us  on  to  the  life  that  is  for 
ever,  and  standeth  in  the  possession  and  the  knowledge 
of  God. 

O  Lord!  cleanse  our  hearts,  we  pray,  from  all  in 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  205 

them  that  is  contrary  to  Thy  holy  will,  and  teach  us  to 
understand  that  will  more  deeply  and  more  fully,  for 
dormant  lurking  in  our  conduct  and  in  our  characters 
are  actions  and  desires  contrary  to  Thy  holy  self. 

We  pray  Thee  to  strengthen  us  day  by  day  to  pursue 
the  great  task  of  cleansing  ourselves  from  all  filthiness 
of  flesh  and  spirit,  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  teach  even  us  transgressors  Thy  way.  We 
are  emboldened  to  ask  it  because  we  know  that  good 
and  upright  is  the  Lord.  And  we  thank  Thee  that 
Thy  goodness  and  uprightness  do  not  now,  since  we 
have  learnt  Thee  in  Jesus  Christ,  repel  us  from  Thyself, 
but  rather  draw  us  to  Thee.  Surely  Thy  deepest  desire 
is  to  make  Thy  children  like  the  Father,  and  we  pray 
then  that  Thy  goodness  and  uprightness  may  com- 
municate themselves  to  us,  and  that  we  may  too  be 
able  to  walk  in  the  ways  that  are  higher  than  our 
ways,  and  to  think  the  thoughts  that  are  higher  than 
our  thoughts. 

O  Lord!  cleanse,  purge,  purify  by  Thy  discipline 
and  by  Thy  Spirit,  and  help  us  day  by  day  to  overcome 
in  the  conflict  with  our  own  evil,  and  to  be  lords  and 
masters  of  the  things  around  us.  We  beseech  Thee 
for  Thy  blessing  as  we  are  gathered  here  this  morning, 
and  adore  Thy  loving-kindness  and  Thy  tender  care, 
which,  knowing  our  frame  and  remembering  that  we 
are  dust,  dost  permit  and  enjoin  us  to  gather  together 
thus,  and  help  one  another  in  the  Divine  life,  and 
towards  communion  with  Thyself.  May  we  this 
morning  truly  have  our  fellowship  with  the  Father, 
and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  And  may  our  gather- 
ing together  help  each  of  us  to  fill  up  that  which  is 
lacking  in  our  faith,  and  to  be  more  assuredly  and 
joyously  in  the  possession  of  that  power  which  cleanses 


206  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

from  all  unrighteousness,  and  makes  partakers  of  the 
very  fullness  of  God. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  forgive  our  many  sins,  to  accept 
our  humble  petitions,  and  to  grant  us  the  light  of  Thy 
countenance  to  shine  in  our  hearts  and  on  our  paths, 
for  the  sake  of  Him  Who  brings  all  light  into  our 
darkness,  even  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 


cm 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  for  that  Eternal 
Light  which  was  with  Thee,  and  has  been  manifested 
to  us.  And  we  pray  that  we  may  be  brought  more 
and  more  into  fellowship  with  Thy  dear  Son,  and 
may  draw  from  Him  that  life  which,  like  His,  is  in 
the  Light. 

We  pray  Thee  to  shed  abroad  upon  us  Thy  gracious 
influences  that  our  meeting  together  may  be  for  our 
good,  and  that  each  may  be  aware  of  receiving  some 
impulse  from  Thyself  which  shall  carry  us  on  some 
stages  further  in  the  life  which  is  the  true  life,  the 
life  of  fellowship  with  Thee  and  of  separation  from 
all  unrighteousness.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  past 
gifts  and  mercies  to  us,  and  pray  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  still  be  near  each  of  us  according  to  our 
different  necessities  and  circumstances,  and  so  mould 
the  dealings  of  Thy  providence  and  the  communica- 
tions of  Thy  grace  to  us  as  that  these  may  answer 
one  another,  and  together  further  our  growth  in  the 
grace  and  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ. 

Speak  peace  to  all  sad  hearts,  stand  by  those  who 
have  burdens  to  bear,  or  conflicts  to  wage,  and  lead 
us  day  by  day  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  which 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  207 

Thou  hast  ordained  to  be  paths  of  peace.  Shed 
abroad  Thy  grace  upon  all  Christian  communities 
under  every  name  and  language  and  country;  and 
grant  that  all  Thy  people  may  be  taught  of  God,  and 
be  teachers  for  God  in  the  world.  Bless  all  we  love, 
present  or  absent,  we  beseech  Thee.  Thou  art  the 
confidence  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  of  them 
that  are  afar  off  upon  the  sea.  We  commit  our  dear 
ones  to  Thee,  nor  would  we  forget  wider  interests  ; 
but  pray  that  Thy  mercy  may  be  spread  throughout 
mankind,  and  that  all  nations  may  learn  who  is  the 
true  Lord  and  King,  and  be  gathered  together  in  amity 
and  peace  around  His  footstool. 

Hear  and  forgive,  we  pray ;  grant  us  Thy  gracious 
presence  as  we  worship,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 


CIV 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  to  call  upon  our  souls  and  all  that 
is  within  us  to  bless  Thy  holy  Name.  For  surely  Thy 
Name  is  a  strong  tower  into  which  running  we  can 
be  safe.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  glories  that 
comipose  it,  for  all  the  revelation  of  Thyself  in  all  the 
works  of  Thy  hands,  in  all  the  dealings  of  Thy  provi- 
dence, in  the  depths  of  our  own  hearts,  in  the  good 
thoughts  which  Thou  dost  breathe  into  men's  minds, 
in  all  the  truth  and  goodness  and  beauty  which  fill 
the  world,  and  speak  to  us.  We  thank  Thee  that 
Thou  hast  gathered  all  these  utterances  at  sundry 
times  and  in  divers  manners  into  the  one  great 
Revelation  of  Thyself  through  Thy  Son,  in  Whom  is 
Thy  Name.  May  we  learn  it  all,  may  we  love  it  all, 
may  we  obey  all  the  commandments,  and  realise  all 


208  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

the  blessings  that  are  stored  up  in  the  Name  which 
is  above  every  name.  In  that  Name  we  draw  near 
to  Thee  now,  building  all  our  confidence,  not  on  what 
we  are,  but  on  what  Thou  art,  and  thanking  Thee  that 
though  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Thy 
throne,  righteousness  and  judgment  are  its  pillars, 
and  Love  is  enthroned  there. 

We  beseech  Thee,  then,  to  help  us  that  we  may 
draw  near  to  Thee  now,  with  the  peaceful  confidence, 
with  the  calm  certitude,  with  the  joyful  hope  which 
become  us.  May  we  not  receive  the  light  and  love 
the  darkness,  may  we  not  repel  the  light  by  our  love 
of  the  darkness.  May  we  walk  in  the  light  as  Thou 
art  the  Light,  and  in  it.  We  pray  for  Thy  cleansing 
grace,  for  Thine  uplifting  power,  for  Thy  comforting, 
strengthening  spirit ;  and  we  ask  Thee  that  our  inward 
being,  conformed  to  Thy  will,  may  ever  issue  in 
thoughts  and  words  and  acts  which  shall  witness 
for  Thee. 

We  pray  for  Thy  pardoning  mercy,  and  beseech 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  look  upon  our 
own  faultful  selves  in  some  measure  as  Thou  dost 
look  upon  us.  May  we  be  delivered  from  all  the 
deceitfulness  of  evil,  and  made  wise  to  see  the 
things  that  are  contrary  to  Thy  holy  will.  May 
we  have  no  tolerance  for  our  own  faults,  and  no 
intolerance  for  those  of  others.  May  we  walk  before 
Thee  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  which  Thou  hast 
appointed,  and  then  we  shall  find  them  to  be  paths 
of  peace. 

Bless  us  in  all  our  ways ;  guide  us  by  Thy  counsel ; 
make  us  wise  to  know  Thy  will,  swift  to  apprehend 
the  commandments  which  we  love,  and  glad  to  do 
the  good  which  Thou  dost  appoint  for  us.     In  all  our 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  209 

ways  help  us  to  keep  Thee  before  us.  May  we  live, 
not  as  in  the  great  Taskmaster's  eye,  but  happy  in 
the  thought  as  a  child  for  its  father,  that  Thou  God 
seest  us ;  and  may  that  keep  us  from  being  guilty  of 
much  transgression,  and  quick  and  eager  for  all  good. 
Hear  us,  and  be  near  us  as  we  worship  before  Thee ; 
accept  and  answer  us,  for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


CV 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  we  would  again  draw 
near  unto  Thee  to  Whom  we  must  ever  come  anew  for 
life  itself,  and  for  all  its  blessings.  And  we  lift  up  our 
hearts  with  thankfulness  to  Thee  that  Thou  hast  given 
to  us  so  richly  out  of  Thy  full  hand,  and  in  the  great- 
ness of  Thy  mercy  taught  us  whence  our  mercies  come 
that  we  may  bring  them  back  to  Thee  by  the  devotion 
and  thankfulness  of  our  hearts,  and  by  faithful  steward- 
ship in  them  all. 

Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  thus  to  live,  keeping  that 
which  is  committed  to  our  trust,  and  committing  to 
Thy  keeping  ourselves  and  all  that  belongs  to  us. 
Help  us  to  take  Thee  for  our  Portion.  May  we  not 
trust  in  the  uncertainty  of  anything  here  below,  but 
in  the  living  God  Who  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to 
enjoy,  and  Who  Himself  is  the  richness  of  our  wealth 
and  the  gladness  of  our  joy. 

O  Lord,  pour  out  Thy  blessing  upon  us  all  according 
to  our  need.  Help  us  to  speak,  help  us  to  hear,  Thy 
word.  May  the  Master  Himself  be  in  our  midst,  and 
our  poor  utterances  be  made  strong  and  sufficient  by 
His  gracious  aid.  Do  Thou  write  Thy  message  upon 
our  wills  and  hearts  as  well  as  upon  our  minds.  Lead 
us,  we  pray,  into  those  depths  of  God  where  truth 
o 


210  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

shines  and  peace  abides.  Strengthen  us,  day  by  day, 
for  our  daily  tasks,  helping  us  to  apprehend  what  the 
good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  the  Lord  is ; 
and  helping  us  to  do  it,  in  so  far  as  it  is  revealed  unto 
us,  that  thereby  we  may  learn  more  and  more  of  the 
councils  of  the  Most  High,  and  of  our  duties. 

We  pray  Thee  to  bind  up  all  wounds  which  Thy 
loving  providence  makes  in  our  hearts ;  and  help  us, 
when  we  suffer,  to  commit  the  keeping  of  our  souls  to 
Thee  in  well-doing,  as  unto  a  faithful  Creator  and 
loving  Father.  Strengthen  and  support  all  who  may, 
in  any  special  manner,  need  Thy  succour.  Grant  us 
grace,  according  to  our  different  characters  and  posi- 
tions, to  be  Thy  faithful  servants,  the  stewards  of  Thy 
riches,  and  the  soldiers  of  Thy  host  in  the  world. 

Withdraw  not  Thy  gracious  presence  from  us,  but 
accept  and  forgive  as  we  come  in  the  Name  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


CVI 

O  Lord  our  Lord,  help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  make 
Thee  ours,  and  to  make  ourselves  Thine.  We  thank 
Thee  that  like  as  a  Father  pitieth  His  children  Thou 
pitiest.  Knowing  our  frame,  and  looking  upon  us  with 
the  loving  eye  of  a  faithful  Creator,  Thou  wilt  satisfy 
the  souls  whom  Thou  hast  made  to  need  Thee.  Thou 
hearest  the  ravens  when  they  cry,  and  Thou  wilt 
answer  us.  Give  us  that  which  our  empty  souls  need, 
that  which  our  lonely  lives  require,  that  which  our 
seeking  groping  hearts  do  often  feel  after,  and 
mistakenly  think  that  we  have  found  in  Thy  creatures. 
Give  us  Thyself  that  we  may  be  strong,  and  that  it  may 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  211 

be  well  with  us,  and  that  we  may  be  pure  and  right, 
and  like  Thee. 

We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  not  disdain  to  enter 
the  narrow  room  of  our  hearts.  We  thank  Thee  that 
Thou  canst  tread  the  path  thither,  and  be  nearer  us 
than  all  loves,  and  closer  to  us  than  some  parts  of  our- 
selves, and  more  really  with  us  than  our  flesh  and  blood 
is.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  union  possible  between  us 
and  Thee,  and  we  pray  Thee  to  take  out  of  our  hearts 
and  characters  every  separating  film,  everything  that 
comes  between  us  and  God. 

O  Lord!  we  draw  near  to  Thee  this  morning  with 
lowly  thanksgiving  for  all  Thy  great  mercies  ;  but  we 
pray,  too,  that  our  hearts  and  minds  may  never  be  so 
occupied  with  the  sweetness  of  these,  or  with  the 
bitterness  of  our  sorrows,  as  that  either  the  one  or  the 
other  may  come  between  us  and  Thee.  Help  us  to  use 
the  things  seen  and  temporal  as  media  by  which  we  can 
draw  near  to  Thee,  not  as  barriers  by  which  we  shut 
Thee  out  from  ourselves. 

We  confess  our  many  sins  in  this  respect,  and  how 
hard  it  has  been  for  us,  and  is,  day  by  day,  to  keep  God 
in  our  hearts  and  minds  whilst  our  hands  and  thoughts 
are  fully  occupied  with  the  duties  which  God  gives  us. 
But  we  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  day  by 
day  to  renew  our  hold  on  Thee,  and  may  we  have  quiet 
and  secret  moments  when  we  refresh  our  spirits,  and 
tighten  our  grasp  of  the  great  verities  and  of  the  great 
God,  and  so  be  able  to  go  out  into  life  and  not  lose  our 
hold  of  either. 

We  pray  Thee  to  give  us  Thy  gracious  help  and 
presence,  without  which  our  service  here  is  but  as 
sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbal.  We  pray  Thee 
to  make  our  approach  to  Thee  more  real,  very  sincere, 


212  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  very  simple.  May  we  pass  beyond  forms  to  our 
Father,  and  receive  from  Him  forgiveness  of  sins,  help 
in  v^orship,  lifting  av^^ay  of  every  burden  ;  and  drawing 
near  with  true  hearts  and  full  assurance  of  faith  may 
we  realise  what  we  desire,  and  feel  that  we  have  with 
us  our  Father-God.  We  pray  Thee  to  forgive  our  sins, 
and  accept  our  petitions,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 

CVII 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  Heaven,  may  we  receive 
that  Christ-baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  fire 
which  shall  burn  up  all  our  coldness,  and  dissolve  our 
impurities,  and  make  us  as  the  fine  gold  tried  in  the 
fire.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  spirit  of  burning.  We 
beseech  Thee  to  cleanse  us  by  that  swift  energy,  and  to 
make  us  more  and  more  what  Thou  wouldst  have  us  to 
be,  like  Thyself  in  holiness  and  in  purity. 

We  draw  near  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  with  many  needs  in 
our  experience,  some  of  us  with  weights  upon  our 
hearts,  all  of  us  with  tasks  upon  our  shoulders  ;  and  we 
beseech  Thee  for  strength  according  to  our  day.  May 
we  have  grace  given  to  us  to  face  the  duties  that  are 
enjoined  upon  us.  May  we  look  to  Thee  for  all  our 
power,  for  little  things  and  great.  In  the  trivialities 
of  life,  and  in  its  crises,  may  we  realise  Thy  presence ; 
may  we  run  and  not  be  weary,  may  we  walk  and  not 
faint. 

Help  us,  wherever  Thy  providence  leads  us,  to  carry 
deep  in  our  hearts,  for  peace  and  for  power,  the 
assurance  of  the  presence  of  Thy  Spirit ;  and  out  of 
the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  may  we  come  into 
the  world  influences  for  good  and  for  God,  and  be  our- 
selves kept  free  from  much  transgression. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  213 

We  pray  Thee  to  comfort  and  succour  any  among 
us  who  have  come  into  Thy  house  seeking  for  peace 
and  consolation,  with  aching  hearts  that  need  Thy 
gentlest  touch,  with  sorrows  that  Thou  only  canst 
console.  We  bless  Thee  that  amidst  all  the  varieties 
of  our  troubles  there  is  the  one  Source  open  for  us  all ; 
and  may  none  of  us  neglect  the  great  Comforter,  nor 
shut  our  hearts  against  Thy  loving  whispers  of  peace 
and  stillness.  Do  Thou  help  us  to  use  aright  our 
sorrows  and  our  joys,  that  by  all  the  changes  of  their 
vicissitudes  we  may  be  swept  nearer  to  Thee,  that  the 
cross-currents  of  our  lives  may  all  drift  towards  God  ; 
and  that  whatever  Thou  dost  send  us  we  may  be  able 
to  undertake  in  Thy  power,  and  be  more  than  con- 
querors through  Him  that  loved  us. 

Accept  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  mercies  to  us  ;  for- 
give, we  beseech  Thee,  our  unworthy  requital  of  Thee 
for  them,  and  our  often  unworthy  use  of  them.  Oh 
to  carry  the  thought  of  Thyself  into  every  corner  of  our 
activities,  and  every  experience  and  emotion  of  our 
lives ! 

We  beseech  Thee  to  guide  us  by  Thy  counsel,  and 
speak  some  words  through  us  and  to  us  that  may  be 
true  and  profitable  to  us  all.  Accept  our  praise  that 
Thou  dost  gather  us  together  thus.  May  this  gift  of 
Thy  day  of  rest  be  to  us  a  day  of  gladness,  of  resurrec- 
tion, of  recreation  of  our  spirits,  of  the  consolidation  of 
our  faith,  of  the  increase  of  our  love,  of  the  more 
resolved  consecration  of  ourselves  to  whatsoever  things 
are  lovely  and  of  good  report,  and  to  Thee  Who  art  the 
fountain  of  them  all. 

Hear  us  in  these  our  supplications,  and  in  Thy 
great  mercy  answer  and  bless  us,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


214  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

CVIII 

O  Lord  !  Who  hast  of  old  called  a  man  Thy  friend,  may 
we  be  friends  of  Thine,  and  Abraham's  God  be  our  God. 
Thou  art  the  same  to-day  as  in  the  most  blessed  yester- 
day, and  as  in  the  most  glorious  to-morrow.  May  we 
feel  Thee  with  us,  a  present  God  in  each  present 
moment  of  our  lives ;  and  do  Thou  give  us  Thy  strength 
to  live,  and  Thy  peace  in  our  hearts  in  all  circumstances. 
May  we  indeed  celebrate  Thy  praise,  and  magnify  Thy 
holy  Name  in  our  daily  lives. 

Look  upon  us,  and  give  us  Thy  blessing  this  evening. 
May  that  divine  Spirit  Whom  Thou  hast  promised  and 
given  be  felt  to  be  with  us,  and  may  all  our  service  be 
rendered  in,  and  accepted  through,  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 


CIX 

O  Lord  !  our  gracious  God,  Who  in  Jesus  Christ  dost 
call  us  to  Thyself,  weary  and  heavy  laden  we  would 
come,  for  our  souls  need  rest.  We  pray  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  every  one  of  us  to  take  upon  us  that  easy 
yoke  which  helps  us  to  draw  the  light  burden  of 
obedience  to  a  loved  Master's  commandments. 

We  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  indeed  manifest 
Thy  love  to  each  of  our  hearts.  And  oh !  help  us  not 
to  be  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision,  nor  to  turn 
away  from  the  revelation  of  Thy  grace.  We  need  Thee 
for  daily  life,  in  all  its  continually  recurring  small 
duties,  and  in  the  great  moments  of  it.  We  need  Thee 
in  our  joys  as  much  as  in  our  sorrows.  We  need  Thee 
in  life  as  in  death. 

Preserve  us  from  the  thought  that  it  is  time  to  think 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  215 

of  Thee  when  the  sands  are  running  low.  Preserve  us 
from  looking  upon  Thy  truth  and  the  great  message 
of  Thy  love  in  Jesus  Christ  as  a  thing  that  may  be 
neglected  till  the  end  is  near.  Deliver  us  from  the 
temptations  so  thickly  sown  in  all  our  lives,  and  so 
seconded  by  our  own  weakness  to  put  away  from  our- 
selves that  which  concerns  us  most.  May  we  have 
the  wisdom  to  seek  the  best  things  first,  and  to  put  the 
world  second,  and  God  and  His  will  and  His  Kingdom 
in  the  foremost  place.  And  may  we  order  our  lives 
by  Heaven's  light  and  Heaven's  laws,  and  whatever 
other  companionship  we  may  have,  or  whatever  solitude 
we  may  have  to  walk  in,  may  we  walk  with  God  and 
realise  Thy  Presence,  Thy  thrilling  Presence,  Thy  sancti- 
fying, gladdening,  strengthening,  peace-giving  presence, 
in  every  part  of  our  experience  of  daily  life. 

O  Lord !  regard  us  here  before  Thee  according  to  all 
the  diversity  of  our  necessities  and  characters.  Thou 
dost  appoint  our  paths  for  us.  As  we  would  believe. 
Thou  art  the  Lord  of  circumstances ;  make  us  lords 
of  them  by  the  recognition  of  Thy  presence  in  them. 
And  whatever  may  be  our  present  condition,  whether 
of  sorrow  or  joy,  ease  or  trouble,  help  us  in  each  of  our 
duties  and  in  all  our  lives.  If  any  of  us  have  to  face 
temptations,  either  of  a  practical  or  an  intellectual 
kind,  do  Thou  strengthen  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  the 
conflict.  Be  Thou  our  peace  in  heavy  sorrows,  our 
light  in  darkness.  If  any  of  us  are  called  to  face  duties 
from  which  we  shrink  because  they  are  disagreeable  or 
hard,  be  Thou  our  strength.  Teach  us  all  what  is  Thy  holy 
will,  and  make  us  careful  so  to  live  that  we  may  never 
be  out  of  hearing  of  the  call  of  the  great  Shepherd. 

We  pray  Thee  to  guide  our  thoughts  when  we  try  to 
speak  a  word  in  Thy  Name.    Be  Thou  our  Strength,  for 


216  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

our  own  strength  is  weakness.  Move  Thou  upon  the 
thoughts  of  those  that  hear,  that  the  word  which  we 
can  only  address  to  the  outward  ear  may  become  the 
engrafted  word  which  is  able  to  save  the  soul.  Other 
teachers  speak  to  us ;  do  Thou,  Lord,  speak  in  us. 

Hear  us  now,  we  beseech  Thee;  give  us  Thy  gracious 
help  in  our  worship ;  forgive  all  our  imperfections  and 
the  iniquities  of  our  holy  things,  and  draw  near  to  us 
in  Thy  grace  and  love,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


CX 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  God,  we  humbly  confess  that  our 
ways  are  not  as  Thy  ways.  We  joyfully  accept  the 
assurance  that  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the 
earth,  so  are  Thy  ways  higher  than  our  ways,  and  Thy 
thoughts  than  our  thoughts.  We  cannot  conceive  of 
Thee,  of  Thy  love,  of  Thy  tender  heart,  of  Thine  infinite 
compassion,  of  Thy  love  which  hopeth  all  things  for 
the  worst  of  us,  and  beareth  all  things  from  the  worst 
of  us.  But  we  bless  Thee  that  as  from  the  heavens  come 
down  all  fruitful-making  power,  so  from  Thee  there 
will  come  to  our  barren  natures,  if  we  keep  our  hearts 
open  to  the  noontide  of  God,  all  things  that  shall  root 
out  the  briar  and  bring  forth  the  myrtle,  and  that  shall 
make  even  our  poverty  rich  and  our  unfruitfulness 
fruitful. 

We  come  to  claim  our  portion,  O  Lord,  in  Thy  great 
love  and  tender  care.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  large 
tokens  and  results  of  that  love  and  care  which  are  given 
to  us  all,  even  when  we  neither  claim  them  nor 
recognise  their  source.  But  we  would  not  be  blind  to 
the  great  Fountain  from  which  all  the  streams  of 
blessing  come,  nor  would  we  be  unthankful  even  whilst 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  217 

we  enjoy  Thy  manifold  mercies.  Therefore  we  pray 
Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  realise 
our  continual  dependence  upon  Thee,  and  to  rejoice  in 
it ;  to  see  that  in  Thee  we  live  and  move  and  have  our 
being ;  that  from  Thee  all  that  brightens  life,  all  that 
ennobles  life  and  makes  us  glad,  all  that  helps  us  to  be 
good,  comes.  May  we  ever  thus  recognise  Thy  presence 
in  the  world,  and  feel  that  all  things  are  drenched  with 
God ;  that  we  ourselves  are  in  fellowship  with  Him. 

Help  us  day  by  day  to  live  in  the  light  of  Thy  face. 
May  that  light  conquer  all  our  native  darkness,  whether 
it  be  ignorance  or  sin  or  sorrow.  Redeem  us  from  the 
bondage  of  corruption ;  and  bring  us,  we  beseech  Thee, 
into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  Thy  great  goodness 
to  us.  We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  always  been  beside 
us  to  further  and  to  help  us ;  to  enrich  us  with  many 
blessings;  to  anticipate  and  disappoint  many  fore- 
bodings and  fears ;  to  lead  us,  though  we  often  have 
been  blind,  by  the  way  that  we  know  not.  Thou  hast 
surprised  us  with  mercy  as  well  as  sometimes  with 
sorrow,  and  Thou  hast  done  all  from  a  loving  heart, 
and  for  the  great  purpose  that  we  might  be  partakers 
of  Thy  holiness.  May  that  purpose  be  fulfilled  in  us. 
May  we  grow  in  whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of 
good  report,  and  so  adorn  the  teaching  in  all  things. 

Accept  our  thanks,  we  beseech  Thee,  for  Thy  mani- 
fold blessings.  Be  near  us  as  we  draw  near  to  Thy 
mercy-seat.  Pour  some  beams  of  Thine  own  light 
into  our  hearts,  and  clear  away  the  mists  that  so  often 
come  between  us  and  Thee.  And  whatever  pressure  of 
care,  or  duty,  or  of  exciting  occupations,  may  have  come 
with  us  into  Thy  presence,  may  the  grip  of  all  earthly 
things  be  slackened  now,  and  our  souls  set  free  to  soar, 


218  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

that  thereby  we  may  come  down  again  to  earth  and 
work  all  the  better  there. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  grant  Thy  blessing  on  our 
worship,  and  to  accept  and  answer  us,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CXI 

O  Lord  our  God,  let  Thy  light  shine  in  us  and  through 
us,  we  beseech  Thee.  And  may  it  so  shine  as  to  show 
Thee,  and  not  us,  to  every  seeing  eye.  We  thank  Thee 
for  these  great  promises  ;  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst 
help  us  to  fulfil  the  conditions.  May  we  be  poor  in 
spirit,  mourning,  meek,  merciful,  peace-bringing,  and 
living  the  Christ-life  in  the  world.  May  we  possess  the 
Christ-given  blessing,  and  have  to-day,  and  not  only  in 
some  distant  future,  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  which  is 
righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  for 
our  treasure. 

Help  us,  we  pray,  to  war  against  everything  in  our- 
selves which  is  against  Thee,  and  so  against  our  own 
highest  good ;  and  give  us  Thy  grace  that,  day  by  day, 
as  Thy  faithful  servants,  we  may  delight  to  do  Thy  will, 
and  as  Thy  soldiers  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  help  in  all  our  changing  circum- 
stances. Lead  us  by  Thy  counsel  in  any  difficulty  or 
perplexity  which  comes  to  us  in  the  ordering  of  our 
daily  lives.  May  we  never  be  at  a  loss  as  to  what  duty 
is,  and  having  docile  hearts  may  we  be  ever  taught,  and 
knowing  these  things  may  we  possess  the  blessing  of 
those  that  do  them.  Keep  us  from  letting  our  actions 
stray  away  from  the  control  of  our  deepest  principles. 
Keep  us  from  letting  the  things  which  we  profess  to 
believe  lie  idle  in  our  minds.    May  we  live  our  faith, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  219 

and  may  all  our  days  be  penetrated  and  enlightened  by 
the  strength  that  we  believe.  May  all  our  work  be 
worship.  And  if  any  of  us  have  special  burdens  of 
sorrow  to  carry,  and  surely  there  are  some  here  this 
morning  with  heavy  hearts,  may  they  find  that  yielding 
to  Thee  brings  peace ;  and  when  the  will  melts,  unseen 
by  any  but  themselves,  blessing  begins  to  come.  May 
it  be  so  with  us  all,  in  our  various  trials  and  difficulties. 

Give  us  a  blessing,  O  Lord,  as  we  seek  to  renew  our 
faith,  and  deepen  our  love  by  our  service  now.  Give  us 
some  word  to  speak  that  may  be  Thy  word,  and  have 
power  in  all  our  hearts  and  consciences  to  move  our 
wills,  to  enlighten  our  understandings,  to  guide  us  into 
the  perception  and  the  practice  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  and  to  bless  all  who,  in 
like  manner,  are  drawing  near  to  Thee  to-day  ;  and  to 
shed  abroad  Thy  gracious  influences  upon  all  their 
hearts  and  ours,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and 
Saviour. 


CXII 

O  Lord,  most  gracious.  Who  art  very  near  to  us  to 
know,  and  knowing  to  pity,  and  pitying  to  help,  help 
us  now,  we  beseech  Thee  ;  for  the  more  we  need  Thee 
the  less  we  feel  after  Thee,  and  the  further  away  from 
Thee  we  are  the  more  we  need  Thy  drawing  hand. 
Strengthen  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  we  may  yield 
ourselves  to  the  outward  associations,  and  to  the 
memories  of  this  day  ;  and  may  find  that  for  once  the 
things  seen  do  help  us  to  a  firmer  and  a  more  peaceful 
possession  of  the  things  unseen. 
We  praise  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  dost  thus  appoint 


220  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

our  gathering  together  that  our  many  weaknesses 
may  unite  to  bring  some  strength,  and  the  dying 
embers  drawn  together  may  break  into  a  flame.  We 
thank  Thee  for  all  the  blessings  which  Thou  art  wont 
to  give  to  those  who  in  secret  seek  Thy  face.  We  thank 
Thee  for  the  blessings  which  Thou  art  wont  to  give  to 
those  who,  in  company  with  their  brethren,  draw  near 
to  Thee ;  and  as  Thou  hast  permitted  us  to  assemble 
thus  may  we  not  be  without  the  consciousness  of  that 
presence  in  the  midst  of  us  which  moulds  all  our  cold- 
ness, which  lifts  us  up  into  the  fellowship  of  Christ's 
own  ascended  life,  and  causes  us  to  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places  with  Him.  May  we,  this  morning,  be 
able  to  shake  off  from  ourselves  chains  and  hindrances, 
and  to  draw  near  to  Thee. 

And  grant,  O  Lord,  that  we  may  not  merely  feel  after 
Thee,  if  haply  we  may  find  Thee,  but  seek,  as  those  do 
who  know  where  that  which  they  seek  for  is,  and  in 
seeking  do  find. 

We  pray  Thee  to  apply  Thy  manifold  grace  to  us 
in  the  fashion  which  we  may  severally  most  need. 
Some  of  us  have  brought  sluggish  and  heavy  hearts 
into  Thy  presence.  Quicken  us,  O  Lord,  that  we  may 
call  upon  Thy  Name,  and  that  we  may  run  after  Thee, 
and  find  Thee.  Some  of  us  have  come  in  outward  form, 
with  no  real  approach  of  heart  to  Thee.  Mayest  Thou 
be  found  of  them  that  seek  Thee  not,  and  manifest 
Thyself  even  to  careless  eyes,  that  they  may  turn 
aside  to  see  this  great  sight,  dimly  beheld  before 
them,  and  half  understood.  Some  of  us  have  brought 
into  Thy  presence  sorrowful  souls  ;  comfort  Thou  such, 
and  may  all  our  troubles  always  bring  us  nearer  Thee, 
and  never,  as  they  so  often  do,  drive  us  away  from 
Thee.    We  have  all  come  with  deep  needs,   and  the 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  221 

deepest  of  all  is  the  need  for  Thyself.  O  help  us  to 
understand  ourselves,  in  the  depths  of  our  beings,  and 
to  be  sure  that  nothing  will  satisfy  us  except  God. 
And  may  that  conviction  rule  in  our  lives,  and  not 
only  dawn  upon  us  now  and  then,  and  then  be  swal- 
lowed up  again  in  the  clouds. 

O  may  no  earth-born  cloud  arise 

To  hide  Thee  from  Thy  servant's  eyes. 

May  we  live  near  to  Thee,  and  may  our  worship  of  this 
morning  help  us  to  permanent  and  stable  fellowship 
with  Thyself,  which  shall  not  be  broken  but  rather 
increased  by  the  necessity  of  going  out  into  the  world  ; 
because  there  we  go  to  do  Thy  will,  and  find  Thee 
manifesting  Thyself  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers 
manners. 

Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  that  thus  this  day  may  not 
be  so  much  an  exception  to  the  ordinary  course  of  our 
thoughts  and  endeavours  and  desires,  as  that  it  may 
be  a  reservoir  of  strength  from  which  there  shall  come 
the  power  that  shall  assimilate  the  other  days  to  itself, 
and  make  all  our  work  worship. 

O  Lord !  cleanse  our  hearts,  we  beseech  Thee.  Pre- 
pare us  now  for  an  hour  of  true  devotion  and  com- 
munion with  Thyself.  May  earth's  noises  be  silenced, 
and  the  chains  that  so  often  bind  us  down  to  this 
present  scene  be  relaxed,  and  we  set  free  to  soar  and  to 
come  near  to  God.  Mercifully  accept  our  thanks  for 
all  Thy  great  mercies  to  us.  We  know  not  their 
number ;  we  thank  Thee  for  their  unbroken  stream, 
many-coloured,  and  with  many  an  apparent  cross- 
current in  it  which  all  flows  from  Thyself,  and  is  all 
meant  to  bear  us  on  its  course  towards  Thee.  Accept 
our  praise,  and  help  us  to  live  our  praise,  and  to  use  all 


222  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

the  things  which  Thou  dost  send — the  changes  of 
condition,  the  stages  of  growth  and  progress,  our 
sorrows  and  our  joys, our  achievements  and  our  failures, 
our  hopes  fulfilled  and  our  hopes  disappointed — to  use 
them  all  that  they  may  bring  us  nearer  to  God,  and 
make  us  in  fuller  measure  partakers  of  His  holiness. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  and  in  Thy  grace 
accept  and  answer  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour. 


CXIII 

O  Lord,  our  merciful  Father,  Thou  seest  our  hearts 
and  knowest  how  often  they  betray  us,  and  how  hard 
we  find  it  to  unite  our  hearts  in  the  single-eyed  fear 
and  service  of  Thyself.  So  many  rivals  seek  to  draw 
us  away,  and  there  is  so  much  in  us  that  yields  to  the 
drawing.  But  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
help  us  in  all  the  relations  to,  and  administration  of, 
the  things  here  on  earth  to  use  them  in  Thy  service, 
to  make  them  not  antagonists  to  Thee,  but  revealers 
of  Thee,  and  helpers  towards  Thee.  May  all  life  speak 
to  us  of  God,  and  all  duty  be  stamped  with  His  com- 
mandment, and  done  by  His  help.  May  all  possessions, 
inward  or  outward,  all  capacities,  facilities,  oppor- 
tunities, resources,  all  acquirements  and  attainments, 
all  that  we  are,  and  all  that  we  have,  be  more  com- 
pletely yielded  up  unto  Him  from  Whom  all  has  come. 
We  pray  Thee  to  accept,  and  by  accepting  enrich,  our 
poverty,  and  to  make  us  more  and  more  possessors 
of  Thyself,  in  the  fullness  which  is  possible  to  us  whilst 
we  are  here. 

O  Lord !  we  pray  Thee  to  lead  us  day  by  day  along 
that  road  of  daily  duty.    May  it  not  be  a  lonely  one. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  223 

It  is  Thy  providence  that  determines  whether  it  shall 
be  a  crooked  one  or  a  straight  one,  abounding  in  rough 
places  or  smooth  and  plain.  We  dare  not  make 
petitions  of  our  desires  in  that  respect,  but  we  beseech 
Thee  that  upon  that  highway  no  ravenous  beast  may 
come  up,  nor  any  enemies  lurk  that  shall  mar  and  rob 
us ;  but  may  He  Who  goeth  before  us  be  with  us  there, 
and  may  our  road  never  be  a  solitary  one,  because  the 
Master  is  with  us,  and  the  Breaker  and  the  Pathfinder 
has  gone  up  before  us. 

We  pray  Thee  to  bless  us  day  by  day.  We  pray  Thee 
to  bless  us  now,  to  take  away  all  deadness  and  all 
coldness  from  our  hearts  and  minds,  and  to  help  us  in 
this  hour  of  apparent  worship,  that  the  communion 
between  us  and  Thee  may  be  real  and  living,  and  that 
we  may  go  hence  in  some  measure  strengthened  and 
helped  for  Thy  holy  will  and  for  our  day's  service. 

Whilst  we  thank  Thee  for  Thy  mercies  we  would 
pray  Thee  to  be  near  all  who  are  in  any  kind  of  sorrow 
or  trouble.  Some  amongst  us  have  brought  into  Thy 
house  very  heavy  hearts,  perplexed  and  saddened  some 
by  difficulties,  sorrows,  and  losses.  We  beseech  Thee 
that  whatever  tribulations  Thou  mayest  be  exercising 
Thy  children  with,  it  may  afterward  yield  the  peaceable 
fruit  of  righteousness ;  and  may  none  of  us  waste  our 
sorrows,  and  not  find  them  bringing  us  nearer  to 
Thee,  and  making  Thee  more  precious  to  us. 

We  pray  Thee  to  bless  all  Thy  people  who  in  any 
fashion  are  trying  to  do  Thy  will  in  the  world  to 
make  known  Thy  great  Name.  Bless  all  teachers  and 
preachers,  all  guides  and  leaders  of  thought  and  in- 
fluence in  this  and  other  lands ;  and  grant  that  the 
travail  of  soul  by  which  many  are  exercised  may  end 
in  bringing  many  nearer  to  the  one  Light  of  all  our 


224  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

seeing,  and  may  scatter  the  darkness  that  prevails. 
Rule  Thou,  O  Lord,  amidst  the  perturbations  of  the 
nations  and  the  shocks  of  change.  And  grant,  we 
beseech  Thee,  that  whatsoever  things  may  be  shaken 
and  removed,  the  established  Kingdom  may  be  more 
manifest,  more  widely  spread,  more  mightily  operative 
on  the  hearts  of  individuals,  and  on  the  counsels  of  the 
kingdoms. 

We  pray  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  bless  and  accept, 
and  to  forgive  all  our  sins,  for  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ's  sake. 


CXIV 

O  Lord  our  God,  Who  desirest  truth  in  the  inward 
parts,  give  us  what  Thou  desirest,  and  help  us  that  we 
may  draw  near  with  true  hearts,  and  in  full  assurance. 
We  would  bring  the  sacrifice  which  Thou  dost  not 
despise,  and  acknowledge  before  Thee  with  lowly 
minds  our  own  evil  which  Thou  knowest  better  than 
we  can  tell,  but  which  it  is  good  for  us  to  spread 
before  Thee.  We  thank  Thee  that  we  need  do  so  with 
no  disturbing  fear.  Set  free  therefrom,  we  would 
think  of  our  own  transgressions  and  sins  rather  than 
of  their  consequences,  and  seek  to  lay  these  in  Thy 
holy  Presence,  that  Thy  pure  eye  may  purge  away 
what  we  would  try  to  hide,  and  may  make  us  what 
we  sometimes  desire  to  be,  holy  as  our  Father  in 
Heaven  is  holy. 

Thou  seest  how  closely  our  evils  twine  themselves 
around  our  very  being,  and  how  they  rule  and  tyrannise 
over  us.  And  we  come  to  ask  Thee  to  wash  us 
throughly  from  our  iniquity,  and  cleanse  us  from  our 
sin.    May  Thy  holy  Spirit,  Thy  free  Spirit,  Thy  strong 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  225 

Spirit,  Thy  right  Spirit,  be  given  to  us,  we  pray  Thee  ; 
and  therein  may  we  find  more  fully,  and  possess  more 
purely  and  continually,  the  joy  of  Thy  salvation,  and 
the  consciousness  of  the  light  of  Thy  countenance 
resting  upon  us. 

We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  dost  help  all  who  wait 
upon  Thee  ;  and  we  pray  for  Divine  power  to  reinforce 
our  weakness,  and  for  Thy  grace  which  makes  holy, 
to  cast  out  from  us  all  our  sins.  Baptize  us,  we  pray 
Thee,  in  the  Holy  Ghost  and  in  fire.  May  the  rushing 
mighty  wind  bring  life  into  our  beings ;  may  the  dew 
of  Thy  sweet  influence  refresh  our  parched  spirits. 
Anoint  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  with  unction  from  the 
Holy  One.  May  we  have  that  oil  in  our  vessels  with 
our  lamps.  May  we  be  prepared  thereby,  by  Thy 
Divine  anointing,  for  service  as  prophets,  priests,  and 
kings  ;  to  declare  Thy  Name,  to  bring  Thee  to  men,  and 
men  to  Thee ;  and  to  rule  over  the  Kingdom  within, 
and  to  be  lords  of  all  things. 

We  thank  Thee  for  Thy  great  and  gracious  promises 
to  us ;  we  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  never  close  our 
hearts  against  the  influences,  so  widespread,  and  so 
entirely  revivifying,  which  Thou  dost  give  in  Jesus 
Christ  Thy  Son.  We  thank  Thee  for  that  gift  of  a 
Divine  Spirit ;  we  pray  that  it  in  our  hearts  may  help 
our  infirmities,  and  may  teach  and  guide  us  into  all 
truth.  Hear  us  in  these  our  prayers.  We  thank  Thee 
for  all  Thy  benefits  towards  us ;  we  would  not  forget 
the  least,  the  most  outward  and  fleeting  of  these ;  for 
surely  in  Thy  hands  our  breath  is,  and  Thine  are  all 
our  ways.  Surely  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  both 
of  the  things  which  perish  with  the  using,  and  of  the 
things  which  grow  by  use,  cometh  from  the  Father  of 
lights. 

P 


226  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

We  praise  Thee  for  Thy  mercy,  and  we  pray  that  the 
assurance  of  Thine  unchangeable  nature  as  the  giving 
God,  Who  knoweth  what  things  we  have  need  of,  and 
will  never  give  us  stones  for  bread,  may  ever  hearten 
us  in  all  the  difficulties  and  perplexities,  the  trials  and 
the  wearinesses,  the  disappointments  and  the  losses, 
the  heavy  tasks  and  the  heavier  sorrow  which  make  up 
so  much  of  our  earthly  lives.  The  Lord  be  praised ! 
the  Lord  be  trusted !  The  Lord  be  recognised  in,  and 
thanked  for,  all  that  befalls  us. 

Hear  us ;  pardon  our  many  sins,  O  Lord !  Grant  us 
deliverance  therefrom,  and  knit  us  to  Thyself,  in  bonds 
that  cannot  be  broken  ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour. 

cxv 

O  Lord  our  God !  Thou  hast  not  called  us  to  unclean- 
ness  but  unto  holiness.  And  we  thank  Thee  for  that 
free  Spirit  which  brings  liberty  wherever  it  comes. 
May  we  stand  fast  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath 
made  us  free,  and  be  entangled  by  no  yoke  of  bondage, 
whether  imposed  by  men  or  sought  to  be  fastened  upon 
us  by  our  own  evil  selves.  Give  us  liberty  to  love,  to 
serve,  to  grow  like  Thee ;  give  us  liberty  to  walk  at 
large,  knowing  no  restraints  because  we  love  the  bonds 
with  which  Thou  hast  bound  us.  Help  us  that  our 
wills  and  our  inclinations  may  ever  coincide  with  Thy 
will  and  Thy  commandments,  and  in  our  natures  may 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  abundantly  be  found. 

We  pray  for  love,  peace,  joy,  righteousness,  and  all 
the  graces  with  which  Thou  art  so  willing  to  adorn  our 
spirits.  And  whilst  we  thus  ask,  we  beseech  Thee  that 
our  daily  efforts  may  coincide  with  our  prayers  and 
with  our  lives  too — in  dependence  upon  Thee,  and  in 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  227 

lofty  estimation  of  the  best  things ;  may  be  prayers 
that  Thou  wouldst  bestow  upon  us  the  good  things 
which  Thou  knowest  how  to  give,  and  especially  that 
Holy  Spirit  which  they  who  believe  on  Christ  shall 
receive.  May  we  thereby  have  the  Spirit  of  adoption, 
the  Spirit  of  supplication,  the  Spirit  of  wisdom,  the 
Spirit  of  burning,  the  Spirit  of  power,  the  Spirit  of 
love  and  of  a  sound  mind,  and  may  we  be  kept  from 
the  lusts  of  the  flesh. 

Grant  us  Thy  gracious  presence  and  blessing  as  we 
remain  here,  seeking  in  outward  form,  at  all  events, 
Thy  face.  And  grant  that  our  inmost  desires  may 
correspond  with  our  outward  engagements ;  and  we  be 
not  feeling  after  Thee  if  haply  we  may  find  Thee,  but 
going  straight  to  Thee  because  we  know  where  Thou 
art,  and  are  sure  that  they  who  seek  Thee  earnestly 
shall  find  Thee. 

Give  us  Thy  gracious  presence,  O  Lord  ;  speak  to  us, 
speak  in  us.  May  the  word  of  the  Lord  be  glorified 
among  us.  May  Thy  message  be  felt  by  each  of  us  to 
be  with  power,  and  to  be  directed  to  us  individually. 
May  we  be  helped  by  our  service  of  to-day  to  live  more 
as  those  ought  to  do  who  have  such  great  things 
given,  and  yet  greater  things  promised  from  Thy  full 
store. 

We  commend  one  another  to  Thy  care.  We  pray 
Thee  to  comfort  and  solace  any  in  special  need  of  Thy 
sustaining,  consoling  influences.  We  commend  one 
another,  in  all  the  variety  of  our  callings  and  char- 
acters, to  Thy  gracious  care  ;  and  beseech  Thee  that  for 
each  of  us  life  may  be  the  means  of  leading  us  on  to 
that  which  is  better  than  life,  and  which  endures  and 
persists  through,  and  after,  the  death  of  the  outward 
life. 


228  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Graciously  be  with  us  as  we  worship  ;  accept  us  and 
answer  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


CXYI 

O  Lord  !  truly  Thou  art  our  Light  and  our  Salvation. 
Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  walk  in  the  light,  and  to 
hold  fast  by  the  salvation,  that  nothing  may  alarm 
and  nothing  may  hurt.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  the 
good  cheer  and  strengthening  of  heart  which  Thou  art 
ever  giving  to  them  that  wait  on  Thee.  And  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  so  move  upon  and 
influence  our  too  often  wayward  and  wandering  hearts 
that  with  still  confidence  we  may  wait  upon  Thee,  and 
with  patient  hope  may  expect  Thee  in  the  darkness, 
and  with  happy  love  may  find  Thee  as  evermore 
our  Light. 

Draw  near  to  us,  O  Lord!  we  beseech  Thee,  and 
pour  out  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication  upon 
all  of  us  gathered  before  Thee.  From  many  diverse 
homes  and  circumstances  we  have  come.  Thy  wise 
providence  appoints  to  us  different  and  often  con- 
trasted paths ;  but  whether  Thou  hast  been  making  us 
to  feel  the  joy  or  the  insufficiency  of  earthly  good ; 
whether  our  recent  road  has  led  through  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death,  or  green  pastures,  or  by  still 
waters ;  whether  we  bring  to  Thee  songs  or  sobs,  we 
beseech  Thee  that  we  may  be  able  to  sing  '  of  mercy 
and  of  judgment,'  and  to  bless  the  Lord  our  God  for  all 
the  way  by  which  He  has  led  us. 

Teach  us  to  understand  the  loving-kindness  of  the 
Lord  by  patient  and  believing  observance  of  the  Lord's 
ways ;  and  may  we  never  be  brought  to  a  stand,  or  per- 
plexity,  or  robbed  of  our  faith  by  any  incidence  of 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  229 

sorrow  upon  our  lives.  May  we  never  be  drawn  away 
from  Thee  by  the  brightness  of  Thy  gifts.  Be  Thou 
with  us  in  the  darkness,  the  Pillar  of  Fire  ;  in  the  sun- 
shine of  worldly  prosperity  and  happiness  the  Pillar  of 
Cloud  to  temper  the  deceitful  ray.  And  help  us  out  of 
both  to  bring  the  treasure  which  Thou  dost  lay  up  for 
Thy  children  in  both,  even  that  we  may  become  par- 
takers of  Thy  holiness,  and  have  our  characters  and 
our  spirits  moulded  more  and  more  into  the  noble 
likeness  of  Thy  dear  Son. 

Grant,  O  Lord,  that  we  may  be  workers  with  Thee  in 
that  great  work,  pursued  by  all  Thy  providence.  And 
since  Thou  hast  '  wrought  us  for  the  self-same  thing,' 
may  we  not  resist  Thy  working  nor  murmur  at  any  of 
its  accompaniments  ;  but  always  feel  that  the  pleasure 
of  the  Lord  is  being  wrought  out  in  our  characters, 
and  that  we  are  lovingly,  gratefully,  submissively, 
yielding  ourselves  to  the  Master's  hand. 

O  Lord!  lift  away  from  every  heart  here  every 
oppression,  and  every  hindrance.  And  help  us  all  to 
enter  into  the  whole  blessedness,  and  power,  and  sweet- 
ness of  this  service.  Thou  hast  put  the  treasure  in 
earthen  vessels.  May  our  weakness  not  hinder  its 
working.  We  pray  that  passing  beyond  all  external 
and  human  agencies,  we  may  each  of  us  be  brought 
into  fellowship  and  touch  with  Thyself ;  and  hear  the 
deep  Voice  that  speaks  to  us  through  all  events,  and 
more  clearly  through  such  ordinances  as  these,  and 
bids  us  to  come  up  nearer  to  Thyself. 

O  Lord !  help  us  to-day  in  our  worship.  Thou 
knowest  our  inadequacy  for  such  service ;  Thou 
knowest  how  unfit  we  are  to  gather  up  into  one 
utterance  the  desires  and  the  needs  of  Thy  people,  and 
how  unfit  to  handle  the  sacred  Word  of  Grod.    But  we 


230  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

pray  that  all  imperfection,  all  unworthiness  of  motive, 
and  double  aim  may  be  taken  away  from  them  that 
speak  in  Thy  Name  this  day;  and  that  upon  many 
congregations  of  waiting  men  there  may  descend  the 
fulness  of  Thy  Divine  Spirit,  and  influences  may  begin 
which  shall  persist  through  many  days,  and  blend  with 
others  in  our  souls  to  make  us  liker  Thee. 

Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  these  petitions ;  grant  us 
Thy  gracious  presence,  and  accept  and  forgive  now, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


CXVII 

O  Lord  our  Father,  help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  we 
may  indeed  withdraw  our  trust  from  all  crumbling 
uncertainties,  and  fix  them  upon  the  living  God  Who 
giveth  all  things  richly  to  enjoy.  We  beseech  Thee  to 
make  us  more  and  more  rich  and  content  in  the  posses- 
sion of  Thyself.  May  it  be  true  of  us  that  for  mind  and 
heart  and  will  and  life  Thou  art  our  Portion;  the 
strength  of  our  hearts,  and  the  aim  and  treasure  of 
our  lives. 

O  Lord !  we  have  to  confess  our  wandering,  many 
shortcomings,  terrible  gaps  between  our  ideal  and  the 
reality.  We  know  so  much  better  than  we  do.  We 
desire,  sometimes,  so  much  more  nobly  than  we  habit- 
ually aim.  We  forget  Thee  in  the  midst  of  Thy  good 
things,  in  the  midst  of  the  duties  that  Thou  dost 
appoint,  in  the  midst  of  the  cares  and  perplexities 
which  we  often  pull  down  upon  our  own  heads.  We 
pray  Thee  to  help  us  to  simpler  lives,  to  a  more  com- 
plete and  persistent  faith  in  Thee,  running  through  all 
our  days,  and  making  the  weakest  of  us  as  an  angel  of 
God.    Help  us  in  our  daily  life  to  set  the  Lord  always 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  231 

before  us ;  and  with  that  light  before  our  eyes  may  we 
not  walk  in  darkness. 

O  Lord !  have  pity  upon  our  imperfections ;  speak 
Thy  word  through  us,  even  us,  O  Lord !  that  its  great 
power  may  vindicate  itself,  and  our  hearts  may  yield 
to  Thy  message.  Guide  us  in  the  paths  of  daily  duty 
and  conflict,  and  may  the  things  seen  and  temporal 
help  us  towards  the  unseen  and  eternal.  We  pray  for 
all  the  weary  and  the  sad,  the  lonely  and  the  stricken 
hearts  among  us  ;  that  Thy  sweet  presence  may  steal 
into  desolate  souls ;  that  bowing  to  Thy  holy  will  we 
may  be  enriched  with  Thy  perfect  peace.  We  pray  for 
all  who  are  seeking  to  do  Thy  will  in  the  world,  and  to 
make  other  men  know  and  love  the  King  and  His  law. 
And  we  beseech  Thee  that  through  the  nations  of  the 
earth  that  holy  and  sweet  power  may  flow  which  shall 
turn  the  weapons  of  war  into  the  instruments  of  peace- 
ful service  and  fruit-bearing  toil. 

Grant  us  Thy  blessing  in  our  hour  of  worship,  O 
Lord,  we  pray,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and 
Saviour. 

CXVIII 

Almighty  God !  it  is  Thou  that  hast  made  us,  and  we 
are  Thine.  Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  yield  ourselves 
to  Thee  in  lowly  trust  and  lofty  aspiration ;  and  may 
we  ever  dwell  very  near  Thee,  and  carry  our  thoughts 
of  Thy  grace  and  power,  of  Thy  tenderness  and  father- 
hood, into  all  our  common  deeds.  We  thank  Thee  for 
that  mighty  Name  that  standeth  fast  for  ever,  the 
name  of  Righteousness  and  Love,  of  Wisdom  and  of 
Power.  May  we  know  Thy  Name,  and  put  our  trust 
in  Thee. 
Look  upon  us  this  evening.    Shed  abroad  upon  us 


232  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

that  mighty  Spirit  which  shall  voice  all  our  thoughts 
and  desires  into  one,  and  dwelling  in  our  hearts  shall 
be  the  pledge  of  acceptance  and  of  peace.  Help  us 
to  wait  before  Thee.  Send  us  help  according  to  our 
different  necessities.  All  our  sins  forgive,  and  cleanse 
away ;  and  help  us  in  very  deed  this  evening  to  listen 
to  God's  voice,  and  to  hear  Him  speak,  even  through 
human  lips. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  give  us  Thy  blessing 
and  presence  as  we  wait  before  Thee  now,  and  to  accept 
and  answer  us,  in  Christ  our  Lord. 


CXIX 

O  Lord  !  Infinite  Love,  Fountain  of  all  good.  Rock  of 
Ages,  Thou  Home  of  our  hearts,  and  Friend  of  all. 
Help  us  to  draw  near  to  Thee  now  with  true  hearts, 
and  not  only  in  this  outward  form  of  worship,  but  may 
our  thoughts  be  set  free  from  low  and  earthly  cares ; 
and  our  joys  and  our  sorrows,  our  circumstances  and 
our  duties,  impel  us  towards  Thyself,  and  not  hinder  us 
from  drawing  near  to  Thee. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  the  firm  assurance 
which  we  all  may  have  of  Thy  fatherly  heart,  of  Thy 
changeless  goodness,  of  the  infinite  wisdom  and  tender- 
ness of  all  Thy  purposes  towards  us.  And  we  beseech 
Thee  that  the  strength-giving  and  ennobling  assurances 
that  we  are  in  amity  with  Thee,  and  compassed  about 
by  Thee,  for  our  blessedness  and  defence,  may  enter 
into  every  part  of  our  lives,  and  may  satisfy  every 
part  of  our  natures,  and  make  us  possessors  indeed  of 
God. 

O  Lord !  we  come  to  Thee  now  to  claim  our  portion 
in  that    great    and    free   forgiveness  which    frankly 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  233 

pardons  great  or  small  sin.  And  we  beseech  Thee 
that  we  may  understand  ourselves  so  as  to  know 
that  whatever  may  have  been  the  outward  purity 
and  righteousness  of  our  lives,  we  belong  to  those  who 
have  much  forgiven.  When  we  think  of  our  own 
inward  nature,  of  our  wandering  and  wayward  wills, 
of  our  many  rebellions  against  Thee,  of  the  selfishness 
which  has  covered  so  much  of  our  lives,  of  the  negli- 
gence and  slothfulness  towards  things  that  are  good, 
of  the  feeble  resolutions  so  often  broken  almost  as 
soon  as  made,  of  the  gulf  between  what  we  ought  and 
what  we  would  do,  and  of  all  the  manifold  acts  of 
weakness  and  unworthiness  which  even  men  can  see  in 
us,  and  we  ourselves  can  see,  we  would  bow  ourselves 
before  Thee,  and  acknowledge  the  greatness  of  our 
transgressions.  Then  we  would  stretch  out  the  hand 
of  faith  to  lay  hold  on  the  greater  greatness  of  Thy 
pardoning  mercy.  Our  iniquities  are  more  than  the 
hairs  of  our  head,  but  Thy  thoughts  which  are  to  us- 
ward,  and  are  all  thoughts  of  goodness  and  mercy,  are 
more  even  than  they.  So  we  dare  to  look  up,  and  we 
come  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  in  the  assurance  that  Thou  art 
glad  to  welcome  back  Thy  wandering  children,  and  art 
ready  to  give  us  of  the  richest  gifts  which  it  is  possible 
for  us  to  receive. 

We  pray  that  Thy  good  Spirit  may  be  with  us  in 
our  service  of  this  evening.  Thou  knowest  how  unfit 
we  are  to  speak  to  our  brethren  gathered  here.  But 
we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help,  that  Thou  wouldst 
teach  and  inspire,  that  Thou  wouldst  give  thoughts  and 
words,  that  Thou  wouldst  carry  Thy  truth  to  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  all  of  us  that  hear ;  and  we  pray, 
Lord !  that  some  wandering  child  of  Thine  may  be 
brought  back  this  evening,  and  that  some  of  us  who 


234  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

have  seen  no  beauty  in  Jesus  Christ  that  we  should 
desire  Him  may  learn  that  He  is  the  altogether  lovely, 
and  the  Pearl  of  great  price. 

Bless  our  meeting  together,  OLord;  and  whatever 
other  purposes  it  may  serve  or  fail  to  attain,  may  there 
be  set  forth  amongst  us  the  glory  of  Christ's  Name,  and 
the  power  of  His  Cross.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy 
loving-kindness  and  tender  care  over  us.  We  pray  for 
one  another,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  be 
near  each  of  us,  according  to  our  different  necessities 
and  characters.  Thou  hast  laid  Thy  hand  heavily  upon 
some  of  us.  There  are  some  sad  hearts  here  this  even- 
ing. We  beseech  Thee  to  be  very  tender  and  gracious 
to  such.  Some  wounds  can  only  be  bound  up  by  Thy 
gentle  hand,  but  we  bless  Thee  that  bandage  and  balm 
are  with  Thee.  And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  come 
near  any  of  us  that  are  sad  and  weary,  perplexed  and 
lonely,  desolate  or  forsaken,  and  be  to  each  of  us  that 
which  we  most  need,  whether  it  is  that  which  we  most 
desire  or  no. 

And  now.  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves  to 
Thy  gracious  care,  and  humbly  renew  our  petitions  for 
Thy  help  and  blessing  in  our  worship,  and  offer  our 
sacrifices  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  of  loving  hearts 
and  trusting,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


cxx 

We  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord  our  Father,  to  plead  with 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  remember  Thy  loving-kind- 
nesses and  Thy  tender  mercies  which  have  been  ever  of 
old,  and  wouldst  still  manifest  Thyself  to  us  in  our 
daily  lives  and  in  our  inmost  spirits  as  being  what 
indeed  Thou  art,  our  Portion  and  our  Life. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  235 

We  thank  Thee  for  that  unceasing  stream  of  light 
and  love  which  flows  from  Thee  unto  all  Thy  universe. 
And  we  beseech  Thee  that  since  Thou  hast  in  Thy 
loving-kindness  made  us  capable  of  receiving  Thy  best 
gifts,  Thou  wouldst,  as  a  faithful  Creator,  supply  the 
needs  which  Thou  hast  given  to  us,  and  fill  us  with 
Thyself.  Thou  art  good  and  upright.  We  come  before 
Thee  darkened  with  many  evils,  and  conscious  of  not  a 
few  transgressions  ;  but  we  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast 
taught  us  to  plead  with  Thee  the  very  greatness  of  our 
transgressions  as  a  reason  for  Thy  dealing  with  them. 
Pardon  our  iniquity,  for  it  is  great ;  too  great  for  us  or 
for  any  power  but  Thine  to  deal  with.  And  the 
greater  it  is  the  more  the  glory  to  Thy  Name  if  we 
are  delivered  therefrom.   Good  and  upright  is  the  Lord. 

We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  taught  us  to  say 
therefore  will  He  guide  sinners  in  the  way.  For  surely 
Thy  goodness  has  no  greater  delight,  and  no  nobler 
field  on  which  to  manifest  itself,  than  to  make  us,  in 
our  measure  and  degree,  partakers  of  that  uprightness. 
So,  Lord !  we  come  to  Thee  with  full  confidence,  falling 
back  upon  Thy  Name  when  coldness,  or  fears,  or 
indifference  to  conduct  and  character  may  seize  us; 
and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  walk  in 
Thy  ways,  and  find  that  all  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are 
mercy  and  truth  to  them  that  keep  His  command- 
ments. 

Regard  us  as  we  have  gathered  ourselves  this 
morning,  we  hope  in  obedience  to  Thy  command,  not 
merely  in  conformity  with  a  custom.  We  beseech 
Thee  that  each  of  us  here,  bringing  Christ  with  us,  may 
find  Him  in  the  midst  of  us.  We  would  gather  in  Thy 
Name,  in  His  Name,  which  is  Thine,  and  beseech  Thee 
that  Thy  promised  presence,  with  all  its  quickening. 


236  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

gladdening,  emancipating  influences,  may  be  bestowed 
upon  each  of  us.  Help  us  to  leave  cares  and  sorrows 
and  joys  and  work  behind  us,  or  to  bring  these  with  us 
only  in  so  far  as  they  may  make  us  more  earnest  in  our 
desire  to  receive  the  needful  blessings  from  Thyself. 
We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  aid  given  to  our  sluggish 
faith  by  outward  forms  and  means  this  morning ;  and 
we  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  be  led  through  them, 
and  beyond  them,  and  be  brought,  each  of  us,  into  Thy 
own  presence,  wherein  all  outward  forms  and  means 
shall  drop  away  and  be  forgotten,  and  the  spirit  of 
a  man  be  joined  to  the  Spirit  of  God. 

O  Lord !  help  us  in  our  worship ;  guide  all  our 
thoughts ;  grant  us  clear  visions  of  Thyself  and  of 
Thy  truth  ;  lead  us  into  holy  aspirations,  sane  estimates 
of  our  own  past  and  of  ourselves.  Help  us  to  look 
above  the  things  that  so  often  engross  us  in  our  daily 
lives,  and  put  our  whole  selves  into  Thy  loving  hands. 
May  we  find  not  only  peace  but  inflowing  power 
and  blessedness  that  shall  enrich  and  enlarge  our 
hearts. 

We  pray  Thee  to  be  near  us  according  to  our 
necessity,  to  accept  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  great 
mercies  to  us,  and  to  help  us  that  if  in  our  remem- 
brances or  in  our  present  circumstances  there  blend 
plain  and  manifest  blessings  with  blessings  thickly 
veiled,  Thou  wouldst  give  us  the  clear  sight  to  see 
behind  the  veil  the  Angel  face,  and  so  to  sing  of  mercy 
and  of  judgment,  and  to  thank  Thee  for  all  the  way 
by  which  the  Lord  our  God  has  led  us.  Thou  knowest 
it  is  very  hard  for  some  of  us  to  do  that,  but  we  bless 
Thee  that  Thou  dost  help  us  wisely  to  look  back  upon 
our  past,  and  here  and  now  to  praise  Thy  Name  for  it 
altogether. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  237 

We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  bless  and  keep  us, 
to  forgive  and  answer,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour. 

CXXI 

Help  and  strengthen  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee, 
for  the  race  that  is  set  before  us  ;  and  may  we  have  the 
mind  that  was  in  Christ,  and  by  His  strength  may  our 
feeble  feet  be  quickened,  and  grace  given  to  us  to  run, 
not  uncertainly,  and  to  run  so  that  we  obtain. 

O  Lord  !  we  need  Thy  help  at  every  moment.  Life  is 
often  very  hard  ;  it  is  always  full  of  effort,  and  some- 
times full  of  dangers  and  sorrows ;  and  we  need  Thee 
to  be  beside  us,  and  we  need  to  keep  beside  Thee, 
when  we  wander  away  from  Thee,  and  forget  Thee, 
and  try  to  do  our  work  in  our  own  strength,  and  fail  to 
keep  before  us  the  great  quickening  impulse,  and  to 
grasp  the  great  enabling  power  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit. 
But  we  beseech  Thee  that  day  by  day  Thou  wouldst  be 
near  us,  to  keep  us  that  whether  it  be  Thy  command- 
ment that  we  should  walk  in  the  minutest  recurrence 
of  small  duties  and  commonplace  events,  or  whether  it 
should  be  Thy  will  that  we  have  to  run  in  the  crises  of 
trials  and  difficulties  and  sorrows,  we  may  have  Thee 
to  help  us.  Make  our  feet  as  hinds'  feet ;  by  Thy  grace 
may  we  run  and  not  be  weary,  and  walk  and  not  faint. 

We  pray  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  help  to  make  our  worship 
real,  to  deliver  us  from  dependence  upon  these  external 
means,  and  yet  to  enable  us  to  get  all  the  good  out  of 
them  to  the  last  drop  that  is  in  them.  Guide  us  in 
hearing  and  in  speaking  what  purports  to  be  Thy  word. 
May  it  be  so  really,  and  whatever  human  element  and 
alloy  must  necessarily  be  mixed  with  it,  do  Thou  clear 
it,  and  let  the  pure   gold  of  Thy  revealed  will  and 


238  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

manifest  commandment  enter  into  all  our  spirits  and 
enrich  us.  May  we  live  our  convictions  more  as  we 
learn.  And  what  we  feel  in  our  worship  here  may  it 
issue  in  action  in  our  daily  life.  May  there  be  none  of 
us  who,  knowing  these  things,  are  so  miserable  as  not 
to  do  them. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  help  and  bless  each  of  us 
according  to  our  different  circumstances  in  the  present, 
and  our  different  characters  and  spiritual  needs.  Com- 
fort all  sad  hearts  among  us.  Be  very  near  to  all 
solitary  souls;  stay  all  who  may  be  reeling  before 
temptations,  or  all  but  cast  down  by  sorrows.  Guide 
any  that  are  perplexed.  Deliver  us  each  from  the 
errors  which  we  do  not  know,  and  from  the  sins 
which  we  have  never  seen.  And  do  Thou  help  us  in 
our  daily  lives  to  avoid  many  a  temptation  because  we 
press  toward  the  mark,  and  to  be  kept  from  undue 
disturbance  because  we  set  the  Lord  always  before  us, 
and  so  shall  not  be  greatly  moved. 

Graciously  grant  us  Thy  help  and  presence,  we  beseech 
Thee,  for  our  Lord  and  Saviour's  sake. 


CXXII 

Many,  O  Lord  our  God,  are  Thy  wonderful  works 
which  Thou  hast  done,  and  Thy  thoughts  which  are  to 
usward.  We  bless  Thee  that  just  because  we  are  poor 
and  needy  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  us.  We  come  to 
Thee,  this  morning,  with  the  lowly  and  yet  trustful 
hearts  which  become  us ;  and  whilst  on  the  one  hand 
we  think  of  the  manifold  transgressions  which  are 
ours,  on  the  other  we  would  lose  these  sad  thoughts  in 
those  of  the  yet  more  manifold  mercies  which  are 
Thine.    Blessed  be  Thy  Name !    Thou  art  our  Bef  uge 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  239 

from  ourselves,  and  yet  we  know  ourselves  best  in  our 
weakness  and  our  need,  in  our  meanness  and  evil,  in 
the  lurking  faults  which  sometimes  we  can  see,  and 
which  often  rule  us  in  the  dark ;  we  think  most  of 
Thee,  and  bless  Thee  that  we  can  turn  to  Thee  from 
all  our  evil,  and  pray  Thee  to  purge  us,  to  cleanse  us 
wholly,  to  deliver  us  from  all  iniquity,  to  make  us 
pure,  and  to  strengthen  us  to  keep  that  holy  command- 
ment which  is  also  a  most  blessed  promise,  and  to  be 
holy  as  Thou  art  holy. 

O  Lord !  we  draw  near  to  Thee  now,  humbly  thanking 
Thee  for  Thy  many  mercies  to  us,  for  the  daily  blessings 
of  our  lot,  for  all  the  benefits  which  Thou  dost  scatter 
along  our  paths,  and  which  ought  to  speak  to  our 
hearts  and  make  us  very  trustful  and  peaceful. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  understand  the  loving- 
kindness  of  the  Lord  more  than  we  have  done,  and  may 
be  strengthened  to  apprehend  the  gracious  meaning 
in  all  that  befalls  us.  O  that  we  were  able  to  look 
more  on  the  things  seen  and  temporal  as  Thou  dost 
see  them,  and  to  use  them  more  as  Thou  dost  mean  us 
to  employ  them,  as  helps,  whatever  their  character,  to 
know  Thee  better,  and  to  possess  Thee  more  fully. 
We  ask  that  we  may  be  taught  the  meaning  of  the 
small  and  the  great  things  in  our  daily  lives,  that  we 
may  bring  them  all  increasingly  into  contact  with 
Thyself,  that  whatever  we  do  we  may  do  as  to  the 
Lord,  and  then  we  shall  do  it  heartily ;  and  that  whilst 
all  other  lower  motives,  powerful  and  good  in  their 
places,  do  influence  and  spur  us,  we  may  be  stirred 
most  of  all,  and  '  labour  that  whether  present  or  absent 
we  may  be  well-pleasing  to  Thee.' 

We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  gathered  us  together 
this  morning,  and  whilst  we  are  conscious  of  the  many 


240  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

unfitnesses  in  our  wandering  minds  and  slothful  spirits, 
and  feel  how  hard  it  is  to  use  even  these  outward 
forms  which  Thou  hast  mercifully  appointed  whereby 
we  may  rise  to  Thee,  yet  beseeching  Thee  that  having 
given  us  the  means  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  employ 
them  to  the  end ;  and  pass,  by  aid  of  communion  with 
one  another,  and  the  outward  forms  of  worship,  into 
the  secret  silences  of  the  presence  of  the  Most  High, 
and  feel  that  we  are  with  Thee. 

We  pray  for  Thy  pardoning  mercy,  for  Thy  quickening 
and  cleansing  grace,  for  that  ennobling  and  emanci- 
pating spirit  which  Thou  hast  promised  to  all  them 
that  believingly  wait  upon  Thee ;  and  we  beseech  Thee 
that  more  and  more  all  of  us  may  be  conscious  of  a 
Power  mightier  than  ourselves,  and  holier  than  our 
hearts,  dwelling  within  us,  and  sanctifying  our  hearts. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us  as  we  come  to  Thee 
now,  to  forgive  all  our  shortcomings,  and  take  away 
anything  that  may  stand  in  the  way  of  our  full 
entrance  into  the  blessed  privilege  of  Thy  sanctuary. 
May  we  have  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  the 
Son,  through  the  Divine  Spirit.  Hear  us,  for  our  Lord 
Christ's  sake,  we  pray  Thee. 


CXXIII 

May  we,  O  Lord,  experience,  and  gladly  submit  to, 
that  mighty  working  whereby  Christ  is  able  to  subdue 
all  things,  even  our  wayward  and  rebellious  hearts, 
unto  Himself.  Help  us  that,  forgetting  the  things 
that  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  the  things 
that  are  before,  we  may  press  toward  the  mark ;  and 
as  our  souls  follow  hard  after  Thee  may  Thy  right 
hand    uphold    us,  and   may  we    know  ourselves   in- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  241 

creasingly  to  be  sustained  and   impelled,  as  well  as 
guided  or  directed  by  Thyself. 

Thus,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  be  near  us  for  all 
needful  acts  of  self- surrender  and  self-denial.  May 
our  estimate  of  things  be  plain  and  Christ-like,  and  so 
may  we  seek  the  best  things  first,  and  look  upon  all 
lesser  good  as  best,  by  reason  of  its  helping  us  to  the 
possession  of  our  true  treasure.  Strengthen  us,  we 
pray  Thee,  thus  to  handle  the  things  seen  and  temporal, 
so  that  not  only  we  may  not  finally  lose  but  may  daily, 
more  completely  possess,  the  things  that  are  unseen 
and  eternal. 

We  thank  Thee  for  this  morning's  opportunity  of 
drawing  near  to  Thee  thus,  and  blessing  Thee  that  our 
single  and  separate  weaknesses  gathered  together 
may  become  strengths  for  each  of  us.  We  pray  that 
Thou  wouldst  help  us  in  all  our  worship,  and  take 
away  anything  in  mind,  body,  or  estate,  which  may 
interfere  with  our  joyful  and  believing  worship  now. 
May  we  rise  to  communion  with  Thyself,  and  whatever 
there  may  be  in  our  lives,  in  our  characters,  in  our 
circumstances  which  might  mar  the  completeness  and 
the  peacef  ulness  of  our  speech  with  God,  and  of  His  to 
us,  may  these  things  be  all  swept  away.  Use  us  as 
Thy  vehicles  and  messengers;  and  grant,  O  Lord,  we 
pray  Thee,  that  none  of  us  may  turn  a  deaf  ear  to 
what  God  is  saying  to  our  souls  and  consciences. 

We  pray  for  one  another,  in  all  the  variety  of  our 
condition.  Comfort  the  sad  hearts  among  us.  Be 
very  near  to  those  who  may  be  lonely  and  cast  down. 
Breathe  Thy  grace  which  sustains  and  brings  gladness 
even  in  darkness  into  all  suffering,  troubled  souls. 
And  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  the  issue  of  every 
trial,  great    or    small,  which  we  meet  with  on  our 


242  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

earthly  course,  may  be  to  prepare  us  more  and  more 
for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  And  from 
all  of  them  may  we  hear  the  great  Voice  that  says 
•  Come  up  hither.'  We  thank  Thee  that  there  is 
changeless  blessedness  and  peace  and  power;  and  we 
beseech  Thee  that  we  may  not  live  down  here,  amongst 
the  troubles  and  the  cares  and  the  changes,  but  have 
our  lives  hid  with  Christ  in  God. 

O  Lord  !  bless  all  whom  we  should  remember  before 
Thee.  Specially  we  plead  that  Thou  wouldst  watch 
over  our  countrymen  in  peril  of  their  lives,  or  facing 
the  cruelties  of  heathen  lands.  We  ask  that  if  it  be 
Thy  will  Thou  wouldst  restrain  the  wrath  of  men,  that 
Thou  wouldst  make  the  remainder  thereof  to  praise 
Thee.  We  stand  silent  before  the  awful  sorrows  which 
riot  through  the  world  rampant,  and  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  give  us  grace  to  trust  in  the  dark- 
ness ;  and  that  Thou  wouldst,  in  Thine  own  time,  and 
in  such  measure  as  Thou  seest  to  be  best  for  Thy 
people,  show  us  some  gleams  of  light  in  the  darkness 
that  we  may  discern  at  least  the  beginnings  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  great  promise  that  the  kingdoms  of 
this  world  shall  be  the  Kingdom  of  our  God  and  of  His 
Christ. 

The  world  waits,  O  Lord,  and  Thy  saints  cry  to 
Thee.  Make  bare  Thine  arm  and  crush  the  evil.  Now 
we  pray  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  accept  us  in  Thy  mercy, 
and  to  grant  us  Thy  blessing  in  our  hour  of  service ; 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


CXXIV 

With  thankful  love,   O  Lord,  and   lowly  hearts  we 
would  come  into  Thy  presence,  and  bless  Thee  that  we 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  243 

can  do  so  with  confidence  and  children's  dispositions. 
Thou  art  our  Father,  though  we  have  been  but  pro- 
digal children.  Our  transgressions  are  many;  blessed 
be  Thy  name  !  Thy  mercies  are  more  than  they.  Our 
hearts  fail  us,  so  that  we  cannot  look  up ;  but  Thou 
hast  opened  our  eyes  to  see  how  much  stronger  Thou 
art  than  our  sin,  and  how  Thy  love  is  not  turned  away 
even  by  transgressions  multiplied  seventy  times  seven. 
And  so  we  would  put  away  all  our  fears  with  them, 
and  ask  Thee  not  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  the 
consciousness  of  our  unworthiness,  but  that  it  may  be 
deepened,  if  only  there  always  go  with  it,  and  triumph 
over  it,  the  assurance  of  Thy  continual  rescuing  and 
cleansing  life.  We  would  not  forget  our  sin.  It  is 
good  for  us  to  remember  it  for  warning,  for  humility, 
for  the  larger  and  more  wondering  apprehension  of 
Thy  great  mercy  which  persists  through  it  all.  We 
would  not  forget  our  sin,  but  we  pray  that  it  may 
never  come  between  us  and  Thee.  We  ask  that  we 
may  not  lose  consciousness  of  it,  and  so  sink  into 
foolish  self-complacency  or  stolid  indifference  as  to 
whether  we  are  right  or  wrong,  good  or  evil ;  but  we 
pray  that  it  may  never  haunt  and  harass,  but  may 
ever  pass  into  the  loving  contemplation  of  that  great 
mercy  which  blotteth  out  our  sins  as  a  cloud,  and 
as  a  thick  cloud  our  transgressions. 

Look  upon  us  this  morning,  O  Lord!  We  have 
brought  many  hindrances  along  with  us,  and  we  feel 
these  most  when  we  try  to  rise  toward  Thee.  But  we 
beseech  Thee  that  nothing  within  us,  and  nothing 
around  us,  may  draw  us  away  from  Thee,  or  impede 
our  rising  towards  Thee,  being  borne  up  by  faith  and 
love. 

Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  approach  Thee  now  with 


244  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

glad  and  grateful  hearts,  making  mention  of  Thy 
great  mercies  to  us,  and  wisely  including  in  the  list  of 
Thy  mercies  our  sorrows,  pains,  and  losses.  We  thank 
Thee  for  all  the  way  by  which  Thou  hast  led  us ;  surely 
the  div^erse  workings  of  Thy  hand  have  one  uniform 
purpose ;  and  through  summer  and  winter,  storm  and 
calm,  Thou  dost  seek  for  the  ripening  of  the  seed  of 
the  Kingdom  in  all  our  natures  and  characters. 

We  pray  that  we  may  estimate  our  daily  circum- 
stances as  Thou  dost  judge  them;  and  use  them  all,  of 
whatever  complexion  they  are,  for  the  one  purpose  for 
which  life  as  a  whole,  and  in  each  of  its  moments  and 
details,  is  given  to  us,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of 
Thy  holiness.  Deliver  us  thus,  we  pray  Thee,  O  Lord, 
keeping  in  view  the  supreme  end  for  which  we  are  here, 
from  many  short-sighted  murmurings  and  mournings, 
from  much  perplexed  wondering  at  Thy  dark  provi- 
dences, either  as  regards  ourselves  or  as  regards 
others;  and  help  us  to  live  in  the  sunshine  of  Thy  face, 
whatever  there  may  be  of  weather  round  about  us. 

We  pray  Thee  to  accept  our  thanks  for  all  Thy  great 
mercies  to  us  day  by  day.  We  pray  Thee  to  deepen  in 
us  the  consciousness  of  our  peaceful  dependence  upon 
Thee ;  and  of  our  strenuous  endeavour  to  please  Thee. 
May  we  carry  into  all  our  lives,  in  their  small  as  in 
their  great  moments,  the  sense  of  Thy  presence,  and 
the  wish  to  order  our  conversation  so  as  to  please 
Thee;  and  in  whatever  we  do  may  we  set  the  Lord 
always  before  us,  and  whatever  comes  may  we  not  be 
greatly  moved. 

We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  gathered  us  together 
this  morning  thus.  We  pray  for  Thy  gracious  pre- 
sence and  help  as  we  wait  before  Thee  now.  We  bring 
Thee  our  thanks  for   those   great  gifts   of  Thy  love 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  245 

which  this  day  brings  to  our  mind  ;  and  we  beseech 
Thee  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  the  power  of 
Christ's  Resurrection,  and  dying  indeed  unto  sin  may 
we  live  unto  God ;  and  being  raised  from  the  dead  with 
Him  may  'even  now  with  Him  sit  together  in  heavenly 
places  '  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  our  worship  ;  pardon  all 
our  shortcomings  and  sins  ;  accept  and  bless  us  as  we 
draw  near  to  Thee  now,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 


cxxv 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  given 
unto  us  all  things  that  pertain  unto  salvation  and 
godliness,  which  is  the  best  life.  We  beseech  Thee 
that  we  may  not  receive  the  gift  of  God  in  vain,  but 
giving  all  diligence  may  add  to  our  faith  whatsoever 
excellent  things  are  within  the  compass  of  humanity, 
and  so  be  made  fit  to  have  an  abundant  entrance 
ministered  unto  us  into  Thy  everlasting  kingdom  and 
glory. 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  day  by  day  to  labour  'that,  whether 
present  or  absent,  we  may  be  well  pleasing '  to  Thee, 
and  to  Thy  Son,  our  Lord.  Teach  us  all  the  things  in 
which  we  may  yet  be  deficient,  and  shew  us  where  we 
go  astray  from  Thy  commandments,  or  misunderstand 
Thy  will,  either  in  matters  of  opinion  or  of  action. 
Help  us  to  seek,  day  by  day,  honestly  and  earnestly,  to 
bring  into  our  daily  lives  all  which  we  know  of  Thy 
holy  will,  and  to  make  all  that  we  believe  the  guides  of 
all  that  we  do.  May  there  be  no  faith  in  us  which 
does  not  work.  May  there  be  no  works  in  us  which 
are  not  of  faith.    May  we  press  nearer  to  Jesus  Christ, 


246  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  in  the  depths  of  our  spirits  come  into  closer  union 
with  Him,  so  that  we  may  more  lovingly  divine  His 
will,  and  more  swiftly  apprehend  all  that  is  pleasing  in 
His  sight.  And  do  Thou  strengthen  our  weak  hands 
to  bring  into  practice  all  which  Thy  grace  teaches  us 
of  Thy  will,  Thy  nature,  and  our  duty. 

Help  us  in  our  worship  now ;  guide  us  when  we  speak 
some  poor  words  in  Thy  name.  May  they  have  the 
power  of  God  in  them,  whatever  else  they  may  lack ; 
and  do  Thou  grant  that  in  hearing  we  may  listen  as 
those  who  hear  God  speak,  and  may  have  grace  given 
us  to  discern  between  the  imperfections  of  the  human 
vehicle  and  the  perfectness  of  the  Word  that  it  brings. 

And  help  each  of  us,  when  we  go  hence,  to  carry 
with  us  in  our  hearts,  and  to  bring  to  bear  in  our  lives, 
to-morrow  and  thereafter,  the  lessons  of  Thy  word ; 
and  to  carry  out  the  resolutions  of  the  moment,  and 
true  to  the  impressions  that  may  be  made  upon  us. 
And  do  Thou  help  each  of  us,  in  all  the  variety  of  our 
present  condition.  Some  of  us  in  Thy  sight  are  sad 
and  weary,  lonely  and  perplexed,  suffering  in  the 
manifold  ways  in  which  Thy  wisdom  makes  men  feel 
pain  and  weariness  and  loss.  We  would  bless  Thee 
for  the  discipline,  and  beseech  Thee  that  we  may 
neither  faint  when  we  are  rebuked  of  Thee  nor  despise 
Thy  chastisements.  Give  us  grace  to  profit  by  all  that 
befalls  us,  and  a  happy  issue  out  of  all  our  troubles ; 
the  one  happy  issue  being  that  they  waft  us  nearer  to 
Thyself. 

Bless  all  Christian  people  this  day,  O  Lord,  who  are 
gathered  as  we  are  now  in  every  land,  in  every  name, 
in  every  church.  Wherever  there  are  hearts  that  feel 
after  Thee  and  love  Thee,  though  they  be  separated 
from  all  the  communions  of  Thy  people,  and  though 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  247 

they  may  be  encompassed  with  many  errors  and  dark- 
ness, we  beseech  Thee  to  be  near  such ;  and  guide  all 
seeking  souls  to  the  Light,  and  help  them  to  rejoice  in 
Thyself. 

We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  stretch  out  Thy  mighty 
arm,  and  subdue  the  tumults  of  the  nations.  Break 
the  axe  of  the  oppressor,  and  deliver  Thy  servants  in 
distant  lands  who  may  be  in  peril  of  their  lives  for  the 
Master's  sake.  Whatever  disasters  and  changes  sweep 
over  this  troubled  world  may  they  be  as  the  winter 
storms  that  proclaim  the  coming  of  the  spring,  and 
will  end  in  the  abundant  harvest. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  take  our  thoughts  and  words 
into  Thy  special  care  now.  Keep  us  from  marring  the 
glory  and  sublimity  of  Thy  great  word  by  our  inade- 
quate handling  of  it.  Draw  near  us,  bless,  and  f  orgi  ve 
for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


CXXVI 

Lord,  Thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in  all 
generations.  Help  us  !  that  we  may  indeed  abide  in 
the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and  so  ever  be  at 
rest,  and  safe  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty. 
We  would  make  Thee  our  refuge ;  we  would  flee  from 
ourselves,  from  vanity,  from  all  the  cares  and  sorrows, 
and  even  from  the  brightnesses  and  the  joys  of  this 
fleeting  show,  to  Thyself,  Who  art,  while  these  things 
only  seem  to  be. 

We  bless  Thee  for  the  unseen  and  eternal  dwelling- 
place  of  spirits ;  and  ask  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  not 
to  make  this  world,  or  anything  in  it  that  passeth 
away,  the  anchorage,  the  refuge,  the  home  of  our 
hearts.    Teach  us,  we  pray  Thee,  how  to  set  our  love 


248  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

upon  Thee,  and  then  fulfil  Thy  promise  of  delivering. 
Teach  us  how  to  know  Thy  Name  which  Thou  hast  so 
fully  made  known  to  us,  and  which  yet  we  are  so 
ignorant  of ;  and  then  do  Thou  fulfil  Thy  promise  of 
setting  us  by  that  knowledge  on  high  above  whatever 
can  pass  or  change  or  die.  May  we  be  Thine,  and  then, 
whatever  be  the  length  of  our  days,  we  shall  be 
satisfied  ;  and  whatever  else  Thou  mayest  hide  from  us 
Thou  wilt  show  us  Thy  salvation. 

We  come  to  Thee  now,  with  humble  thanksgivings 
for  Thy  manifold  mercies  to  us,  and  bless  and  praise 
Thee  for  all  Thy  good  gifts.  Truly  we  can  say  that  we 
are  ransomed  and  healed,  restored  and  forgiven ;  that 
our  inmost  hearts  may  melt  and  flow  forth  in  lives 
of  service,  of  blessed  communion,  of  ennobling  and 
emancipating  obedience  ;  and  that  we  may  glorify  God, 
the  Redeemer  and  Father  of  our  spirits.  For  all  Thy 
blessings  to  us  we  desire  to  praise  Thee,  and  beseech 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us,  now  and  here  in  Thy 
presence,  to  draw  ever  near  to  Thyself,  and  hold  true 
communion  with  Thee,  wherein  is  our  rest  and  peace. 
Cleanse  our  hearts  from  vanity,  turn  away  our  eyes 
from  beholding  folly.  Keep  our  hearts  from  all 
crooked  ways.  Help  us  to  walk  in  the  light,  as  Thou 
art  in  the  light,  and  so  walking  to  follow  and  come  to 
the  light. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  to  rest  upon  us 
gathered  here  this  morning.  We  thank  Thee  for  all 
the  mercies  and  good  gifts  which  some  of  us  have 
received,  in  many  years  gone  by,  in  this  place.  And 
now  that  Thou  hast  brought  us  together  again,  we  pray 
that  the  days  to  come  may  yet  be  more  fruitful  and 
blessed  than  the  days  that  are  past;  and  that  Thou 
wouldst  manifest  Thy  great  power  and  presence  with 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  249 

us,  whensoever  we  assemble  together  thus,  forgiving 
and  healing  and  quickening  all  that  is  good  in  us,  by 
our  gathering  together  with  one  accord  in  this  place. 
And  help  us  in  speaking  Thy  will,  and  in  hearing  Thy 
word. 

Accept  us  now,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  by  Thy 
mercy  upon  us,  for  our  hope  is  in  Thee,  and  Thy  mercy 
must  come  to  us,  and  our  hope  must  clasp  Thee, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CXXVII 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  we  come  to  Thee  remem- 
bering all  the  work  and  graciousness  of  Thy  Son  our 
Brother,  and  blessing  Thee  for  all  the  consolation  that 
steals  into  troubled  hearts,  and  for  all  the  truth  that  is 
infused  into  weak  spirits  when  we  remember,  in  the 
midst  of  our  temptations,  the  merciful  and  faithful 
High  Priest  Who  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are 
tempted.  May  we,  in  our  various  paths  of  life,  beset 
as  we  are  with  different  dangers  and  snares,  find 
the  one  solace  and  the  one  source  of  strength  more 
than  sufficient  for  all  our  need.  In  the  sign  of  Christ's 
Cross  may  we  conquer,  and  find  there  not  only  the 
ground  of  our  hope  but  the  pattern  of  our  lives. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  strengthen  and  bless  us,  day 
by  day,  and  to  enable  us,  with  increasing  certitude 
and  constancy,  to  lay  hold  upon  that  Lord  Who 
has  taken  our  nature,  and  has  become  one  of 
us,  that  we  may  become  like  unto  Him.  Go  with 
us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  Christ  Thy  Son  and  that 
comforting  communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which 
comes  from  Him,  with  each  of  us,  in  all  the  variety  of 
our  circumstances,  conditions,  temptations,  and  conse- 


250  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

quent  necessities.  We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  send 
none  of  us  a  warfare  at  our  own  charges.  We  thank 
Thee  for  the  strength  that  conies  in  obedience,  and  we 
pray  for  strength  for  obedience ;  and  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  be  lords  of  ourselves,  to 
govern  passions  and  inclinations  and  desires,  to  bring 
every  thought  into  subjection,  and  to  lay  our  whole 
selves,  with  all  that  we  have  and  desire  and  do,  upon 
Thine  altar.  Unworthy  we  are,  but  we  bless  Thee 
that  that  altar  sanctifies  the  giver  and  the  gift.  And 
we  pray  for  grace  to  live  iives  yielded  in  will  and  in 
heart  and  desire  and  thought  to  Thyself.  So  shall  we 
possess  ourselves.  We  beseech  Thee  that  it  may  be  so 
increasingly  with  every  one  of  us. 

And  now,  O  Lord,  we  desire  to  conimend  to  Thee 
others  who  are  in  our  hearts.  We  pray  for  all  the  sad 
and  the  sorrowful,  for  all  the  weary  and  the  solitary, 
for  any  amongst  us  who  may  be  bearing  the  burden  of 
suspense  and  fear,  or  who  may  have  had  suspense  and 
fear  resolved  into  settled  sadness  and  sure  loss. 

O  Lord !  draw  near  to  any  of  us  who  may,  in  any 
special  manner,  need  Thy  help,  and  that  Thou  wouldst 
be  with  all  Thy  people  who  may  be  in  weakness  and 
suffering  of  body  or  of  mind.  Thou  art  the  Physician, 
Thou  canst  heal.  We  commend  all  Thy  servants  on 
sick  beds,  and  those  that  are  watching  by  them,  to  Thy 
gracious  care. 

We  pray  for  our  Sovereign  and  our  country  at  this 
time.  Guide  the  thoughts  of  men,  and  the  counsels  of 
the  nations,  in  such  ways  as  may  most  speedily  and 
effectually  bring  about  that  Kingdom  in  which  alone 
the  unrest  and  the  perplexity  of  nations  shall  be 
guided  and  solved.  We  pray  especially  for  Thy 
missionary  servants  in  distant  lands,  in  peril  of  their 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  251 

lives.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  sustain  and  solace 
their  loved  ones  at  home,  who  may  have  been  called 
upon  to  part  with  dear  ones.  And  we  beseech  Thee 
that  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  may  be  the  seed  of  the 
Church,  and  that  all  these  perturbations  may  be  but 
as  the  shaking  of  the  things  that  are  made ;  that  the 
things  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain,  and  the 
kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved  may  emerge  from  the 
confusion  and  the  overthrow.  Hear  us  ;  grant  us  Thy 
blessing  as  we  worship  here  before  Thee,  and  accept 
and  answer  us,  in  Christ  our  Saviour. 


CXXVIII 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  praise,  for  surely 
Thou  art  willing  to  breathe  desires  into  our  hearts, 
and  to  quicken  in  us  all  that  which  is  ready  to  perish. 
We  would  turn  ourselves  to  Thee  this  morning,  and 
bless  Thee  that  in  the  midst  of  the  vocations  of  daily 
life,  and  all  the  struggles  and  perplexities  and  pressing 
difficulties  devolving  upon  us,  we  have  this  day  of  the 
Lord,  which  makes  it  easier  for  us,  even  by  the  weight 
of  outward  things,  to  rise  to  communion  with  Thyself. 
These  outward  things  are  so  often  against  us  that 
we  thank  Thee  if,  for  once  in  the  week,  they  are  for  us. 
And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  rightly  to 
use  the  associations  of  this  place  and  the  forms  of 
worship,  and  so  to  rise  beyond  these,  and  individually 
to  come  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High. 

Lord!  help  us  everywhere,  so  weak  that  the  very 
means  which  Thou  hast  mercifully  granted  and 
appointed,  by  which  sense  may  aid  spirit,  are  too  often 
made  by  us  the  end,  and  by  them  spirit  is  weakened 
instead  of  strengthened.    May  we  worship  Thee  to-day 


252  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

in  spirit,  whilst  we  do  so  in  form;  and  may  we  find 
that  the  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  that  call  upon  Him  in 
truth.  Thou  dost  open  Thine  hand,  and  dost  satisfy 
the  desires  of  every  living  thing.  Surely  Thou  wilt 
not  neglect  the  desires  of  living  souls  that  turn  to  Thee 
for  more  abundant  life. 

We  beseech  thee  to  help  us.  Truly  we  need  Thee, 
Lord !  We  need  Thee  to  give,  we  need  Thee  to  teach 
us  to  receive,  we  need  Thee  to  answer  and  to  inspire 
our  prayers.  And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us 
now,  giving  to  each  of  us  our  portion  of  that  spirit  of 
supplication  which  maketh  intercession  in  us  with 
unutterable  desires. 

O  Lord !  when  we  think  of  such  words,  and  then  are 
conscious  of  how  poor,  and  how  feeble,  and  how  much 
smaller  than  the  utterance  of  them  our  real  desires 
after  them  often  are,  we  do  not  wonder  that  we  get 
few  answers.  But  we  pray  Thee  to  help  us  this 
morning.  May  we  break  away  from  everything  that 
fetters ;  may  the  frost  of  our  hearts  be  melted  by  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness.  May  we  rise  above  the  things 
seen  and  temporal.  May  we  apprehend  our  true  good. 
May  we  covet  earnestly  the  best  things,  and  may  we 
find  that  none  who  ask  from  Thee  the  good  things 
which  Thou  knowest  to  be  for  our  good  are  ever  sent 
empty  away. 

Lord!  we  need  Thy  pardoning  and  Thy  cleansing 
power.  We  ask  and  we  hope,  in  some  measure  we 
desire,  that  our  lives  may  be  made  more  conformable 
to  the  example  of  our  Master,  and  our  inmost  selves  be 
brought  into  closer  union  with  Him  Who  is  the  very 
life  of  our  lives  and  the  self  of  ourselves.  To  us  may  it 
more  truly  than  ever  it  has  been  be  Christ  to  live.  And 
may  all  that  we  are  and  do  be  submitted  to  the  obed- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  253 

ience  of  Christ.  Help  us  in  our  daily  lives  to  fight  the 
good  fight  whatever  shape  it  may  take,  and  many  differ- 
ent shapes  it  does  take  in  our  different  lives.  Arm  us 
against  our  temptations.  Make  us  clear-sighted  to  know 
what  they  are.  Show  us  the  things  wherein,  by  nature 
or  by  circumstances,  or  indulged  habits,  we  have  become 
weakest.  And  do  Thou  build  us  the  ruined  walls,  and 
help  us  to  resist  successfully.  Enlighten  us  as  to  duty. 
May  we  see  higher  heights  than  we  have  ever  seen. 
May  we  not  shrink  from  climbing  to  any  heights  we 
see.  May  our  consciences  be  made  sensitive  and  swift 
and  sure,  and  help  us  implicitly  to  follow.  May  we  not 
condemn  ourselves  in  anything  that  we  allow  ourselves. 
May  we  be  taught  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  may  that 
ever  be  our  law. 

We  pray  Thee  to  come  near  to  us  this  morning,  to 
help  and  bless  us  in  our  worship,  to  accept  our  thanks, 
and  to  continue  to  us  such  outward  blessings  as 
Thou  knowest  to  be  for  our  highest  good.  Make  us 
willing  to  accept  Thy  will  in  regard  to  all  outward 
things,  the  smaller,  and  in  regard  to  all  great  and 
eternal  things.  Be  Thy  mercy  upon  us,  according  as 
our  hope  is  in  Thee.  And  make  our  hope  greater  and 
more  assured  and  more  firm,  because  Thou  dost  put 
our  poor  expectations  to  shame  by  the  wealth  of  Thy 
answers.  We  pray  Thee  to  hear,  accept,  and  bless  us, 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


CXXIX 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  to  draw  near  with  true  hearts,  and 
in  full  assurance  of  faith.  Cleanse  us  with  the  pure 
water  of  Thy  ever-flowing  Spirit  that  our  spirits  may 
be  purged  from  all  evil.    We  know  that  it  is  '  a  fearful 


254  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.'  We 
thank  Thee  that  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  commit  our 
spirits  into  Thy  hands.  And  we  would  do  so  remem- 
bering that  Thou  dost  redeem  us,  and  that  Thou  art 
the  Lord  God  of  truth. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  all  of  us  here  this  morning  may- 
find  the  blessedness  of  putting  ourselves,  by  the  sub- 
mission of  our  wills  and  the  outgoings  of  our  desires, 
into  Thy  gracious  hands.  Do  Thou  come  to  us  as 
we  may  severally  require,  in  the  manifoldness  of  Thy 
grea't  gifts,  and  bestow  upon  each  of  us  that  which 
we  most  need  for  the  life  of  godliness.  We  thank 
Thee  that  however  often  and  sorely  we  may  err  in 
the  presentation  of  our  necessities  to  Thee,  Thou 
knowest  Thy  thoughts  to  usward  which  are  for  good 
and  not  for  evil.  And  we  would  leave  ourselves  in 
Thy  hands,  and  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  bestow  upon 
us  what  we  most  need,  whether  it  is  what  we  most 
desire  or  no.  Love  and  care  for  each  of  us.  Lord! 
Give  us  Thyself,  give  us  purer  hearts,  loftier  desires, 
clearer  insight  into  duty,  more  resolute  purpose  to 
perform  it.  Help  us  to  live  as  Christ's  followers  and 
like  our  Master,  and  to  follow  the  Lamb  that  was  slain 
whithersoever  He  goeth. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  now;  forgive 
the  imperfections  of  heart  and  mind.  May  we  feel 
that  the  bonds  of  earth  are  somewhat  slackened;  that 
we  may  see  the  things  which  are,  and  the  things  which 
only  appear,  in  truer  proportion.  We  thank  Thee 
that  by  these  gatherings  we  are  helped  to  set  right  our 
motions  as  to  the  relative  importance  of  the  present  and 
the  future,  of  the  outward  and  the  inward.  We  ask  Thee 
to  bless  us  with  some  illumination  of  spirit  this  morning, 
by  which  we  shall  discern  the  things  that  differ,  and 
see  the  unseen  and  eternal  in  its  magnitude  and  glory. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  255 

Bless  each  of  us  in  all  the  variety  of  Thy  provi- 
dences with  us  and  our  characters  and  needs.  Draw 
near  to  each  heart,  for  Thou  canst  shape  Thy  message 
and  Thy  gifts  so  as  to  be  that  which  each  of  us 
most  requires ;  comfort  where  consolation  is  needed, 
enlightenment  where  illumination  is  sought,  strength 
to  obey  and  to  run  where  weakness  is  felt,  and  for  each 
of  us  the  gift  which  is  all  gifts,  the  gift  of  Thy  Holy 
Spirit  and  of  Thy  dear  Son.  We  pray  Thee  to  draw 
near,  to  forgive,  and  answer  us,  through  Christ  our 
Saviour-Lord. 


cxxx 

O  Lord!  we  thank  Thee  that  whilst  we  bow  before 
Thy  majesty  we  can  think  of  Thy  love.  We  thank  Thee 
that  we  have  learnt,  may  we  never  forget  the  lesson, 
that  the  Throne  of  God  is  the  Throne  of  grace.  Surely 
Thou  dost  delight  to  give ;  surely  Thou  dost  delight  to 
forgive.  Surely  Thy  joy  is  in  bending  down  to  our 
lowliness  and  replenishing  our  emptiness,  and  cleans- 
ing our  sinfulness  and  helping  our  helplessness. 
Strengthen  us  now  to  lift  up  the  empty  hands  which 
Thou  dost  delight  to  fill,  and  to  open  the  hearts  which 
Thou  dost  delight  to  enter.  Blessed  be  Thy  Name  ! 
Thou  art  first  in  all  things.  Thou  givest  before  we  ask, 
and  whilst  we  are  yet  speaking  Thou  dost  hear.  May 
the  instantaneous  answer  of  peace,  and  of  felt  truth, 
and  loosening  of  the  bonds  of  earth,  come  to  each  of  us 
now.  So  may  we  be  taught  to  accept  greater  things 
from  God,  and  to  pray  with  a  firmer  belief  in  the 
power  of  the  answers  of  prayer. 

We  lift  up  our  hearts  to  Thee  now,  O  Lord,  in  humble 
thanksgiving.  Truly  we  have  to  praise  Thy  Name 
which  alone  is  excellent.  Thy  glory  above  the  united 


256  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

praises  of  Heaven  and  earth.  We  draw  near  to  Thee 
and  rejoice  that  we  too  can  claim  that  through  Jesus 
Christ  we  are  brought  nigh  unto  God.  May  we  all  find 
it  so.  And  whatever  may  be  the  hindrances  of  our 
circumstances,  or  in  our  own  weak  hearts,  of  fellowship 
with  Thyself,  may  all  these  hindrances  be  overcome, 
and  for  each  of  us  this  be  what  Thou  dost  intend  it  to 
be,  an  hour  of  true  fellowship  with  God,  when  we  shall 
be,  in  some  measure,  emancipated  from  the  bonds  of 
daily  life,  and  lifted  nearer  to  the  Source  of  our  true 
life. 

We  pray  for  Thy  help,  for  Thy  teaching,  for  the 
communication,  through  these  outward  services,  of  the 
greatest  gifts  of  Thy  love  and  spirit.  May  none  of  us 
draw  near  to  Thee  only  in  outward  form,  or  thinking 
that  we  shall  be  heard  for  our  much  speaking,  or  caring 
not  whether  we  are  heard  at  all.  But  may  we  all,  even 
here  in  our  united  aspect,  enter  into  our  closet,  and  shut 
to  the  door,  and  pray  to  our  Father  in  secret.  We  bless 
Thee  that  both  things  may  be  true,  that  our  worship 
now  may  be  the  gathered  worship  of  Thy  people,  and 
the  solitary  flight  of  the  single  soul  to  the  alone  God. 
Strengthen  us  for  the  reception  of  Thy  gifts,  which 
Thou  art  more  willing  to  bestow  than  we  are  to  receive, 
and  for  the  discharge  of  all  the  duties  which  Thy  loving 
hand  lays  upon  us.  In  Thy  great  mercy  forgive  and 
answer  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


CXXXI 

O  Lord  our  Father,  we  draw  near  through  that  great 
High  Priest  Who  is  passed  into  the  Heavens,  in  Whom 
we  'have  boldness,  and  access  with  confidence'  by 
faith  of  Him.    And  we  beseech  Thee  that  the  promise 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  257 

of  the  Father  may  indeed  clothe  us  with  power,  so 
that  by  our  lives,  as  well  as  by  our  words,  we  may  be 
witnesses  for  Jesus  Christ. 

We  thank  Thee  for  the  great  gift  promised  to  our 
weakness ;  may  we  all  more  and  more  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  may  we  all  more  and  more  find  a 
mighty  power  working  within  our  weakness,  and 
fitting  us  for  all  our  work,  and  for  all  Thy  grace.  May 
we  have  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry  Abba ! 
Father !  May  we  have  the  Spirit  of  power  and  of  love, 
and  of  a  sound  mind.  May  we  have  the  Spirit  of 
supplication,  and  the  Spirit  of  holiness.  And  may  we 
so  live  as  neither  to  grieve  nor  quench  that  Divine 
Spirit,  but  by  the  power  that  works  in  us  may  we  be 
made  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death. 

We  thank  Thee  for  any  illumination  as  to  Thy  word, 
for  any  quickening  in  the  Divine  life,  for  any  stimulus 
to  service,  for  any  strengthening  of  feeble  faith  and 
kindling  of  dying  love  which  any  of  us  have  ever 
experienced  in  our  worship  here.  Thou  hast  been 
gracious  in  many  days  that  are  past.  Be  with  us  still, 
O  Lord !  and  give  us  some  message  from  Thyself  which 
shall  bear  its  own  credentials,  and  be  winged  with  its 
own  Divine  power,  and  so  find  its  way  to  minds  and 
hearts  and  wills,  and  issue  out  in  noble  service  in  our 
daily  lives.  Succour  and  comfort  any  weary  and  sad 
souls  among  us,  and  be  near  those  who  walk  in  dark- 
ness. Surely  the  darkness  is  blessed  and  soothing  when 
Thy  presence  is  felt  in  it,  and  thou  dost  make  the  dark- 
ness light  above  us.  Both  are  alike  to  Thee ;  they 
cannot  be  alike  to  us,  but  they  may  each  have  their 
own  messages  and  their  own  blessings.  May  we  learn 
to  make  the  highest  use  of  joy  and  of  sorrow,  night 
and  morning,  winter  and  sunshine. 


258  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Be  near  any  who  may  have  special  tasks  and  heavy 
burdens  that  seem  to  pass  their  strength  to  carry. 
Thou  dost  never  bid  us  do  anything  which  Thou  dost 
not  fit  us  to  be.  Give  the  fitness,  and  then  shew  the 
duty.  'Give  what  Thou  commandest,  and  command 
what  Thou  wilt.' 

Forgive  our  many  evils;  grant  us  Thy  help  and 
presence  in  this  hour  of  worship.  Hear  us;  in  the 
Name  of  Christ  our  Lord  we  ask  it. 


CXXXII 

Gladly,  O  Lord,  would  we  answer  Thy  merciful  call 
to  seek  Thy  face,  and  humbly  do  we  ask  Thee  not  to 
hide  Thy  face  from  us.  Surely  Thou  hast  never  said 
to  any,  '  Seek  ye  My  face  in  vain.'  Surely  Thy  love 
streams  forth  to  meet  us,  before  ours  is  kindled  to 
respond  to  Thine.  Thou  dost  draw  near  ere  we  draw 
near.  Help  us  to  yield  ourselves  now,  by  thought  and 
desire,  and  submission  and  confidence,  to  the  drawings 
of  Thine  own  Revelation  of  Thyself.  May  the  light  of 
Thy  countenance  ever  shine  into  our  hearts,  so  that 
we,  in  the  possession  of  the  perfect  bliss  which  Thou 
only  canst  give,  may,  with  fixed  purpose,  make  Thee 
the  strength  of  our  hearts  and  our  portion  for  ever. 

We  bless  Thee  that  amidst  all  this  fleeting  good  Thou 
dost  manifest  Thyself  to  them  who  desire  Thee  as  the 
eternal  Refuge.  We  thank  Thee  that  we  need  not  be 
condemned  to  be  ever  buffeted  about  from  one  tran- 
sient scene  to  another,  but  may  enter  into  the  calm 
blessedness  of  those  who  have  an  unchanging  portion, 
having  chosen  that  good  thing  which  shall  not  be 
taken  away  from  them. 

We  come  to  Thee  with  humble  thanksgivings  for  Thy 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  259 

great  mercies  which  have  flowed  in  upon  our  lives  in 
one  unbroken  stream.  Help  us  to  be  so  near  to  Thee 
that  we  may  declare  with  thankfulness  all  Thy  works, 
and  bless  Thee  for  all  the  way  by  which  Thou  hast  led 
us.  We  would  rise  to  the  height  of  thanking  Thee  for 
disappointments  and  losses  and  sorrows.  Surely  Thou 
art  training  us  for  the  rest  that  remains  ;  surely  Thou 
art  preparing  us  for  service  in  a  better  land.  Help  us 
not  to  cast  away  any  of  Thy  precious  lessons,  nor  to 
let  any  of  the  changing  events  of  life  pass  us  by 
without  leaving  us  better  than  they  found  us,  and  so 
discharging  the  purpose  for  which  Thou  hast  sent 
them.  May  we  be  disciplined  by  Thine  hand.  May  we 
yield  ourselves  to  Thy  working.  May  we  rejoice  in  all 
which  Thou  dost  appoint,  whether  it  come  to  us  in  the 
shape  of  duties  enjoined  or  of  patient  endurance  pre- 
scribed ;  may  we  be  ready  for  all  Thy  holy  will,  and  find 
that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  us,  because 
we  love  God. 

We  draw  near  to  Thee  feeling  how  unworthy  we  are 
to  draw  near,  or  to  receive  the  blessings  which  come 
to  us  so  abundantly.  Lowly  before  Thee  would  we 
confess  the  faults  of  life  and  character,  and  pray  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  let  the  candle  of  the  Lord  shine  into, 
and  search  the  depths  of,  our  spirits,  and  all  the  hidden 
recesses  of  which  we  ourselves  know  so  little.  Keep 
Thou  us  from  secret  faults.  Help  us  to  treasure 
nothing  within  us  that  is  contrary  to  Thy  will.  May 
we  make  conscience  of  careful  study  of  our  own  selves, 
in  order  that  we  may  find  the  hidden  things  of 
darkness,  and  may  drag  them  to  the  light  that  it  may 
overcome  them. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  as  we  are  here  this 
morning,  praising  Thee  for  all  Thy  past  mercies  to  us, 


260  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  for  all  the  associations  and  memories  which  some 
of  us  have  of  days  gone  by  in  this  service.  Give  each 
of  us  here  some  consciousness  of  Thy  blessed  nearness, 
some  vision  of  Thy  love  that  shall  lead  us  to  loftier 
desires  ;  and  more  resolute  determinations  to  live,  in 
time  to  come,  soberly,  righteously,  godly.  Draw  near 
to  us  according  to  Thy  gracious  promises  to  them  that 
draw  near  to  Thee ;  free  us  from  the  bonds  of  common- 
place and  ordinary  use  and  wont,  and  help  us  to  feel 
that  it  is  good  for  us  to  draw  nigh  unto  God.  Hear  us, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour-Lord. 


CXXXIII 

O  Lord,  our  merciful  Father,  Who  knowest  all  our 
hearts,  and  seest  our  desires,  and  understandest  our 
needs  far  better  than  we  do.  We  beseech  Thee  most 
chiefly  for  hearts  docile  to  Thy  guidance,  and  willing  to 
accept  Thy  will  however  it  manifests  itself  in  our  daily 
providences.  Deliver  us  from  the  pain  and  weariness 
of  self- cherished  and  kindled  desires,  and  teach  us  more 
and  more  to  keep  our  wishes  within  the  limits  of  Thy 
purposes,  and  to  covet  earnestly  the  best  things,  con- 
cerning which  we  are  sure  that  Thou  wilt  satisfy  our 
desires. 

O  Lord !  we  come  from  many  different  circumstances 
and  spheres  of  duty,  where  Thou  dost  wisely  appoint 
for  us  our  various  forms  of  service  and  of  trial.  May 
these  be  so  far  present  to  our  minds  as  to  make  us  very 
earnest  in  our  approach  to  Thee,  and  never  disturb  our 
communion  with  Thee  in  this  hallowed  hour.  May  we 
forget  them  for  a  little  in  order  that  we  may  go  forth 
and  act  in  them  the  more  bravely,  the  more  wisely,  and 
the  more  like  our  Master. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  261 

Help  us  to  bring  all  our  thoughts  into  the  obedience 
of  Christ,  and  to  regulate  the  smallest  of  our  doings 
by  the  greatest  of  principles.  Lead  us  by  Thy  counsel, 
O  Lord,  and  fit  us  for  all  Thy  will.  Help  us  to  use  the 
things  temporal  as  means  whereby  we  may  more  surely 
and  abundantly  possess  the  things  unseen  and  eternal. 
Give  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  the  midst  of  life  and  its  pass- 
ing circumstances  and  events,  the  assured  conscious- 
ness of  Thy  presence.  O  Lord  !  teach  us  how  to  speak 
a  word  in  Thy  Name  this  morning.  Guide  us  in  all 
our  handling  of  Thy  word.  Let  the  message  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  love  be  glorified  on  our  lips ;  and  may 
we  hearing  receive  into  honest  and  good  hearts  the 
good  seed,  cherishing  it  there  that  it  may  bring  forth  a 
hundredfold. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  be  very  near  any  of  us  who  may 
seem  to  ourselves  to  have  special  need  of  Thy  guidance 
and  help.  Comfort  all  that  are  sad  ;  be  the  Friend  and 
Companion  of  all  solitary  souls ;  counsel  those  who  are 
perplexed  in  purpose,  or  who  are  looking  back  to 
vanished  joys,  or  forward  to  anticipated  sorrows. 
Grant  that  each  of  us  may  find  Thy  grace  taking  the 
shape  of  our  momentary  necessities,  and  that  the 
Lord  supplies  all  our  need  according  to  His  infinite 
riches. 

We  commend  to  Thee  our  Sovereign,  our  country,  all 
rulers  and  persons  of  authority  and  influence  in  this 
land.  Be  with  all  who  guide  opinion,  all  teachers  in 
colleges  and  schools  and  places  of  learning,  all  who 
wield  the  power  of  the  pen  and  the  press,  all  those  who 
shape  the  counsels  of  the  nations.  We  pray  Thee  to 
bring  peace  in  our  time.  Lead  the  peoples  into  the 
obedience  of  Christ,  and  set  up  His  Kingdom  in  all  the 
dark  places  of  the  earth  ;  and  make  this  land  of  ours 


262  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

more  and  more  in  reality  what  it  has  so  long  been  in 
name,  a  Christian  country. 

We  pray  for  Thy  blessing  as  we  draw  near ;  forgive 
our  many  sins,  and  bless  us  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

CXXXIV 

Thou  hast  said.  Seek  ye  My  face;  our  hearts  would 
say  unto  Thee,  Thy  face,  Lord,  will  we  seek.  Hide  not 
Thy  face  far  from  us.  May  we  all  find  this  morning 
the  light  of  Thy  countenance  as  our  illumination,  and 
the  sweet  strength  of  Thy  presence  our  power  and 
peace.  May  we  each,  whatever  the  homes  and  the  cir- 
cumstances from  which  we  have  come,  draw  near  in 
very  deed  to  Thee,  and  find  that  it  is  blessed  to  long 
after  Thee ;  almost  as  blessed  as  to  possess  Thee. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  gracious  help  and  presence 
in  to-day's  worship  ;  and  with  thankfulness  for  Thy 
goodness  to  us,  and  for  the  unspeakable  gift  of  which 
this  day  speaks,  we  present  our  petitions,  and  crave 
Thy  help  and  blessing,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  risen 
Lord. 

CXXXV 

O  Lord!  we  thank  Thee  for  the  gospel  of  peace,  of 
peace  with  Thee,  with  ourselves,  with  all  Thy  pro- 
vidence, and  with  the  whole  world.  May  Thy  peace 
guard  and  abide  in  all  our  hearts.  Help  us  to  come 
very  near  to  Thee,  in  thought  and  desire,  in  faith  and 
submission.  Thou  hast  given  great  blessings  to  them 
whose  wills  are  bowed  to  Thine,  and  whose  prayers  are 
the  expression  of  their  submissive  will. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  our  prayers  may  be  sweet 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  263 

indeed,  because  Thou  dost  give  the  spirit  by  which 
we  pray ;  and  that  all  our  desires,  being  spoken 
to  Thee,  may  be  purged  and  elevated.  We  confess, 
O  Lord,  that  we  have  often  wandered  from  the 
highest  good,  and  have  chased  after  vanities,  and 
become  vain  like  the  things  that  we  pursue.  We 
thank  Thee  for  the  test  of  prayer  whereby  we  may 
discern  the  wrongness  of  many  of  our  wishes,  and  be 
delivered  from  the  feverishness  of  hot  and  earthly 
desires,  and  brought  into  the  sanity  of  longing  most 
for  what  we  are  quite  sure  that  it  is  Thy  will  to  get 
us. 

Lord  !  we  need  Thee  above  all  else ;  we  need  Thy 
love.  Thy  strength,  Thy  righteousness.  We  bless  Thee 
that  righteousness  and  strength  and  love  are  all 
treasured  for  us  boundlessly  in  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour.  Possessing  Him  we  may  be  filled  with  all  the 
fulness  of  God.  Thou  hast  taught  us  to  open  wide  our 
mouths  when  Thou  hast  taught  us  such  a  prayer.  May 
it  be  the  deepest  desire  of  each  of  us,  and  may  we  be 
delivered  from  all  that  would  draw  us  away  from 
Thee,  and  preserve  us  from  setting  our  hearts  upon  the 
things  that  are  not.  May  all  our  true  desires  and  joys, 
and  our  true  possessions  and  experienced  wealth,  be 
in  the  things  that  are,  and  which  can  never  be  taken 
from  us. 

Lord !  we  come  to  Thee  with  humble  petitions  that 
Thou  wouldst  deliver  us  from  any  faults  of  character, 
and  wouldst  reveal  to  us  the  points  wherein  we  are 
contrary  to  Thy  holy  will.  We  know  that  with  us  all 
there  are  many  evil  things  of  which  we  are  not  aware, 
and  we  pray  the  ancient  prayer  that  Thou  wouldst 
deliver  us  from  secret  faults.  May  we  never  shrink 
from  the  light  which  Thou  dost  bring  to  bear,  that  the 


264  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

candle  of  the  Lord  may  search  our  inmost  parts.  May 
we  be  glad  when  the  hidden  evil  is  brought  to  light, 
and  allow  ourselves  in  nothing,  great  or  small,  habitual 
or  occasional,  which  we  do  not  know  to  be  in  accord- 
ance with  Thy  holy  will.  Help  us  to  be  our  own 
most  rigid  judges,  and  to  be  ever  charitable  to  one 
another. 

We  pray  for  Thy  pardoning  mercy,  O  Lord,  and,  if  it 
might  be,  we  would  pray  still  more  for  Thy  cleansing 
mercy,  that  we  may  be  purged  from  all  our  evil,  and 
made  without  spot  and  blameless,  even  in  Thy  sight. 
Give  each  of  us  the  help  that  we  most  need  for  various 
duties  and  sorrows,  and  for  all  the  discipline  of  life. 
Help  us  that  we  may  never  petulantly  put  away  Thy 
hand,  nor  negligently  forget  Thy  power.  May  we  carry 
Thee  into  every  corner  of  our  lives,  and  all  that  we  do 
be  done  as  for  Thee,  and  as  by  Thee.  May  we  walk 
before  Thee  and  be  perfect ;  may  we  walk  with  Thee 
and  be  at  rest.  May  we  walk  after  Thee,  and  do  Thou 
guide  us  by  Thy  counsel. 

We  bless  Thee  that  we  can  be  sure  of  the  loving  pur- 
pose of  all  that  annoys  and  distresses  and  perplexes. 
O  Lord  !  may  our  faith  not  fail  when  we  need  it  most. 
May  it  not  only  be  in  the  easy  days  that  we  say,  '  It  is 
the  Lord  ;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good.'  But 
may  that  saying  be  our  voice  in  the  darkness  and  the 
storm,  and  may  all  our  sorrows  and  trials  be  precious 
to  us— the  root  and  the  buds  that  shall  produce 'the 
peaceable  fruit.' 

Give  us  Thy  blessing  as  we  are  gathered  in  Thy 
presence  now.  Lead  and  guide  us  in  all  our  thoughts 
and  meditations.  Give  us  a  word  to  speak  from  Thy- 
self, and  may  all  our  hearts  be  prepared  to  hear,  not 
what  man  says,  but  what  God  says  to  us.    And  we  pray 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  265 

that  Thy  good  Spirit  may  come  down  upon  this  con- 
gregation; and  we  ask  that  the  abundance  of  Thy 
gracious  influences  may  be  poured  out  so  that  this  may 
be  a  living  church,  from  whom  the  word  of  the  Lord 
sounds  out,  by  lip  and  by  life. 

With  like  blessings,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee  to 
visit  all  Christian  people  and  communities  of  all  names, 
and  in  all  lands,  and  to  grant  that  Thy  servants  at 
home  and  abroad  may  more  and  more  lay  to  heart  the 
solemn  responsibilities  that  devolve  upon  God's  wit- 
nesses. Spread  abroad  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ. 
May  the  world  know  Him  that  died  for  it.  May  the 
world  bow  to  Him  that  lives  to  rule  and  bless  it. 
Prosper  the  work  of  all  our  missionaries  and  missionary 
societies.  In  those  days  of  distress  and  tribulation 
may  Thy  servants'  faith  be  strong,  and  do  Thou  give 
patience  to  them  who  are  called  upon  to  endure. 

"We  thank  Thee,  not  for  the  martyrdoms,  but  for  the 
martyrs'  crowns.  We  beseech  Thee  that  once  more  the 
blood  shed  may  be  the  seed  of  the  Church.  We  com- 
mend ourselves,  all  whom  we  love,  all  Christian  folk, 
to  Thy  gracious  care.  We  pray  that  Thou  wouldst 
bless  our  Sovereign,  our  rulers,  all  persons  of  influence 
and  authority  in  this  land  who  help  to  mould  opinion 
and  direct  action,  all  writers  and  teachers  and  pro- 
fessors and  students  in  colleges  and  places  of  learning. 
We  thank  Thee  that  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  may  be 
exalted  in  the  world ;  and  the  infinite  treasures  of 
knowledge,  and  the  wisdom  and  blessing  which  are 
shrined  in  Him,  may  be  possessed  and  enjoyed  by 
mankind. 

Hear  us  in  our  prayer ;  be  near  us  now,  we  beseech 
Thee ;  forgive  our  sins,  and  accept  and  bless  us, 
through  Christ  our  Saviour. 


266  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

CXXXVI 

O  Lord,  Whose  last  best  name  is  Love,  we  come  to 
Thee  in  the  strength  of  that  Name,  and  laying  hold  on 
Him  in  Whom  Thou  hast  spoken  it  for  ever  to  all  souls 
Thy  gentleness  hath  made  us  great.  And  we  thank 
Thee  for  all  which  Thou  hast  lavished  upon  us,  both  of 
the  gifts  that  perish  with  the  using  and  are  renewed 
day  by  day,  and  of  the  better  gift  which  grows  as 
used,  and  is  new  every  morning. 

We  bless  Thee  for  that  Saviour  Who  does  not  break 
the  bruised  reed,  and  for  all  His  healing  and  restoring 
power.  We  bless  Thee  for  Him  Who  does  not  quench 
the  smoking  flax,  for  all  His  quickening  and  enkindling 
power.  And  we  pray  that  our  weaknesses,  our  wounds 
in  character  and  nature,  may  indeed  be  bound  up ;  and 
that  our  faint  and  feeble  sparks  of  anything  better 
may  be  cherished  into  a  bright  flame  that  shall 
illuminate  our  own  lives,  and  bear  witness  of  the 
uncreated  Light  to  many  around  us. 

We  draw  near  to  Thee  now,  O  Lord,  with  lowly 
thanksgiving  for  all  Thy  great  benefits,  and  pray  for 
enlightened  eyes  and  retentive  memories  and  grateful 
hearts  for  the  smallest  of  Thy  gifts ;  for  the  smallest 
gift  does  mean,  when  bestowed  upon  us,  the  most 
wondrous  grace.  We  thank  Thee  for  Thy  daily 
benefits ;  for  all  the  gifts  of  Thy  hand,  of  Thy  provid- 
ence ;  for  Thy  commandments ;  for  the  path  of  duty 
which  Thou  dost  mark  out  for  us ;  and  for  all  the  helps 
so  abundantly  given,  and  yet  more  abundantly  offered, 
to  run  in  the  way  of  Thy  commandments  with  enlarged 
hearts  and  nimble  feet.  And  whilst  we  think  of  all 
Thy  daily  benefits,  we  would  ask  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  us  more  faithfully,  and  with  more  con- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  267 

tinuous  and  conscious  reference  to  Thee,  and  meet  all 
our  circumstances  and  undertake  all  our  duties,  and 
realise  ever,  in  the  midst  of  conflict  and  toil,  '  the  rest 
that  remaineth,'  and  the  peace  that  is  granted  to  the 
people  of  God. 

Go  with  us  day  by  day,  in  all  the  variety  of  our 
callings,  and  according  to  the  diversity  of  our  tempta- 
tions and  circumstances.  By  means  of  these  changing 
and  fleeting  events  may  we  be  led  to  a  fuller  possession 
of  the  unchanging  and  eternal  good,  the  only  good  for 
our  spirits.  Cleanse  our  hearts  from  all  their  evil,  cast 
out  from  our  minds  all  our  errors  and  delusions,  reveal 
more  clearly  the  points  in  which  we  are  defective  and 
the  things  which  we  think  wrong,  and  do  wrong  ;  and 
help  us  to  be  honest  with  ourselves,  and  being  our  own 
most  rigid  judges,  to  be  ready  to  pluck  out  the  right 
eye  if  we  know  that  it  offends,  and  to  cast  aside  every 
weight,  and  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  us.  And 
may  our  meditations  this  morning,  and  our  unspoken 
resolves,  the  glimpses  of  a  better  light  into  the  true 
realities  which  we  may  have  here,  work  within  us  last- 
ing betterment. 

Draw  near  now,  O  Lord ;  speak  to  us  that  we  may 
speak  to  one  another;  and  may  the  words  of  our 
mouths,  and  the  meditations  of  our  hearts,  be  accept- 
able in  Thy  sight,  O  Lord,  our  Strength  and  our 
Redeemer. 


CXXXVII 

O  Lord  !  surely  Thou  hast  called  upon  each  of  us  to 
work  for  Thee.  May  we  never  set  our  hands  to  the 
plough  and  look  back,  and  so  be  unfit  for  the  Kingdom. 
Strengthen  us  to  discern  Thy  call,  of  whatever  kind  it 


268  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

may  be,  and  by  whatever  way  it  may  be  made  known 
unto  us.  And,  O  Lord,  we  would  ask  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  help  us,  without  reluctance  or  hanging  back, 
either  in  mind  or  in  act,  to  obey  and  be  Thy  faithful 
servants. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  sendest  no  man  a 
warfare  at  his  own  charges,  and  dost  never  lay  upon 
us  any  duties  for  which  Thou  dost  not  fit  us.  Give 
what  Thou  commandest,  and  command  what  Thou 
wilt.  And  help  us  with  glad  hearts,  whatever  is 
manifestly  our  duty  to  embrace,  and  however  Thy  call 
comes,  to  answer,  '  Here  am  I,  send  me  ! '  May  all  Thy 
servants  be  more  conscious  of  Thy  mission  for  them, 
and  be  less  concerned  to  make  a  way  for  themselves 
than  to  find  the  way  our  God  has  made  for  us. 

We  thank  Thee  for  the  opportunity  of  thus  uniting 
together  again.  Sweet  and  sacred  memories  gather 
around  us  here  ;  still  be  near  and  shed  Thy  blessing 
upon  us ;  may  our  drawing  near  be  very  childlike  and 
real,  and  our  going  hence  be  accompanied  with  some 
new  force  in  our  convictions,  and  some  new  sanctifying 
and  elevating  influence  in  our  lives.  May  the  blessing 
of  God  rest  upon  each  of  us,  according  to  our  different 
callings  and  needs.  Thy  providences  vary.  Thy  pur- 
poses remain  the  same.  Thy  grace  is  sufficient  for  all 
our  need,  and  we  pray  for  one  another  in  the  sure 
confidence  that  in  Thy  great  storehouse  each  may  find 
just  what  we  require.  Thou  knowest  our  circum- 
stances and  our  characters. 

Draw  near  to  any  that  have  any  special  necessity, 
whether  we  may  need  it  or  not.  If  there  be  burdened 
hearts  here,  the  Lord  be  near  to  bear  the  burden  for 
them.  We  thank  Thee  that  the  loads  which  Thou  dost 
lay  upon  us  can  carry  those  who  have  to  carry  them ; 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  269 

and  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  be  near  each 
of  us,  in  all  our  difficulties,  in  all  sorrows,  in  our  soli- 
tude, in  our  sicknesses,  in  our  perplexities,  and  in  all 
the  varying  forms  of  need  which  press  upon  this  weary- 
world. 

And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  pour  out  Thy  bless- 
ing upon  all  good  people,  and  make  the  communities 
that  call  themselves  by  Thy  Name  more  like  the  Name 
by  which  they  are  called,  and  more  devoted  to  the 
glory  of  God.  Give  a  loftier  piety,  a  deeper  consecra- 
tion, a  more  manifest  unworldliness,  a  more  con- 
spicuous Christ-likeness,  to  all  professing  Christian 
people,  and  to  all  congregations  of  such  in  churches. 
And  grant  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  Thou  hast 
entrusted  to  Thy  servants'  ministrations  may  be  spread 
by  earnest  men  throughout  the  world,  and  that  wisdom 
and  prudence  may  be  proclaimed  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  And  give  Thy  blessing  to  all  work  done,  how- 
ever feeble.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thy  strength  is  made 
perfect  in  weakness.  May  it  be  so  in  the  ministrations 
of  Thy  Church.  Spread  abroad  the  knowledge  of 
Christ's  Name.  And  may  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ. 

We  pray  for  Thy  blessing  to  be  on  our  worship. 
Thankfully  we  recognise  all  Thy  great  mercies.  O 
Lord !  forgive  the  iniquity  of  our  holiest  things,  and 
receive  even  us,  and  our  poor  petitions,  through  Him 
Whom  Thou  hearest  always,  even  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 


CXXXVIII 

Lift  up  our  hearts,  O  Lord,  we  pray  Thee,  unto  Thy- 
self ;  and  may  we  all  feel,  as  we  draw  near  to  Thee  now, 


270  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

that  Thy  ear  is  open,  and  Thy  heart  is  open,  and  that 
Thy  hand  is  open.  Give  us  what  we  need,  love  us 
though  we  deserve  it  so  little,  and  draw  near  to  us 
now  that  with  heart  and  mind  we  may  rise  above  our- 
selves and  the  things  seen  and  temporal,  and  come, 
with  peaceful  confidence  as  becometh  children  who 
are  sure  of  the  Father's  heart,  into  Thy  presence. 

Blessed  be  Thy  Name !  Thou  hast  scattered  all  the 
mists  and  doubts  and  darknesses  which  come  from  our 
own  transgressions  and  evils.  And  we  thank  Thee 
that  the  bright  shining  of  Thine  own  light  has  scat- 
tered the  obscurities  and  thinned  away  the  mist.  May 
we  always  walk  in  the  sunshine,  being  quite  sure  of 
Thee,  and  so  sure  of  ourselves. 

We  thank  Thee  for  loving  care,  for  daily  provi- 
dences, for  the  manifestations  of  Thy  goodness  made 
to  us  in  all  fleeting  gifts  and  small  events.  And  we 
beseech  Thee  that  from  these  plain  dealings  of  Thine 
hand  we  may  ever  learn  the  lessons  which  shall  never 
fail  us  when  we  come  to  interpret  the  more  perplexing 
passages  of  Thy  great  providence.  We  would  begin 
with  the  remembrance  that  Thou  preservest  man  and 
beast,  and  so  venture  to  think  of  Thy  judgments 
which  are  a  mighty  deep,  and  of  Thy  righteousness 
beneath  Thy  judgments,  and  towering  above  them  like 
great  mountains. 

O  Lord !  we  thank  Thee  that  we  have  the  key  to 
everything  in  Thine  own  dear  Son,  and  that  Thou  hast 
taught  us  of  Thyself.  May  Thy  purposes  and  Thy  de- 
sires for  us  in  Him  be  ever  precious  to  us.  Lead  us  into 
deeper  knowledge  of  Thyself,  and  a  clearer  light  in 
which  we  may  walk,  being  always  confident  because 
we  are  always  beholding  God. 
We  come  to  Thee  this  morning  with  thanksgiving 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  271 

for  all  the  lessons  and  messages  which  this  day  brings 
to  us ;  and  we  pray  Thee  to  help  us  that  our  faith  in 
the  risen  Saviour  may  be  for  us  the  assurance  of  our 
victory  over  all  our  evils,  over  sin  and  death.  Grant, 
we  beseech  Thee,  that  more  and  more  we  may  bear 
about  with  us,  in  our  inmost  being,  the  dying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  may  be  made  comformable  unto  His 
death,  and  so  be  partakers  of  the  power  of  His  Resur- 
rection. May  Christ  be  in  us  the  life  of  our  lives  ;  and 
may  our  outward  lives,  in  their  deepest  roots,  '  be  hid 
with  Christ  in  God,'  and  beyond  the  world's  sight.  But 
help  us,  O  Lord,  to  live  in  the  world's  sight  lives 
worthy  of  their  source ;  and  may  we  in  all  our  doings, 
in  our  relations  with  others,  in  our  demeanour  towards 
duty,  in  our  patience  in  sorrow,  bear  about  with  us 
the  image  of  the  heavenly,  and  be  conformed  unto  the 
pattern  of  Thy  dear  Son. 

O  Lord!  help  us,  notwithstanding  weakness  and 
imperfections  of  mind  and  body,  to  worship  before 
Thee  with  true  hearts  ;  and  send  us  the  consciousness 
of  Thy  loving  presence.  We  commend  ourselves  to 
Thy  gracious  care,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 


CXXXIX 

O  Lord  !  we  thank  Thee  that  we  do  not  need  to  say 
'  Lord !  evermore  give  us  this  Bread,'  but  only  to  ask 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  to  take  it.  Thou  hast 
not  waited  to  be  asked,  blessed  be  Thy  name !  else 
Thou  wouldst  have  waited  for  ever.  But  when  we  had 
no  such  desires  Thou  hast  bestowed  upon  a  world,  that 
knew  not  its  hunger  nor  its  food,  the  Bread  of  God. 

O  Lord!  may  we  all  of  us  live  more  and  more  by 
Jesus  Christ,  and  make  Him  the  Source  and  the  Aim 


272  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

and  the  End  and  the  Nourishment  of  our  whole  being. 
We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  had  pity  upon  our 
poverty,  and  compassion  upon  our  hunger  and  our 
sore  need ;  hast  given  us  all  that  heart  can  desire,  all 
that  any  part  of  our  being  requires  in  that  great  Lord 
of  all  our  souls.  O  Lord !  may  none  of  us  be  spending 
our  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  or  starving  in 
the  presence  of  such  bountiful  supplies,  bread  enough 
and  to  spare  in  our  Father's  house. 

O  Lord !  regard  us  here,  the  children  of  so  many 
blessings,  and  yet  needing  so  continually  the  supply 
from  Thine  own  gracious  hands.  Help  us  all  to  realise 
more  fully  where  our  strength,  and  our  righteousness, 
and  our  joy,  and  our  peace  are.  May  we  not  be  our 
own  worst  enemies  by  breaking  the  sweet  bond  that 
unites  us  to  Thee,  nor  setting  up  our  own  inclinations, 
our  own  wills,  as  our  lords  and  guides. 

We  pray  Thee  be  with  each  of  us  according  to  our 
different  necessities  and  circumstances.  We  wotild 
crave  the  guidance  of  Thy  wise  Spirit,  as  well  as  the 
monitions  of  Thy  providence.  And  we  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  help  us  at  all  times  to  understand 
what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is,  in  regard  even  of  the 
smallest  circumstances  of  our  daily  lives. 

O  Lord !  be  with  each  of  us,  according  to  our  present 
necessities.  Breathe  Thy  peace  into  the  sad  hearts 
that  are  here  this  morning.  May  the  oil  of  gladness 
be  above  the  water  of  affliction.  O  Lord !  some  of  us 
have  heavy  tasks  to  perform ;  fit  the  back  for  the 
burden,  and  give  us  a  joyous  spirit,  unsubdued  by  toil 
and  labour,  we  pray  Thee. 

Some  of  us  may  have  special  cause  for  thanksgiving 
this  morning.  If  there  be  such  in  Thy  presence,  do 
Thou  help  us  to  find  what  we  need  in  the  one  safe 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  273 

place  where  all  the  necessities  of  all  men   are  more 
than  supplied. 

Look  upon  us  now,  and  in  Thy  mercy  be  near  us, 
keep,  and  bless  us,  for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


CXL 

O  Lord,  our  merciful  Father,  the  Rock  of  Ages  that 
cannot  move,  we  bless  Thee  for  that  constancy  of  love 
which  is  not  easily  provoked  nor  soon  angry,  which 
beareth  all  things,  and  for  the  worst  of  us  hopeth  all 
things.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that  we,  when  we  are 
most  conscious  of  our  own  weakness  and  ill-desert, 
may  be  most  confident  of  Thy  grace  and  pardoning 
mercy,  and  quickening  and  sustaining  power. 

So  help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  come  to 
Thee,  driven  by  our  own  sense  of  need,  and  drawn  by 
Thy  great  revelation  of  Thy  love  and  care,  which  Thou 
hast  given  to  us  in  all  the  incidents  of  our  daily  lives, 
in  the  depths  of  our  own  hearts,  and  most  of  all  in  the 
message  of  Thy  dear  Son  Thou  hast  delivered  our 
souls  from  death,  our  eyes  from  tears ;  Thou  hast 
always  been  ready  to  deliver  our  feet  from  falling, 
and  if  we  have  fallen  it  is  because  we  have  put  away 
from  ourselves  the  help  that  would  have  kept  us 
standing. 

But  we  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  revealed  Thyself  to 
us  as  the  God  that  upholdeth  all  those  that  are  fallen, 
and  raiseth  up  all  those  that  be  bowed  down.  And  we 
come  to  Thee  now  to  ask  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
cleanse  our  hearts,  wouldst  deliver  us  from  the  power 
of  evils  done,  wouldst  set  us  free  from  the  entail  of 
past  sin,  wouldst  strengthen  us  in  present  and  in 
future  temptation,  and   set  our  feet  upon   a  rock,  O 


274  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Lord,  and  establish  our  goings.  In  Thee,  O  Lord,  is 
the  Refuge  from  all  our  fears,  the  Strength  for  all  our 
weakness,  the  Power  that  will  conquer  in  all  conflicts. 
O  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  open  our  hearts  for  the 
entrance  of  Thy  grace,  and  come  in  and  fill  the  empty 
room,  and  make  us  strong  in  the  strength  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

Let  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us 
now,  and  be  felt  to  be  with  us.  May  we  be  aware  of  a 
Presence  mightier  and  more  than  that  of  one  another. 
May  we  realise  in  our  faithful  and  quiet  hearts  that 
where  two  or  three  are  gathered  in  Christ's  Name  He 
is  ever  in  the  midst.  May  we  fulfil  the  conditions,  and 
then  He  will  fulfil  His  promise. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  Thy  loving-kindness 
to  us.  '  Day  unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and  night  unto 
night  sheweth  knowledge,'  of  a  loving  Father's  con- 
tinual guiding  and  giving  hand.  And  we  praise  Thee 
for  all  the  way  by  which  Thou  hast  led  us.  If  any  of 
us  find  it  hard  to  say  '  all  the  way,'  do  Thou  strengthen 
us  to  understand  that  great  and  blessed  thought  '  He 
for  our  profit,  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  His  holi- 
ness.' And  help  us  each,  by  whatever  providences  we 
may  be,  or  may  have  been  exercised,  to  see  clearly  the 
purpose  of  it  all,  and  to  realise  in  our  own  experience 
that  all  works  together  for  our  good. 

Accept  us  as  we  come  to  Thee ;  help  us  to  take  the 
cup  of  salvation,  to  make  our  own  all  the  blessings 
both  of  Thy  providence  and  of  Thy  grace,  which  Thou 
dost  hold  out  for  our  acceptance ;  and  in  taking  of  it 
may  we  not  forget  the  Giver,  but  turn  every  cup  of 
gladness  or  of  sorrow  into  a  cup  of  blessing  because 
we  name  over  it  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 
Forgive,  accept,  and  answer,  for  the  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  275 

CXLI 

O  Lord,  our  God  and  Father,  faithful  and  true,  Who 
hast  sealed  to  us  all  Thy  promises  in  Jesus  Christ,  and 
through  Whom,  by  our  own  experience,  dost  permit 
us  to  set  to  our  seals  that  God  is  true,  and  to  bring  our 
Amen.  Help  us  to  be  steadfast  and  firm,  and  to  accept 
with  unfaltering  faith  the  promises  and  the  word  that 
comes  to  us  with  Thine  own  unchangeable  truth 
stamped  upon  it. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  draw  near  to  us  as  we  are 
gathered  in  Thy  presence,  and  to  help  us  to  open  heart 
and  mind  for  the  entrance  of  Thy  great  gifts,  and  of 
Thy  great  Giver,  and  Thy  Divine  Spirit.  We  beseech 
Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  establish  us  in  Jesus  Christ, 
and  anoint  us  with  His  anointing,  that  we  too  may 
live  as  dead  to  sin,  and  alive  to  God.  Give  us  light  to 
shine  upon  Thy  word  as  we  are  now  gathered.  Help 
us  both  in  hearing  and  in  speaking  Thy  gracious 
message ;  may  we  all  draw  near  to  Thee,  and  may  we 
all  be  aware  that  God  is  speaking  to  us.  May  this 
service  help  us  to  holier  living,  simpler  faith,  more 
Christlike  characters.  May  we  all  feel  that  God  is 
ever  near  to  us.  May  the  things  unseen  cheer  us  often 
— though  dim  to  us  by  our  own  faults — through  the 
multiplicity  of  our  duties  and  the  greatness  of  Thy 
transient  benefits  to  us  ;  and  shine  out  clear  before  us, 
and  be  ever  the  guiding  star  of  our  lives. 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  that  our  profit  may  appear  unto  all 
men,  by  our  daily  living  soberly,  righteously,  godly,  in 
this  present  world.  May  we  be  of  those  who  plainly 
declare  that  they  seek  a  country.  May  we  live  in  the 
communion  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit.   Give  us  Thy  help  and  blessing  in  all  the  variety 


276  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

of  our  occupations  and  duties,  and  according  to  our 
different  characters  and  conditions.  Help  us  that  we 
may  live  in  the  light  of  God,  and  walk  in  the  sunshine 
of  Thy  presence,  seeing  the  light  in  that  light,  and 
drawing  from  the  fountain  of  that  light,  and  drinking 
from  the  river  of  Thy  pleasures. 

Bless  us  according  to  our  different  necessities  ;  be 
near  any  of  us  that  are  in  any  sorrow.  Manifest  Thy- 
self unto  such  by  those  dear  Names  by  which  we  have 
been  reading  of  Thee,  as  the  Father  of  mercies,  and 
the  God  of  all  comfort.  Who  is  able  to  comfort  them 
that  are  in  any  tribulation  with  His  own  sweet  and 
sufficing  solace. 

And  now.  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves  to 
Thee,  thanking  Thee  for  Thy  great  mercies,  beseeching 
Thee  to  help  us  that  we  may  be  less  unworthy  of  Thy 
good  gifts  which  perish  with  the  using,  and  may  more 
faithfully  employ,  and  so  increase,  the  better  gifts 
which  grow  by  use.  Take  us  now  into  Thy  care ;  give 
us  Thy  blessing  and  presence  in  our  worship,  for  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


CXLII 

O  Lord  our  God,  wondrous  is  Thy  condescending  love, 
which  permits  that  Thou  shouldst  be  extolled  by  our 
tongues,  and  does  not  turn  away  our  prayer  nor  Thy 
mercy  from  us.  We  come  to  Thee  to  enlist  all  Thy 
powers  of  grace  and  goodness  upon  our  sides ;  and  we 
bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  hear  us,  and  even  though 
there  be  too  often  regard  to  iniquity  in  our  hearts 
Thy  pardoning  mercy  draws  near  to  us,  and  by  the 
manifestation  of  Thy  great  love  does  wean  us  from 
each  other. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  277 

O  help  us  to  open  our  hearts  to  Thy  gracious 
entrance,  to  be  sure  that  Thou  carest  for  us.  May  we 
feel  more  than  ever  we  have  done  that  in  Thee  are  all 
supplies,  and  that  Thou  art  infinitely  able  to  bestow 
upon  us  Thy  best,  which  is  Thyself.  Clothe  us,  we 
beseech  Thee,  with  Thy  purity.  Strengthen  us  with 
Thy  might ;  soften  us  by  the  inflow  into  our  selfishness 
of  Thy  great  love ;  and  may  we  dwell  so  near  to  Thee 
by  daily  communion  and  aspiration  and  obedience 
that  we  shall  more  and  more  see  all  things  in  the  light 
of  God,  and  do  all  in  His  strength  and  for  His  sake. 

We  would  acknowledge  before  Thee  all  our  short- 
comings and  sins.  We  thank  Thee  that  we  can 
venture  to  bring  all  our  evil  into  Thy  sight.  Surely 
Thou  seest  it,  whether  we  bring  it  or  no,  and  as  surely 
Thou  dost  delight  when  we  do  bring  it,  and  ask  Thee 
to  deliver  us  from  it. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  no  true  wish  to  be  set 
free  from  any  evil  in  character  is  in  vain  in  Thy  sight. 
Thou  hast  wisely  appointed  that  we  must  be  labourers 
together  with  Thee  in  cleansing  ourselves  from  all 
filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit.  And  Thou  hast  mercifully 
granted  Thy  good  Spirit  to  dwell  with  our  weak 
spirits,  and  to  arm  us  with  might  to  fight  the  good 
fight.  Help  us  daily  that  we  may  shake  off  the  burden 
and  death  of  our  own  evil  natures  and  selfish  lives, 
and  that  day  by  day  we  may  more  and  more  put  on 
that  new  man  which  is  evermore  in  the  image  of  Him 
that  created  him. 

Help  us  to  be  Christlike;  to  deny  ourselves,  and  if 
need  be  to  slay  ourselves.  If  our  eye  offend  us,  and 
cause  us  to  stumble,  help  us  to  pluck  it  out  and  cast  it 
from  us.  Blessed  be  Thy  Name !  such  mutilation  is 
completeness ;  such  death   is  life.    Lord !   be  near  us 


278  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

day  by  day,  and  fit  us  for  all  Thy  holy  will,  and  so  fit 
us  to  receive  all  Thy  best  gifts.  We  bless  Thee  for  all 
Thy  gifts,  great  and  small,  passing  and  permanent; 
those  which  perish  with  the  using,  and  those  which 
grow  by  use.  And  continue  to  bestow  upon  us,  and 
make  us  more  capable  of  receiving,  and  more  desirous 
of  retaining.  Thy  highest  and  best  gifts. 

Abide  with  us  each,  in  all  the  variety  of  our  require- 
ments according  to  our  conditions,  our  duties,  our 
characters,  our  relationship  with  others ;  and  help  us 
in  all  things  to  discharge  the  obligations  which  Thy 
loving  providence  lays  upon  us,  for  surely  all  Thy  call 
to  duty  is  a  promise  of  strength. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us  now,  to  draw  near  to 
each  of  us  in  our  morning's  worship ;  and  in  Thy 
mercy  to  accept  and  bless  us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Saviour. 


CXLIII 

Truly,  O  Lord,  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for, 
nor  do  we  know  how  to  pray  as  we  ought.  But  give 
Thou  the  Spirit  by  which  we  pray,  and  incline  our 
hearts'  desires  to  the  best  things.  And  help  us,  when 
we  come  to  Thee  with  our  petitions,  to  have  one 
petition  underlying  them  all — Thy  will  be  done.  Give 
us  that  entire  submission,  acquiescence  in  Thy  provi- 
dence, obedience  to  Thy  commandments,  subordination 
of  ourselves  to  Thee,  and  then  Thou  wilt  give  us  the 
desires  of  our  hearts  when  our  heart's  desire  is  to 
have  more  of  God. 

Help  us  to  make  our  wills  Thine,  that  Thou  mayest 
make  Thy  will  ours.  And  lead  us  thus,  O  Lord,  in 
paths  of  peace  and  righteousness.    May  we  walk  in 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  279 

the  light,  as  Thou  art  in  the  light,  and  experience,  and 
show  how  blessed  and  how  noble  a  thing  earthly  life 
may  be  when  it  is  full  of  Thyself.  Help  us  that  all 
things  may  work  together  for  our  good.  Help  us  so  to 
love  Thee  that  in  all  things  we  may  be  working  for 
good.  And  we  pray  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst,  more  and 
more,  draw  us  into  the  circle  of  continual  communion 
with  Thyself,  which  shall  make  us  more  diligent  in 
business,  more  fervent  in  spirit,  and  in  all  things 
servants  of  God. 

Be  near  us  all,  O  Lord,  according  to  our  different 
requirements.  Thou  knowest  the  homes  from  which 
we  have  come.  Some  of  them  may  be  darkened  and 
solitary ;  some  just  as  they  have  been  for  many  days 
past;  some  bright  with  new  joys  and  hopes.  We 
thank  Thee  for  all  this  diversity  of  experience,  and 
we  bless  Thee  for  the  land  of  promise  and  of  posses- 
sion which  Thou  givest  to  them  that  put  their  trust 
in  Thee. 

Grant,  we  pray  Thee,  that  each  of  us,  whatever  may 
be  the  complication  of  the  present  moment,  may  have 
a  firm  hold  of  Thyself,  and  so  be  strong  to  do,  if  that 
be  our  task  ;  to  endure,  if  that  be  our  appointment ; 
and  to  rejoice,  if  that  be  Thy  gracious  gift.  Help  us 
in  all  things  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  passing 
providences,  and  out  of  them  to  bring  a  more  assured 
possession  of  the  one  eternal  and  real  good.  Teach  us 
how  to  draw  near  to  Thy  Spirit,  to  handle  Thy  holy 
Word ;  how  to  hear,  how  to  speak,  and  may  we  all  be 
better  for  our  gathering  together  this  morning. 

We  commend  ourselves,  and  all  whom  we  love,  our 
country,  its  rulers,  and  all  its  interests,  the  peoples  of 
the  earth,  the  dark  hands  that  stay  paralysed  in  the 
shadow  of  death,  to  Thy  gracious  care.    We  beseech 


280  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  send  into  all  the  darkness  the 
great  light,  into  all  the  confusions  and  commotions  the 
great  peace,  into  all  the  sin  the  great  Healer;  and 
make  the  world  know  its  Saviour  and  its  King. 

Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  in  these  our  prayers  ;  and 
in  Thy  mercy  forgive  and  accept  us,  for  our  Lord 
Christ's  sake. 


CXLIV 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  we  too  would  come  with 
'  wonder,  love  and  praise,'  for  surely  Thy  mercies  pass 
expectation,  and  rise  high  above  all  our  thoughts. 
May  that  love  of  Thine  kindle  a  flame  of  answering 
love  in  our  hearts  which  shall  flow  out  in  constant 
surrender,  constant  aspiration,  and  constant  practical 
obedience,  as  well  as  in  the  calves  of  our  lips  and  the 
sacrifices  of  our  songs. 

May  we  all  feel  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord  our  God 
upon  us  for  good,  drawing  us  nigh  to  Thyself,  and 
drawing  us  gently  and  strongly  away  from  our  evil 
selves,  and  from  all  the  cares  of  our  low-thoughted 
lives.  Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  turn  ourselves  to 
Thee,  and  to  make  our  own  the  things  which  Thou 
dost  destine,  and  hast  given  us  ere  we  asked  Thee. 

We  bless  Thee  that  we  may  all  have  the  happiness 
of  the  man  that  has  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help,  and 
we  pray  that  we  may  be  all  inclined  to  set  our  hopes  on 
the  Lord  our  God.  Blessed  be  Thy  Name  for  all  Thy 
great  mercies  to  us,  for  all  Thy  daily  benefits,  for  all 
the  minute  and  fleeting  good  things  which  make  up  so 
much  of  our  lives. 

We  thank  Thee  for  continued  loving-kindness  and 
tender  care ;  and  we  pray  this  morning,  when  we  are 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  281 

wisest  and  nearest  Thee,  that  Thou  wouldst  help  us 
to  leave  out  nothing  that  Thou  hast  sent  us  in  our 
acknowledgments  and  thanksgivings.  Surely  even 
already  we  have  found  out  that  Thy  blessings  some- 
times come  with  darkened  faces.  But  we  praise  Thee 
that  beneath  the  veil  is  Thy  own  face,  and  we  thank 
Thee  for  all  the  hidden  kernels  of  sweetness  which  we 
have  found  as  time  has  passed  on,  even  in  the  roughest 
and  bitterest  of  our  sorrows. 

And  we  pray  that  we  may  be  taught  by  experience, 
and  never  be  swept  away  from  the  assurance  of  Thy 
love  by  any  troubles,  by  any  perplexities  of  mind  or 
heart.  Keep  us,  we  pray  Thee,  near  Thyself,  that 
standing  in  the  centre  we  may  see  how  all  the  stars 
move  in  harmony  and  beauty. 

O  Lord !  we  bow  before  Thee  this  morning,  beseech- 
ing Thee  especially  that  Thou  wouldst  quicken  our 
desires,  and  enlarge  our  capacities,  and  draw  us  away 
from  earth  and  to  Thyself  ;  and  that  Thou  wouldst  bless 
us  in  our  worship  now,  according  to  our  different  parts 
in  this  Thy  service,  helping  us  to  hear,  and  helping  us 
to  speak,  being  near  each  of  us  that  we  may  come  near 
to  Thee.  Give  us  grace  to  forget  anything  that  would 
hinder  our  full  and  peaceful  fellowship  with  Thyself. 
Give  us  grace  to  remember  whatsoever  may  increase 
that  blessing;  and  be  near  us,  that  the  words  of  our 
mouths,  and  the  meditations  of  our  heart,  may  be 
acceptable  in  Thy  sight. 

We  praise  Thee  for  all  which  this  day  speaks  to  us 
of  a  risen  Saviour,  for  all  the  associations  and  memories 
of  blessed  hours  long  gone  by  in  this  place.  Help  us, 
in  Thy  mercy,  that  we  may  bring  our  whole  selves  to 
Thee.  If  there  be  evil  in  our  hearts  may  we  be  glad 
that  Thou  shouldst  look  upon  it ;  and  may  we  believe 


282  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

that  whatsoever  of  evil  Thou  dost  see  Thou  dost  war 
against  in  us,  and  wilt  help  us  to  fight  the  good  fight 
of  faith,  and  to  cast  it  from  us.  May  we  not  cling  to 
that  which  is  death,  and  may  it  never  be  able  to 
separate  us  from  Him  Who  is  life. 

Be  near  us  to  hear  our  prayer,  and  to  grant  us 
Thy  gracious  help  and  presence,  for  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


CXLV 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  that  we  can  call  on 
Thee  as  our  future,  and  we  beseech  Thee  that  we  may 
never  forget  that  Thou  art  our  Judge  too ;  and  so, 
whilst  we  draw  near  with  all  child-like  confidence  and 
love,  may  we  come  with  deep  reverence,  and  ever 
hearing  the  Voice  that  summons  us  to  be  holy  as  Thou 
art  holy.  Cleanse  our  poor  hearts  from  all  their 
weaknesses  and  follies,  from  their  unreliableness  and 
unworthiness.  Deliver  us  from  yielding  up  the  trea- 
sures of  our  love  and  trust  to  any  in  competition  with 
Thyself.  And  whilst  we  thankfully  accept  the  bless- 
ings which  Thou  dost  give  us  in  our  daily  lives,  and 
the  joys  of  living  in,  and  being  loved  by,  and  loving 
human  hearts,  help  us  to  use  all  these  as  means  to 
come  nearer  to  Thyself ;  and  may  the  ladder,  having  its 
foot,  have  its  top  in  the  heavens  with  the  face  of  God 
Himself  above. 

O  Lord !  we  come  to  Thee  this  morning,  the  creatures 
of  Thy  gracious  hands,  the  recipients  of  a  thousand 
mercies,  made  by  Thee  to  possess  Thee,  and  unmade 
by  ourselves,  so  that  we  are  unworthy  of  Thee,  and 
unfit  for  Thee.  But  we  pray  Thee  to  help  us  against 
our  baser  selves,  and  to  give  strength  to  any  feeble 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  283 

good  that  may  be  in  us,  and  to  quicken  it  into  mighty 
power  and  more  manifest  dominion  in  our  daily 
lives. 

Lord!  we  are  ever  unable  to  judge  ourselves.  "We 
pray  for  the  searchlight  of  the  candle  of  the  Lord  to 
illuminate  all  our  darkness  ;  and  may  we  recognise, 
and  recognising  abhor,  and  abhorring  eject,  our  lurk- 
ing evils  and  secret  sins.  Do  Thou  strengthen  us  day 
by  day  for  the  work  of  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  ;  and  not  in  His  fear  only,  but  in  His  love, 
and  in  the  trust  in  the  great  and  precious  promises  by 
which  Thou  dost  reinforce  all  our  weakness,  and  dost 
teach  us  to  dare  to  expect  things  beyond  our  reach. 

We  pray  for  Thy  grace  to  abide  upon  us,  as  we  are 
here  this  morning.  Lead  us  by  the  green  pastures  and 
the  still  waters  of  Thy  great  truth  and  love.  We 
beseech  Thee  for  wisdom  to  hear  and  to  speak,  and 
pray  that  in  whatever  else  this  service  may  fail,  it 
may  bring  us  all  into  real  and  happy  touch  with  God 
manifest  in  His  Son. 

O  Lord !  bless  us  all  in  our  daily  callings  and  duties. 
We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  given  us  work  to  do 
which  we  clearly  see  to  be  ours.  Help  us  to  look  not 
every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  also  on  the  things  of 
others,  and  not  to  count  that  we  have  fulfilled  Thy 
will  unless  we  have  been  helpers  of  many. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  make  us  faithful  stewards  of 
whatever  gifts,  of  every  sort.  Thou  dost  bestow  upon 
us ;  and  may  that  be  as  much  a  part  of  our  day's  work 
as  our  professions  or  our  callings.  Some  of  Thy  ser- 
vants may  be  looking  back  with  sad  hearts ;  some  may 
be  looking  forward  with  shrinking  apprehension. 
Comfort  them  all !  We  thank  Thee  that  as  our  day  so 
may  our  strength  be ;  and  whatever  Thy  hand  of  pro- 


284  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

vidence  lays  upon  us  to  bear,  Thy  hand  of  grace  may 
strengthen  us  to  carry. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  all  Christian  people,  and 
all  workers  for  their  fellows  of  all  sorts ;  and  to  grant 
that  the  many  earnest  hearts  that  are  seeking  to 
spread  truth  and  goodness,  and  above  all,  the  Name  of 
Jesus  Christ  throughout  the  world,  may  know  and 
may  see,  in  such  measure  as  is  good  for  them,  that 
their  labour  is  not  in  vain  because  it  is  in  the  Lord. 

Take  us  now,  O  Lord,  into  Thy  care ;  regard  all  the 
necessities  of  this  nation ;  check  and  subdue  our 
national  sins ;  deliver  us  from  our  national  weaknesses 
and  errors ;  bring  us  to  know  and  to  recognise  more 
practically,  in  our  national  and  civic  and  social  life, 
the  rule  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  His  commandment  as  the 
golden  law.  And  do  Thou  grant  that,  in  like  manner, 
all  the  nations  of  the  world  may  be  healed  of  their 
sorrows  and  gathered  in,  to  couch,  like  a  peaceful 
flock,  round  the  feet,  and  to  be  guided  by  the  rod  and 
the  staff  of  the  One  Shepherd. 

Hear  us ;  grant  us  Thy  blessing  and  Thy  help  now, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


CXLVI 

Help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  O  Lord !  and  draw  our  hearts 
to  Thyself  by  the  outgoing  of  Thy  own  heart  to  us. 
May  we  each  feel  the  magnetism  of  Thy  manifested 
love  in  Christ  our  Lord. 

We  come  to  Thee  this  morning  with  many  reasons 
for  praise,  and  we  thank  Thee  that  we  can  gather 
them  all  into  one  when  we  bring  thanks  to  God  for 
His  unspeakable  gift.  We  bless  Thee  for  Him  in 
Whom   are  treasured  all  the  wealth  of  wisdom  and 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  285 

knowledge,  in  Whom  Thou  hast  tabernacled  among  us, 
bringing  grace  and  truth  to  us  all,  if  we  will  have  them. 

We  bless  Thee  for  that  Lord,  the  channel  and 
medium  of  every  common  gift,  and  for  all  the  mercies 
which  speak  of  Thy  greater  love,  and  minister  to  our 
greater  and  eternal  blessedness. 

O  Lord !  we  come  to  Thee  but  too  conscious  of  our 
poor  answers  to  Thy  great  love ;  and  we  feel  that 
whatever  else  we  need,  we  need  pardon  not  only  for 
the  things  in  which  we  have  gone  against  Thy  holy 
will,  but  for  the  many  more  in  which  we  have  fallen 
beneath  Thy  gracious  commandments,  and  have  failed 
to  apprehend  and  make  our  own  Thy  gracious  gifts. 
We  pray  for  Thy  forgiveness  ;  and  that  in  each  heart 
in  Thy  presence  now  there  may  move  that  Divine 
Spirit,  all  Whose  strength-giving  work  begins  by 
teaching  us  our  own  weakness.  May  that  Divine 
Spirit  convince  us  of  sin,  and  may  we  welcome  the 
conviction ;  and  then.  Lord,  do  Thou  help  us  to  lay 
firm  hold  on  the  righteousness  which  Thou  dost  impart 
to  all  that  seek  it  where  Thou  hast  stored  it,  in  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour. 

Strengthen  us,  we  pray  Thee,  by  Thy  good  Spirit  too, 
in  this  hour  of  worship,  and  grant  that  each  of  us  may 
feel  that  it  is  no  vain  thing  to  wait  upon  the  Lord. 
May  we  indeed  be  waiting  upon  Thee,  not  only  in 
these  outward  forms  of  worship  and  communion  and 
praise,  but  in  the  silence  of  our  own  souls.  And  oh ! 
do  Thou  help  us  to  a  wise  forgetfulness  and  a  wise 
remembrance  ;  that  we  may  forget  everything  in  daily 
life  that  may  distract  our  thoughts,  or  interfere  with 
our  devotion;  and  may  remember  our  own  great 
needs.  Thy  greater  gift,  and  the  way  by  which  even 
Christ  our  Lord,  our  need  and  Thy  gift,  may  meet. 


286  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

Be  with  us,  O  Lord,  in  our  changing  conditions,  and 
when  we  return  again  to  the  ordinary  duties  of  the 
week,  may  we  bear  with  us  some  impulse,  some  influ- 
ence, some  steadying  power,  some  overcoming  might, 
from  our  communion  with  Thee  this  day.  And  so  the 
Lord  accept  and  bless,  and  be  near  us  now,  and  help  us 
in  this  hour  of  worship ;  and  through  Thy  help  now  in 
this  hour  help  us  in  our  daily  lives,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CXLVII 

Lift  us,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  that  happy  sunlit 
height  where  we  shall  always  feel  the  warm  beams  of 
Thy  love.  And  whatever  in  our  own  hearts,  or  in  our 
own  circumstances,  or  in  the  mysteries  of  life,  may 
seem  to  contradict  our  faith,  may  we  be  of  those  who 
know  and  believe  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us. 

Lord !  we  need  little  else  if  only  we  can  hold  fast  by 
that  conviction.  And  yet  Thou  knowest  how  foolishly 
and  way  wardly  we  have  cast  away  the  pearl  of  great 
price,  and  how  we  have  been  contented  to  slake  our 
thirst  at  broken  cisterns,  and  to  live  by  the  sweetness 
of  limited  and  transient  laws. 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  we  pray  Thee,  whatever  else  fills 
our  hearts,  to  love  them  in  God  and  God  in  them.  And 
do  Thou  strengthen  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  our  days 
may  all  be  passed  under  the  influence  of  that  mighty 
constraining  and  inspiring  power.  May  we  be  the 
children  of  love,  and  walk  in  it;  and  not  only  with 
heart  and  soul  and  strength  and  mind  turn  its  beams 
upwards  to  Thee,  but  outwards  upon  men.  Oh  to 
have  more  of  that  victorious  power  over  our  own 
rooted  and  obstinate  self-regard.     Oh  to  know  more 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  287 

of  the  blessedness  of  those  who  lose  their  lives  and 
find  them,  who  cast  out  self,  and  so  have  a  better  self 
formed  within  them.  Abide  with  us,  Lord,  that  day 
by  day  we  may  seek  to  mould  ourselves  after  the 
Divine  likeness,  and  dwell  in  love  and  dwell  in  God. 

We  come  to  Thee  this  morning,  O  Lord,  thanking 
Thee  for  Thy  great  mercies  to  us ;  and  beseech  Thee 
that  Thou  wouldst  draw  near  us  now,  and  bless  us  as 
we  worship  here  before  Thee.  We  would  cast  our- 
selves, O  Lord,  on  Thy  faithful  promises.  We  know 
that  Thou  art  ready  to  come  near  to  us,  in  the  fulness 
of  Thy  grace,  and  beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst 
help  us  to  put  away  everything  that  may  come  be- 
tween us  and  the  rich  flow  of  Thy  Spirit's  influence  ; 
and  do  Thou  help  us  to  hear  and  to  speak,  and  make 
this  an  hour  of  true  communion  with  the  living  God. 

Bless  each  of  us,  day  by  day,  in  all  our  various  occu- 
pations and  duties.  We  thank  Thee  that  diverse  as 
these  may  be,  there  is  one  grace  that  can  fit  each  of  us 
for  every  task  ;  and  one  Divine  Spirit  Who,  dwelling 
with  us,  can  make  us  more  equal  to  all  circumstances. 
Thou  dost  send  to  us  changing  conditions  of  joy  and 
sorrow,  failure  and  success,  hopes  disappointed  and 
hopes  fulfilled.  And  we  thank  Thee  that  all  the 
changes  mean  but  one  thing,  that  we  may  be  par- 
takers of  Thy  holiness.  May  we  be  fellow-workers 
with  Thee,  and  so  use  the  things  temporal  that  not 
only  we  finally  fail  not  of  the  things  that  are  eternal, 
but  that  day  by  day  we  may  apprehend  these  more 
clearly,  and  appropriate  them  more  fully,  by  our  right 
use  of  the  changing  circumstances  of  our  fleeting 
lives. 

Now,  O  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves  to 
Thy  gracious  care.     We  cast  ourselves  on  Thy  pro- 


288  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

raises;  we  confess  our  own  unfitness  and  unworthiness ; 
and  we  beseech  Thee  that  Thy  Divine  Spirit  may  Him- 
self come  to  us  this  morning,  and  guide  us  into  all 
truth. 

Hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  forgive  and  bless,  for 
our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


CXLVIII 

Thou  saidst,  '  Seek  ye  My  face ! '  May  our  hearts  say 
unto  Thee  '  Thy  face.  Lord,  will  we  seek ! '  '  Hide  not 
Thy  face  far  from  us.'  Blessed  be  Thy  Name !  Thou 
never  dost  hide  from  seeking  souls.  Thou  hast  not 
spoken  in  secret.  Thou  hast  never  said  to  any  of  the 
seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  My  face  in  vain.  Therefore,  O 
Lord,  we  come  to  Thee  now,  lowly  and  yet  confident, 
and  believe  that  Thou  wilt  ever  answer  us,  and  that 
they  who  seek  Thee  earnestly  shall  find  Thee. 

O  prepare  our  hearts,  for  the  preparation  of  the 
heart  and  the  answer  alike  come  from  Thee.  Draw 
us,  and  then  we  will  run  after  Thee.  Help  us  to  see 
some  glimpses  of  Thy  sufficiency  and  goodness  which 
may  slacken  earth's  hold  upon  us,  and  let  some  beam 
of  Thy  own  uncreated  and  ineffable  light  shine  into 
our  hearts  that  shall  darken  the  glories  of  all  besides. 

We  bless  Thee  for  all  which  Thou  hast  given  us  to 
know  of  Thyself.  But,  O  Lord,  the  more  loftily  we 
think  of  Thy  great  and  continuous  revelation  of  Thy- 
self to  us,  in  all  ways  and  at  all  times,  the  more 
ashamed  we  are  of  our  own  slowness  of  apprehension. 
'  Thou  hast  been  so  long  time  with  us,  and  yet  we  have 
not  known  Thee.'  Forgive!  we  pray  Thee,  all  the 
blindness  of  our  indisposition  to  avail  ourselves  of  the 
light  of  Thy  glory  shining  down  upon  us   for   ever. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  289 

And  draw  us  by  the  sacred  attractions  of  Thy  Touch 
into  the  innermost  place,  where  we  may  dwell  alone 
with  God. 

We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  a  house  ever  open  to 
us.  May  we  more  and  more  make  Thee  our  strong 
habitation,  whereunto  we  continually  resort.  And 
may  all  the  duties  of  our  daily  lives,  and  the  various 
occupations  and  scenes  through  which  we  pass,  aval? 
not  to  break  our  fellowship  with  Thee ;  but  may  all 
things,  rightly  used  and  subordinated,  tend  to  make 
us  feel  more  our  need  of  Thee  and  Thy  sufficiency  for 
us.  Help  us  thus  to  live  on  high,  that  we  may  all  the 
more  earnestly  and  patiently  do  Thy  work  in  the  valley. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  blessing  as  we  are  gathered 
here  in  Thy  presence ;  and  with  our  prayer  we  would 
blend  our  thanksgiving  for  all  the  help  which  Thou 
hast  stored  for  us,  even  in  outward  things,  by  the 
requirements  of  this  day  with  its  memories. 

May  we  feel  that  it  is  not  only  we  that  are 
seeking  God,  but  God  Who  is  seeking  us.  O  Lord! 
help  us  to  worship  Thee  in  spirit  and  in  truth, 
knowing  the  great  and  wondrous  truth  that  Thou 
seekest  such  to  worship  Thee.  We  would  come  into 
Thy  presence  in  the  great  Name  before  which  all 
barriers  melt,  and  all  closed  gates  open.  We  would 
come  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  beseech  Thee 
that  joining  ourselves  to  Him  by  humble  faith  and 
loyal  obedience  we  may  be  joined  to  the  Lord,  and 
receive  what  He  possesses,  and  sit  with  Him  in 
heavenly  places  at  Thy  right  hand.  May  it  be  so  for 
us,  even  as  we  pass  through  the  changing  scenes  and 
pressing  duties  of  our  daily  lives.  And  may  it  be 
eminently  so  in  such  an  hour  as  this  when,  in  outward 
form,  we  draw  near  to  Thee.  We  thank  Thee  for  the 
T 


290  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

momentary  cessation  of  earthly  duties,  for  the  loosened 
grip  of  earthly  cares,  for  the  diminished  attraction  of 
earthly  joys. 

Help  us  all  this  morning  to  rejoice  in  Jesus  Christ, 
and  worship  God  in  the  Spirit.  Hear  us  in  our  suppli- 
cation, and  of  Thy  great  mercy  answer  and  forgive, 
through  Christ  our  Lord. 


CXLIX 

O  Lord  our  God,  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  love  Thee 
with  all  our  hearts  and  minds,  and  to  live  in  accord- 
ance with  our  supreme  love.  Give  us  day  by  day  the 
consciousness  that  Thou  lovest  us  that  we  may  love 
Thee;  and  grant,  O  Lord,  more  and  more  it  may  be 
manifested  in  our  lives  where  our  hearts  are,  and  what 
our  treasure  is.  Oh  for  greater  devotion  of  Spirit,  for 
more  continuous  and  close  fellowship  with  Thyself.  O 
to  be  withdrawn  more  and  more  from  all  false  loves, 
and  to  hold  all  true  and  good  ones  in  subordination 
and  in  union  with  Thyself. 

Strengthen  us,  O  Lord,  that  we  may  indeed  walk  in 
that  way  of  love  which  is  the  way  of  peace.  And 
pardon  our  hearts,  and  strengthen  our  wills,  and  rule 
Thou  our  desires,  and  direct  Thou  our  acts.  And  in 
all  things,  outward  and  inward,  may  we  live  conse- 
crated lives. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  regard  us  now  in  Thy  presence, 
to  give  us  Thy  help  as  we  remain  together.  Speak 
Thou  in  our  heart,  O  Lord,  that  we  may  speak  Thy 
word  and  not  our  own,  and  make  Thy  message  power- 
ful to  the  building  up  of  all  that  is  good  in  us,  and  to 
the  weakening  and  casting  out  of  all  that  is  evil.    And 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  291 

do  Thou  grant  that  we  all,  hearers  and  speaker  alike, 
may  be  able  to  pass  beyond  the  ontward  form,  and  to 
enter  into  the  depths  of  true  communion  with  God, 
the  submission  of  heart  and  effort  and  of  desire 
towards  and  after  Him.  Guide  us  in  our  words,  in  all 
our  worship,  and  help  us  when  we  go  hence  to  bear 
away  some  influence  that  may  blend  with  the  other 
influences  of  our  lives,  and  make  for  goodness. 

Bless  us  each,  we  pray  Thee,  according  to  our  callings 
and  characters  and  circumstances.  And  since  Thou 
dost  appoint  our  necessary  share  of  joy  and  sorrow, 
may  we  acquiesce  in  Thy  appointments,  and  try  to 
discover  what  is  the  will  of  the  Lord,  as  revealed  in 
our  changing  conditions.  If  any  of  us  have  any  special 
difficulty  in  keeping  hold  of  Thy  hand  by  reason  of 
any  special  burdens  of  sorrow,  and  are  ready  to  say, 
'  as  for  me,  my  feet  were  almost  gone,'  do  Thou  stay 
the  tremulous  hearts,  and  strengthen  weak  faith,  and 
give  the  measure  of  Thy  consolation,  which  is  greater 
than  the  measure  of  our  sorrow. 

O  Lord !  look  upon  all  Christian  people,  and  on  all 
who  may  be  feeling  after  Thee  if  haply  they  may  find 
Thee.  We  beseech  Thee  to  clear  away  errors,  and 
bring  pure  confidence  in  Thyself  and  in  Thy  Son.  And 
make  all  things  plain  to  them  that  seek  it.  Give 
power,  O  Lord!  to  all  the  work  of  good  people  who 
are  trying  to  benefit  their  fellows,  and  especially  to 
them  who  are  seeking  to  make  known  that  Name  in 
which  all  benefit  and  blessing  are  treasured,  the  Name 
of  Jesus  Christ. 

Now,  O  Lord,  we  thank  Thee  that  we  can  commit 
ourselves  to  Thee ;  and  we  would  do  it  in  peaceful  trust 
and  patient  hope,  believing  that  Thou  art  able  to  keep 
all  that  is  committed  to  Thee  against  that  day.    Hear 


292  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

us ;  give  us  Thy  help  and  blessing  now,  for  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


CL 

Many,  O  Lord  our  God,  are  Thy  wonderful  words,  and 
Thy  thoughts  which  are  to  usward.  We  thank  Thee 
for  all  those  manifold  and  great  reasons  which  we  have 
to  love  Thee  ;  and  beseech  Thee  that  we  may  not  only 
recount  them  with  our  lives,  but  realise  them  in  our 
deepest  hearts,  and  thereby  be  drawn  more  than  ever 
we  have  been  to  answering  love  which  shall  purge  our 
hearts  and  fulfil  all  Thy  law.  May  it  be  true  of  us 
that  we  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  and  that  Thy  law  is 
within  our  hearts.  May  we  make  Thy  commandments 
our  joys.  May  we  ever  feel  that  nothing  is  so  blessed 
as  to  yield  to  Thee,  and  in  our  daily  obedience  may  we 
realise  the  great  peace  which  they  have  who  love  Thy 
law. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  Thy  mercies  lavished 
upon  us,  without  stint  and  without  interruption.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  the  blessings  which  fill  our  daily 
lives,  and  escape  our  notice  for  the  most  part  because 
they  are  continuous,  may  be  more  visible  to  us,  and 
more  felt  by  us  than  ever  they  have  been.  And  may 
they  lead  us  on  into  the  depths  of  God,  and  draw  us  to 
desire,  and  so  to  possess,  the  richer  blessings  which 
Thou  canst  only  bestow  on  hearts  that  seek  Thee. 

O  Lord!  preserve  us  from  the  folly  and  the  sin  of 
which  we  have  been  so  often  guilty,  of  letting  what 
was  meant  to  lead  us  to  God  keep  us  away  from 
Him ;  and  let  the  things  seen  and  temporal,  and  all  the 
varying  manifestations  of  Thy  unvarying  love  which 
come  to   us  through  them,  draw   us  to  desire  more, 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  293 

and  to  be  more  fit  to  possess,  the  things  unseen  and 
eternal. 

We  come  to  Thee  this  morning  feeling  that  unless 
Thy  mercies  were  more  than  could  be  remembered,  our 
sins,  which  are  more  than  the  hairs  of  our  heads, 
would  hinder  us  from  looking  up  to  Thee.  But  we 
thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  anticipated  our  need,  and 
hast  revealed  Thy  great  love  to  us,  that  it  may  cheer 
us  when  we  are  cast  down,  and  raise  us  again  when  we 
are  burdened  with  the  consciousness  of  demerit  and 
unworthiness.  May  we  never  think  of  our  own  short- 
comings without  thinking  of  Thy  goodness  and  love, 
and  never  think  of  Thy  goodness  and  love  without 
thinking  of  our  shortcomings.  Help  us  to  be  humble, 
in  our  confidence,  and  confident  in  our  humility. 
When  we  draw  near  to  Thee  may  we  ever  feel  that 
Thou  hast  drawn  near  to  us  first,  and  most  effectually, 
and  that  Thou  art  ready  to  put  away  from  us  all  in  us 
that  comes  between  us  and  Thee.  May  we  feel  and 
realise  that  it  is  so  now,  and  with  emancipated  and 
lightened  hearts  may  we  draw  near  to  God,  Who  has 
drawn  near  to  us. 

We  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  great  mercies  to  us.  We 
bless  Thee  for  the  recurrence  of  this  day,  for  all  of 
which  it  reminds  us,  of  Him  in  Whom  we  are  more 
than  conquerors  over  death  and  the  grave.  We 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst  draw  near  to  us  now  ; 
help  and  bless  and  be  with  us  in  this  our  worship, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CLI 

O  Lord  our  Father,  we  thank  Thee  that  because  every 
good  gift  comes  from  Thee,  and  because  Thou  hast  no 


294  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

variableness  nor  shadow  of  turning,  nothing  can  come 
from  Thee  but  what  is  good.  We  beseech  Thee  to  help 
us  ever  to  keep  ourselves  on  guard  against  our  own 
lusts  lest  being  enticed  by  them  we  should  turn  Thy 
gifts  into  temptations,  and  make  poison  of  our 
necessary  food.  As  we  wait  before  Thee  now  give  us, 
Lord,  some  blessing  from  Thyself  which  shall  abides 
hallowing  and  elevating,  calming  and  cleansing, 
quickening  us  for  many  days. 

We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  dost  permit  us  to  gather 
together  thus,  to  reinforce  our  several  weaknesses  by 
conjoined  strength;  and  we  pray  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  be  with  us  in  our  worship,  and  wouldst  guide 
us  in  our  thoughts  and  words,  as  well  as  in  our  hearing 
and  our  thoughts.  And  upon  us  all,  according  to  our 
divers  necessities,  may  there  descend  the  gifts  that  we 
need.  Thou  art  the  God  that  givest  liberally  and  dost 
upbraid  not.  We  have  to  confess  our  past  misuse  of 
many  of  Thy  gifts.  But  we  pray  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  come  near  to  us  now,  and  bestow  upon  us,  as 
we  may  severally  require,  patience  and  fortitude, 
strength  to  endure  and  strength  to  do,  that  in  all  the 
variety  of  our  conditions,  whether  these  be  bright  or 
dark,  solitary  or  companioned,  we  may  have  the 
assurance  that  Thou  art  with  us,  and  that  all  things 
are  working  together  for  good. 

Draw  near  to  each,  bless  all  whom  we  love,  and  all 
whom  we  should  remember  at  Thy  throne  ;  granting 
to  each  the  gifts  that  they  specially  require,  and  help- 
ing all  Thy  servants  throughout  the  world  to  live  as 
witnesses  of  God.  Take  us  into  Thy  care  now;  hear 
us,  be  with  us,  and  bless  us,  for  our  Lord  Christ's 
sake. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  295 


CLII 

O  Lord,  our  Father,  Thou  hast  opened  to  us  the  doors 
of  Thy  house,  and  the  way  to  Thy  very  heart.  And  we 
thank  Thee  for  these  rich  and  faithful  promises  which 
Thou  hast  attached  to  our  spreading  out  our  hearts 
before  Thee. 

O  help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  in  everything  by 
prayer  and  supplication,  and  never  forgetting  thanks- 
giving, we  may  make  our  requests  known  to  Thee. 
We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  let  us  say  anything, 
that  we  need  hide  nothing  in  our  hearts.  And  we 
beseech  Thee  that  we  may  have  access  with  confidence, 
and  with  free  speech,  to  Thyself. 

O  keep  us  from  ever  cherishing  anything  in  our 
minds  that  we  dare  not  tell  to  Thee,  and  may  we  make 
that  ability  to  speak  to  Thee  about  it  more  of  a  test 
than  we  have  done  of  our  thoughts  and  deserts. 

We  bless  Thee  for  the  assurance,  not  that  Thou  wilt 
give  us  what  we  think  we  need,  but  that  Thou  wilt 
always  give  us  Thy  peace  in  our  hearts  if  we  keep  near 
Thee  in  supplication.  Lord !  we  know  that  that  is 
better  than  all  outward  gifts.  May  we  live  in  that 
faith,  and  so  be  able  to  accept  Thy  not  answering 
according  to  our  desires,  seeing  that  Thou  dost  answer 
always  according  to  a  better  wisdom  and  a  deeper 
knowledge. 

We  sometimes  feel  as  if  our  prayers  would  be  more 
fervent  if  we  were  always  sure  that  in  regard  of  out- 
ward things  we  should  get  what  we  desire.  But  we 
beseech  Thee  to  deliver  us  from  that  temptation,  and 
help  us  more  and  more  to  pray  as  those  who  feel  that 
it  is  enough  for  them  that  if  they  ask  anything  accord- 
ing to  Thy  will  Thou  dost  hear. 


296  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

But  we  bless  Thee  that  again  Thou  dost  delight  when 
we  tell  Thee  all,  even  our  foolish  thoughts,  and  we  pray 
Thee  to  help  us  to  be  frank  with  God  always.  And 
now  draw  near  to  us  in  our  worship,  and  breathe  Thy 
gracious  spirit  into  all  our  hearts.  May  we  indeed 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway,  and  find  it  increasingly  true 
that  our  God  supplies  all  our  need  according  to  His 
riches  in  glory  in  Christ  Jesus. 

We  pray  for  a  firmer  hold  of  Thine  own  self.  We 
beseech  Thee,  for  Thou  hast  taught  us  even  so  great  a 
prayer,  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  our  hearts  by  faith  ; 
that  we  may  be  able  to  apprehend  the  measureless 
measures  of  Thy  love,  and  so  be  filled  with  all  the 
fulness  of  God. 

O  Lord  !  we  need  Thee  at  every  moment,  for  our 
smallest  tasks  are  too  great  unless  Thou  dost  help  us, 
and  the  greatest  are  not  too  great  if  we  have  Thy 
presence.  Be  Thou  near  us,  our  Sufficiency  and  our 
Strength ;  be  Thou  in  us  our  Life ;  be  Thou  before  us 
that  we  may  walk  as  in  Thy  sight  all  the  day  long. 
And  do  Thou  help  us  to  make  Jesus  Christ,  the  Angel 
in  Whom  Thy  name  is,  the  Pattern  and  the  Power,  the 
Aim  and  the  Reward  of  all  our  thoughts  and  words 
and  deeds.  Dwell  in  our  hearts,  Lord,  that  we  may 
dwell  in  Thee ;  and  being  in  that  safe  habitation  may 
we  depart  from  danger,  sin,  and  fear. 

O  Lord!  we  would  bring  our  thanksgivings  for  all 
Thy  great  benefits  to  us.  Surely  'day  unto  day 
uttereth  speech,  and  night  unto  night  sheweth 
knowledge'  of  Thy  loving-kindness  and  Thy  tender 
care.  How  often  we  take  Thy  gifts  with  no  thought 
of  the  Giver.  How  often  we  misuse  them.  How  often 
we  forget  all  about  them  as  soon  as  they  have  perished 
with  the  using.     We  beseech  Thee  that  it  may  be 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  297 

otherwise  with  us  in  the  days  that  may  yet  be 
before  us,  so  that  we  may  bring  into  every  corner 
of  our  lives  gratitude,  and  be  able  to  bless  God  for 
all  the  way  by  which  He  has  led  us  these  many 
years. 

Now,  Lord,  we  pray  Thee  to  breathe  Thy  Spirit 
upon  all  our  hearts  and  minds.  We  thank  Thee  for 
this  opportunity  of  meeting  together,  in  the  midst  of 
the  cares  and  duties  of  the  week,  and  that  these 
gatherings  may  continue  to  be  what  they  have  been 
for  some  of  us  for  many  years  that  are  gone — sources 
of  blessing  and  of  strength. 

Be  near  us  whenever  we  assemble  as  a  Christian 
community.  May  a  simpler,  stronger  faith  characterise 
all  the  members  of  this  church  and  congregation. 
May  they  be  living  more  and  more  manifestly  by  the 
power  of  the  world  to  come,  and  walking  in  the  foot- 
steps of  Jesus  Christ.  May  our  responsibilities  lie 
heavy  upon  us,  and  may  we  be  sustained  in  them  by 
Thy  upholding  grace ;  and  all  Thy  people  learn  that 
they  are  here  for  God's  sake  as  well  as  for  their  own, 
and  set  here  to  be  God's  apostles  and  missioners  in  the 
world;  and  grant  that  from  our  lives,  our  manifest 
Christ-likeness,  our  unworthiness,  our  purity,  and  our 
gentleness  and  pity  for  men's  souls,  there  may  sound 
out  the  word  of  the  Lord. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  hear  us,  to  pour  out  Thy  grace 
upon  us  when  we  are  in  sorrow  or  trouble.  To  all  such 
bring  Thy  gracious  tender  touch  which  alone  is  able  to 
handle  without  hurting  sore  hearts. 

Mercifully  hear  and  forgive  us ;  grant  Thy  blessing 
in  this  hour  of  worship,  for  our  Saviour  Christ's  sake. 


298  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

CLIII 

O  Lord  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  for  that  Name.  It  is 
Thou  that  hast  made  us,  and  we  are  Thine,  and  Thou 
dost  remember  all  the  needs  which  Thou  hast  made  us 
to  feel.  Thou  knowest  our  frame,  and  since  Thou  hast 
created  us  Thou  hast  bound  Thyself  to  satisfy  us.  We 
thank  Thee  for  the  great  promises  which  Thy  very 
word  of  Creation  brings  with  it.  '  Faithful  is  He  that 
hath  called  us.  Who  also  shall  do  it.'  Thou  art  not  of 
those  who  begin  works  that  they  are  not  able  to  finish. 
When  we  cry  unto  Thee  do  Thou  perfect  that  which 
concerneth  us.  Forsake  not  the  works  of  Thine  own 
hands.  Thou  dost  answer,  '  I  will  never  leave  Thee,  nor 
forsake  Thee,  till  I  have  done  that  which  I  have 
spoken  to  Thee  of.' 

Help  us  then,  we  beseech  Thee,  to  commit  the  keep- 
ing of  ourselves,  body,  soul  and  estate ;  and  may  we 
have  an  active  faith,  and  trust  ourselves  to  Thee  in 
well-doing,  not  expecting  Thy  providence  to  stretch 
out  its  hand  to  save  us  when  we  go  against  Thy  holy 
will. 

Accept  our  praise,  O  Lord,  for  all  the  great  blessings 
which  Thou  hast  bestowed  upon  us  ;  and  chiefly  because 
we  can  come  to  Thee  with  free  hearts,  in  full  assurance 
as  children  of  faith,  and  having  no  dread,  though  we 
have  reverent  awe,  and  can  believe  that  Thou  art  ever 
pacified  towards  us  for  all  that  we  have  done,  and  art 
ready  to  accept  and  to  bless  and  answer  us  in  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour. 

We  thank  Thee  for  those  sufferings  whereby  we  are 
healed ;  and  we  pray  that  we  may  each  of  us,  in  our 
measure  and  degree,  take  up  our  cross  daily  and 
follow  the  Lord  our  Redeemer  and  our  Pattern. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  299 

We  bless  Thee  for  Him  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was 
guile  found  in  His  mouth.  And  we  beseech  Thee  to 
give  us  more  and  more  of  the  spirit  that  was  in  Christ 
Jesus,  that  in  meekness  and  gentleness  we  too  may- 
live.  And  may  we  be  wise  to  make  the  highest  and 
best  use  of  all  the  changing  circumstances  of  our  daily 
lives.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  art  in  the  darkness 
as  in  the  light.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  sendest 
nothing  to  Thy  children  which  has  not  the  token  of 
Thy  love  plainly  written  upon  it  to  the  eye  of  faith. 
And  we  beseech  Thee  that  all  which  befalls  us  in  our 
daily  lives  may  so  minister  to  our  highest  needs  as 
that  we  shall  be  thankful  for  it,  and  for  the  darkness 
and  the  sorrow. 

We  praise  Thee  that  Thou  art  more  willing  to  give 
Thy  blessing  than  we  often  are  to  ask  it.  We  thank 
Thee  for  all  the  rich  store  which  Thou  hast  laid  up  for 
Thy  children  in  Thy  word.  We  pray  that  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  may  shine  on  Thy  truth,  and  permit  us  all 
not  only  to  perceive  but  to  receive  and  obey  the  will  of 
the  Lord  revealed  to  us  in  His  Word. 

Guide  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  all  our  meditations  and 
worship  in  this  hour  of  prayer.  We  bless  Thee  that  we 
can  turn  aside  and  find  refreshment  and  strengthening 
and  patience  and  peace  in  drawing  near  to  God.  May 
it  be  a  true  hour  of  fellowship  with  the  Father 
and  the  Son  through  the  Divine  Spirit  for  each 
of  us  here. 

Be  with  all  who  are  dear  to  us,  and  all  members  of 
this  community  of  ours  who  are  absent  from  us.  The 
Lord  be  with  them  where  they  are.  If  any  are  in 
sorrow  or  sickness,  or  watching  by  the  beds  of  dear 
ones,  give  them  what  they  specially  need,  we  pray.  If 
any  are  busied  with  legitimate  duties,  and  pressed 


300  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

upon  by  many  cares,  help  such,  even  in  the  midst  of  the 
business  of  life,  to  be  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the 
Lord  as  truly  as  we  are.  And  do  Thou  pour  out  of  Thy 
holy  influences  upon  this  congregation.  Make  us  more 
manifestly  Thy  witnesses  and  epistles;  and  grant,  we 
beseech  Thee,  that  the  work  of  our  hands,  being  done 
for  Thy  holy  Name,  may  be  done  with  Thy  rich  bless- 
ing ;  and  that  much  good  may  result  from  our  gathering 
together,  and  the  ministration  of  Thy  truth  amongst 
us. 

We  pray  Thee  to  lift  away  from  hearts  and  minds 
anything  that  may  come  in  the  way  of  our  full 
entrance  into  the  meaning  and  the  blessedness  of  this 
hour  of  worship,  and  deliver  us  from  any  externals  that 
may  mar  the  completeness  of  our  communion  with 
Thee. 

The  Lord  help  us,  and  be  near  us ;  speak  to  us  and 
through  us ;  the  Lord  accept,  forgive,  and  answer  our 
petitions ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CLIV 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  help  us,  we  beseech  Thee, 
that  we,  too,  may  belong  to  those  who  by  faith  '  out  of 
weakness  are  made  strong,'  and  who  are  able  to  look 
away  from  the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal  unto 
Jesus,  the  great  Pattern  and  perfect  Example  of  faith. 
We  bless  Thee  that  Thou  hast  appointed  for  each  of  us 
the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  and  that  when  Thou  dost 
command  us  to  run  Thou  dost  put  strength  into  the 
feeble  knees,  and  make  our  sluggish  feet  as  hind's  feet. 
Lead  us  in  the  paths  of  righteousness,  and  may  we 
find  them  the  paths  of  peace. 

We  pray  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  help  us,  that  day  by  day 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  301 

we  may  go  in  that  blessed  and  peaceful  trust,  and  clear 
and  realising  apprehension  of  Thyself  revealed  to  us 
in  Jesus  Christ,  whereby  we  shall  be  made  more  than 
conquerors,  and  ready  for  all  tasks. 

We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  art,  not  shall  be,  called  our 
God.  And  may  we  never  be  ashamed  to  be  called  Thy 
people,  and  may  we  live  as  pilgrims  and  sojourners, 
content  to  dwell  in  tabernacles,  because  we  *  look  for 
a  city  which  hath  foundations.'  We  thank  Thee  that 
we  do  not  belong  to  this  present  fleeting  order  of 
things,  for  our  hearts  are  set  on  Thee.  And  we  pray 
that  the  passing  away  of  all  that  can  pass  may  never 
sadden  us,  may  never  darken  our  hearts  or  dim  our 
eyes ;  but  that  we  may  always  be  able  to  realise  our 
present  possession  of  the  unchanging  good,  and  the 
eternal  blessedness  which  we  have  in  Thyself.  May 
our  faith  work  in  us  by  love,  and  bring  forth  all  great 
and  precious  fruits  which  Thou  dost  intend  that  it 
should  produce  in  men's  hearts. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  the  large  mercies  which 
we  have  received  from  Thy  hand.  Day  by  day  Thou 
dost  awake  us  to  get  fresh  blessing  from  Thee,  and 
dost  repeat  with  patient  love  old  mercies,  so  that  we 
have  with  every  new  morning  to  cherish  new  hope, 
and  with  every  new  evening  to  return  again  unto  our 
rest  with  thankfulness.  We  pray  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  strengthen  us  to  pass  on  through  life  in 
cheerful  godliness,  in  humble  dependence  upon  Thyself, 
and  seeking  to  exhibit  in  our  characters  and  to  incor- 
porate into  our  very  being  the  graces  which  Thou  art 
so  willing  to  bestow,  and  which  Christ  has  made  sure 
to  us.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  opportunity  to  turn 
away  for  a  time  from  the  daily  cares,  and  even  from 
the  daily  duties,  and  to  draw  near  to  Thee.    And  we 


302  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

beseech  Thee  that  our  gatherings  together  thus  may 
always  have  the  seal  of  Thine  approval  on  them,  and 
in  our  own  hearts  the  manifest  sign  that  it  is  no  vain 
thing  to  wait  upon  the  Lord. 

We  bless  Thee  for  past  mercies  received  from  Thee 
in  such  circumstances,  and  in  this  place,  and  we  pray 
that  Thou  wouldst  still  be  with  us,  and  be  with  us  now. 
And  grant  that  our  meeting  together  this  evening  may 
tend  to  the  deepening  in  all  our  hearts  and  minds  of 
the  determination  to  know  *  nothing  save  Jesus  Christ, 
and  Him  crucified,'  and  to  live  'according  to  the 
pattern  which  has  been  shewed  to  us  on  the  mount.' 

O  Lord !  remember  all  whom  we  love,  and  all  who 
may  be  in  any  of  our  hearts  now ;  especially  any  that 
may  be  in  trouble  or  sorrow,  or  may  be  mourning  for 
separations  by  the  great  Separator,  and  who  may  be 
looking  into  empty  places  that  can  never  be  filled.  Be 
very  near  to  all  such,  and  do  Thou  Thyself  fill  the 
places  which  Thou  hast  emptied. 

We  pray  Thee  to  guide  each  of  us  in  all  the  variety 
of  our  perplexity,  circumstances  and  difficulties  ;  when 
we  find  it  hard  to  decide  the  path  of  duty,  and,  perhaps, 
harder  still  to  walk  in  it.  Be  near  us  in  such,  and  in 
all  circumstances,  guiding  us  by  Thy  counsel,  sustain- 
ing us  by  Thy  strong  hand,  impelling  us  by  the  impulse 
which  Thou  dost  breathe  into  waiting  hearts,  and 
making  us  strong  to  carry  out  our  convictions  in  all 
regions  and  in  every  way.  And  now  we  commit  our- 
selves to  Thy  gracious  care,  with  thankfulness  for  Thy 
many  mercies  to  us  ;  and  beseeching  Thee  that  Thou 
wouldst  still  help  and  bless  us,  as  Thou  hast  helped 
and  blessed  us  in  the  past ;  through  Him  Who  is  the 
same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever,  even  Christ 
our  living  Lord. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  303 

CLV 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  Father,  lift  us,  we  beseech  Thee, 
to  that  height  of  peaceful,  patient  trust  in  Thee  which 
make  it  impossible  for  us  to  be  anxious  because  we  are 
sure  that  '  our  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  we  have 
need '  of  these  outward  things.  It  is  Thy  '  good  plea- 
sure to  give  us  the  Kingdom.'  Thou  dost  give  us  the 
greater,  Thou  wilt  not  withhold  the  less.  Thou  hast 
given  us  that  supreme  end.  Thou  wilt  not  forget  to 
provide  the  things  that  are  needful  on  the  road  to  it. 
We  would  cast  ourselves  on  Thy  gracious  care.  We 
know  that  Thou  dost  love  us.  We  believe  in  Thy  wise 
and  rich  providences,  and  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst 
help  us  to  interpret  all  the  transitions,  the  trials,  the 
temptations,  the  sorrows,  and  the  agonies  of  this  life 
in  the  light  of  that  great  faith  that  Thou  doest  all 
things,  and  that  all  things  which  Thou  doest  are  well. 

We  thank  Thee  that  we  can  look  upon  Thee  as  '  the 
Father  of  Lights,  from  Whom  cometh  every  good  and 
every  perfect  gift.'  And  since  we  know  that '  there  is 
no  variableness,'  nothing  but  what  is  good  and  perfect 
can  come  from  Thy  hands  to  Thy  children.  Bow  our 
spirits,  and  perfect  them,  and  enlighten  us  that  with  a 
single  eye  we  may  look  upon  Thy  dealings  with  us, 
and  upon  all  things  here  below,  and  so  walk  ever  in 
the  light  of  those  who  understand  the  way  by  which 
the  Lord  their  God  has  led  them. 

We  beseech  Thee  for  Thy  patience,  for  Thy  peace, 
for  the  light  of  Thy  love  to  shine  into  our  hearts,  for 
Thy  holy  Spirit  to  elevate  and  rectify  our  thoughts  of 
what  is  good  for  us,  and  our  desires  after  Thee,  that 
we  may  seek  the  best  things  first,  the  'Kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness,'  and  be  content  to  regard 


304  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

these  objects — which  men  who  have  not  Thee  to  look 
up  to,  look  upon  as  the  essentials  and  the  most  blessed 
things— as  additions  to  that  which  is  '  the  one  thing 
needful.' 

We  praise  and  bless  Thy  Name  that  Thou  dost  permit 
Thy  children  to  come  to  Thee  and  hold  fellowship  with 
Thee.  We  speak  to  Thee,  and  we  believe  that  Thou 
dost  speak  to  us.  We  thank  Thee  for  the  voices  in  Thy 
word,  and  in  Thy  providences  in  our  hearts.  We 
thank  Thee  most  for  the  great  Voice  in  which  the 
whole  of  that  which,  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers 
manners,  has  been  spoken  through  the  ages,  is  spoken 
to  us  in  Thy  Son.  May  we  learn  all  the  Name  which  is 
in  Him,  and  may  we  come  more  and  more  into  realis- 
ing the  communion  with  Thyself  which  shall  carry 
us  on  through  all  the  duties,  and  it  may  be  the  difficul- 
ties and  the  sorrows  of  our  daily  lives,  and  shall  make 
us  more  than  conquerors  in  Him  that  loves  us. 

We  pray  Thee  to  be  with  us  in  our  gathering  this 
evening,  to  be  near  all  our  hearts  and  minds,  and  to 
draw  us  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  that 
we  may  behold  more  clearly  than  we  often  do,  and 
aspire  more  earnestly  after,  the  things  that  are  at  Thy 
right  hand;  and  Thyself  Who  art  even  more  than 
they.  We  pray  for  Thy  teaching,  for  Thy  illumination 
to  shine  into  our  hearts  and  upon  Thy  word ;  and  we 
ask  Thee  to  give  us  some  word  in  season  that  may 
come  to  all  our  minds  and  hearts  as  the  message  from 
God  that  we  need. 

We  bless  Thee  for  all  that  Thou  hast  ministered  to 
many  hearts  in  past  days  and  years  here  in  these 
gatherings.  Grant,  O  Lord,  that  the  light  of  Thy  love 
may  shine  more  brightly  amongst  us  in  our  Christian 
experience,  and  in  our  daily  lives  may  we  more  mani- 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  305 

festly  copy  Thine.  May  Thy  servants  gathered  here  in 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  really  be  knit  together  in  His 
word  and  power,  and  may  we  be  able  to  live  in  the 
world  adorning  the  teaching  in  all  things. 

Be  near  all  in  sorrow,  all  who  have  special  cares  and 
burdens  to  bear,  comfort  all  sad  hearts,  companion  all 
lonely  ones,  enlighten  all  that  are  darkened.  Oh  coun- 
sel the  perplexed,  be  strength  to  the  weak ;  be  grace 
according  to  our  need  to  each  of  us. 

O  Lord,  hear  us  in  our  prayers,  forgive  our  many 
sins,  in  Thy  great  mercy  and  love  be  present  with  us 
as  we  worship  here  before  Thee,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CLVI 

O  Lord!  truly  we  have  nothing  to  pay,  and  frankly 
Thou  forgivest  us  all.  May  the  sense  of  our  infinite 
obligations  to  Thee  for  Thine  infinite  mercy  to  us  open 
up  fountains  of  joyful  surrender  in  our  hearts  which 
will  flow  out  always  in  all  holy  living,  and  in  grateful 
yielding  of  ourselves  to  that  great  Saviour. 

Deliver  us,  we  pray  Thee,  from  the  error  of  ever 
making  light  of  the  sins  which  Thy  pardoning  mercy 
takes  away.  May  we  all  feel,  what  indeed  is  true,  that 
we  all  have  been  forgiven  very  much.  And  may  our 
love  ever  bear  some  proportion  to  our  obligation 
and  our  lives  be  ordered  by  our  love. 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  however  the  past  has 
been  stained  and  imperfect,  they  who  come  to  Thee 
with  penitent  tea-rs  and  with  thankful  love  cease  to  be 
sinners,  whatever  men  may  think.  We  thank  Thee 
that  Thou,  Who  knowest  us  better  than  any  of  us 
know  one  another,  hast  infinite  mercy,  and  that  Thou 
u 


306  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

canst  read  all  hearts.  Read  ours,  we  beseech  Thee,  and 
teach  us  to  read  them.  May  we  have  no  pharisaical 
abhorrence  of  sinful  men  and  women,  no  pharisaical 
confidence  in  our  own  deeds,  but  we  be  glad  to  take 
our  place  beside  the  publicans  of  the  world,  and  be 
content  to  depend,  as  they  do,  upon  Thy  mercy,  un- 
merited and  free,  all-sufficient  and  entire. 

But  we  pray  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  wouldst  help 
us  day  by  day  '  to  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord';  and  just  because  Thou  hast  lifted  us  from  the 
horrible  pit  and  the  miry  clay  may  we  feel  that  our 
feet  are  set  upon  a  rock.  And  may  our  goings  be 
established,  and  we  live  day  by  day  cultivating  and 
m.aking  our  own  more  and  more  of  the  excellences  and 
the  graces  of  which  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Example,  and 
of  which,  blessed  be  God!  Jesus  Christ  is  the  source 
for  us. 

We  thank  Thee  that  in  union  with  Him  we  become 
other  than  we  are.  We  thank  Thee  for  that  new  life 
created  after  the  image  of  Thyself,  which  is  imparted 
to  all  them  that  humbly  cherish  the  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ.  And  we  pray  that  we  may  experience,  and 
feel  that  we  growingly  experience,  not  only  Thy  for- 
giving mercy  but  Thy  sanctifying  and  elevating  and 
ennobling  grace.  May  we  be  growing,  and  to  our  own 
perception  growing,  more  and  more  in  the  likeness  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

Thou  hast  appointed  that  the  nearer  we  come  to 
Thee,  the  further  off  we  feel  we  are.  Thou  hast  made 
it  the  case  that  the  more  we  grow  towards  God,  the 
more  we  are  sensible  of  the  distance  between  us.  But 
we  thank  Thee  for  that  gracious  knowledge  of  infir- 
mity, of  imperfection,  which  ever  accompanies  the 
advance  in  the  Divine  life.    And  we  beseech  Thee  that 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  307 

the  higher  we  rise  towards  Thee,  the  lowlier  we  may 
lie  in  our  own  estimation,  as  recognising  how  far  it  is 
from  the  highest  mountain -tops  to  the  Heavens,  and 
from  the  most  perfect  man  to  God.  But  help  us,  we 
pray  Thee,  not  only  to  be  conscious  of  the  imperfection 
of  sin,  but  to  be  buoyed  up,  and  borne  onwards  by, 
and  uprising  continually  to  calm  assurance  that  we 
shall  be  like  Him  when  we  see  Him  as  He  is. 

We  thank  Thee  for  the  great  hope,  we  thank  Thee 
for  the  encouragement  which  comes  to  all  toilers  and 
wrestlers  here  below.  We  thank  Thee  that  none  of  us 
needs  to  give  up,  or  to  let  the  feeble  hands  hang  down, 
and  the  knees  give  way  and  cease  to  advance  on  the 
road  to  God.  We  pray  that  we  may  be  helped  and 
heartened  day  by  day,  to  take  up  our  cross  and  our 
burden  to-day,  to  do  the  day's  work  with  the  day's 
strength,  and  to  look  as  those  who  trust  in  Thee  may 
look  without  presumption,  that  in  all  good  things 
possessed,  and  in  all  good  things  done  and  realised  in 
our  souls,  '  to-morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much 
more  abundant.' 

Help  us  thus,  we  pray  Thee,  to  grow  in  the  grace  and 
the  knowledge  of  our  Saviour.  May  our  lives  be 
peaceful  and  happy  lives  because  we  are  coming  ever 
nearer  to  our  love,  ever  closer  to  our  Redeemer,  ever 
liker  to  Him  in  His  perfection. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  give  us  Thy  blessing  in  this 
evening's  worship.  May  it  be  indeed  to  meet  with 
Thee  that  we  come.  Oh!  do  Thou  help  us  to  pass 
beyond  all  external  aids,  even  by  the  help  of  these 
aids,  to  come  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High, 
that  we  may  each  have  touch  with  God,  and  each  feel 
that  it  is  Thee  Who  by  these  outward  ordinances  art 
speaking  to  our  hearts.    Lead  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  our 


308  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

hour  of  service  into  the  holy  places  where  we  shall 
find  our  Master,  and  lose  our  sins.  And  if  we  have 
brought  with  us  burdens  or  sorrows,  tasks  or  duties, 
cares  or  troubles,  strengthen  us  by  waiting  upon  Thee 
to  bear  and  to  do  all  Thy  holy  will,  and  may  we  do  it 
as  from  the  heart,  and  so  do  it  well. 

In  all  the  variety  of  circumstances  and  character, 
guide  us  along  the  paths  of  life  so  that  we  may  glorify 
Thy  Holy  Name.  It  is  for  Thee  to  appoint  whether  the 
road  be  rough  or  smooth,  crooked  or  straight.  We 
dare  not  seem  to  prescribe  to  Thee.  Thou  maintainest 
our  lot.  May  our  hearts  say  Thou  shalt  choose  our 
inheritance  for  us,  but  help  us,  wherever  Thou  dost 
lead  us,  and  whatever  Thou  dost  lay  upon  us,  giving  us 
grace  according  to  our  need,  strength  that  shall  per- 
fect itself  in  our  weakness,  and  the  daily  bread  and 
succour  for  the  daily  hunger  and  necessity. 

Take  us  into  Thy  care  now,  O  Lord,  forgive  our 
many  sins,  and  grant  us  Thy  gracious  presence  and 
blessing  in  this  hour  of  worship,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


CLVII 

O  Lord  !  Who  hast  appointed  that  '  every  transgres- 
sion and  disobedience  shall  bear  its  just  recompense  of 
reward,'  and  dost  gather  Thy  ministers  of  retribution 
wheresoever  corruption  is,  we  thank  Thee  that  that 
is  not  all  that  we  know  about  Thee  ;  and  we  bless  Thee 
that  Thou  not  only  dost  vindicate  Thy  righteousness, 
but  Thou  dost  manifest,  in  yet  more  blessed  and 
wondrous  fashion.  Thine  infinite  love  and  Thy  pitying 
mercy. 
We  would  cast  ourselves  on  Thee.O  Lord !   We  know 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  309 

that  in  this  there  is  much  that  may  bring  down  Thy 
chastisements.  But  we  thank  Thee  that  we  can  think 
of  all  our  demerit  and  all  our  evil,  and  yet  not  be  afraid 
in  Thy  presence,  but  rather  court  Thine  eye.  For 
surely  Thou  lovest  yet  better  than  Thou  knowest,  and 
surely  Thou  art  willing  to  purge  away  whatsoever 
Thou  seest  in  us,  and  which  unpurged  might  need 
Thy  rod. 

We  beseech  Thee  that  the  mighty  power  of  Thy 
revealed  love  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  attraction  of  His 
Cross,  the  cleansing  of  His  blood,  the  indwelling  of 
His  Spirit,  may  purify  our  hearts  and  minds,  and  make 
us  more  and  more,  every  day  we  live,  victors  over  any 
evil  tendencies  within  us,  and  lords  of  all  temptations 
without. 

We  pray  Thee  that  entering  into  the  fulness  of  that 
reconciling  heart  we  may  be  the  friends  of  God,  and 
able  to  look  forward  to  the  Day  of  the  Lord  with  joy. 
May  we  be  of  those  who  are  not  in  the  darkness  that 
that  day  should  overtake  us  as  a  thief.  May  we  be 
children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day,  the  day  that  is, 
and  the  Day  that  comes.  And  so  may  we  walk  as 
children  of  the  light  in  all  purity,  casting  off  the  work 
of  darkness,  and  bracing  on  the  armour  of  light. 

Go  with  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  through  our  daily 
lives  ;  and  in  all  the  frequently-recurring  trifles  which 
make  these  up  may  we  be  able  to  bring  to  bear  the 
highest  principles  of  love  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
desire  to  be  like  Him ;  so  that  nothing  may  be  too 
small  to  be  offered  by  us  upon  Thine  altar,  even  as 
nothing  thus  offered  is  too  small  to  be  acceptable  to 
Thee.  We  thank  Thee  that  Thou  dost  care  for  the 
trifles  that  Thy  children  bring.  We  beseech  Thee  that 
our  poor  work  may  find  a  place  in  that  wonderful 


310  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

storehouse  where  Thou  dost  keep  and  treasure  cups  of 
cold  water,  and  widows'  mites,  and  we  thus  live  conse- 
crating all  that  we  have  to  Thine  own  Self,  and 
realising  in  the  consecration  the  fuller  and  more 
blessed  possession  of  whatsoever  we  thus  offer. 

We  come  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  with  humble  thanks- 
giving for  all  Thy  great  goodness  to  us.  Surely  we 
have  to  say  that  we  will  sing  *  of  mercy  and  of  judg- 
ment,' and  we  have  to  embrace  both  mercies  and 
judgments,  in  our  song  of  praise,  and  believe  that  they 
are  all  coming  from  the  one  hand,  and  all  meant  for 
the  one  end.  May  we  not  murmur,  may  we  not  waste 
our  time  and  weaken  our  minds  by  vain  regrets  for 
good  that  is  irrevocably  past.  May  we  be  children  of 
the  future,  and  not  only  of  the  past,  and  believe  that, 
loving  Thee,  '  to-morrow,'  and  right  away  on  to  the  end 
of  the  days,  'shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more 
abundant.' 

We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord,  that  Thou  hast  not  ex- 
hausted Thy  blessings  by  the  past  blessings  that  Thou 
hast  given  us.  We  thank  Thee  that  the  fountain  is  as 
full  as  when  it  began  to  flow.  We  thank  Thee  that  as 
of  old  Thy  servants  sung,  so  in  all  generations  Thy 
people  have  still  to  acknowledge  that  Thy  'mercy 
endureth  for  ever.'  And  we  pray  that  as  Thy  mercy 
so  our  trust  and  praise  may  be  continual,  and  last  as 
long  as  our  lives  shall  last.  Help  us  to  go  on  day  by 
day  very  quietly,  very  peacefully,  and  rejoicingly, 
having  learnt  in  whatsoever  state  we  are,  therewith  to 
be  content,  because  in  it  we  have,  and  know  that  we 
have,  the  fountain  of  all  goodness  in  the  life  of  God,  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  bless  each  of  us,  to  go  with  us 
in  all  the  variety  of  our  occupations,  circumstances 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  311 

and  work.  Guide  us  by  Thy  counsel  in  the  paths  of 
daily  life,  and  help  us  to  set  the  Lord  always  before  us, 
that  so  none  of  the  agitations  that  shake  our  souls  to 
their  very  centre  may  greatly  move  us.  We  beseech 
Thee  to  give  us  wisdom  to  understand  the  beckonings 
of  Thy  hand,  and  the  motions  of  Thine  eye,  in  the 
providences  of  our  lives,  and  may  none  of  us  waste  our 
afflictions  or  our  joys. 

Comfort  any  amongst  us  that  are  in  sadness,  draw 
near  to  any  who  may  especially  need  the  consolations 
of  our  God,  and  manifest  Thyself  to  such  as  the  Father 
of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  comfort. 

We  pray  Thee  to  give  us  Thy  blessing  as  we  are 
assembled  now.  Help  us  to  meditate  upon  Thy  truth 
and  to  take  it  into  our  hearts  and  wills,  as  well  as  into 
our  minds.  And  may  our  days  witness  that  we  profit, 
having  received  with  meekness  the  engrafted  word 
which  is  able  to  save  our  souls. 

O  Lord !  we  thank  Thee  for  all  Thy  past  goodness  to 
us  in  our  times  of  worship  here ;  for  all  the  blessings, 
that  some  of  us  have  received  for  many  years  during 
these  services.  And  we  pray  that  Thou  wouldst  be 
with  us  still,  and  teach  us  more  and  more  of  Thy 
ways ;  and  grant,  we  pray  Thee,  that  the  loving  Spirit 
of  Jesus  Christ  may  dwell  in  us  as  a  church,  and  in  us 
individually,  and  that  here  the  provisions  of  Thy  house 
being  blessed,  and  Thy  poor  being  filled  with  bread, 
the  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 
may  be  advanced  abundantly. 

Hear  us  in  these  our  prayers,  and  in  Thy  mercy 
forgive  and  accept  us,  for  our  Lord  Christ's  sake. 


312  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

CLVIII 

O  Lord,  our  gracious  God,  Whose  life  has  come  down 
to  us  filtered  through  all  the  little  deeds  of  daily  life, 
and  in  one  great  flood  of  benediction  and  mercy  in 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  we  would  draw  near  to  Thee 
now,  as  becomes  us,  with  glad  hearts,  putting  away 
from  us,  by  Thy  gracious  help,  anything  that  might 
interfere  with  the  completeness  of  our  consecration 
and  the  fulness  of  our  acceptance  of  Thyself.  We 
would  rejoice  that,  however  poor  and  unworthy  may 
be  our  desires  and  our  thoughts  about  Thee,  Thou  art 
infinitely  willing  to  bend  Thyself  to  our  lowness,  and 
even  sometimes  to  shape  Thy  gifts  after  our  desires, 
always  Thou  dost  shape  them  after  our  needs. 

But  Thou  hast  mercifully  invited  us  to  command 
Thee  concerning  the  work  of  Thy  hands.  Lord!  we 
thank  Thee  that  we  can  never  better  Thy  purposes. 
We  bless  Thee  that  our  highest  wisdom  and  truest 
peace  lie  in  conforming  ourselves  to  Thy  will,  not  in 
forcing  ours  upon  Thee.  And  we  pray  Thee  to  help  us 
whenever  we  come  to  Thy  Throne,  to  come  in  the  sure- 
ness  which  Thou  dost  permit  us  to  cherish,  that  if  we 
ask  anything  according  to  Thy  will  Thou  hearest  us. 
May  we  never  think  that  that  is  but  a  poor  charter  of 
liberty.  May  we  always  stand  firm  in  the  confidence 
that  nothing  half  so  good  as  Thy  will  can  ever  befall 
us.  So  teach  us  day  by  day  to  take  up  the  burden,  and 
to  face  the  circumstances  which  Thy  providences 
appoint,  and  to  find  that  in  submission  there  is  peace, 
and  in  'keeping  Thy  commandments  there  is  great 
reward.' 

Help  us  all,  we  pray  Thee,  to  stand  fast  in  the  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free.    May  our  hearts 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  313 

be  knit  to  Him  by  true  faith,  by  loyal  love,  by  con- 
tinual obedience  and  aspiration ;  and  so  may  the  good 
gifts  which  are  in  His  hands  in  such  rich  abundance 
flow  into  our  characters  and  lives  in  such  a  measure  as 
we  require.  We  praise  Thee  for  Him,  and  for  all  that 
His  Name  means  to  us  sinful  creatures.  We  beseech 
Thee  that  we  may  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  that 
fulness  which  is  treasured  in  our  Lord  Christ,  and  may 
growingly  make  our  own,  and  be  enriched  in  the 
possession  of  all  the  wealth  of  God  that  is  in  Jesus 
Christ.  Thou  hast  taught  us  to  pray  great  prayers, 
and  encouraged  by  Thy  teaching  we  venture  to  ask 
what  we  dare  not  have  dreamt  of  without  it,  that 
Christ  may  dwell  in  our  hearts  by  faith;  that  being 
rooted  and  grounded  in  love  we  may  be  able  to  compre- 
hend the  height  and  breadth  and  depth  and  length  of 
Thy  love,  and  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God. 
Help  us  to  make  these  our  supreme  desires  for  life,  and 
help  us  in  some  measure  to  realise  the  desire,  for  Thou 
hast  promised  that  when  Thy  children  call  Thou  wilt 
answer,  and  whatsoever  they  are  able  to  receive  Thou 
wilt  bestow. 

In  all  the  variety  of  our  daily  duties  and  circum- 
stances, guide  us,  O  Lord,  defend  us  from  evil,  bestow 
upon  us  such  outward  blessings  as  Thou  dost  know  to 
be  for  our  highest  good.  And  help  us  so  to  handle  all 
Thy  providences  as  that  they  may  indeed  be  blessings 
for  us.  If  any  of  us  have  come  into  Thy  house  with 
full  hearts  of  thankfulness  '  looking  back  upon  all  the 
way  by  which  the  Lord  our  God  has  led  us,'  accept  our 
praise.  If  any  of  us  have  come  with  sad  hearts,  feel- 
ing that  Thy  footsteps  are  in  the  sea  and  Thy  paths  in 
the  deep  waters,  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  to  be  sure,  too, 
that  Thy  way  is  in  the  sanctuary  and  that  righteous- 


314  PULPIT  PRAYERS 

ness  and  holiness  are  the  foundations  of  Thy  Throne, 
and  in  all  Thy  dealings  with  us.  And  may  the  comforts 
of  Thy  sweet  presence,  and  the  gracious  peace  that 
follows  when  we  can  say,  '  Thy  will  be  done,'  be 
granted  to  each  of  us  that  may  have  any  sorrows 
which  make  it  hard  for  sense  to  acquiesce  in  Thy 
providences. 

Guide  us  now,  O  Lord,  as  we  are  gathered  together. 
Help  us  to  meditate  upon  Thy  holy  word,  and  give  us 
some  message  to  speak  that  may  be  from  Thyself,  and 
may  find  its  way  to  the  very  springs  of  life  in  each  of 
us,  and  there  work  blessing  and  healing. 

And  now,  Lord,  we  desire  to  commend  ourselves  to 
Thy  gracious  care.  We  pray  Thee  to  be  near  us  and 
bless  us,  to  forgive  and  to  answer  us,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 


Date  Due 


